 Committee on Financial <unk> on Capital Markets , Insurance , and Government @-@ Sponsored Enterprises 
 Subcommittee on Housing and Community Opportunity 
 Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations 
 Committee on Homeland <unk> on Emerging Threats , Cybersecurity , and Science and Technology 
 Subcommittee on Management , Investigations , and Oversight 
 = = = Caucus membership = = = 
 Congressional Progressive Caucus 
 = = 2012 congressional election = = 
 Kilroy ran in the newly redrawn , Columbus @-@ based Ohio 's 3rd congressional district in 2012 . Despite being endorsed by former U.S. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi , she lost the Democratic primary to former State Representative Joyce Beatty , who defeated Kilroy , Tyson , and Celeste 38 % <unk> % -15 % <unk> % . Kilroy lost a 2014 election for Franklin County Court of Appeals . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Mary Jo Kilroy currently resides in the Clintonville neighborhood of Columbus . She and her husband have two daughters : Julia , an elementary school teacher and Rosa , an undergraduate at Brown University . Kilroy owned three dogs from animal rescue organizations at the time of the 2006 election . 
 = Miniopterus brachytragos = 
 Miniopterus brachytragos is a bat in the genus Miniopterus that occurs in northern and western Madagascar . Populations of this species have historically been included in Miniopterus manavi , but molecular data published in 2008 and 2009 indicate this supposed species in fact consists of five separate species , including the newly described M. brachytragos . Up to four species of this group may occur in the same place . M. brachytragos has been found in dry and wet forests from sea level to 320 m ( 1 @,@ 050 ft ) altitude . 
 Miniopterus brachytragos is a small , brown Miniopterus ; its forearm length is 35 to 38 mm ( 1 @.@ 4 to 1 @.@ 5 in ) . The hairs of the underparts have buff tips . The short tragus ( a projection in the outer ear ) is an important distinguishing feature . The uropatagium ( tail membrane ) is well @-@ furred and the palate is concave . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 During the 2000s , molecular studies have revealed that the widely distributed African , Eurasian , and Australian genus Miniopterus is much more species @-@ rich than previously thought . In a 1995 contribution to Faune de Madagascar on Malagasy bats , Randolph Peterson and colleagues listed four species of Miniopterus on Madagascar and the nearby Comoros , including the small Miniopterus manavi with a broad distribution on both Madagascar and the Comoros . In 2008 and 2009 , however , Steven Goodman and colleagues presented evidence that the former concept of M. manavi in fact encompassed five morphologically and molecularly distinct species of small Miniopterus . These included M. manavi itself in the Central Highlands , M. griveaudi and M. aelleni in the Comoros and northern and western Madagascar , M. mahafaliensis in southwestern Madagascar , and M. brachytragos in northern and western Madagascar . The five recognized species of M. manavi @-@ like bats are not each other 's closest relatives , but apparently acquired their similarities through convergent evolution . At some places ( for example , Namoroka ) four cryptic species of M. manavi @-@ like bats , including M. brachytragos , may occur together . 
 Miniopterus brachytragos was described as a new species in the second 2009 paper by Goodman and colleagues . The specific name combines the Ancient Greek brachys " short " and tragos " goat " and refers to the short tragus ( a fleshy projection in the inner side of the outer ear ) , one of the main distinguishing features of the species ; the name of this structure derives from the Greek tragos . Analysis of sequences of the mitochondrial cytochrome b gene suggested that M. brachytragos is most closely related to the clade of M. manavi and another Malagasy species , M. petersoni . There was some variation within the species — the most distinctive individual , from the island of Nosy Komba , differed by about 2 @.@ 1 % from other individuals of the same species in its cytochrome b sequence — but Goodman and colleagues regarded their samples as insufficient for clear conclusions about phylogeographic structure within the species . 
 = = Description = = 
 Miniopterus brachytragos is a small , short @-@ tailed Miniopterus with short and relatively thin fur . The fur of the upperparts is dark brown and the hairs on the underparts have buff tips . Miniopterus mahafaliensis is similar in color , but other small Malagasy Miniopterus are darker . The ears are haired above , but virtually naked below and end in a rounded tip . The tragus ( a projection on the inner side of the outer ear ) is short and has a broad base , sometimes with a crest at the side . It ends in a pointed to slightly rounded tip , which is covered with hairs that are not readily visible to the unaided eye . The short tragus easily distinguishes M. brachytragos from other Malagasy Miniopterus . The wing membrane is also brown , but the uropatagium ( tail membrane ) is lighter . The wing membrane and uropatagium are attached to the upper leg at the same level , above the ankle . The uropatagium is relatively densely covered with hairs , particularly on the upper side . M. manavi and M. mahafaliensis also have a densely haired uropatagium , but in M. aelleni and M. griveaudi it is only sparsely haired or even mostly naked . 
 In 28 to 30 specimens measured by Goodman and colleagues , total length was 83 to 92 mm ( 3 @.@ 3 to 3 @.@ 6 in ) , averaging 87 @.@ 4 mm ( 3 @.@ 44 in ) ; tail length was 38 to 43 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 to 1 @.@ 7 in ) , averaging 40 @.@ 2 mm ( 1 @.@ 58 in ) ; hindfoot length was 5 to 6 mm ( about 0 @.@ 2 in ) , averaging 5 @.@ 8 mm ( 0 @.@ 23 in ) ; tragus length was 3 to 4 mm ( 0 @.@ 12 to 0 @.@ 16 in ) , averaging 3 @.@ 9 mm ( 0 @.@ 15 in ) ; ear length was 9 to 11 mm ( about 0 @.@ 4 in ) , averaging 10 @.@ 0 mm ( 0 @.@ 39 in ) ; forearm length was 35 to 38 mm ( 1 @.@ 4 to 1 @.@ 5 in ) , averaging 36 @.@ 6 mm ( 1 @.@ 44 in ) ; and body mass was 2 @.@ 9 to 6 @.@ 3 g ( 0 @.@ 10 to 0 @.@ 22 oz ) , averaging 4 @.@ 3 g ( 0 @.@ 15 oz ) . There is no evidence for substantial size differences between males and females . 
 In the skull , the rostrum ( front part ) is short relative to other small Malagasy Miniopterus and line @-@ shaped . The central groove in the nasal depression is relatively broad and deep . The frontal bones are slightly rounded and bear an indistinct sagittal crest . Further back on the braincase , the lambdoid crest is also poorly developed . The middle part of the palate is concave , not flat as in M. aelleni and M. manavi . At the palate 's back margin is a short , blunt posterior palatal spine . There are often foramina ( openings ) in the palate near the last molar . Miniopterus brachytragos has 36 teeth in the dental formula 2 @.@ 1 @.@ 2 @.@ 33 @.@ 1 @.@ 3 @.@ 3 ( three incisors , one canine , three premolars , and two molars in both upper toothrows and two incisors , one canine , two premolars , and three molars in the lower toothrows ) . As is characteristic of Miniopterus , the first upper premolar ( P1 ) is smaller and more simplified than the second ( P2 ) . 
 = = Distribution and ecology = = 
 Miniopterus brachytragos is known from several ecologically different sites . In the Namoroka region , it has been recorded at 100 to 200 m ( 330 to 660 ft ) altitude in dry forest and gallery forest . Another specimen was caught in forest in a karst region in <unk> . Near Daraina in the northeast , the species occurs in eastern humid forest mixed with dry forest at 320 m ( 1 @,@ 050 ft ) . At another northeastern site , on the Masoala Peninsula , it was found in lowland gallery forest near sea level . On Nosy Komba , its habitat consists of dry forest mixed with introduced <unk> indica ( mango tree ) . Little is known of the ecology of M. brachytragos , but species of Miniopterus generally feed on insects , breed seasonally , and roost in large colonies in caves . 
 = Michael Jackson 's health and appearance = 
 Michael Jackson ( August 29 , 1958 – June 25 , 2009 ) was an African American singer , <unk> , who spent over forty @-@ two years in the public eye , first as a child star with the Jackson 5 , and later as a solo artist , during which time he went through various image changes . Starting in the mid @-@ 1980s , it became clear that Jackson 's appearance was changing dramatically . The shape of his face , particularly his nose , triggered widespread speculation of cosmetic surgery . His skin tone also changed , becoming much lighter . Jackson was diagnosed with the skin disorder vitiligo , but it was speculated that the change was due to skin bleaching . 
 Jackson and some of his siblings said they had been physically and psychologically abused by their father , Joseph . In 2003 , Joseph acknowledged whipping them as children , but has emphatically rejected the longstanding abuse allegations . The whippings deeply traumatized Jackson and may have led to the onset of further health issues later in his life . Physicians speculated that he had body dysmorphic disorder . 
 At some point during the 1990s , it appeared that Jackson had become dependent on prescription drugs , mainly painkillers and strong sedatives . The drug use was later linked to second and third degree burns he had suffered years before . As more and more difficulty emerged in his life he gradually became dependent on these drugs and his health deteriorated . He went into rehabilitation in 1993 with the help of Elizabeth Taylor and Elton John . 
 While preparing for a series of comeback concerts scheduled to begin in July 2009 , Jackson died of acute propofol and benzodiazepine intoxication after suffering cardiac arrest on June 25 , 2009 . His personal physician was convicted of involuntary manslaughter in his death and sentenced to four years in prison . 
 = = Skin color = = 
 Jackson 's skin was a medium @-@ brown color throughout his youth but starting in the mid 1980s , his skin gradually grew more pale , which was partly due to vitiligo , but also widely considered to be due to skin bleaching and changing of his features to appear white . According to Jackson biographer J. Randy Taraborrelli , in 1986 , Jackson was diagnosed with vitiligo , which Taraborrelli stated was sometimes considered by doctors to be a consequence of damage done by bleaching chemicals over the years . However , skin bleaching is not the only suspected cause of vitiligo , which is a rare non @-@ contagious disease . The causes are not known , but a range of genetic , auto @-@ immune , and environmental causes are suspected . Between 1 % and 2 % of the worldwide population are considered to be affected . The depigmentation occurs in patches and affects all ethnic / racial groups equally . 
 Taraborrelli stated that Jackson began making his nose smaller around the same time his skin became gradually lighter , and he was using the over @-@ the @-@ counter skin @-@ bleaching cream called <unk> to achieve the lighter skin . He said that Jackson 's sister La Toya used <unk> too , and that they had crates of this cream stored at their family home Hayvenhurst , " hoarding it as the most valuable beauty product ever produced . " Jackson 's physical changes gained widespread media coverage , and provoked criticism from the public . African American psychologists argued Jackson was " a lousy role model for black youth . " Dr. Dennis Chestnut said Jackson gave " black youth a feeling that they can achieve " , but also may encourage some people to think they 've got to be esoteric and idiosyncratic to be successful . It was also presumed that Jackson bleached his skin just to boost his career . Dr. Halford Fairchild stated Jackson and other African American celebrities would try " to look more like white people in order to get in films and on television " . 
 New York plastic surgeon Dr. Pamela Lipkin , who has never treated Jackson or reviewed his medical records , said , " when you look at the other features , the skin bleaching sort of goes along with what I think was his quest for beauty , so I have to wonder what came first ? Vitiligo or lighter skin ? " Noting that Jackson had even skin tone when he was younger , Lipkin 's interpretation was that " probably he 's trying to look Caucasian : His skin is whiter . His nose is getting thinner every six months . His lips are getting thinner . His eyebrows are getting higher . His eyes are getting wider every time . His cheekbones are getting bigger . " 
 However , in 1993 , Jackson told Oprah Winfrey " there , as I know of , there is no such thing as skin bleaching . I 've never seen it , I don 't know what it is . " It was in this interview that Jackson stated he had a skin disorder ( vitiligo ) and also stated that the disorder was hereditary , rather than something he caused , though he also said he used make @-@ up to even out the uneven skin tone . " It is something I cannot help , " explained Jackson . " When people make up stories that I don 't want to be who I am , it hurts me . It 's a problem for me . I can 't control it . But what about all the millions of people who sit in the sun to become darker , to become other than what they are . Nobody says nothing about that . " Winfrey 's interview of Jackson was watched by 62 million Americans . It also started a public discourse on the topic of vitiligo , a relatively unknown condition before then . 
 Jackson had publicly stated that he was proud to be black . He also wrote a letter to photographer William <unk> Jr. in 1988 which reads : " Maybe I look at the world through rose colored glasses but I love people all over the world . That is why stories of racism really disturb me . [ … ] Because in truth I believe ALL men are created equal , I was taught that and will always believe it . I just can ’ t conceive of how a person could hate another because of skin color . I love every race on the planet earth . Prejudice is the child of ignorance . Naked we come into the world and naked we shall go out . And a very good thing too , for it reminds me that I am naked under my shirt , whatever its color . " 
 Taraborrelli stated that Jackson was diagnosed with lupus , that the vitiligo partially lightened his skin , and the lupus was in remission , and both illnesses made him sensitive to sunlight , which could have caused his lupus condition to recur . Jackson 's autopsy did not confirm or refute the claim that he had lupus , but it confirmed that he had vitiligo . His skin was found to have a reduced ( though not absent ) melanocytes , the cells active in skin pigmentation . 
 To treat these conditions , Jackson used <unk> , Tretinoin , and <unk> . On June 29 , 2009 , multiple tubes of <unk> and hydroquinone were found in Jackson 's home . Both creams are commonly used to treat vitiligo ; Dr. David <unk> said some patients with vitiligo get to the point where it makes more sense to remove the brown bits because so much of the skin is pale . On the other hand , getting depigmented skin to darken is extremely difficult . <unk> causes a permanent and extreme sensitivity to the sun . Vitiligo patients are at risk to contract melanoma . An annual cancer check @-@ up is recommended . Jackson also had <unk> injected directly into his scalp regularly . Another common way of treating vitiligo is using makeup to camouflage depigmented skin . The treatments Jackson used for his condition further lightened his skin tone , and with the application of pancake makeup to even out his skin tone , he could appear very pale . For example , Stevie Nicks recalled , in a Rolling Stone interview : " I remember before [ we performed at Bill Clinton 's 1993 inauguration ] , Michael sent somebody to find out if I had any foundation make @-@ up he could borrow . I was using some light Chanel foundation at that time , and Michael sent back a note to say , thanks , but the foundation wasn 't quite light enough for him . " Jackson also covered his skin disorder with clothing wearing long sleeves and long pants . In the music video for " Remember the Time " , all dancers and actors except for Jackson are lightly dressed following the example set by ancient Egyptians . Jackson usually didn 't wear patterned clothing in order to avoid attention to the disorder . 
 Vitiligo occurs in three different patterns . Segmental depigmentation means only one side of the body is affected , generalized depigmentation means many parts of the body are affected . Jackson 's autopsy report states a " focal depigmentation of the skin " ( i.e. , the depigmentation occurs on one or a few areas of the body ) . In Jackson 's case , there were 5 affected areas . 
 In 1996 , during the Australian leg of the HIStory World Tour , Jackson married his dermatologist 's nurse , Debbie Rowe . The pair first met in the mid @-@ 1980s , when Jackson was diagnosed with vitiligo . She spent many years treating his illness as well as providing emotional support , and they built a strong friendship before their marriage . The couple divorced in 1999 and remained friends thereafter . 
 = = Cosmetic procedures and diet = = 
 Over time , Jackson 's facial structure changed as well . Surgeons speculated he also had a rhinoplasty , a forehead lift , cheekbone surgery , altered his lips , and had a cleft put in his chin . Those close to the singer estimated that , by 1990 , he had undergone around ten procedures . According to biographer J. Randy Taraborrelli , Jackson had his first rhinoplasty after breaking his nose during a complex dance routine in 1979 . However , the surgery was not a complete success , and he complained of breathing difficulties that would affect his career . He was referred to Steven Hoefflin , who performed his second rhinoplasty in 1981 . Katherine Jackson , though , has said in a recent interview that Michael intentionally got his first <unk> from Steven Hoefflin . Taraborrelli stated Jackson had a third rhinoplasty three years later and a fourth in 1986 . Jackson wrote in his 1988 autobiography Moonwalk that , in addition to the two <unk> , he also had a dimple created in his chin . From 1986 onward he was a regular client of Arnold Klein , a dermatologist who specializes in dermal filler injection , a non @-@ surgical cosmetic procedure . 
 In his book , Jackson attributed the changes in the structure of his face to puberty , a strict vegetarian diet , weight loss , a change in hair style and stage lighting . Jackson denied allegations that he had altered his eyes . By 1990 , the full extent of Jackson 's surgery was widely debated ; those close to him estimated he had undergone ten operations on his face up to this point . In June 1992 , the Daily Mirror ran a full front @-@ page picture , allegedly of Jackson 's face , which they described as " hideously disfigured " by plastic surgery . Jackson sued the tabloid , and , in 1998 , they agreed to an out @-@ of @-@ court settlement with Jackson . At the High Court , the paper 's former editor acknowledged that after meeting Jackson in person , he believed that Jackson was neither hideously disfigured nor scarred at all . A Daily Mirror solicitor maintained that the publication did not tamper with the picture . 
 Media reports stated that Jackson 's autopsy reported one scar beside each of his nostrils , one scar behind each of his ears , and two scars on his neck , " probably " from cosmetic surgery , plus cosmetic tattoos on his eyebrows , around his eyes and lips , and on his scalp ( at his receding hairline ) . 
 In the unedited version of the documentary Living With Michael Jackson , which was shown in court in 2005 , Jackson said he had two procedures on his nose so that he could breathe better . When he was asked about his cheeks , Jackson answered : " These cheekbones ? No . My father has the same thing . We have Indian blood . " 
 = = Health concerns = = 
 Over the years , Jackson had various medical problems that were covered by the media . In early 1984 , Jackson was treated for scalp burns ; his hair had caught fire during a shooting for a commercial . In June 1990 , Jackson was admitted to a Santa Monica hospital with chest pains . According to Dr. Mark <unk> " laboratory and X @-@ ray tests of Jackson 's heart and lungs revealed no abnormalities " ; the pains " were caused by bruised ribs suffered during a vigorous dance practice " . 
 Various concerts were cancelled owing to illness and a remaining tour was called off due to addiction . On March 12 , 1988 , Jackson cancelled a show in St. Louis which was rescheduled for March 14 ; on March 13 , Jackson performed in St. Louis although he was fighting a cold . The cold progressed to laryngitis ; the show on March 14 , was also cancelled . Three shows in Tacoma , scheduled from October 31 to November 2 , 1988 , had to be cancelled on his physicians ' advice because Jackson had the flu . Two shows in Los Angeles were cancelled due to swollen vocal cords ; three shows in Los Angeles scheduled for November 20 , 21 and 22 were also cancelled ; these five concerts were rescheduled for January 1989 . 
 In August 1992 , a concert in London , England had to be postponed due to a viral infection . Four days later , Jackson performed in Cardiff , Wales . In September 1992 , a concert in Gelsenkirchen , Germany was cancelled because Jackson was taken ill with the flu . In Lausanne , Switzerland , an ambulance took Jackson back to his hotel after the show held on September 8 ; another show in Basel , Switzerland , scheduled for September 11 , was also cancelled . In October 1992 , two concerts in Turkey , Istanbul and Izmir , and another one in Athens , Greece had to be cancelled due to loss of voice caused by a cold . His private doctor attended to Jackson in Istanbul . According to organisers Jackson 's " vocal cords were irritated " . These concerts were supposed to be the last three shows of the tour 's European leg . Jackson was seen by a throat specialist in London , and was advised to seek further treatment in Los Angeles . 
 In August 1993 , two shows of Jackson 's Dangerous Tour in Thailand had to be cancelled due to dehydration . On August 27 , 1993 , Jackson " returned to the concert stage " . On August 30 , 1993 , a show in Singapore had to be cancelled due to nausea and a severe headache . In the opinion of his physician , Dr. David Forecast , Jackson " was in no condition to perform " . A neurology specialist attended to Jackson . The specialist confirmed Forecast 's diagnosis of " late @-@ onset migraine " , and medication was prescribed for Jackson who also underwent tests in a hospital in Singapore . The show was held two days later . Jackson consumed a lot of water , a step which prevents both dehydration and voice problems . 
 The first concert in Santiago de Chile , scheduled for October 21 , 1993 , was cancelled due to lumbar problems ; two days later , Jackson performed at Estadio Nacional . Another concert in Lima , Peru , scheduled for October 26 , 1993 , was cancelled due to a torn muscle suffered during a show in Brazil . Several concerts in Mexico City were cancelled due to tooth problems . Two <unk> molars were pulled . However , there were five shows in Mexico City . The last concert of the Dangerous Tour was held in Mexico City , on November 11 , 1993 . 
 In November 1993 , Jackson announced the cancellation of the remaining Dangerous Tour due to an addiction to painkillers which had been prescribed after a recent constructive scalp surgery . 
 It was also reported , Jackson cancelled shows in Russia and Israel . However , these two concerts did take place . The rescheduling of the concert in Israel was not due to health problems . 
 According to Dr. Neil Ratner , Jackson suffered a back injury in July 1997 ; one of the stages collapsed during a concert in Munich , Germany . However , the History Tour continued ; there was only one concert cancelled after the fatal accident of Princess Diana about two months later . In fact , such an incident happened during a charity concert in Munich , in 1999 . Jackson was later taken to a hospital . Jackson 's promoter Marcel Avram said he [ Jackson ] received abrasions and bruises . Jackson left the hospital the next morning . 
 On February 15 , 2005 , Jackson was admitted to the Marian Medical Center in Santa Maria with " flu @-@ like symptoms . " According to Dr. Chuck Merrill , Jackson was in stable condition and would recover within a few days . Jackson left the hospital on February 16 , 2005 ; Dr. Todd Bailey said Jackson " continued to need care for some persistent viral symptoms , but otherwise he was in good spirits . " One week later , the jury selection for the child molestation trial resumed , in Jackson 's presence . 
 On March 10 , 2005 , Jackson appeared late in court after having received treatment in a hospital due to a back problem . During the trial , Jackson occasionally needed help to get to his seat . On June 5 , 2005 , Jackson was taken to the emergency room at the Santa Ynez Valley Cottage Hospital to seek treatment of a back pain . Jackson 's spokeswoman , <unk> Bain , said " stress contributed to the back problem " . During the trial Jackson had been briefly in hospital several times . 
 Dr. Christopher Rogers testified in the trial against Dr. Conrad Murray that , in his opinion , Jackson " was healthier than the average person of his age . " Rogers said the arteries around Jackson 's heart were free of fat and cholesterol , which is unusual for a 50 @-@ year @-@ old individual . 
 = = = Childhood and mental health = = = 
 Another publicly discussed aspect of Jackson 's private life is his childhood particularly his relationship with his father . Jackson and some of his siblings stated that they were physically and mentally abused by their father Joseph from a young age , through incessant rehearsals , whippings and the use of derogatory names such as " big nose " for Michael ; this abuse had affected Michael throughout his life . In one altercation — later recalled by Marlon Jackson , Joseph held Michael upside down by one leg and " pummeled him over and over again with his hand , hitting him on his back and buttocks " . Joseph would often trip the boys or push them into walls . 
 One night while Jackson was asleep , Joseph climbed into his room through the bedroom window . Wearing a fright mask , he entered the room screaming and shouting . Joseph said he wanted to teach his children not to leave the window open when they went to sleep . For a number of years afterward , Jackson suffered nightmares about being kidnapped from his bedroom . By the early 1980s , he was deeply unhappy ; Jackson explained , " Even at home , I 'm lonely . I sit in my room sometimes and cry . It 's so hard to make friends ... I sometimes walk around the neighborhood at night , just hoping to find someone to talk to . But I just end up coming home . " 
 Although it had been reported for a number of years that Jackson had an abusive childhood , he first spoke openly about it in his 1993 interview with Oprah Winfrey . He grimaced when speaking of the childhood abuse at the hands of his father ; he believed he had missed out on much of his childhood years , acknowledging that he often cried from loneliness . In the same interview , speaking of his father , Jackson said , " There were times when he 'd come to see me , I 'd get sick ... I 'd start to regurgitate . I 'm sorry ... Please don 't be mad at me ... But I do love him . " In Jackson 's other high profile interview Living with Michael Jackson ( 2003 ) , he covered his face with his hand and began crying when talking about his childhood abuse . 
 Jackson recalled that Joseph sat in a chair as the group rehearsed , saying , " He had this belt in his hand . If you didn 't do it the right way , he would tear you up , really get you . It was bad . Real bad . " Both of Jackson 's parents have rejected the longstanding allegations of child abuse by saying that <unk> were common when disciplining children back then . The child abuse allegations polarized some of the siblings , with some of them rejecting the claims . 
 In 2003 , Jackson was accused of child sexual abuse and was acquitted two years later . During the investigation , Jackson 's profile was examined by Stan Katz , a mental health professional , who spent several hours with the accuser as well . According to J. Randy Taraborrelli , the assessment made by Katz was that Jackson had become a regressed ten @-@ year @-@ old . Some medical professionals have publicly stated their belief that Jackson also had body dysmorphic disorder , a psychological condition whereby the sufferer has no concept of how his or her physical appearance is perceived by others . 
 = = = Weight and drug addiction = = = 
 The changes to his face were , in part , due to periods of significant weight loss . Jackson became slimmer in the early 1980s because of a change in diet and a desire for " a dancer 's body " . By 1984 , Jackson had lost 20 pounds ( 9 @.@ 1 kg ) , bringing his weight to 105 pounds ( 48 kg ) on a <unk> ( 1 @.@ 85 m ) frame , the slimmest he had ever been as an adult . Witnesses reported that Jackson was often dizzy and speculated that he was suffering from anorexia nervosa . Following accusations of child molestation in 1993 , Jackson stopped eating , losing even more weight . 
 In late 1995 , Jackson was rushed to a hospital after collapsing during rehearsals for a televised performance ( which was subsequently cancelled ) ; a non @-@ related writer claims that the incident was caused by a stress @-@ related panic attack , while medics cited irregular beats , gastro @-@ intestinal inflammation , dehydration , and kidney and liver irregularities . In none of these hospitalizations , including this one , did medics find drugs in Jackson 's system . The BBC reported that during his 2005 trial , the singer again suffered from stress @-@ related illnesses and severe weight loss . 
 A biographer states that in 1993 , the entertainer admitted taking Valium , Xanax and Ativan to deal with the stress of the child sexual abuse allegations made against him , while Jackson himself does not mention sedatives , he stated that painkillers actually were prescribed to soothe excruciating pain that he was suffering after recent reconstructive surgery on his scalp resulting from his accident in 1984 . A few months after the allegations became news , Jackson had lost approximately 10 pounds ( 4 @.@ 5 kg ) in weight and had stopped eating . In a court deposition unrelated to alleged child abuse , Jackson was visibly drowsy , lacked concentration and repeatedly slurred while speaking . He could not remember the dates of his prior album releases or names of people he had worked with . It took him several minutes to name some of his recent albums . 
 Jackson also stated during the 1993 interview that he first began taking painkiller medications regularly in 1984 . In January 24 of that year , Jackson was filming a Pepsi commercial when his hair caught on fire from faulty pyrotechnics on stage that were intended to be part of one of many being filmed . He sustained second @-@ degree burns to his scalp and never fully recovered from the injury or from the lingering pain . He reportedly began taking the painkillers after refusing at first in order to deal with the intense pain . 
 On November 9 , and November 10 , 1993 , Jackson was questioned about a copyright matter . According to the sworn declaration from the plaintiffs ' lawyer , he had been told that Jackson " was taking painkillers because of recent oral surgery . " 
 In November 1993 , Jackson announced that he was addicted to painkillers ; he said he had recently undergone a scalp surgery , and the painkillers had been prescribed . Jackson said due to the pressure caused by the child molestation allegations , and the energy he needed for the Dangerous Tour he was " physically and emotionally exhausted " . He said he had " become increasingly more dependent on painkillers " , and would seek treatment . His lawyers said , Jackson would be treated for addiction overseas for one and a half months to two months . In December 1993 , Jackson returned to the United States . 
 Jackson 's health had deteriorated to the extent that he cancelled the remainder of his tour and flew with friends Elizabeth Taylor and her husband to London . When the singer arrived at the airport , he had to be held up by his two friends ; he was then rushed to the home of Elton John 's manager and then to a clinic . He was searched for drugs on entry ; vials of medicine were found in a suitcase . He took over the fourth floor of the hospital and was put on Valium IV to wean him from painkillers . The singer 's spokesperson then told reporters that Jackson was " barely able to function adequately on an intellectual level " . While in the clinic , Jackson took part in group and one @-@ on @-@ one therapy sessions . According to Taraborrelli , in January 2004 , as his trial approached , Jackson became dependent on morphine and Demerol and was being treated for this dependency by herbalist Alfredo Bowman in Colorado . 
 In an interview with Aphrodite Jones , Patrick Treacy , a cosmetic surgeon who treated Jackson between July 2006 and early 2007 , as well as shortly before his death , stated that he would have known if Jackson would have been also treated by another physician and that he never saw any drugs in the house . He also said that Jackson did not have insomnia and never asked him for narcotics . Treacy stated Jackson was in good physical health ; he said Jackson always insisted on the presence of an anesthetist when <unk> was administered . 
 Jackson was 5 ft . <unk> and weighed 136 lbs , which would be within a normal weight range , although he was thin , Dr. Rogers testified in court . According to his costumer Michael Bush , Jackson lost so much weight during a concert due to loss of water that the costumes Jackson wore at the end of the show had to be smaller than those he wore at the beginning of the show ; usually , he was a 28 @-@ inch waist . According to Dr. Nader <unk> , a sleeping expert at UCLA drugs such as Demerol can cause insomnia . In the case of Jackson , insomnia could have been caused by " anxiety for performing " as well . 
 Following Jackson 's death , a police warrant issued against his attending physician , Conrad Murray , stated that Jackson 's many doctors had used nineteen distinct aliases , such as " Omar Arnold , " " Josephine Baker , " " Fernand Diaz , " " Paul <unk> , " " Peter <unk> , " " <unk> Muhammad , " " Roselyn Muhammad , " " Blanca Nicholas , " " Jimmy Nicholas , " " Bryan Singleton , " " Frank Tyson , " and " Rob Kaufman " while prescribing medications for Jackson . He also took prescriptions as " Prince , " " Michael Amir , " and " Kai Chase , " the names of one of his sons , his spokesperson , and his former personal chef , respectively . Police found a CD mentioning the " Omar Arnold " alias when they raided the Las Vegas , Nevada home and office of Conrad Murray , Jackson 's personal physician . Use of pseudonyms by celebrities ' doctors is common practice for maintaining the confidentiality of patients ' medical history , and does not necessarily indicate addiction . 
 = = Death = = 
 Following Jackson 's death , reports of his use of pethidine ( Demerol ) surfaced . Cherilyn Lee , a nurse who provided nutritional counseling to Jackson , said that on April 12 , 2009 he asked her for unspecified " products for sleep . " On April 19 , 2009 he told her the only medicine that would help was propofol . Lee refused , telling him , " Michael , the only problem with you taking this medication ... is you 're going to take it and you 're not going to wake up . " Jackson dismissed the warning , telling her he had been given the drug before , by IV injection , and that his doctor told him it was safe . He did not name the doctor . An overdose of propofol can cause the patient to stop breathing , leading to a shortage of oxygen and a buildup of carbon dioxide in the body which can lead to arrhythmias and cardiac arrest . It was the last time they met . 
 Due to an enquiry about a cancellation insurance for the upcoming tour , insurance carriers demanded a medical exam by a doctor they trusted . In February 2009 , Jackson had an examination performed by Dr. David <unk> of New York . Later , the broker told an AEG senior vice president Jackson had only slight hay fever and had passed the exam " with flying colors " . A second medical exam was supposed to take place on July 6 , 2009 . 
 According to Lee , she received a frantic call on June 21 , 2009 from an aide on Jackson 's staff . The aide reported that Jackson was feeling ill . Lee reported overhearing Jackson complain that one side of his body was hot , the other side cold . She believed that somebody had given him something that affected his central nervous system . She advised the aide to take him to the hospital . 
 After his death , the autopsy report revealed that Jackson had a strong heart and was a " fairly healthy " 50 @-@ year @-@ old . According to BBC , his weight was in the acceptable range for a man of his height , but he had punctured arms , and suffered from lung damage and some arthritis . The document shows that Jackson 's most serious health problem was his chronically inflamed lungs , but this was not serious enough to be a contributing factor to his death . The post mortem did not uncover any physical problems that may have limited Jackson 's ability to perform . " His overall health was fine , " said Dr Zeev Kain of the University of California , who reviewed the report for AP but was not involved in the post @-@ mortem examination , " The results are in normal limits . " The autopsy also revealed that he was partially bald , and that his lips , eyebrows and scalp were tattooed . 
 In 2011 Dr. Rogers said in his testimony : " The theory that seems less reasonable to me is that Mr. Jackson woke up , and although he was under the influence of sedative medications , managed to give himself another dose . " <unk> Dan Anderson testified that Demerol was not detected in Jackson 's system . 
 = If We Are the Body = 
 " If We Are the Body " is a song recorded by Christian rock band Casting Crowns . Written by Mark Hall and produced by Mark A. Miller and Steven Curtis Chapman , it was released as the lead single from the band 's 2003 self @-@ titled debut album through Beach Street Records on July 26 , 2003 . The song , originally written by Hall as a " teaching tool " for his youth group , is a CCM and acoustic rock song . It incorporates the violin , mandolin , and accordion in its arrangement and questions why the Christian church does not minister impartially . 
 " If We Are the Body " received positive reviews from music critics , who praised its lyrics and arrangement , and it was nominated for the awards for Song of the Year and Pop / Contemporary Recorded Song of the Year at the 35th GMA Dove Awards . The song spent three weeks at number one on the Radio & Records Christian AC and Christian CHR charts and peaked at number three on the Billboard Hot Christian Songs and Hot Christian AC charts . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 According to lead singer Mark Hall , " If We Are the Body " was originally written for use as a " teaching tool " in his youth group . Hall , a youth pastor , said that " [ the youth group had ] forgotten what the body of Christ looked like " and commented that " The world is well aware of what the church is against , but they aren ’ t always aware of what it ’ s for . Everybody in the body of Christ is given gifts to minister with ; and when Christians aren ’ t using these gifts , the body suffers " . Hall 's inspiration for writing the song came from the second chapter of the book of James , where the writer " admonishes " readers to " steer clear of giving preferential treatment to any one particular group over another , such as favoring the rich over the poor " . 
 " If We Are the Body " was produced by Mark A. Miller and Steven Curtis Chapman . It was recorded at Glow In The Dark Studio in Decatur , Georgia and Zoo Studio in Franklin , Tennessee . The song was engineered by Matt Goldman and Sam Hewitt . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " If We Are the Body " is a song with a length of three minutes and 58 seconds . It is set in common time in the key of F ♯ minor and has a tempo of 126 beats per minute . Mark Hall 's vocal range in the song spans from the low note of B1 to the high note of A2 . A CCM song , it has an acoustic rock sound and incorporates the violin , mandolin , and accordion in its arrangement . Featuring " energetic instrumental spurts and tight melodies " , the song " admonishes the church for giving preferential treatment to any one particular group over another " and questions why the church does not minister impartially . The song 's chorus , which references the Christian concept of the body of Christ , asks " If we are the body , why aren 't his arms reaching ? / Why aren 't his hands healing ? / Why aren 't his words teaching ? / And if we are the body ? / Why aren 't his feet going ? / Why is his love not showing them there is a way ? " " If We Are the Body " challenges the church to welcome outsiders and to " get more visibly involved in changing this world " . 
 = = Critical reception and accolades = = 
 " If We Are the Body " received positive reviews from music critics . Kim Jones of About.com noted it as a " highlight " from Casting Crowns . Andy Argyrakis of CCM Magazine said that the song " commands attention " of lead singer Mark Hall . Belinda S. Ayers of Christian Broadcasting Network described it as " powerful " and " catchy " . Steve Best of Cross Rhythms felt it was an example of Casting Crowns being " more ... than rock bluster " . Russ Breimeier of The Fish felt " If We Are the Body " evokes " Michael Card and Keith Green " in its lyrical message . At the 35th GMA Dove Awards , " If We Are the Body " was nominated for the awards for Song of the Year and Pop / Contemporary Recorded Song of the Year . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " If We Are the Body " was released to Christian AC and Christian CHR radio on July 26 , 2003 as the lead single from Casting Crowns ' eponymous debut album . It debuted at number 37 on the Billboard Hot Christian Songs chart for the chart week of August 23 , 2003 and dropped off the chart the following week . The song re @-@ entered at number 37 for the chart week of September 6 , 2003 , In its seventh chart week , " If We Are the Body " advanced to number 24 and in its 10th chart week , it advanced to number seven . In its twelfth chart week , " If We Are the Body " reached its peak position of number three on the Hot Christian Songs chart . It also peaked at number three on the Billboard Hot Christian AC chart and spent three weeks atop both the Radio & Records Christian AC and Christian CHR charts . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Casting Crowns has performed " If We Are the Body " live in concert . At a concert on April 1 , 2005 at Giant Center in Hershey , Pennsylvania , the band opened up their set list with the song . At a concert on November 12 , 2005 at the Stabler Arena in Bethlehem , Pennsylvania , they performed it as the third song on their set list . They performed the song at a concert held on March 22 , 2008 at Jacksonville Veterans Memorial Arena in Jacksonville , Florida . Casting Crowns performed " If We Are the Body " as the second song on their set list at their February 4 , 2010 concert at Sprint Center in Kansas City , Missouri . The band performed it at their February 16 , 2012 concert at Van Andel Arena in Grand Rapids , Michigan . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits taken from Allmusic . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release and radio history = = 
 = ATL ( film ) = 
 ATL is a 2006 American drama film , and the feature film directorial debut of music video director Chris Robinson . The screenplay was written by Tina Gordon Chism from an original story by Antwone Fisher , and is loosely based on the experiences of the film 's producers Dallas Austin and Tionne " T @-@ Boz " Watkins ( of the R & B group TLC ) growing up in Atlanta , Georgia ( ATL ) . The film is a coming @-@ of @-@ age tale concerning Rashad , played by Atlanta native and hip hop artist T.I. in his film debut , and his friends in their final year in high school and on the verge of adulthood . The film also stars Antwan Andre Patton , aka Big Boi of the hip hop group OutKast , Evan Ross , Jackie Long , Lauren London , and Mykelti Williamson . 
 ATL was the first feature film for its director and the majority of its cast . Filmed in Atlanta , Georgia in summer 2005 , many celebrities from the city make cameo appearances , including Jazze Pha , Killer Mike , and Monica . ATL received generally favorable reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Rashad ( T.I. ) is a teen living in Atlanta , Georgia with his Uncle , George ( Mykelti Williamson ) and his little brother Ant ( Evan Ross ) . He and his brother were raised by their uncle George since their parents died in a car accident , and they work with him as part of his custodial company . When not working or finishing his last year of high school , Rashad spends most of his time with his friends Brooklyn ( Albert Daniels ) , Teddy ( Jason Weaver ) , and Esquire ( Jackie Long ) . Rashad is a talented artist but does not see much of a future in that field as he has become accustomed to working the family business . Esquire , Rashad 's best friend , goes to a prep school on the opposite side of town from where they live , and is trying to attend an Ivy League college after senior year . However , he finds out that he will need a letter of recommendation from someone of high stature to better his chances of acceptance at the school he wants to attend . 
 Rashad and his friends are also a skate crew , known as " The Ones " , on Sunday nights at Cascade , a skating rink where local teens hang out . While there , Rashad catches the eye of New @-@ New ( Lauren London ) , a round @-@ the @-@ way girl with a mysterious background , since he only sees her around when she is hanging out with her friends Veda ( Khadijah Haqq ) and Star ( Malika Haqq ) . The two become attracted to one another and they later kiss when he gives her a ride home in his Chevrolet El Camino . However , in contrast , Esquire instantly develops a disliking for Rashad 's new love interest , considering her bad company . Meanwhile , no longer under Rashad 's watchful eyes , Ant becomes involved with a drug dealer named Marcus ( Patton ) and begins to sell for him . He also starts dating a girl named <unk> ( April Clark ) , who takes a liking to him only after he began to make money through drug dealing . 
 At work one day , Esquire meets John Garnett ( Keith David ) , a millionaire who heads a successful business venture called the United Express . The two quickly become friends , with Garnett 's admiration for Esquire 's ambition and Esquire 's respect for Garnett 's success driving the relationship . Esquire sees an opportunity to obtain the letter of recommendation that would bring about his acceptance to his primary college choice . When Esquire goes to Garnett 's house to pick up the letter , he meets his daughter Erin , who , to his surprise , turns out to be New @-@ New , whose real name is Erin . Erin says that she will reveal where Esquire is really from ( something he lied to her father about ) if he tells Rashad about her . 
 Things soon begin to fall apart for Rashad ; Ant is arrested for selling weed , and later Rashad finds out the truth about Erin . He no longer speaks to his friends , realizing that Esquire knew about Erin the whole time . Esquire , feeling guilty about the way he obtained the letter , decides to return it to Garnett , and reveals the truth about himself and his background . He , Brooklyn , and Teddy attempt to make peace with Rashad and ask him to attend Skate Wars , Cascade 's annual skate competition , with them ; Rashad , however , refuses their offer . Just as he decides that he will go , after being persuaded by his uncle , he finds out that Marcus is looking for Ant on the streets , searching for cash that Ant owes to him . Rashad tracks the two down and throws the money that Ant owes Marcus in his face . Marcus then holds Rashad at gunpoint and makes a rude comment . Rashad knocks the gun off of Marcus 's hand , it goes off , and they fight briefly until Rashad gets up to leave . Rashad tells Ant to get into the car while Marcus grabs his gun and ends up shooting Ant ( later revealed ) in the chest . At the hospital , Rashad and Ant are able to reconnect ; likewise , Erin , Esquire , and Rashad make peace , as the scene ends with the poem " Love 's Deceit " by rapper Big Rube playing . 
 In the film 's final scene , Teddy opens his own business concerning the production of gold teeth , Brooklyn finds a job at a Krystal restaurant , while Esquire receives a mysterious letter of recommendation ( presumably from Garnett ) and is able to attend his college . The twins Veda and Star remain in the old neighborhood and hang out at Cascade on Sundays , while Erin goes to Spelman College , the school she wanted to attend . Uncle George starts attending church more often and finds a good woman to date . Ant changes direction , discarding the notion of drug dealing , finds a new girlfriend and begins to focus on his studies in school . Rashad , lastly , becomes a comic artist for the Sunday edition of the Atlanta Evening Standard , the city 's newspaper . The film ends with Rashad leaving his skates in Cascades , and the building 's lights go off . 
 = = Cast = = 
 T.I. as Rashad , the narrator of the story . Chris Robinson had directed Harris ' first music video four years prior to the creation of ATL , and was very impressed by his charisma and presence . " But on this film he came to the table , worked so hard and never tried to be T.I. — he became Rashad . " On being a part of the film 's production , Harris said he felt " it was the most honest representation of my culture and my city ever to be put on screen and the largest production to be ever filmed in Atlanta , so I [ feel ] somewhat obligated . " 
 Evan Ross as Ant , Rashad 's younger brother . ATL marks Ross ' film debut , which he says actually made his first foray easier , since it was also co @-@ star T.I. ' s debut . " It ’ s his first movie too , and that has been good because we ’ ve been able to find ways of doing it together that has made it a lot easier for each of us . " 
 Lauren London as New New / Erin Garnett , Rashad 's love interest and John Garnett 's daughter . The character of New @-@ New was loosely based on R & B group TLC 's " T @-@ Boz as a kid , " said London . " I talked to her about my character ... she explained to me how it was when she was young — the attitude and the flavor . And it ’ s funny , a lot of people say that I act like she used to act at the skating rink . ” Director Robinson was impressed by London and " everything from her look , to the fact that she 's new . And there 's just so much truth in her , and she doesn 't know how to lie yet as an actress . It was perfect . " 
 Jackie Long as Benjamin " Esquire " Gordon , a close friend of Rashad 's . The character of Esquire was inspired by a friend of producer Austin 's , who worked at a country club but would tell his friends he worked at a hot dog joint . " And you ’ d think his family had money , but he lived in the projects . " Long auditioned a year prior to shooting the film at the director 's home in California . " And he was a long shot but he came in and he became that character , " said Robinson . 
 Albert Daniels as Brooklyn , a New York transplant and one of Rashad 's closest friends . Robinson had known Daniels since he was a fifteen @-@ year @-@ old production assistant on his music video shoots in New York . " He was an annoying little kid who got fired every time he was a P.A. because he was so inquisitive . But every time they fired him I 'd bring him back because I felt like he always had something . " Eight years later , Robinson ran into Daniels at a poetry reading in New York City , and told him to audition for the film . Daniels didn 't have any money to get to Atlanta where he had to audition , so he hustled money doing poetry in subways , and bought a bus ticket to get there . 
 Jason Weaver as Teddy , a close friend of Rashad 's . Weaver impressed producer Austin in his previous film Drumline enough to get a role in ATL . The director felt that Weaver , the veteran of the young cast , and his experience would be helpful to the other cast members . 
 Antwan " Big Boi " Patton as Marcus , the drug dealer Ant begins to work for . He serves as the antagonist of the film , as he plans to lure Ant from Rashad for his own profit . The film also marked Big Boi 's film debut . As said by director Robinson in reference to Big Boi 's performance , " he wasn 't the normal kind of a bad guy . He put so much charisma and flavor behind it . We loved it . " 
 Nicholas Sheriff as Zero the leader of the gang D @-@ Boys . Nick is a great actor and a pleasure to work with . As said by director Robinson in reference to Nick 's performance , " he wasn 't the normal type of gang member . He put so much charisma and attitude behind it . 
 Keith David as John Garnett , Erin 's father and Esquire 's acquaintance . He is unaware of the fact that Esquire is lying about who he really is . 
 Mykelti Williamson as Uncle George , Rashad and Ant 's uncle and guardian . George means well but he is very stingy with his snacks so he keeps them locked up in his room or labels them " Property of George " . When Rashad and Ant fall out about Ant 's drug dealing , George says things to Rashad he doesn 't mean but they later make up . 
 April Clark as <unk> , Ant 's girlfriend . At first , she was rude to Ant when he would try to talk to her . After he begins to become more popular , she begins to develop a crush on him and asks him to be her boyfriend . 
 Khadijah Haqq as Veda , New New 's friend and Star 's twin sister . 
 Malika Haqq as Star , New New 's friend and Veda 's twin sister . 
 Lonette McKee as Priscilla Garnett , Erin 's mother and John Garnett 's wife . 
 <unk> Moore as Austin , Ant 's friend and Marcus ' cousin . 
 La <unk> <unk> as Tonya , Rashad 's ex @-@ girlfriend . 
 Tasha Smith as Gayle , Veda and Star 's mother . 
 Monique " Whyte Chocolate " Harris @-@ Ford as Sexy Pizza Customer . 
 <unk> Carruth as Big Booty Judy . 
 Monica as Waffle House Waitress . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The music for ATL was to be released as a soundtrack but they recorded so much music it became T.I. ' s 4th studio album King . It features such singles as What You Know , Top Back , Why You Wanna and Aaliyah 's At Your Best ( You Are Love ) . 
 = = Production = = 
 ATL 's story is loosely based on material by producers Dallas Austin and Tionne Watkins , who set out to describe their experiences growing up on the south side of Atlanta in the early ' 90s . Watkins and producer Jody Gerson approached James Lassiter with the idea of a story about a skating rink that many involved in the Atlanta music scene had started at , and how all of these people would attend the rink every Sunday night in their teen years . 
 Chris Robinson , a renowned music video director , was contacted with an offer to direct Austin and Watkins ' visualization , and took on his first feature with ATL . The films producers decided Robinson would be well @-@ suited for the project because of his ability to capture the music @-@ driven aspects of the film , as provided by his experience in the field . They also cited his talent in storytelling . According to producer Austin , " a lot of music video directors can 't capture the story , so what we 'd do was turn on the directors ' tapes , turn down the music and just watch to see if we could find the story . Chris was far and away the best . " About making ATL his first feature , Robinson stated that " as a music video director , I 'd get a lot of scripts that had to do with really big visual pictures . But I wanted to start off doing something that had heart . " After being hired , Robinson traveled to Atlanta and spent time with Austin to try to soak up the vibe and energy of the unique city . 
 Open auditions were held in Atlanta , Chicago , Los Angeles , and New York to comb the crowd for candidates who could compose the film 's ensemble cast . Robinson had already decided he wanted relatively unknown actors to perform in the film . Once the cast was assembled , Robinson had his actors converge in Atlanta for six weeks to rehearse the script and familiarize themselves with each other . " All this young black talent out there , all these young black actors who don 't get a shot or who have to wait years to get their shot , are getting their shot in this film , and they 're bringing it . " 
 Three months prior to the start of production , the actors gathered at Atlanta ’ s <unk> to begin training for the skating sequences in the film . Some had never been on roller skates before . Vaughn Newton , the actors ' skate captain , worked with them rigorously , usually practicing five hours a day . “ Lauren and the twins , Malika and Khadijah , adapted very quickly , " said Newton . " The guys came along a little slower . Al Be , Jason and Jackie Long developed very fast . T.I. was determined to learn . They were all great students and very supportive of each other . ” In addition to the main cast , Robinson decided to include numerous cameos in the film , generally involving people popular in the Atlanta music scene , a core element of the movie . Music producer Jazze Pha played the skating rink 's DJ ; Rico Wade , a part of the Atlanta @-@ based production team Organized Noize , who also frequented <unk> in the early ' 90s , made an appearance as well . R & B singer Monica , a protégé of producer Austin 's , also plays a Waffle House waitress in the film . A few of the south 's most sought after music video models made appearances as well including ' Whyte Chocolate ' also known as Monique Harris @-@ Ford . There are also cameos from rappers Bone Crusher , <unk> , and Killer Mike . 
 Dallas Austin coordinated the music for the film , which executive producer Timothy M. Bourne says is " all new music that 's rooted in the Atlanta vibe . " Austin had already produced his first feature with Drumline in 2002 , and wanted to be sure ATL would be similarly authentic to the culture of his hometown by using its current hip @-@ hop scene as the story 's backdrop . Music in the environment of the rink was the way Austin pitched the film " as a way to make a musical without putting Singin ' in the Rain on the screen ... without the kids breaking into song . I 'm determined to show Hollywood and New York the culture from the South . " 
 Under the working title " Jellybean " , the film was shot over a span of six weeks in fifty @-@ two locales throughout the city of Atlanta . Filming took place in the summer , sometimes in temperatures over a hundred degrees , challenging the cast and crew 's ability to stay motivated . " A lot of times we had to motivate each other to say ' listen , up your game . Go hard , ' " said Robinson . " And sometimes we needed to step back , take a breath , so we could get through . " 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Chris Robinson and Robb Buono , the film 's production designer , decided that the script was composed of two distinct parts — the reality of the teens ' lives and the time they spent at the skating rink . According to Buono , " we wanted to look at it [ the rink ] through rose colored glasses , because when you think back on your memories of that time period — no matter what age you are — you see everything bigger . Our goal was to make that roller skating rink a character that grows as we keep coming back , and each time it ’ s more magical — a Saturday Night Fever @-@ like contrast to the reality of life . ” Robinson and Buono chose to shoot at the Cascade Family Skating Rink in Atlanta after visiting and witnessing the energy and excitement of the rink . However , the filmmakers felt Cascade 's interior design was too bland and decided it should be redesigned . 
 Buono chose black and red for the rink 's new color palette . Red was used for its intensity and energy , and black was utilized because the rink would appear larger . Additionally , usage of black would contrast more boldly with the red colors . The ceiling above the rink was removed for lighting purposes . The rink floor was also refinished with darker colors to provide better light reflection . Rigging for the lights became an artistic challenge for Buono . Working with the art department , the rigging electrics and the rigging grips , he designed a wagon wheel effect that moved with the motion of the skating and allowed the lights to be programmed , aesthetically lighting both ends of the rink and capturing the action of the skating sequences . The skate rental section , arcade and snack bar were redesigned at the rink as well , so that the areas besides the skating floor wouldn 't feel monotonous . “ We did every inch of that rink , ” said Buono . “ The carpet on the walls , painting the ceiling , putting in the lights , painting the snack bar , changing the color of the tables . We used a lot of neon and bold bright colors . ” 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 ATL was released on March 31 , 2006 in 1 @,@ 602 theatres across the U.S. The film grossed at $ 11 @,@ 554 @,@ 404 , and ranked third at the box office behind Ice Age : The Meltdown at one and Spike Lee 's Inside Man at two ; the film 's opening weekend was a success . Its second weekend profits were considerably lower , as the film only earned $ 3 @,@ 710 @,@ 215 , enough for it to be reach seventieth place on the list of widely released films with the biggest weekend drops in the last twenty @-@ six years . The film made less money in the following weekends , and by the end of its theatrical run ATL had accumulated a total of $ 21 @,@ 170 @,@ 563 . After the theater take of approximately 50 % , ATL earned around half of its production cost , producing a significant loss . 
 = = = Home video = = = 
 The film was released in the U.S. on video and DVD July 18 , 2006 . DVD features include a behind @-@ the @-@ scenes featurette , deleted scenes , star T.I. ' s music video for his single " What You Know , " and the film 's theatrical trailer . The film was also released on Blu @-@ ray on November 14 , 2006 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 ATL received generally positive reviews from critics . At Allmovie , the film was given three stars , and critic Derek Armstrong , in a positive review of the film , stated that the film is only an average coming of age story " because some substance must take a backseat to all this beautifully crafted style . " Melissa Walters at BlackFilm.com , while believing some of the writing to be clichéd and the story familiar , also called the film " heartfelt , genuine , and enjoyable . " Film critic Roger Ebert awarded the film three stars in his Chicago Sun @-@ Times review , declaring the film " warm " and praising the screenplay 's " unforced , genuine affection for its characters . " IGN.com gave the film a 4 / 5 rating , naming Robinson 's directorial debut " masterful . " Metacritic , a normalized film rating website , provided the film a 63 / 100 score . At the review aggregator site Rotten Tomatoes , the film averaged a 62 % approval rate . Ruthe Stein from the San Francisco Chronicle called the film one of the better kind of its genre , praising the performances of the young cast , and the film 's star T.I. in particular . At Yahoo ! Movies , based on 13 reviews the film has averaged a B- by the critics standards . 
 All reviews of the picture weren 't so enthusiastic , however . Lisa Schwarzbaum of Entertainment Weekly graded the film a B- , saying that while the skating scenes are a blast , the film stumbles when it attempts to be too much for too many audiences . Neil Genzlinger of The New York Times said he was surprised that with so many untested actors rounding out the main cast , " the most amateurish thing about it is the script . " Genzlinger also called the screenplay <unk> marred and predictable , while giving credit to the young actors of the film . He was also critical of Chris Robinson 's direction , stating that he " can 't stay with a scene long enough to let his actors build momentum . " At The Atlanta Journal @-@ Constitution , Bob Longino provided a negative review of the movie , pointing it out as " boring , uninteresting , and slow " . However , Longino did say that stars T.I. and Big Boi 's performances improved as the film progressed , and that there were a few laugh @-@ out @-@ loud comedic moments in the film . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 = = Sequel = = 
 On January 7 , 2015 Chris Robinson posted a teaser poster of the sequel on Instagram with the main cast in it confirming that a sequel is in the works . On March 4 , 2015 T.I. confirmed on his instagram , that an ATL 2 is to be released . 
 = Striped honeyeater = 
 The striped honeyeater ( Plectorhyncha lanceolata ) is a passerine bird of the honeyeater family , Meliphagidae , found in Australia . It is a medium @-@ sized honeyeater , about 23 centimetres ( 9 @.@ 1 in ) in length . Both sexes are a light greyish brown with dark brown centres to the feathers , which give the appearance of stripes . The stripes are particularly distinct on the head and back of the neck . While it is found mainly in inland eastern Australia where it inhabits the drier open forests , it is also found in coastal swamp forests from south east Queensland to the central coast of New South Wales . 
 Although a honeyeater , the striped honeyeater relies on insects as its major food source , and its bill has been adapted to an insect diet . When not breeding it has been recorded feeding and travelling in small groups , but it nests singly , laying around three eggs in a deep cup @-@ shaped nest suspended from the end of drooping branches . It is widely distributed and common within its range , thus the population is listed as being of least concern for conservation by the IUCN . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The striped honeyeater was first described by English ornithologist and bird artist , John Gould , in A Synopsis of the Birds of Australia and the Adjacent Islands , published in 1838 . It is a member of the family Meliphagidae , the honeyeaters , and the sole member of the monotypic genus Plectorhyncha . Molecular studies indicate that genus is closely allied to the monotypic genus <unk> , though dissimilar in appearance . The painted honeyeater ( <unk> picta ) and the striped honeyeater are part of a subclade that includes also Philemon and <unk> . 
 The genus name Plectorhyncha is derived from a combination of the Greek words for " a spear point " and " the bill " and refers to the fine pointed bill . The species name lanceolata comes from the Latin for " lance @-@ shaped " in reference to the long pointed feathers on the throat and breast . The bird is also referred to as the <unk> honeyeater . 
 Honeyeaters are related to the Pardalotidae ( pardalotes ) , Acanthizidae ( Australian warblers , scrubwrens , thornbills , etc . ) , and the Maluridae ( Australian fairy @-@ wrens ) in a large Meliphagoidea superfamily . 
 = = Description = = 
 The striped honeyeater is a medium @-@ sized honeyeater with a body length of 22 – 25 centimetres ( 8 @.@ 7 – 9 @.@ 8 in ) , a wingspan of 28 – 36 centimetres ( 11 – 14 in ) , and an average weight of 40 grams ( 1 @.@ 4 oz ) . 
 The upper parts are generally light greyish brown with dark brown centres to the feathers , giving the appearance of stripes . These stripes are marked on the head and nape , less distinct on the rump and almost absent from the upper tail coverts . The underparts are whitish with faint streaks on the belly . The feathers of the upper breast and throat are long and pointed , giving the head a spiky appearance . The wing and tail are both moderately long with rounded tips . The bill is short , with a sharp pointed appearance , dark blue @-@ grey grading to a grey @-@ black at the tip and around the nostrils . Legs and feet are blue @-@ grey with black claws . The bare skin around the eye is dark brown and the iris a dark black @-@ brown . 
 Males and females are similar in appearance . Juvenile birds are slightly browner than the adults , with buff or brown edges to the feathers of the wings and back . Juveniles have a duller , less streaked appearance than adults . Juveniles moult into adult plumage at around one year old . There is no seasonal difference in the plumage of breeding birds . 
 The striped honeyeater 's song is described as a chirp , chirp , cherry , cherry , its contact call as a sharp <unk> and its alarm call as a shrill whistling note . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 This species is found mainly in eastern Australia , predominantly inland . It inhabits the drier open forests such as mallee and mulga but also heathland and mangroves on the coast . An observer in 1923 was surprised to find a small number of striped honeyeaters nesting at Forster on the New South Wales mid @-@ north coast , saying " it is a remarkable fact for this bird to leave its proper habitat so far inland , to come to the coast " . However the range has expanded , and contemporary accounts give its distribution as eastern Australia from central and south @-@ east Queensland extending inland to south @-@ east South Australia , and to the coast south to the Tuggerah Lakes , New South Wales . Small irruptions associated with weather patterns and habitat changes have been recorded in areas outside its usual range including the Grampians and the Adelaide Plains . 
 It occurs in a wide variety of habitats , including riparian woodlands such as river red gum , <unk> box and black box with an understory of lignum or saltbush ; mallee woodland , especially where mixed with thickets of <unk> or Emu Bush ; woodlands of Native Pine growing on sand ridges ; and semi @-@ arid scrubland dominated by Acacia including <unk> . On the coast The striped honeyeater is found in swamp forests of paperbark and Casuarina , and in developed areas containing native and exotic trees and shrubs such as caravan parks , reserves , gardens , and farms and orchards . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 Although a honeyeater in origin , the striped honeyeater 's food source is primarily insects , and its diet includes seeds and fruits as well as nectar . Its bill has evolved to a short , straight , sharply pointed shape more suited to probing crevices for insects , than to probing flower tubes . It has the honeyeater ’ s brush tongue and takes nectar from shallow flowers such as eucalypt blossoms . 
 It is arboreal , mostly feeding amongst the foliage in the canopy of trees . Most food is obtained from the leaves , and less often from the bark or flowers and fruit . The major foraging methods are gleaning from leaves and dead branches , probing under loose bark and in crevices , probing woody fruits of Black Oak , probing flowers of <unk> ( Eucalyptus gracilis ) and sallying for insects . The striped honeyeater occasionally hangs upside @-@ down to extract insects . 
 = = = Social behaviour = = = 
 The striped honeyeater has most often been observed singly or in twos , and occasionally in small flocks . When not breeding it has been recorded feeding in loose mobile groups , drinking in mixed groups with miners , and travelling in small groups . It engages in a high level of social activity , including perching closely and allopreening , and when feeding in groups chasing , calling and scolding . The non @-@ breeding striped honeyeater is vocal , calling while feeding and perching , though only occasionally calling in flight . It has been recorded engaged in a display of wing raising and calling , and performing duets and call @-@ and @-@ response song . 
 While the striped honeyeater aggressively defends its nest by dive @-@ bombing people and animals who come too close , and has been observed singing from display perches , it is not known to be territorial . It often feeds near other species of honeyeater and no inter @-@ species aggression has been noted . 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 The striped honeyeater breeds throughout its distribution range , usually as simple pairs , with both sexes building the nest , incubating and feeding the young . However cooperative breeding has been observed , with a third adult bird involved in feeding nestlings . It nests solitarily , and pairs use the same or adjoining trees for nesting over two or more seasons . 
 The breeding season is from August to January , though dependent on local conditions . The nest site is usually in the drooping foliage of a tall shrub or low tree , such as Casuarina , Melaleuca , Acacia , and mallee eucalypts . The site is sometimes near to or overhanging water , and the nest is usually constructed at the end of a drooping branch , suspended from twigs or foliage . The striped honeyeater often nests in the vicinity of a nesting butcherbird . It builds a deep cup @-@ shaped or bag @-@ shaped nest , with thick walls and the lip of the opening turned slightly inwards . The nest is made from thin dry grass and coated with plant down , feathers or wool , the coating often completely obscuring the grass framework . It is lined with spider webs , hair , wool or rootlets , and on occasion flowers and tissue paper . The striped honeyeater will commonly re @-@ use material from previous nests . 
 The eggs are an elongated oval 2 @.@ 4 centimetres ( 0 @.@ 94 in ) by 1 @.@ 7 centimetres ( 0 @.@ 67 in ) somewhat pointed at one end . They are a dull white , smooth and lustreless or slightly lustrous , and moderately blotched with reddish @-@ brown marks over the whole shell , though more profusely towards and over the larger end . The striped honeyeater lays an average of three eggs at 24 @-@ hour intervals . The eggs are incubated by both parents who sit constantly in alternating periods of around 20 minutes for 16 or 17 days . The fledging period is also around 16 days . 
 The nests of the striped honeyeater are parasitized by the pallid cuckoo ( Cacomantis pallidus ) . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 Because of its wide distribution and stable numbers , the population status of the striped honeyeater has been evaluated by the IUCN as being of least concern . 
 = Joseph McCarthy = 
 Joseph Raymond " Joe " McCarthy ( November 14 , 1908 – May 2 , 1957 ) was an American politician who served as a U.S. Senator from the state of Wisconsin from 1947 until his death in 1957 . Beginning in 1950 , McCarthy became the most visible public face of a period in which Cold War tensions fueled fears of widespread Communist subversion . He was noted for making claims that there were large numbers of Communists and Soviet spies and sympathizers inside the United States federal government and elsewhere . Ultimately , the controversy he generated led him to be censured by the United States Senate . 
 The term " McCarthyism " , coined in 1950 in reference to McCarthy 's practices , was soon applied to similar anti @-@ communist activities . Today , the term is used by critics of McCarthy in reference to what they consider demagogic , reckless , and unsubstantiated accusations , as well as public attacks on the character or patriotism of political opponents . 
 McCarthy was born in 1908 in the Town of Grand Chute in <unk> County , Wisconsin , and attended Marquette University , eventually earning an LL.B. from Marquette University Law School . At age 33 , McCarthy volunteered for the United States Marine Corps and served during World War II . He successfully ran for the United States Senate in 1946 , defeating Robert M. La Follette Jr . After three largely undistinguished years in the Senate , McCarthy rose suddenly to national fame in February 1950 when he asserted in a speech that he had a list of " members of the Communist Party and members of a spy ring " who were employed in the State Department . 
 In succeeding years after his 1950 speech , McCarthy made additional accusations of Communist infiltration into the State Department , the administration of President Harry S. Truman , the Voice of America , and the United States Army . He also used various charges of communism , communist sympathies , disloyalty , or sex crimes to attack a number of politicians and other individuals inside and outside of government . 
 McCarthy made various attempts to investigate , and hold accountable ( as the practice was still against the law in many locations ) , persons whom he accused , or threatened to publicly accuse , of homosexuality . Former U.S. Senator Alan K. Simpson has written , " The so @-@ called ' Red Scare ' has been the main focus of most historians of that period of time . A lesser @-@ known element ... and one that harmed far more people was the " Lavender Scare " , a witch @-@ hunt McCarthy and others conducted against homosexuals . " With the highly publicized Army – McCarthy hearings of 1954 , and following the suicide of Wyoming Senator Lester C. Hunt that same year , McCarthy 's support and popularity faded . On December 2 , 1954 , the Senate voted to censure Senator McCarthy by a vote of 67 – 22 , making him one of the few senators ever to be disciplined in this fashion . McCarthy died at Bethesda Naval Hospital in Bethesda , Maryland on May 2 , 1957 , at the age of 48 . The official cause of death was acute hepatitis ; some biographers say this was caused , or exacerbated , by alcoholism . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 McCarthy was born on a farm in the Town of Grand Chute , Wisconsin , near Appleton , the fifth of seven children . His mother , Bridget Tierney , was from County Tipperary , Ireland . His father , Timothy McCarthy , was born in the United States , the son of an Irish father and a German mother . McCarthy dropped out of junior high school at age 14 to help his parents manage their farm . He entered Little Wolf High School , in Manawa , Wisconsin , when he was 20 and graduated in one year . 
 McCarthy worked his way through college from 1930 to 1935 , studying first engineering , then law , and receiving an LL.B. degree in 1935 from Marquette University Law School in Milwaukee . He was admitted to the bar in 1935 . While working at a law firm in Shawano , Wisconsin , he launched an unsuccessful campaign for district attorney as a Democrat in 1936 . In 1939 , McCarthy had better success when he ran for the nonpartisan elected post of 10th District circuit judge . ( During his years as an attorney , McCarthy made money on the side by gambling . ) McCarthy became the youngest circuit judge in the state 's history by defeating incumbent Edgar V. Werner , who had been a judge for 24 years . In the campaign , McCarthy exaggerated Werner 's age of 66 , claiming that he was 73 , and so allegedly too old and infirm to handle the duties of his office . Writing of Werner in Reds : McCarthyism In Twentieth @-@ Century America , Ted Morgan wrote : " <unk> and condescending , he was disliked by lawyers . He had been reversed often by the Wisconsin Supreme Court , and he was so inefficient that he had piled up a huge backlog of cases . " 
 McCarthy 's judicial career attracted some controversy because of the speed with which he dispatched many of his cases as he worked to clear the heavily backlogged docket he had inherited . Wisconsin had strict divorce laws , but when McCarthy heard divorce cases , he would expedite them whenever possible , and he made the needs of children involved in contested divorces a priority . When it came to other cases argued before him , McCarthy compensated for his lack of experience as a jurist by demanding and relying heavily upon , precise briefs from the contesting attorneys . The Wisconsin Supreme Court reversed a low percentage of the cases he heard , but he was also censured in 1941 for having lost evidence in a price fixing case . 
 = = = Military service = = = 
 In 1942 , shortly after the U.S. entered World War II , McCarthy was commissioned into the United States Marine Corps , despite the fact that his judicial office exempted him from compulsory service . His education qualified him for an automatic commission as an officer , and he became a second lieutenant after completing basic training . He served as an intelligence briefing officer for a dive bomber squadron in the Solomon Islands and Bougainville . McCarthy reportedly chose the Marines with the hope that being a veteran of this branch of the military would serve him best in his future political career . 
 According to Morgan , writing in Reds , Joe 's friend Urban P. Van Susteren , a lawyer , and later judge , whom McCarthy had named divorce counsel for Shawano County , and who had applied for active duty in the Army Air Force in early 1942 , advised him : " Be a hero — join the Marines . " When McCarthy seemed hesitant , Van Susteren asked , " You got shit in your blood ? " Van Susteren managed McCarthy 's 1946 Senate campaign , and during McCarthy 's Senate career he stayed with Van Susteren whenever he was in Appleton . 
 McCarthy served 30 months as an intelligence officer ( August 1942 -- February 1945 ) , and he held the rank of captain by the time he was discharged in April 1945 . He volunteered to fly twelve combat missions as a gunner @-@ observer , acquiring ( or perhaps giving himself ) the nickname of " Tail @-@ Gunner Joe " in the course of one of these missions . 
 He later falsely claimed 32 aerial missions in order to qualify for a Distinguished Flying Cross , which he received in 1952 . McCarthy also publicized a letter of commendation which he claimed had been signed by his commanding officer and countersigned by Admiral Chester W. Nimitz , then Chief of Naval Operations . However , it was revealed that McCarthy had written this letter himself , in his capacity as intelligence officer . A " war wound " that McCarthy made the subject of varying stories involving airplane crashes or anti @-@ aircraft fire was in fact received aboard ship during a ceremony for sailors crossing the equator for the first time . Because of McCarthy 's various lies about his military heroism , his " Tail @-@ Gunner Joe " nickname was sarcastically used as a term of mockery by his critics . 
 McCarthy campaigned for the Republican Senate nomination in Wisconsin while still on active duty in 1944 but was defeated for the GOP nomination by Alexander Wiley , the incumbent . He resigned his commission in April 1945 , five months before the end of the Pacific war in September 1945 . He was then reelected unopposed to his circuit court position , and began a much more systematic campaign for the 1946 Republican Senate primary nomination , with support from Thomas Coleman , the Republican Party 's political boss in Wisconsin . In this race , he was challenging three @-@ term senator Robert M. La Follette Jr . , founder of the Wisconsin Progressive Party and son of the celebrated Wisconsin governor and senator Robert M. La Follette , Sr. 
 = = = Senate campaign = = = 
 In his campaign , McCarthy attacked La Follette for not enlisting during the war , although La Follette had been 46 when Pearl Harbor was bombed . He also claimed La Follette had made huge profits from his investments while he , McCarthy , had been away fighting for his country . In fact , McCarthy had invested in the stock market himself during the war , netting a profit of $ 42 @,@ 000 in 1943 . La Follette 's investments consisted of partial interest in a radio station , which earned him a profit of $ 47 @,@ 000 over two years . 
 The suggestion that La Follette had been guilty of war profiteering was deeply damaging , and McCarthy won the primary nomination 207 @,@ 935 votes to 202 @,@ 557 . It was during this campaign that McCarthy started publicizing his war @-@ time nickname " Tail @-@ Gunner Joe " , using the slogan , " Congress needs a tail @-@ gunner " . Arnold <unk> later stated that McCarthy " was elected to his first term in the Senate with support from the Communist @-@ controlled United Electrical , Radio and Machine Workers , CIO " , which preferred McCarthy to the anti @-@ communist Robert M. La Follette . In the general election against Democratic opponent Howard J. McMurray , McCarthy won 61 @.@ 2 % to Democrat McMurray 's 37 @.@ 3 % , and thus joined Senator Wiley , whom he had challenged unsuccessfully two years earlier , in the Senate . 
 = = United States Senate = = 
 Senator McCarthy 's first three years in the Senate were unremarkable . McCarthy was a popular speaker , invited by many different organizations , covering a wide range of topics . His aides and many in the Washington social circle described him as charming and friendly , and he was a popular guest at cocktail parties . He was far less well liked among fellow senators , however , who found him quick @-@ tempered and prone to impatience and even rage . Outside of a small circle of colleagues , he was soon an isolated figure in the Senate . 
 He was active in labor @-@ management issues , with a reputation as a moderate Republican . He fought against continuation of wartime price controls , especially on sugar . His advocacy in this area was associated by critics with a $ 20 @,@ 000 personal loan McCarthy received from a Pepsi bottling executive , earning the Senator the derisive nickname " The Pepsi @-@ Cola Kid " . He supported the Taft – Hartley Act over Truman 's veto , angering labor unions in Wisconsin but solidifying his business base . 
 In an incident for which he would be widely criticized , McCarthy lobbied for the commutation of death sentences given to a group of Waffen @-@ SS soldiers convicted of war crimes for carrying out the 1944 Malmedy massacre of American prisoners of war . McCarthy was critical of the convictions because of allegations of torture during the interrogations that led to the German soldiers ' confessions . He charged that the U.S. Army was engaged in a coverup of judicial misconduct , but never presented any evidence to support the accusation . Shortly after this , a poll of the Senate press corps voted McCarthy " the worst U.S. senator " currently in office . 
 = = = Wheeling speech = = = 
 McCarthy experienced a meteoric rise in national profile on February 9 , 1950 , when he gave a Lincoln Day speech to the Republican Women 's Club of Wheeling , West Virginia . His words in the speech are a matter of some debate , as no audio recording was saved . However , it is generally agreed that he produced a piece of paper that he claimed contained a list of known Communists working for the State Department . McCarthy is usually quoted to have said : " The State Department is infested with communists . I have here in my hand a list of 205 — a list of names that were made known to the Secretary of State as being members of the Communist Party and who nevertheless are still working and shaping policy in the State Department . " 
 There is some dispute about whether or not McCarthy actually gave the number of people on the list as being " 205 " or " 57 " . In a later telegram to President Truman , and when entering the speech into the Congressional Record , he used the number 57 . The origin of the number 205 can be traced : in later debates on the Senate floor , McCarthy referred to a 1946 letter that then – Secretary of State James Byrnes sent to Congressman Adolph J. Sabath . In that letter , Byrnes said State Department security investigations had resulted in " recommendation against permanent employment " for 284 persons , and that 79 of these had been removed from their jobs ; this left 205 still on the State Department 's payroll . In fact , by the time of McCarthy 's speech only about 65 of the employees mentioned in the Byrnes letter were still with the State Department , and all of these had undergone further security checks . 
 At the time of McCarthy 's speech , communism was a significant concern in the United States . This concern was exacerbated by the actions of the Soviet Union in Eastern Europe , the victory of the communists in the Chinese Civil War , the Soviets ' development of a nuclear weapon the year before , and by the contemporary controversy surrounding Alger Hiss and the confession of Soviet spy Klaus Fuchs . With this background and due to the sensational nature of McCarthy 's charge against the State Department , the Wheeling speech soon attracted a flood of press interest in McCarthy 's claim . 
 = = = Tydings Committee = = = 
 McCarthy himself was taken aback by the massive media response to the Wheeling speech , and he was accused of continually revising both his charges and figures . In Salt Lake City , Utah , a few days later , he cited a figure of 57 , and in the Senate on February 20 , he claimed 81 . During a five @-@ hour speech , McCarthy presented a case @-@ by @-@ case analysis of his 81 " loyalty risks " employed at the State Department . It is widely accepted that most of McCarthy 's cases were selected from the so @-@ called " Lee list " , a report that had been compiled three years earlier for the House Appropriations Committee . Led by a former Federal Bureau of Investigation agent named Robert E. Lee , the House investigators had reviewed security clearance documents on State Department employees , and had determined that there were " incidents of inefficiencies " in the security reviews of 108 employees . McCarthy hid the source of his list , stating that he had penetrated the " iron curtain " of State Department secrecy with the aid of " some good , loyal Americans in the State Department " . In reciting the information from the Lee list cases , McCarthy consistently exaggerated , representing the hearsay of witnesses as facts and converting phrases such as " inclined towards Communism " to " a Communist " . 
 In response to McCarthy 's charges , the Senate voted unanimously to investigate , and the Tydings Committee hearings were called . This was a subcommittee of the United States Senate Committee on Foreign Relations set up in February 1950 to conduct " a full and complete study and investigation as to whether persons who are disloyal to the United States are , or have been , employed by the Department of State " . Many Democrats were incensed at McCarthy 's attack on the State Department of a Democratic administration , and had hoped to use the hearings to discredit him . The Democratic chairman of the subcommittee , Senator Millard Tydings , was reported to have said , " Let me have him [ McCarthy ] for three days in public hearings , and he 'll never show his face in the Senate again . " 
 During the hearings , McCarthy moved on from his original unnamed Lee list cases and used the hearings to make charges against nine specific people : Dorothy Kenyon , Esther Brunauer , <unk> Hanson , Gustavo Durán , Owen Lattimore , Harlow Shapley , Frederick Schuman , John S. Service , and Philip Jessup . Some of them no longer worked for the State Department , or never had ; all had previously been the subject of charges of varying worth and validity . Owen Lattimore became a particular focus of McCarthy 's , who at one point described him as a " top Russian spy " . Throughout the hearings , McCarthy employed colorful rhetoric , but produced no substantial evidence , to support his accusations . 
 From its beginning , the Tydings Committee was marked by partisan infighting . Its final report , written by the Democratic majority , concluded that the individuals on McCarthy 's list were neither Communists nor pro @-@ communist , and said the State Department had an effective security program . The Tydings Report labeled McCarthy 's charges a " fraud and a hoax " , and said that the result of McCarthy 's actions was to " confuse and divide the American people [ ... ] to a degree far beyond the hopes of the Communists themselves " . Republicans responded in kind , with William E. Jenner stating that Tydings was guilty of " the most brazen whitewash of treasonable conspiracy in our history " . The full Senate voted three times on whether to accept the report , and each time the voting was precisely divided along party lines . 
 = = = Fame , notoriety , and personal life = = = 
 From 1950 onward , McCarthy continued to exploit the fear of Communism and to press his accusations that the government was failing to deal with Communism within its ranks . McCarthy also began investigations into the numerous homosexuals working in the foreign policy bureaucracy , who were considered prime candidates for blackmail by the Soviets . These accusations received wide publicity , increased his approval rating , and gained him a powerful national following . 
 " In Congress , there was little doubt that homosexuals did not belong in sensitive government positions . " Since the late 1940s , the government had been dismissing about five homosexuals a month from civilian posts ; by 1954 , the number had grown twelve @-@ fold . " Mixed in with the hysterics were some logic , though : homosexuals faced condemnation and discrimination , and most of them — wishing to conceal their <unk> vulnerable to blackmail . " DCI Roscoe <unk> was called to Congress to testify on homosexuals being employed at the CIA . He said , " The use of homosexuals as a control mechanism over individuals recruited for espionage is a generally accepted technique which has been used at least on a limited basis for many years . " As soon as the DCI said these words , his aide signaled to take the remainder of the DCI 's testimony off the record . Political historian David Barrett uncovered <unk> 's notes , which reveal the remainder of the statement : " While this agency will never employ homosexuals on its rolls , it might conceivably be necessary , and in the past has actually been valuable , to use known homosexuals as agents in the field . I am certain that if Josef Stalin or a member of the Politburo or a high satellite official were known to be a homosexual , no member of this committee or of the Congress would balk against our use of any technique to penetrate their operations ... after all , intelligence and espionage is , at best , an extremely dirty business . " The Senators reluctantly agreed the CIA had to be flexible . 
 McCarthy 's methods also brought on the disapproval and opposition of many . Barely a month after McCarthy 's Wheeling speech , the term " McCarthyism " was coined by Washington Post cartoonist Herbert Block . Block and others used the word as a synonym for demagoguery , baseless defamation , and mudslinging . Later , it would be embraced by McCarthy and some of his supporters . " McCarthyism is Americanism with its sleeves rolled , " McCarthy said in a 1952 speech , and later that year he published a book titled McCarthyism : The Fight For America . 
 McCarthy has been accused of attempting to discredit his critics and political opponents by accusing them of being Communists or communist sympathizers . In the 1950 Maryland Senate election , McCarthy campaigned for John Marshall Butler in his race against four @-@ term incumbent Millard Tydings , with whom McCarthy had been in conflict during the Tydings Committee hearings . In speeches supporting Butler , McCarthy accused Tydings of " protecting Communists " and " shielding traitors " . McCarthy 's staff was heavily involved in the campaign , and collaborated in the production of a campaign tabloid that contained a composite photograph doctored to make it appear that Tydings was in intimate conversation with Communist leader Earl Russell Browder . A Senate subcommittee later investigated this election and referred to it as " a despicable , back @-@ street type of campaign " , as well as recommending that the use of defamatory literature in a campaign be made grounds for expulsion from the Senate . The pamphlet was clearly labeled a composite . McCarthy said it was " wrong " to distribute it ; though staffer Jean Kerr thought it was fine . After his election defeat , Tydings claimed foul play ( he had lost by almost 40 @,@ 000 votes ) , however , his reelection campaign was in trouble before Tydings butted heads with McCarthy : Tydings was the highly visible chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee and had some responsibility for the lack of preparedness for the Korean campaign , he was increasingly unpopular with African @-@ American voters because of his support for Jim Crow laws , and McCarthy and anti @-@ communism were popular with Maryland 's Catholic voters at election time . 
 In addition to the Tydings – Butler race , McCarthy campaigned for several other Republicans in the 1950 elections , including Everett Dirksen against Democratic incumbent and Senate Majority Leader Scott W. Lucas . Dirksen , and indeed all the candidates McCarthy supported , won their elections , and those he opposed lost . The elections , including many that McCarthy was not involved in , were an overall Republican sweep . Although his impact on the elections was unclear , McCarthy was credited as a key Republican campaigner . He was now regarded as one of the most powerful men in the Senate and was treated with new @-@ found deference by his colleagues . In the 1952 Senate elections McCarthy was returned to his Senate seat with 54 @.@ 2 % of the vote , compared to Democrat Thomas Fairchild 's 45 @.@ 6 % . 
 In 1950 McCarthy assaulted journalist Drew Pearson in the cloakroom of a Washington club , reportedly kneeing him in the groin . McCarthy , who admitted the assault , claimed he merely " slapped " Pearson . In 1952 , using rumors collected by Pearson , Nevada publisher Hank Greenspun wrote that McCarthy was a homosexual . The major journalistic media refused to print the story , and no notable McCarthy biographer has accepted the rumor as probable . In 1953 , McCarthy married Jean Kerr , a researcher in his office . He and his wife adopted a baby girl , whom they named Tierney Elizabeth McCarthy , in January 1957 . 
 = = = McCarthy and the Truman administration = = = 
 McCarthy and President Truman clashed often during the years both held office . McCarthy characterized Truman and the Democratic Party as soft on , or even in league with , Communists , and spoke of the Democrats ' " twenty years of treason " . Truman , in turn , once referred to McCarthy as " the best asset the Kremlin has " , calling McCarthy 's actions an attempt to " sabotage the foreign policy of the United States " in a cold war and comparing it to shooting American soldiers in the back in a hot war . It was the Truman Administration 's State Department that McCarthy accused of harboring 205 ( or 57 or 81 ) " known Communists " . Truman 's Secretary of Defense , George Catlett Marshall , was the target of some of McCarthy 's most vitriolic rhetoric . Marshall had been Army Chief of Staff during World War II and was also Truman 's former Secretary of State . Marshall was a highly respected General and statesman , remembered today as the architect of victory and peace , the latter based on the Marshall Plan for post @-@ war reconstruction of Europe , for which he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1953 . McCarthy made a lengthy speech on Marshall , later published in 1951 as a book titled America 's Retreat From Victory : The Story of George Catlett Marshall . Marshall had been involved in American foreign policy with China , and McCarthy charged that Marshall was directly responsible for the loss of China to Communism . In the speech McCarthy also implied that Marshall was guilty of treason ; declared that " if Marshall were merely stupid , the laws of probability would dictate that part of his decisions would serve this country 's interest " ; and most famously , accused him of being part of " a conspiracy so immense and an infamy so black as to dwarf any previous venture in the history of man " . 
 During the Korean War , when President Truman dismissed General Douglas MacArthur , McCarthy charged that Truman and his advisors must have planned the dismissal during late @-@ night sessions when " they 've had time to get the President cheerful " on bourbon and <unk> . McCarthy declared , " The son of a bitch should be impeached . " 
 = = = Support from Roman Catholics and the Kennedy Family = = = 
 One of the strongest bases of anti @-@ Communist sentiment in the United States was the Catholic community , which constituted over 20 % of the national vote . McCarthy identified himself as Catholic , and although the great majority of Catholics were Democrats , as his fame as a leading anti @-@ Communist grew , he became popular in Catholic communities across the country , with strong support from many leading Catholics , diocesan newspapers , and Catholic journals . At the same time , some Catholics did oppose McCarthy , notably the anti @-@ Communist author Father John Francis Cronin and the influential journal Commonweal . 
 McCarthy established a bond with the powerful Kennedy family , which had high visibility among Catholics . McCarthy became a close friend of Joseph P. Kennedy Sr. , himself a fervent anti @-@ Communist , and was a frequent guest at the Kennedy compound in Hyannis Port . He dated two of Kennedy 's daughters , Patricia and Eunice , and was godfather to Robert F. Kennedy 's first child , Kathleen Kennedy . Robert Kennedy was chosen by McCarthy as a counsel for his investigatory committee , but resigned after six months due to disagreements with McCarthy himself and committee Counsel Roy Marcus Cohn . Joseph Kennedy had a national network of contacts and became a vocal supporter , building McCarthy 's popularity among Catholics and making sizable contributions to McCarthy 's campaigns . The Kennedy patriarch hoped that one of his sons would be president . Mindful of the anti @-@ Catholic prejudice Al Smith faced during his 1928 campaign for that office , Joseph Kennedy supported McCarthy as a national Catholic politician who might pave the way for a younger Kennedy 's presidential candidacy . 
 Unlike many Democrats , John F. Kennedy , who served in the Senate with McCarthy from 1953 until the latter 's death in 1957 , never attacked McCarthy . McCarthy had refused to campaign for Kennedy 's 1952 opponent , Republican incumbent Henry Cabot Lodge Jr . , due to his friendship with the Kennedys . When a speaker at a February 1952 final club dinner stated that he was glad McCarthy had not attended Harvard College , an angry Kennedy jumped up , denounced the speaker , and left the event . Asked by Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. why he avoided criticism of McCarthy , Kennedy said , " Hell , half my voters in Massachusetts look on McCarthy as a hero . " 
 = = = McCarthy and Eisenhower = = = 
 During the 1952 presidential election , the Eisenhower campaign toured Wisconsin with McCarthy . In a speech delivered in Green Bay , Eisenhower declared that while he agreed with McCarthy 's goals , he disagreed with his methods . In draft versions of his speech , Eisenhower had also included a strong defense of his mentor , George Marshall , which was a direct rebuke of McCarthy 's frequent attacks . However , under the advice of conservative colleagues who were fearful that Eisenhower could lose Wisconsin if he alienated McCarthy supporters , he deleted this defense from later versions of his speech . The deletion was discovered by William H. Laurence , a reporter for The New York Times , and featured on its front page the next day . Eisenhower was widely criticized for giving up his personal convictions , and the incident became the low point of his campaign . 
 With his victory in the 1952 presidential race , Dwight Eisenhower became the first Republican president in 20 years . The Republican party also held a majority in the House of Representatives and the Senate . After being elected president , Eisenhower made it clear to those close to him that he did not approve of McCarthy and he worked actively to diminish his power and influence . Still , he never directly confronted McCarthy or criticized him by name in any speech , thus perhaps prolonging McCarthy 's power by giving the impression that even the President was afraid to criticize him directly . Oshinsky disputes this , stating that " Eisenhower was known as a harmonizer , a man who could get diverse factions to work toward a common goal . ... Leadership , he explained , meant patience and conciliation , not ' hitting people over the head ' . " 
 McCarthy won reelection in 1952 with 54 % of the vote , defeating former Wisconsin State Attorney General Thomas E. Fairchild but badly trailing a Republican ticket which swept the state of Wisconsin ; all the other Republican winners , including Eisenhower himself , received at least 60 % of the Wisconsin vote . Those who expected that party loyalty would cause McCarthy to tone down his accusations of Communists being harbored within the government were soon disappointed . Eisenhower had never been an admirer of McCarthy , and their relationship became more hostile once Eisenhower was in office . In a November 1953 speech that was carried on national television , McCarthy began by praising the Eisenhower Administration for removing " 1 @,@ 456 Truman holdovers who were ... gotten rid of because of Communist connections and activities or perversion " . He then went on to complain that John Paton Davies Jr. was still " on the payroll after eleven months of the Eisenhower Administration " , even though Davies had actually been dismissed three weeks earlier , and repeated an unsubstantiated accusation that Davies had tried to " put Communists and espionage agents in key spots in the Central Intelligence Agency " . In the same speech , he criticized Eisenhower for not doing enough to secure the release of missing American pilots shot down over China during the Korean War . By the end of 1953 , McCarthy had altered the " twenty years of treason " catchphrase he had coined for the preceding Democratic administrations and began referring to " twenty @-@ one years of treason " to include Eisenhower 's first year in office . 
 As McCarthy became increasingly combative towards the Eisenhower Administration , Eisenhower faced repeated calls that he confront McCarthy directly . Eisenhower refused , saying privately " nothing would please him [ McCarthy ] more than to get the publicity that would be generated by a public repudiation by the President . " On several occasions Eisenhower is reported to have said of McCarthy that he did not want to " get down in the gutter with that guy " . 
 = = = Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations = = = 
 With the beginning of his second term as senator in 1953 , McCarthy was made chairman of the Senate Committee on Government Operations . According to some reports , Republican leaders were growing wary of McCarthy 's methods and gave him this relatively mundane panel rather than the Internal Security Subcommittee — the committee normally involved with investigating Communists — thus putting McCarthy " where he can 't do any harm " , in the words of Senate Majority Leader Robert A. Taft . However , the Committee on Government Operations included the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations , and the mandate of this subcommittee was sufficiently flexible to allow McCarthy to use it for his own investigations of Communists in the government . McCarthy appointed Roy Cohn as chief counsel and 27 @-@ year @-@ old Robert F. Kennedy as an assistant counsel to the subcommittee . 
 This subcommittee would be the scene of some of McCarthy 's most publicized exploits . When the records of the closed executive sessions of the subcommittee under McCarthy 's chairmanship were made public in 2003 – 04 , Senators Susan Collins and Carl Levin wrote the following in their preface to the documents : 
 Senator McCarthy 's zeal to uncover subversion and espionage led to disturbing excesses . His <unk> tactics destroyed careers of people who were not involved in the infiltration of our government . His freewheeling style caused both the Senate and the Subcommittee to revise the rules governing future investigations , and prompted the courts to act to protect the Constitutional rights of witnesses at Congressional hearings . ... These hearings are a part of our national past that we can neither afford to forget nor permit to reoccur . 
 The subcommittee first investigated allegations of Communist influence in the Voice of America , at that time administered by the State Department 's United States Information Agency . Many VOA personnel were questioned in front of television cameras and a packed press gallery , with McCarthy lacing his questions with hostile innuendo and false accusations . A few VOA employees alleged Communist influence on the content of broadcasts , but none of the charges were substantiated . Morale at VOA was badly damaged , and one of its engineers committed suicide during McCarthy 's investigation . Ed <unk> , a policy advisor for the service , would later comment that it was VOA 's " darkest hour when Senator McCarthy and his chief hatchet man , Roy Cohn , almost succeeded in muffling it " . 
 The subcommittee then turned to the overseas library program of the International Information Agency . Cohn toured Europe examining the card catalogs of the State Department libraries looking for works by authors he deemed inappropriate . McCarthy then recited the list of supposedly pro @-@ communist authors before his subcommittee and the press . The State Department bowed to McCarthy and ordered its overseas librarians to remove from their shelves " material by any controversial persons , Communists , fellow travelers , etc . " Some libraries went as far as burning the newly forbidden books . Shortly after this , in one of his carefully oblique public criticisms of McCarthy , President Eisenhower urged Americans : " Don 't join the book burners . ... Don 't be afraid to go in your library and read every book . " 
 Soon after receiving the chair to the Subcommittee on Investigations , McCarthy appointed Joseph Brown Matthews ( generally known as J. B. Matthews ) as staff director of the subcommittee . One of the nation 's foremost anti @-@ communists , Matthews had formerly been staff director for the House Un @-@ American Activities Committee . The appointment became controversial when it was learned that Matthews had recently written an article titled " Reds and Our Churches " , which opened with the sentence , " The largest single group supporting the Communist apparatus in the United States is composed of Protestant Clergymen . " A group of senators denounced this " shocking and unwarranted attack against the American clergy " and demanded that McCarthy dismiss Matthews . McCarthy initially refused to do this but as the controversy mounted , and the majority of his own subcommittee joined the call for Matthews ' ouster , McCarthy finally yielded and accepted his resignation . For some McCarthy opponents , this was a signal defeat of the senator , showing he was not as invincible as he had formerly seemed . 
 = = = Investigating the Army = = = 
 In autumn 1953 , McCarthy 's committee began its ill @-@ fated inquiry into the United States Army . This began with McCarthy opening an investigation into the Army Signal Corps laboratory at Fort Monmouth . McCarthy , newly married to Jean Kerr , cut short his honeymoon to open the investigation . He garnered some headlines with stories of a dangerous spy ring among the Army researchers , but after weeks of hearings , nothing came of his investigations . Unable to expose any signs of subversion , McCarthy focused instead on the case of Irving Peress , a New York dentist who had been drafted into the Army in 1952 and promoted to major in November 1953 . Shortly thereafter it came to the attention of the military bureaucracy that Peress , who was a member of the left @-@ wing American Labor Party , had declined to answer questions about his political affiliations on a loyalty @-@ review form . Peress ' superiors were therefore ordered to discharge him from the Army within 90 days . McCarthy subpoenaed Peress to appear before his subcommittee on January 30 , 1954 . Peress refused to answer McCarthy 's questions , citing his rights under the Fifth Amendment . McCarthy responded by sending a message to Secretary of the Army , Robert T. Stevens , demanding that Peress be court @-@ martialed . On that same day , Peress asked for his pending discharge from the Army to be effected immediately , and the next day Brigadier General Ralph W. Zwicker , his commanding officer at Camp Kilmer in New Jersey , gave him an honorable separation from the Army . At McCarthy 's encouragement , " Who promoted Peress ? " became a rallying cry among many anti @-@ communists and McCarthy supporters . In fact , and as McCarthy knew , Peress had been promoted automatically through the provisions of the Doctor Draft Law , for which McCarthy had voted . 
 = = = Army – McCarthy hearings = = = 
 Early in 1954 , the U.S. Army accused McCarthy and his chief counsel , Roy Cohn , of improperly pressuring the Army to give favorable treatment to G. David Schine , a former aide to McCarthy and a friend of Cohn 's , who was then serving in the Army as a private . McCarthy claimed that the accusation was made in bad faith , in retaliation for his questioning of Zwicker the previous year . The Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations , usually chaired by McCarthy himself , was given the task of adjudicating these conflicting charges . Republican Senator Karl Mundt was appointed to chair the committee , and the Army – McCarthy hearings convened on April 22 , 1954 . 
 The Army consulted with an attorney familiar with McCarthy to determine the best approach to attacking him . Based on his recommendation , it decided not to pursue McCarthy on the issue of communists in government : " The attorney feels it is almost impossible to counter McCarthy effectively on the issue of kicking Communists out of Government , because he generally has some basis , no matter how slight , for his claim of Communist connection . " 
 The hearings lasted for 36 days and were broadcast on live television by ABC and DuMont , with an estimated 20 million viewers . After hearing 32 witnesses and two million words of testimony , the committee concluded that McCarthy himself had not exercised any improper influence on Schine 's behalf , but that Cohn had engaged in " unduly persistent or aggressive efforts " . The committee also concluded that Army Secretary Robert Stevens and Army Counsel John Adams " made efforts to terminate or influence the investigation and hearings at Fort Monmouth " , and that Adams " made vigorous and diligent efforts " to block subpoenas for members of the Army Loyalty and Screening Board " by means of personal appeal to certain members of the [ McCarthy ] committee " . 
 Of far greater importance to McCarthy than the committee 's inconclusive final report was the negative effect that the extensive exposure had on his popularity . Many in the audience saw him as bullying , reckless , and dishonest , and the daily newspaper summaries of the hearings were also frequently unfavorable . Late in the hearings , Senator Stuart Symington made an angry and prophetic remark to McCarthy , upon being told by McCarthy that " You 're not fooling anyone " : " Senator , the American people have had a look at you now for six weeks ; you 're not fooling anyone , either . " In Gallup polls of January 1954 , 50 % of those polled had a positive opinion of McCarthy . In June , that number had fallen to 34 % . In the same polls , those with a negative opinion of McCarthy increased from 29 % to 45 % . 
 An increasing number of Republicans and conservatives were coming to see McCarthy as a liability to the party and to anti @-@ communism . Congressman George H. Bender noted , " There is a growing impatience with the Republican Party . McCarthyism has become a synonym for witch @-@ hunting , Star Chamber methods , and the denial of ... civil liberties . " Frederick Woltman , a reporter with a long @-@ standing reputation as a staunch anti @-@ communist , wrote a five @-@ part series of articles criticizing McCarthy in the New York World @-@ Telegram . He stated that McCarthy " has become a major liability to the cause of anti @-@ communism " , and accused him of " wild twisting of facts and near facts [ that ] repels authorities in the field " . 
 The most famous incident in the hearings was an exchange between McCarthy and the army 's chief legal representative , Joseph Nye Welch . On June 9 , the 30th day of the hearings , Welch challenged Roy Cohn to provide U.S. Attorney General Herbert Brownell Jr. with McCarthy 's list of 130 Communists or subversives in defense plants " before the sun goes down " . McCarthy stepped in and said that if Welch was so concerned about persons aiding the Communist Party , he should check on a man in his Boston law office named Fred Fisher , who had once belonged to the National Lawyers Guild , which Brownell had called " the legal mouthpiece of the Communist Party " . In an impassioned defense of Fisher that some have suggested he had prepared in advance and had hoped not to have to make , Welch responded , " Until this moment , Senator , I think I never really gauged your cruelty or your recklessness ... " When McCarthy resumed his attack , Welch interrupted him : " Let us not assassinate this lad further , Senator . You 've done enough . Have you no sense of decency , sir , at long last ? Have you left no sense of decency ? " Mr. Welch said this even after he had already outed Fred Fisher to the New York Times , where a full length article was published . When McCarthy once again persisted , Welch cut him off and demanded the chairman " call the next witness " . At that point , the gallery erupted in applause and a recess was called . 
 = = = Edward R. Murrow , See It Now = = = 
 Even before Welch asked McCarthy , " Have you no sense of decency , sir , at long last ? " in the hearings , one of the most prominent attacks on McCarthy 's methods was an episode of the television documentary series See It Now , hosted by journalist Edward R. Murrow , which was broadcast on March 9 , 1954 . Titled " A Report on Senator Joseph R. McCarthy " , the episode consisted largely of clips of McCarthy speaking . In these clips , McCarthy accuses the Democratic party of " twenty years of treason " , describes the American Civil Liberties Union as " listed as ' a front for , and doing the work of ' , the Communist Party " , and berates and harangues various witnesses , including General Zwicker . 
 In his conclusion , Murrow said of McCarthy : 
 No one familiar with the history of this country can deny that congressional committees are useful . It is necessary to investigate before legislating , but the line between investigating and persecuting is a very fine one , and the junior Senator from Wisconsin has stepped over it repeatedly . His primary achievement has been in confusing the public mind , as between the internal and the external threats of Communism . We must not confuse dissent with disloyalty . We must remember always that accusation is not proof and that conviction depends upon evidence and due process of law . We will not walk in fear , one of another . We will not be driven by fear into an age of unreason , if we dig deep in our history and our doctrine , and remember that we are not descended from fearful men — not from men who feared to write , to speak , to associate and to defend causes that were , for the moment , unpopular . 
 This is no time for men who oppose Senator McCarthy 's methods to keep silent , or for those who approve . We can deny our heritage and our history , but we cannot escape responsibility for the result . There is no way for a citizen of a republic to abdicate his responsibilities . As a nation we have come into our full inheritance at a tender age . We proclaim ourselves , as indeed we are , the defenders of freedom , wherever it continues to exist in the world , but we cannot defend freedom abroad by deserting it at home . 
 The actions of the junior Senator from Wisconsin have caused alarm and dismay amongst our allies abroad , and given considerable comfort to our enemies . And whose fault is that ? Not really his . He didn 't create this situation of fear ; he merely exploited it — and rather successfully . Cassius was right : " The fault , dear Brutus , is not in our stars , but in ourselves . " 
 The following week See It Now ran another episode critical of McCarthy , this one focusing on the case of Annie Lee Moss , an African @-@ American army clerk who was the target of one of McCarthy 's investigations . The Murrow shows , together with the televised Army – McCarthy hearings of the same year , were the major causes of a nationwide popular opinion backlash against McCarthy , in part because for the first time his statements were being publicly challenged by noteworthy figures . To counter the negative publicity , McCarthy appeared on See It Now on April 6 , 1954 , and made a number of charges against the popular Murrow , including the accusation that he colluded with <unk> , the " Russian espionage and propaganda organization " . This response did not go over well with viewers , and the result was a further decline in McCarthy 's popularity . 
 Murrow and his staff spent two months editing film . McCarthy was shown picking his nose and belching . Nothing in the episode showed McCarthy being business @-@ like or reasonable . McCarthy 's most hostile Catholic critic , John Cogley of Commonweal , pointed out , " A totally different selection of film would turn McCarthy into a man on a shining white steed — infinitely reasonable , burdened with the onus of single @-@ handedly cleaning out subversives in the face of violent criticism . " Cogley wrote that when television is " Combined with selectivity it would explode in any person 's or any group 's face . " Cogley said Murrow used " partial truth and innuendo " that Murrow and other critics accused McCarthy of using . 
 = = = The " Joe Must Go " recall attempt = = = 
 On March 18 , 1954 Sauk @-@ Prairie Star editor Leroy Gore of Sauk City , Wisconsin urged the recall of McCarthy in a front page editorial that ran alongside a sample petition that readers could fill out and mail to the newspaper . A Republican and former McCarthy supporter , Gore cited the senator with subverting President Eisenhower 's authority , disrespecting Wisconsin 's @-@ own Gen. Ralph Wise Zwicker and ignoring the plight of Wisconsin dairy farmers faced with price @-@ slashing surpluses . 
 Despite critics ' claims that a recall attempt was foolhardy , the " Joe Must Go " movement caught fire and was backed by a diverse coalition including other Republican leaders , Democrats , businessmen , farmers and students . Wisconsin 's constitution stipulates the number of signatures needed to force a recall election must exceed one @-@ quarter the number of voters in the most recent gubernatorial election , requiring the anti @-@ McCarthy movement to gather some 404 @,@ 000 signatures in sixty days . With little support from organized labor or the state Democratic Party , the roughly organized recall effort attracted national attention , particularly during the concurrent Army @-@ McCarthy hearings . 
 Following the deadline of June 5 , the final number of signatures was never determined because the petitions were sent out of state to avoid a subpoena from the Sauk County district attorney , an ardent McCarthy supporter who was investigating the leaders of the recall campaign on the grounds that they had violated Wisconsin 's Corrupt Practices Act . Chicago newspapermen later tallied 335 @,@ 000 names while another 50 @,@ 000 were said to be hidden in Minneapolis , with other lists buried on Sauk County farms . 
 = = = Public opinion = = = 
 = = = Censure and the Watkins Committee = = = 
 Several members of the U.S. Senate had opposed McCarthy well before 1953 . Senator Margaret Chase Smith , a Maine Republican , delivered her " Declaration of Conscience " on June 1 , 1950 , calling for an end to the use of smear tactics without mentioning McCarthy or anyone else by name . Six other Republican Senators – Wayne Morse , Irving Ives , Charles W. Tobey , Edward John Thye , George Aiken , and Robert C. Hendrickson – joined her in condemning McCarthy 's tactics . McCarthy referred to Smith and her fellow Senators as " Snow White and the six dwarfs " . 
 On March 9 , 1954 , Vermont Republican Senator Ralph E. Flanders gave a humor @-@ laced speech on the Senate floor , questioning McCarthy 's tactics in fighting communism , likening McCarthyism to " housecleaning " with " much clatter and <unk> " . He recommended that McCarthy turn his attention to the worldwide encroachment of Communism outside North America . In a June 1 speech , Flanders compared McCarthy to Adolf Hitler , accusing him of spreading " division and confusion " and saying , " Were the Junior Senator from Wisconsin in the pay of the Communists he could not have done a better job for them . " On June 11 , Flanders introduced a resolution to have McCarthy removed as chair of his committees . Although there were many in the Senate who believed that some sort of disciplinary action against McCarthy was warranted , there was no clear majority supporting this resolution . Some of the resistance was due to concern about usurping the Senate 's rules regarding committee chairs and seniority . Flanders next introduced a resolution to censure McCarthy . The resolution was initially written without any reference to particular actions or misdeeds on McCarthy 's part . As Flanders put it , " It was not his breaches of etiquette , or of rules or sometimes even of laws which is so disturbing , " but rather his overall pattern of behavior . Ultimately a " bill of particulars " listing 46 charges was added to the censure resolution . A special committee , chaired by Senator Arthur Vivian Watkins , was appointed to study and evaluate the resolution . This committee opened hearings on August 31 . 
 After two months of hearings and deliberations , the Watkins Committee recommended that McCarthy be censured on two of the 46 counts : his contempt of the Subcommittee on Rules and Administration , which had called him to testify in 1951 and 1952 , and his abuse of General Zwicker in 1954 . The Zwicker count was dropped by the full Senate on the grounds that McCarthy 's conduct was arguably " induced " by Zwicker 's own behavior . In place of this count , a new one was drafted regarding McCarthy 's statements about the Watkins Committee itself . 
 The two counts on which the Senate ultimately voted were : 
 That McCarthy had " failed to cooperate with the Subcommittee on Rules and Administration " , and " repeatedly abused the members who were trying to carry out assigned duties ... " 
 That McCarthy had charged " three members of the [ Watkins ] Select Committee with ' deliberate deception ' and ' fraud ' ... that the special Senate session ... was a ' lynch party ' " , and had characterized the committee " as the ' unwitting handmaiden ' , ' involuntary agent ' and ' attorneys in fact ' of the Communist Party " , and had " acted contrary to senatorial ethics and tended to bring the Senate into dishonor and disrepute , to obstruct the constitutional processes of the Senate , and to impair its dignity " . 
 On December 2 , 1954 , the Senate voted to " condemn " McCarthy on both counts by a vote of 67 to 22 . The Democrats present unanimously favored condemnation and the Republicans were split evenly . The only senator not on record was John F. Kennedy , who was hospitalized for back surgery ; Kennedy never indicated how he would have voted . Immediately after the vote , Senator H. Styles Bridges , a McCarthy supporter , argued that the resolution was " not a censure resolution " because the word " condemn " rather than " censure " was used in the final draft . The word " censure " was then removed from the title of the resolution , though it is generally regarded and referred to as a censure of McCarthy , both by historians and in Senate documents . McCarthy himself said , " I wouldn 't exactly call it a vote of confidence . " He added , " I don 't feel I 've been lynched . " 
 = = Final years = = 
 After his censure , McCarthy continued senatorial duties for another two and a half years , but his career as a major public figure had been unmistakably ruined . His colleagues in the Senate avoided him ; his speeches on the Senate floor were delivered to a near @-@ empty chamber or were received with conspicuous displays of inattention . The press that had once recorded his every public statement now ignored him , and outside speaking engagements dwindled almost to nothing . President Eisenhower , finally freed of McCarthy 's political intimidation , quipped to his Cabinet that McCarthyism was now " <unk> " . 
 Still , McCarthy continued to rail against Communism . He warned against attendance at summit conferences with " the Reds " , saying that " you cannot offer friendship to tyrants and murderers ... without advancing the cause of tyranny and murder . " He declared that " coexistence with Communists is neither possible nor honorable nor desirable . Our long @-@ term objective must be the eradication of Communism from the face of the earth . " In one of his final acts in the Senate , McCarthy opposed President Eisenhower 's nomination to the Supreme Court of William J. Brennan , after reading a speech Brennan had given shortly beforehand in which he characterized McCarthy 's anti @-@ Communist investigations as " witch hunts " . McCarthy 's opposition failed to gain any traction , however , and he was the only Senator to vote against Brennan 's confirmation . 
 McCarthy 's biographers agree that he was a changed man after the censure ; declining both physically and emotionally , he became a " pale ghost of his former self " in the words of Fred J. Cook . It was reported that McCarthy suffered from cirrhosis of the liver and was frequently hospitalized for alcoholism . Numerous eyewitnesses , including Senate aide George Reedy and journalist Tom Wicker , reported finding him alarmingly drunk in the Senate . Journalist Richard Rovere ( 1959 ) wrote : 
 He had always been a heavy drinker , and there were times in those seasons of discontent when he drank more than ever . But he was not always drunk . He went on the wagon ( for him this meant beer instead of whiskey ) for days and weeks at a time . The difficulty toward the end was that he couldn 't hold the stuff . He went to pieces on his second or third drink . And he did not snap back quickly . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 McCarthy died in Bethesda Naval Hospital on May 2 , 1957 , at the age of 48 . The official cause of his death was listed as acute hepatitis , an inflammation of the liver . It was hinted in the press that he died of alcoholism , an estimation that is now accepted by contemporary biographers . He was given a state funeral attended by 70 senators , and a Solemn Pontifical Requiem Mass was said before more than 100 priests and 2 @,@ 000 others at Washington 's St. Matthew 's Cathedral . Thousands of people viewed the body in Washington . He was buried in St. Mary 's Parish Cemetery , Appleton , Wisconsin , where more than 17 @,@ 000 filed through St. Mary 's Church to pay their last respects . Three senators — George W. Malone , William E. Jenner , and Herman Welker — had flown from Washington to Appleton on the plane carrying McCarthy 's casket . Robert F. Kennedy quietly attended the funeral in Wisconsin . McCarthy was survived by his wife , Jean , and their adopted daughter , Tierney . 
 In the summer of 1957 , a special election was held to fill McCarthy 's seat . In the primaries , voters in both parties turned away from McCarthy 's legacy . The Republican primary was won by Walter J. Kohler , Jr . , who called for a clean break from McCarthy 's approach ; he defeated former Congressman Glenn Robert Davis , who charged that Eisenhower was soft on Communism . The Democratic winner was William Proxmire , who called the late McCarthy " a disgrace to Wisconsin , to the Senate , and to America " . On August 27 , Proxmire won the election , serving in the seat for 32 years until the end of his fifth full term at the start of 1989 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Joseph McCarthy remains a very controversial figure . In the view of a few conservative latter @-@ day authors , such as commentators William Norman Grigg and Medford Stanton Evans , McCarthy 's place in history should be reevaluated . Many scholars , including some generally regarded as conservative , have opposed these views . 
 Other authors and historians , including Arthur Herman , assert that new evidence — in the form of Venona @-@ decrypted Soviet messages , Soviet espionage data now opened to the West , and newly released transcripts of closed hearings before McCarthy 's subcommittee — has partially vindicated McCarthy by showing that many of his identifications of Communists were correct and that the scale of Soviet espionage activity in the United States during the 1940s and 1950s was larger than many scholars suspected . 
 After reviewing evidence from Venona and other sources , historian John Earl Haynes concluded that , of 159 people identified on lists used or referenced by McCarthy , evidence was substantial that nine had aided Soviet espionage efforts . He suggested that a majority of those on the lists could legitimately have been considered security risks , but that a substantial minority could not . Among those implicated in files later made public from the Venona project and Soviet sources were Cedric <unk> , Frank Coe , Lauchlin Currie , Harold Glasser , David Karr , Mary Jane Keeney , and Leonard <unk> . 
 These viewpoints are considered revisionist by many scholars . Challenging efforts aimed at the " rehabilitation " of McCarthy , Haynes argues that McCarthy 's attempts to " make anti @-@ communism a partisan weapon " actually " threatened [ the post @-@ War ] anti @-@ Communist consensus " , thereby ultimately harming anti @-@ Communist efforts more than helping . 
 Diplomat George Kennan drew on his State Department experience to provide his view that " The penetration of the American governmental services by members or agents ( conscious or otherwise ) of the American Communist Party in the late 1930s was not a figment of the imagination ... it really existed ; and it assumed proportions which , while never overwhelming , were also not trivial . " Kennan wrote that under the Roosevelt administration : " warnings which should have been heeded fell too often on deaf or incredulous ears . " However , Kennan made his assessment before the revelation of the Venona decrypts . The facts in the Venona documents were damning . The previous cautious assessments had to be revised . Not a few “ but hundreds of American Communists abetted Soviet espionage in the United States ” in the 1930s and 1940s . No modern government had been more thoroughly penetrated . Plus , only a tiny fraction of the Venona intercepts have been decrypted ( about 3 % ) , so no one knows the entire extent of the penetration . All anyone can know for sure is that the Soviet penetration into the United States government was massive . 
 William Bennett , former Reagan Administration Secretary of Education , summed up this perspective in his 2007 book America : The Last Best Hope : 
 The cause of anti @-@ communism , which united millions of Americans and which gained the support of Democrats , Republicans and independents , was undermined by Sen. Joe McCarthy ... McCarthy addressed a real problem : disloyal elements within the U.S. government . But his approach to this real problem was to cause untold grief to the country he claimed to love ... Worst of all , McCarthy besmirched the honorable cause of anti @-@ communism . He discredited legitimate efforts to counter Soviet subversion of American institutions . 
 = = HUAC and SACB = = 
 McCarthy 's hearings are often incorrectly conflated with the hearings of the House Committee on Un @-@ American Activities ( HUAC ) . HUAC is best known for the investigation of Alger Hiss and for its investigation of the Hollywood film industry , which led to the blacklisting of hundreds of actors , writers , and directors . HUAC was a House committee , and as such had no formal connection with McCarthy , who served in the Senate , although the existence of the House Un @-@ American Activities Committee thrived in part as a result of McCarthy 's activities . HUAC was active for 29 years . 
 Similarly , the Subversive Activities Control Board ( SACB ) was a five @-@ member committee established by the McCarran Internal Security Act , which had a mandate , similar to HUAC and inspired by McCarthy , to locate and investigate so @-@ called " subversives " , or those sympathetic to the Communists . They were accused of promoting the establishment of a " totalitarian dictatorship " in the United States . Truman vetoed the act , sending Congress a lengthy veto message in which he criticized specific provisions as " the greatest danger to freedom of speech , press , and assembly since the Alien and Sedition Laws of 1798 , " and called it a " mockery of the Bill of Rights " and a " long step toward totalitarianism " . His veto was overridden . SACB was active for 22 years . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 From the start of his notoriety , McCarthy was a favorite subject for political cartoonists . He was traditionally depicted in a negative light , normally pertaining to McCarthyism and his accusations . <unk> 's cartoon that coined the term McCarthyism appeared less than two months after the senator 's now famous February 1950 speech in Wheeling , West Virginia . In 1953 , the popular daily comic strip Pogo introduced the character Simple J. Malarkey , a pugnacious and conniving wildcat with an unmistakable physical resemblance to McCarthy . After a worried Rhode Island newspaper editor protested to the syndicate that provided the strip , creator Walt Kelly began depicting the Malarkey character with a bag over his head , concealing his features . The explanation was that Malarkey was hiding from a Rhode Island Red hen , a clear reference to the controversy over the Malarkey character . 
 As his fame grew , McCarthy increasingly became the target of ridicule and parody . He was impersonated by nightclub and radio impressionists and was satirized in Mad magazine , on The Red Skelton Show , and elsewhere . Several comedy songs lampooning the senator were released in 1954 , including " Point of Order " by Stan Freberg and Daws Butler , " Senator McCarthy Blues " by Hal Block , and unionist folk singer Joe Glazer 's " Joe McCarthy 's Band " , sung to the tune of " McNamara 's Band " . Also in 1954 , the radio comedy team Bob and Ray parodied McCarthy with the character " Commissioner Carstairs " in their soap opera spoof " Mary <unk> , Noble Wife " . That same year , the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation radio network broadcast a satire , The Investigator , whose title character was a clear imitation of McCarthy . A recording of the show became popular in the United States , and was reportedly played by President Eisenhower at cabinet meetings . 
 The 1953 fiction novel " Mr. Costello , Hero " by Theodore Sturgeon was described by noted journalist and author Paul Williams as " the all @-@ time great story about Senator Joseph McCarthy , who he was and how he did what he did . " The novel was adapted in 1958 by X Minus One into a radio teleplay and broadcast on July 3 , 1956 . In a 1977 interview Sturgeon commented that it was his concerns about the ongoing McCarthy Hearings that prompted him to write the story . 
 A more serious fictional portrayal of McCarthy played a central role in the 1959 novel The Manchurian Candidate by Richard Condon . The character of Senator John Iselin , a demagogic anti @-@ communist , is closely modeled on McCarthy , even to the varying numbers of Communists he asserts are employed by the federal government . He remains a major character in the 1962 film version . 
 McCarthy was portrayed by Peter Boyle in the 1977 Emmy @-@ winning television movie Tail Gunner Joe , a dramatization of McCarthy 's life . Archival footage of McCarthy himself was used in the 2005 movie Good Night , and Good Luck about Edward R. Murrow and the See It Now episode that challenged McCarthy . McCarthy was also portrayed by Joe Don Baker in the 1992 HBO film Citizen Cohn . In the German @-@ French docu @-@ drama " The Real American - Joe McCarthy " ( 2012 ) , directed by Lutz <unk> , McCarthy is portrayed by the British actor and comedian John Sessions . 
 R.E.M. ' s song " <unk> McCarthy " from their 1987 album Document largely deals with McCarthy and contains sound clips from the Army @-@ McCarthy Hearings . 
 = Harvest ( Numbers ) = 
 " Harvest " is the 14th episode of the second season of the American television show Numb3rs . Inspired by a Christian Science Monitor article about organ tourists , people who travel to a different country in order to donate their organs for money , and an algorithm developed in the United States , the episode features Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) agents and mathematicians attempting to locate a missing organ tourist before she is killed . 
 After airing in the United States on CBS on January 27 , 2006 , the episode received mixed reviews . Critics enjoyed it while the medical community was concerned about the impact that the episode would have on organ donations . " Harvest " has inspired two academic case studies in which viewers were more likely to donate their organs after watching the episode . The episode also has won one award and has been nominated for another award . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 On the same night that Dr. Amita Ramanujan ( Navi Rawat ) is presented with a prestigious mathematics award , FBI Special Agents Don Eppes ( Rob Morrow ) and David Sinclair ( Alimi Ballard ) respond to a disturbance call from a hotel and find a young Indian woman ( <unk> <unk> ) cowering in a blood @-@ stained basement . Back at the office , she refuses to talk to anyone until Amita , wondering why the woman was there , asks to see the woman . The woman then tells Amita that her name is Santi and that she and her sister , Prita ( <unk> <unk> ) , came to the United States from Chennai , India , as organ tourists , selling their kidneys to earn money for their families . Dr. Charlie Eppes ( David Krumholtz ) and Dr. Larry <unk> ( Peter MacNicol ) determine the time of another victim 's death as earlier in the day . 
 Following tips from the bread delivery man ( P.J. Brown ) and from the Los Angeles Police Department ( LAPD ) , FBI Special Agent Megan Reeves ( Diane Farr ) goes to the hospital to see if Santi 's sister is there . She learns that a young Indian woman had been in the morgue for a couple of days , dead from complications involving the removal of one of her kidneys . When Megan and Amita show Santi the picture of the dead woman , Santi tells them that she was a friend of theirs , Sonali , who was a fellow organ tourist . Santi also tells the women that there was another missing friend , Jaya . While following up on the lead about the ambulance , David and FBI Special Agent Colby Granger ( Dylan Bruno ) chase the ambulance that was spotted at the hospital by the bread delivery man . The ambulance crashes , killing the driver . Charlie and Larry use the driver 's log to determine that the ambulance driver returned to the hospital during off @-@ hours . At the hospital 's morgue , the team finds Jaya dead and learns that a doctor had been behind the black @-@ market organ transplants . 
 Charlie , Amita , and Larry use Santi 's blood ( providing a familiar match to Prita 's human leukocyte antigen ( HLA ) type ) and an organ @-@ matching database to find the most likely person to receive Prita 's organs . Upon finding a link to a recipient who had paid to procure Prita 's organs on the black market , Don and the team track Prita and the doctor to another hotel , where they rescue Prita just before the doctor began surgery . The sisters are reunited . Amita decides to use her money from her prize to finance the sisters ' education and to take a trip to India with her grandmother , since the case has inspired her to learn about her heritage . Don and Charlie become organ donors . During the case , Don learns that his and Charlie 's father Alan Eppes ( Judd Hirsch ) had a friend who needed a transplant and could not find a match . Alan 's story about his friend inspires Don to make the decision to become an organ donor . During a discussion about the need for organ donors at the dinner table , Charlie decides to become an organ donor also . 
 = = Origin = = 
 An article in the Christian Science Monitor inspired Numb3rs series writer J. David Harden to write an episode about organ tourists . Harden contacted the Hollywood , Health & Society program to learn more about the need for organ donations and the process of organ matching . He initially encountered resistance to the idea of a storyline about organ donations due to the medical community 's assumption that misinformation about organ transplants could lead to increased public resistance to organ donations . 
 Harden also incorporated <unk> Segev and Summer Gentry ’ s algorithm for matching transplant donors and recipients . In developing their algorithm , Gentry , a United States Naval Academy applied mathematician , and Segev , a Johns Hopkins University transplant surgeon , sought an improvement over the Top Trading Cycles and Chains ( TTCC ) algorithm , an algorithm developed by economists Alvin Roth , <unk> <unk> , and Utku <unk> used to match kidney recipients with living organ donors who have different blood types from the recipients . TTCC was used to make the best possible matches during organ exchanges , a process where transplant recipient and organ donors would exchange healthy organs . To decrease the risk of organ rejection , the TTCC algorithm required a large number of organ donors and transplant recipients . The large number of people required by the algorithm was unrealistic . Using a modified version of Jack Edmonds ’ computational complexity algorithm , Gentry and Segev discovered that their algorithm could be used to create a national organ donor registry . 
 = = Reception = = 
 First airing in the United States on January 27 , 2006 , over 13 @.@ 22 million people watched " Harvest " on CBS . The episode received mixed reviews . Television critics liked the episode . Cynthia Boris of DVD Verdict stated that the episode had " nice twists " . In an article highlighting the rise of realistic Indian @-@ American characters on American television , Anil Padmanabhan , a writer for India Today , called the episode Rawat 's " best exposure " . Opinions from the medical community were more mixed . Although he found the message about organ donations " positive " , Kevin B. O 'Reilly of the American Medical Association 's <unk> called " Harvest " " a mixed bag " . Other medical experts disliked the storyline of black market organ donations in the United States . On the other hand , Joyce Somsak of the Health Resources and Services Administration stated that " Harvest " was " really good " . 
 The episode inspired a couple of academic case studies . The first was a George Washington University School of Public Health and Health Services case study about the effects of television writers consulting medical professionals on the storyline of a television episode . Participants in a survey conducted by the University of Southern California and Purdue University felt that a black market for organs existed and that a person 's place on the organ priority list can be influenced by money or fame . They , as a result of " Harvest " , also were more likely to become organ donors or to consider doing so . The second case study was about TV 's influence on the discussion of organ donations . Participants in a Hollywood Health & Society online survey were also more likely to believe in the existence of black @-@ market organ trafficking and were more likely to donate organs after watching " Harvest " . They also were more likely to see the importance of organ donations . 
 " Harvest " has won one award and been nominated for a second . It won the University of Southern California Annenberg School for Communication 's Norman Lear Center 2006 Sentinel for Health Award in the primetime drama category , winning over two episodes of Grey 's Anatomy and one episode of Without a Trace . The Academy of Television Arts and Sciences nominated Jim Vickers ' work on " Harvest " for a Creative Arts Emmy for " Outstanding Stunt Coordination " , but the episode lost to an episode of E @-@ Ring . 
 = 1947 Sun Bowl = 
 The 1947 Sun Bowl was a post @-@ season American college football bowl game between the Virginia Tech Hokies of the Southern Conference and the Cincinnati Bearcats . It took place on January 1 , 1947 , at Kidd Field in El Paso , Texas . Cincinnati defeated Virginia Tech 18 – 6 in cold and icy conditions that led to a scoreless first half and three blocked extra points by Virginia Tech . The game was the first NCAA @-@ sanctioned post @-@ season football contest for Cincinnati , and was the first bowl game in Virginia Tech history . The 1947 game was also the 13th edition of the Sun Bowl , which had been played every year since 1935 . In exchange for their participation in the event , each team received $ 9 @,@ 438 . 
 = = Pregame buildup = = 
 The 1947 Sun Bowl game was held as the culminating event of the Sun Carnival and was held at 15 @,@ 000 @-@ seat Kidd Field on the campus of Texas Western University , today known as the University of Texas El Paso . The matchup of Virginia Tech and Cincinnati was out of character for the Sun Bowl , which traditionally matched the champion of the Border Conference with the best possible opponent . Hardin @-@ Simmons University , champions of the Border Conference , declined a Sun Bowl bid , as did the second @-@ place team , Texas Tech . With no other option , a member of the Sun Bowl Committee — who happened to be an alumnus of Virginia Tech — suggested inviting the Hokies to play against Cincinnati , which had already accepted an invitation . 
 = = = Virginia Tech = = = 
 Virginia Tech came into the game having gone 3 @-@ 3 @-@ 3 under coach James Kitts . Kitts , in his first year replacing coach H. M. <unk> , had coached the team in 1941 before the outbreak of World War II interrupted the Virginia Tech football program . During the 1946 season , Kitts ' team defeated the No. 12 N.C. State Wolfpack for the first win over an Associated Press Top 25 team in school history , the Washington and Lee University Generals , and the Hokies ' traditional rivals , the Virginia Military Institute <unk> . During Virginia Tech 's preparations before its departure for El Paso , heavy snow fell on Blacksburg , Virginia , forcing the team to use snowplows and construction equipment to clear a space for the team to practice . The Hokies traveled to El Paso without star punter and rusher Bobby Smith , who had been injured in Virginia Tech 's final regular @-@ season game . 
 = = = Cincinnati = = = 
 The Cincinnati Bearcats traveled to El Paso having amassed an 8 – 2 record under second @-@ year head coach Ray Nolting , who took the head coaching position in Cincinnati with the revival of the football program after the end of World War Two . The Bearcats ' two losses came against Kentucky and at Tulsa , and they earned wins against tough opponents such as Indiana , Michigan State , and Ohio . 
 The 1947 Sun Bowl was the Bearcats ' first official bowl game , but two 1902 post @-@ season games in New Orleans , Louisiana , may be considered the first bowl games in Cincinnati football history . In 1902 , Cincinnati completed a 7 @-@ 1 @-@ 1 season , losing only to the Carlisle Indians . Following the conclusion of its football schedule , the Bearcats were invited to New Orleans by the Southern Athletic Club to play a football game on New Year 's Day . Cincinnati easily defeated the Athletic Club team , and at the victory party following the win , students from nearby Louisiana State University invited the Cincinnati players to come to their school to play another game . That game , which took place a few days later , resulted in a 22 – 0 Cincinnati win , and may be considered the first bowl game . 
 = = Game summary = = 
 The game was played in extremely cold and icy conditions , still the worst in Sun Bowl history . Three inches of snow fell on top of a layer of frozen rain the day before the game , and at kickoff the teams took the field under cloudy skies and in below @-@ freezing temperatures . Despite the inclement weather , 15 @,@ 000 @-@ seat Kidd Field was approximately half full , and bowl officials estimated the crowd at around 10 @,@ 000 people . 
 Weather conditions allowed both teams ' defenses to dominate in the first half . Virginia Tech had the best chance to score of either team in the first half when it drove to a first down inside the Cincinnati two @-@ yard line late in the first quarter . On four straight running plays , however , the Bearcats ' defense held , and Virginia Tech was denied a scoring opportunity . 
 In the second half , however , Cincinnati 's offense managed to begin moving the ball effectively . On Cincinnati ’ s first play of the second half , halfback Roger Stephens broke through the Virginia Tech defensive line for 26 yards , taking the ball inside Virginia Tech territory . Cincinnati 's drive would overcome two 15 @-@ yard penalties and one five @-@ yard penalty en route to a touchdown just a few plays later . On its next possession , Cincinnati 's All @-@ American Roger Stephens again broke off another long run , this time for 19 yards , setting up another Bearcats ' touchdown . Virginia Tech countered with a long drive that reached the Cincinnati 23 @-@ yard line before an errant pass was intercepted by the Bearcats in the end zone . Virginia Tech managed a defensive stop , however , and marched down the field for a touchdown to climb within six points . Cincinnati sealed its victory , however , when Bearcats ' halfback Harold Johnson intercepted a Virginia Tech pass late in the fourth quarter , returning it all the way to the Virginia Tech 25 @-@ yard line . That return set up a Cincinnati touchdown and put the Bearcats up by the game 's final score , 18 – 6 . 
 = = Statistical summary = = 
 Virginia Tech blocked all three Cincinnati extra point attempts , while Virginia Tech 's sole extra point kick missed . Cincinnati 's kicking woes were also reflected in their punting game . Cincinnati averaged just 19 yards a punt , setting the record for the lowest punting average in Sun Bowl history . All 24 of the game 's points were scored in the second half . Virginia Tech earned just 34 rushing yards against the Bearcats ' defense while allowing 369 yards to Cincinnati 's rushing offense . Those two totals are the least @-@ gained and most @-@ allowed marks in Virginia Tech bowl game history . 
 Prior to 1954 , the Sun Bowl did not award most valuable player honors , but Harold Johnson from Cincinnati was statistically the game 's most valuable player , intercepting two Virginia Tech passes ( one in the end zone ) and scoring the first touchdown of the game on a 13 @-@ yard run . 
 = Frank 's Cock = 
 Frank 's Cock is a 1993 Canadian short film written and directed by Mike Hoolboom . The eight @-@ minute production stars Callum Keith Rennie as an unnamed narrator who discusses his relationship with his partner , Frank . The two met while the narrator was a teenager and spent nearly ten years together . Frank has since been diagnosed with AIDS , and the narrator fears his death . The story was based on the experience of one of Hoolboom 's friends at People With AIDS , which Hoolboom adapted after receiving a commission to create a short film about breaking up . 
 Shot on a low budget , the work is shown in a split @-@ screen format with interspersed scenes from popular culture , gay pornography , and human embryo formation ; this format is meant to symbolise the " fragmentation of the body " experienced by AIDS sufferers . Produced by Alex Mackenzie , Frank 's Cock was critically acclaimed and won several awards , including the NFB – John <unk> Award for best Canadian short film at the 1994 Toronto International Film Festival . The script has been republished several times and has inspired a short on LGBT issues in Canada 's native community . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 An unnamed narrator ( Callum Keith Rennie ) , who as a teenager intended to be the " Michael Jordan of sex " or " Wayne Gretzky with a hard @-@ on " , discusses how he met and fell in love with an older man named Frank . After the two met at a group sex session , they began an older brother – younger brother fantasy and moved in together . Frank has a voracious sexual appetite and , at times , invites the narrator for whole @-@ day sex sessions . He is a tender lover , teaching his partner how to fly a box kite and cooking omelettes for him . The narrator is pleased with Frank 's attentions and their sexual experimentation , although he is initially confused by Frank 's insistence on listening to Peter Gzowski 's Morningside during sex . As their ten @-@ year anniversary approaches , Frank – having lost much weight and developed Kaposi 's sarcomas – has been diagnosed with AIDS , leaving the narrator stunned ; he concludes the narration with " I 'm going to miss him . He was the best friend I ever had . " 
 = = Production = = 
 The Canadian director Mike Hoolboom was diagnosed with HIV in 1988 or 1989 , after going to donate blood . In a 1993 interview , he stated that he felt himself working harder after the diagnosis , finishing films at a more rapid rate because he was uncertain how long he would live . Hoolboom also became " fascinated with a body of parts spliced and spliced again " , experimenting with " interruptive rhythms " as a way to reexamine simple acts . Having previously focused on films about the body , Hoolboom began dealing heavily with fragmentation , HIV / AIDS , and situations faced by those with the virus ; Frank 's Cock was his first venture directly addressing the AIDS issue . 
 While living in Vancouver , Hoolboom joined the local People With AIDS ( PWA ) group . There he befriended a man ( Joey in some sources , Alan in others ) whose partner was dying of AIDS . Upon his friend 's suggestion , Hoolboom began work on a script for " a real movie " : one which portrayed an AIDS patient as full of love , not one that showed the patient 's friends abandoning him . The friend was , however , unwilling to appear in the film . In writing the script Hoolboom tried to keep elements of humour ; he later said that the humour was necessary as the source had insisted " most of our relationship was incredibly joyous and happy and a good time " . 
 After receiving a commission to make a short film for the Vancouver @-@ based cooperative <unk> , Hoolboom began working on realising the script with a low budget and limited amount of 16 mm film from the National Film Board of Canada ; he was one of seven artists commissioned to " spark local production " with short films on breakup , which were ultimately included in the omnibus Breaking Up . Rennie – at that time a relative unknown – agreed to deliver the monologue . Hoolboom was pleased with the results , writing that Rennie presented the monologue as if " he 'd been living this story all along . " The majority of the technical work , including direction , cinematography , and editing , was handled by Hoolboom ; Alex Mackenzie , working for <unk> , produced the film . 
 Part of the terms of his grant were that Hoolboom was allowed a limited number of edits ( one or three ) . After pondering how to complete the film under such terms , Hoolboom chose to use no edits . He recorded previously edited footage , some appropriated from various sources , through a hole in a piece of cardboard , producing a single quadrant ; he repeated this process three times , using the same film , which resulted in four quadrants with four different images . Production was completed by early 1993 , and in screenings Frank 's Cock was marketed as an " extremely explicit " experimental film . 
 Although societal awareness of AIDS had developed at a slower pace in Canada than in the United States , films regarding the disease had appeared nearly concurrently : both the first Canadian documentary and the first American feature @-@ length film on the subject , Nik Sheehan 's No Sad Songs and John Erman 's An Early Frost respectively , were released in 1985 . However , the majority of the early gay artists with AIDS had died by the time Hoolboom made Frank 's Cock ; as such , the film scholar Thomas Waugh considers Hoolboom a second @-@ generation figurehead in AIDS activism and one of the earliest not coming from the gay community . 
 = = Style = = 
 Frank 's Cock divides the screen into quadrants , with the majority of the film focusing on the upper @-@ right corner of the screen . In this panel , Rennie 's character gives a monologue , which is sometimes illustrated by images in other panels : the lower @-@ right panel flashes scenes of hardcore gay pornography , the upper @-@ left shows scenes representing human embryo formation , while the lower @-@ left flashes excerpts from popular art . Aside from the original footage of Rennie , the short appropriated clips from the Nova episode " The Miracle of Life " , the gay pornographic film The Best of Blondes , and the music video for Madonna 's 1992 song " Erotica " . The effect was later reused in Hoolboom 's 1997 short <unk> . 
 Janis Cole , writing for POV magazine , described the split @-@ screen effect as supporting the text while " creating an optical treatment purposefully grounded in both dream and reality " , as elements show out of sync . Jeff Rush and Cynthia Baughman , writing in the Journal of Film and Video , described the film as showing that " text can reverse the traditional balance of words 
 = abstractions / images = 
 the concrete " through the creation of vivid , perhaps disturbing , word pictures which serve as tangible images contrasted with the faint abstractions which are the actual images . Jack Rusholme , prefacing a retrospective of Hoolboom 's works by <unk> Media Arts , wrote that the split @-@ screen evokes the effects of AIDS , in which " the body [ is ] broken into dispersed <unk> " , while the narration serves to " bind with words what this disease will render lifeless and inert " . In a 1994 interview , Hoolboom stated that his intent was to represent the " fragmentation of the body " experienced by AIDS sufferers . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Frank 's Cock has received warm critical reviews , both in Canada and abroad . Cole called it an " extraordinary experimental documentary " that is " as bold as the title implies " and a strong argument for the widespread dissemination of short films . Waugh placed Frank 's Cock as one of a " great AIDS triptych " , together with Hoolboom 's later works Letters from Home ( 1996 ) and <unk> . The Canadian film scholar Darell Varga wrote that the film is an " emotionally riveting " eulogy to the loss of love . Karen Tisch , writing in Take One , found that the short built its emotional power " delicately but steadily " ; she suggested that its Toronto International Film Festival ( TIFF ) win was well @-@ deserved . 
 Reviewing for the Western Australian independent film magazine In the Picture , James Twentyman wrote that the film was " relatively straightforward " but strong and provocative , emphasising the " soul @-@ baring " nature of the monologue . Rush and Baughman found that the short took the narrative voice beyond what is mainstream , demonstrating " the power of word and image " , while Rusholme described Frank 's Cock as Hoolboom 's " most explicit AIDS narrative " . The Swiss film festival Viper touted the short as expressing humour and sexual obsession in the face of a plague . 
 Hoolboom has stated that he felt the film was accessible to both gay or straight audiences , which should " open them up to differences of form and why [ one ] would make something formally different . " Waugh suggested that this was successful , as in his experience audiences often cried at screenings . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Frank 's Cock won several awards at domestic and international film festivals . At the 1994 TIFF it won the NFB – John <unk> Award , given for the best Canadian short film . The jury cited Frank 's Cock for its " evocative images , ... impeccable writing and mise en scene , ... moving depiction of the universal human experiences of love and loss in the age of AIDS , and especially for its success in shaking our preconceptions " . The selection included C $ 2 @,@ 500 in prize money and a further C $ 2 @,@ 500 worth of film processing . When accepting the award , Hoolboom quipped " Frank 's Cock has never seemed so large " ; Waugh , however , suggests that the title " caused more embarrassment than mirth " when it was read during the citation . Special citations were also read for Andrew Munger 's Make Some Noise and Philip Hoffman 's <unk> Ordering . 
 That year the film won a Golden Leopard at the Locarno International Film Festival in Locarno , Switzerland . At the Ann Arbor Film Festival in Ann Arbor , Michigan , Frank 's Cock won Best Dramatic Film . The Canadian Filmmakers ' Distribution Centre , which has distribution rights for the film , notes further awards at the <unk> Festival in Berlin and Second Prize Experimental at the Big Muddy Film Festival in Carbondale , Illinois ( both 1995 ) , while Hoolboom records Frank 's Cock as receiving an honourable mention at the University of Oregon 's Queer Film Fest ( 1994 ) . 
 The script for Frank 's Cock has been published several times , including in the script anthology By the Skin of Their Tongues and in the Journal of Film and Video ( both 1997 ) . The film influenced Adam Garnet Jones ' Secret Weapons ( 2008 ) , commissioned by the Canadian Filmmakers Distribution Centre in celebration of its fortieth anniversary . However , unlike Frank 's Cock , Secret Weapons focused on an LGBT identity within Canada 's native community . 
 After his success at the TIFF , Hoolboom directed numerous further films , many showing a " fascination with its impermanence " ; several , including Letters From Home , dealt explicitly with AIDS . Rennie , who had also received critical acclaim for his supporting role in Mina Shum 's Double Happiness ( 1994 ) , later became known for playing villains in Hollywood films . 
 = Rodrigues rail = 
 The Rodrigues rail or Leguat 's <unk> ( Erythromachus leguati ) is an extinct , flightless rail that was endemic to the Mascarene island of Rodrigues , east of Madagascar in the Indian Ocean . It was described as having grey plumage , a red beak , red legs , and a naked red patch around the eye . The beak varied between specimens from straight to curved , but the reason for this is unknown . 
 It is sometimes assigned to the genus Aphanapteryx , along with its close relative the red rail ( A. bonasia ) of Mauritius , but they are commonly kept separate . Its relationship with other rails is unclear . It was described as being attracted to red objects , which humans exploited while hunting it . 
 The Rodrigues rail is believed to have become extinct in the mid @-@ 18th century because of destruction of its habitat and predation by humans and introduced animals . Apart from information gathered from subfossil bones , the bird is poorly understood and is only known from two contemporaneous descriptions , and there are no extant illustrations of it . The bird was first described by François Leguat , a French Huguenot refugee marooned on Rodrigues in 1691 , and was named leguati in his honour . The second description is by Julien Tafforet , also marooned on the island in 1726 . Subfossil remains were first described and connected with the extant descriptions in 1874 . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 In 1848 , Hugh Strickland wrote that a bird similar to the red rail ( Aphanapteryx bonasia ) of Mauritius was mentioned in François Leguat 's memoirs , but was unable to classify it further because of a lack of remains . He wrote that it may have been a grouse or <unk> bird . In 1874 , Alphonse Milne @-@ Edwards connected Leguat 's and Tafforet 's descriptions with some bones found in a cave on Rodrigues , and recognised their similarity to those of the red rail . Milne @-@ Edwards coined the generic name <unk> from the Greek words for " red " and " battle " , in reference to its behaviour towards red objects , and the specific name is in honour of Leguat . The junior synonym <unk> , from " red " and " hatred " , was coined by Alfred Newton in 1893 , also referring to this behaviour . James Greenway wrote that Leguat 's description referred to wind @-@ blown purple swamphen . This has not been accepted by other authors . More remains were found in 1974 . 
 Unlike the red rail and other extinct Mascarene birds , the Rodrigues rail was not illustrated by contemporaneous artists . Ornithologist Storrs L. Olson described reconstructions made for Walter Rothschild 's 1907 book Extinct Birds and Masauji <unk> 's The Dodo and Kindred Birds ( 1953 ) as " rather fanciful " . Frederick William Frohawk based his restoration in the former book on an outline sketch , which was in turn based on a 17th @-@ century sketch drawn by Sir Thomas Herbert , which is now known to depict the red rail . Hermann Schlegel thought it depicted a species of dodo ( Didus <unk> ) from Rodrigues when he drew the outline in 1854 , and that it was the species mentioned by Leguat . 
 = = = Evolution = = = 
 Apart from being a close relative to the red rail , the relationships of the Rodrigues rail are uncertain and the two are commonly listed as separate genera , Aphanapteryx and Erythromachus , but have sometimes been united as species of Aphanapteryx . Edward Newton and Albert Günther first generically synonymised them in 1879 because of their skeletal similarities . It has been suggested that because of these species ' geographic locations and the morphology of the nasal bones , they may have been related to the genera Gallirallus , Dryolimnas , Atlantisia , and Rallus . Rails have reached many oceanic archipelagos , which has frequently lead to speciation and the evolution of <unk> . These rails may be of Asian origins , like many other Mascarene birds . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Rodrigues rail was a plump , flightless rail with bright grey plumage , perhaps flecked with white , and it had a red bill and legs , and a red , naked area around its eyes . It was somewhat smaller than its closest relative , the red rail . The bird 's exact length is unknown , but it was about the size of a chicken . The strong bill varied greatly in size and shape ; some specimens had short and almost straight bills , and others had much longer bills that were prominently curved . It is unknown whether this was related to sexual dimorphism or to individual variation . Its cranium was 38 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) long by 20 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) wide , and the bill was 77 millimetres ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) long . The pelvis was large and strongly built in proportion to the size of the bird . 
 The Rodrigues rail had somewhat larger wings than the red rail , but the species ' leg proportions , pelvis and sacrum was also similar . It also had a proportionately longer humerus , a broader and shorter skull , and having longer and lower nostrils from the red rail , from which it differed considerably in plumage , based on early descriptions . 
 = = = Contemporary accounts = = = 
 The Rodrigues rail was first recorded by François Leguat in his 1708 memoir , A New Voyage to the East Indies . Leguat was the leader of a group of nine French Huguenot refugees ; the group were the first to colonise Rodrigues from 1691 to 1693 , after they were marooned there by their captain . Leguat 's observations are considered some of the first cohesive accounts of animal behaviour in the wild . 
 Leguat 's full account of the bird reads as follows : 
 Our ' <unk> ' [ hens ] are fat all the year round and of a most delicate taste . Their colour is always of a bright grey , and there is very little difference in plumage between the two sexes . They hide their nests so well that we could not find them out , and consequently did not taste their eggs . They have a red naked area round their eyes , their beaks are straight and pointed , near two and two @-@ fifths inches long , and red also . They cannot fly , their fat makes them too heavy for it . If you offer them anything red , they are so angry they will fly at you to catch it out of your hand , and in the heat of the combat we had an opportunity to take them with ease . 
 Another description of appearance and behaviour is found in an anonymous document called Relation de l 'Ile Rodrigue , which was rediscovered in 1874 and has been attributed to Julien Tafforet , who was marooned on Rodrigues in 1726 : 
 There is a sort of bird , of the size of a young hen , which has the beak and feet red . Its beak is a little like that of a curlew , excepting that it is slightly thicker and not quite so long . It plumage is spotted with white and grey . They generally feed on the eggs of the land tortoises , which they find in the ground , which makes them so fat that they often have difficulty running . They are very good to eat , and their fat is of a yellowish red , which is excellent for pains . They have small pinions [ wings ] , without feathers , on which account they cannot fly ; but on the other hand , they run very well . Their cry is a continual whistling . When they see any one who pursues them they produce another sort of noise , like that of a person who has hiccups . 
 = = Behaviour and ecology = = 
 The Rodrigues rail ate invertebrates , possibly small vertebrates , and in the nesting season of the now extinct Cylindraspis tortoises , they dug up and fattened themselves on their eggs . It is possible that the birds had an annual cycle of becoming fat and slim , corresponding with varying availability of food throughout the year . Its vocalizations were a continuous whistling , and it had a hiccup @-@ like , staccato alarm call . Leguat wrote that the birds were hunted in similar method to that used on Mauritius to catch red rails : a piece of red cloth was shown to the birds , which responded with aggressive behaviour , jumping at the cloth and trying to tear it apart . They no fear of humans because they had evolved in the absence of predators , enabling hunters to catch them in large numbers . Neither Leguat or Tafforet located the eggs and nests of the birds . 
 Many other species endemic to Rodrigues became extinct after humans arrived , and the island 's ecosystem is heavily damaged . Before humans arrived , forests covered the island entirely , but very little remains today . The Rodrigues rail lived alongside other recently extinct birds , such as the Rodrigues solitaire , the Rodrigues parrot , Newton 's parakeet , the Rodrigues starling , the Rodrigues owl , the Rodrigues night heron , and the Rodrigues pigeon . Extinct reptiles include the domed Rodrigues giant tortoise , the saddle @-@ backed Rodrigues giant tortoise , and the Rodrigues day gecko . 
 = = Extinction = = 
 The disappearance of the Rodrigues rail coincided with the tortoise trade between 1730 and 1750 ; traders burnt vegetation , hunted birds , and imported cats and pigs which preyed on eggs and chicks . The fat of birds that had been feeding on tortoise eggs was bright orange and was used as a remedy for people recovering from illness . Although the Rodrigues rail survived predation by rats that were accidentally introduced in the late 17th century and had multiplied by the time of Leguat 's visit , it was unable to withstand persecution by humans . Alexandre Guy Pingré wrote in his 1763 report that the bird was extinct by 1761 . 
 = Blame It on Lisa = 
 " Blame It on Lisa " is the fifteenth episode of the thirteenth season of the American animated sitcom The Simpsons . In the episode , the Simpson family goes to Rio de Janeiro , Brazil in search of a Brazilian orphan named Ronaldo whom Lisa has been sponsoring . Lisa used to receive a letter from Ronaldo every month , but that recently stopped and according to personnel at the orphanage , he is missing . As the Simpsons search through Rio de Janeiro , Homer is kidnapped and in order to free him the family must pay a ransom of 50 @,@ 000 dollars , which they do not have . Lisa soon discovers that Ronaldo has been working in a flamingo costume on the children 's television series Teleboobies , which is the reason he left the orphanage . Ronaldo finally meets up with the Simpsons and gives them the 50 @,@ 000 dollars they need to rescue Homer . 
 Written by Bob Bendetson and directed by Steven Dean Moore , " Blame It on Lisa " features several references to popular culture , including a parody of the Brazilian children 's television host Xuxa and an allusion to the film A Trip to the Moon . When it originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on March 31 , 2002 , it was seen by around eleven million people . In 2010 , the episode was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray along with the rest of the episodes of the thirteenth season . 
 " Blame It on Lisa " was controversial in Brazil because of its inclusion of clichés and stereotypes , and because the Brazilian culture was inaccurately mixed with the cultures of surrounding Latin American countries . Riotur , the tourist board of Rio de Janeiro , planned on suing Fox for damaging the international image of the city , which they thought was incorrectly portrayed as having rampant street crime , kidnappings , slums , and a rat infestation . James L. Brooks , executive producer of The Simpsons , soon issued an apology to Rio de Janeiro . 
 = = Plot = = 
 As Homer and Bart are watching The Itchy & Scratchy Show , Marge tells them that the telephone company has charged the family hundreds of dollars for making phone calls to Brazil . Homer and Marge decide to visit the company , thinking there has been a mistake . They meet with customer service representative Lindsey Naegle , who cuts off the family 's phone service after Homer tells her that he refuses to pay the bill . Homer attempts to connect illegally to the phone lines , but only succeeds in getting electrocuted at least 5 times and , when he regains consciousness on the couch , is told that he was found " smoldering in the bushes " . When Lisa finds out the reason the family no longer has phone service , she confesses that she has actually made calls to Brazil . She has been sponsoring an orphan named Ronaldo in the country and she used to receive a letter from him once every month until recently . Lisa called Ronaldo 's orphanage to find out what had happened and she was told he is missing . She shows her family a tape recorded by Ronaldo that she received after her first donation , in which Ronaldo thanks Lisa and tells her that with her money he has purchased a pair of dancing shoes for himself and the orphanage has been able to buy a door . Touched by the tape , the Simpsons decide to travel to Brazil to solve the mystery behind Ronaldo 's disappearance , leaving Maggie with Patty and Selma . 
 When the family arrives in Rio de Janeiro , they discover that they can get anywhere they want by joining a conga line . After dancing their way to the hotel , Bart turns on the television in their room and watches a children 's show called Teleboobies which Marge criticizes because of its sexual undertones . The Simpsons then head out to search for Ronaldo . First , they travel to the slums in Rio de Janeiro . According to Lisa , " The government just painted them bright colors so the tourists would not be offended . " In the slums , the family sees thousands of rats painted in various colors . They then reach Ronaldo 's orphanage , but the nun working there has no idea where he has gone . Later that day , as the Simpsons are having dinner at a restaurant , Lisa shows a map on which she has marked all the places Ronaldo likes to visit . She splits the map in two , giving one piece to Homer and Bart and keeping one piece for her and Marge . Homer and Bart first search through Copacabana Beach and then a market , where they are robbed by children , while Marge and Lisa visit a samba school . However , both duos are unsuccessful in finding Ronaldo so far . To get to their last location , Homer and Bart take a taxi and are kidnapped at gunpoint by the taxi driver . However , Bart is able to get away and tell the rest of the family . 
 The taxi driver and his companion hold Homer hostage deep into the rainforest . They force Homer to make a phone call to Marge , telling her that if the family provides 50 @,@ 000 dollars to the kidnappers , he will be released . However , the Simpsons do not have enough money so they go looking for Homer instead . Walking through the streets of Rio de Janeiro , they run into a parade that features a Teleboobies float with characters from the show . Lisa is surprised to discover that Ronaldo is working inside the costume of the dancing flamingo from Teleboobies — a well @-@ paid job he got after learning to dance with the shoes he bought with Lisa 's donation money . Ronaldo tells Lisa that he stopped writing to her because he did not know which state she lives in , since it was the orphanage that used to send his letters . Later , Ronaldo gives the Simpsons the money they need to save Homer . Meanwhile , Homer shows the kidnappers a scrapbook he made of his kidnapping memories . Apparently , he has developed Stockholm syndrome . The family and the kidnappers then meet up high over a valley near the Sugarloaf Mountain in two separate cable cars . The Simpsons toss the kidnappers their money , and when Homer jumps into his family 's cable car , the cables break , sending the family crashing into the mountainside and rolling down to the ground . They all survive unharmed , but Bart is then eaten whole by an anaconda . The episode ends with Bart dancing inside the snake to carnival music . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Blame It on Lisa " was written by Bob Bendetson and directed by Steven Dean Moore as part of the thirteenth season of The Simpsons ( 2001 – 2002 ) . For the scenes taking place in Brazil , the animators based much of their work on photographs taken by a staff member who had previously visited the country . This episode is not the first in which the Simpsons travel to a location outside of the United States . Throughout the series , they have visited Australia , Canada , China , France , Israel , Japan , Ireland , and the United Kingdom . Their visit to Brazil in " Blame It on Lisa " was later referenced in the eighteenth season episode " The Wife Aquatic " ( 2007 ) , in which the family makes a trip to an island called Barnacle Bay that they discover has been devastated by overfishing . Lisa says to Bart : " This is the most disgusting place we 've ever gone , " to which Bart asks : " What about Brazil ? " Lisa corrects herself , responding : " After Brazil . " 
 Several references to popular culture are included in the episode . The title " Blame It on Lisa " refers to the 1984 film Blame It on Rio , which also takes place in Brazil . As Homer and Bart walk on Copacabana Beach , the famous 1939 song " <unk> do Brasil " ( also known as " Brazil " ) is played . Teleboobies is a parody of the children 's television series Xuxa that attracted complaints because of the revealing outfits worn by the host , Brazilian actress and singer Xuxa . The name " Teleboobies " is a reference to the British television series Teletubbies . The Itchy & Scratchy cartoon that Homer and Bart watch at the beginning of the episode parodies Georges Méliès ' 1902 film A Trip to the Moon ; Itchy and Scratchy are playing golf when Itchy hits Scratchy 's head with his golf club , sending his head crashing into the Man in the Moon as the rocket does in the film . According to showrunner Al Jean , the staff members of The Simpsons asked American golfer Tiger Woods to do a guest appearance in this cartoon , but they were turned down . 
 = = Release = = 
 In its original broadcast on the Fox network in the United States on March 31 , 2002 , " Blame It on Lisa " received a 6 @.@ 3 Nielsen rating and was seen by approximately eleven million people . The episode finished forty @-@ third in the ratings for the week of March 25 – 31 , 2002 , tying with a new episode of the comedy series George Lopez and the news program 48 Hours . In addition , it became the highest @-@ rated program on Fox that week . On August 24 , 2010 , " Blame It on Lisa " was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray as part of the box set The Simpsons – The Complete Thirteenth Season . Staff members Steven Dean Moore , Al Jean , Matt Groening , Matt Selman , Tim Long , John Frink , Don Payne , Joel H. Cohen , Matt Warburton , David Silverman , and Mike B. Anderson participated in the DVD audio commentary for the episode . 
 Bendetson was nominated for a Writers Guild of America Award in the animation category for his work on the episode , but lost to Ken Keeler , the writer of the Futurama episode " <unk> " . Reception of " Blame It on Lisa " from television critics has been mixed . Casey Broadwater of Blu @-@ ray.com cited it as the best episode of the season . DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson argued that it was not as funny as some of the other episodes that have poked fun at nations . He added that the episode " musters the occasional laugh , and like much of [ season thirteen ] , it ’ s not a bad show , but it ’ s not a memorable one either . " DVD Verdict 's Jennifer Malkowski cited the scrapbook Homer made of his kidnapping memories as the highlight of the episode . 
 = = = Reaction in Brazil = = = 
 " Blame It on Lisa " was met with negative reception in Brazil shortly after its broadcast in the United States . According to The Washington Post , " an immediate media frenzy was born " as the episode started receiving coverage in local newspapers and news programs on Brazilian television . An article published in the Houston Chronicle on April 8 , 2002 stated that critics in the country were upset by the inclusion of clichés and stereotypes not related to Brazil , such as Brazilians having Spanish accents and wearing mustaches . The general Brazilian perception was that the episode mixed up their culture with that of surrounding Spanish @-@ speaking Latin American countries . Alex Bellos , The Guardian 's correspondent in Brazil , commented that one of the things upsetting the Brazilians was the many inaccuracies featured in the episode , such as the conga and the <unk> being popular dances in Brazil ; the conga is actually a Caribbean dance , and the <unk> does not come from Brazil nor is it frequently performed there . 
 On April 6 , 2002 , it was reported by the Brazilian media that Riotur , the tourist board of Rio de Janeiro , was planning on suing Fox for damaging the international image of the city . Riotur stated that Rio de Janeiro was portrayed in " Blame It on Lisa " as having rampant street crime , kidnappings , slums , and a rat infestation , and it was thought that this would discourage foreigners from visiting the city . Over a period of three years up to the airing of " Blame It on Lisa " in the United States , Riotur had spent US $ 18 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 on a campaign to attract tourists to Rio de Janeiro . The tourist board now saw this as a waste of money since they believed the campaign was undermined by the portrayal of the city in the episode . Riotur 's planned lawsuit was supported by the Brazilian government , with president Fernando Henrique Cardoso stating that the episode " brought a distorted vision of Brazilian reality " . 
 Martin <unk> , South America correspondent for National Public Radio , reported on April 9 , 2002 that since their announcement that they were going to sue Fox , the Riotur officials had been told by their lawyers in the United States that it would be difficult to sue the episode there because of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution , which protects parodies . The Simpsons executive producer James L. Brooks soon issued a statement saying : " We apologize to the lovely city and people of Rio de Janeiro . And if that doesn 't settle the issue , Homer Simpson offers to take on the president of Brazil on Fox 's Celebrity Boxing . " <unk> for Fox told the press that they had not received nearly as much criticism with previous episodes that poked fun at other nations . Showrunner Al Jean has said in an interview that " Every other place has had a good sense of humor . Brazil caught us by surprise . " When " Blame It on Lisa " eventually aired in Brazil in December 2002 , there was a statement at the beginning noting that Fox is not responsible for the vision of the producers behind the episode . 
 A later episode , " You Don 't Have to Live Like a Referee " , has the family visiting Brazil again . 
 = The Log from the Sea of Cortez = 
 The Log from the Sea of Cortez is an English @-@ language book written by American author John Steinbeck and published in 1951 . It details a six @-@ week ( March 11 – April 20 ) marine specimen @-@ collecting boat expedition he made in 1940 at various sites in the Gulf of California ( also known as the Sea of Cortez ) , with his friend , the marine biologist Ed Ricketts . It is regarded as one of Steinbeck 's most important works of non @-@ fiction chiefly because of the involvement of Ricketts , who shaped Steinbeck 's thinking and provided the prototype for many of the pivotal characters in his fiction , and the insights it gives into the philosophies of the two men . 
 The Log from the Sea of Cortez is the narrative portion of an unsuccessful earlier work , Sea of Cortez : A Leisurely Journal of Travel and Research , which was published by Steinbeck and Ricketts shortly after their return from the Gulf of California , and combined the journals of the collecting expedition , reworked by Steinbeck , with Ricketts ' species catalogue . After Ricketts ' death in 1948 , Steinbeck dropped the species catalogue from the earlier work and republished it with a eulogy to his friend added as a foreword . 
 = = Journey = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Steinbeck met Ricketts in 1930 through a shared interest in marine biology . Ricketts made a modest living as a professional biologist by preparing and selling specimens of intertidal fauna to laboratories and universities from his small lab in Cannery Row , and Steinbeck spent many hours at the lab in Ricketts ' company . Ricketts was the inspiration for the boozy , good @-@ hearted character of " Doc " , who appeared in the novels Steinbeck set in and around Monterey , and elements of his personality are mirrored by many other important characters in Steinbeck 's novels . 
 Both Steinbeck and Ricketts had achieved some measure of security and recognition in their professions by 1939 : Steinbeck had capitalized on his first successful novel , Tortilla Flat , with the publication of The Grapes of Wrath , and Ricketts had published Between Pacific Tides , which became the definitive handbook for the study of the intertidal fauna of the Pacific Coast of the coterminous United States . Steinbeck was exhausted and looking for a new start ; Ricketts was looking for a new challenge . The two men had long thought of producing a book together and , in a change of pace for both of them , they began work on a handbook of the common intertidal species of the San Francisco Bay Area . The book came to nothing , but it spurred them into making a trip to the Sea of Cortez . Initially they planned a motoring trip to Mexico City as a break from their work on the handbook , but as time went on they became more interested in a collecting trip around the Gulf of California . Ricketts noted in his journal : 
 Jon said , " If you have an objective , like collecting specimens , it puts so much more direction onto a trip , makes it more interesting . " ... Then he said , " We 'll do a book about it that 'll more than pay the expenses of the trip . " 
 A specimen @-@ collecting expedition along the Pacific Coast and down into Mexico provided them with a chance to relax , and , for Steinbeck , a chance for a brief escape from the controversy mounting around The Grapes of Wrath . Ricketts , suffering as a result of the breakup of his long @-@ term relationship with a married woman in Monterey , was glad to get away too . They planned to collect specimens from the rock and tide pools and the shore line uncovered between tides which would allow them build up a picture of the macro level ecosystem in the Gulf . The preserved specimens of the fauna they collected could be identified and catalogued or sold on their return . 
 Early in 1940 , Steinbeck and Ricketts hired a Monterey Bay sardine fishing boat , the Western Flyer , with a four @-@ man crew , and spent six weeks travelling the coast of the Gulf of California collecting biological specimens . Along with Ricketts and the four crew members mentioned in the book , Steinbeck was accompanied by his wife , Carol . Steinbeck hoped that the trip would help rescue their failing marriage , but it seems to have had the opposite effect : the marriage ended soon after they returned . Steinbeck 's lawyer and friend , Toby Street , was also on board as far as San Diego . 
 = = = Account of the expedition = = = 
 The Western Flyer was a 75 @-@ foot ( 23 m ) purse seiner , crewed by Tony Berry , the captain ; " Tex " Travis , the engineer ; and two able seamen , " Sparky " Enea and " Tiny " <unk> . Stocked with supplies , collecting equipment and a small library , the boat put out to sea on the afternoon of March 11 , 1940 . They started in a leisurely fashion down the Pacific coast , fishing as they went . They refueled at San Diego and on March 17 passed Point San Lazaro and made their way down the Pacific side of the Baja California peninsula . They put in at Cabo San Lucas , on the tip of the peninsula , where they were greeted by Mexican officials and began collecting specimens . The collecting team was initially planned to consist of Steinbeck and Ricketts alone , but Carol and eventually Enea and <unk> joined them , allowing for a much more efficient collection at each stop . 
 The battles with their outboard motor , referred to pseudonymously as the " Hansen Sea @-@ Cow " , which would feature as a humorous thread throughout the journal , began immediately and continued the next day when they moved further round the coast to El <unk> Reef : 
 Our Hansen Sea @-@ Cow was not only a living thing but a mean , irritable , contemptible , vengeful , mischievous , hateful living thing .... [ it ] loved to ride on the back of a boat , trailing its propeller <unk> in the water while we rowed ... when attacked with a screwdriver [ it ] fell apart in simulated death ... It loved no one , trusted no one , it had no friends . 
 Making for Isla Espiritu Santo they faced strong winds and , rather than attempting to land at the island , they anchored at Pescadero on the mainland . On March 20 they returned to the island and spent the day collecting . A visit from some natives of La Paz that evening , coupled with the exhaustion of their supplies of beer , encouraged them to make for the town the next morning . They spent three days collecting with the assistance of the locals , and enjoyed the hospitality of La Paz . In writing about the town , Steinbeck briefly recounts the story that he would later rewrite as The Pearl . 
 On March 23 , they moved on to San José Island , where the " Sea @-@ Cow " again let them down : they wanted it to bring the boat close to Cayo islet , but they ended up rowing the boat , with the outboard still attached , after it failed to start . The next day , Easter Sunday , they continued on to Marcial Reef . After collecting specimens there , they sailed to Puerto Escondido where they met some holidaying Mexicans who invited them on a hunting trip . They accepted , wanting to see the interior of the peninsula , and enjoyed two days in the company of the Mexicans , eating , drinking and listening to unintelligible dirty jokes in Spanish . Due to the relaxed attitudes of their hosts , no actual hunting took place , which pleased Steinbeck : 
 Furthermore , they had taught us the best of all ways to go hunting , and we shall never use any other . We have , however , made one slight improvement on their method : we shall not take a gun , thereby obviating the last remote possibility of having the hunt cluttered up with game . 
 Puerto Escondido proved to be a rich collecting ground , and after nine days in the Gulf , they had to scale back their collecting ambitions owing to lack of space for the specimens . It had already become clear that there were certain species that were ubiquitous in the region : some species of crabs , sea anemones , limpets , barnacles and sea cucumbers were found at every stop , and the sun star , <unk> <unk> , the sea urchin , <unk> <unk> , and <unk> of the <unk> genus were common . 
 Leaving Puerto Escondido , they continued up the coast to Loreto , where they restocked their supplies . They then visited the Coronado Islands , <unk> Bay and San Lucas Cove , collecting specimens at each stop . The work was exhausting ; Steinbeck wrote in his letters that he had little time for sleep because the collecting and preparation took so long . In the cramped quarters of the boat , all the equipment had to be set up and stowed each time the boat moved to a new anchorage , which made the work of cataloguing and processing the specimens doubly arduous . 
 Making their way to San Carlos Bay , they bypassed the town of Santa Rosalía , and entered the sparsely populated upper Gulf , stopping at San Francisquito Bay . On April 1 , they made for Bahía de los Ángeles , which was to be the last stop on the peninsula before they crossed to the mainland coast . On April 2 they rounded Isla Ángel de la Guarda , and anchored in Puerto Refugio for the night . The next morning they made for <unk> Island , on the eastern side of the Gulf . They collected specimens at Red Point Bluff , keeping an eye out for the Seri , a local tribe who they had heard were rumored to be cannibals : 
 In our usual condition of hunger , it would have been a toss @-@ up whether <unk> ate us or we ate <unk> . The one who got in the first bite would have had the dinner , but we never did see a Seri . 
 Although the crew were eager to get to Guaymas as soon as possible , it was too far for a single day 's journey , so the next day they put in at Puerto San Carlos , where they collected . Early the next morning they made the short run to Guaymas . 
 They left Guaymas on the morning of April 8 and , only an hour out , encountered a Japanese fishing fleet dredging the bottom . Although initially wary , the crew of one of the boats welcomed Steinbeck and Ricketts on board and allowed them to select some specimens from the catch , though to the annoyance of the crew of the Western Flyer , Ricketts and Steinbeck forgot to get any fish to eat . Taking leave of the fleet , they made for the Estero de la Luna , a huge estuary where Ricketts and Steinbeck became lost in fog while out on a collecting expedition , after the " Sea @-@ Cow " once again refused to run . Although spooked by the episode , they were able to navigate back to the Western Flyer once the fog cleared . 
 Continuing down to <unk> lagoon , they stopped to collect along the shores , and then recrossed the Gulf by night , putting in at San Gabriel Bay for a last collection before making for home . On the afternoon of April 12 they secured all the equipment and laid in a course for San Diego . 
 The collecting trip had been very successful : they catalogued over 500 species of the fauna of the shores of the Gulf ; recorded a species of brittle star , <unk> marginatus , last recorded nearly 100 years earlier ; and discovered about 50 new species . Three species of sea anemone they discovered were named for them by Dr. Oscar <unk> at the Lund University 's Department of Zoology in Sweden : <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , and <unk> <unk> . 
 = = Book = = 
 = = = Sea of Cortez = = = 
 The year after their return from the trip Steinbeck and Ricketts published Sea of Cortez : A Leisurely Journal of Travel and Research , in which Steinbeck combined the daily journals of the trip with Ricketts ' annotated specimen list . The title " Sea of Cortez " was preferred to the " Gulf of California " as a better @-@ sounding and a more exciting name . It was assumed by many that Steinbeck had kept a journal during the trip and that the book was merely an amalgamation of his log and Ricketts ' taxonomic list ; but the two authors revealed that the journal was Ricketts ' . Although Steinbeck had added to it during the journey , he had done the real work of editing it after they returned . The log was based on what Ricketts called the <unk> Transcript , an account of the trip he had compiled from the various notes he kept during the trip . Much of the final narrative was little changed from Ricketts ' notes ; Steinbeck shifted from the first person singular to the first person plural and gave some of Ricketts ' drier prose a poetic twist , but many of the scenes remained almost unchanged from the daily journal . The suggestion by Steinbeck 's editor , Pascal Covici , that the title page should state that Steinbeck was the author and add that the appendices were by Ricketts met with blunt opposition from Steinbeck : " I not only disapprove of your plan — I forbid it " . Steinbeck also drew upon the journal of Tony Berry , mostly to confirm dates and times . 
 The book is a travelogue and biological record , but also reveals the two men 's philosophies : it dwells on the place of humans in the environment , the interconnection between single organisms and the larger ecosystem , and the themes of leaving and returning home . A number of ecological concerns , rare in 1940 , are voiced , such as an imagined but horrific vision of the long term damage that the Japanese bottom fishing trawlers are doing to the sea bed . Although written as if it were the journal kept by Steinbeck during the voyage , the book is to some extent a work of fiction : the journals are not Steinbeck 's , and his wife , who had accompanied him on the trip , is not mentioned ( though at one point Steinbeck slips and mentions the matter of food for seven people ) . Since returning home is a theme throughout the narrative , the inclusion of his wife , a symbol of home , would have dissipated the effect . Steinbeck and Ricketts are never mentioned by name but are amalgamated into the first person " we " who narrate the log . 
 A version of Ricketts ' philosophical work " Essay on Non @-@ teleological Thinking " , which to some extent expressed both authors ' outlooks , was included as the Easter Sunday chapter . Although Steinbeck altered the original , Ricketts expressed his satisfaction with the result . Becoming known as the " Easter Sunday Sermon " , it explores the gap between the methods of science and faith and the common ground they share , and it expounds on the holistic approach both men took to ecology : 
 It is advisable to look from the tide pool to the stars and then back to the tide pool again . 
 Steinbeck enjoyed writing the book ; it was a challenge to apply his novel @-@ writing skills to a scientific subject . However , he doubted from an early stage that the book would sell well . He considered it would be a good read , but not for the " take @-@ a @-@ book @-@ to @-@ bed public " . As he progressed further , he began to see that the book would have very limited appeal , but equally he was convinced that it was a good book and the best work he had done . He was happy that it took his writing in a new direction and would confound the attempts of the critics to pigeonhole him , and , with a slightly masochistic joy he looked forward to their " rage and contempt " . In that , he was proved incorrect ; the reviews were mixed , but largely favorable , focusing on his affirmation of humankind 's place in the wider environment , and picking up on the excitement Steinbeck and Ricketts felt for their subject . Most felt that even though there were moments when Steinbeck was at his best , the blending of philosophy , travelogue and biological recording made for an uneven read : 
 Thus the reader will be enjoying the chase of Tethys the sea @-@ hare when all of a sudden he will find himself becalmed in a soupy discussion of teleology . Most readers , one suspects , will prefer Tethys the sea @-@ hare . 
 Those critics who looked beyond the narrative portion were impressed by Ricketts ' catalogue . Marine biologist Joel W. <unk> , writing in the San Francisco Chronicle , predicted it would be indispensable for students of the marine invertebrates of the Gulf of California . Steinbeck was right about the lack of popular appeal , however : the unusual mixture of taxonomic data and travelogue meant the book struggled to find an audience . Few copies were printed and it was soon all but forgotten . The country 's entry into the war and plummeting book sales also had an effect . Ricketts ' share of the revenues from sales did not even provide him with the money to pay back Steinbeck for financing the journey . 
 = = = Reissue = = = 
 Ricketts was killed in 1948 when a train collided with his car while he was crossing the rail tracks . Ricketts ' death severely hurt Steinbeck : " he was part of my brain for 18 years " . Although Steinbeck had moved to New York shortly after the journey and the two men had not seen as much of each other in the following years , they had corresponded by mail and had been planning a further expedition , this time northwards to the Aleutian Islands . 
 In 1951 Steinbeck republished the narrative portion of Sea of Cortez as The Log from the Sea of Cortez , dropping Ricketts ' species list and adding a preface entitled " About Ed Ricketts " , a biography of his friend . 
 Pascal Covici had always regarded Ricketts as a hanger @-@ on and had been keen to deny his authorship of the original book . He pushed Steinbeck to get Ricketts ' son , Ed Jr . , to sign over the copyright to the narrative portion of the book , so that the reissued version could credit Steinbeck alone . Covici suggested a 15 – 20 % share of the royalties as a recompense ; but Ed Jr . , knowing that the narrative was largely Ricketts ' own , insisted on 25 % . With the copyright secured , Ricketts ' name was dropped from the cover , though the title page acknowledged that the book was " the narrative portion of the Sea of Cortez by John Steinbeck and E.F. Ricketts " , and throughout his life , Steinbeck insisted on referring to the work as a collaboration . The republished narrative is unchanged from the original published in Sea of Cortez . 
 The republished version enjoyed greater success than the original . Although , by the time of his death in 1968 , Steinbeck 's reputation was at an all @-@ time low owing to his mediocre output during the last decades of his life and his support for American involvement in Vietnam , his books have slowly regained their popularity . The Log from the Sea of Cortez became an important work within his oeuvre , not only as an interesting travelogue and work of non @-@ fiction , but for its first @-@ hand account of Ed Ricketts , the man whose thinking had so much influence on the course of Steinbeck 's writing and on whom he had based so many of his pivotal characters . Whereas earlier critics mostly assumed that " Mr. Ricketts contributed some of the biology , and Mr. Steinbeck all of the prose " , the publication of Ricketts ' rediscovered original notes in 2003 has revealed how closely Steinbeck followed Ricketts ' journal . This has forced a re @-@ evaluation of how far it is fair to attribute authorship of the narrative portion of Sea of Cortez to Steinbeck , and has caused critics to view the removal of Ricketts ' name from the cover as reflecting badly on Steinbeck . 
 Travels With Charley : In Search of America , another non @-@ fiction travelogue which Steinbeck wrote in 1962 , is seen as a more rounded view of the author late in life , but The Log from the Sea of Cortez is regarded as showing the direct influence of Ed Ricketts and his philosophies on Steinbeck , and provides clues to the underlying rationales for some events in his novels . In particular , " About Ed Ricketts " reveals how closely he was tied to the characters in Steinbeck 's novels : parts are taken almost verbatim from descriptions of " Doc " in Cannery Row . The book is also important for seeing something of Ed Ricketts himself . It was the only example of his philosophical writings published in his lifetime . The " Essay on Non @-@ teleological Thinking " was part of a trilogy of philosophical essays he had written before the trip , and which , with Steinbeck 's help , he continued to try to have published until his death . As a travelogue it captures a lost world . Even as they were making the trip , a new hotel was being built in La Paz . Steinbeck bemoaned the coming of tourism : 
 Probably the airplanes will bring week @-@ enders from Los Angeles before long , and the beautiful poor bedraggled old town will bloom with a Floridian ugliness . 
 Today , Cabo San Lucas is home to luxury hotels and the houses of American rock stars , and many of the small villages have become suburbs of the larger towns of the Gulf , but people still visit , attempting to capture something of the spirit of the leisurely journey Steinbeck and Ricketts took around the Sea of Cortez . 
 = Ayn Rand = 
 Ayn Rand ( / <unk> <unk> / ; born Alisa <unk> <unk> Rosenbaum , Russian : <unk> ́ <unk> <unk> ́ <unk> <unk> ́ <unk> ; February 2 [ O.S. January 20 ] 1905 – March 6 , 1982 ) was a Russian @-@ born American novelist , philosopher , playwright , and screenwriter . She is known for her two best @-@ selling novels , The Fountainhead and Atlas Shrugged , and for developing a philosophical system she called Objectivism . Educated in Russia , she moved to the United States in 1926 . She had a play produced on Broadway in 1935 – 1936 . After two early novels that were initially unsuccessful in America , she achieved fame with her 1943 novel , The Fountainhead . 
 In 1957 , Rand published her best @-@ known work , the novel Atlas Shrugged . Afterward , she turned to non @-@ fiction to promote her philosophy , publishing her own magazines and releasing several collections of essays until her death in 1982 . Rand advocated reason as the only means of acquiring knowledge , and rejected faith and religion . She supported rational and ethical egoism , and rejected altruism . In politics , she condemned the initiation of force as immoral , and opposed collectivism and statism as well as anarchism , and instead supported laissez @-@ faire capitalism , which she defined as the system based on recognizing individual rights . In art , Rand promoted romantic realism . She was sharply critical of most philosophers and philosophical traditions known to her , except for Aristotle and some <unk> , and classical liberals . 
 Literary critics received Rand 's fiction with mixed reviews , and academia generally ignored or rejected her philosophy , though academic interest has increased in recent decades . The Objectivist movement attempts to spread her ideas , both to the public and in academic settings . She has been a significant influence among libertarians and American conservatives . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Rand was born Alisa <unk> <unk> Rosenbaum ( Russian : <unk> ́ <unk> <unk> <unk> ) on February 2 , 1905 , to a Russian Jewish bourgeois family living in Saint Petersburg . She was the eldest of the three daughters of Zinovy Zakharovich Rosenbaum and his wife , Anna <unk> ( née Kaplan ) , largely non @-@ observant Jews . Zinovy Rosenbaum was a successful pharmacist and businessman , eventually owning a pharmacy and the building in which it was located . With a passion for the liberal arts , Rand later said she found school unchallenging and she began writing screenplays at the age of eight and novels at the age of ten . At the prestigious <unk> Gymnasium , her closest friend was Vladimir Nabokov 's younger sister , Olga . The two girls shared an intense interest in politics and would engage in debates at the Nabokov mansion : while <unk> defended constitutional monarchy , Rand supported republican ideals . She was twelve at the time of the February Revolution of 1917 , during which she favored Alexander Kerensky over Tsar Nicholas II . 
 The subsequent October Revolution and the rule of the Bolsheviks under Vladimir Lenin disrupted the life the family had previously enjoyed . Her father ’ s business was confiscated and the family displaced . They fled to the Crimean Peninsula , which was initially under control of the White Army during the Russian Civil War . She later recalled that , while in high school , she determined that she was an atheist and that she valued reason above any other human virtue . After graduating from high school in the Crimea at 16 , Rand returned with her family to Petrograd ( as Saint Petersburg was renamed at that time ) , where they faced desperate conditions , on occasion nearly starving . 
 After the Russian Revolution , universities were opened to women , allowing Rand to be in the first group of women to enroll at Petrograd State University , where , at the age of 16 , she began her studies in the department of social pedagogy , majoring in history . At the university she was introduced to the writings of Aristotle and Plato , who would be her greatest influence and counter @-@ influence , respectively . A third figure whose philosophical works she studied heavily was Friedrich Nietzsche . Able to read French , German and Russian , Rand also discovered the writers Fyodor Dostoevsky , Victor Hugo , Edmond Rostand , and Friedrich Schiller , who became her perennial favorites . 
 Along with many other " bourgeois " students , Rand was purged from the university shortly before graduating . However , after complaints from a group of visiting foreign scientists , many of the purged students were allowed to complete their work and graduate , which Rand did in October 1924 . She subsequently studied for a year at the State Technicum for Screen Arts in Leningrad . For one of her assignments , she wrote an essay about the Polish actress Pola Negri , which became her first published work . 
 By this time she had decided her professional surname for writing would be Rand , possibly as a Cyrillic contraction of her birth surname , and she adopted the first name Ayn , either from a Finnish name Aino or from the Hebrew word <unk> ( <unk> , meaning " eye " ) . 
 = = = Arrival in the United States = = = 
 In the autumn of 1925 , Rand was granted a visa to visit American relatives . She departed on January 17 , 1926 . When she arrived in New York City on February 19 , 1926 , she was so impressed with the skyline of Manhattan that she cried what she later called " tears of splendor " . Intent on staying in the United States to become a screenwriter , she lived for a few months with relatives in Chicago , one of whom owned a movie theater and allowed her to watch dozens of films for free . She then set out for Hollywood , California . 
 Initially , Rand struggled in Hollywood and took odd jobs to pay her basic living expenses . A chance meeting with famed director Cecil B. DeMille led to a job as an extra in his film The King of Kings as well as subsequent work as a junior screenwriter . While working on The King of Kings , she met an aspiring young actor , Frank O 'Connor ; the two were married on April 15 , 1929 . She became a permanent US resident in July 1929 , and became an American citizen on March 3 , 1931 . Taking various jobs during the 1930s to support her writing , she worked for a time as the head of the costume department at RKO Studios . She made several attempts to bring her parents and sisters to the United States , but they were unable to acquire permission to emigrate . 
 = = = Early fiction = = = 
 Rand 's first literary success came with the sale of her screenplay Red Pawn to Universal Studios in 1932 , although it was never produced . This was followed by the courtroom drama Night of January 16th , first produced by E.E. Clive in Hollywood in 1934 and then successfully reopened on Broadway in 1935 . Each night the " jury " was selected from members of the audience , and one of the two different endings , depending on the jury 's " verdict " , would then be performed . In 1941 , Paramount Pictures produced a movie loosely based on the play . Rand did not participate in the production and was highly critical of the result . Ideal is a novel and play written in 1934 which were first published in 2015 by her estate . The heroine is an actress who embodies Randian ideals . 
 Rand 's first published novel , the semi @-@ autobiographical We the Living , was published in 1936 . Set in Soviet Russia , it focused on the struggle between the individual and the state . In a 1959 foreword to the novel , Rand stated that We the Living " is as near to an autobiography as I will ever write . It is not an autobiography in the literal , but only in the intellectual sense . The plot is invented , the background is not ... " Initial sales were slow and the American publisher let it go out of print , although European editions continued to sell . After the success of her later novels , Rand was able to release a revised version in 1959 that has since sold over three million copies . In 1942 , without Rand 's knowledge or permission , the novel was made into a pair of Italian films , Noi <unk> and Addio , Kira . Rediscovered in the 1960s , these films were re @-@ edited into a new version which was approved by Rand and re @-@ released as We the Living in 1986 . 
 Her novella Anthem was written during a break from the writing of her next major novel , The Fountainhead . It presents a vision of a dystopian future world in which totalitarian collectivism has triumphed to such an extent that even the word ' I ' has been forgotten and replaced with ' we ' . It was published in England in 1938 , but Rand initially could not find an American publisher . As with We the Living , Rand 's later success allowed her to get a revised version published in 1946 , which has sold more than 3 @.@ 5 million copies . 
 = = = The Fountainhead and political activism = = = 
 During the 1940s , Rand became politically active . Both she and her husband worked full @-@ time in volunteer positions for the 1940 presidential campaign of Republican Wendell Willkie . This work led to Rand 's first public speaking experiences , including fielding the sometimes hostile questions from New York City audiences who had just viewed pro @-@ Willkie newsreels , an experience she greatly enjoyed . This activity also brought her into contact with other intellectuals sympathetic to free @-@ market capitalism . She became friends with journalist Henry Hazlitt and his wife , and Hazlitt introduced her to the Austrian School economist Ludwig von Mises . Despite her philosophical differences with them , Rand strongly endorsed the writings of both men throughout her career , and both of them expressed admiration for her . Once Mises referred to Rand as " the most courageous man in America " , a compliment that particularly pleased her because he said " man " instead of " woman " . Rand also developed a friendship with libertarian writer Isabel Paterson . Rand questioned the well @-@ informed Paterson about American history and politics long into the night during their numerous meetings and gave Paterson ideas for her only nonfiction book , The God of the Machine . 
 Rand 's first major success as a writer came with The Fountainhead in 1943 , a romantic and philosophical novel that she wrote over a period of seven years . The novel centers on an uncompromising young architect named Howard Roark and his struggle against what Rand described as " second @-@ handers " — those who attempt to live through others , placing others above themselves . It was rejected by twelve publishers before finally being accepted by the Bobbs @-@ Merrill Company on the insistence of editor Archibald Ogden , who threatened to quit if his employer did not publish it . While completing the novel , Rand was prescribed Benzedrine , a brand of amphetamine , to fight fatigue . The drug helped her to work long hours to meet her deadline for delivering the finished novel , but when the book was done , she was so exhausted that her doctor ordered two weeks ' rest . Her use of the drug for approximately three decades may have contributed to what some of her later associates described as volatile mood swings . 
 The Fountainhead eventually became a worldwide success , bringing Rand fame and financial security . In 1943 , Rand sold the rights for a film version to Warner Bros. , and she returned to Hollywood to write the screenplay . Finishing her work on that screenplay , she was hired by producer Hal Wallis as a screenwriter and script @-@ doctor . Her work for Wallis included the screenplays for the Oscar @-@ nominated Love Letters and You Came Along . This role gave Rand time to work on other projects , including a planned nonfiction treatment of her philosophy to be called The Moral Basis of Individualism . Although the planned book was never completed , a condensed version was published as an essay titled " The Only Path to Tomorrow " , in the January 1944 edition of Reader 's Digest magazine . 
 Rand extended her involvement with free @-@ market and anti @-@ communist activism while working in Hollywood . She became involved with the Motion Picture Alliance for the Preservation of American Ideals , a Hollywood anti @-@ Communist group , and wrote articles on the group 's behalf . She also joined the anti @-@ Communist American Writers Association . A visit by Isabel Paterson to meet with Rand 's California associates led to a final falling out between the two when Paterson made comments to valued political allies , which Rand considered rude . In 1947 , during the Second Red Scare , Rand testified as a " friendly witness " before the United States House Un @-@ American Activities Committee . Her testimony described the disparity between her personal experiences in the Soviet Union and the portrayal of it in the 1944 film Song of Russia . Rand argued that the film grossly misrepresented conditions in the Soviet Union , portraying life there as being much better and happier than it actually was . She wanted to also criticize the lauded 1946 film The Best Years of Our Lives for what she interpreted as its negative presentation of the business world , but she was not allowed to testify about it . When asked after the hearings about her feelings on the effectiveness of the investigations , Rand described the process as " futile " . 
 After several delays , the film version of The Fountainhead was released in 1949 . Although it used Rand 's screenplay with minimal alterations , she " disliked the movie from beginning to end " , complaining about its editing , acting , and other elements . 
 = = = Atlas Shrugged and Objectivism = = = 
 In the years following the publication of The Fountainhead , Rand received numerous letters from readers , some of whom the book profoundly influenced . In 1951 Rand moved from Los Angeles to New York City , where she gathered a group of these admirers around her . This group ( jokingly designated " The Collective " ) included future Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan , a young psychology student named Nathan Blumenthal ( later Nathaniel Branden ) and his wife Barbara , and Barbara 's cousin Leonard Peikoff . At first the group was an informal gathering of friends who met with Rand on weekends at her apartment to discuss philosophy . Later she began allowing them to read the drafts of her new novel , Atlas Shrugged , as the manuscript pages were written . In 1954 Rand 's close relationship with the younger Nathaniel Branden turned into a romantic affair , with the consent of their spouses . 
 Atlas Shrugged , published in 1957 , was considered Rand 's magnum opus . Rand described the theme of the novel as " the role of the mind in man 's existence — and , as a corollary , the demonstration of a new moral philosophy : the morality of rational self @-@ interest . " It advocates the core tenets of Rand 's philosophy of Objectivism and expresses her concept of human achievement . The plot involves a dystopian United States in which the most creative industrialists , scientists , and artists respond to a welfare state government by going on strike and retreating to a mountainous hideaway where they build an independent free economy . The novel 's hero and leader of the strike , John Galt , describes the strike as " stopping the motor of the world " by withdrawing the minds of the individuals most contributing to the nation 's wealth and achievement . With this fictional strike , Rand intended to illustrate that without the efforts of the rational and productive , the economy would collapse and society would fall apart . The novel includes elements of romance , mystery , and science fiction , and it contains Rand 's most extensive statement of Objectivism in any of her works of fiction , a lengthy monologue delivered by Galt . 
 Despite many negative reviews , Atlas Shrugged became an international bestseller . In an interview with Mike Wallace , Rand declared herself " the most creative thinker alive " . After completing the novel , Rand fell into a severe depression . Atlas Shrugged was Rand 's last completed work of fiction ; a turning point in her life , it marked the end of Rand 's career as a novelist and the beginning of her role as a popular philosopher . 
 In 1958 Nathaniel Branden established Nathaniel Branden Lectures , later incorporated as the Nathaniel Branden Institute ( NBI ) , to promote Rand 's philosophy . Collective members gave lectures for NBI and wrote articles for Objectivist periodicals that she edited . Rand later published some of these articles in book form . Critics , including some former NBI students and Branden himself , have described the culture of NBI as one of intellectual conformity and excessive reverence for Rand , with some describing NBI or the Objectivist movement itself as a cult or religion . Rand expressed opinions on a wide range of topics , from literature and music to sexuality and facial hair , and some of her followers mimicked her preferences , wearing clothes to match characters from her novels and buying furniture like hers . Rand was unimpressed with many of the NBI students and held them to strict standards , sometimes reacting coldly or angrily to those who disagreed with her . However , some former NBI students believe the extent of these behaviors has been exaggerated , with the problem being concentrated among Rand 's closest followers in New York . 
 = = = Later years = = = 
 Throughout the 1960s and 1970s , Rand developed and promoted her Objectivist philosophy through her nonfiction works and by giving talks to students at institutions such as Yale , Princeton , Columbia , Harvard , and MIT . She received an honorary doctorate from Lewis & Clark College in 1963 . She also began delivering annual lectures at the Ford Hall Forum , responding afterward to questions from the audience . During these speeches and Q & A sessions , she often took controversial stances on political and social issues of the day . These included supporting abortion rights , opposing the Vietnam War and the military draft ( but condemning many draft dodgers as " bums " ) , supporting Israel in the Yom Kippur War of 1973 against a coalition of Arab nations as " civilized men fighting savages " , saying European colonists had the right to develop land taken from American Indians , and calling homosexuality " immoral " and " disgusting " , while also advocating the repeal of all laws about it . She also endorsed several Republican candidates for President of the United States , most strongly Barry Goldwater in 1964 , whose candidacy she promoted in several articles for The Objectivist Newsletter . 
 In 1964 Nathaniel Branden began an affair with the young actress <unk> Scott , whom he later married . Nathaniel and Barbara Branden kept the affair hidden from Rand . When she learned of it in 1968 , though her romantic relationship with Branden had already ended , Rand terminated her relationship with both <unk> , which led to the closure of NBI . Rand published an article in The Objectivist repudiating Nathaniel Branden for dishonesty and other " irrational behavior in his private life " . Branden later apologized in an interview to " every student of Objectivism " for " perpetuating the Ayn Rand mystique " and for " contributing to that dreadful atmosphere of intellectual <unk> that pervades the Objectivist movement . " In subsequent years , Rand and several more of her closest associates parted company . 
 Rand underwent surgery for lung cancer in 1974 after decades of heavy smoking . In 1976 , she retired from writing her newsletter and , despite her initial objections , allowed <unk> Pryor , a social worker from her attorney 's office , to enroll her in Social Security and Medicare . During the late 1970s her activities within the Objectivist movement declined , especially after the death of her husband on November 9 , 1979 . One of her final projects was work on a never @-@ completed television adaptation of Atlas Shrugged . 
 Rand died of heart failure on March 6 , 1982 , at her home in New York City , and was interred in the Kensico Cemetery , Valhalla , New York . Rand 's funeral was attended by some of her prominent followers , including Alan Greenspan . A 6 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) floral arrangement in the shape of a dollar sign was placed near her casket . In her will , Rand named Leonard Peikoff the heir to her estate . 
 = = Philosophy = = 
 Rand called her philosophy " Objectivism " , describing its essence as " the concept of man as a heroic being , with his own happiness as the moral purpose of his life , with productive achievement as his noblest activity , and reason as his only absolute . " She considered Objectivism a systematic philosophy and laid out positions on metaphysics , epistemology , ethics , political philosophy and aesthetics . 
 In metaphysics , Rand supported philosophical realism , and opposed anything she regarded as mysticism or supernaturalism , including all forms of religion . 
 In epistemology , she considered all knowledge to be based on sense perception , the validity of which she considered axiomatic , and reason , which she described as " the faculty that identifies and integrates the material provided by man 's senses . " She rejected all claims of non @-@ perceptual or a priori knowledge , including " ' instinct , ' ' intuition , ' ' revelation , ' or any form of ' just knowing . ' " Rand argued that the requirements of cognition determine the objective criteria of conceptualization , which she summarized in the form of a philosophical razor . Known as " Rand 's razor , " it states that " concepts are not to be multiplied beyond necessity — the corollary of which is : nor are they to be integrated in disregard of necessity . " In her Introduction to Objectivist Epistemology , Rand presented a theory of concept formation and rejected the analytic – synthetic dichotomy . 
 In ethics , Rand argued for rational and ethical egoism ( rational self @-@ interest ) , as the guiding moral principle . She said the individual should " exist for his own sake , neither sacrificing himself to others nor sacrificing others to himself . " She referred to egoism as " the virtue of selfishness " in her book of that title , in which she presented her solution to the is @-@ ought problem by describing a meta @-@ ethical theory that based morality in the needs of " man 's survival qua man " . She condemned ethical altruism as incompatible with the requirements of human life and happiness , and held that the initiation of force was evil and irrational , writing in Atlas Shrugged that " Force and mind are opposites . " 
 Rand 's political philosophy emphasized individual rights ( including property rights ) , and she considered laissez @-@ faire capitalism the only moral social system because in her view it was the only system based on the protection of those rights . She opposed statism , which she understood to include theocracy , absolute monarchy , Nazism , fascism , communism , democratic socialism , and dictatorship . Rand believed that natural rights should be enforced by a constitutionally limited government . Although her political views are often classified as conservative or libertarian , she preferred the term " radical for capitalism " . She worked with conservatives on political projects , but disagreed with them over issues such as religion and ethics . She denounced libertarianism , which she associated with anarchism . She rejected anarchism as a naïve theory based in <unk> that could only lead to collectivism in practice . 
 Rand 's aesthetics defined art as a " selective re @-@ creation of reality according to an artist 's metaphysical value @-@ judgments . " According to Rand , art allows philosophical concepts to be presented in a concrete form that can be easily grasped , thereby fulfilling a need of human consciousness . As a writer , the art form Rand focused on most closely was literature , where she considered romanticism to be the approach that most accurately reflected the existence of human free will . She described her own approach to literature as " romantic realism " . 
 Rand acknowledged Aristotle as her greatest influence and remarked that in the history of philosophy she could only recommend " three A 's " — Aristotle , Aquinas , and Ayn Rand . In a 1959 interview with Mike Wallace , when asked where her philosophy came from , she responded , " Out of my own mind , with the sole acknowledgement of a debt to Aristotle , the only philosopher who ever influenced me . I devised the rest of my philosophy myself . " However , she also found early inspiration in Friedrich Nietzsche , and scholars have found indications of his influence in early notes from Rand 's journals , in passages from the first edition of We the Living ( which Rand later revised ) , and in her overall writing style . However , by the time she wrote The Fountainhead , Rand had turned against Nietzsche 's ideas , and the extent of his influence on her even during her early years is disputed . Among the philosophers Rand held in particular disdain was Immanuel Kant , whom she referred to as a " monster " , although philosophers George Walsh and Fred Seddon have argued that she misinterpreted Kant and exaggerated their differences . 
 Rand said her most important contributions to philosophy were her " theory of concepts , [ her ] ethics , and [ her ] discovery in politics that evil — the violation of rights — consists of the initiation of force . " She believed epistemology was a foundational branch of philosophy and considered the advocacy of reason to be the single most significant aspect of her philosophy , stating , " I am not primarily an advocate of capitalism , but of egoism ; and I am not primarily an advocate of egoism , but of reason . If one recognizes the supremacy of reason and applies it consistently , all the rest follows . " 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 During Rand 's lifetime , her work evoked both extreme praise and condemnation . Rand 's first novel , We the Living , was admired by the literary critic H. L. Mencken , her Broadway play Night of January 16th was both a critical and popular success , and The Fountainhead was hailed by a reviewer in The New York Times as " masterful " . Rand 's novels were derided by some critics when they were first published as being long and melodramatic . However , they became bestsellers largely through word of mouth . 
 The first reviews Rand received were for Night of January 16th . Reviews of the production were largely positive , but Rand considered even positive reviews to be embarrassing because of significant changes made to her script by the producer . Rand believed that her first novel , We the Living , was not widely reviewed , but Rand scholar Michael S. Berliner says " it was the most reviewed of any of her works " , with approximately 125 different reviews being published in more than 200 publications . Overall these reviews were more positive than the reviews she received for her later work . Her 1938 novella Anthem received little attention from reviewers , both for its first publication in England and for subsequent re @-@ issues . 
 Rand 's first bestseller , The Fountainhead , received far fewer reviews than We the Living , and reviewers ' opinions were mixed . There was a positive review in The New York Times that Rand greatly appreciated . The reviewer called Rand " a writer of great power " who wrote " brilliantly , beautifully and bitterly " , and stated that " you will not be able to read this masterful book without thinking through some of the basic concepts of our time " . There were other positive reviews , but Rand dismissed most of them as either not understanding her message or as being from unimportant publications . Some negative reviews focused on the length of the novel , such as one that called it " a whale of a book " and another that said " anyone who is taken in by it deserves a stern lecture on paper @-@ rationing " . Other negative reviews called the characters unsympathetic and Rand 's style " offensively pedestrian " . 
 Rand 's 1957 novel Atlas Shrugged was widely reviewed , and many of the reviews were strongly negative . In the National Review , conservative author Whittaker Chambers called the book " sophomoric " and " remarkably silly " . He described the tone of the book as " <unk> without reprieve " and accused Rand of supporting a godless system ( which he related to that of the Soviets ) , claiming " From almost any page of Atlas Shrugged , a voice can be heard , from painful necessity , commanding : ' To a gas chamber — go ! ' " Atlas Shrugged received positive reviews from a few publications , including praise from the noted book reviewer John Chamberlain , but Rand scholar Mimi <unk> Gladstein later wrote that " reviewers seemed to vie with each other in a contest to devise the cleverest put @-@ downs " , calling it " execrable claptrap " and " a nightmare " ; they said it was " written out of hate " and showed " remorseless hectoring and prolixity " . Author Flannery O 'Connor wrote in a letter to a friend that " The fiction of Ayn Rand is as low as you can get re fiction . I hope you picked it up off the floor of the subway and threw it in the nearest garbage pail . " 
 Rand 's nonfiction received far fewer reviews than her novels had . The tenor of the criticism for her first nonfiction book , For the New Intellectual , was similar to that for Atlas Shrugged , with philosopher Sidney Hook likening her certainty to " the way philosophy is written in the Soviet Union " , and author Gore Vidal calling her viewpoint " nearly perfect in its immorality " . Her subsequent books got progressively less attention from reviewers . 
 On the 100th anniversary of Rand 's birth in 2005 , Edward Rothstein , writing for The New York Times , referred to her fictional writing as quaint utopian " retro fantasy " and programmatic neo @-@ Romanticism of the misunderstood artist , while criticizing her characters ' " isolated rejection of democratic society " . In 2007 , book critic Leslie Clark described her fiction as " romance novels with a patina of pseudo @-@ philosophy " . In 2009 , GQ 's critic columnist Tom Carson described her books as " capitalism 's version of middlebrow religious novels " such as Ben @-@ Hur and the Left Behind series . 
 = = = Popular interest = = = 
 In 1991 , a survey conducted for the Library of Congress and the Book @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Month Club asked club members what the most influential book in the respondent 's life was . Rand 's Atlas Shrugged was the second most popular choice , after the Bible . Rand 's books continue to be widely sold and read , with over 29 million copies sold as of 2013 ( with about 10 % of that total purchased for free distribution to schools by the Ayn Rand Institute ) . In 1998 , Modern Library readers voted Atlas Shrugged the 20th century 's finest work of fiction , followed by The Fountainhead in second place , Anthem in seventh , and We the Living eighth ; none of the four appeared on the critics ' list . Although Rand 's influence has been greatest in the United States , there has been international interest in her work . Rand 's work continues to be among the top sellers among books in India . 
 Rand 's contemporary admirers included fellow novelists , such as Ira Levin , Kay Nolte Smith and L. Neil Smith , and later writers such as Erika Holzer and Terry <unk> have been influenced by her . Other artists who have cited Rand as an important influence on their lives and thought include comic book artist Steve Ditko and musician Neil Peart of Rush . Rand provided a positive view of business , and in response business executives and entrepreneurs have admired and promoted her work . John Allison of BB & T and Ed Snider of Comcast <unk> have funded the promotion of Rand 's ideas , while Mark Cuban , owner of the Dallas Mavericks , and John P. Mackey , CEO of Whole Foods , among others , have said they consider Rand crucial to their success . 
 Rand and her works have been referred to in a variety of media : on television shows including animated sitcoms , live @-@ action comedies , dramas , and game shows , as well as in movies and video games . She , or a character based on her , figures prominently ( in positive and negative lights ) in literary and science fiction novels by prominent American authors . Nick Gillespie , editor in chief of Reason , has remarked that " Rand 's is a tortured immortality , one in which she 's as likely to be a punch line as a protagonist ... " and that " jibes at Rand as cold and inhuman , run through the popular culture " . Two movies have been made about Rand 's life . A 1997 documentary film , Ayn Rand : A Sense of Life , was nominated for the Academy Award for Documentary Feature . The Passion of Ayn Rand , a 1999 television adaptation of the book of the same name , won several awards . Rand 's image also appears on a 1999 U.S. postage stamp designed by artist Nick Gaetano . 
 = = = Political influence = = = 
 Although she rejected the labels " conservative " and " libertarian " , Rand has had continuing influence on right @-@ wing politics and libertarianism . Jim Powell , a senior fellow at the Cato Institute , considers Rand one of the three most important women ( along with Rose Wilder Lane and Isabel Paterson ) of modern American libertarianism , and David Nolan , one of the founders of the Libertarian Party , stated that " without Ayn Rand , the libertarian movement would not exist " . In his history of the libertarian movement , journalist Brian Doherty described her as " the most influential libertarian of the twentieth century to the public at large " , and biographer Jennifer Burns referred to her as " the ultimate gateway drug to life on the right " . 
 She faced intense opposition from William F. Buckley , Jr. and other contributors for the National Review magazine . They published numerous criticisms in the 1950s and 1960s by Whittaker Chambers , Garry Wills , and M. Stanton Evans . Nevertheless , her influence among conservatives forced Buckley and other National Review contributors to reconsider how traditional notions of virtue and Christianity could be integrated with support for capitalism . 
 The political figures who cite Rand as an influence are usually conservatives ( often members of the United States Republican Party ) , despite Rand taking some positions that are atypical for conservatives , such as being pro @-@ choice and an atheist . A 1987 article in The New York Times referred to her as the Reagan administration 's " novelist laureate " . Republican Congressmen and conservative pundits have acknowledged her influence on their lives and recommended her novels . 
 The late @-@ 2000s financial crisis spurred renewed interest in her works , especially Atlas Shrugged , which some saw as foreshadowing the crisis , and opinion articles compared real @-@ world events with the plot of the novel . During this time , signs mentioning Rand and her fictional hero John Galt appeared at Tea Party protests . There was also increased criticism of her ideas , especially from the political left , with critics blaming the economic crisis on her support of selfishness and free markets , particularly through her influence on Alan Greenspan . For example , Mother Jones remarked that " Rand 's particular genius has always been her ability to turn upside down traditional hierarchies and recast the wealthy , the talented , and the powerful as the oppressed " , while equating Randian individual well @-@ being with that of the Volk according to Goebbels . Corey Robin of The Nation alleged similarities between the " moral syntax of <unk> " and fascism . 
 = = = Academic reaction = = = 
 During Rand 's lifetime her work received little attention from academic scholars . When the first academic book about Rand 's philosophy appeared in 1971 , its author declared writing about Rand " a treacherous undertaking " that could lead to " guilt by association " for taking her seriously . A few articles about Rand 's ideas appeared in academic journals before her death in 1982 , many of them in The Personalist . One of these was " On the Randian Argument " by libertarian philosopher Robert Nozick , who argued that her meta @-@ ethical argument is unsound and fails to solve the is – ought problem posed by David Hume . Some responses to Nozick by other academic philosophers were also published in The Personalist arguing that Nozick misstated Rand 's case . Academic consideration of Rand as a literary figure during her life was even more limited . Academic Mimi Gladstein was unable to find any scholarly articles about Rand 's novels when she began researching her in 1973 , and only three such articles appeared during the rest of the 1970s . 
 Since Rand 's death , interest in her work has gradually increased . Historian Jennifer Burns has identified " three overlapping waves " of scholarly interest in Rand , the most recent of which is " an explosion of scholarship " since the year 2000 . However , few universities currently include Rand or Objectivism as a philosophical specialty or research area , with many literature and philosophy departments dismissing her as a pop culture phenomenon rather than a subject for serious study . 
 Gladstein , Chris Matthew Sciabarra , Allan Gotthelf , Edwin A. Locke and Tara Smith have taught her work in academic institutions . Sciabarra co @-@ edits the Journal of Ayn Rand Studies , a nonpartisan peer @-@ reviewed journal dedicated to the study of Rand 's philosophical and literary work . In 1987 Gotthelf helped found the Ayn Rand Society with George Walsh and David Kelley , and has been active in sponsoring seminars about Rand and her ideas . Smith has written several academic books and papers on Rand 's ideas , including Ayn Rand 's <unk> Ethics : The Virtuous Egoist , a volume on Rand 's ethical theory published by Cambridge University Press . Rand 's ideas have also been made subjects of study at Clemson and Duke universities . Scholars of English and American literature have largely ignored her work , although attention to her literary work has increased since the 1990s . 
 Rand scholars Douglas Den <unk> and Douglas B. Rasmussen , while stressing the importance and originality of her thought , describe her style as " literary , hyperbolic and emotional " . Philosopher Jack Wheeler says that despite " the incessant bombast and continuous venting of Randian rage " , Rand 's ethics are " a most immense achievement , the study of which is vastly more fruitful than any other in contemporary thought . " In the Literary Encyclopedia entry for Rand written in 2001 , John David Lewis declared that " Rand wrote the most intellectually challenging fiction of her generation " . In a 1999 interview in the Chronicle of Higher Education , Sciabarra commented , " I know they laugh at Rand " , while forecasting a growth of interest in her work in the academic community . 
 Libertarian philosopher Michael Huemer has argued that very few people find Rand 's ideas convincing , especially her ethics , which he believes is difficult to interpret and may lack logical coherence . He attributes the attention she receives to her being a " compelling writer " , especially as a novelist . Thus , Atlas Shrugged <unk> not only the works of other philosophers of classical liberalism such as Ludwig von Mises , Friedrich Hayek , or Frederic Bastiat , but also Rand 's own non @-@ fiction works . 
 Political scientist Charles Murray , while praising Rand 's literary accomplishments , criticizes her claim that her only " philosophical debt " was to Aristotle , instead asserting that her ideas were derivative of previous thinkers such as John Locke and Friedrich Nietzsche . 
 Although Rand maintained that Objectivism was an integrated philosophical system , philosopher Robert H. Bass has argued that her central ethical ideas are inconsistent and contradictory to her central political ideas . 
 = = = Objectivist movement = = = 
 In 1985 , Rand 's heir Leonard Peikoff established the Ayn Rand Institute , a nonprofit organization dedicated to promoting Rand 's ideas and works . In 1990 , philosopher David Kelley founded the Institute for Objectivist Studies , now known as The Atlas Society . In 2001 historian John McCaskey organized the Anthem Foundation for Objectivist Scholarship , which provides grants for scholarly work on Objectivism in academia . The charitable foundation of BB & T Corporation has also given grants for teaching Rand 's ideas or works . The University of Texas at Austin , the University of Pittsburgh , and University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill are among the schools that have received grants . In some cases these grants have been controversial due to their requiring research or teaching related to Rand . 
 = = Selected works = = 
 Novels : 
 1936 We the Living 
 1943 The Fountainhead 
 1957 Atlas Shrugged 
 Other fiction : 
 1934 Night of January 16th 
 1938 Anthem 
 2015 Ideal 
 Non @-@ fiction : 
 1961 For the New Intellectual 
 1964 The Virtue of <unk> 
 1966 Capitalism : The Unknown Ideal 
 1969 The Romantic Manifesto 
 1971 The New Left : The Anti @-@ Industrial Revolution 
 1979 Introduction to Objectivist Epistemology 
 1982 Philosophy : Who Needs It 
 = Kitsunegari = 
 " Kitsunegari " is the eighth episode of the fifth season of American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It was written by Vince Gilligan and Tim Minear , and directed by Daniel Sackheim . It aired in the United States on January 4 , 1998 on the Fox network . " Kitsunegari " earned a Nielsen household rating of 11 @.@ 6 , being watched by 19 @.@ 75 million people in its initial broadcast . The episode received mixed reviews from television critics . 
 The show centers on FBI Special Agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal , while the skeptical Scully has been assigned to debunk his work . In this episode , Mulder and Scully search for the infamous killer Robert " Pusher " Modell ( Robert Wisden ) — a human with the ability to force his will onto others — after he escapes from prison . The agents soon discover that he is not their only concern ; he has a sister , and she is just as capable of mind @-@ control as he is . 
 " Kitsunegari " serves as a sequel to the third season episode " Pusher " . The episode 's title means " Fox hunt " in Japanese . Minear 's original story for the episode was one where a convicted criminal who happened to be an atheist would have heard the voice of God , commanding him to kill a truly evil man . Series creator Frank Spotnitz suggested that Minear should use fan favorite Robert Modell . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Lorton , Virginia , Robert Patrick Modell escapes from a prison hospital , after which the guard on duty <unk> says , " He had to go . " Later , Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) , Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) , and Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) arrive at the prison and learn that Modell had suddenly woken up from his coma , induced by Mulder , six months previously . 
 Scully worriedly asks Mulder if he 's deliberately playing Modell 's game again by heading the investigation . The agents learn from Modell 's physical therapist that the Little Sisters of Charity , who try to visit all the hospitalized inmates , have been seeing Modell . Modell calls the prison and talks to Mulder , who refuses to listen . The call is traced to a sports shop in <unk> , Virginia where a <unk> @-@ Bar wrapper is left on the counter . Later , Modell is holding a picture of a young woman in a house where a man is covered in Cerulean Blue paint . 
 The agents identify the dead man as Nathan Bowman , who was the prosecutor at Modell 's trial . " Kitsunegari " , the Japanese term for " fox hunt " , is written on the walls in blue paint . A paint smudge leads the agents to Nathan 's wife Linda , a realtor who has an appointment with a " Mr. Fox Mulder " at a commercial property . Modell uses his influence to affect the first two officers to arrive , but he is not found . When she arrives , Linda tells the agents that her husband had talked about Modell . Mulder is confused , as Modell 's actions do not fit his previous modus operandi . He investigates a nearby building , where he runs into Modell . Modell tries to get Mulder to listen to him , and eventually breaks Mulder 's resolve . 
 Mulder later tells Scully that he does not believe Modell is on another killing spree , and , after an odd interview with Linda , believes she is the killer and has the same powers as Modell . Skinner suspends Mulder , but Mulder vows to prove his theory right . He talks with Modell 's therapist again , who mentions that a nun from the Little Sisters of Charity had called him a " conquered warrior " . On a hunch , Mulder tries to show her a picture of Linda . The phone rings and , after stating she is with Mulder , she sticks her hand into a fuse box and is fatally electrocuted . 
 At the FBI safe house , a police car arrives with Modell . Modell enters the room that Linda is in and locks the door behind him . Mulder tells Scully the news of the therapist 's death and urges her to keep Linda away from a phone . At the safe house , Skinner finds Linda 's room door locked . He kicks the door down to find Modell and Linda , with Modell calmly saying that he has a gun . Without hesitation , Skinner shoots Modell when he sees a gun in Modell 's hand , but once he is on the ground Skinner sees that his hand is curled into the shape of the gun . 
 As Modell is taken away on a stretcher , Mulder arrives and thinks that Modell forced Skinner to shoot him on purpose in order to protect Linda Bowman . Scully says that Linda has been taken home , at which an annoyed Mulder leaves to see Modell in the hospital . A nurse enters the hospital room and tells Mulder that she has to change the patient 's bandages . When Mulder leaves , it is revealed that the nurse is actually Linda Bowman wearing a paper with " Nurse " written on it . Linda then talks Modell 's heart into stopping . A nurse runs past Mulder and he follows her into Modell 's room , where Modell is pronounced dead . Mulder notices the " Nurse " paper has " 214 Channel Avenue " on the back . That night , Mulder visits the address and finds Scully , pointing a gun at him and claiming to be controlled by Linda ; she kills herself . Mulder hears footsteps behind him and turns around to see Linda Bowman pointing a gun at him ; " Linda " states personal information about Mulder , revealing herself to indeed be Scully despite what Mulder sees . She fires a shot at a figure moving behind Mulder , and he then sees Scully in front of him , and a wounded Linda behind him . In Skinner 's office , Linda Bowman 's brain scan shows an advanced temporal lobe tumor , just like her fraternal twin , Robert Modell ; the two had been separated at birth . Mulder has misgivings about nearly killing Scully and feels that he ultimately lost Linda 's game . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Tim Minear and Vince Gilligan , and directed by Daniel Sackheim . Minear 's original idea for the episode involved a convicted criminal who happened to be an atheist . While in prison , he would have heard the voice of God , commanding him to kill a truly evil man , and then he would have suddenly found himself mystically transferred out of the prison . Although the police would be after him , only Mulder would believe he was working for the greater good . Minear noted that " I pitched it and I was going to do it , eventually , until we found ourselves at a point in the year where we needed a script really fast . " Executive producer Frank Spotnitz suggested to Minear that the " convicted atheist " should actually be Robert Modell from the third season episode " Pusher " . After this was decided , Minear put aside the " Word of God " story , as it was called , teamed up with Gilligan , and the two wrote the final script . 
 Robert Wisden , who had played the original role , was available for the episode . In addition to his appearance on The X @-@ Files , he had also appeared on the Chris Carter @-@ created series Millennium . Diana Scarwid was cast as Modell 's sister . The body of Nathan Bowman , Linda 's husband , was created by drenching an in @-@ house dummy with the correct shade of paint . 
 The scenes filmed to look as if they were at the Lorton Penitentiary cafeteria were actually filmed at a former hospital storage facility . In order to dress the set , the structure had to be completely cleared of debris and garbage ; this required that several old pump housings be " <unk> into smithereens " . The episode 's title , " Kitsunegari " ( <unk> ) is the Japanese term for " fox hunting " . The series hired two Japanese translators to yield a proper translation of the phrase , due to the fact that " fox hunting " is not readily rendered in Japanese . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Kitsunegari " premiered on the Fox network in the United States on January 4 , 1998 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 11 @.@ 6 , with a 17 share , meaning that roughly 11 @.@ 6 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 17 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 19 @.@ 75 million viewers . 
 The episode received mixed reviews from television critics . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five . The two wrote that , while " it lacks Vince Gilligan 's trademark wit " , the episode takes the plot threads started in " Pusher " to their " logical conclusions " . Shearman and Pearson explained that the episode 's acting , most notably that of Robert Wisden and Diana Scarwid , " helps raise ' Kitsunegari ' above the average . " Zack Handlen from The A.V. Club gave the episode a mixed review and awarded it a C + . He wrote that , despite his love for " Pusher " , " ' Kitsunegari ' isn 't anywhere near as good as its predecessor " . Handlen cited the change in Modell 's personality , his lack of a desire to kill , and Scully 's portrayal as a " humorless scold who only sees the truth when required to for narrative convenience " as reasons why the episode was weak . He concluded that " Kitsunegari " was " not very well put together " . 
 John Keegan from Critical Myth gave the episode a largely negative review and awarded it a 4 out of 10 . He wrote , " Overall , this episode was a disappointing sequel to one of the most popular episodes of the series . Bringing back Modell for this story was an ill @-@ advised attempt to capitalize on impressions of continuity , especially since the character aspects of ' Pusher ' were completely absent this time around . It 's hard to believe that Vince and Tim , both strong writers on their own , were responsible for this material . " Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a mixed review and awarded it two stars out of four . She called the entry " tame " compared to its original , although she understood the show 's desire to write a sequel . Vitaris also criticized the fact that Modell never murdered anyone and called the episode 's basic plot " cheesy " . She did , however , compliment several of the episode 's set pieces , such as " Nathan Bowman covered in cerulean blue paint " — which she called " striking " — and the scene wherein " Linda stops the heart of the suffering Modell " , calling the latter " <unk> performed . " 
 = Westgate @-@ on @-@ Sea = 
 Westgate @-@ on @-@ Sea is a seaside town in north @-@ east Kent , England , with a population of 6 @,@ 996 at the 2011 Census . It is within the Thanet local government district and borders the larger seaside resort of Margate . Its two sandy beaches have remained a popular tourist attraction since the town 's development in the 1860s from a small farming community . 
 The town is notable for once being the location of a Royal Naval Air Service seaplane base at St Mildred 's Bay , which defended the Thames Estuary coastal towns during World War I. The town is the subject of Sir John Betjeman 's poem , Westgate @-@ on @-@ Sea . Residents have included the 19th @-@ century surgeon Sir Erasmus Wilson and former Archbishop of Canterbury William Temple . The artist Sir William Quiller Orchardson painted several of his most well @-@ known pictures while living in Westgate @-@ on @-@ Sea . The British composer Arnold Cooke attended the town 's Streete Preparatory School in the early 20th century , and Eton headmaster Anthony Chenevix @-@ Trench spent the earliest few years of his education in the town . 
 = = History = = 
 Before the 1860s , Westgate consisted of only a farm , a coastguard station ( built 1791 and still standing in Old Boundary Road ) and a few cottages for the crew that surrounded it . These were located beside the coast at St Mildred 's Bay , named after Mildrith , Thanet 's patron saint and a one @-@ time Abbess of Minster . The town inherited its name from the Westgate Manor , which was located in the area in medieval times . In the early 20th century , the remains of a Roman villa were discovered in what is now Beach Road , where a stream once used to flow . Fresh water can still be seen rising from the sand at low tide . 
 During the late 1860s , businessmen developed the area into a seaside resort for the upper to middle @-@ classes . A stretch of sea wall , with promenade on top , was constructed around the beaches at St Mildred 's Bay and West Bay , and the land divided into plots to be sold for what would become an exclusive development by the sea for wealthy metropolitan families within a ' gated community ' , rather than for occasional tourists . The opening of a railway station , in 1871 , led to the rapid expansion of the population , which reached 2 @,@ 738 by 1901 . The demands of the increasing population led to the building of the parish churches of St. James in 1872 and St. Saviour in 1884 . St. Saviour 's was designed by the architect C.N. Beazley . In 1884 it was reported that Essex , on the other side of the Thames Estuary , was hit by a tremor so large that it caused the bells of St. James ' Church to ring . In 1884 , ownership of most of the resort passed to Coutts Bank , after the previous proprietors had gone bankrupt . 
 Around twenty schools were opened during the late 19th century , although many had only a few pupils or closed within a few years . The largest of the schools were Streete Court School , Wellington House Preparatory School and St Michael 's School . 
 Wellington House was established in 1886 by two clergymen , the Bull brothers . It closed in 1970 and was demolished in 1972 . Notable old boys included Doctor Who actor Jon Pertwee and cabinet minister John Profumo , known for his involvement in the Profumo affair . Streete Court School was opened in 1894 by John Vine Milne , the father of the author A. A. Milne . In the 1890s , the school was attended by St John Philby , the father of the spy Kim Philby . 
 The Coronation Bandstand was built by the cliff edge in 1903 , at a cost of £ 350 , to celebrate the coronation of King Edward VII . The following year , a group of French Ursuline nuns , who were banned from teaching in France , fled with some of their pupils to Westgate @-@ on @-@ Sea and established the Ursuline Convent School , which in 1995 was re @-@ established as Ursuline College . In 1910 , a Swiss @-@ Gothic styled town hall was built . However , it was soon decided that the building could be put to better use , and in 1912 , it was transformed into the Town Hall Cinema . In 1932 , it was renamed the Carlton Cinema . 
 On 1 August 1914 , after the outbreak of World War I , a Royal Navy seaplane base was opened by the coast to defend the Thames Estuary naval towns against attack . It was at first used for both seaplanes and <unk> , but due to landing problems , a separate landplane base was opened in Manston in 1916 . After the war , the seaplane base was decommissioned , and the landplane base in Manston eventually became Kent International Airport . During the war , the Coronation Bandstand was converted into sleeping quarters for use by the Royal West Kent Regiment . In 1925 , the bandstand was refurbished and reopened as the 600 @-@ seat Westgate Pavilion theatre . By 1931 , the town 's population had reached 4 @,@ 554 . During World War II , several schools were evacuated to inland areas , with some , such as Streete Court School , leaving the town permanently . On 24 August 1942 , a German fighter pilot , Herbert Bischoff , was captured after being shot down and crash landing in a field adjacent to <unk> Rd , just south of the town . 
 On 27 April 1944 a Liberator aircraft from the 392nd USAAF bombing group Based in East Anglia near <unk> , Norfolk , crashed off the beach , adjacent to the Westgate Pavilion , with five of the crew killed and four injured in the crash . A special memorial service was held for the crew by the Mayor of Margate and veterans organisations on 27 April 2009 at the war memorial overlooking the crash site . 
 In 1975 , five historic church bells were transferred to St Saviour 's Church from the Holy Cross Church in Canterbury , which had closed in 1972 . Three of the bells date back to the early 17th century and one was cast in the 14th century . From the 1970s to the 1990s , the Westgate Pavilion was a bingo hall , after which it closed and became derelict . In 2001 , a group of volunteers formed a charitable trust to repair the pavilion and it was eventually reopened as a theatre . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Westgate @-@ on @-@ Sea is located in northeast Kent , on the coast of the Thames Estuary . It is bordered by the town of Margate to the east and the village of Birchington @-@ on @-@ Sea to the west . The town is built beside the two sandy bays of St Mildred 's Bay and West Bay , which both have a sea wall and groynes to prevent coastal flooding . Chalk cliffs are present in between the bays and either side of the bays . The whole of the northeast Kent coast has been designated a Site of Special Scientific Interest . 
 The town is situated on the Isle of Thanet , a separate island from mainland Kent until around two hundred years ago , when the channel in between silted up . The geology of Thanet consists mainly of chalk , deposited when the area was below the sea . The Isle of Thanet was formed when the English Channel was formed by the sea breaking through , an island of chalk being left on the east side of the county . It was separated from the rest of Kent by the Wantsum Channel . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 In East Kent , the warmest time of the year is July and August , when maximum temperatures average around 21 ° C ( 70 ° F ) . The coolest time of the year is January and February , when minimum temperatures average around 1 ° C ( 34 ° F ) . The average maximum and minimum temperatures are around 1 / 2 ° C higher than the national average . East Kent 's average annual rainfall is about 728 millimetres ( 29 in ) , with October to January being the wettest months , compared with the national average of 838 millimetres ( 33 in ) . 
 These are average temperature and rainfall figures taken between 1971 and 2000 at the Met Office weather station in Wye , around 25 miles ( 40 km ) southwest of Westgate @-@ on @-@ Sea : 
 = = = Transport links = = = 
 Westgate @-@ on @-@ Sea railway station is on the Chatham Main Line , which runs between Ramsgate in East Kent and London Victoria . Other stations on this line include Broadstairs , Margate , Herne Bay , Faversham , Gillingham , Rochester and Bromley South . Westgate @-@ on @-@ Sea is around 1 hour and 45 minutes to London by fast @-@ service train . A National Express coach service runs between London Victoria and Ramsgate , and a selection of trains run to London 's Cannon Street station , primarily for business commuting . There is a Stagecoach bus service running to neighbouring Birchington and Margate , and a service running between Broadstairs and Canterbury via Westgate @-@ on @-@ Sea . The A28 road runs between Hastings and Margate via Ashford , Canterbury , Birchington and Westgate @-@ on @-@ Sea . 4 miles ( 6 km ) southwest of Westgate @-@ on @-@ Sea , the A28 crosses the A299 road , which leads along North Kent towards London , becoming the M2 motorway at Faversham . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 At the 2001 UK census , the Westgate @-@ on @-@ Sea electoral ward had 6 @,@ 594 residents and 2 @,@ 845 households . Of those households , 38 @.@ 0 % were married couples , 8 @.@ 4 % were cohabiting couples and 9 @.@ 4 % were lone parents . 39 @.@ 2 % of all households were made up of individuals and 21 @.@ 9 % had someone living alone at pensionable age . 23 @.@ 6 % of households included children aged under 16 , or a person aged 16 to 18 who was in full @-@ time education . There was a high percentage of households made up of individuals , compared with the percentage for the whole of England . The average household size was 2 @.@ 7 . 
 The town has a low proportion of non @-@ white people compared to national figures ; the ethnicity recorded in the 2001 census was 97 @.@ 4 % white , 1 @.@ 0 % mixed race , 0 @.@ 4 % Chinese , 0 @.@ 6 % other Asian , 0 @.@ 3 % black and 0 @.@ 3 % other . The number of foreign @-@ born residents is relatively low , with the place of birth of residents in 2001 being 94 @.@ 5 % United Kingdom , 1 @.@ 0 % Republic of Ireland , 0 @.@ 5 % Germany , 0 @.@ 6 % other Western Europe countries , 0 @.@ 3 % Eastern Europe , 0 @.@ 8 % Far East , 0 @.@ 6 % North America , 0 @.@ 5 % Africa , 0 @.@ 4 % South Asia , 0 @.@ 2 % Middle East and 0 @.@ 2 % Oceania . Religion was recorded as 75 @.@ 8 % Christian , 0 @.@ 5 % Muslim , 0 @.@ 2 % Hindu , 0 @.@ 1 % Buddhist and 0 @.@ 3 % Jewish . 14 @.@ 4 % were recorded as having no religion , 0 @.@ 3 % had an alternative religion and 8 @.@ 3 % did not state their religion . 
 The age distribution was 5 % aged 0 – 4 years , 13 % aged 5 – 15 years , 5 % aged 16 – 19 years , 28 % aged 20 – 44 years , 22 % aged 45 – 64 years and 27 % aged 65 years and over . There was a high percentage of residents over 65 , compared with the national average of 16 % , mainly due to seaside towns being popular retirement destinations . For every 100 females , there were 85 @.@ 7 males . 
 = = Economy = = 
 As a seaside resort , the economy is mainly based around tourism ; there are several hotels and guest houses near the seafront , to accommodate the influx of visitors during the summer . The High Street has a variety of shops and services , and there are a small number of factories . The elderly population has led to many health and social care jobs at local care homes . At the 2001 UK census , 6 @.@ 9 % of the population resided in a medical or care establishment , compared with the national average of only 0 @.@ 8 % . 
 At the 2001 census , the economic activity of residents in the Westgate @-@ on @-@ Sea electoral ward was 32 @.@ 9 % in full @-@ time employment , 12 @.@ 3 % in part @-@ time employment , 7 @.@ 8 % self @-@ employed , 4 @.@ 3 % unemployed , 2 @.@ 1 % students with jobs , 4 @.@ 3 % students without jobs , 18 @.@ 1 % retired , 6 @.@ 2 % looking after home or family , 9 @.@ 5 % permanently sick or disabled and 2 @.@ 3 % economically inactive for other reasons . The percentage of retired people was significantly higher than the national figure of 14 % and the percentage of unemployed people was high compared with the national rate of 3 @.@ 4 % . The number of permanently sick or disabled people was much higher than the national figure of 5 @.@ 3 % . 12 % of residents aged 16 – 74 had a higher education qualification or the equivalent , compared with 20 % nationwide . The Office for National Statistics estimated that during the period of April 2001 to March 2002 , the average gross weekly income of households was £ 430 ( £ 22 @,@ 421 per year ) . 
 The industry of employment of residents , at the 2001 census , was 16 % retail , 16 % health and social work , 13 % manufacturing , 9 % construction , 9 % real estate , 9 % education , 7 % transport and communications , 5 % public administration , 5 % hotels and restaurants , 3 % finance , 1 % agriculture and 6 % other community , social or personal services . Compared with national figures , there was a relatively high number of workers in the construction and health and social care industries and a relatively low number in finance and real estate . Many residents commute to work outside the town ; at the 2001 census , the town had 2 @,@ 388 employed residents , but only 1 @,@ 464 jobs . 
 = = Politics = = 
 Since the constituency was created in 1983 , the Member of Parliament for North Thanet , covering northern Thanet and Herne Bay , has been the Conservative Roger Gale . At the 2005 general election , the Conservatives won a majority of 7 @,@ 634 and 49 @.@ 6 % of the vote in North Thanet . Labour won 32 @.@ 2 % of the vote , Liberal Democrats 14 @.@ 4 % and United Kingdom Independence Party 3 @.@ 9 % . At the 2001 general election , the Conservatives had a higher share of the vote with 50 @.@ 3 % but a lower majority of 6 @,@ 650 . During Labour 's landslide victory at national level at the 1997 general election , the Conservative majority in North Thanet was reduced to 2 @,@ 766 , with the Conservatives on 44 @.@ 1 % of the vote and Labour on 38 @.@ 4 % . The voter turnout during the past three general elections has been between 59 @.@ 3 % and 68 @.@ 8 % . 
 The town is in the Thanet local government district . It is within the electoral ward of Westgate @-@ on @-@ Sea , which has three of the fifty six seats on the Thanet District Council . At the 2007 local elections , two of those seats were won by the Conservative Party and one by an independent candidate . Conservative candidates in the ward won 45 @.@ 8 % of the vote , independent candidates won 27 @.@ 0 % , Labour Party candidates 17 @.@ 6 % and a Grey Party candidate 4 @.@ 6 % . The turnout was 34 @.@ 5 % . 
 In 2015 Thanet Council set up a parish council for the Westgate @-@ on @-@ Sea ward . The new council took office at its first meeting in May 2015 as Westgate @-@ on @-@ Sea Town Council . It meets in Westgate @-@ on @-@ Sea Town Hall . 
 = = Education = = 
 The town 's secondary school is Ursuline College , a specialist sports college and Roman Catholic aided comprehensive school , with nearly 800 pupils and facilities for boarding students . In 2005 , 32 % of its pupils gained at least five GCSEs at grades A * – C including English and maths , ranking it 71st out of Kent 's 120 secondary schools . Many secondary students commute to schools in other nearby towns , especially to the grammar schools in Ramsgate and Broadstairs . The Westgate College For Deaf People for students aged 16 and over closed on 11 December 2015 . An inspection the previous month by the Care Quality Commission uncovered what the inspectors called " shocking examples of institutionalised failings and abuse " and the trust running the schools subsequently went into administration . The London House School of English provides English language courses for foreign students . 
 The primary state schools are St Crispin 's Infant School and St Saviour 's Church of England Primary School , which is owned by the church but run by Kent County Council . <unk> School is an independent primary school , educating children from 3 to 11 years . 
 = = Culture = = 
 The town has sandy beaches at both St Mildred 's Bay and West Bay . The larger of the beaches is at St Mildred 's Bay , where it is possible to hire beach huts , deck chairs and jet @-@ skis . The beach is a short distance from tennis courts and a golf putting course . At West Bay , there are many small rock pools , which are popular with children . Each beach has nearby cafés , restaurants and public houses , and a European Blue Flag Award is shared between them due to their cleanliness and safety . 
 The town centre has several Victorian canopied shops , a library and the three @-@ screen Carlton Cinema . In addition to the theatre , the Westgate Pavilion is a venue for discos , yoga , indoor bowls and dance classes . 
 Formed in 1896 , Westgate and Birchington Golf Club has an 18 @-@ hole 4 @,@ 889 @-@ yard ( 4 @,@ 471 m ) course on the cliff tops between Westgate and Birchington . Based at <unk> Field , Westgate @-@ on @-@ Sea Cricket Club runs two Saturday teams and two Sunday teams . In the 2007 season , both Saturday teams played in the Kent Cricket Feeder League East ; the Saturday 1st XI team in Division 1C and the Saturday 2nd XI in Division 2C . The Sunday teams do not play in competitive matches . In 2006 , Thanet Council opened a free skatepark at the Lymington Road recreation ground . Designed by local young people , the park caters for skateboarders and in line skaters of all ages and skill levels . 
 = = Local media = = 
 = = = Newspapers = = = 
 There are four local weekly newspapers providing news on the Thanet district area . Isle Of Thanet KM Extra is owned by the KM Group , and the Isle of Thanet Gazette , Thanet Adscene and Thanet Times are owned by Trinity Mirror . Isle Of Thanet KM Extra and Thanet Adscene are free newspapers , whereas the other two are paid @-@ for . KOS publish newspapers covering this area . 
 = = = Radio = = = 
 KMFM Thanet is a radio station on frequency <unk> , owned by the KM Group and previously known as TLR ( Thanet Local Radio ) . Community radio station Academy FM ( Thanet ) launched in 2010 on 107 @.@ 8 . 
 = = Notable residents = = 
 Notable residents of the town have included : 
 the 19th @-@ century surgeon Sir Erasmus Wilson , who spent the latter part of his life in the town until his death in 1884 . 
 former Archbishop of Canterbury William Temple , who died in the town in 1944 . 
 In 1888 , the astronomer and journalist Joseph Norman Lockyer built an observatory on the side of his house in Westgate @-@ on @-@ Sea , from where he took observations that formed the basis for his book , The Sun 's Place in Nature . 
 British composer Arnold Cooke attended Streete Preparatory School in the early 20th century . 
 The artist Sir William Quiller Orchardson painted several of his most well @-@ known pictures while living in Westgate @-@ on @-@ Sea . He was buried in the town in 1910 . 
 While staying at nearby Birchington @-@ on @-@ Sea in the 1930s , the poet Sir John Betjeman wrote about the town in his poem Westgate @-@ on @-@ Sea . 
 In 1957 , suspected serial killer Dr John Bodkin Adams spent two weeks in hiding in the town ( to escape the press ) following his controversial acquittal at the Old Bailey . 
 = Moodu Pani = 
 Moodu Pani ( English : The Mist ) is a 1980 Indian Tamil @-@ language thriller film written , directed and filmed by Balu Mahendra and produced by Raja Cine Arts . Starring Shoba and Pratap K. Pothen in the lead roles , with N. Viswanathan , Ganthimathi , Mohan and Bhanu Chander in supporting roles , it is based on the 1978 novel Idhuvum Oru Viduthalai Thaan by Rajendra Kumar . The film tells the story of Chandru ( Pothen ) , who has a strong hatred towards prostitutes and would kill any such woman whom he encounters . He falls in love with Rekha ( Shoba ) and believes marrying her will end his psychological distress . 
 Moodu Pani was the third directorial venture of Mahendra and his second Tamil film after Azhiyatha Kolangal ( 1979 ) . It was the last film featuring Shoba to be produced before her death in the same year , and the first appearance of Mohan in a Tamil film ; he would later become a successful actor in the industry . Moodu Pani was shot mostly in Bangalore , with additional filming taking place in Ooty . The film 's similarities to Alfred Hitchcock 's Psycho ( 1960 ) and the Oedipal elements between Chandru and his mother have been widely discussed . The soundtrack was composed by Ilaiyaraaja , this being his 100th film , and his brother Gangai Amaran was the main lyricist . 
 Moodu Pani was released on 6 November 1980 to critical acclaim , with particular praise for the way the story was told visually with minimum dependence on dialogue and acting , though the performances of Pothen and Shoba and Ilaiyaraaja 's music also received wide praise , especially the song " Yen Iniya Pon Nilavae " . The film was a commercial success , running for 250 days in theatres . It was also responsible for a resurgence of the thriller genre in Tamil cinema at that point . Despite the film propelling Pothen to stardom , it also led to him being typecast in similar roles . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Chandru ( Pratap K. Pothen ) , the managing director of an export company in Bangalore , has a hatred for prostitutes since childhood , as he was the victim of a prostitute who ruined his family by taking his father away from his mother . Raghunath ( N. Viswanathan ) is a police inspector who knows Chandru and his mother . Raghunath 's son Ravi ( Bhanu Chander ) is engaged to Rekha ( Shoba ) . 
 Haunted by memories of the prostitute , Chandru lures two prostitutes to lonely places and murders them as he sees that woman in each of them . Rekha 's female friend Pallavi comes to Bangalore to meet her , and telephones her for her residential address . The conversation is overheard by the Madam of a brothel ( Ganthimathi ) , who misleads Pallavi . Instead of being taken to Rekha 's house , Pallavi is taken to the brothel and forced into prostitution . Rekha and Raghunath search for Pallavi . Chandru comes to the same brothel and takes Pallavi in his car , but kills her . Rekha learns of Pallavi 's murder through Raghunath ; neither Rekha nor Raghunath are aware that Chandru is the murderer . 
 Still photographer Bhaskar ( Mohan ) takes pictures of his lover with a motorbike in the background . Chandru , who had come on that motorbike , had parked it there and murdered a prostitute ( Vijaychandrika ) who enticed him near the same location , then rode away . Reading about the murder in a newspaper , Bhaskar shows Raghunath the pictures with the murderer 's motorbike in the background . Raghunath investigates and learns that the owner has lent it to his friend . 
 Troubled by his constant anger , Chandru meets with a psychiatrist who advises him to marry soon so that he will no longer be lonely , saying the loneliness is leading him to dwell on his past and indulge in extreme acts . Chandru meets Rekha at a theatre and then at a book stall . He proposes to Rekha and even pleads with her to marry him . Surprised at his extreme pleading , Rekha politely informs him that she loves someone else ( Ravi ) , and their marriage is already fixed . Raghunath is startled when Rekha tells him about Chandru 's marriage proposal . 
 Chandru keeps following Rekha ; one day when she goes to visit her friend , he makes her unconscious and takes her away to a bungalow in Ooty . When she regains consciousness , he tells her that he had purchased this house in Ooty only for her , and again asks her to marry him . When Rekha refuses and begs to be freed , he asks her to stay for at least a month so that she can understand him better , and then reduces it to a week . He makes all the arrangements to ensure that she cannot escape . One day , Rekha slams Chandru with a spade and runs away . However , he catches and traps her in the garage of his house , but is hospitalised for his injury . 
 Raghunath visits Chandru 's office for an enquiry and learns that he has gone to Ooty . He also meets Chandru 's psychiatrist and learns about his hatred for prostitutes . He immediately connects this with the recent news of the prostitutes murdered in the city . He visits Chandru 's house . Hidden in the garage , he finds the same motorbike photographed by Bhaskar . With his suspicions growing stronger , he arrives in Ooty to meet Chandru and visits the police station , where he finds Chandru 's car . The area 's inspector tells Raghunath that an unknown person came in the car to the hospital and was admitted ; the car was brought to the police station for safety . Raghunath visits the hospital , but finds that Chandru has left . Raghunath is joined by Ravi , and both rush to Chandru 's house . 
 Meanwhile , Rekha escapes from the garage and enters the room where Chandru earlier claimed his mother stays . However , she finds only a skeleton and is cornered by Chandru , who tries to assault her . Ravi and Raghunath hear Rekha screaming and rush to the room . Raghunath subdues Chandru , who collapses and reveals that the skeleton is his mother 's . Raghunath understands Chandru 's love for his mother and his traumatic childhood , which had made him develop a hatred for women with loose morals . Chandru is arrested , while Rekha and Ravi unite . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Shoba as Rekha 
 Pratap K. Pothen as Chandru 
 N. Viswanathan as Raghunath 
 Ganthimathi as the Madam of the brothel 
 Mohan as Bhaskar 
 Vijaychandrika as the prostitute 
 Bhanu Chander as Ravi ( uncredited ) 
 = = Production = = 
 Moodu Pani , which was Balu Mahendra 's third feature film and second in Tamil after Azhiyatha Kolangal ( 1979 ) , was based on Rajendra Kumar 's 1978 novel Idhuvum Oru Viduthalai Thaan . It was produced by Raja Cine Arts and edited by D. Vasu . In addition to scripting and directing the film , Mahendra also served as the cinematographer . 
 Pratap K. Pothen was cast as Chandru , the mild @-@ mannered and psychopathic serial killer of prostitutes . He had previously collaborated with Mahendra on Azhiyatha Kolangal . Shoba was chosen to play Rekha , the female lead . This was her last film to be produced ; she died after filming was complete . It was her third appearance in a film directed by Mahendra , following the Kannada film Kokila ( 1977 ) , and Azhiyatha Kolangal . 
 N. Viswanathan was cast as the police inspector Raghunath , and Bhanu Chander was chosen to play Raghunath 's son and Rekha 's fiancé Ravi ( although he was not credited ) , while Ganthimathi was cast as the Madam of a brothel . Vijaychandrika appeared as a prostitute murdered by Chandru . Mohan , who later became a leading actor in Tamil cinema , made his debut in Tamil with this film , playing the photographer Bhaskar . It was his second film under Mahendra 's direction , following Kokila . 
 Moodu Pani was shot in 30 days in Bangalore with 36 @,@ 000 feet of negative film . It was also shot at Ooty . According to cinematographer Rajiv Menon , Mahendra was " trying to capture that misty feel " while shooting the film in hilly places . In the post @-@ production phase , Mahendra had dubbed the voice for Pothen . In making Moodu Pani , Mahendra faced the challenge of distinguishing it from P. Bharathiraja 's Sigappu Rojakkal ( 1978 ) , which had a similar theme . The final length of the film was 3 @,@ 848 metres ( 12 @,@ 625 ft ) . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Although Moodu Pani is officially based on the novel Idhuvum Oru Viduthalai Thaan , it has frequently been described as also having been inspired by Alfred Hitchcock 's thriller Psycho ( 1960 ) . According to Rukmini Krishnan of Daily News and Analysis , it was Psycho that inspired Mahendra to make Moodu Pani . R. <unk> of Frontline stated that while Mahendra was inspired by Psycho , his camera work , the " mist @-@ covered nights " of Bangalore and Ooty , and the " weirdness " of the subject made the film " unique " . While Idhuvum Oru Viduthalai Thaan and its author were acknowledged in the opening credits of the film , Hitchcock and Psycho were not . According to Sify , there is a strong similarity between Moodu Pani and Psycho as the male leads in both films keep the skeletal remains of their respective mothers , which they continue to communicate with . Mahendra 's disciple Ameer noted the Oedipal elements between Chandru and his deceased mother . 
 Mahendra , in his now defunct blog Moondram Pirai ... , referred to the film as a suspense thriller , while N. Venkateswaran of The Times of India described it as a psychological thriller . Devika Bai , writing for the New Straits Times , referred to Moodu Pani as a whodunit film . K. Hariharan , director of the L. V. Prasad Film & TV Academy , noted that sexuality and the repression of desire were the dominant motifs in Moodu Pani , expressed through the mysterious misty atmospheres of Ooty where the protagonist confronts their psychological antagonist . He also noted that Moodu Pani , like many of Mahendra 's films , borrowed its themes and stylistic devices from French New Wave and New Hollywood styles of filmmaking . <unk> noted that Chandru 's character , which was depicted as having flashes of wickedness bordering on perversion , was new to Tamil cinema . Crime and detective fiction writer Pattukkottai <unk> considers Moodu Pani , along with Sigappu Rojakkal and <unk> Naal ( 1984 ) , to explore the personalities and behavioural traits of psychopaths in detail . 
 = = Music = = 
 The film 's soundtrack and score were composed by Ilaiyaraaja , this being his 100th film . It was also the first film in which he collaborated with Mahendra ; Ilaiyaraaja would later compose for all of Mahendra 's films until Thalaimuraigal ( 2013 ) , the director 's last film before his death in February 2014 . According to Mahendra , " When I first met [ Ilaiyaraaja ] I explained him what my kind of movie is and what I expect from him . The background score should allow meaningful silences in my films . I believe silence conveys more than words or music " . The soundtrack cover shows a scene from the song " Yen Iniya Pon Nilavae " involving Chandru ( Pothen ) and Rekha ( Shoba ) . The scene shows Chandru 's dream of being together with Rekha , even though she dislikes him because he has abducted and taken her to Ooty , and she seeks to escape . 
 Moodu Pani marked A. R. Rahman 's first association with Ilaiyaraaja ; the former ( then known by his birth name Dilip ) worked as a keyboard player in the film . During the re @-@ recording of Moodu Pani 's soundtrack and score , Ilaiyaraaja fired his original keyboard player owing to the person 's drinking behaviour . At that time , another one of his troupe members asked Ilaiyaraaja to meet a boy named Dilip , who knew how to play the keyboard . Ilaiyaraaja agreed and sent for Dilip , whom he instructed regarding the notes and tune he had to play . Dilip , under Ilaiyaraaja 's supervision , successfully completed the re @-@ recording process . 
 The soundtrack was released under the label EMI Records . " Yen Iniya Pon Nilavae " was written in January 1980 , and had the longest prelude and interlude using a guitar . Ilaiyaraaja had composed the song " <unk> Nila " which was initially supposed to feature in this film , but Mahendra rejected it and chose " Yen Iniya Pon Nilavae " instead . " <unk> Nila " was subsequently used in <unk> <unk> ( 1982 ) . According to A. S. <unk> of Frontline , the dominant genre of the music used in Moodu Pani was " modern jazz with a sprinkling of avant @-@ garde elements . " Ilaiyaraaja 's brother Gangai Amaran was the main lyricist of the soundtrack , except for the English language number " Sing Swing " ( also known as " Swing Swing " ) which was written by Viji Manuel ( credited as <unk> on the first soundtrack edition , and <unk> on the second ) ; the lyricist of " <unk> Raja " , is not credited . The first soundtrack edition did not feature " <unk> Raja " ; the song was , however , included in a 1981 edition of the soundtrack . 
 The songs were praised for their superior quality . Due to the popularity of its music , Moodu Pani became the first Tamil film for which a cutout was made for Ilaiyaraaja and displayed in theatres . According to film producer and writer G. Dhananjayan , Ilaiyaraaja was the first music director to have been honoured with a cutout . Writing for The Times of India , <unk> Murugesan praised " Yen Iniya Pon Nilavae " for showing K. J. Yesudas ' versatility as a singer . In July 2011 , D. Karthikeyan of The Hindu singled out the film 's re @-@ recording and ranked it alongside the music director 's other films such as Mullum Malarum ( 1978 ) , Uthiripookkal ( 1979 ) , Moondram Pirai ( 1982 ) , Nayakan ( 1987 ) and Thalapathi ( 1991 ) . Indo @-@ Asian News Service described " Yen Iniya Pon Nilavae " as one of Yesudas ' " best songs " . The song was included in Master Pieces , a compilation album featuring 14 songs composed by Ilaiyaraaja , which was released by Saregama in 2008 . Elements of " Yen Iniya Pon Nilavae " were incorporated by Ilaiyaraaja in his song " <unk> Hawa " from Cheeni Kum ( 2007 ) . A remix version of " Yen Iniya Pon Nilavae " is featured on music artist M. Rafi 's album <unk> <unk> . In 2006 , Yesudas performed " Yen Iniya Pon Nilavae " during a programme held at PSG College of Technology , organised by Helpline Arts Academy to sponsor the education of underprivileged children in and around Coimbatore . In March 2010 , singer Vijay Prakash performed " Yen Iniya Pon Nilavae " as part of a medley , at the Star Vijay music show " Kaadhal Unplugged " . Singer <unk> also performed " Yen Iniya Pon Nilavae " live , at the <unk> TV music show " <unk> Unplugged " in March 2014 . 
 Tracklist 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Moodu Pani was released on 6 November 1980 and was commercially successful , running for 250 days in theatres . The film received critical acclaim , with critics praising the way the story was told visually with minimum dependence on dialogues and acting , though the performances of Pothen and Shoba also received praise . On 30 November 1980 , Ananda Vikatan said , " Half the dialogues in the film were spoken by the camera ... Balu Mahendra 's camera challenges and asks when I am there , where is the need for screenplay and dialogues ... " The 1991 book Indian Cinema by India 's Ministry of Information and Broadcasting states that Mahendra and Pothen " had brought superb craftsmanship to their sensitively told stories " such as Moodu Pani . English journalist Phil Hardy stated in his 1997 book The BFI Companion to Crime , " Finally , given the tendency in Indian cinema to remake successful Hollywood films , it is worth signalling Balu Mahendra 's remake of Psycho in Tamil , <unk> ( 1980 ) . " 
 Bhama Devi Ravi of The Times of India said , " With his easygoing manners , <unk> was brilliant as a serial killer , and the last few minutes of the film were <unk> . " In an interview with India Today , cinematographer Natarajan Subramaniam called Moodu Pani his " eureka moment " . G. Dhananjayan , in his 2011 book The Best of Tamil Cinema called the film a " sleek thriller " , appreciating it for its " quality of making and camera work " . In February 2014 , S. Saraswathi of Rediff.com included Moodu Pani in her list , " The Best Films of Balu Mahendra " . K. S. Sivakumaran of Ceylon Today described the film as " halfway between artistic and merely entertaining . " The Telegraph called it one of Mahendra 's " masterpieces " , as did U. <unk> , writing for The New Indian Express . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 After Sigappu Rojakkal , there was a resurgence of the thriller genre in Tamil cinema , as evidenced by films like Moodu Pani . According to G. Dhananjayan , the film became a " benchmark for every cinematographer on how it was shot frame by frame " , and it " inspired a generation to take up film @-@ making " . M. Suganth of The Times of India stated that Mahendra " changed the landscape of Tamil cinema with his distinctive visuals and eclectic films " such as Moodu Pani . Pothen recalled in January 2015 that it was the simultaneous release of Moodu Pani and his other film Varumayin Niram Sivappu that made him a star . However , both Varumayin Niram Sivappu , which depicted Pothen as an eccentric director obsessed with an actress , and Moodu Pani led to him being typecast in similar roles . " Both roles caught the public imagination , and I admit I cashed in when I was offered similar stuff . Now , unless I 'm offered an unreasonable amount of money , I doubt I 'll accept these roles , " he said in a 2014 interview . 
 In Iruvar <unk> ( 2006 ) , Azhagu ( Abhay ) keeps the skeletal remains of his mother and frequently talks to her ; Sify compared this plot detail to that of Moodu Pani and Psycho . Malathi Rangarajan of The Hindu , in her review of Julie Ganapathi ( 2003 ) a film about a mentally deranged woman ( Saritha ) who saves an accident victim ( Jayaram ) from death , nurses him in her own home and also falls in love with him , but holds him captive there , stated that the film had " shades " of Moodu Pani . Actor Veera Bahu stated that he watched Moodu Pani in preparation for his role as a psychopath in the thriller <unk> <unk> . 
 Mahendra 's 2001 film En Iniya Pon Nilavae was named after the song of the same name . Veena player <unk> <unk> 's 2005 album was also titled En Iniya Pon Nilaave . In <unk> <unk> ( 2008 ) , when Suriya 's character first sees Sameera Reddy 's character and falls in love with her , he takes his guitar and performs " Yen Iniya Pon Nilavae " . Pothen expressed appreciation for Suriya 's version of the song in a May 2015 interview , saying that he had " enjoyed it " . In June 2014 during Ilaiyaraaja 's 71st birthday , singers Shweta Mohan and <unk> Raju collaborated to make a video in which they performed some of Ilaiyaraaja 's songs as a tribute to him ; one song was " Yen Iniya Pon Nilavae " . In May 2015 , the FM radio station , Radio City , commemorated Ilaiyaraaja 's 72nd birthday by broadcasting the composer 's songs in a special show titled Raja <unk> for 91 days . " Yen Iniya Pon Nilavae " was one of the most requested songs on the show . Although no print of Moodu Pani has survived , the film is still available on home video . 
 = 4chan = 
 4chan is an English @-@ language imageboard website . Users generally post anonymously , with the most recent posts appearing above the rest . 4chan is split into various boards with their own specific content and guidelines . Registration is not required , nor is it possible ( except for staff ) . 
 Launched on October 1 , 2003 , its boards were originally used for posting pictures and discussing manga and anime , as the site was modeled on Japanese imageboards , particularly <unk> . The site quickly became popular and expanded , though much of 4chan 's content still features otaku , anime , and other Japanese cultural influences . 
 The site has been linked to Internet subcultures and activism , most notably Anonymous and Project Chanology . 4chan users have been responsible for the formation or popularization of Internet memes such as <unk> , Rickrolling , " Chocolate Rain " , Pedobear and many others . The site 's " Random " board , also known as " / b / " , was the site 's first forum , and is the one that receives the most traffic . As its name suggests , the Random board has minimal rules on posted content . Gawker once jokingly claimed that " reading / b / will melt your brain " . The site 's anonymous community and culture have often provoked media attention . For media planners , this enterprise is " further proof that creativity is everywhere and new media is less accessible " to advertisement agencies . 
 4chan users have been instrumental in pranks such as hijacking Internet destinations to cause images of Rick Astley to appear in place of their content , coordinating attacks against other websites and Internet users , and posting threats of violence in order to elicit individual and public reactions . The Guardian once summarized the 4chan community as " lunatic , juvenile [ ... ] brilliant , ridiculous and alarming . " 
 = = Background = = 
 The activity of 4chan takes place on message boards and imageboards . The website is split into six categories : Japanese culture , Interests , Creative , Adult ( 18 + ) , Other , and Misc ( 18 + ) . These provide for on @-@ topic boards to discuss anime , manga , technology , sport , photography , music , hentai , torrents , travel , physical fitness , as well as a random board . 4chan originally hosted discussion boards on a separate domain called " <unk> " , but these were later moved to the <unk> <unk> . The site has had at least one employee , a programmer whom 4chan 's founder Christopher Poole met via online Tetris . All other moderators are volunteers . The / b / ( Random ) , / v / ( Video games ) , / a / ( Anime and Manga ) , and / s / ( explicit images ) boards are respectively the site 's first , second , third , and fourth most popular boards . 
 4chan is one of the Internet 's most trafficked imageboards , according to the Los Angeles Times . 4chan 's Alexa rank is generally around 700 , though it has been as high as number 56 at times . It is provided to its users free of charge and consumes a large amount of bandwidth ; as a result , its financing has often been problematic . Poole acknowledges that donations alone cannot keep the site online , so he has turned to advertising to help make ends meet . However , the explicit content hosted on 4chan has deterred businesses who do not want to be associated with the site 's content . In January 2009 , Poole signed a new deal with an advertising company ; in February 2009 , he was $ 20 @,@ 000 in debt and the site was continuing to lose money . The 4chan servers were moved from Texas to California in August 2008 , which upgraded the maximum bandwidth throughput of 4chan from <unk> / s to <unk> / s . 
 Unlike most web forums , 4chan does not have a registration system , allowing users to post anonymously . Any nickname may be used when posting , even one that has been previously adopted , such as " Anonymous " or " moot " . In place of registration , 4chan has provided <unk> as an optional form of authenticating a poster 's identity . As making a post without filling in the " Name " field causes posts to be attributed to " Anonymous " , general understanding on 4chan holds that Anonymous is not a single person but a collective ( hive ) of users . <unk> generally post without a name even when performing <unk> actions . A " capcode " may be used to attribute the post to " Anonymous # # Mod " , although moderators often post without the capcode . In a 2011 interview on Nico Nico Douga , Poole explained that there are approximately 20 volunteer moderators active on 4chan . 4chan also has a junior moderation team , called " janitors " , who may delete posts or images and suggest that the normal moderation team ban a user , but who can not post with a capcode . Revealing oneself as a janitor is grounds for immediate dismissal . 
 4chan has been the target of occasional denial of service attacks . For instance , on December 28 , 2010 , 4chan and other websites went down due to such an attack , following which Poole said on his blog , " We now join the ranks of MasterCard , Visa , PayPal , et al . — an exclusive club ! " 
 = = History = = 
 4chan was started in 2003 in the bedroom of Christopher Poole , a then @-@ 15 @-@ year @-@ old student from New York City whose 4chan handle is " moot " . Prior to starting 4chan , Poole had been a regular participant on the Something Awful forums . He intended 4chan to be a place to discuss Japanese comics and anime , as an American counterpart to the popular Japanese Futaba Channel ( " <unk> " ) imageboard . Upon the creation of 4chan , Poole encouraged users from the Something Awful <unk> titled " Anime Death Tentacle Rape Whorehouse " , who also happened to be dissatisfied with the forum , to discuss anime on his website . Poole originally used the Futaba Channel to obtain anime @-@ related images , and liked the concept of a message board where people anonymously shared images , which eventually led to his idea of creating a similar English @-@ based website . During the creation of 4chan , he obtained the source code for the Futaba Channel website , and translated the Japanese text into English using <unk> 's <unk> online translator . When he first created the website , it had only two boards : " / a / – Anime / General " and " / b / – Anime / Random " ; more boards were created over time , and / b / was eventually renamed to simply " / b / – Random " . 
 During the early days of 4chan , the boards that originally existed were the anime , random , cute , hentai , and yaoi boards ; a lolicon board also existed at / l / , but after being disabled for a week around the turn of the year 2004 it was removed in October 2004 . The / g / board also was initially dedicated to <unk> , before it was deleted and later remade as the " technology " board . During 2004 , 4chan briefly went offline , then returned fully online a few months later . Following 4chan 's return , non @-@ anime related boards , such as the weapons , automobile , and video games boards , were introduced . In 2008 , the " Japan / General " board at / <unk> / was created for topics that did not fit under the anime and manga category of / a / ; / <unk> / was later renamed to " Otaku Culture " . 
 In January 2011 , Poole announced the deletion of the / r9k / ( " <unk> " ) and / new / ( News ) boards , saying that / new / had become devoted to racist discussions , and / r9k / no longer served its original purpose of being a test implementation of xkcd 's <unk> script . During the same year , the / soc / board was created in an effort to reduce the number of socialization threads on / b / . / r9k / was restored on October 23 , 2011 , along with / hc / ( " Hardcore " , previously deleted ) , / pol / ( a rebranding of / new / ) and the new / <unk> / board , in addition to an apology by Poole where he recalls how he criticized the deletion of Encyclopedia Dramatica , and realized that he had done the same . 
 In 2010 , 4chan had implemented reCAPTCHA in an effort to thwart spam arising from JavaScript worms . By November 2011 , 4chan made the transition to utilizing <unk> following a series of distributed denial of service attacks . The 4chan imageboards were rewritten in valid HTML5 / <unk> in May 2012 in an effort to improve client @-@ side performance . On September 28 , 2012 , 4chan introduced a " 4chan pass " that , when purchased , " allows users to bypass typing a reCAPTCHA verification when posting and reporting posts on the 4chan image boards " ; the money raised from the passes will go towards supporting the site . 
 On January 21 , 2015 , moot stepped down as the site 's administrator . On September 21 , 2015 , moot announced that Hiroyuki Nishimura had purchased from him the ownership rights to 4chan , without disclosing the terms of the acquisition . Nishimura was the former administrator of 2channel between 1999 and 2014 , the website forming the basis for anonymous posting culture which influenced later websites such as Futaba Channel and 4chan ; Nishimura lost the rights for 2channel to ex @-@ US Army officer Jim Watkins following financial difficulties and a series of scandals involving Nishimura 's alleged <unk> and sales of 2channel personal user data to political parties . 
 = = = Christopher Poole = = = 
 Poole kept his real @-@ life identity hidden until it was revealed on July 9 , 2008 , in The Wall Street Journal . Before that time he had used the alias " moot " . 
 In April 2009 , Poole was voted the world 's most influential person of 2008 by an open Internet poll conducted by Time magazine . The results were questioned even before the poll completed , as automated voting programs and manual ballot stuffing were used to influence the vote . 4chan 's interference with the vote seemed increasingly likely , when it was found that reading the first letter of the first 21 candidates in the poll spelled out a phrase containing two 4chan memes : " <unk> . ALSO , THE GAME . " 
 On September 12 , 2009 , Poole gave a talk on why 4chan has a reputation as a " Meme Factory " at the <unk> Symposium in Vienna , Austria , which was part of the <unk> 09 festival , themed Urban Hacking . In this talk , Poole mainly attributed this to the anonymous system , and to the lack of data retention on the site ( " The site has no memory . " ) . 
 In April 2010 , Poole gave evidence in the trial United States of America v. David Kernell as a government witness . As a witness , he explained the terminology used on 4chan to the prosecutor , ranging from " OP " to " <unk> " . He also explained to the court the nature of the data given to the FBI as part of the search warrant , including how users can be uniquely identified from site audit logs . 
 = = Links to Anonymous and Project Chanology = = 
 4chan has been labeled as the starting point of the Anonymous meme by The Baltimore City Paper , due to the norm of posts signed with the " Anonymous " moniker . The National Post 's David George @-@ Cosh said it has been " widely reported " that Anonymous is associated with 4chan and <unk> , as well as numerous Internet Relay Chat ( IRC ) channels . 
 Through its association with Anonymous , 4chan has become associated with Project Chanology , a worldwide protest against the Church of Scientology held by members of Anonymous . On January 15 , 2008 , a 4chan user posted to / b / , suggesting participants " do something big " against the Church of Scientology 's website . This message resulted in the Church receiving threatening phone calls . It quickly grew into a large real @-@ world protest . Unlike previous Anonymous attacks , this action was characterized by 4chan memes including <unk> and Guy Fawkes masks . The raid drew criticism from some 4chan users who felt it would bring the site undesirable attention . 
 = = Notable imageboards = = 
 As of January 2016 , 4chan hosts 66 discussion @-@ based imageboards , one upload @-@ only Flash board , and a number of trial boards . 
 = = = / b / = = = 
 The " random " board , / b / , follows the design of Futaba Channel 's <unk> board . It was the first board created , and is by far 4chan 's most popular board , with 30 % of site traffic . Gawker.com 's Nick Douglas summarized / b / as a board where " people try to shock , entertain , and coax free porn from each other . " / b / has a " no rules " policy , except for bans on certain illegal content , such as child pornography , invasions of other websites ( posting floods of disruptive content ) , and under @-@ 18 viewing , all of which are inherited from site @-@ wide rules . The " no invasions " rule was added in late 2006 , after / b / users spent most of the summer " invading " Habbo Hotel . The " no rules " policy also applies to actions of administrators and moderators , which means that users may be banned at any time , for any reason , including no reason at all . Due partially to its anonymous nature , board moderation is not always successful — indeed , the site 's anti @-@ child pornography rule is a subject of jokes on / b / . Christopher Poole told The New York Times , in a discussion on the moderation of / b / , that " the power lies in the community to dictate its own standards " and that site staff simply provided a framework . 
 The humor of / b / ' s many users , who refer to themselves as " / b / <unk> " , is often incomprehensible to newcomers and outsiders , and is characterized by intricate inside jokes and dark comedy . Users often refer to each other , and much of the outside world , as fags . They are often referred to by outsiders as trolls , who regularly act with the intention of " doing it for the lulz " : a corruption of " LOL " used to denote amusement at another 's expense . The New York Observer has described posters as " immature pranksters whose bad behavior is encouraged by the site 's total anonymity and the absence of an archive " . Douglas said of the board , " reading / b / will melt your brain " , and cited Encyclopedia Dramatica 's definition of / b / as " the asshole of the <unk> [ sic ] " . Mattathias Schwartz of The New York Times likened / b / to " a high @-@ school bathroom stall , or an obscene telephone party line " , while Baltimore City Paper wrote that " in the high school of the Internet , / b / is the kid with a collection of butterfly knives and a locker full of porn . " Wired describes / b / as " notorious " . 
 Each post is assigned a post number . Certain post numbers are sought after with a large amount of posting taking place to " GET " them . A " GET " occurs when a post 's number ends in a special number , such as <unk> , <unk> , or every millionth post . A sign of 4chan 's scaling , according to Poole , was when <unk> lost meaning due to the high post rate resulting in a GET occurring every few weeks . He estimated / b / ' s post rate in July 2008 to be 150 @,@ 000 – 200 @,@ 000 posts per day . 
 = = = / pol / = = = 
 / pol / is 4chan 's political discussion board , titled " Politically Incorrect " . A <unk> thread on its front page states that the board 's intended purpose is " discussion of news , world events , political issues , and other related topics " . / pol / was created in October 2011 as a rebranding of 4chan 's news board , / new / , which was deleted that January for a high volume of racist discussion . 
 Media sources have characterized / pol / as predominantly racist and sexist , with many of its posts taking an explicitly neo @-@ Nazi bent . The Southern Poverty Law Center regards / pol / ' s rhetorical style as widely emulated by white supremacist websites such as The Daily Stormer ; the Stormer 's editor , Andrew Anglin , concurred . 
 / pol / was where screenshots of Trayvon Martin 's hacked social media accounts were initially posted . The board 's users have started antifeminist , transphobic , and anti @-@ Arab Twitter campaigns . 
 = = Internet memes = = 
 Many Internet memes – – catchphrases or images that spread quickly , peer to peer , across the Internet – have originated on 4chan , usually / b / , as its fast moving , crowd psychology nature enables content to quickly be passed on to large numbers of viewers . Other memes originating on the site have gained media attention of a lesser degree . These include " So I herd u <unk> <unk> " [ sic ] , which involves a phrase based on Pokémon and which generated numerous YouTube tribute videos , and the term " an hero " [ sic ] as a synonym for suicide , after a misspelling in the Myspace online memorial of seventh grader Mitchell Henderson . 4chan , and other websites , such as the satirical Encyclopedia Dramatica , have also contributed to the development of significant amounts of <unk> . Adult fans of My Little Pony : Friendship Is Magic are also known to frequent 4chan , having had a board dedicated to their interest . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 A <unk> is an image combining a photograph of a cat with text intended to contribute humour . The text is often idiosyncratic and grammatically incorrect . In 2005 , the meme was widely popularized by 4chan in the form of " <unk> " . Every Saturday , users posted pictures of cats with image macros relating to that day 's theme . 
 = = = Rickrolling = = = 
