 = Washington State Route 168 = 
 State Route 168 ( SR 168 ) is a legislated , but not constructed , state highway located in Washington , United States . The highway is meant to serve as an alternate crossing through the Cascade Range , supplementing the seasonal Chinook Pass on SR 410 . Proposals were first drawn in the 1930s , and the highway has been codified in law under its current designation since 1970 , however no construction has occurred . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The highway is legislated to begin in Greenwater , in Pierce County , at a junction with SR 410 . The road would continue east through Mount Baker @-@ Snoqualmie National Forest , Naches Pass , and Wenatchee National Forest to its eastern terminus with SR 410 north of <unk> , in Yakima County . The highway would pass near Pyramid Peak , which has a maximum altitude of 5 @,@ 718 ft ( 1 @,@ 743 m ) . Currently , a crossing similar to the legislated highway is covered by a variety of Forest Routes , including Road 19 and Road 70 . 
 Two main reasons for creating the highway exist . First , SR 168 would be an all @-@ season route through Naches Pass ( elevation 4 @,@ 923 feet ( 1 @,@ 501 m ) ) . SR 410 closes annually due to avalanche dangers near Chinook Pass ( elevation 5 @,@ 430 feet ( 1 @,@ 655 m ) ) . Second , SR 168 would allow commercial vehicles to bypass Mount Rainier National Park , where they are prohibited on SR 410 . The current restriction detours commercial traffic south to U.S. Route 12 over White Pass or north to Interstate 90 over Snoqualmie Pass . 
 = = History = = 
 Plans for a Naches Tunnel or highway date back to the early 1930s , designated as the Naches Pass Link of Primary State Highway 5 . The state legislature appropriated $ 50 thousand ( equivalent to $ 3 @.@ 58 million in 2015 ) for a study on the feasibility of a new highway . In the early 1960s , Governor Albert Rosellini established a committee to study the feasibility of a toll road . The route was considered feasible by the committee , and they estimated tolls of $ 1 @.@ 50 per vehicle ( equivalent to $ 28 @.@ 00 in 2015 ) would need to be levied to pay for the highway . Proponents of the new highway were pushing to have U.S. Route 10 routed over the pass , away from the routing over Snoqualmie Pass ; however this never occurred . Ultimately , the highway was not built as the state considered the highway unfeasible . The highway has been codified in Washington law since 1970 , while the tunnel through Naches Pass has been codified in state law since 1959 . 
 = Bernard Stone = 
 Bernard " Berny " L. Stone ( November 24 , 1927 – December 22 , 2014 ) was alderman of the 50th Ward of the City of Chicago , Illinois from 1973 to 2011 . The 50th Ward encompasses part of Chicago 's far North Side and includes the West Ridge , West Rogers Park and Peterson Park neighborhoods . First elected to the Council in 1973 , Stone was the second longest @-@ serving alderman ( after Edward M. Burke ) . His tenure spanned the terms of seven Mayors , from Richard J. Daley to Richard M. Daley . Stone was also Vice Mayor of the City of Chicago from 1998 to 2011 . 
 Stone was a member of the " Vrdolyak 29 " , which opposed Mayor Harold Washington 's agenda . For most of his life a Democrat , Stone followed Alderman Edward Vrdolyak to the Republican Party , and unsuccessfully challenged Carol Moseley Braun for Cook County Recorder of Deeds . Stone was a protagonist in a protracted legal conflict with the neighboring suburb of Evanston in 1993 – 1994 . Employees of Stone 's 2007 re @-@ election campaign were convicted of vote fraud in 2010 . Stone was " outspoken " and " relished the rough and tumble of politics " . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Stone was born on November 24 , 1927 in Chicago to Jewish immigrant parents . He was educated in the Chicago Public Schools system at Von Humboldt Elementary and <unk> High School , which is now Roberto Clemente Community Academy . Stone enlisted in the United States Army in 1945 . Stone attended Wright Junior College , now known as Wilbur Wright College , and John Marshall Law School . 
 = = Early attempts at elected office = = 
 In 1956 , Stone ran in the Democratic primary for the Illinois House of Representatives , but was defeated by Esther Saperstein , who went on to serve in the Illinois House for ten years and became Illinois ' first female state senator . 
 In 1963 , Stone was one of a record 233 candidates filing to run for Chicago alderman , and one of ten challengers to the incumbent in the 50th Ward , Republican Alderman Jack I. Sperling , who sought a third four @-@ year term . Stone filed without the endorsement of a political party . By February , 1963 , Stone was not on the ballot for the February 26 , 1963 election . 
 = = 1973 campaign for alderman = = 
 On January 29 , 1973 , the Supreme Court of Illinois appointed Alderman Sperling to fill a vacancy as Cook County Circuit Court judge . The Chicago City Council called a special election for June 5 , 1973 to fill vacant City Council seats , including the 50th Ward alderman seat . Stone was an employee in the office of Cook County Sheriff Richard Elrod and the vice president of the 50th Ward Regular Democratic Organization , which endorsed him for alderman . Stone was one of five candidates who filed to finish Sperling 's term . Another candidate , independent Theodore Berland , was a medical writer and nationally recognized anti @-@ noise activist who was chiefly responsible for Chicago 's anti @-@ noise ordinance . Stone organized the " Concerned Citizens of the 50th Ward " to counter neighboring Lincolnwood 's opposition to a bridge over the North Shore Channel at Pratt Avenue , which Stone called a " necessity " for the 50th Ward . In the first round of voting , Stone led with 47 % of the vote and Berland finished second , with 27 % . In the run @-@ off election on July 3 , 1973 , Stone defeated Berland 12 @,@ 882 to 10 @,@ 958 , with a turnout of about 53 % , winning the 50th Ward for Democrats for the first time since 1955 . 
 = = The Republican years ( 1987 – 1990 ) = = 
 Former Alderman and former Cook County Democratic Party chairman Edward R. Vrdolyak converted to the Republican Party and encouraged Stone to follow suit and run for Cook County Recorder of Deeds . By threatening Republican Party of Cook County leadership that he would run for county Chairman and Cook County State 's Attorney , Vrdolyak brokered a deal to slate himself for Clerk of the Circuit Court of Cook County and Stone for Cook County Recorder of Deeds . On October 29 , 1987 , Stone announced he had joined the Republican Party and expressed his intention to run for Recorder . " I can no longer be part of a party that punishes law @-@ abiding , tax @-@ paying citizens and communities " , Stone said , adding that he also felt " the Democratic Party is drifting away from America 's historically strong commitment to Israel " . 
 On November 25 , 1987 , Chicago Mayor Harold Washington died . Stone announced his candidacy for mayor to fellow aldermen on November 29 and to the public on December 1 . Many saw Stone 's mayoral candidacy as an attempt to publicize his Recorder race . Two days later the City Council elected Alderman Eugene Sawyer as mayor . 
 In 1988 , Stone ran as a Republican against African @-@ American Democratic Illinois State Representative Carol Moseley Braun for Cook County Recorder of Deeds . Stone told reporters that although he did not expect their newspapers ' endorsements , " Just run a picture of Braun . That 's all I ask " . Stone included Braun 's photograph in his campaign flyers . Stone was defeated by Braun and contributed to a sweep of Cook County offices by Democrats . 
 In 1989 , Stone unsuccessfully sought the Republican nomination for Mayor of Chicago , to unseat Mayor Sawyer . Richard M. Daley defeated Sawyer in the Democratic primary and Republican nominee Edward Vrdolyak in the general election to become mayor . In 1990 , Stone returned to the Democratic Party . 
 = = " Berny 's Wall " = = 
 Although resident and corporate relations between Chicago and neighboring suburb Evanston are generally cordial and co @-@ operative , Stone was a protagonist in perhaps the most significant altercation in recent decades . The Evanston City Council adopted the Southwest II Tax Increment Financing ( TIF ) District , also called the Howard @-@ <unk> TIF , on April 27 , 1992 , in order to <unk> the development of a disused 23 @-@ acre Bell and Howell distribution center . A city contractor installed a $ 150 @,@ 000 , 2 @.@ 5 feet ( 0 @.@ 76 m ) high , three @-@ block @-@ long , continuous steel guardrail down the middle of Howard Street , from Kedzie Avenue to California Avenue , blocking vehicles from crossing between Evanston and Chicago , to protect residents from the vehicular traffic expected at a proposed shopping center on the Evanston side of Howard Street that was projected to open in 1995 . A Cook County Circuit Court judge denied Evanston 's request for a restraining order to halt the erection of the barrier , which became known in the media as " Berny 's Wall " . The Chicago Tribune editorialized calling Stone " silly " and the guardrail a " senseless idea ... just an insipid ploy by a useless alderman who has too much time on his hands and too much of the taxpayers ' money at his disposal " . 
 On May 28 , 1993 , Evanston Mayor Lorraine H. Morton , Chicago Mayor Richard M. Daley , Stone , and city officials met at Chicago City Hall , and hours later , Morton announced that Evanston would drop legal action against Chicago . The next day , after consultation with Evanston 's corporation counsel and others , Evanston announced they would continue legal recourse in conjunction with negotiations . Stone demanded that Evanston pick up the cost of the installation and removal of the guardrail . On June 1 , 1993 , the Evanston City Council voted to refuse to contribute funds , to continue their lawsuit , and to defer modifications to the site plan until the barrier was dismantled . 
 Testimony began July 25 , 1994 . Chicago Transportation Commissioner Joseph Boyle Jr. and Planning Commissioner Valerie Jarrett testified that the guardrail had been installed at Stone 's request without the benefit of traffic or planning studies . A partner of the shopping center 's construction firm testified that Stone had discussed with him in 1992 the idea of siting the project on vacant land near the Lincoln Village Shopping Center , a site that was scheduled to be redistricted into the 50th Ward in 1995 . Evanston officials said Stone was jealous of the project going to Evanston . On September 21 , 1994 , the judge ruled that the March 25 , 1993 resolution which Stone ushered through the Chicago City Council authorized Chicago 's Department of Transportation commissioner to consider a barrier , declared that the Department had no authority to install the guardrail , ordered Chicago to remove it and pay all costs including Evanston 's legal fees , and dismissed Chicago 's countersuit to block the shopping center . Chicago 's request for a stay pending appeal was denied , Bell and Howell agreed to pay the estimated $ 35 @,@ 000 to remove the barrier , and removal began on October 4 , 1994 . " The party isn 't over until the fat man sings , and I 'm the fat man " , said Stone . The Chicago Tribune editorialized calling the barrier " a petty , indulgent waste of money at the people 's expense " . 
 Stone passed legislation through the Chicago City Council to change to one @-@ way , northbound only , portions of Kedzie and Sacramento Avenues , two Chicago streets south of the shopping center . After the changes were implemented November 10 , 1994 , Stone 's office received numerous complaints , and by November 16 Kedzie was again a two @-@ way street . 
 On November 3 , 1999 , the City of Chicago established the Lincoln Avenue TIF district , including the Lincoln Village Shopping Center area . 
 = = Sleeping in Council Chambers = = 
 A photograph of Stone asleep in Council Chambers , during a hearing on an ordinance restricting the use of a cell phone while operating an automobile , ran on the front page of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times in January , 2004 . " Some aldermen have a tendency while they 're thinking to close their eyes and that may register with their constituency as not paying attention or , perhaps , even sleeping during the session " , Stone later explained . Stone fell asleep at his desk in Council Chambers in City Hall during the City Council 's Finance Committee debate on the controversial parking meter lease in December , 2008 and was photographed by the press . Stone was videotaped sleeping during a Finance Committee hearing on the transparency of the City 's tax increment financing program in March , 2009 . 
 = = Campaign employees convicted of vote fraud = = 
 On September 4 , 2007 , speaking from the floor of Council Chambers during a meeting of the Buildings Committee , Stone warned fellow aldermen of an ongoing investigation into absentee balloting . On January 28 , 2008 , two employees of Stone 's 2007 re @-@ election campaign were arrested and charged with improperly influencing voters , primarily from the ward 's Indian and Pakistani communities , to vote absentee for Stone . Anish Eapen , a precinct captain and a ward superintendent with the city 's Streets and Sanitation Department , was charged with " official misconduct , absentee ballot fraud , and mutilation of election materials " . Eapen allegedly partnered with Armando Ramos , an unemployed student , who was also charged with absentee ballot fraud and mutilation of election materials . Stone accused the state attorney 's office of acting at the behest of the area 's U.S. Representative , Jan Schakowsky . " We know where this all started . We know it 's politically based . ... Her [ Schakowsky 's ] aide was soliciting the state 's attorney to investigate . It 's absolutely a devious political trick " , he said . Schakowsky denied involvement . Bond was set at $ 50 @,@ 000 and $ 40 @,@ 000 for Eapen and Ramos , respectively . 
 City Inspector General David H. Hoffman called for Eapen to be fired . For nearly two years , Eapen was on paid administrative leave from his $ 83 @,@ 940 @-@ a @-@ year job with the city . On October 8 , 2009 , Streets and Sanitation Department Commissioner Tom Byrne found Eapen a job tracking equipment . Stone blamed Byrne 's predecessor for Eapen 's paid leave , saying " Mike <unk> has no <unk> " . 
 On October 24 , 2008 , during the annual budget hearing process , Inspector General Hoffman testified before the Committee on the Budget of the Chicago City Council . " It is my intent , Mr. Inspector General , to wipe your entire office out of the budget " , Stone told Hoffman . " It is my intent to submit a budget amendment which will destroy your department " . " He 's come after me , so I 'm going after him . That 's the way the game is played " , Stone said . Stone 's amendment came before the Budget Committee on November 17 , 2008 and was tabled 14 @-@ 2 . 
 Eapen and Ramos waived their right to trial by jury . In a bench trial , four members of a family who lived in the ward testified that Eapen came to their homes , watched as they completed the absentee ballot applications and absentee ballots , collected their ballots , and mailed them . One family member , who was not registered to vote , testified that Eapen filled out her ballot and she signed it . Another witness testified that when she told Stone in his office that Ramos filled out her ballot , Stone was dismissive , saying , " This meeting is over " . Stone commented on the testimony , " I have no recollection of what she is talking about " . 
 On June 24 , 2010 , Cook County Judge Marcus Salone found Eapen and Ramos each guilty on one count of attempted mutilation of voting materials and additional counts of attempted absentee ballot violations . On August 4 , 2010 , Salone sentenced Eapen and Ramos to prison terms of 364 days and 270 days , respectively . " This is a kiss " , Salone said of the sentences . " I think the evidence is overwhelming . The reality is that Mr. Eapen and Mr. Ramos attempted to steal democracy and they did it in a vicious way " . Stone called the case " a witch hunt " , said that Ramos and Eapen were " political prisoners " , and compared their crimes to " spitting on the sidewalk " . Stone said Inspector General Hoffman targeted his staff while failing to investigate other aldermen 's staffs . " They are not the ones who attempted to steal democracy . The one who attempted to steal democracy was David Hoffman " , Stone said . " This is a miscarriage of justice " . 
 = = Committees = = 
 Stone was the Chairman of the City Council Committee on Buildings , and also served on the following City Council committees : Budget and Government Operations , Finance , Historical Landmark Preservation , Housing and Landmark Preservation , Traffic Control and Safety , and the Committee on Committees . 
 = = Loss in 2011 run @-@ off = = 
 In 2008 , Illinois State Senator Ira Silverstein defeated Stone in the voting for the 50th Ward Democratic committeeman , an unpaid party post . In February 2011 , in a five @-@ way race for alderman including Silverstein 's wife , Certified Public Accountant Debra Silverstein , no candidate garnered 50 % plus one of the vote , forcing a run @-@ off . In the April 2011 run @-@ off , Debra Silverstein prevailed with 62 % of the vote to 38 % for Stone . On election night , Stone said Silverstein would be " a disaster for this ward . There ’ s no way I 'll help her . She knows nothing " . Stone 's tenure as alderman spanned seven Chicago Mayors , including two Mayors Daley . 
 = = Political philosophy = = 
 Stone stated his political philosophy as " You take care of the people who take care of you – you know , the people who voted for you . That 's not Chicago politics , that 's Politics 101 " . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Stone married his wife , Lois ( d . 1995 ) , in 1949 . They had three daughters and a son . 
 Stone worshipped at Congregation <unk> Israel and served on their Board of Directors . Stone also served on the Board of Directors for the Bernard Horwich Jewish Community Center , the Associated Talmud Torahs , and the Jewish National Fund . 
 In 2003 , Stone 's son , Jay , unsuccessfully challenged incumbent 32nd Ward Alderman Theodore Matlak . Stone supported Matlak , calling his son " an embarrassment " who " doesn 't know what he 's doing " . Father and son remained on good terms . 
 Stone died on December 22 , 2014 at age 87 from complications from a fall . Stone was remembered by the Chicago Tribune and Chicago Sun @-@ Times as " outspoken " ; by Chicago Mayor Rahm Emanuel as " fiercely loyal to his constituents " ; and in a City Council resolution as " a vigorous advocate for the people of the 50th Ward " . 
 = History of the board game Monopoly = 
 The history of the board game Monopoly can be traced back to the early 20th century . The earliest known version of Monopoly , known as The Landlord 's Game , was designed by an American , Elizabeth Magie , and first patented in 1904 but existed as early as 1902 . Magie , a follower of Henry George , originally intended The Landlord 's Game to illustrate the economic consequences of Ricardo 's Law of Economic rent and the Georgist concepts of economic privilege and land value taxation . A series of board games were developed from 1906 through the 1930s that involved the buying and selling of land and the development of that land . By 1933 , a board game had been created much like the version of Monopoly sold by Parker Brothers and its related companies through the rest of the 20th century , and into the 21st . Several people , mostly in the Midwestern United States and near the East Coast , contributed to the game 's design and evolution . 
 By the 1970s , the idea that the game had been created solely by Charles Darrow had become popular folklore ; it was printed in the game 's instructions for many years , in a 1974 book devoted to Monopoly , and was cited in a general book about toys even as recently as 2007 . Even a guide to family games published for Reader 's Digest in 2003 only gave credit to Darrow and Elizabeth Magie , erroneously stating that Magie 's original game was created in the 19th century , and not acknowledging any of the game 's development between Magie 's creation of the game , and the eventual publication by Parker Brothers . 
 Also in the 1970s , Professor Ralph Anspach , who had himself published a board game intended to illustrate the principles of both monopolies and trust busting , fought Parker Brothers and its then parent company , General Mills , over the copyright and trademarks of the Monopoly board game . Through the research of Anspach and others , much of the early history of the game was " rediscovered " and entered into official United States court records . Because of the lengthy court process , including appeals , the legal status of Parker Brothers ' copyright and trademarks on the game was not settled until 1985 . The game 's name remains a registered trademark of Parker Brothers , as do its specific design elements ; other elements of the game are still protected under copyright law . At the conclusion of the court case , the game 's logo and graphic design elements became part of a larger Monopoly brand , licensed by Parker Brothers ' parent companies onto a variety of items through the present day . Despite the " rediscovery " of the board game 's early history in the 1970s and 1980s , and several books and journal articles on the subject , Hasbro ( Parker Brothers ' current parent company ) did not acknowledge any of the game 's history before Charles Darrow on its official Monopoly website as recently as June 2012 . Nor did Hasbro acknowledge anyone other than Darrow in materials published or sponsored by them , at least as recently as 2009 . 
 International tournaments , first held in the early 1970s , continue to the present , although the last national tournaments and world championship were held in 2009 . Starting in 1985 , a new generation of spin @-@ off board games and card games appeared on both sides of the Atlantic Ocean . In 1989 , the first of many video game and computer game editions was published . Since 1994 , many official variants of the game , based on locations other than Atlantic City , New Jersey ( the official U.S. setting ) or London ( the official Commonwealth setting , excepting Canada ) , have been published by Hasbro or its licensees . In 2008 , Hasbro permanently changed the color scheme and some of the gameplay of the standard U.S. Edition of the game to match the UK Edition , although the U.S. standard edition maintains the Atlantic City property names . Hasbro also modified the official logo to give the " Mr. Monopoly " character a 3 @-@ D computer @-@ generated look , which has since been adopted by licensees USAopoly , Winning Moves and Winning Solutions . And Hasbro has also been including the Speed Die , introduced in 2006 's Monopoly : The Mega Edition by Winning Moves Games , in versions produced directly by Hasbro ( such as the 2009 Championship Edition ) . 
 = = Game development 1903 – 1934 = = 
 In 1903 , the Georgist Lizzie Magie applied for a patent on a game called The Landlord 's Game with the object of showing that rents enriched property owners and impoverished tenants . She knew that some people would find it hard to understand the logic behind the idea , and she thought that if the rent problem and the Georgist solution to it were put into the concrete form of a game , it might be easier to demonstrate . She was granted the patent for the game in January 1904 . The Landlord 's Game became one of the first board games to use a " continuous path " , without clearly defined start and end spaces on its board . Another innovation in gameplay attributed to Magie is the concept of " ownership " of a place on a game board , such that something would happen to the second ( or later ) player to land on the same space , without the first player 's piece still being present . A copy of Magie 's game that she had left at the Georgist community of Arden , Delaware and dating from 1903 – 1904 , was presented for the PBS series History Detectives . This copy featured property groups , organized by letters , later a major feature of Monopoly as published by Parker Brothers . 
 Although The Landlord 's Game was patented , and some hand @-@ made boards were made , it was not actually manufactured and published until 1906 . Magie and two other <unk> established the Economic Game Company of New York , which began publishing her game . Magie submitted an edition published by the Economic Game Company to Parker Brothers around 1910 , which George Parker declined to publish . In the UK , it was published in 1913 by the <unk> Game Company under the title Brer Fox an ' Brer Rabbit . Shortly after the game 's formal publication , Scott Nearing , a professor in what was then known as the Wharton School of Finance and Commerce at the University of Pennsylvania , began using the game as a teaching tool in his classes . His students made their own boards , and taught the game to others . After Nearing was dismissed from the Wharton School , he began teaching at the University of Toledo . A former student of Nearing , Rexford Guy Tugwell , also taught The Landlord 's Game at Wharton , and took it with him to Columbia University . Apart from commercial distribution , it spread by word of mouth and was played in slightly variant homemade versions over the years by Quakers , <unk> , university students ( including students at Smith College , Princeton , and MIT ) , and others who became aware of it . 
 A shortened version of Magie 's game , which eliminated the second round of play that used a Georgist concept of a single land value tax , had become common during the 1910s , and this variation on the game became known as Auction Monopoly . The auctioning part of the game came through a rule that auctioned any unowned property to all game players when it was first landed on . This rule was later dropped by the Quakers , and in the current game of Monopoly an auction takes place only when an unowned property is not purchased outright by the player that first lands on it . That same decade , the game became popular around the community of Reading , Pennsylvania . Another former student of Scott Nearing , Thomas Wilson , taught the game to his cousin , Charles Muhlenberg around 1915 – 1916 . The original patent on The Landlord 's Game expired in 1921 . By this time , the hand made games became known simply as Monopoly . Charles Muhlenberg and his wife , Wilma , taught the game to Wilma 's brothers , Louis and Ferdinand " Fred " Thun , in the early 1920s . 
 Simultaneous to these events , Magie moved back to Illinois , and married Andrew Phillips . She moved to the Washington , D.C. area with her husband by 1923 , and re @-@ patented a revised version of The Landlord 's Game in 1924 ( under her married name , Elizabeth Magie Phillips ) . This version , unlike her first patent drawing , included named streets ( though the versions published in 1910 based on her first patent also had named streets ) . Magie sought to regain control over the plethora of hand @-@ made games . For her 1924 edition , a couple of streets on the board were named after Chicago streets and locations , notably " The Loop " and " Lake Shore Drive . " This revision also included a special " monopoly " rule and card that allowed higher rents to be charged when all three railroads and utilities were owned , and included " chips " to indicate improvements on properties . Magie again approached Parker Brothers about her game , and George Parker again declined , calling the game " too political " . Parker is , however , credited with urging Magie to take out her 1924 patent . 
 After the <unk> learned the game , they began teaching its rules to their fraternity brothers at Williams College around 1926 . Daniel W. Layman , in turn , learned the game from the Thun brothers ( who later tried to sell copies of the game commercially , but were advised by an attorney that the game could not be patented , as they were not its inventors ) . Layman later returned to his hometown of Indianapolis , Indiana , and began playing the game with friends there , ultimately producing hand @-@ made versions of the board based on streets of that city . Layman then commercially produced and sold the game , starting in 1932 , with a friend in Indianapolis , who owned a company called Electronic Laboratories . This game was sold under the name The Fascinating Game of Finance ( later shortened to Finance ) . Layman soon sold his rights to the game , which was then licensed , produced and marketed by Knapp Electric . The published board featured four railroads ( one per side ) , Chance and Community Chest cards and spaces , and properties grouped by symbol , rather than color . Also in 1932 , one edition of The Landlord 's Game was published by the <unk> Company with a new set of rules called Prosperity , also by Magie . 
 It was in Indianapolis that Ruth Hoskins learned the game , and took it back to Atlantic City . After she arrived , Hoskins made a new board with Atlantic City street names , and taught it to a group of local Quakers . It has been argued that their greatest contribution to the game was to reinstate the original Lizzie Magie rule of " buying properties at their listed price " rather than auctioning them , as the Quakers did not believe in auctions . Another source states that the Quakers simply " didn 't like the noise of the <unk> . " Among the group taught the game by Hoskins were Eugene Raiford and his wife , who took a copy of the game with Atlantic City street names to Philadelphia . Due to the <unk> ' unfamiliarity with streets and properties in Philadelphia , the Atlantic City @-@ themed version was the one taught to Charles Todd , who in turn taught Esther Darrow , wife of Charles Darrow . After learning the game , Darrow then began to distribute the game himself as Monopoly . Darrow initially made the sets of the Monopoly game by hand with the help of his first son , William Darrow , and his wife . Their new sets retained Charles Todd 's misspelling of " Marvin Gardens " . Charles Darrow drew the designs with a drafting pen on round pieces of <unk> , and then his son and his wife helped fill in the spaces with colors and make the title deed cards and the Chance cards and Community Chest cards . After the demand for the game increased , Darrow contacted a printing company , Patterson and White , which printed the designs of the property spaces on square carton boards . Darrow 's game board designs included elements later made famous in the version eventually produced by Parker Brothers , including black locomotives on the railroad spaces , the car on " Free Parking " , the red arrow for " Go " , the faucet on " Water Works " , the light bulb on " Electric Company " , and the question marks on the " Chance " spaces , though many of the actual icons were created by a hired graphic artist . While Darrow received a copyright on his game in 1933 , its specimens have disappeared from the files of the United States Copyright Office , though proof of its registration remains . 
 = = Acquisition by Parker Brothers = = 
 Darrow first took the game to Milton Bradley and attempted to sell it as his personal invention . They rejected it in a letter dated May 31 , 1934 . After Darrow sent the game to Parker Brothers later in 1934 , they rejected the game as " too complicated , too technical , [ and it ] took too long to play . " Darrow received a rejection letter from the firm dated October 19 , 1934 . During this time , the " 52 design errors " story was invented as a reason why Parker rejected Monopoly , but this has more recently been proven to be part of the Parker @-@ invented " creation myth " surrounding the game . 
 In early 1935 , however , the company heard about the game 's excellent sales during the Christmas season of 1934 in Philadelphia and at <unk> Schwarz in New York City . Robert Barton , President of Parker Brothers , contacted Darrow and scheduled a new meeting in New York City . On March 18 , Parker Brothers bought Darrow 's game , helped him take out a patent on it , and purchased his remaining inventory . By April , 1935 , the company had learned that Darrow was not the sole inventor of the game , but sought out an affidavit by Darrow to repeat his statements to the contrary , and thus bolster their claim to the game . Parker Brothers subsequently decided to buy out Magie 's 1924 patent and the copyrights of other commercial variants of the game to claim that it had legitimate undisputed rights to the game . 
 Robert Barton , president of Parker Brothers , bought the rights to Finance from Knapp Electric later in 1935 . Finance would be redeveloped , updated , and continued to be sold by Parker Brothers into the 1970s . Other board games based on a similar principle , such as a game called Inflation , designed by Rudy Copeland and published by the Thomas Sales Co . , in Fort Worth , Texas , also came to the attention of Parker Brothers management in the 1930s , after they began sales of Monopoly . Copeland continued sales of the latter game after Parker Brothers attempted a patent lawsuit against him . Parker Brothers held the Magie and Darrow patents , but settled with Copeland rather than going to trial , since Copeland was prepared to have witnesses testify that they had played Monopoly before Darrow 's " invention " of the game . The court settlement allowed Copeland to license Parker Brothers ' patents . Other agreements were reached on Big Business by <unk> , and Easy Money by Milton Bradley , based on Daniel Layman 's Finance . Another clone , called Fortune , was sold by Parker Brothers , and became combined with Finance in some editions . 
 Monopoly was first marketed on a broad scale by Parker Brothers in 1935 . A Standard Edition , with a small black box and separate board , and a larger Deluxe Edition , with a box large enough to hold the board , were sold in the first year of Parker Brothers ' ownership . These were based on the two editions sold by Darrow . Parker Brothers sets were the first to include metal tokens for playing pieces . George Parker himself rewrote many of the game 's rules , insisting that " short game " and " time limit " rules be included . On the original Parker Brothers board ( reprinted in 2002 by Winning Moves Games ) , there were no icons for the Community Chest spaces ( the blue chest overflowing with gold coins came later ) and no gold ring on the Luxury Tax space . Nor were there property values printed on spaces on the board . The Income Tax was slightly higher ( being $ 300 or 10 % , instead of the later $ 200 or 10 % ) . Some of the designs known today were implemented at the behest of George Parker . The Chance cards and Community Chest cards were illustrated ( though some prior editions consisted solely of text ) , but were without " Rich Uncle Pennybags " , who was introduced in 1936 . 
 Late in 1935 , after learning of The Landlord 's Game and Finance , Robert Barton held a second meeting with Charles Darrow in Boston . Darrow admitted that he had copied the game from a friend 's set , and he and Barton reached a revised royalty agreement , granting Parker Brothers worldwide rights and releasing Darrow from legal costs that would be incurred in defending the origin of the game . 
 = = = Licensing outside the United States = = = 
 In December 1935 , Parker Brothers sent a copy of the game to Victor Watson , Sr. of Waddington Games . Watson and his son Norman tried the game over a weekend , and liked it so much that Waddington took the ( then extraordinary ) step of making a transatlantic " trunk call " to Parker Brothers , the first such call made or received by either company . This impressed Parker Brothers sufficiently that Waddington was granted licensing rights for Europe and the then @-@ British Commonwealth , excluding Canada . Waddingtons version , their first board game , with locations from London substituted for the original Atlantic City ones , was first produced in 1936 . 
 The game was very successful in the United Kingdom and France , but the 1936 German edition , published by Schmidt Spiele disappeared from the market within three years . This edition , featuring locations from Berlin , was denounced , allegedly by Joseph Goebbels to the Hitler Youth due to the game 's " Jewish @-@ speculative character . " It is also alleged that the real reason behind the Nazi denouncement was due to the high @-@ ranking members ( i.e. Goebbels , again ) who lived on those sections of the game board given the highest property values , and not wanting to be associated with a game . The game last appeared in a pre @-@ World War II Schmidt Spiele catalog in 1938 . A new German edition , with " generic " street and train station names ( i.e. , not chosen from a single German city ) would not appear until 1953 . The 1936 German edition , with the original cards and Berlin locations , was reprinted in 1982 by Parker Brothers and again in 2003 ( in a wooden box ) , and 2011 ( in a red metal tin ) by Hasbro . 
 Waddington licensed other editions from 1936 to 1938 , and the game was exported from the UK and resold or reprinted in Switzerland , Belgium , Australia , Chile , The Netherlands , and Sweden . In Italy , under the fascists , the game was changed dramatically so that it would have an Italian name , locations in Milan , and major changes in the rules . This was for compliance under Italian law of the period . Italian publishers Editrice Giochi produced the game in Italy until 2009 , having held a unique licensing agreement from Parker Brothers and their own copyright dating back to 1935 / 1936 . As of 2009 , Hasbro has taken over the publishing of the game in Italy , but have also , for now , kept the Milan @-@ based properties . 
 In Austria , versions of the game first appeared as Business and <unk> ( Speculation ) , and eventually evolved to become Das <unk> Talent ( <unk> ) ( The Businessman 's Talent ) . Versions of <unk> have been sold in Austria since 1940 . The game first appeared as Monopoly in Austria in about 1981 . The Waddingtons edition was imported into The Netherlands starting in 1937 , and a fully translated edition first appeared in 1941 . 
 Waddingtons later produced special games during World War II which secretly contained files , a compass , a map printed on silk , and real currency hidden amongst the Monopoly money , to enable prisoners of war to escape from German camps . However , this story has come under recent scrutiny and is being disputed . 
 Collector Albert C. <unk> features a map on his " Monopoly Lexicon " website showing which versions of the game were remade and distributed in other countries , with the Atlantic City , London , and Paris versions being the most influential . After World War II , homemade games would sometimes appear behind the Iron Curtain , despite the fact that the game was effectively banned . Monopoly is cited as the board game played most often and most duplicated via hand made copies in the former German Democratic Republic . One official version of the game was printed for the Soviet Union by Parker Brothers in 1988 . After the Cold War ended , official editions have been published throughout eastern Europe by Parker , Tonka and Hasbro . Hungary was the first , in 1992 , followed by the Czech Republic and Poland in 1993 , Croatia in 1994 , Slovenia in 1996 , Romania and a new edition for Russia in 1997 , and Estonia , Latvia , Lithuania and Slovakia , all in 2001 . 
 = = Marketing within the United States 1930s = = 
 In 1936 , Parker Brothers published four further editions along with the original two : the Popular Edition , Fine Edition , Gold Edition , and Deluxe Edition , with prices ranging from US $ 2 to US $ 25 in 1930s money . After Parker Brothers began to release its first editions of the game , Elizabeth Magie Phillips was profiled in the Washington D.C. Evening Star newspaper , which discussed her two editions of The Landlord 's Game . In December 1936 , wary of the Mah @-@ <unk> and Ping @-@ Pong fads that had left unsold inventory stuck in Parker Brothers ' warehouse , George Parker ordered a stop to Monopoly production as sales leveled off . However , during the Christmas season , sales picked up again , and continued a resurgence . In early 1937 , as Parker Brothers was preparing to release the board game Bulls and Bears with Darrow 's photograph on the box lid ( though he had no involvement with the game ) , a Time magazine article about the game made it seem as if Darrow himself was the sole inventor of both Bulls and Bears and Monopoly : 
 = = Parker Brothers ' Marketing 1940s – 1960s = = 
 At the start of World War II , both Parker Brothers and Waddington stockpiled materials they could use for further game production . During the war , Monopoly was produced with wooden tokens in the U.S. , and the game 's cellophane cover was eliminated . In the UK , metal tokens were also eliminated , and a special spinner was introduced to take the place of dice . The game remained in print for a time even in the Netherlands , as the printer there was able to maintain a supply of paper . Elizabeth Magie 's second patent on The Landlord 's Game expired in September , 1941 , and it is believed that after the expiration , she was no longer promoted as an inventor of Monopoly . The game itself remained popular during the war , particularly in camps , and soldiers playing the game became part of the product 's advertising in 1944 . 
 After the war , sales went from 800 @,@ 000 a year to over one million . The French and German editions re @-@ entered production , and new editions for Spain , Greece , Finland and Israel were first produced . By the late 1950s , Parker Brothers printed only game sets with board , pieces and materials housed in a single white box . Several copies of this edition were exhibited at the American National Exhibition in Moscow in 1959 . All of them were stolen from the exhibit . In the early 1960s , " Monopoly happenings " began to occur , mostly marathon game sessions , which were recognized by a Monopoly Marathon Records Documentation Committee in New York City . In addition to marathon sessions , games were played on large indoor and outdoor boards , within backyard pits , on the ceiling in a University of Michigan dormitory room , and underwater . In 1965 , a 30th anniversary set was produced in a special plastic case . 
 = = End of Parker Brothers ' Independence = = 
 = = = Marketing under General Mills 1968 – 1985 = = = 
 Parker Brothers was acquired by General Mills in February 1968 . The first Monopoly edition in Braille is published in 1973 . Also in 1973 , as the Atlantic City Commissioner of Public Works considered name changes for Baltic and Mediterranean Avenues , fans of the board game , with support from the president of Parker Brothers , successfully lobbied for the city to keep the names . After Parker Brothers was taken over by General Mills , the Monopoly license to Waddingtons was renegotiated ( as was the Clue / Cluedo license to Parker Brothers / General Mills by Waddingtons ) . By 1974 , Parker Brothers had sold 80 million sets of the game . In 1975 , another anniversary edition was produced , but this edition came in a cardboard box looking much like a standard edition . Parker Brothers was under management by General Mills as the first six Monopoly Tournaments were held . See " The Monopoly Tournaments " below . 
 = = = Kenner Parker Toys and Kenner Parker Tonka 1985 – 1991 = = = 
 Kenner was combined with Parker Brothers and spun off as Kenner Parker Toys in 1985 . Regular and Deluxe 50th Anniversary editions of Monopoly were released that same year . The spinoff game Advance to Boardwalk was first published in 1985 . Kenner Parker was acquired by Tonka in 1987 . The 1987 / 1988 Monopoly Tournaments were held under Kenner Parker Tonka management . 
 In the United Kingdom , Monopoly publisher Waddingtons produced its first non @-@ London edition in 1989 , creating a Limited Edition based on Leeds as a charity fundraiser . 
 = = = Monopoly ( game show ) = = = 
 In 1990 , Merv Griffin Enterprises turned Monopoly into a prime time game show , airing after Super Jeopardy ! on Saturday nights on ABC . The program was hosted by Mike Reilly and announced by Charlie O 'Donnell . 
 = = Marketing 1990s = = 
 Monopoly Junior was first published in 1990 . Kenner Parker Tonka was acquired by Hasbro in 1991 . An all @-@ Europe edition was published by Parker Brothers in 1991 for the nations of the then European Communities , using the <unk> ( European Currency Unit ) . After acquisition by Hasbro , publication of Monopoly in the U.S. ceased at the Parker Brothers plant in Salem , Massachusetts in November 1991 . 
 In 1994 , the license to the company that would become USAopoly was issued , and they produced a San Diego , California edition as their first board . In 1995 , a license for new game variations and reprints of Monopoly was granted to Winning Moves Games . See the Localizations , licenses , and spin @-@ offs section below for details on further releases by both companies . 
 In 1995 , a 60th Anniversary edition was released in a gold box . In late 1998 , Hasbro announced a campaign to add an all @-@ new token to U.S. standard edition sets of Monopoly . Voters were allowed to select from a biplane , a piggy bank , and a sack of money — with votes being tallied through a special website , via a toll @-@ free phone number , and at FAO Schwarz stores . 
 In March 1999 , Hasbro announced that the winner was the sack of money ( with 51 percent of the vote , compared to 29 percent for the biplane and 20 percent for the piggy bank ) . Thus , the sack of money became the first new token added to the game since the early 1950s . In 1999 , Hasbro renamed the Rich Uncle Pennybags mascot " Mr. Monopoly " , and released Star Wars : Episode I , Pokémon and Millennium editions of Monopoly . A second European edition is released in 1999 , this time using the Euro as currency , but incorrectly listing Geneva as the capital of Switzerland . 
 = = Marketing 2000s = = 
 A 65th Anniversary Edition was released in a variation of the white box in 2000 . In 2001 , the European Edition is reissued , correcting the mistake of the 1999 printing , and correctly listing Bern as the capital of Switzerland . In 2005 , a 70th Anniversary Edition was released in a silver @-@ metallic tin with a plastic slip case . Also starting in 2005 , various " Here & Now " editions were released in multiple countries . The first release of this edition was for the UK market , and its success led to the selection of properties for a U.S. edition by online vote . The most popular properties were released on the U.S. " Here & Now " edition board in 2006 . This , in turn , led to a world @-@ wide " Here & Now " edition ( released in 2008 ) , along with other national editions ( including a second UK " Here and Now " edition ) with properties selected by online vote . The main principle of the " Here & Now " editions was " What if Monopoly had been invented today ? " 
 The first changes to the gameplay of the Monopoly game itself occurred with the publication of both the Monopoly Here & Now Electronic Banking Edition by Hasbro UK and Monopoly : The Mega Edition by Winning Moves Games in 2006 . The Electronic Banking Edition uses VISA @-@ branded debit cards and a debit card reader for monetary transactions , instead of paper bills . This edition is available in the UK , Germany , France , Australia and Ireland . A version was released in the U.S. in 2007 , albeit without the co @-@ branding by Visa . An electronic counter had been featured in the Stock Exchange editions released in Europe in the early 2000s ( decade ) , and is also a feature of the Monopoly City board game released in 2009 . 
 The Mega Edition has been expanded to include fifty @-@ two spaces ( with more street names taken from Atlantic City ) , skyscrapers ( to be played after hotels ) , train depots , the 1000 denomination of play money , as well as " bus tickets " and a speed die . Shortly after the release of Mega Monopoly in 2006 , Hasbro adopted the same blue version of the speed die into a special " Speed Die Edition " of the game . By 2008 , the die , now red , became a permanent addition to the game , though its use remains optional there . In 2009 's " Championship Edition " , use of the speed die is mandatory , as it also became mandatory in most of 2009 's Monopoly tournaments . 
 In addition to permanently adding the speed die in 2008 , Hasbro also instituted further changes to the United States standard edition of the board , including making Mediterranean and Baltic Avenues a brown color group , making the Income Tax space a flat $ 200 ( removing the 10 % option ) , changing the colors on the GO space from red to black , increasing the Luxury Tax to $ 100 ( from $ 75 ) , and changing certain of the Community Chest and Chance cards . The changes in these four areas made the U.S. standard edition more uniform with the UK and modern European editions . In 2009 , Winning Moves Games introduced " The Classic Edition " , with a pre @-@ 2008 game board and cards , re @-@ inclusion of the " sack of money " playing piece , and a plain MONOPOLY logo in the center of the board , with neither the 1985 or 2008 version of " Mr. Monopoly " present . Also in 2009 , Monopoly " theme packs " entered the retail market , including the Dog Lovers and Sports Fans editions , which include customized money , replacements for houses and hotels , and custom tokens , but no board . 
 = = Marketing 2010s = = 
 In early 2010 , Hasbro began selling the " Free Parking " and " Get out of Jail " add @-@ on games , which can be played alone or when a player lands on the respective Monopoly board spaces . If played during a Monopoly game , success at either game gets the winning player a " free taxi ride to any space on the board " or " out of jail free " , respectively . A new , customizable edition called " U @-@ Build " is also released . Later in 2010 , for the 75th anniversary of the game 's publication , Hasbro released Monopoly Revolution , giving the game a graphic redesign , as well as returning it to a round shape , which had not been seen since some of Darrow 's 1930s custom @-@ made sets . The game includes " bank cards " and keeps track of players ' assets electronically , as was introduced in the " Electronic Banking Edition " earlier in the decade . The game also features clear plastic playing pieces for movers , and electronic sound effects , triggered by certain events ( for instance , a " jail door slam " sound effect when a player goes to jail ) . Monopoly Live was announced at the New York Toy Fair in February , 2011 . The Monopoly Millionaire version of the game was released in 2012 . 
 In early 2013 , a board game version of the Monopoly Hotels online game was released . From January 8 to February 5 , 2013 , through the Monopoly page on Facebook in a campaign called " Save Your Token , " Hasbro took votes from the public to make another permanent change in the lineup of game tokens . The token with the least number of " Save Your Token " votes will be retired , and replaced with one of five other tokens , depending on which of the new candidates gets the most votes . The potential tokens were a robot , a helicopter , a cat , a guitar or a diamond ring . Neither the biplane nor the piggy bank from the 1998 vote are being considered this time . Early on February 6 , it was announced that the iron would be retired for having received the least votes , and the cat would be replacing it , having received the most votes . Starting in February 2013 , the U.S. discount chain Target will be selling a " Golden Token " set with the eight classic tokens and all five candidates . Special editions with the thirteen golden tokens have also been released in the UK and France . The first Monopoly game to have the new token lineup was released in June 2013 . In 2015 , the game celebrated its 80th anniversary with eight tokens from each decade in a special edition . 
 = = The Monopoly Tournaments 1973 – 2015 = = 
 The first Monopoly tournaments were suggested by Victor Watson of Waddington after the World Chess Championship 1972 . Such championships are also held for players of the board game Scrabble . The first European Championship was held in Reykjavík , Iceland , the same site as the 1972 World Chess Championship . Accounts differ as to the eventual winner : Philip Orbanes and Victor Watson name John Mair , representing Ireland and the eventual World Monopoly Champion of 1975 , as also having won the European Championship . Gyles Brandreth , himself a later European Monopoly Champion , names Pierre <unk> , representing France , as the European Champion . One of the reasons there may be differing accounts of the eventual winner is attributable to a minor controversy with the final game . According to Parker Brothers ' Randolph " <unk> " P. Barton , an error was made by one of the participants and a protest was filed by an opponent . The judges ( Barton , Watson , and a representative from Miro , the French publishers of Monopoly ) weighed the options of starting the final game over and delaying the chartered plane that would take them home from Iceland vs allowing the game to stand with the error but allowing them to make their flight . In the end , the judges upheld the result of the game with the error uncorrected . 
 Victor Watson and <unk> Barton began holding tournaments in the UK and US , respectively . World Champions were declared in the United States in 1973 and 1974 ( and are still considered official World Champions by Hasbro ) . While the 1973 tournament , the first , matched three United States regional champions against the UK champion and thus could be argued as the first international tournament , true multinational international tournaments were first held in 1975 . Both authors ( Orbanes and Brandreth ) agree that John Mair was the first true World Champion , as decided in tournament play held in Washington , D.C. days after the conclusion of the European Championship ( which Mair had also won ) , in November 1975 . 
 By 1982 , tournaments in the United States featured a competition between tournament winners in all 50 states , competing to become the United States Champion . National tournaments were held in the US and UK the year before World Championships through 2003 – 2004 but during the same year as of 2009 ( see table , below ) . The determination of the US champion was changed for the 2003 tournament : winners of an Internet @-@ based quiz challenge were selected to compete , rather than one state champion for each of the 50 states . The tournaments are now typically held every six years . In the past , the US edition Monopoly board was used at the World championship level , while national variants are used at the national level . Since true international play began in 1975 , no World champion has come from the US , still considered the board game 's " birthplace . " However , Dana Terman , two @-@ time US Champion , placed second at the 1980 World Championship , Richard <unk> , the 2009 US Champion , placed third at the 2009 World Championship , and Brian Valentine , the 2015 US Representative , placed third at the 2015 World Championship . 
 Nicolò Falcone of Italy defeated players from 27 countries plus the defending champion in the 2015 World Championship held at The Venetian resort in Macau . 
 = = Localizations , licenses , and spin @-@ offs = = 
 The original hand made editions of the Monopoly game had been localized for the cities or areas in which it was played , and Parker Brothers has continued this practice . Their version of Monopoly has been produced for international markets , with the place names being localized for cities including London and Paris and for countries including the Netherlands and Germany , among others . By 1982 , Parker Brothers stated that the game " has been translated into over 15 languages .... " In 2009 , Hasbro reported that Monopoly is officially published in 27 languages , and has been licensed by them in 81 countries . As of January 2013 , Hasbro states that the game is now available in 43 languages and 111 countries . 
 The game has also inspired official spin @-@ offs , such as the board game Advance to Boardwalk from 1985 . There have been six card games : Water Works from 1972 , Free Parking from 1988 , Express Monopoly from 1993 , Monopoly : The Card Game from 1999 , Monopoly Deal from 2008 and Monopoly Millionaire Deal from 2012 . Finally , there have been two dice games : Don 't Go to Jail from 1991 and an update , Monopoly Express , ( 2006 – 2007 ) . A second product line of games and licenses exists in Monopoly Junior , first published in 1990 . In the late 1980s , official editions of Monopoly appeared for the Sega Master System and the Commodore 64 and Commodore 128 . A television game show , produced by King World Productions , was attempted in the summer of 1990 , but lasted for only 12 episodes . In 1991 – 1992 , official versions appeared for the Apple Macintosh and Nintendo 's NES , SNES , and Game Boy . In 1995 , as Hasbro ( which had taken over Kenner Parker Tonka in 1991 ) was preparing to launch Hasbro Interactive as a new brand , they chose Monopoly and Trivial Pursuit to be their first two CD @-@ ROM games . The Monopoly CD @-@ ROM game also allowed for play over the Internet . CD @-@ ROM versions of the officially licensed Star Wars and FIFA World Cup ' 98 editions also were released . Later CD @-@ ROM exclusive spin @-@ offs , Monopoly Casino and Monopoly Tycoon , were also produced under license . 
 Various manufacturers of the game have created dozens of officially licensed versions , in which the names of the properties and other elements of the game are replaced by others according to the game 's theme . The first such license was awarded in 1994 , to the company that became USAopoly , starting with a San Diego edition of Monopoly and later including themes such as national parks , Star Trek , Star Wars , Nintendo , Disney characters , Pokémon , Peanuts , various particular cities ( such as Las Vegas and New York City ) , states , colleges and universities , the World Cup , NASCAR , individual professional sports teams , and many others . USAopoly also sells special corporate editions of Monopoly . Official corporate editions have been produced for Best Buy , the Boy Scouts of America , FedEx , and UPS , among others . In 1995 , a second license was awarded to Winning Moves Games in Massachusetts . Winning Moves has produced a new board game and card games based on Monopoly in the United States . Winning Moves also produces official localized editions of the game in the UK , France , Germany and Australia . The Doctor Who 50th Anniversary Edition of Monopoly is a special case , having been originally produced by Winning Moves in the UK , and resold by USAopoly within the US . A third license was awarded in 2000 by Hasbro to Winning Solutions , Inc . , which produces specialty deluxe editions mostly for sale by specialized retailers . Other licensed localized editions of the game are being published in Nigeria and The Netherlands , among other locations . 
 When creating some of the modern licensed editions , such as the Looney Tunes and The Powerpuff Girls editions of Monopoly , Hasbro included special variant rules to be played in the theme of the licensed property . Infogrames , which has published a CD @-@ ROM edition of Monopoly , also includes the selection of " house rules " as a possible variant of play . Electronic Arts , which publishes current electronic versions of the game , such as for the Nintendo Wii , also includes the selection of certain house rules . 
 Unofficial versions of the game , which share some of the same playing features , but also incorporate changes so as not to infringe on copyrights , have been created by firms such as Late for the Sky Production Company and Help on Board . These are done for smaller cities , sometimes as charity fundraisers , and some have been created for college and university campuses . Others have non @-@ geographical themes such as Wine @-@ <unk> and Chocolate @-@ <unk> . There is also a version called Make Your Own <unk> , which allows you to customize all the game equipment and rules to your liking . 
 Before the creation of Hasbro Interactive , and after its later sale to Infogrames , official computer and video game versions have been made available on many platforms . In addition to the versions listed above , they have been produced for Amiga , BBC Micro , Game Boy Advance , Game Boy Color , GameCube , PC , Nintendo 64 , PlayStation , PlayStation 2 , Sega Genesis , Xbox , and mobile phones . A version for Windows CE was planned in 1999 . A handheld electronic game was first released in 1998 that allowed for one human player against up to three player @-@ selected or randomly chosen AI " personalities " out of five . A Nintendo DS release ( along with Battleship , Boggle , and Yahtzee ) has been published ( by Atari ) , as well as a stand @-@ alone edition for the same console ( by EA ) . In 2001 , Stern Pinball , Inc. released a pinball machine version of Monopoly , designed by Pat Lawlor . 
 = = = House rules and custom rules = = = 
 The official Parker Brothers rules and board remained largely unchanged from 1936 to 2008 . Ralph Anspach argued against this during an on @-@ air conversation with The Monopoly Book author Maxine Brady in 1975 , calling it an end to " steady progress " and an impediment to progress . Several authors who have written about the board game have noted many of the " house rules " that have become common among players , although they do not appear in Parker Brothers ' rules sheets . Gyles Brandreth included a section titled " Monopoly Variations , " Tim Moore notes several such rules used in his household in his Foreword , Phil Orbanes included his own section of variations , and Maxine Brady noted a few in her preface . Authors Noel Gunther and Richard Hutton published Beyond Boardwalk and Park Place in 1986 , as a guide , per the cover , " to making Monopoly fun again " , by introducing new variations of rules and strategies . R. Wayne <unk> , a former editor of Games magazine , acknowledged the work of Gunther and Hutton in his own 1992 guide New Rules for Classic Games ( which includes several pages of Monopoly variations and suggestions that vary from the standard rules of the game ) . 
 = = Anti @-@ Monopoly , Inc. vs. General Mills Fun Group , Inc. court case 1976 – 1985 = = 
 Starting in 1974 , Parker Brothers and its then corporate parent , General Mills , attempted to suppress publication of a game called Anti @-@ Monopoly , designed by San Francisco State University economics professor Ralph Anspach and first published the previous year . Anspach began to research the game 's history , and argued that the copyrights and trademarks held by Parker Brothers should be nullified , as the game came out of the public domain . Among other things , Anspach discovered the empty 1933 Charles B. Darrow file at the United States Copyright Office , testimony from the Inflation game case that was settled out of court , and letters from Knapp Electric challenging Parker Brothers over Monopoly . As the case went to trial in November 1976 , Anspach produced testimony by many involved with the early development of the game , including Catherine and Willard <unk> , Dorothea Raiford and Charles Todd . Willard <unk> attempted to sell a version of the game to Milton Bradley in 1931 , and published an article about the game 's early history in the UK in 1975 . Raiford had helped Ruth Hoskins produce the early Atlantic City games . Even Daniel Layman was interviewed , and Darrow 's widow was deposed . The presiding judge , Spencer Williams , originally ruled for Parker Brothers / General Mills in 1977 , allowing the Monopoly trademark to stand , and allowing the companies to destroy copies of Anspach 's Anti @-@ Monopoly . Anspach appealed . 
 In December 1979 , the 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals ruled in favor of Professor Anspach , with an opinion that agreed with the facts about the game 's history and differed from Parker Brothers ' " official " account . The court also upheld a " purchasing motivation " test ( described in the decision as a " <unk> Doctrine " ) , a " test by which the trademark was valid only if consumers , when they asked for a Monopoly game , meant that they wanted Parker Brothers ' version .... " This had the effect of potentially nullifying the Monopoly trademark , and the court returned the case to Judge Williams . Williams heard the case again in 1980 , and in 1981 he again held for Parker Brothers . Anspach appealed again , and in August 1982 the appeals court again reversed . The case was then appealed by General Mills / Parker Brothers to the United States Supreme Court , which decided not to hear the case in February 1983 , and denied a petition for rehearing in April . This allowed the appeals court 's decision to stand and further allowed Anspach to resume publication of his game . 
 With the trademark nullified , the name " Monopoly " entered the public domain , where the naming of games was concerned , and a profusion of non @-@ Parker @-@ Brothers variants were published . Parker Brothers and other firms lobbied the United States Congress and obtained a revision of the trademark laws . The case was finally settled in 1985 , with Monopoly remaining a valid trademark of Parker Brothers , and Anspach assigning the Anti @-@ Monopoly trademark to the company but retaining the ability to use it under license . Anspach received compensation for court costs and the destroyed copies of his game , as well as unspecified damages . He was allowed to resume publication with a legal disclaimer . Anspach later self @-@ published a book about his research and legal fights with General Mills , Kenner Parker Toys , and Hasbro . 
 = = = Legal status = = = 
 Parker Brothers / Hasbro now claims trademark rights to the name and its variants , and has asserted it against others such as the publishers of <unk> . Professor Anspach assigned the Anti @-@ Monopoly trademark back to Parker Brothers , and Hasbro now owns it . Anspach 's game remains in print . The previous publishers were a company called <unk> , but the game is currently distributed and sold by University Games worldwide . 
 Various patents have existed on the game of Monopoly and its predecessors , such as The Landlord 's Game , but all have now expired . The specific graphics of the game board , cards , and pieces are protected by copyright law and trademark law , as is the specific wording of the game 's rules . 
 = = Monopoly as a brand = = 
 Parker Brothers created a few accessories and licensed a few products shortly after it began publishing the game in 1935 . These included a money pad and the first stock exchange add @-@ on in 1936 , a birthday card , and a song by Charles Tobias ( lyrics ) and John Jacob Loeb ( music ) . At the conclusion of the Anti @-@ Monopoly case , Kenner Parker Toys began to seek trademarks on the design elements of Monopoly . It was at this time that the game 's main logo was redesigned to feature " Rich Uncle Pennybags " ( now " Mr. Monopoly " ) reaching out from the second " O " in the word Monopoly . To commemorate the game 's 50th anniversary in 1985 , the company commissioned artist Lou Brooks to redesign and illustrate the main logo as a red street sign @-@ like banner , as well as the character Rich Uncle Pennybags reaching out of the " O. " Brooks was also hired at the time to develop and illustrate the game 's special " Commemorative Edition " embossed tin box packaging . The art was also carried over onto the more traditional cardboard game box which was revised for the anniversary . 
 All items stamped with the red MONOPOLY logo also feature the word " Brand " in small print . In the mid @-@ 1980s , after the success of the first " collector 's tin anniversary edition " ( for the 50th anniversary ) , an edition of the game was produced by the Franklin Mint , the first edition to be published outside Parker Brothers . At about the same time , McDonald 's started its first Monopoly game promotions , considered the company 's most successful , which continue to the present . The twentieth such promotion was sponsored in 2012 . 
 In recent years , the Monopoly brand has been licensed onto a line of slot machines built by WMS Gaming ( first introduced in 1998 , six models had been made by 2000 , and over 20 by 2005 ) . The slots were named " Most Innovative Gaming Product in 1999 and voted " most popular " in 2001 . The brand has also been licensed onto instant @-@ win lottery tickets , and lines of 1 : 64 scale model cars produced by Johnny Lightning , which also included collectible game tokens . Other licenses have been issued for clothing and accessories , including a line of bathroom accessories . <unk> Winning Moves Games also had a Monopoly Calculator that could be used as a standard calculator , or used to aid in transactions during a game . 
 = = = Official sites = = = 
 The official U.S. Monopoly web site 
 The official UK Monopoly web site 
 Monopoly on Facebook 
 = = = History = = = 
 U.S. Patent 748 @,@ 626 – Patent for the first version of The Landlord 's Game , Issued Jan 5 , 1904 
 U.S. Patent 1 @,@ 509 @,@ 312 – Patent for the second version of The Landlord 's Game , Issued Sep 23 , 1924 
 U.S. Patent 2 @,@ 026 @,@ 082 – Patent awarded to C.B. Darrow for " Monopoly " on December 31 , 1935 
 The History of The Landlord 's Game and Monopoly . 
 History of Monopoly at World of Monopoly 
 Online photo album of many historical U.S. Monopoly sets , from Charles Darrow 's sets through the 1950s 
 Another online photo album of early Parker Brothers and Waddington sets , 1935 – 1954 . 
 Under the Boardwalk – The MONOPOLY Story – Film detailing the early history of the game with interviews including Phil Orbanes , Randolph Barton , Victor Watson , & Charles Darrow II . 
 = Humbert Roque Versace = 
 Captain Humbert Roque " Rocky " Versace ( July 2 , 1937 – September 26 , 1965 ) was a United States Army officer of Puerto Rican @-@ Italian descent who was awarded the United States ' highest military decoration — the Medal of Honor — for his heroic actions while a prisoner of war ( POW ) during the Vietnam War . He was the first member of the U.S. Army to be awarded the Medal of Honor for actions performed in Southeast Asia while in captivity . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Humbert Roque Versace was born in Honolulu , Hawaii on July 2 , 1937 . He was the eldest of five children born to Marie Teresa Ríos ( 1917 – 1999 ) — the author of three books , including the Fifteenth Pelican , on which The Flying Nun ( starring Sally Field ) , the TV series of the 1960s , was based — and Colonel Humbert Joseph Versace ( 1911 – 1972 ) . Versace grew up in Alexandria , Virginia and attended Gonzaga College High School in Washington , D.C. during his freshman and sophomore years . His junior year he attended Frankfurt American High School in Germany . He graduated from Norfolk Catholic High School in his senior year . He joined the Armed Forces in Norfolk , Virginia . As had his father before him , Versace entered the United States Military Academy West Point . He graduated in 1959 and was commissioned a Second Lieutenant of Armor in the U.S. Army . 
 He was a member of Ranger Class 4 – 60 and was awarded the Ranger Tab on December 18 , 1959 . Upon graduation from Ranger School , Capt. Versace attended Airborne School and was awarded the parachutist badge . He then served with 3rd Battalion , 40th Armor , 1st Cavalry Division in the Republic of Korea as an M @-@ 48 tank platoon leader from March 1960 to April 1961 . Captain Versace was then assigned to the 3d U.S. Infantry ( Old Guard ) , where he served as a tank platoon leader in Headquarters and Headquarters Company . After volunteering for duty in Vietnam , he attended the Military Assistance Institute , the Intelligence course at Fort Holabird , Maryland , and the <unk> Vietnamese language Course at the Presidio of Monterey . 
 = = Vietnam War = = 
 On May 12 , 1962 , Versace began his first tour of duty in the Republic of Vietnam as an intelligence advisor . In May 1963 he volunteered for a six @-@ month extension of his tour , planning to attend seminary at the conclusion of his service and join the Catholic priesthood , hoping to return to Vietnam as a missionary working with orphans . 
 Less than two weeks before the end of his tour , on October 29 , 1963 , while visiting a Military Academy classmate in Detachment A @-@ 23 , 5th Special Forces Group in the Mekong Delta , Versace accompanied several companies of South Vietnamese Civilian Irregular Defense ( CIDG ) troops who had attacked to remove a Viet Cong ( VC ) command post located in the U Minh Forest , a VC stronghold . A VC Main Force battalion ambushed and overran Versace 's unit , wounding him in the process . He was able to provide enough covering fire so that the CIDG forces could withdraw from the killing zone . 
 A second government force of about 200 men operating only a few thousand yards from the main fight learned of the disaster too late to help . U.S. authorities said the communist radio jammers had knocked out both the main channel and the alternate channel on all local military radios . Versace was captured and taken to a prison deep in the jungle along with two other Americans , Lieutenant Nick Rowe and Sergeant Dan Pitzer . He tried to escape four times , but failed in his attempts . Versace insulted the Viet Cong during the indoctrination sessions and cited the Geneva Convention treaty time after time . The Viet Cong separated Versace from the other prisoners . The last time the prisoners heard his voice , he was loudly singing " God Bless America " . On September 26 , 1965 , North Vietnam 's " Liberation Radio ” announced the execution of Captain Humbert Roque Versace . Versace 's remains have never been recovered . His headstone at Arlington National Cemetery stands above an empty grave and can be located in the Memorial section MG @-@ 108 . 
 Upon learning of their son 's fate , Marie Teresa Rios Versace and her husband , Colonel Versace , tried to find out what they could about the circumstances . She went to Paris in the late 1960s , trying unsuccessfully to see the North Vietnamese delegation as it arrived for peace talks . Rios Versace expressed her frustration and anguish in poems . 
 Nominations to award Versace the Medal of Honor were initiated in 1969 , but the nomination failed and he was posthumously awarded the Silver Star instead . The quest for a Medal of Honor for Versace languished until the " Friends of Rocky Versace " reinitiated the crusade once more in 1999 . Language added by Congress in the 2002 Defense Authorization Act ended the standoff and authorized the award of the nation 's highest military decoration for combat valor to Versace . 
 On July 8 , 2002 , in a ceremony in the White House East Room , Versace was posthumously awarded the Medal of Honor by President George W. Bush for his heroism , the first time an Army POW had been awarded the nation 's highest honor for actions in captivity . Present were his surviving siblings , Dr. Stephen Versace , Richard ( former coach of the Indiana Pacers ) , Michael and Trilby Versace . On November 7 , 2008 , the Department of the Army announced that the Silver Star awarded to Versace was revoked because the Silver Star award was upgraded to the Medal of Honor . 
 <unk> 
 <unk> OF THE ARMY 
 WASHINGTON , DC , 29 December 2009 
 IV — <unk> STAR @-@ <unk> . So much of Department of the Army General Orders , No. 31 , Headquarters , Department of the Army , Washington , D.C. , dated 1 July 1971 , pertaining to the award of the Silver Star to Captain Humbert R. Versace , United States Army , is herein revoked ; as announced in United States Human Resources Command , Permanent Orders 312 @-@ 07 , dated 7 November 2008 . 
 = = = Medal of Honor citation = = = 
 Humbert Roque Versace 
 Rank and organization : Captain , U.S. Army , Intelligence Advisor , Special Operations 
 Place : Republic of Vietnam 
 Entered service at : Norfolk , Virginia 
 Born : Honolulu , Hawaii 
 Citation : 
 For conspicuous gallantry and intrepidity at the risk of his life above and beyond the call of duty while a prisoner of war during the period of October 29 , 1963 to September 26 , 1965 in the Republic of Vietnam . While accompanying a Civilian Irregular Defense Group patrol engaged in combat operations in Thoi Binh District , An Xuyen Province , Republic of Vietnam on October 29 , 1963 , Captain Versace and the CIDG assault force were caught in an ambush from intense mortar , automatic weapons , and small arms fire from elements of a reinforced enemy Main Force battalion . As the battle raged , Captain Versace fought valiantly and encouraged his CIDG patrol to return fire against overwhelming enemy forces . He provided covering fire from an exposed position to enable friendly forces to withdraw from the killing zone when it was apparent that their position would be overrun , and was severely wounded in the knee and back from automatic weapons fire and shrapnel . He stubbornly resisted capture with the last full measure of his strength and ammunition . Taken prisoner by the Viet Cong , he demonstrated exceptional leadership and resolute adherence to the tenets of the Code of Conduct from the time he entered into a prisoner of war status . Captain Versace assumed command of his fellow American prisoners , and despite being kept locked in irons in an isolation box , raised their morale by singing messages to popular songs of the day , and leaving inspiring messages at the latrine . Within three weeks of captivity , and despite the severity of his untreated wounds , he attempted the first of four escape attempts by dragging himself on his hands and knees out of the camp through dense swamp and forbidding vegetation to freedom . Crawling at a very slow pace due to his weakened condition , the guards quickly discovered him outside the camp and recaptured him . Captain Versace scorned the enemy 's exhaustive interrogation and indoctrination efforts , and inspired his fellow prisoners to resist to the best of their ability . When he used his Vietnamese language skills to protest improper treatment of the American prisoners by the guards , he was put into leg irons and gagged to keep his protestations out of earshot of the other American prisoners in the camp . The last time that any of his fellow prisoners heard from him , Captain Versace was singing God Bless America at the top of his voice from his isolation box . Unable to break his indomitable will , his faith in God , and his trust in the United States of America and his fellow prisoners , Captain Versace was executed by the Viet Cong on September 26 , 1965 . Captain <unk> extraordinary heroism , self @-@ sacrifice , and personal bravery involving conspicuous risk of life above and beyond the call of duty were in keeping with the highest traditions of the United States Army , and reflect great credit to himself and the U.S. Armed Forces . 
 = = In memory = = 
 The name Humbert R Versace is inscribed on the Vietnam Veterans Memorial ( " The Wall " ) on Panel <unk> , Row 033 . On July 6 , 2002 , Rocky Versace Plaza in Alexandria , Virginia was dedicated in honor of Humbert R. Versace . There is a statue with the likeness of Versace in the Plaza , which was made possible with a donation of $ 125 @,@ 000 raised by the citizens of Alexandria , Virginia . On July 9 , 2002 , the day after the White House Medal of Honor ceremony , Secretary of the Army Thomas E. White and Army Chief of Staff General Eric K. Shinseki inducted Versace into the Pentagon Hall of Heroes . 
 In 2003 , he was inducted into the Military Intelligence Corps Hall of Fame . The Military Intelligence Hall of Fame is a Hall of Fame established by the Military Intelligence Corps of the United States Army in 1988 to honor soldiers and civilians who have made exceptional contributions to Military Intelligence . The Hall is administered by the United States Army Intelligence Center at Fort Huachuca , Arizona . 
 The name of Humbert Roque Versace was engraved in " El Monumento de la Recordación " ( Monument of Remembrance ) , dedicated to Puerto Rico 's fallen military members and situated in front of the Capitol Building in San Juan , Puerto Rico , and unveiled by Puerto Rico Senate President Kenneth McClintock ( see copy of speech ) and PR National Guard Adjutant General Col. David Carrión on Memorial Day , 2007 . 
 = = Awards and decorations = = 
 Among Capt. Humbert Roque Versace 's military decorations are the following : 
 Medal of Honor 
 Purple Heart 
 POW Medal 
 Armed Forces Expeditionary Medal 
 National Defense Service Medal 
 Vietnam Service Medal 
 Vietnam Campaign Medal 
 Badges : 
 Combat Infantryman Badge 
 Parachutist badge 
 Tabs : 
 Special Forces Tab 
 Ranger Tab 
 = Plug @-@ in electric vehicle = 
 A plug @-@ in electric vehicle ( PEV ) is any motor vehicle that can be recharged from an external source of electricity , such as wall sockets , and the electricity stored in the rechargeable battery packs drives or contributes to drive the wheels . PEV is a subset of electric vehicles that includes all @-@ electric or battery electric vehicles ( BEVs ) , plug @-@ in hybrid vehicles ( PHEVs ) , and electric vehicle conversions of hybrid electric vehicles and conventional internal combustion engine vehicles . 
 Plug @-@ in cars have several benefits compared to conventional internal combustion engine vehicles . They have lower operating and maintenance costs , and produce little or no local air pollution . They reduce dependence on petroleum and may reduce greenhouse gas emissions from the onboard source of power , depending on the fuel and technology used for electricity generation to charge the batteries . Plug @-@ in hybrids capture most of these benefits when they are operating in all @-@ electric mode . Despite their potential benefits , market penetration of plug @-@ in electric vehicles has been slower than expected as adoption faces several hurdles and limitations . As of 2016 , plug @-@ in electric vehicles are significantly more expensive than conventional vehicles and hybrid electric vehicles due to the additional cost of their lithium @-@ ion battery packs . Other factors discouraging the adoption of electric cars are the lack of public and private recharging infrastructure and , in the case of all @-@ electric vehicles , drivers ' fear of the batteries running out of energy before reaching their destination due to the limited range of existing electric cars . Plug @-@ in hybrids eliminate the problem of range anxiety associated to all @-@ electric vehicles , because the combustion engine works as a backup when the batteries are depleted , giving PHEVs driving range comparable to other vehicles with gasoline tanks . 
 Several national and local governments have established tax credits , subsidies , and other incentives to promote the introduction and adoption in the mass market of plug @-@ in electric vehicles depending on their battery size and all @-@ electric range . The term " plug @-@ in electric drive vehicle " is formally used in U.S. federal legislation to grant this type of consumer incentive . In China , plug @-@ in electric vehicles are called new energy vehicles ( NEVs ) , and only pure electric vehicles and plug @-@ in hybrid electric vehicles are subject to purchase incentives . Cumulative global sales of highway legal plug @-@ in electric passenger cars and light utility vehicles passed the 1 @.@ 5 million unit milestone in May 2016 . Despite their rapid growth , plug @-@ in electric cars represented just 0 @.@ 1 % of the one billion cars on the world 's roads by the end of 2015 . 
 As of September 2015 , there were almost 70 models of highway legal plug @-@ in electric passenger cars and light @-@ duty utility vans available for retail sales in the world . As of March 2016 , the Nissan Leaf is the world 's all @-@ time top selling highway @-@ capable all @-@ electric car , with global sales of almost 220 @,@ 000 units , followed by the Tesla Model S with about 120 @,@ 000 units sold worldwide , and the Chevrolet Volt plug @-@ in hybrid , which together with its sibling the Opel / Vauxhall Ampera has combined global sales of over 110 @,@ 000 units . Ranking next are the Mitsubishi Outlander P @-@ HEV with about 102 @,@ 000 units sold , and the Toyota Prius Plug @-@ in Hybrid with 75 @,@ 000 delivered worldwide . 
 As of June 2016 , cumulative sales by country are led by the United States with a stock of about 474 @,@ 000 highway legal light @-@ duty plug @-@ in electric vehicles delivered since 2008 . China ranks second with almost 390 @,@ 000 units sold between 2011 and May 2016 , followed by Japan with more than 150 @,@ 000 plug @-@ ins sold between 2009 and April 2016 . Over 500 @,@ 000 plug @-@ in passenger cars and utility vans have been registered in Europe up until May 2016 , making the continent the world 's largest light @-@ duty plug @-@ in regional market . European sales are led by Norway with over 105 @,@ 000 units registered through May 2016 , followed by the Netherlands with over 93 @,@ 300 units registered at the end of May 2016 , and France with about 89 @,@ 600 units registered through May 2016 . China is the world 's leader in the plug @-@ in heavy @-@ duty segment , including electric all @-@ electric buses , and plug @-@ in commercial and sanitation trucks . The stock of new energy vehicles sold in China since 2011 passed the 500 @,@ 000 unit milestone in March 2016 . 
 = = Terminology = = 
 = = = Plug @-@ in electric vehicle = = = 
 A plug @-@ in electric vehicle ( PEV ) is any motor vehicle with rechargeable battery packs that can be charged from the electric grid , and the electricity stored on board drives or contributes to drive the wheels for propulsion . Plug @-@ in electric vehicles are also sometimes referred to as grid @-@ enabled vehicles ( <unk> ) and also as electrically chargeable vehicles . 
 PEV is a subcategory of electric vehicles that includes battery electric vehicles ( BEVs ) , plug @-@ in hybrid vehicles , ( PHEVs ) , and electric vehicle conversions of hybrid electric vehicles and conventional internal combustion engine vehicles . Even though conventional hybrid electric vehicles ( HEVs ) have a battery that is continually recharged with power from the internal combustion engine and regenerative braking , they can not be recharged from an off @-@ vehicle electric energy source , and therefore , they do not belong to the category of plug @-@ in electric vehicles . 
 " Plug @-@ in electric drive vehicle " is the legal term used in U.S. federal legislation to designate the category of motor vehicles eligible for federal tax credits depending on battery size and their all @-@ electric range . In some European countries , particularly in France , " electrically chargeable vehicle " is the formal term used to designate the vehicles eligible for these incentives . While the term " plug @-@ in electric vehicle " most often refers to automobiles or " plug @-@ in cars " , there are several other types of plug @-@ in electric vehicle , including scooters , motorcycles , neighborhood electric vehicles or <unk> , city cars , vans , light trucks or light commercial vehicles , buses , trucks or lorries , and military vehicles . 
 = = = Battery electric vehicles = = = 
 A battery electric vehicle ( BEV ) uses chemical energy stored in rechargeable battery packs as its only source for propulsion . BEVs use electric motors and motor controllers instead of internal combustion engines ( <unk> ) for propulsion . 
 A plug @-@ in hybrid operates as an all @-@ electric vehicle or BEV when operating in charge @-@ depleting mode , but it switches to charge @-@ sustaining mode after the battery has reached its minimum state of charge ( SOC ) threshold , exhausting the vehicle 's all @-@ electric range ( AER ) . 
 = = = Plug @-@ in hybrid electric vehicles = = = 
 A plug @-@ in hybrid electric vehicle ( PHEV or PHV ) , also known as a plug @-@ in hybrid , is a hybrid electric vehicle with rechargeable batteries that can be restored to full charge by connecting a plug to an external electric power source . A plug @-@ in hybrid shares the characteristics of both a conventional hybrid electric vehicle and an all @-@ electric vehicle : it uses a gasoline engine and an electric motor for propulsion , but a PHEV has a larger battery pack that can be recharged , allowing operation in all @-@ electric mode until the battery is depleted . 
 = = = <unk> conversions = = = 
 An aftermarket electric vehicle conversion is the modification of a conventional internal combustion engine vehicle ( <unk> ) or hybrid electric vehicle ( HEV ) to electric propulsion , creating an all @-@ electric or plug @-@ in hybrid electric vehicle . 
 There are several companies in the U.S. offering conversions . The most common conversions have been from hybrid electric cars to plug @-@ in hybrid , but due to the different technology used in hybrids by each carmaker , the easiest conversions are for 2004 – 2009 Toyota Prius and for the Ford Escape / Mercury Mariner Hybrid . 
 = = = New energy vehicles = = = 
 In China the term new energy vehicles ( NEVs ) refers to vehicles that are partially or fully powered by electricity , such as battery electric vehicles ( BEVs ) and plug @-@ in hybrids ( PHEVs ) . The Chinese government began implementation of its <unk> program in 2009 to foster the development and introduction of new energy vehicles . 
 = = Advantages = = 
 = = = Lower operating and maintenance costs = = = 
 Internal combustion engines are relatively inefficient at converting on @-@ board fuel energy to propulsion as most of the energy is wasted as heat , and the rest while the engine is idling . Electric motors , on the other hand , are more efficient at converting stored energy into driving a vehicle . Electric drive vehicles do not consume energy while at rest or coasting , and modern plug @-@ in cars can capture and reuse as much as one fifth of the energy normally lost during braking through regenerative braking . Typically , conventional gasoline engines effectively use only 15 % of the fuel energy content to move the vehicle or to power accessories , and diesel engines can reach on @-@ board efficiencies of 20 % , while electric drive vehicles typically have on @-@ board efficiencies of around 80 % . 
 In the United States , as of early 2010 with a national average electricity rate of US $ 0 @.@ 10 per kWh , the cost per mile for a plug @-@ in electric vehicle operating in all @-@ electric mode is estimated between $ 0 @.@ 02 to $ 0 @.@ 04 , while the cost per mile of a standard automobile varies between $ 0 @.@ 08 to $ 0 @.@ 20 , considering a gasoline price of $ 3 @.@ 00 per gallon . As petroleum price is expected to increase in the future due to oil production decline and increases in global demand , the cost difference in favor of PEVs is expected to become even more advantageous . 
 According to Consumer Reports , as of December 2011 the Nissan Leaf has a cost of 3 @.@ 5 cents per mile and the Chevrolet Volt has a cost in electric mode of 3 @.@ 8 cents per mile . The Volt cost per mile is higher because it is heavier than the Leaf . These estimates are based on the fuel economy and energy consumption measured on their tests and using a U.S. national average rate of 11 cents per kWh of electricity . When the Volt runs in range @-@ extended mode using its premium gasoline @-@ powered engine , the plug @-@ in hybrid has a cost of 12 @.@ 5 cents per mile . The out @-@ of @-@ pocket cost per mile of the three most fuel efficient gasoline @-@ powered cars as tested by the magazine are the Toyota Prius , with a cost of 8 @.@ 6 cents per miles , the Honda Civic Hybrid with 9 @.@ 5 cents per mile , the Toyota Corolla with 11 @.@ 9 cents per mile , and the Hyundai Elantra 13 @.@ 1 cents per mile . The analysis also found that on trips up to 100 mi ( 160 km ) , the Volt is cheaper to drive than the Prius and the other three cars due to the Volt 's 35 mi ( 56 km ) driving range on electricity . The previous operating costs do not include maintenance , depreciation or other costs . 
 All @-@ electric and plug @-@ in hybrid vehicles also have lower maintenance costs as compared to internal combustion vehicles , since electronic systems break down much less often than the mechanical systems in conventional vehicles , and the fewer mechanical systems on board last longer due to the better use of the electric engine . PEVs do not require oil changes and other routine maintenance checks . 
 The following table compares out @-@ of @-@ pocket fuel costs estimated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency according to its official ratings for fuel economy ( miles per gallon gasoline equivalent in the case of plug @-@ in electric vehicles ) for series production all @-@ electric passenger vehicles rated by the EPA as of December 2015 , versus EPA rated most fuel efficient plug @-@ in hybrid with long distance range ( Chevrolet Volt - second generation ) , gasoline @-@ electric hybrid car ( Toyota Prius Eco - fourth generation ) , and EPA 's average new 2016 vehicle , which has a fuel economy of 25 mpg @-@ US ( 9 @.@ 4 L / 100 km ; 30 mpg @-@ imp ) . 
 The following table compares EPA 's estimated out @-@ of @-@ pocket fuel costs and fuel economy ratings of serial production plug @-@ in hybrid electric vehicles rated by EPA as of May 2016 expressed in miles per gallon gasoline equivalent ( mpg @-@ e ) , versus the most fuel efficient gasoline @-@ electric hybrid car , the 2016 Toyota Prius Eco ( fourth generation ) , rated 56 mpg @-@ US ( 4 @.@ 2 L / 100 km ; 67 mpg @-@ imp ) , and EPA 's average new 2016 vehicle , which has a fuel economy of 25 mpg @-@ US ( 9 @.@ 4 L / 100 km ; 30 mpg @-@ imp ) . The table also shows the fuel efficiency for plug @-@ in hybrids in all @-@ electric mode expressed as KWh / 100 mile , the metric used by EPA to rate electric cars before November 2010 . 
 The Edison Electric Institute ( <unk> ) conducted an analysis that demonstrated that between January 1976 and February 2012 the real price for gasoline has been much more volatile than the real price of electricity in the United States . The analysis is based on a plug @-@ in electric vehicle with an efficiency of 3 @.@ 4 miles per kW @-@ hr ( like the Mitsubishi i MiEV ) and a gasoline @-@ powered vehicle with a fuel economy rated at 30 mpg @-@ US ( 7 @.@ 8 L / 100 km ; 36 mpg @-@ imp ) ( like the 2012 Fiat 500 ) . The <unk> estimated that operating a plug @-@ in would have had an equivalent cost of around US $ 1 @.@ 50 a gallon in the late 1970s and early 1980s , and around US $ 1 @.@ 00 a gallon since the late 1990s . In contrast , the price to operate an internal combustion engine vehicle has had much ample variations , costing more than US $ 3 @.@ 50 per gallon during the 1979 energy crisis , then had a couple of lows with prices at less than US $ 1 @.@ 50 during 1999 and 2001 , only to climb and reach a maximum of more than US $ 4 @.@ 00 before the beginning of the 2007 – 2009 financial crisis , by early 2012 has fluctuated around US $ 3 @.@ 50 . The analysis found that the cost of an equivalent electric @-@ gallon of gasoline would have been not only cheaper to operate during the entire analysis period but also that equivalent electricity prices are more stable and have been declining in terms of equivalent dollars per gallon . 
 = = = Air pollution and greenhouse gas emissions = = = 
 Electric cars , as well as plug @-@ in hybrids operating in all @-@ electric mode , emit no harmful tailpipe pollutants from the onboard source of power , such as particulates ( soot ) , volatile organic compounds , hydrocarbons , carbon monoxide , ozone , lead , and various oxides of nitrogen . The clean air benefit is usually local because , depending on the source of the electricity used to recharge the batteries , air pollutant emissions are shifted to the location of the generation plants . In a similar manner , plug @-@ in electric vehicles operating in all @-@ electric mode do not emit greenhouse gases from the onboard source of power , but from the point of view of a well @-@ to @-@ wheel assessment , the extent of the benefit also depends on the fuel and technology used for electricity generation . This fact has been referred to as the long tailpipe of plug @-@ in electric vehicles . From the perspective of a full life cycle analysis , the electricity used to recharge the batteries must be generated from renewable or clean sources such as wind , solar , hydroelectric , or nuclear power for PEVs to have almost none or zero well @-@ to @-@ wheel emissions . On the other hand , when PEVs are recharged from coal @-@ fired plants , they usually produce slightly more greenhouse gas emissions than internal combustion engine vehicles and higher than hybrid electric vehicles . In the case of plug @-@ in hybrid electric vehicles operating in hybrid mode with assistance of the internal combustion engine , tailpipe and greenhouse emissions are lower in comparison to conventional cars because of their higher fuel economy . 
 The magnitude of the potential advantage depends on the mix of generation sources and therefore varies by country and by region . For example , France can obtain significant emission benefits from electric and plug @-@ in hybrids because most of its electricity is generated by nuclear power plants ; California , where most energy comes from natural gas , hydroelectric and nuclear plants can also secure substantial emission benefits . The U.K. also has a significant potential to benefit from PEVs as natural gas plants dominate the generation mix . On the other hand , emission benefits in Germany , China , India , and the central regions of the United States are limited or non @-@ existent because most electricity is generated from coal . However these countries and regions might still obtain some air quality benefits by reducing local air pollution in urban areas . Cities with chronic air pollution problems , such as Los Angeles , México City , Santiago , Chile , São Paulo , Beijing , Bangkok and Kathmandu may also gain local clean air benefits by shifting the harmful emission to electric generation plants located outside the cities . Nevertheless , the location of the plants is not relevant when considering greenhouse gas emission because their effect is global . 
 = = = = Carbon footprint during production = = = = 
 Ricardo 
 A report published in June 2011 , prepared by Ricardo in collaboration with experts from the UK 's Low Carbon Vehicle Partnership , found that hybrid electric cars , plug @-@ in hybrids and all @-@ electric cars generate more carbon emissions during their production than current conventional vehicles , but still have a lower overall carbon footprint over the full life cycle . The higher carbon footprint during production of electric drive vehicles is due mainly to the production of batteries . As an example , 43 percent of production emissions for a mid @-@ size electric car are generated from the battery production , while for standard mid @-@ sized <unk> combustion engine vehicle , around 75 % of the embedded carbon emissions during production comes from the steel used in the vehicle glider . The following table summarizes key results of this study for four powertrain technologies : 
 The Ricardo study also found that the lifecycle carbon emissions for mid @-@ sized gasoline and diesel vehicles are almost identical , and that the greater fuel efficiency of the diesel engine is offset by higher production emissions . 
 Volkswagen 
 In 2014 Volkswagen published the results of life @-@ cycle assessment of its electric vehicles certified by <unk> NORD , and independent inspection agency . The study found that CO 
 2 emissions during the use phase of its all @-@ electric VW e @-@ Golf are 99 % lower than those of the Golf 1 @.@ 2 <unk> when powers comes from exclusively hydroelectricity generated in Germany , Austria and Switzerland . Accounting for the full lifecycle , the e @-@ Golf reduces emissions by 61 % , offsetting higher production emissions . When the actual EU @-@ 27 electricity mix is considered , the e @-@ Golf emissions are still 26 % lower than those of the conventional Golf 1 @.@ 2 <unk> . Similar results were found when comparing the e @-@ Golf with the Golf 1 @.@ 6 TDI . The analysis considered recycling of the three vehicles at the end of their lifetime . 
 = = = = Well @-@ to @-@ wheel GHG emissions in the U.S. = = = = 
 Environmental Protection Agency 
 The following table compares tailpipe and upstream CO2 emissions estimated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency for all series production model year 2014 plug @-@ in electric vehicles available in the U.S. market . Total emissions include the emissions associated with the production and distribution of electricity used to charge the vehicle , and for plug @-@ in hybrid electric vehicles , it also includes emissions associated with tailpipe emissions produced from the internal combustion engine . These figures were published by the EPA in October 2014 in its annual report " Light @-@ Duty Automotive Technology , Carbon Dioxide Emissions , and Fuel Economy Trends : 1975 Through 2014 . " All emissions are estimated considering average real world city and highway operation based on the EPA 5 @-@ cycle label methodology , using a weighted 55 % city and 45 % highway driving . For the first time , the 2014 Trends report presents an analysis of the impact of alternative fuel vehicles , with emphasis in plug @-@ in electric vehicles because as their market share is approaching 1 % , the EPA concluded that PEVs began to have a measurable impact on the U.S. overall new vehicle fuel economy and CO2 emissions . 
 For purposes of an accurate estimation of emissions , the analysis took into consideration the differences in operation between plug @-@ in hybrids . Some , like the Chevrolet Volt , can operate in all @-@ electric mode without using gasoline , and others operate in a blended mode like the Toyota Prius PHV , which uses both energy stored in the battery and energy from the gasoline tank to propel the vehicle , but that can deliver substantial all @-@ electric driving in blended mode . In addition , since the all @-@ electric range of plug @-@ in hybrids depends on the size of the battery pack , the analysis introduced a utility factor as a projection of the share of miles that will be driven using electricity by an average driver , for both , electric only and blended EV modes . Since all @-@ electric cars do not produce tailpipe emissions , the utility factor applies only to plug @-@ in hybrids . The following table shows the overall fuel economy expressed in terms of miles per gallon gasoline equivalent ( mpg @-@ e ) and the utility factor for the ten <unk> plug @-@ in hybrids available in the U.S. market , and EPA 's best estimate of the CO2 tailpipe emissions produced by these PHEVs . 
 In order to account for the upstream CO2 emissions associated with the production and distribution of electricity , and since electricity production in the United States varies significantly from region to region , the EPA considered three scenarios / ranges with the low end scenario corresponding to the California powerplant emissions factor , the middle of the range represented by the national average powerplant emissions factor , and the upper end of the range corresponding to the powerplant emissions factor for the Rocky Mountains . The EPA estimates that the electricity GHG emission factors for various regions of the country vary from 346 g CO2 / kWh in California to 986 g CO2 / kWh in the Rockies , with a national average of 648 g CO2 / kWh . 
 Union of Concerned Scientists 
 The Union of Concerned Scientists ( UCS ) published a study in 2012 that assessed average greenhouse gas emissions in the U.S. resulting from charging plug @-@ in car batteries from the perspective of the full life @-@ cycle ( well @-@ to @-@ wheel analysis ) and according to fuel and technology used to generate electric power by region . The study used the model year 2011 Nissan Leaf all @-@ electric car to establish the analysis baseline , and electric @-@ utility emissions are based on EPA 's 2009 estimates . The UCS study expressed the results in terms of miles per gallon instead of the conventional unit of grams of greenhouse gases or carbon dioxide equivalent emissions per year in order to make the results more friendly for consumers . The study found that in areas where electricity is generated from natural gas , nuclear , hydroelectric or renewable sources , the potential of plug @-@ in electric cars to reduce greenhouse emissions is significant . On the other hand , in regions where a high proportion of power is generated from coal , hybrid electric cars produce less CO2 equivalent emissions than plug @-@ in electric cars , and the best fuel efficient gasoline @-@ powered <unk> car produces slightly less emissions than a PEV . In the worst @-@ case scenario , the study estimated that for a region where all energy is generated from coal , a plug @-@ in electric car would emit greenhouse gas emissions equivalent to a gasoline car rated at a combined city / highway driving fuel economy of 30 mpg @-@ US ( 7 @.@ 8 L / 100 km ; 36 mpg @-@ imp ) . In contrast , in a region that is completely reliant on natural gas , the PEV would be equivalent to a gasoline @-@ powered car rated at 50 mpg @-@ US ( 4 @.@ 7 L / 100 km ; 60 mpg @-@ imp ) . 
 The study concluded that for 45 % of the U.S. population , a plug @-@ in electric car will generate lower CO2 equivalent emissions than a gasoline @-@ powered car capable of combined 50 mpg @-@ US ( 4 @.@ 7 L / 100 km ; 60 mpg @-@ imp ) , such as the Toyota Prius and the Prius c . The UCS also found that for 37 % of the population , the electric car emissions will fall in the range of a gasoline @-@ powered car rated at a combined fuel economy of 41 to 50 mpg @-@ US ( 5 @.@ 7 to 4 @.@ 7 L / 100 km ; 49 to 60 mpg @-@ imp ) , such as the Honda Civic Hybrid and the Lexus <unk> . Only 18 % of the population lives in areas where the power @-@ supply is more dependent on burning carbon , and the greenhouse gas emissions will be equivalent to a car rated at a combined fuel economy of 31 to 40 mpg @-@ US ( 7 @.@ 6 to 5 @.@ 9 L / 100 km ; 37 to 48 mpg @-@ imp ) , such as the Chevrolet Cruze and Ford Focus . The study found that there are no regions in the U.S. where plug @-@ in electric cars will have higher greenhouse gas emissions than the average new compact gasoline engine automobile , and the area with the dirtiest power supply produces CO2 emissions equivalent to a gasoline @-@ powered car rated at 33 mpg @-@ US ( 7 @.@ 1 L / 100 km ) . 
 In September 2014 the UCS published an updated analysis of its 2012 report . The 2014 analysis found that 60 % of Americans , up from 45 % in 2009 , live in regions where an all @-@ electric car produce fewer CO2 equivalent emissions per mile than the most efficient hybrid . The UCS study found several reasons for the improvement . First , electric utilities have adopted cleaner sources of electricity to their mix between the two analysis . The 2014 study used electric @-@ utility emissions based on EPA 's 2010 estimates , but since coal use nationwide is down by about 5 % from 2010 to 2014 , actual efficiency in 2014 is better than estimated in the UCS study . Second , electric vehicles have become more efficient , as the average 2013 all @-@ electric vehicle used 0 @.@ 33 kWh per mile , representing a 5 % improvement over 2011 models . Also , some new models are cleaner than the average , such as the BMW i3 , which is rated at 0 @.@ 27 kWh by the EPA . An i3 charged with power from the Midwest grid would be as clean as a gasoline @-@ powered car with about 50 mpg @-@ US ( 4 @.@ 7 L / 100 km ) , up from 39 mpg @-@ US ( 6 @.@ 0 L / 100 km ) for the average electric car in the 2012 study . In states with a cleaner mix generation , the gains were larger . The average all @-@ electric car in California went up to 95 mpg @-@ US ( 2 @.@ 5 L / 100 km ) equivalent from 78 mpg @-@ US ( 3 @.@ 0 L / 100 km ) in the 2012 study . States with dirtier generation that rely heavily on coal still lag , such as Colorado , where the average BEV only achieves the same emissions as a 34 mpg @-@ US ( 6 @.@ 9 L / 100 km ; 41 mpg @-@ imp ) gasoline @-@ powered car . The author of the 2014 analysis noted that the benefits are not distributed evenly across the U.S. because electric car adoptions is concentrated in the states with cleaner power . 
 In November 2015 the Union of Concerned Scientists published a new report comparing two battery electric vehicles ( BEVs ) with similar gasoline vehicles by examining their global warming emissions over their full life @-@ cycle , cradle @-@ to @-@ grave analysis . The two BEVs modeled , midsize and full @-@ size , are based on the two most popular BEV models sold in the United States in 2015 , the Nissan Leaf and the Tesla Model S. The study found that all @-@ electric cars representative of those sold today , on average produce less than half the global warming emissions of comparable gasoline @-@ powered vehicles , despite taken into account the higher emissions associated with BEV manufacturing . Considering the regions where the two most popular electric cars are being sold , excess manufacturing emissions are offset within 6 to 16 months of average driving . The study also concluded that driving an average EV results in lower global warming emissions than driving a gasoline car that gets 50 mpg @-@ US ( 4 @.@ 7 L / 100 km ) in regions covering two @-@ thirds of the U.S. population , up from 45 % in 2009 . Based on where EVs are being sold in the United States in 2015 , the average EV produces global warming emissions equal to a gasoline vehicle with a 68 mpg @-@ US ( 3 @.@ 5 L / 100 km ) fuel economy rating . The authors identified two main reason for the fact that EV @-@ related emissions have become even lower in many parts of the country since the first study was conducted in 2012 . Electricity generation has been getting cleaner , as coal @-@ fired generation has declined while lower @-@ carbon alternatives have increased . In addition , electric cars are becoming more efficient . For example , the Nissan Leaf and the Chevrolet Volt , have undergone improvements to increase their efficiencies compared to the original models launched in 2010 , and other even more efficient BEV models , such as the most lightweight and efficient BMW i3 , have entered the market . 
 National Bureau of Economic Research 
 One criticism to the UCS study is that the analysis was made using average emissions rates across regions instead of marginal generation at different times of the day . The former approach does not take into account the generation mix within interconnected electricity markets and shifting load profiles throughout the day . An analysis by three economist affiliated with the National Bureau of Economic Research ( <unk> ) , published in November 2014 , developed a methodology to estimate marginal emissions of electricity demand that vary by location and time of day across the United States . The marginal analysis , applied to plug @-@ in electric vehicles , found that the emissions of charging PEVs vary by region and hours of the day . In some regions , such as the Western U.S. and Texas , CO2 emissions per mile from driving PEVs are less than those from driving a hybrid car . However , in other regions , such as the Upper Midwest , charging during the recommended hours of midnight to 4 a.m. implies that PEVs generate more emissions per mile than the average car currently on the road . The results show a fundamental tension between electricity load management and environmental goals as the hours when electricity is the least expensive to produce tend to be the hours with the greatest emissions . This occurs because coal @-@ fired units , which have higher emission rates , are most commonly used to meet base @-@ level and off @-@ peak electricity demand ; while natural gas units , which have relatively low emissions rates , are often brought online to meet peak demand . 
 = = = = Well @-@ to @-@ wheel GHG emissions in several countries = = = = 
 A study published in the UK in April 2013 assessed the carbon footprint of plug @-@ in electric vehicles in 20 countries . As a baseline the analysis established that manufacturing emissions account for 70 g CO2 / km for an electric car and 40 g CO2 / km for a petrol car . The study found that in countries with coal @-@ intensive generation , PEVs are no different from conventional petrol @-@ powered vehicles . Among these countries are China , Indonesia , Australia , South Africa and India . A pure electric car in India generates emissions comparable to a 20 mpg @-@ US ( 12 L / 100 km ; 24 mpg @-@ imp ) petrol car . 
 The country ranking was led by Paraguay , where all electricity is produced from hydropower , and Iceland , where electricity production relies on renewable power , mainly hydro and geothermal power . Resulting carbon emissions from an electric car in both countries are 70 g CO2 / km , which is equivalent to a 220 mpg @-@ US ( 1 @.@ 1 L / 100 km ; 260 mpg @-@ imp ) petrol car , and correspond to manufacturing emissions . Next in the ranking are other countries with low carbon electricity generation , including Sweden ( mostly hydro and nuclear power ) , Brazil ( mainly hydropower ) and France ( predominantly nuclear power ) . Countries ranking in the middle include Japan , Germany , the UK and the United States . 
 The following table shows the emissions intensity estimated in the study for those countries where electric vehicle are available , and the corresponding emissions equivalent in miles per US gallon of a petrol @-@ powered car : 
 = = = Less dependence on imported oil = = = 
 For many net oil importing countries the 2000s energy crisis brought back concerns first raised during the 1973 oil crisis . For the United States , the other developed countries and emerging countries their dependence on foreign oil has revived concerns about their vulnerability to price shocks and supply disruption . Also , there have been concerns about the uncertainty surrounding peak oil production and the higher cost of extracting unconventional oil . A third issue that has been raised is the threat to national security because most proven oil reserves are concentrated in relatively few geographic locations , including some countries with strong resource nationalism , unstable governments or hostile to U.S. interests . In addition , for many developing countries , and particularly for the poorest African countries , high oil prices have an adverse impact on the government budget and deteriorate their terms of trade thus jeopardizing their balance of payments , all leading to lower economic growth . 
 Through the gradual replacement of internal combustion engine vehicles for electric cars and plug @-@ in hybrids , electric drive vehicles can contribute significantly to lessen the dependence of the transport sector on imported oil as well as contributing to the development of a more resilient energy supply . 
 = = = Vehicle @-@ to @-@ grid = = = 
 Plug @-@ in electric vehicles offer users the opportunity to sell electricity stored in their batteries back to the power grid , thereby helping utilities to operate more efficiently in the management of their demand peaks . A vehicle @-@ to @-@ grid ( V2G ) system would take advantage of the fact that most vehicles are parked an average of 95 percent of the time . During such idle times the electricity stored in the batteries could be transferred from the PEV to the power lines and back to the grid . In the U.S this transfer back to the grid have an estimated value to the utilities of up to $ 4 @,@ 000 per year per car . In a V2G system it would also be expected that battery electric ( BEVs ) and plug @-@ in hybrids ( PHEVs ) would have the capability to communicate automatically with the power grid to sell demand response services by either delivering electricity into the grid or by throttling their charging rate . 
 = = Disadvantages = = 
 = = = Cost of batteries and cost of ownership = = = 
 Cost of batteries 
 As of 2015 , plug @-@ in electric vehicles are significantly more expensive as compared to conventional internal combustion engine vehicles and hybrid electric vehicles due to the additional cost of their lithium @-@ ion battery pack . According to a 2010 study by the National Research Council , the cost of a lithium @-@ ion battery pack was about US $ 1 @,@ 700 / kWh of usable energy , and considering that a PHEV @-@ 10 requires about 2 @.@ 0 kWh and a PHEV @-@ 40 about 8 kWh , the manufacturer cost of the battery pack for a PHEV @-@ 10 is around US $ 3 @,@ 000 and it goes up to US $ 14 @,@ 000 for a PHEV @-@ 40 . As of June 2012 , and based on the three battery size options offered for the Tesla Model S , the New York Times estimated the cost of automotive battery packs between US $ 400 to US $ 500 per kilowatt @-@ hour . A 2013 study by the American Council for an Energy @-@ Efficient Economy reported that battery costs came down from US $ 1 @,@ 300 per kWh in 2007 to US $ 500 per kWh in 2012 . The U.S. Department of Energy has set cost targets for its sponsored battery research of US $ 300 per kWh in 2015 and US $ 125 per kWh by 2022 . Cost reductions through advances in battery technology and higher production volumes will allow plug @-@ in electric vehicles to be more competitive with conventional internal combustion engine vehicles . 
 According to a study published in February 2016 by Bloomberg New Energy Finance ( BNEF ) , battery prices fell 65 % since 2010 , and 35 % just in 2015 , reaching US $ 350 per kWh . The study concludes that battery costs are on a trajectory to make electric vehicles without government subsidies as affordable as internal combustion engine cars in most countries by 2022 . BNEF projects that by 2040 , long @-@ range electric cars will cost less than US $ 22 @,@ 000 expressed in 2016 dollars . BNEF expects electric car battery costs to be well below US $ 120 per kWh by 2030 , and to fall further thereafter as new chemistries become available . 
 Cost of ownership 
 A study published in 2011 by the Belfer Center , Harvard University , found that the gasoline costs savings of plug @-@ in electric cars do not offset their higher purchase prices when comparing their lifetime net present value of purchase and operating costs for the U.S. market at 2010 prices , and assuming no government <unk> . According to the study estimates , a PHEV @-@ 40 is US $ 5 @,@ 377 more expensive than a conventional internal combustion engine , while a battery electric vehicles is US $ 4 @,@ 819 more expensive . These findings assumed a battery cost of US $ 600 per kWh , which means that the Chevrolet Volt battery pack cost around US $ 10 @,@ 000 and the Nissan Leaf pack costs US $ 14 @,@ 400 . The study also assumed a gasoline price of US $ 3 @.@ 75 per gallon ( as of mid June 2011 ) , that vehicles are driven 12 @,@ 000 miles ( 19 @,@ 000 km ) per year , an average price of electricity of US $ 0 @.@ 12 per kWh , that the plug @-@ in hybrid is driven in all @-@ electric mode 85 % of the time , and that the owner of PEVs pay US $ 1 @,@ 500 to install a Level II 220 / 240 volt charger at home . 
 The study also include hybrid electric vehicles in the comparison , and analyzed several scenarios to determine how the comparative net savings will change over the next 10 to 20 years , assuming that battery costs will decrease while gasoline prices increase , and also assuming higher fuel efficiency of conventional cars , among other scenarios . Under the future scenarios considered , the study found that BEVs will be significantly less expensive than conventional cars ( US $ 1 @,@ 155 to US $ 7 @,@ 181 cheaper ) , while PHEVs , will be more expensive than BEVs in almost all comparison scenarios , and only less expensive than conventional cars in a scenario with very low battery costs and high gasoline prices . The reason for the different savings among PEVs is because BEVs are simpler to build and do not use liquid fuel , while PHEVs have more complicated powertrains and still have gasoline @-@ powered engines . The following table summarizes the results of four of the seven scenarios analyzed by the study . 
 According to a study by the Electric Power Research Institute published in June 2013 , the total cost of ownership of the 2013 Nissan Leaf SV is substantially lower than that of comparable conventional and hybrid vehicles . For comparison , the study constructed average hybrid and conventional vehicles and assumed an average US distance per trip distribution . The study took into account the manufacturer 's suggested retail price , taxes , credits , destination charge , electric charging station , fuel cost , maintenance cost , and additional cost due to the use of a gasoline vehicle for trips beyond the range of the Leaf . 
 = = = Availability of recharging infrastructure = = = 
 Despite the widespread assumption that plug @-@ in recharging will take place overnight at home , residents of cities , apartments , dormitories , and townhouses do not have garages or driveways with available power outlets , and they might be less likely to buy plug @-@ in electric vehicles unless recharging infrastructure is developed . Electrical outlets or charging stations near their places of residence , in commercial or public parking lots , streets and workplaces are required for these potential users to gain the full advantage of PHEVs , and in the case of EVs , to avoid the fear of the batteries running out energy before reaching their destination , commonly called range anxiety . Even house dwellers might need to charge at the office or to take advantage of opportunity charging at shopping centers . However , this infrastructure is not in place and it will require investments by both the private and public sectors . 
 Several cities in California and Oregon , and particularly San Francisco and other cities in the San Francisco Bay Area and Silicon Valley , already have deployed public charging stations and have expansion plans to attend both plug @-@ ins and all @-@ electric cars . Some local private firms such as Google and Adobe Systems have also deployed charging infrastructure . In Google 's case , its Mountain View campus has 100 available charging stations for its share @-@ use fleet of converted plug @-@ ins available to its employees . Solar panels are used to generate the electricity , and this pilot program is being monitored on a daily basis and performance results are published on the <unk> website . As of December 2013 , Estonia is the first and only country that had deployed an EV charging network with nationwide coverage , with 165 fast chargers available along highways at a minimum distance of between 40 to 60 km ( 25 to 37 mi ) , and a higher density in urban areas . 
 The importance to build the infrastructure necessary to support electric vehicles is illustrated by the decision of Car2Go in San Diego , California , that due to insufficient charging infrastructure decided to replace all of its all @-@ electric car fleet with gasoline @-@ powered cars starting on 1 May 2016 . When the carsharing service started in 2011 , Car2Go expected 1 @,@ 000 charging stations to be deployed around the city , but only 400 were in place by early 2016 . As a result , an average of 20 % of the carsharing fleet is unavailable at any given time because the cars are either being charged or because they don ’ t have enough electricity in them to be driven . Also , many of the company ’ s 40 @,@ 000 San Diego members say they often worry their Car2Go will run out of charge before they finish their trip . 
 = = = = Battery swapping = = = = 
 A different approach to resolve the problems of range anxiety and lack of recharging infrastructure for electric vehicles was developed by Better Place . Its business model considers that electric cars are built and sold separately from the battery pack . As customers are not allowed to purchase battery packs , they must lease them from Better Place which will deploy a network of battery swapping stations thus expanding EVs range and allowing long distance trips . <unk> users pay a per @-@ distance fee to cover battery pack leasing , charging and swap infrastructure , the cost of sustainable electricity , and other costs . Better Place signed agreement for deployment in Australia , Denmark , Israel , Canada , California , and Hawaii . The Renault Fluence Z.E. was the electric car built with switchable battery technology sold for the Better Place network . The robotic battery @-@ switching operation was completed in about five minutes . 
 After implementing the first modern commercial deployment of the battery swapping model in Israel and Denmark , Better Place filed for bankruptcy in Israel in May 2013 . The company 's financial difficulties were caused by the high investment required to develop the charging and swapping infrastructure , about US $ 850 million in private capital , and a market penetration significantly lower than originally predicted by Shai Agassi . Less than 1 @,@ 000 Fluence Z.E. cars were deployed in Israel and around 400 units in Denmark . 
 Tesla Motors designed its Model S to allow fast battery swapping . In June 2013 , Tesla announced their goal to deploy a battery swapping station in each of its supercharging stations . At a demonstration event Tesla showed that a battery swap operation with the Model S takes just over 90 seconds , about half the time it takes to refill a gasoline @-@ powered car used for comparison purposes during the event . The first stations are planned to be deployed along Interstate 5 in California where , according to Tesla , a large number of Model S sedans make the San Francisco @-@ Los Angeles trip regularly . These will be followed by the Washington , DC to Boston corridor . 
 = = = = Other charging solutions = = = = 
 The REVA NXR exhibited in the 2009 Frankfurt Motor Show and the Nissan Leaf SV trim both have roof @-@ mounted solar panels . These solar panels are designed to trickle charge the batteries when the car is moving or parked . Another proposed technology is <unk> , by REVA . When the REVA NXR 's batteries are running low or are fully depleted , the driver is able to send an SMS to <unk> and unlock a hidden reserve in the battery pack . REVA has not provided details on how the system will work . The Fisker Karma uses solar panel in the roof to recharge the 12 @-@ volt lead @-@ acid accessory battery . The Nissan Leaf SL trim also has a small solar panel at the rear of the roof / spoiler that can trickle charge the auxiliary 12 @-@ volt lead @-@ acid battery . 
 = = = Potential overload of the electrical grid = = = 
 The existing electrical grid , and local transformers in particular , may not have enough capacity to handle the additional power load that might be required in certain areas with high plug @-@ in electric car concentrations . As recharging a single electric @-@ drive car could consume three times as much electricity as a typical home , overloading problems may arise when several vehicles in the same neighborhood recharge at the same time , or during the normal summer peak loads . To avoid such problems , utility executives recommend owners to charge their vehicles overnight when the grid load is lower or to use smarter electric meters that help control demand . When market penetration of plug @-@ in electric vehicles begins to reach significant levels , utilities will have to invest in improvements for local electrical grids in order to handle the additional loads related to recharging to avoid blackouts due to grid overload . Also , some experts have suggested that by implementing variable time @-@ of @-@ day rates , utilities can provide an incentive for plug @-@ in owners to recharge mostly overnight , when rates are lower . 
 General Motors is sponsoring the Pecan Street demonstration project in Austin , Texas . The project objective is to learn the charging patterns of plug @-@ in electric car owners , and to study how a residential fleet of electric vehicles might strain the electric grid if all owners try to charge them at the same , which is what the preliminary monitoring found when the plug @-@ in cars return home in the evening . The Mueller neighborhood is the test ground , and as of June 2013 , the community has nearly 60 Chevrolet Volt owners alone . This cluster of Volts was achieved thanks to GM 's commitment to match the federal government 's $ 7 @,@ 500 rebate incentive , which effectively halves the purchase price of the plug @-@ hybrid electric cars . 
 = = = Risks associated with noise reduction = = = 
 Electric cars and plug @-@ in hybrids when operating in all @-@ electric mode at low speeds produce less roadway noise as compared to vehicles propelled by an internal combustion engine , thereby reducing harmful noise health effects . However , blind people or the visually impaired consider the noise of combustion engines a helpful aid while crossing streets , hence plug @-@ in electric cars and conventional hybrids could pose an unexpected hazard when operating at low speeds . 
 Several tests conducted in the U.S. have shown that this is a valid concern , as vehicles operating in electric mode can be particularly hard to hear below 20 mph ( 30 km / h ) for all types of road users and not only the visually impaired . At higher speeds the sound created by tire friction and the air displaced by the vehicle start to make sufficient audible noise . However , a 2011 study , commissioned by the UK Department for Transport ( DfT ) and conducted by the Transport Research Laboratory , found little correlation between pedestrian vehicle involvement density and noise level for the majority of vehicles . In addition , the analysis found no evidence of a pattern in pedestrian vehicle involvement densities when only considering those accidents occurring on 30 mph ( 48 km / h ) or slower roads , or where the pedestrian was disabled . A previous study did not found an increased pedestrian vehicle involvement density for electric and hybrid vehicles with respect to their conventional counterparts which raised the question as to whether added sound is necessarily required . 
 Some carmakers announced they have decided to address this safety issue , and as a result , the new Nissan Leaf electric car and Chevrolet Volt plug @-@ in hybrid , both launched in December 2010 , as well as the Fisker Karma plug @-@ in hybrid launched in 2011 launched in 2012 , include electric warning sounds to alert pedestrians , the blind and others to their presence . As of January 2014 , most of the hybrids and plug @-@ in electric and hybrids available in the United States , Japan and Europe make warning noises using a speaker system . The Tesla Model S is one of the few electric cars without warning sounds , because Tesla Motors will await until regulations are enacted . Volkswagen and BMW also decided to add artificial sounds to their electric drive cars only when required by regulation . 
 The Japanese Ministry of Land , Infrastructure , Transport and Tourism issued guidelines for hybrid and other near @-@ silent vehicles in January 2010 . In the United States the Pedestrian Safety Enhancement Act of 2010 was approved by the U.S. Senate and the House of Representatives in December 2010 . The act does not stipulate a specific speed for the simulated noise but requires the U.S. Department of Transportation to study and establish a motor vehicle safety standard that would set requirements for an alert sound . A proposed rule was published for comment by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration ( NHTSA ) in January , 2013 . It would require hybrids and electric vehicles traveling at less than 18 @.@ 6 miles per hour ( 30 km / h ) to emit warning sounds that pedestrians must be able to hear over background noises . According to the NHTSA proposal carmakers would be able to pick the sounds the vehicles make from a range of choices , and similar vehicles would have to make the same sounds . The rules were scheduled to go into effect in September 2014 . However , in January 2015 the NHTSA rescheduled the date for a final ruling to the end of 2015 . Since the regulation comes into force three years after being rendered as a final rule , compliance was delayed to 2018 . 
 On 6 February 2013 , the European Parliament approved a draft law to tighten noise limits for cars to protect public health , and also to add alerting sounds to ensure the audibility of hybrid and electric vehicles to improve the safety of vulnerable road users in urban areas , such as blind , visually and auditorily challenged pedestrians , cyclists and children . The draft legislation states a number of tests , standards and measures that must first be developed for an Acoustic Vehicle Alerting Systems ( AVAS ) to be compulsory in the future . The approved amendment establishes that the sound to be generated by the AVAS should be a continuous sound and should be easily indicative of vehicle behavior and should sound similar to the sound of a vehicle of the same category equipped with an internal combustion engine . " In April 2014 the European Parliament approved legislation that requires the mandatory use of the AVAS for all new electric and hybrid electric vehicles and car manufacturers have to comply within 5 years . 
 = = = Risks of battery fire = = = 
 Lithium @-@ ion batteries may suffer thermal runaway and cell rupture if overheated or overcharged , and in extreme cases this can lead to combustion . To reduce these risks , lithium @-@ ion battery packs contain fail @-@ safe circuitry that shuts down the battery when its voltage is outside the safe range . When handled improperly , or if manufactured <unk> , some rechargeable batteries can experience thermal runaway resulting in overheating . Especially prone to thermal runaway are lithium @-@ ion batteries . Reports of exploding cellphones have been reported in newspapers . In 2006 , batteries from Apple , HP , Toshiba , Lenovo , Dell and other notebook manufacturers were recalled because of fire and explosions . Also , during the Boeing 787 Dreamliner 's first year of service , at least four aircraft suffered from electrical system problems stemming from its lithium @-@ ion batteries , resulting in the whole Dreamliner fleet being voluntarily grounded in January 2013 . 
 Several plug @-@ in electric vehicle fire incidents have taken place since the introduction of mass @-@ production plug @-@ in electric vehicles in 2008 . Most of them have been thermal runaway incidents related to the lithium @-@ ion batteries and have involved the Zotye M300 EV , Chevrolet Volt , Fisker Karma , BYD e6 , Dodge Ram 1500 Plug @-@ in Hybrid , Toyota Prius Plug @-@ in Hybrid , Mitsubishi i @-@ MiEV and Outlander P @-@ HEV . As of November 2013 , four fires after a crash have been reported associated with the batteries of all @-@ electric cars involving a BYD e6 and three Tesla Model S cars . 
 The first modern crash @-@ related fire was reported in China in May 2012 , after a high @-@ speed car crashed into a BYD e6 taxi in Shenzhen . The second reported incident occurred in the United States in October 1 , 2013 , when a Tesla Model S caught fire after the electric car hit metal debris on a highway in Kent , Washington state , and the debris punctured one of 16 modules within the battery pack . A second reported fire occurred on October 18 , 2013 in Merida , Mexico . In this case the vehicle was being driven at high speed through a roundabout and crashed through a wall and into a tree . On November 6 , 2013 , a Tesla Model S being driven on Interstate 24 near Murfreesboro , Tennessee caught fire after it struck a tow hitch on the roadway , causing damage beneath the vehicle . 
 The U.S. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration ( NHTSA ) is conducting a study due in 2014 to establish whether lithium @-@ ion batteries in plug @-@ electric vehicles pose a potential fire hazard . The research is looking at whether the high @-@ voltage batteries can cause fires when they are being charged and when the vehicles are involved in an accident . Both General Motors and Nissan have published a guide for firefighters and first responders to properly handle a crashed plug @-@ in electric @-@ drive vehicle and safely disable its battery and other high voltage systems . 
 = = = Rare earth metals availability and supply security = = = 
 Common technology for plug @-@ ins and electric cars is based on the lithium @-@ ion battery and an electric motor which uses rare earth elements . The demand for lithium , heavy metals , and other specific elements ( such as neodymium , boron and cobalt ) required for the batteries and powertrain is expected to grow significantly due to the future sales increase of plug @-@ in electric vehicles in the mid and long term . As of 2011 , the Toyota Prius battery contains more than 20 lb ( 9 @.@ 1 kg ) of the rare earth element lanthanum , and its motor magnets use neodymium and dysprosium . While only 0 @.@ 25 oz ( 7 g ) of lithium carbonate equivalent ( LCE ) are required in a smartphone and 1 @.@ 1 oz ( 30 g ) in a tablet computer , electric vehicles and stationary energy storage systems for homes , businesses or industry use much more lithium in their batteries . As of 2016 a hybrid electric passenger car might use 11 lb ( 5 kg ) of LCE , while one of Tesla 's high performance electric cars could use as much as 180 lb ( 80 kg ) . 
 Some of the largest world reserves of lithium and other rare metals are located in countries with strong resource nationalism , unstable governments or hostility to U.S. interests , raising concerns about the risk of replacing dependence on foreign oil with a new dependence on hostile countries to supply strategic materials . 
 Lithium 
 The main deposits of lithium are found in China and throughout the Andes mountain chain in South America . In 2008 Chile was the leading lithium metal producer with almost 30 % , followed by China , Argentina , and Australia . In the United States lithium is recovered from brine pools in Nevada . 
 Nearly half the world 's known reserves are located in Bolivia , and according to the US Geological Survey , Bolivia 's Salar de Uyuni desert has 5 @.@ 4 million tons of lithium . Other important reserves are located in Chile , China , and Brazil . Since 2006 the Bolivian government have nationalized oil and gas projects and is keeping a tight control over mining its lithium reserves . Already the Japanese and South Korean governments , as well as companies from these two countries and France , have offered technical assistance to develop Bolivia 's lithium reserves and are seeking to gain access to the lithium resources through a mining and industrialization model suitable to Bolivian interests . 
 According to a 2011 study conducted at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory and the University of California Berkeley , the currently estimated reserve base of lithium should not be a limiting factor for large @-@ scale battery production for electric vehicles , as the study estimated that on the order of 1 billion 40 kWh Li @-@ based batteries ( about 10 kg of lithium per car ) could be built with current reserves , as estimated by the U.S. Geological Survey . Another 2011 study by researchers from the University of Michigan and Ford Motor Company found that there are sufficient lithium resources to support global demand until 2100 , including the lithium required for the potential widespread use of hybrid electric , plug @-@ in hybrid electric and battery electric vehicles . The study estimated global lithium reserves at 39 million tons , and total demand for lithium during the 90 @-@ year period analyzed at 12 @-@ 20 million tons , depending on the scenarios regarding economic growth and recycling rates . 
 A 2016 study by Bloomberg New Energy Finance ( BNEF ) found that availability of lithium and other finite materials used in the battery packs will not be a limiting factor for the adoption of electric vehicles . BNEF estimated that battery packs will require less than 1 % of the known reserves of lithium , nickel , manganese , and copper through 2030 , and 4 % of the world ’ s cobalt . After 2030 , the study states that new battery chemistries will probably shift to other source materials , making packs lighter , smaller , and cheaper . 
 Rare earth elements 
 China has 48 % of the world 's reserves of rare earth elements , the United States has 13 % , and Russia , Australia , and Canada have significant deposits . Until the 1980s , the U.S. led the world in rare earth production , but since the mid @-@ 1990s China has controlled the world market for these elements . The mines in Bayan Obo near <unk> , Inner Mongolia , are currently the largest source of rare earth metals and are 80 % of China 's production . In 2010 China accounted for 97 % of the global production of 17 rare earth elements . Since 2006 the Chinese government has been imposing export quotas reducing supply at a rate of 5 % to 10 % a year . 
 Prices of several rare earth elements increased sharply by mid @-@ 2010 as China imposed a 40 % export reduction , citing environmental concerns as the reason for the export restrictions . These quotas have been interpreted as an attempt to control the supply of rare earths . However , the high prices have provided an incentive to begin or reactivate several rare earth mining projects around the world , including the United States , Australia , Vietnam , and Kazakhstan . 
 In September 2010 , China temporarily blocked all exports of rare earths to Japan in the midst of a diplomatic dispute between the two countries . These minerals are used in hybrid cars and other products such wind turbines and guided missiles , thereby augmenting the worries about the dependence on Chinese rare earth elements and the need for geographic diversity of supply . A December 2010 report published by the US DoE found that the American economy vulnerable to rare earth shortages and estimates that it could take 15 years to overcome dependence on Chinese supplies . China raised export taxes for some rare earths from 15 to 25 % , and also extended taxes to exports of some rare earth alloys that were not taxed before . The Chinese government also announced further reductions on its export quotas for the first months of 2011 , which represent a 35 % reduction in tonnage as compared to exports during the first half of 2010 . 
 On September 29 , 2010 , the U.S. House of Representatives approved the Rare Earths and Critical Materials Revitalization Act of 2010 ( <unk> ) . The approved legislation is aimed at restoring the U.S. as a leading producer of rare earth elements , and would support activities in the U.S. Department of Energy ( US DoE ) to discover and develop rare earth sites inside of the U.S. in an effort to reduce the auto industry 's near @-@ complete dependence on China for the minerals . A similar bill , the Rare Earths Supply Technology and Resources Transformation Act of 2010 ( S. <unk> ) , is being discussed in the U.S. Senate . 
 In order to avoid its dependence on rare earth minerals , Toyota Motor Corporation announced in January 2011 that it is developing an alternative motor for future hybrid and electric cars that does not need rare earth materials . Toyota engineers in Japan and the U.S. are developing an induction motor that is lighter and more efficient than the magnet @-@ type motor used in the Prius , which uses two rare earths in its motor magnets . Other popular hybrids and plug @-@ in electric cars in the market that use these rare earth elements are the Nissan Leaf , the Chevrolet Volt and Honda Insight . For its second generation <unk> EV due in 2012 , Toyota is using an induction motor supplied by Tesla Motors that does not require rare earth materials . The Tesla Roadster and the Tesla Model S use a similar motor . 
 = = = Car dealers reluctance to sell = = = 
 With the exception of Tesla Motors , almost all new cars in the United States are sold through dealerships , so they play a crucial role in the sales of electric vehicles , and negative attitudes can hinder early adoption of plug @-@ in electric vehicles . Dealers decide which cars they want to stock , and a salesperson can have a big impact on how someone feels about a prospective purchase . Sales people have ample knowledge of internal combustion cars while they do not have time to learn about a technology that represents a fraction of overall sales . As with any new technology , and in the particular case of advanced technology vehicles , retailers are central to ensuring that buyers , especially those switching to a new technology , have the information and support they need to gain the full benefits of adopting this new technology . 
 There are several reasons for the reluctance of some dealers to sell plug @-@ in electric vehicles . PEVs do not offer car dealers the same profits as gasoline @-@ powered car . Plug @-@ in electric vehicles take more time to sell because of the explaining required , which hurts overall sales and sales people commissions . Electric vehicles also may require less maintenance , resulting in loss of service revenue , and thus undermining the biggest source of dealer profits , their service departments . According to the National Automobile Dealers Association ( <unk> ) , dealers on average make three times as much profit from service as they do from new car sales . However , a <unk> spokesman said there was not sufficient data to prove that electric cars would require less maintenance . According to the New York Times , BMW and Nissan are among the companies whose dealers tend to be more enthusiastic and informed , but only about 10 % of dealers are knowledgeable on the new technology . 
 A study conducted at the Institute of Transportation Studies ( ITS ) , at the University of California , Davis ( UC Davis ) published in 2014 found that many car dealers are less than enthusiastic about plug @-@ in vehicles . ITS conducted 43 interviews with six automakers and 20 new car dealers selling plug @-@ in vehicles in California ’ s major metro markets . The study also analyzed national and state @-@ level J.D. Power 2013 Sales Satisfaction Index ( SSI ) study data on customer satisfaction with new car dealerships and Tesla retail stores . The researchers found that buyers of plug @-@ in electric vehicles were significantly less satisfied and rated the dealer purchase experience much lower than buyers of non @-@ premium conventional cars , while Tesla Motors earned industry @-@ high scores . According to the findings , plug @-@ in buyers expect more from dealers than conventional buyers , including product knowledge and support that extends beyond traditional offerings . 
 In 2014 Consumer Reports published results from a survey conducted with 19 secret shoppers that went to 85 dealerships in four states , making anonymous visits between December 2013 and March 2014 . The secret shoppers asked a number of specific questions about cars to test the salespeople ’ s knowledge about electric cars . The consumer magazine decided to conduct the survey after several consumers who wanted to buy a plug @-@ in car reported to the organization that some dealerships were steering them toward gasoline @-@ powered models . The survey found that not all sales people seemed enthusiastic about making PEV sales ; a few outright discouraged it , and even one dealer was reluctant to even show a plug @-@ in model despite having one in stock . And many sales people seemed not to have a good understanding of electric @-@ car tax breaks and other incentives or of charging needs and costs . Consumer Reports also found that when it came to answering basic questions , sales people at Chevrolet , Ford , and Nissan dealerships tended to be better informed than those at Honda and Toyota . The survey found that most of the Toyota dealerships visited recommended against buying a Prius Plug @-@ in and suggested buying a standard Prius hybrid instead . Overall , the secret shoppers reported that only 13 dealers “ discouraged sale of EV , ” with seven of them being in New York . However , at 35 of the 85 dealerships visited , the secret shoppers said sales people recommended buying a gasoline @-@ powered car instead . 
 The ITS @-@ Davis study also found that a small but influential minority of dealers have introduced new approaches to better meet the needs of plug @-@ in customers . Examples include marketing carpool lane stickers , enrolling buyers in charging networks , and preparing incentive paperwork for customers . Some dealers assign seasoned sales people as plug @-@ in experts , many of whom drive plug @-@ ins themselves to learn and be familiar with the technology and relate the car ’ s benefits to potential buyers . The study concluded also that carmakers could do much more to support dealers selling PEVs . 
 = = Government incentives = = 
 Several national and local governments around the world have established tax credits , grants and other financial and non @-@ financial incentives for consumers to purchase a plug @-@ in electric vehicle as a policy to promote the introduction and mass market adoption of this type of vehicles . 
 = = = Asia = = = 
 Japan 
 In May 2009 the Japanese Diet passed the " Green Vehicle Purchasing Promotion Measure " that went into effect on June 19 , 2009 , but retroactive to April 10 , 2009 . The program established tax deductions and exemptions for environmentally friendly and fuel efficient vehicles , according to a set of stipulated environmental performance criteria , and the requirements are applied equally to both foreign and domestically produced vehicles . The program provides purchasing subsidies for two type of cases , consumers purchasing a new passenger car without trade @-@ in ( non @-@ replacement program ) , and for those consumers buying a new car trading an used car registered 13 years ago or earlier ( scrappage program ) . 
 China 
 On June 1 , 2010 , The Chinese government announced a trial program to provide incentives up to 60 @,@ 000 yuan ( ~ US $ 8 @,@ 785 ) for private purchase of new battery electric vehicles and 50 @,@ 000 yuan ( ~ US $ 7 @,@ 320 ) for plug @-@ in hybrids in five cities . 
 = = = Europe = = = 
 As of 2010 , 17 of the 27 European Union member states provide tax incentives for electrically chargeable vehicles . The incentives consist of tax reductions and exemptions , as well as of bonus payments for buyers of PEVs and hybrid vehicles . 
 In the UK the Plug @-@ in Car Grant scheme provided a 25 % incentive towards the cost of new plug @-@ in electric cars that qualify as ultra @-@ low carbon vehicles , capped at GB £ 5 @,@ 000 ( US $ 7 @,@ 800 ) until February 2016 . Both private and business fleet buyers are eligible for the government grant . In December 2015 , the Department for Transport ( DfT ) announced that Plug @-@ in car grant was extended to encourage more than 100 @,@ 000 UK motorists to buy cleaner vehicles . The criteria for the Plug @-@ in Car Grant was updated and the maximum grant dropped from GB £ 5 @,@ 000 ( ~ US $ 7 @,@ 450 ) to GB £ 4 @,@ 500 ( ~ US $ 6 @,@ 700 ) . The eligible ultra @-@ low emission vehicles ( <unk> ) must meet criteria in one of three categories depending on emission levels ( CO2 emissions bands between 50 and 75g / km ) and zero @-@ emission @-@ capable mileage ( minimum of 10 mi ( 16 km ) ) . 
 A price cap is in place , with all Category 1 plug @-@ in vehicles eligible for the full grant no matter what their purchase price , while Category 2 and 3 models with a list price of more than GB £ 60 @,@ 000 ( ~ US $ 90 @,@ 000 ) will not be eligible for the grant . Vehicles with a zero @-@ emission range of at least 70 miles ( 110 km ) ( category 1 ) , including hydrogen fuel cell vehicles , will get a full GB £ 4 @,@ 500 ( ~ US $ 6 @,@ 700 ) , but plug @-@ in hybrids ( categories 2 and 3 ) costing under GB £ 60 @,@ 000 ( ~ US $ 90 @,@ 000 ) will receive GB £ 2 @,@ 500 ( ~ US $ 3 @,@ 725 ) . Under the extended scheme , some plug @-@ in hybrid sports car will no longer be eligible for the grant , such as the BMW i8 because of its GB £ 100 @,@ 000 ( ~ US $ 150 @,@ 000 ) purchase price tag . The updated scheme went into force on 1 March 2016 . 
 Germany approved an incentive scheme in April 2016 with a budget of € 1 billion ( US $ 1 @.@ 13 billion ) . The cost of the purchase incentive will be shared equally between the government and automakers . Electric car buyers will get a € 4 @,@ 000 ( US $ 4 @,@ 520 ) discount while buyers of plug @-@ in hybrid vehicles will get a discount of € 3 @,@ 000 ( US $ 3 @,@ 390 ) . Premium cars , such as the Tesla Model S and BMW i8 , are not eligible to the incentive because there is a cap of € 60 @,@ 000 ( US $ 67 @,@ 800 ) for the purchase price . The scheme is scheduled to start as early as May 2016 . Nissan , Volkswagen , Daimler and BMW have signed up to participate in the scheme . 
 = = = North America = = = 
 United States 
 In the United States the Energy Improvement and Extension Act of 2008 , and later the American Clean Energy and Security Act of 2009 ( ACES ) granted tax credits for new qualified plug @-@ in electric vehicles . The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 ( <unk> ) also authorized federal tax credits for converted plug @-@ ins , though the credit is lower than for new PEVs . 
 The federal tax credit for new plug @-@ in electric vehicles is worth $ 2 @,@ 500 plus $ 417 for each kilowatt @-@ hour of battery capacity over 5 kWh , and the portion of the credit determined by battery capacity cannot exceed $ 5 @,@ 000 . Therefore , the total amount of the credit allowed for a new PEV is $ 7 @,@ 500 . Several states have established incentives and tax exemptions for BEVs and PHEV , and other non @-@ monetary incentives . 
 President Barack Obama set the goal of bringing 1 million plug @-@ in electric vehicles on the road by 2015 . However , considering the actual slow rate of PEV sales , as of mid @-@ 2012 several industry observers have concluded that this goal is unattainable . In September 2014 Governor of California Jerry Brown signed a bill , the Charge Ahead California Initiative , that sets a goal of placing at least 1 million zero @-@ emission vehicles and near @-@ zero @-@ emission vehicles on the road in California by January 1 , 2023 . 
 Canada 
 Ontario established a rebate between CA $ 5 @,@ 000 to CA $ 8 @,@ 500 ( ~ US $ 4 @,@ 900 to US $ 8 @,@ 320 ) , depending on battery size , for purchasing or leasing a new plug @-@ in electric vehicle after July 1 , 2010 . The rebates are available to the first 10 @,@ 000 applicants who qualify . 
 Quebec offers rebates of up to CA $ 8 @,@ 500 ( US $ 8 @,@ 485 ) from January 1 , 2012 , for the purchase of new plug @-@ in electric vehicles equipped with a minimum of 4 kWh battery , and new hybrid electric vehicles are eligible for a CA $ 1 @,@ 000 rebate . All @-@ electric vehicles with high @-@ capacity battery packs are eligible for the full C $ 8 @,@ 000 rebate , and incentives are reduced for low @-@ range electric cars and plug @-@ in hybrids . 
 = = Production plug @-@ in electric vehicles available = = 
 During the 1990s several highway @-@ capable plug @-@ in electric cars were produced in limited quantities , all were battery electric vehicles , and they were available through leasing mainly in California . Popular models included the General Motors EV1 and the Toyota <unk> EV . Some of the latter were sold to the public and are in use still today . In the late 2000s began a new wave of mass production plug @-@ in electric cars , motorcycles and light trucks . However , as of 2011 , most electric vehicles in the world roads were low @-@ speed , low @-@ range neighborhood electric vehicles ( NEVs ) or electric <unk> . Pike Research estimated there were almost 479 @,@ 000 NEVs on the world roads in 2011 . Just in China , a total of 200 @,@ 000 low @-@ speed small electric cars were sold in 2013 , most of which are powered by lead @-@ acid batteries . As of October 2015 , the GEM neighborhood electric vehicle is the market leader in North America , with global sales of more than 50 @,@ 000 units since 1998 . 
 As of August 2015 , there were almost 70 models of highway @-@ capable plug @-@ in electric passenger cars and light @-@ utility vans available in the world , with 45 different plug @-@ in electric passenger car models offered in Europe , 20 available in North America , 19 in China , 14 in Japan , and 7 in Australia . There are also available several commercial models of plug @-@ in motorcycles , all @-@ electric buses , and heavy @-@ duty trucks . 
 As of December 2015 , the Renault @-@ Nissan Alliance is the leading electric vehicle manufacturer with global sales of 302 @,@ 000 all @-@ electric vehicles delivered since December 2010 , representing about half of the global light @-@ duty all @-@ electric market segment . Mitsubishi Motors ranks second , with global sales of about 135 @,@ 000 plug @-@ in electric vehicles since 2009 through December 2015 , consisting of all @-@ electric cars of the Mitsubishi i @-@ MiEV family , all @-@ electric Mitsubishi Minicab MiEV utility vans and trucks , and the plug @-@ in hybrid Mitsubishi Outlander P @-@ HEV . Ranking third is Tesla Motors with almost 125 @,@ 000 electric cars sold between 2008 and March 2016 . Next is General Motors with combined global sales since December 2010 of almost 113 @,@ 000 vehicles through December 2015 , consisting of over 106 @,@ 000 plug @-@ in hybrids of the Volt / Ampera family , over 4 @,@ 300 Chevrolet Spark EVs , and over 2 @,@ 400 Cadillac ELRs . 
 BYD Auto ended 2015 as the world 's best selling manufacturer of highway legal light @-@ duty plug @-@ in electric vehicles , with 61 @,@ 722 units sold , mostly plug @-@ in hybrids , followed by Tesla Motors , with 50 @,@ 580 units sold in 2015 . 
 = = = Sales and main markets = = = 
 By mid @-@ September 2015 , the global stock of highway legal plug @-@ in electric passenger cars and utility vans passed the one million sales milestone . When global sales are broken down by type of powertrain , all @-@ electric cars have oversold plug @-@ in hybrids , with the pure electrics capturing 60 % of global sales as of December 2015 . Sales of plug @-@ in electric vehicles achieved the one million milestone almost twice as fast as hybrid electric vehicles ( HEV ) . While it took four years and 10 months to reach one @-@ million PEV sales , it took more than around nine years and a few months for HEVs to reach its first million sales . 
 Between 2007 and 2010 , only 11 @,@ 768 plug @-@ in electric vehicles were sold worldwide . By comparison , during the Golden Age of the electric car at the beginning of the 20th century , the EV stock peaked at approximately 30 @,@ 000 vehicles . After the introduction of the Nissan Leaf and the Chevrolet Volt in late December 2010 , the first mass @-@ production plug @-@ in cars by major carmakers , plug @-@ in car sales grew to about 50 @,@ 000 units in 2011 , jumped to 125 @,@ 000 in 2012 , and rose to almost 213 @,@ 000 plug @-@ in electric cars and utility vans in 2013 . Sales totaled over 315 @,@ 000 units in 2014 , up 48 % from 2013 . In five years , global sales of highway legal light @-@ duty plug @-@ in electric vehicles have increased more than ten @-@ fold , totaling more than 565 @,@ 00 units in 2015 . Plug @-@ in sales in 2015 increased about 80 % from 2014 , driven mainly by China and Europe . Both markets passed in 2105 the U.S. as the largest plug @-@ in electric car markets in terms of total annual sales , with China ranking as the world 's best @-@ selling plug @-@ in electric passenger car country market in 2015 . Over 220 @,@ 000 plug @-@ in cars and vans were sold during the first five months of 2016 . 
 Since 2004 , cumulative global sales totaled over 1 @.@ 5 million plug @-@ in cars and utility vans by the end of May 2016 . Despite the rapid growth experienced , the plug @-@ in electric car segment represented just 0 @.@ 1 % of the one billion cars on the world 's roads by the end of 2015 . JATO Dynamics , based on LMC Automotive ’ s forecasts , estimates the global market is expected to reach sales in excess of 700 @,@ 000 units in 2016 due to strong growth in China , Europe and the United States . 
 Research published by Bloomberg New Energy Finance in February 2016 predicts that as battery prices continue to fall , light @-@ duty electric vehicles without government subsidies will be as affordable as internal combustion engine cars in most countries by the mid @-@ 2020s . As a result , the study forecasts that annual sales of electric vehicles will hit 41 million by 2040 , representing 35 % of new light duty vehicle sales . In another scenario the study considers that if new carsharing services are successful , together with the adoption of autonomous cars , they could boost electric @-@ vehicle market share to 50 % of new car <unk> by 2040 . On the other hand , the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries ( OPEC ) in its 2015 World Oil Outlook projected that the market share of battery electric cars and fuel cell cars will remain below 1 % in 2040 , while the share of hybrid electric cars is projected to grow from 1 % in 2013 to 14 % in 2040 . 
 As of June 2016 , cumulative sales of highway legal light @-@ duty plug @-@ in electric vehicles by country are led by the United States with a stock of about 474 @,@ 000 cars delivered since 2008 . China ranks second with 389 @,@ 885 units sold between 2011 and May 2016 , followed by Japan with 150 @,@ 142 plug @-@ in units sold between 2009 and April 2016 . As of May 2016 , more than 500 @,@ 000 light @-@ duty plug @-@ in electric vehicles have been registered in Europe , making the continent the world 's largest plug @-@ in regional market in the light @-@ duty segment , which includes utility vans . European registrations are led by Norway with about 105 @,@ 306 units registered since 2004 through May 2016 , followed by the Netherlands with 93 @,@ 310 units registered at the end of May 2016 , France with 89 @,@ 629 units registered since 2010 through May 2016 , the UK with 75 @,@ 914 plug @-@ in cars and vans registered since 2006 , Germany with 57 @,@ 452 plug @-@ in cars registered since 2010 , and Sweden with 21 @,@ 439 registrations since 2011 . The other top selling country is Canada with 20 @,@ 352 new plug @-@ in cars sold between 2011 and May 2016 . As of April 2016 , over 534 @,@ 000 new energy vehicles have been sold in China since 2011 , making the country the world 's leader in the plug @-@ in heavy @-@ duty segment , including electric buses , plug @-@ in trucks , and sanitation trucks . As of December 2015 , China is also the world 's largest electric bus market . 
 Sales of series production PEVs during its first two years in the global market have been lower than initially expected in all countries . However , an analysis by Scientific American found that at the international level and considering the global top selling PEVs over a 36 @-@ month introductory period , monthly sales of the Volt , Prius PHV and Leaf are performing better than the conventional Prius during their respective introductory periods , with the exception of the Mitsubishi i @-@ MiEV , which has been outsold most of the time by the Prius HEV over their 36 @-@ month introductory periods . A similar trend was found by the U.S. Department of Energy for the American market . Combined sales of plug @-@ in hybrids and battery electric cars are climbing more rapidly and outselling by more than double sales of hybrid @-@ electric vehicles over their respective 24 month introductory periods , as shown in the graph at the left . 
 During 2014 , four of the ten top selling countries achieved plug @-@ in electric car sales with a market share higher than 1 % of new car sales , Norway ( 13 @.@ 84 % ) , the Netherlands ( 3 @.@ 87 % ) , Sweden ( 1 @.@ 53 % ) , and Japan ( 1 @.@ 06 % ) . Also two small countries achieved this mark in 2014 , Iceland ( 2 @.@ 71 % ) and Estonia ( 1 @.@ 57 % ) . In 2015 nine countries achieved plug @-@ in electric car sales with a market share equal or higher than 1 % of total new car sales , up from six in 2014 . The nine countries are Norway ( 22 @.@ 39 % ) , the Netherlands ( 9 @.@ 74 % ) , Hong Kong ( 4 @.@ 84 % ) , Iceland ( 2 @.@ 93 % ) , Sweden ( 2 @.@ 62 % ) , Denmark ( 2 @.@ 29 % ) , Switzerland ( 1 @.@ 98 % ) , France ( 1 @.@ 2 % ) , and the UK ( 1 @.@ 1 % ) . In 2015 the European plug @-@ in passenger car market share passed the one percent mark ( 1 @.@ 41 % ) for the first time . 
 The following table presents the top 10 countries according to their PEV market share of total new car sales between 2015 and 2013 . The market share for two selected regions , Europe and California , is also shown . 
 = = = = United States = = = = 
 As of June 2016 , the United States is the country with the largest fleet of light @-@ duty plug @-@ in electric vehicles in the world , with about 474 @,@ 000 highway @-@ capable plug @-@ in electric cars sold since the market launch of the Tesla Roadster in 2008 . As of May 2016 , the American plug @-@ in stock represented 30 @.@ 7 % of the global stock of light @-@ duty plug @-@ in electric vehicles . California is the country 's largest regional market with 200 @,@ 000 plug @-@ in electric vehicles delivered by March 2016 , representing 47 % of all plug @-@ in cars sold in American market since 2008 . As of mid 2013 , 52 % of American plug @-@ in electric car registrations were concentrated in five metropolitan areas : San Francisco , Los Angeles , Seattle , New York , and Atlanta . 
 Nationwide sales climbed from 17 @,@ 800 units delivered in 2011 to 53 @,@ 200 during 2012 , and reached 97 @,@ 100 in 2013 , up 83 % from the previous year . Cumulative plug @-@ in electric car sales since 2008 reached the 250 @,@ 000 unit milestone in August 2014 . During 2014 plug @-@ in electric car sales totaled 123 @,@ 248 units , up 27 @.@ 0 % from 2013 , and fell to 114 @,@ 248 in 2015 , down 7 @.@ 4 % from 2014 . A total of 64 @,@ 165 plug @-@ in cars were sold during the first half of 2016 , up 18 @.@ 9 % from the same period in 2015 . June 2016 is the best monthly plug @-@ in sales volume on record , with 13 @,@ 772 units delivered . The previous record was set in December 2015 , with over 13 @,@ 274 units delivered . 
 The market share of plug @-@ in electric passenger cars increased from 0 @.@ 14 % of new car sales in 2011 to 0 @.@ 37 % in 2012 , 0 @.@ 62 % in 2013 , and reached 0 @.@ 75 % of new car sales during 2014 . As plug @-@ in car sales slowed down during 2015 , the segment 's market share fell to 0 @.@ 66 % of new car sales . The market share increased to 0 @.@ 75 % during the first half of 2016 . The highest @-@ ever market share for plug @-@ in vehicles was achieved also in June 2016 with 0 @.@ 91 % of new car sales . California plug @-@ in sales in 2015 achieved a 3 @.@ 1 % market share , 4 @.@ 7 times higher than the U.S. , and its plug @-@ in market share was surpassed only by two countries , Norway ( 22 @.@ 4 % ) and the Netherlands ( 9 @.@ 7 % ) . 
 As of December 2014 , cumulative sales of plug @-@ in electric vehicles in the U.S. since December 2010 were led by plug @-@ in hybrids , with 150 @,@ 946 units sold representing 52 @.@ 7 % of all plug @-@ in car sales , while 135 @,@ 444 all @-@ electric cars ( 47 @.@ 3 % ) have been delivered to retail customers . This trend was reversed in 2015 , as the all @-@ electric segment grew much faster , with a total of 72 @,@ 303 all @-@ electric cars sold , up 6 @.@ 6 % year @-@ on @-@ year , while plug @-@ in hybrid were down 22 @.@ 4 % year @-@ on @-@ year , with 42 @,@ 959 units sold . As of December 2015 , a total of 206 @,@ 508 all @-@ electric cars and 193 @,@ 904 plug @-@ in hybrids had been sold in the U.S. since 2010 , with all @-@ electrics representing 51 @.@ 6 % of cumulative sales . 
 As of June 2016 , cumulative sales are led by the Chevrolet Volt plug @-@ in hybrid with 98 @,@ 558 units , followed by the Nissan Leaf all @-@ electric car with 95 @,@ 384 units delivered . The Leaf passed the Chevrolet Volt as the top selling PEV in March 2015 , but the Volt became once again the best selling plug @-@ in car in the American market in March 2016 . Both plug @-@ in cars were released in December 2010 . Launched in the U.S. market in June 2012 , the Tesla Model S ranks as the third top selling plug @-@ in electric car with 74 @,@ 861 units sold , followed by the Prius PHV , launched in February 2012 , with 42 @,@ 335 units . Ranking fifth is the Ford Fusion Energi with 34 @,@ 624 units delivered through June 2016 . 
 Plug @-@ in electric car sales in 2014 were led by the Nissan Leaf with 30 @,@ 200 units , followed the Volt with 18 @,@ 805 , and the Model S with 16 @,@ 689 units . The Tesla Model S was the top selling plug @-@ in car in the U.S. in 2015 with 25 @,@ 202 units delivered , followed by the Nissan Leaf with 17 @,@ 269 units , the Volt with 15 @,@ 393 , and the BMW i3 with 11 @,@ 024 . During the first half of 2016 the Model S continued as the top selling plug @-@ in car in the country with about 11 @,@ 700 units , followed by the Volt with 9 @,@ 808 , and the Fusion Energi with 7 @,@ 235 . 
 = = = = China = = = = 
 New energy vehicle sales between January 2011 and April 2016 totaled 534 @,@ 344 units , of which , almost 93 % were sold between January 2014 and April 2016 . These figures include heavy @-@ duty commercial vehicles such buses and sanitation trucks , and only include vehicles manufactured in the country as imports are not subject to government subsidies . As of March 2016 , the Chinese stock of plug @-@ in electric vehicles consisted of 366 @,@ 219 all @-@ electric vehicles ( 72 @.@ 9 % ) and 136 @,@ 353 plug @-@ in hybrids ( 27 @.@ 1 % ) . 
 As of December 2014 , a total of 83 @,@ 198 plug @-@ in electric passenger cars had been registered in the country since 2008 . With 176 @,@ 627 plug @-@ in passenger cars sold in 2015 , China passed the U.S. , the top selling country in 2014 , and became the world 's best @-@ selling plug @-@ in electric car country market in 2015 . As of March 2016 , in terms of light @-@ duty plug @-@ in passenger car stock , China ranks second after the United States , with cumulative sales of around 300 @,@ 000 plug @-@ in cars . As of December 2015 , the Chinese plug @-@ in stock represented 21 % of the global cumulative sales of highway legal plug @-@ in electric passenger cars . 
 The stock of new energy vehicles sold in China since 2011 , and accounting for all segments , passed the 500 @,@ 000 unit milestone in March 2016 , making the country the world 's leader in the plug @-@ in heavy @-@ duty segment , including electric buses , plug @-@ in trucks , and sanitation trucks . Over 160 @,@ 000 heavy @-@ duty new energy vehicles have been sold between 2011 and 2015 , of which , 123 @,@ 710 ( 77 @.@ 2 % ) were sold in 2015 . Sales of commercial new energy vehicles in 2015 consisted of 100 @,@ 763 all @-@ electric vehicles ( 81 @.@ 5 % ) and 22 @,@ 947 plug @-@ in hybrid vehicles ( 18 @.@ 5 % ) . The share of all @-@ electric bus sales in the Chinese bus market climbed from 2 % in 2010 to 9 @.@ 9 % in 2012 , and was expected to be closed to 20 % for 2013 . As of December 2014 , China had about 36 @,@ 500 all @-@ electric buses . As of December 2015 , China is the world 's largest electric bus market , and by 2020 , the country is expected to account for more than 50 % of the global electric bus market . 
 A total of 8 @,@ 159 new energy vehicles were sold in China during 2011 , including passenger cars ( 61 % ) and buses ( 28 % ) . Of these , 5 @,@ 579 units were all @-@ electric vehicles and 2 @,@ 580 plug @-@ in hybrids . Electric vehicle sales represented 0 @.@ 04 % of total new car sales in 2011 . Sales of new energy vehicles in 2012 reached 12 @,@ 791 units , which includes 11 @,@ 375 all @-@ electric vehicles and 1 @,@ 416 plug @-@ in hybrids . New energy vehicle sales in 2012 represented 0 @.@ 07 % of the country 's total new car sales . During 2013 new energy vehicle sales totaled 17 @,@ 642 units , up 37 @.@ 9 % from 2012 and representing 0 @.@ 08 % of the nearly 22 million new car sold in the country in 2013 . Deliveries included 14 @,@ 604 pure electric vehicles and 3 @,@ 038 plug @-@ in hybrids . The <unk> EV was the top selling new energy car in China between 2011 and 2013 , with 2 @,@ 167 units sold in 2011 , 3 @,@ 129 in 2012 , and 5 @,@ 727 in 2013 . Cumulative sales since January 2011 through March 2014 reached 13 @,@ 039 units . 
 New energy vehicle sales during 2014 reached 74 @,@ 763 units , up 320 % from 2013 , and representing a market share of 0 @.@ 32 % of the 23 @.@ 5 million new car sales sold in the country that year . Of these , 71 % were passenger cars , 27 % buses , and 1 % trucks . A total of 45 @,@ 048 all @-@ electric vehicles were sold in 2014 , up 210 % from a year earlier , and 29 @,@ 715 plug @-@ in hybrids , up 880 % from 2013 . The BYD Qin plug @-@ in hybrid , introduced in December 2013 , ranked as the top selling plug @-@ in electric car in China in 2014 with 14 @,@ 747 units sold , and became the country 's top selling passenger <unk> ever . The Qin was followed by the all @-@ electrics Zotye <unk> E20 , with 7 @,@ 341 units , and <unk> <unk> EV , with 5 @,@ 234 . 
 Domestically produced new energy vehicle sales in 2015 totaled a record 331 @,@ 092 units , consisting of 247 @,@ 482 all @-@ electric vehicles and 83 @,@ 610 plug @-@ in hybrid vehicles , up 449 % and 191 % from 2014 , respectively . Sales of plug @-@ in passenger cars , excluding imports , totaled 176 @,@ 627 units in 2015 , allowing China to rank as the world 's best @-@ selling plug @-@ in electric car country market in 2015 . The plug @-@ in electric passenger car segment market share rose to 0 @.@ 84 % in 2015 , up from 0 @.@ 25 % in 2014 . The top selling passenger models in 2015 were the BYD Qin plug @-@ in hybrid with 31 @,@ 898 units sold , followed by the BYD Tang ( 18 @,@ 375 ) , and the all @-@ electrics Kandi EV ( 16 @,@ 736 ) , <unk> <unk> / 160 / 200 EV ( 16 @,@ 488 ) , and the Zotye Z100 EV ( 15 @,@ 467 ) . 
 As of December 2015 , the BYD Qin continues to rank as the all @-@ time top selling plug @-@ in passenger car in the country , with cumulative sales of 46 @,@ 787 units since its introduction . The BYD Qin was the world 's second best selling plug @-@ in hybrid car in 2015 after the Mitsubishi Outlander P @-@ HEV , and also ranked fifth among the world 's top selling plug @-@ in electric cars in 2015 . As a reflexion of the explosive growth of the Chinese plug @-@ in electric car market in 2015 , BYD Auto ended 2015 as the world 's best selling manufacturer of highway legal light @-@ duty plug @-@ in electric vehicles , with around 60 @,@ 000 units sold , ahead of Tesla Motors ( 50 @,@ 580 ) . 
 Sales of domestically produced new energy vehicle sales totaled 58 @,@ 125 units during the first quarter of 2016 , consisting of 42 @,@ 131 all @-@ electric vehicles and 15 @,@ 994 plug @-@ in hybrid vehicles , up 140 % and 43 % from the same quarter in 2015 , respectively . Sales in the new energy passenger segment totaled 39 @,@ 500 units , consisting of 24 @,@ 480 all @-@ electric cars and 14 @,@ 800 plug @-@ in hybrids , up 63 % and 37 % from the same quarter in 2015 , <unk> . 
 = = = = Japan = = = = 
 As of March 2016 , the stock of light @-@ duty plug @-@ in electric vehicles in Japan is the third largest in the world after the United States and China , with about 150 @,@ 000 highway legal plug @-@ in electric vehicles sold in the country since 2009 . During 2012 , global sales of pure electric cars were led by Japan with a 28 % market share of total sales , followed by the United States with a 26 % share . Japan ranked second after the U.S. in terms of its share of plug @-@ in hybrid sales in 2012 , with a 12 % of global sales . A total of 30 @.@ 587 highway @-@ capable plug @-@ in electric vehicles were sold in Japan in 2013 . In 2014 the segment sales remained flat with 30 @,@ 390 units sold , and a market share of 1 @.@ 06 % of total new car sales in the country ( kei cars not included ) . 
 As of December 2014 , the Nissan Leaf is the market leader with 48 @,@ 641 units sold since December 2010 , followed by the Mitsubishi Outlander P @-@ HEV with 19 @,@ 672 units sold since January 2013 . The Prius PHV has sold 19 @,@ 100 units between January 2012 and September 2014 , and the Mitsubishi i @-@ MiEV , launched for fleet customers in Japan in late July 2009 , with cumulative sales of 10 @,@ 423 i @-@ MiEVs through September 2014 . Combined sales of the van and truck version of the Mitsubishi Minicab MiEV reached 6 @,@ 291 units through December 2014 . Other models available in Japan are the Honda Accord Plug @-@ in Hybrid , Tesla Model S , BMW i3 , BMW i8 , and the Nissan e @-@ NV200 , but official sales figures are not available . 
 During 2013 sales were led by the Nissan Leaf with 13 @,@ 021 units , followed by the Outlander P @-@ HEV with 9 @,@ 608 units . The Leaf continued as the market leader in 2014 with 14 @,@ 177 units sold , followed by the Outlander P @-@ HEV with 10 @,@ 064 units , together representing about 80 % of the plug @-@ in segment sales in Japan in 2014 ( 30 @,@ 390 ) . 
 = = = = Europe = = = = 
 Cumulative sales of light @-@ duty plug @-@ in electric vehicles in Europe passed the 500 @,@ 000 unit milestone in May 2016 , representing about a third of global sales . Of these , 192 @,@ 827 units ( 38 @.@ 6 % ) were registered in 2015 . Out of the plug @-@ in stock registered in 2015 , passenger cars accounted for 186 @,@ 170 units ( 96 @.@ 5 % ) . European sales in the light @-@ duty plug @-@ in electric segment , which includes utility vans , were led by the Netherlands with almost 90 @,@ 000 units registered at the end of 2015 . Almost 25 % of the European stock is on the roads in the Nordic countries , with over 100 @,@ 000 registered plug @-@ in electric cars as of December 2015 . Combined registrations in the four countries in 2015 were up 91 % from 2014 . The stock of light @-@ duty plug @-@ in electric vehicles registered in Norway passed the 100 @,@ 000 unit milestone in April 2016 , making the country the fourth largest plug @-@ in market in the world after the U.S. , China and Japan , and becoming the leading European market . 
 A total of 1 @,@ 614 all @-@ electric cars and 1 @,@ 305 light @-@ utility vehicles were sold in 2010 . Sales jumped from 2 @,@ 919 units in 2010 to 13 @,@ 779 in 2011 , consisting of 11 @,@ 271 pure electric cars and 2 @,@ 508 commercial vans . In addition , over 300 plug @-@ in hybrids were sold in 2011 , mainly Opel Amperas . Light @-@ duty plug @-@ in vehicle sales totaled 34 @,@ 333 units in 2012 , consisting of 24 @,@ 713 all @-@ electric cars and vans , and 9 @,@ 620 plug @-@ in hybrids . The Opel / Vauxhall Ampera plug @-@ in hybrid was Europe 's top selling plug @-@ in electric car in 2012 with 5 @,@ 268 units , closely followed by the all @-@ electric Nissan Leaf with 5 @,@ 210 units . 
 The plug @-@ in segment sales more than double to 71 @,@ 943 units in 2013 . Pure electric passenger and light commercial vehicles sales increased by 63 @.@ 9 % to 40 @,@ 496 units . In addition , a total of 31 @,@ 477 extended @-@ range cars and plug @-@ in hybrids were sold in 2013 . Registrations reached 104 @,@ 746 light @-@ duty plug @-@ in electric vehicles in 2014 , up 45 @.@ 6 % from 2013 . A total of 65 @,@ 199 pure electric cars and light @-@ utility vehicles were registered in Europe in 2014 , up 60 @.@ 9 % from 2013 . All @-@ electric passenger cars represented 87 % of the European all @-@ electric segment registrations . Extended @-@ range cars and plug @-@ in hybrid registrations totaled 39 @,@ 547 units in 2014 , up 25 @.@ 8 % from 2013 . 
 For the first time in the region , in 2015 plug @-@ in hybrids ( 195 @,@ 140 ) outsold all @-@ electric cars ( 89 @,@ 640 ) in the passenger car segment , however , when light @-@ duty plug @-@ in utility vehicles are accounted for , the all @-@ electric segment totaled 97 @,@ 687 registrations in 2015 , up 65 @,@ 199 in 2014 , and ahead of the plug @-@ in hybrid segment . Also in 2015 , the European market share of plug @-@ in electric cars passed the 1 % mark for the first time , with a 1 @.@ 41 % share of new car sales that year . 
 During 2013 took place a surge in sales of plug @-@ in hybrids in the European market , particularly in the Netherlands , with 20 @,@ 164 PHEVs registered during the year . Out of the 71 @,@ 943 highway @-@ capable plug @-@ in electric passenger cars and utility vans sold in the region during 2013 , plug @-@ in hybrids totaled 31 @,@ 447 units , representing 44 % of the plug @-@ in electric vehicle segment sales that year . This trend continued in 2014 . Plug @-@ in hybrids represented almost 30 % of the plug @-@ in electric drive sales during the first six months of 2014 , and with the exception of the Nissan Leaf , sales of the previous European best selling models fell significantly , while recently introduced models captured a significant share of the segment sales , with the Mitsubishi Outlander P @-@ HEV , Tesla Model S , BMW i3 , Renault Zoe , Volkswagen e @-@ Up ! , and the Volvo V60 Plug @-@ in Hybrid ranking among the top ten best selling models . 
 In 2014 Norway was the top selling country in the light @-@ duty all @-@ electric market segment , with 18 @,@ 649 passenger cars and utility vans registered , more than doubling its 2013 sales . France ranked second with 15 @,@ 046 units registered , followed by Germany with 8 @,@ 804 units , the UK with 7 @,@ 730 units , and the Netherlands with 3 @,@ 585 car and vans registrations . The Netherlands was the top selling country in the plug @-@ in hybrid segment with 12 @,@ 425 passenger cars registered , followed by the UK with 7 @,@ 821 , Germany with 4 @,@ 527 , and Sweden 3 @,@ 432 units . Five European countries achieved plug @-@ in electric car sales with a market share higher than 1 % of new car sales in 2014 , Norway ( 13 @.@ 84 % ) , the Netherlands ( 3 @.@ 87 % ) , Iceland ( 2 @.@ 71 % ) , Estonia ( 1 @.@ 57 % ) , and Sweden ( 1 @.@ 53 % ) . 
 In 2013 the top selling plug @-@ in was the Leaf with 11 @,@ 120 units sold , followed by the Outlander P @-@ HEV with 8 @,@ 197 units . The Mitsubishi Outlander plug @-@ in hybrid was the top selling plug @-@ in electric vehicle in Europe in 2014 with 19 @,@ 853 units sold , surpassing of the Nissan Leaf ( 14 @,@ 658 ) , which fell to second place . Ranking third was the Renault Zoe with 11 @,@ 231 units . 
 For a second year running , the Mitsubishi ’ s Outlander P @-@ HEV was the top selling plug @-@ in electric car in Europe with 31 @,@ 214 units sold in 2015 , up 57 % from 2014 . The Renault Zoe ranked second among plug @-@ in electric cars , with 18 @,@ 727 registrations , and surpassed the Nissan Leaf to become best selling pure electric car in Europe in 2015 . Ranking next were the Volkswagen Golf GTE plug @-@ in hybrid ( 17 @,@ 300 ) , followed by the all @-@ electric Tesla Model S ( 15 @,@ 515 ) and the Nissan Leaf ( 15 @,@ 455 ) , the BMW i3 , including its REx variant , ( 12 @,@ 047 ) , and the Audi A3 e @-@ tron plug @-@ in hybrid ( 11 @,@ 791 ) . 
 The Netherlands was the top selling country in the European light @-@ duty plug @-@ in electric market segment , with 43 @,@ 971 passenger cars and utility vans registered in 2015 . Norway ranked second with 34 @,@ 455 units registered , followed by the UK with 28 @,@ 188 units , France with 27 @,@ 701 car and vans registrations , and Germany with 23 @,@ 464 plug @-@ in cars . Eight European countries achieved plug @-@ in electric car sales with a market share higher than 1 % of new car sales in 2015 , Norway ( 22 @.@ 4 % ) , the Netherlands ( 9 @.@ 7 % ) , Iceland ( 2 @.@ 9 % ) , Sweden ( 2 @.@ 6 % ) , Denmark ( 2 @.@ 3 % ) , Switzerland ( 2 @.@ 0 % ) , France ( 1 @.@ 2 % ) and the UK ( 1 @.@ 1 % ) . 
 As of December 2015 , and accounting for cumulative sales since 2010 , the Mitsubishi Outlander P @-@ HEV is the all @-@ time top selling plug @-@ in electric car in the region with 59 @,@ 264 units delivered , followed by the Nissan Leaf with 48 @,@ 936 units , Renault Zoe with 38 @,@ 890 units , Tesla Model S with 28 @,@ 149 , and the BMW i3 with 23 @,@ 268 units . The Renault Kangoo Z.E. is the top selling all @-@ electric utility van with 21 @,@ 016 units . 
 = = = = = Norway = = = = = 
 The stock of light @-@ duty plug @-@ in electric vehicles registered in Norway passed the 100 @,@ 000 unit milestone in April 2016 , making the country the fourth largest plug @-@ in market in the world . Accounting for registrations of both new car sales and used imports , the Norwegian light @-@ duty plug @-@ in electric fleet consist of about 81 @,@ 500 all @-@ electric passenger cars , almost 17 @,@ 100 plug @-@ in hybrids , and over 2 @,@ 000 all @-@ electric vans . The government 's target of 50 @,@ 000 all @-@ electric cars on Norwegian roads was reached in April 2015 , more than two years earlier than expected . 
 Sales of used imports in Norway are significant , and as of December 2015 , over 11 @,@ 500 used plug @-@ in vehicles from neighboring countries had been imported , mainly pure electric cars . Registrations of used all @-@ electric cars totaled 2 @,@ 086 units in 2013 , 3 @,@ 063 in 2014 and 5 @,@ 122 in 2015 . In addition , about 1 @,@ 300 used electric cars were imported into Norway before 2013 . 
 The Norwegian fleet of electric cars is one of the cleanest in the world because almost 100 % of the electricity generated in the country comes from hydropower . Norway , with about 5 @.@ 2 million people , is the country with the largest EV <unk> per capita in the world . In March 2014 , Norway became the first country where over one in every 100 registered passenger cars is plug @-@ in electric . The segment 's market penetration reached 2 % in March 2015 , and passed 3 % in December 2015 . 
 The Norwegian plug @-@ in electric vehicle market share of new car sales is the highest in the world , the EV segment market share rose from 1 @.@ 6 % in 2011 , to 3 @.@ 1 % in 2012 , and reached 5 @.@ 6 % of new car sales in 2013 . The Norwegian all @-@ electric segment increased its market share of new car sales to 12 @.@ 5 % in 2014 , and rises to 13 @.@ 8 % if plug @-@ in hybrids are accounted for . The combined sales of new plug @-@ in cars reached a market share of 23 @.@ 4 % of all new passenger cars sold in 2015 , with the all @-@ electric car segment reaching 17 @.@ 1 % , while the plug @-@ in hybrid segment reached 5 @.@ 2 % . 
 Also , Norway was the first country in the world to have electric cars topping the new car sales monthly ranking . The Tesla Model S has been the top selling new car four times , twice in 2013 , first in September and again in December , one more time in March 2014 , and again in March 2015 . The Nissan Leaf has topped the monthly new car sales ranking twice , first in October 2013 and again in January 2014 . In March 2014 the Tesla Model S also broke the 28 @-@ year @-@ old record for monthly sales of a single model regardless of its power source , with 1 @,@ 493 units sold , surpassing the Ford Sierra , which sold 1 @,@ 454 units in May 1986 . In March 2015 another record was set , with three all @-@ electric cars ranking as the top 3 selling new cars in the country , the Tesla Model S with 1 @,@ 140 units , the Volkswagen e @-@ Golf with 956 ( out of a total of 1 @,@ 421 units sold by the Golf nameplate ) , and the Nissan Leaf with 526 . 
 Plug @-@ in electric vehicle registrations totaled 10 @,@ 769 units in 2013 , and the segment achieved a 6 @.@ 9 % market share of total 2013 car registrations . The Leaf continued as the top selling plug @-@ in electric car in 2013 , with 4 @,@ 604 new units sold , followed by the Tesla Model S with 1 @,@ 986 units , and the Volkswagen e @-@ Up ! with 580 . A total of 23 @,@ 390 plug @-@ in electric vehicles were registered in 2014 including used imports . Combined sales of new and used plug @-@ in electric vehicles captured a 13 @.@ 84 % market share of total passenger car registrations in 2014 . Plug @-@ in electric car sales in 2014 were led by the Nissan Leaf with 4 @,@ 781 new registrations , followed by Tesla Model S with 4 @,@ 040 units . Norway ended 2014 as the top selling European country in the light @-@ duty all @-@ electric market segment , with 18 @,@ 649 passenger cars and utility vans registered . 
 A total of 39 @,@ 632 light @-@ duty plug @-@ in electric vehicles were registered in Norway in 2015 , up 69 @.@ 3 % from 2014 . New plug @-@ in sales totaled 34 @,@ 455 units , consisting of 25 @,@ 779 pure electric cars , 7 @,@ 964 plug @-@ in hybrids , and 712 all @-@ electric utility vans . A total of 5 @,@ 177 used imports were registered , of which , 5 @,@ 122 were pure electric cars . The Norwegian fleet of light @-@ duty plug @-@ in electric <unk> reached 84 @,@ 401 units registered as of December 2015 , including both new and used imports , and consisting of 74 @,@ 024 all @-@ electric passenger and light @-@ duty vehicles , and 10 @,@ 377 plug @-@ in hybrids . 
 The combined sales of new plug @-@ in cars reached a market share of 23 @.@ 4 % of all new passenger cars sold in 2015 , with the all @-@ electric car segment reaching 17 @.@ 1 % , up from 12 @.@ 5 % in 2014 , while the plug @-@ in hybrid segment reached 5 @.@ 2 % , up from 1 % in 2014 . The VW e @-@ Golf , with 8 @,@ 943 units sold , was the best @-@ selling plug @-@ in electric car in Norway in 2015 , ahead of the Tesla Model S ( 4 @,@ 039 ) and the Nissan Leaf ( 3 @,@ 189 ) . The top selling plug @-@ in hybrid in 2015 was the Mitsubishi Outlander P @-@ HEV with 2 @,@ 875 units , followed by the Volkswagen Golf GTE with 2 @,@ 000 , and the Audi A3 e @-@ tron with 1 @,@ 684 units . 
 As of December 2015 , the Nissan Leaf continued as the all @-@ time best selling plug @-@ in electric car in the country with a total of 15 @,@ 245 new Leafs registered since 2011 . In addition , a significant number of used imported Leafs from neighboring countries have been registered in the country , raising the stock of registered Leafs to over 20 @,@ 000 units , meaning that more than 10 % of Leafs sold in the world are on Norwegian roads by November 2015 . Ranking second is the Volkswagen e @-@ Golf , with 10 @,@ 961 new units registered since 2014 , flowed by the Tesla Model S , with 10 @,@ 062 new units registered in Norway through December 2015 , representing about 10 % of the Model S global sales . 
 The highest @-@ ever monthly market share for plug @-@ in electric passenger segment was achieved in March 2016 with 33 @.@ 5 % of new car sales ; the all @-@ electric car segment had a 18 @.@ 7 % market share among new passenger cars , while the plug @-@ in hybrid segment had a 14 @.@ 8 % . Sales of new light @-@ duty plug @-@ in vehicles totaled 22 @,@ 425 units during the first half of 2016 , consisting of 11 @,@ 744 all @-@ electric cars , 10 @,@ 338 plug @-@ in hybrids , and 343 all @-@ electric vans . The combined sales of new plug @-@ in cars reached a market share of 28 @.@ 4 % of all new passenger cars sold during the first six months of 2016 , with the all @-@ electric car segment reaching 15 @.@ 1 % , down from 18 @.@ 4 % in the same period in 2015 , while the plug @-@ in hybrid segment reached a record 13 @.@ 3 % , up from 4 @.@ 5 % in 2015 . The all @-@ electric van segment captured 2 @.@ 2 % of new van sales , up from 0 @.@ 4 % during the same period the previous year . The VW e @-@ Golf continued as top selling all @-@ electric car during the first half of 2016 with 2 @,@ 859 units , representing 24 @.@ 3 % of the all @-@ electric car sales , while the Mitsubishi Outlander P @-@ HEV was the top selling plug @-@ in hybrid , with 2 @,@ 843 units representing 27 @.@ 5 % of the segment sales . 
 = = = = = Netherlands = = = = = 
 A total of 93 @,@ 310 highway legal light @-@ duty plug @-@ in electric vehicles were registered in the Netherlands by the end of May 2016 , consisting of 81 @,@ 124 range @-@ extended and plug @-@ in hybrids , 10 @,@ 690 pure electric cars , and 1 @,@ 496 all @-@ electric light utility vans . When buses , trucks , motorcycles , <unk> and tricycles are accounted for , the Dutch plug @-@ in electric @-@ drive fleet climbs to 94 @,@ 726 units . The country 's electric vehicle stock reaches 128 @,@ 936 units when fuel cell electric vehicles ( 23 ) , mopeds ( 3 @,@ 682 ) , electric bicycles ( 30 @,@ 265 ) , and <unk> ( 240 ) are accounted for . 
 As of May 2016 , the Netherlands ranks as the second top selling European market after Norway , and also has the world 's fifth largest light @-@ duty plug @-@ in vehicle stock . With 43 @,@ 971 plug @-@ in passenger cars and utility vans registered in 2015 , the Netherlands was the world 's third best @-@ selling country market for light @-@ duty plug @-@ in vehicles that year . The Netherlands is also among the country 's with the highest EV market penetration in the world . 
 Registrations of plug @-@ in electric car represented a 0 @.@ 57 % share of total new car registrations in the country during 2011 and 2012 . During 2013 plug @-@ in electric passenger car registrations totaled 22 @,@ 415 units , climbing 338 % from 2012 , the highest rate of growth of any country in the world in 2013 . The segment 's market share surged almost ten times from 2012 to 5 @.@ 37 % new car sales in the country during that year , the world 's second highest in 2013 after Norway ( 5 @.@ 6 % ) . The rapid growth of segment during 2013 , allowed the Netherlands to reach a market penetration for plug @-@ in vehicles of around 1 @.@ 71 vehicles per 1 @,@ 000 people , second only to Norway ( 4 @.@ 04 ) . The market share of the plug @-@ in electric passenger car segment in 2014 fell to 3 @.@ 86 % of total new passenger car registrations , after the end of some of the tax incentives . With 43 @,@ 769 plug @-@ in passenger cars registered in 2015 , the segment market share rose to a record 9 @.@ 7 % of new car sales in the Dutch market in 2015 , the second highest after Norway ( 22 @.@ 4 % ) . 
 In November 2013 , a total of 2 @,@ 736 Mitsubishi Outlander P @-@ HEVs were sold , making the plug @-@ in hybrid the top selling new car in the country that month , representing a market share of 6 @.@ 8 % of all the new cars sold . Again in December 2013 , the Outlander P @-@ HEV ranked as the top selling new car in the country with 4 @,@ 976 units , representing a 12 @.@ 6 % market share of new car sales , contributing to a world record plug @-@ in vehicle market share of 23 @.@ 8 % of new car sales . The Netherlands is the second country , after Norway , where plug @-@ in electric cars have topped the monthly ranking of new car sales . The strong increase of plug @-@ in car <unk> during the last months of 2013 was due to the end of the total exemption of the registration fee for corporate cars , which is valid for 5 years . From January 1 , 2014 , all @-@ electric vehicles pay a 4 % registration fee and plug @-@ in hybrids a 7 % fee . 
 A total of 15 @,@ 678 light @-@ duty plug @-@ in electric vehicles were registered in the Netherlands in 2014 , consisting of 12 @,@ 425 plug @-@ in hybrids , down 38 @.@ 4 % from 2013 , 2 @,@ 664 all @-@ electric cars , up 18 @.@ 3 % from a year earlier , and 589 vans , up 236 @.@ 6 % from 2013 . Sales in 2014 were led by the Outlander P @-@ HEV with 7 @,@ 666 units , followed by Volvo V60 Plug @-@ in Hybrid with 3 @,@ 126 units , and Tesla Model S with 1 @,@ 465 units sold . 
 The top 5 best @-@ selling plug @-@ in electric cars in 2015 were all plug @-@ in hybrids , led by the Mitsubishi Outlander P @-@ HEV ( 8 @,@ 757 ) , followed by the Volkswagen Golf GTE ( 8 @,@ 183 ) , Audi A3 e @-@ tron ( 4 @,@ 354 ) , Volvo V60 Plug @-@ in Hybrid ( 3 @,@ 851 ) , and Volkswagen Passat GTE ( 2 @,@ 879 ) . The top selling all @-@ electric car was the Tesla Model S ( 1 @,@ 842 ) . Plug @-@ in car sales achieved its best monthly volume on record ever in December 2015 , with about 15 @,@ 900 units sold , and allowing the segment to reach a record market share of about 23 % . The surge in plug @-@ in car sales was due to reduction of the registration fees for plug @-@ in hybrids . From January 1 , 2016 , all @-@ electric vehicles continue to pay a 4 % registration fee , but for a plug @-@ in hybrid the fee rises from 7 % to 15 % if its CO2 emissions do not exceed 50 g / km . The rate for a conventional internal combustion car is 25 % of its book value . 
 As of December 2015 , the Mitsubishi Outlander P @-@ HEV continues as the all @-@ time top @-@ selling plug @-@ in car in the country with 24 @,@ 506 registered . Ranking second is the Volvo V60 Plug @-@ in Hybrid ( 14 @,@ 470 ) , followed by the Volkswagen Golf GTE ( 8 @,@ 806 ) , Opel Ampera ( 4 @,@ 947 units ) , Tesla Model S ( 4 @,@ 832 ) , and Audi A3 e @-@ tron ( 4 @,@ 657 ) . A total of 78 @,@ 163 plug @-@ in hybrids out of 87 @,@ 531 passenger plug @-@ in electric vehicles were registered in the Netherlands as of 31 December 2015 , meaning that plug @-@ in hybrids dominate the Dutch market with a share of 89 @.@ 3 % of the country 's highway legal plug @-@ in electric car stock . 
 = = = = = France = = = = = 
 Since January 2010 , a total of 86 @,@ 909 light @-@ duty plug @-@ in electric vehicles have been registered in France through April 2016 , consisting of 54 @,@ 066 electric passenger cars , 22 @,@ 473 all @-@ electric utility vans , and 10 @,@ 370 plug @-@ in hybrids . Electric car registrations increased from 184 units in 2010 to 2 @,@ 630 in 2011 . Sales in 2012 increased 115 % from 2011 to 5 @,@ 663 cars , allowing France to rank 4th among the top selling EV countries , with an 11 % market share of global all @-@ electric car sales in 2012 . Registrations reached 8 @,@ 779 electric cars in 2013 , up 55 @.@ 0 % from 2012 , and the all @-@ electric market share of total new car sales went up to 0 @.@ 49 % from 0 @.@ 3 % in 2012 . 
 In addition , 5 @,@ 175 electric utility vans were registered in 2013 , up 42 % from 2012 , and representing a market share of 1 @.@ 4 % of all new light commercial vehicles sold in 2013 . Sales of electric passenger cars and utility vans totaled 13 @,@ 954 units in 2013 , capturing a combined market share of 0 @.@ 65 of these two segments new car sales . When sales of pure electric cars and light utility vehicles are accounted together , France was the leading the European all @-@ electric market in 2012 and 2013 . 
 During 2014 sales of all @-@ electric vehicles in France passed the 10 @,@ 000 unit milestone for the first time . A total of 15 @,@ 045 all @-@ electric cars and vans were registered in 2014 , up 7 @.@ 8 % from 2013 . A total of 10 @,@ 560 pure electric passenger cars registered in 2014 , up 20 @.@ 3 % from the previous year . This figure rises to 10 @,@ 968 units if the BMW i3 with range extender is accounted for . All @-@ electric utility vans continued to be a significant share of the all @-@ electric segment , with 4 @,@ 485 units registered in 2014 , but down 13 @.@ 3 % from 2013 . All @-@ electric cars captured a 0 @.@ 59 % market share of the 1 @.@ 7 million new car registered in France in 2014 , while light @-@ duty electric vehicles reached a 1 @.@ 22 % market share of their segment . Combined both segments represented a market share of 0 @.@ 70 % of new registrations in the country in 2014 . Light @-@ duty all @-@ electric vehicle sales achieved its best monthly volume on record ever in December 2014 , with 2 @,@ 227 units registered , twice the volume registered the same month in 2013 . The slow down in sales that took place in the French EV market during the first half of 2014 , allowed Norway , with 18 @,@ 649 new all @-@ electric vehicles registered , to end 2014 as the top selling European market in the light @-@ duty all @-@ electric segment , and France ranked second . A total of 14 @,@ 833 light @-@ duty all @-@ electric vehicles were sold during the first nine months of 2015 , up 48 % from 2014 year @-@ on @-@ year . 
 In the French market plug @-@ in hybrids or rechargeable hybrids are classified and accounted together with conventional hybrid electric vehicles . Almost 1 @,@ 500 plug @-@ in hybrids were registered during 2012 and 2013 , 666 units in 2012 , and 808 units in 2013 . Plug @-@ in hybrid car registrations totaled 1 @,@ 519 units in 2014 , almost doubling registrations from a year earlier . Plug @-@ in hybrid sales were driven by the Mitsubishi Outlander P @-@ HEV , with 820 units registered in 2014 , representing 54 % of the segment registrations in France that year . Between 2012 and 2014 , cumulative plug @-@ in hybrid registrations totaled 2 @,@ 985 units , rising cumulative French registrations of light @-@ duty plug @-@ in electric vehicles since 2005 to 46 @,@ 590 units , just ahead of the Netherlands ( 45 @,@ 020 ) , and making France the European country where there are more plug @-@ in electric vehicles on the road . 
 During 2012 , all @-@ electric car registrations in France were led by the Bolloré Bluecar with 1 @,@ 543 units . The Renault Kangoo Z.E. was the top selling utility electric vehicle with 2 @,@ 869 units registered in 2012 , representing a market share of 82 % of the segment . The Renault Twizy electric quadricycle , launched in March 2012 , sold 2 @,@ 232 units during 2012 , surpassing the Bolloré Bluecar , and ranked as the second best selling plug @-@ in electric vehicle after the Kangoo Z.E. During 2013 , registrations of pure electric cars were led by the Renault Zoe with 5 @,@ 511 units , representing 62 @.@ 8 % of total EV sales . Registrations of all @-@ electric light utility vehicles were led by the Renault Kangoo Z.E. with 4 @,@ 174 units , representing 80 @.@ 7 % of the segment sales . 
 The Zoe continued leading all @-@ electric vehicle registration in 2014 , with 5 @,@ 970 units registered , followed by the Kangoo Z.E. van with 2 @,@ 657 registrations , and the Nissan Leaf ranked next with 1 @,@ 600 units . As of December 2014 , the French leader in the all @-@ electric segment is the Renault Zoe with 11 @,@ 529 units registered since 2012 , followed by the Kangoo Z.E. utility van with 10 @,@ 483 units registered since 2010 , the Bolloré Bluecar with 3 @,@ 770 units , and the Nissan Leaf with 3 @,@ 645 units . Most units of the Bluecar are in operation for the <unk> ' carsharing service in Paris , and similar carsharing programs in Lyon and Bordeaux . 
 = = = = = United Kingdom = = = = = 
 About 71 @,@ 000 plug @-@ in electric vehicles have been registered in the UK up until March 2016 , including about 67 @,@ 000 plug @-@ in hybrids and all @-@ electric cars , and about 4 @,@ 000 plug @-@ in commercial vans . This figure includes a significant number of registered plug @-@ in electric cars and vans which were not eligible for the grant schemes . Since the launch of the Plug @-@ In Car Grant in January 2011 , a total of 66 @,@ 296 eligible cars have been registered through June 2016 , and , as of March 2016 , the number of claims made through the Plug @-@ in Van Grant scheme totaled 2 @,@ 167 units since the launch of the scheme in 2012 . 
 Before the introduction of series production plug @-@ in vehicles , a total of 1 @,@ 096 all @-@ electric vehicles were registered in the UK between 2006 and December 2010 . All @-@ electric car sales grew from 138 units in 2010 to 1 @,@ 082 units during 2011 . Before 2011 , the G @-@ Wiz , a heavy quadricycle , listed as the top @-@ selling EV for several years . During 2012 , a total of 2 @,@ 254 plug @-@ in electric cars were registered in the UK . Sales in 2012 were led by the Nissan Leaf with 699 units , followed by the Toyota Prius Plug @-@ in Hybrid with 470 . Vehicles eligible for the Plug @-@ in Car Grant accounted for 0 @.@ 1 % of total new car sales in 2012 . Plug @-@ in electric car registrations totaled 3 @,@ 584 units in 2013 , up 59 @.@ 0 % from 2012 . Plug @-@ in car sales represented a 0 @.@ 16 % market share of new cars sold in the UK in 2013 . The top selling plug @-@ in electric car in 2013 was the Nissan Leaf , with over 1 @,@ 650 units sold , and the Prius PHV ended 2013 as the top selling plug @-@ in hybrid with 509 units . 
 The British market experienced a rapid growth of plug @-@ in car sales during 2014 , driven by the introduction of new models such as the BMW i3 , Tesla Model S , Mitsubishi Outlander P @-@ HEV , Renault Zoe , and Volkswagen e @-@ Up ! . Plug @-@ in electric car registrations in the UK quadruple from 3 @,@ 586 in 2013 to 14 @,@ 518 units in 2014 . Registrations consisted of 6 @,@ 697 pure electrics and 7 @,@ 821 plug @-@ in hybrids . Total registrations in 2014 were up 305 % from 2013 , with all @-@ electric cars growing 167 % while plug @-@ in hybrid registrations were up 628 % from a year earlier . The plug @-@ in electric car segment captured a 0 @.@ 59 % market share of new car sales in 2014 , up from 0 @.@ 16 % in 2013 . In November 2014 the passenger plug @-@ in segment 's market share passed 1 % of monthly new car sales for the first time in the UK . 
 The Mitsubishi plug @-@ in hybrid became the top selling plug @-@ in electric vehicle in July 2014 and captured 43 % of all applications to the Plug @-@ in Car Grants scheme that month . The Outlander P @-@ HEV ended 2014 as the top selling plug @-@ in electric car in the UK that year with 5 @,@ 370 units sold . The Nissan Leaf sales also experienced a significant growth in 2014 , with 4 @,@ 051 units sold , up 124 % from the 1 @,@ 812 units sold in 2013 . 
 The surge in demand for plug @-@ in cars continued during 2015 . Plug @-@ in electric car registrations in the UK totaled 28 @,@ 188 units in 2015 , consisting of 9 @,@ 934 pure electric cars and 18 @,@ 254 plug @-@ in hybrids . Total registrations in 2015 were up 94 @.@ 0 % from 2014 , with all @-@ electric cars growing 48 @.@ 3 % year @-@ on @-@ year , while plug @-@ in hybrid registrations were up 133 @.@ 0 % year @-@ on @-@ year . The plug @-@ in electric car segment raised its market share of new car sales in 2015 to almost 1 @.@ 1 % , up from 0 @.@ 59 % in 2014 . The plug @-@ in segment reached a record market share of 1 @.@ 7 % of new car sales in the UK , the highest ever . 
 Sales of the Mitsubishi Outlander P @-@ HEV in the British market reached the 10 @,@ 000 unit milestone in March 2015 , allowing the plug @-@ in hybrid to overtake the Leaf as the all @-@ time top selling plug @-@ in electric vehicle in the UK . Sales of the Nissan Leaf sales passed the 10 @,@ 000 unit milestone in June 2015 . The top selling models in 2015 were the Outlander P @-@ HEV with 11 @,@ 681 units registered , up 118 % from 2014 , followed by the Leaf with 5 @,@ 236 units ( up 29 % ) , and the BMW i3 with 2 @,@ 213 units ( up 59 % ) . As of December 2015 , the Outlander P @-@ HEV continued to rank as the top selling plug @-@ in electric car in the UK ever , with 17 @,@ 045 units registered , and the Nissan Leaf , the top selling all @-@ electric car ever , totaled 12 @,@ 433 units registered . Plug @-@ in car sales in March 2016 achieved the best monthly plug @-@ in sales volume on record ever , with 7 @,@ 144 grant eligible cars registered , exceeding the previous high of 6 @,@ 104 units , recorded in March 2015 . 
 A total of 19 @,@ 252 plug @-@ in electric cars were registered in the UK during the first half of 2016 , consisting of 5 @,@ 267 pure electrics , up 12 @.@ 5 % from the same period in 2015 , and 13 @,@ 985 plug @-@ in hybrids , up 40 @.@ 8 % from 2015 . During the first half of 2016 the plug @-@ in car segment 's market share reached 1 @.@ 36 % of new car sales . While overall new car registrations year @-@ to @-@ date increased 3 @.@ 2 % from the same period in 2015 , total plug @-@ in car registrations during the quarter increased 31 @.@ 8 % from 2015 . 
 = = = = = Germany = = = = = 
 As of April 2016 , there were about 57 @,@ 000 plug @-@ in electric cars registered in Germany . About 73 % of the about 50 @,@ 000 plug @-@ in cars registered in the country by the end of 2015 took place during the last two years , with 13 @,@ 049 units registered in 2014 , and 23 @,@ 464 registered in 2015 . The official German definition of electric vehicles changed at the beginning of 2013 , before that , official statistics only registered all @-@ electric vehicles because plug @-@ in hybrids were accounted together with conventional hybrids . As a result , the registrations figures for 2012 and older do not account for total new plug @-@ in electric car registrations . As of November 2014 , the country had 4 @,@ 800 public charging stations . 
 Total plug @-@ in electric car registrations increased from 1 @,@ 558 units in 2009 to 2 @,@ 307 in 2010 . The total registered plug @-@ in electric stock in 2011 increased 96 @.@ 8 % from 2010 to 4 @,@ 541 cars , to 7 @,@ 114 in 2012 , and reached 12 @,@ 156 registered cars on 1 January 2014 . Registrations of plug @-@ in electric drive vehicles represented a 0 @.@ 028 % market share of all passenger vehicles registered in Germany at the beginning of 2014 . The plug @-@ in hybrid segment in the German market in 2014 experienced an explosive growth of 226 @.@ 9 % year @-@ over @-@ year , and the overall plug @-@ in segment increased 75 @.@ 5 % from a year earlier . The surge in sales continued in 2015 , the plug @-@ in hybrid segment grew 125 @.@ 1 % year @-@ over @-@ year , while the all @-@ electric segment climbed 91 @.@ 2 % from the previous year . 
 During 2011 , a total of 2 @,@ 154 pure electric cars were registered in the country , up from 541 units in 2010 . All @-@ electric car sales for 2011 were led by the Mitsubishi i @-@ MiEV family with 683 i @-@ MiEVs , 208 Peugeot iOns and 200 Citroën C @-@ Zeros , representing 50 @.@ 6 % of all electric car registrations in 2011 . Plug @-@ in hybrid registrations totaled 266 units in 2011 , 241 Opel Amperas and 25 Chevrolet Volts , for a total of 2 @,@ 420 plug @-@ in electric vehicles registered in 2011 . 
 A total of 2 @,@ 956 all @-@ electric vehicles were registered in Germany during 2012 , a 37 @.@ 2 % increase over 2011 . When 901 registered plug @-@ in hybrids are accounted for , 2012 registrations climb to 3 @,@ 857 units , and sales of plug @-@ in electric car represented a 0 @.@ 12 % market share of new passenger vehicles sold in the country in 2012 . Most sales in the country were made by corporate and fleet customers and 1 @,@ 493 all @-@ electric vehicles were registered by the automobile industry , as demonstration or research vehicles . Registrations of plug @-@ in electric @-@ drive vehicles were led by the Opel Ampera extended @-@ range electric car with 828 units , followed by the Smart electric drive with 734 units . In addition , a total of 2 @,@ 413 Renault <unk> were sold during 2012 , making Germany the top selling European market for the electric quadricycle . 
 A total of 5 @,@ 042 plug @-@ in electric cars were registered in Germany in 2013 . Registrations were led by the Smart electric drive with 2 @,@ 146 units , followed by Renault Zoe with 1 @,@ 019 , the Nissan Leaf with 855 units , and the BMW i3 with 559 . During the first six months of 2014 the BMW i3 was the leader , with 1 @,@ 378 units registered , followed by the Volkswagen e @-@ Up ! with 884 and the Smart ED with 645 . Accounting for registrations of plug @-@ in electric cars between January 2010 and June 2014 , the leading model is the Smart electric drive with 3 @,@ 959 units registered , with a significant number in use by carsharing services , followed by the BMW i3 with 1 @,@ 937 units , the Renault Zoe with 1 @,@ 532 , and the Opel Ampera with 1 @,@ 450 units . 
 = = = = Canada = = = = 
 Cumulative sales of plug @-@ in electric cars in Canada passed the 20 @,@ 000 unit mark in May 2016 . The Chevrolet Volt , released in 2011 , is the all @-@ time top selling plug @-@ in electric vehicle in the country , with cumulative sales of 6 @,@ 387 units through May 2015 , representing over 30 % of all plug @-@ in cars sold in the country . Ranking second is the Tesla Model S with 4 @,@ 160 units sold through April 2016 , followed by the Nissan Leaf with 3 @,@ 692 units delivered as of May 2016 . 
 As of December 2015 , there were 18 @,@ 451 highway legal plug @-@ in electric cars registered in Canada , consisting of 10 @,@ 034 ( 54 % ) all @-@ electric cars and 8 @,@ 417 ( 46 % ) plug @-@ in hybrids . Until 2014 Canadian sales were evenly split between all @-@ electric cars ( 50 @.@ 8 ) % and plug @-@ in hybrids ( 49 @.@ 2 % ) . The Model S was the top selling plug @-@ in electric car in Canada in 2015 with 2 @,@ 010 units sold . 
 = = = Top selling PEV models = = = 
 = = = = All @-@ electric cars and vans = = = = 
 The world 's top selling highway @-@ capable all @-@ electric car ever is the Nissan Leaf with global sales of almost 220 @,@ 000 units by mid @-@ April 2016 . The top markets for Leaf sales is the United States with 93 @,@ 309 units delivered through April 2016 , followed by Japan with 64 @,@ 635 units sold through March 2016 , and Europe with over 55 @,@ 000 Leafs sold through March 2016 . The European market is led by Norway with 17 @,@ 199 new units registered up until April 2016 . 
 Ranking second is the all @-@ electric Tesla Model S , with global deliveries of about 120 @,@ 000 units through March 2016 . The United States is the leading market with about 71 @,@ 000 units sold through April 2016 . Norway is the Model S largest overseas market , with 10 @,@ 871 new units registered through April 2016 , followed by China with 5 @,@ 524 units registered through September 2015 . The world 's top selling all @-@ electric light utility vehicle is the Renault Kangoo Z.E. , with global sales of 21 @,@ 220 electric vans delivered through December 2015 . 
 The following table presents global sales of the top selling highway @-@ capable electric cars and light utility vehicles produced between 2008 and December 2015 . The table includes all @-@ electric passenger cars and utility vans with cumulative sales of about or over 25 @,@ 000 units since the introduction of the first modern production all @-@ electric car in 2008 , the Tesla Roadster . 
 = = = = Plug @-@ in hybrids = = = = 
 The Volt / Ampera family is the world 's best selling plug @-@ in hybrid and the third best selling plug @-@ in electric car after the Model S , with combined sales of over 110 @,@ 000 units worldwide through March 2016 , including about 10 @,@ 000 Opel / Vauxhall Amperas sold in Europe through the end of 2015 . As of April 2016 , sales are led by the United States with 94 @,@ 720 Volts delivered , followed by Canada with 6 @,@ 117 units sold . The Netherlands is the leading Ampera market with 4 @,@ 947 units registered as of December 2015 . 
 Ranking next is the Mitsubishi Outlander P @-@ HEV with almost 102 @,@ 000 units sold worldwide as of March 2016 . Europe is the leading market with 65 @,@ 529 units sold , followed by Japan with 33 @,@ 730 units . European sales are led by the Netherlands with 24 @,@ 572 units registered , followed by the UK with 21 @,@ 053 units registered , both at the end of March 2016 , and Sweden with 4 @,@ 433 units sold through November 2015 . 
 Ranking third is the first generation Toyota Prius Plug @-@ in Hybrid with 75 @,@ 400 units sold worldwide through April 2016 . The United States is the market leader with 42 @,@ 320 units delivered through April 2016 . Japan ranks next with about 22 @,@ 100 units , followed by Europe with 10 @,@ 500 units , both , through April 2016 . The leading European market is the Netherlands with 4 @,@ 134 units registered as of 30 November 2015 . Production of the first generation Prius Plug @-@ in ended in June 2015 . The second generation Prius plug @-@ in hybrid , the Toyota Prius Prime , is expected to be released in the U.S. by the end of 2016 . 
 The following table presents cumulative sales through December 2015 of those plug @-@ in hybrid models that have sold about 10 @,@ 000 units since the introduction of the first modern production plug @-@ in hybrid vehicle in December 2008 , the BYD <unk> . 
 = = Books = = 
 David B. <unk> , ed . ( 2009 ) . Plug @-@ In Electric Vehicles : What Role for Washington ? ( 1st. ed . ) . The Brookings Institution . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8157 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 Mitchell , William J. ; <unk> @-@ Bird , Christopher ; Burns , Lawrence D. ( 2010 ) . Reinventing the Automobile : Personal Urban Mobility for the 21st Century ( 1st. ed . ) . The MIT Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 262 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 = Wonder World Tour ( Miley Cyrus ) = 
 The Wonder World Tour is the second concert tour by American recording artist Miley Cyrus . The tour was held to promote her second studio album Breakout ( 2008 ) and first extended play ( EP ) The Time of Our Lives ( 2009 ) . It began in September 2009 and concluded in December 29 , visiting cities in the United States and United Kingdom ; thus , the Wonder World Tour became Cyrus ' first world tour . It also became Cyrus ' first tour not to incorporate performances as Hannah Montana . Alternative band Metro Station served as opening act for all tour venues . It was sponsored by Wal @-@ Mart and promoted by AEG Live . All tickets from the Wonder World Tour were sold using paperless ticketing , in order to prevent ticket scalping similar to what had occurred during Cyrus ' previous tour . One dollar from each ticket sold was donated to the City of Hope National Medical Center , an organization devoted to the fight against cancer . 
 The Wonder World Tour has been described as part of Cyrus ' transitional period , with more elaborate and edgier characteristics . Each concert was divided into seven segments , each of which bared different themes , the subject of matter for the tour 's title . The show opened with Cyrus performing rock @-@ oriented songs . It also featured her and backup dancers being suspended above the stage with aerial rigging various times . At one point , she mounted a Harley @-@ Davidson motorcycle as it was elevated and made its path across the venue . Cyrus also rendered a tribute to the deceased singer Michael Jackson and performed two Hannah Montana @-@ credited songs as herself . 
 The tour received positive to mixed reception from critics . Some praised it and deemed it a spectacle , while others believed it lacked profundity and portrayal of Cyrus ' personality . The Wonder World Tour was commercially successful despite the financial recession that was present in 2009 . It was able to sell @-@ out all European dates in ten minutes and marks the largest attendance at The O2 Arena in London . During the first leg of the tour , one bus overturned several times on a highway . The accident resulted in the injury of one person and the death of another . The cause of the accident is yet to be specified , yet multiple theories for it exist . A filtered version of the Wonder World Tour was broadcast on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) on June 18 , 2010 and received a total of over 2 @.@ 6 million viewers . The full @-@ length concert film was released on the limited , deluxe edition of Cyrus ' third studio album Can 't Be Tamed ( 2010 ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 Cyrus is a singer @-@ songwriter and actress who starred on the Disney Channel television series Hannah Montana as Miley Stewart , a girl with a secret double life as the popstar Hannah Montana . Through the television series , Cyrus developed fame as a teen idol and released music credited to Hannah Montana . Cyrus ' debut studio album , titled Meet Miley Cyrus , was released as the second disc of the Hannah Montana 2 / Meet Miley Cyrus ( 2007 ) double @-@ disc album . In order to promote the album , Cyrus embarked on her first tour , the Best of Both Worlds Tour ( 2007 – 08 ) , a North American tour where she performed both under character , as Hannah Montana , and as herself . With the release of Cyrus ' second studio album , Breakout ( 2008 ) , her first not be affiliated with the Hannah Montana franchise , and an extended play ( EP ) The Time of Our Lives ( 2009 ) , Cyrus decided to embark on tour again with the Wonder World Tour , however , without incorporating performances as Hannah Montana , a step which the media interpreted as furthering her distance from the Hannah Montana franchise . 
 The concert tour was announced alongside Cyrus ' joint apparel line with Max Azria on June 3 , 2009 , through various outlets , including Miley ' Twitter account , a press release , and MileyWorld , Cyrus ' official fan club . It was confirmed that the tour would be sponsored by American retailing company Wal @-@ Mart and promoted by AEG Live . It would expand throughout the United States , from September 14 , 2009 in Portland , Oregon to December 2 , 2009 in Miami , Florida , with a total of forty @-@ five dates . Alternative rock band Metro Station , where Cyrus ' older brother , Trace Cyrus , integrates in , was confirmed as the opening act for all dates . Two days later , a European leg , with nine dates in the United Kingdom , was announced , marking Cyrus ' first concerts to visit another continent . On June 16 , 2009 , two more dates were annexed , and one final date was annexed in October 2009 , in order to meet demand . 
 All tickets for the Wonder World Tour were sold exclusively through paperless ticket delivery , meaning that fans did not receive a physical concert ticket for their entry into the event . Ticket buyers were required to bring the credit card used to make the purchase and photo identification to the concert venue in order to gain entry . All groups were to enter the concert together , and ushers issued seat locator slips . The method of ticket sales was relatively new at the time , although Ticketmaster first experimented it with AC / DC 's Black Ice World Tour ( 2008 – 10 ) . However , it marked the first time for an arena tour to sell all tickets through paperless ticketing . This was done in response to the extensive ticket scalping that occurred during the Best of Both Worlds Tour and in order to give fans the opportunity to purchase good tickets at face value . Cyrus ' manager and president of Morey Management Group , Jason Morey , stated , " The focus was , ' How do we take all the information we gathered last time out and do a better job of it ? ' It was important to us to address the issue of demand . We thought that of every single option that was available out there , this was a really viable option , to go with the paperless ticketing . " As with the Best of Both Worlds Tour , one dollar from each ticket purchased was donated to the City of Hope National Medical Center , a center dedicated to the prevention , treatment and research for the cure of cancer . 
 = = Development = = 
 The tour was titled the Wonder World Tour because of its diversity in themes and styles . Cyrus believed the tour was good transition for solidifying a more rock music @-@ based career . She described the tour to be edgy and " more of a mature show " , with the target audience being teenagers relatively her age , which was sixteen at the time . However , performances that would please younger audiences were added to the setlist . It was conceptualized to be a more elaborate than Cyrus ' previous tour and to reflect Cyrus as an individual . The reason for this to occur was because Cyrus felt more confident as a vocalist to perform stunts and use props while singing . Also , more resources were available , for more companies were willing to invest in the tour . Ideas were suggested by different individuals and were tested during filmed rehearsals in order to decide which would make the final cut . " Each person has their own character and their own story . So , we 've added everyone 's kind of specialty into our show [ ... ] This is not just a concert , it is an absolute show " , Cyrus said . After having completed filming for The Last Song ( 2010 ) in Tybee Island , Georgia , Cyrus returned to Los Angeles for tour rehearsals at The Forum in mid @-@ August . Due to filming The Last Song , Cyrus was only able to rehearse for three weeks although the average rehearsal period for musicians is about three months . 
 Jammal Simms was hired as the tour 's director and main choreographer . <unk> Terry served as an assistant for directing , meanwhile <unk> Johnson assisted choreography . They , along with twelve other members , composed the tour 's creative team . In total , the Wonder World Tour included 124 traveling workers , 19 truckloads of equipment , and 15 buses . The stage was quite different from that of the Best of Both Worlds Tour . It consisted of a rectangular main stage , which featured staircases that elevated the center of the stage , and a narrow runway , which connected the main stage to a B @-@ stage that ran the length of the main stage . Regarding the stage , Cyrus noted that it was " something not many people get to have . I 'm able to move around to each side so there 's no one person who feels like they don 't have the best seat . Every seat is the best seat . " Six LED multi @-@ screen video units were located throughout the stage ; the three largest were placed as the upstage wall , while the other three were hung by rigs above the stage . The center unit consisted of three screens that faced outward ; two others were hung right and left to the center unit , both were double faced toward the center of the venue at a 45 ° angle , while the backside faced the upper @-@ seat audience . The structure of the video panels was designed by Sims to ensure that all seats within the 270 ° angle at each venue received an equal view of the video screens . Video content and lighting were designed by Seán Burke ; the latter was provided by Production Resource Group ( PRG ) . 
 The tour used seven individual rigs for performers and props to become airborne . For dancers to be flown to the center of each upstage , a wench , which dropped 18 inches off the face of the panel , was placed in the rig . Cyrus ' flying required two wenches , one for a vertical lift and one for a horizontal move that coursed the audience and back to the stage . Four elevators , or trap doors , were located throughout the stage , some of which had the option of a 4 × 4 or an 8 × 8 foot opening . All of the fly rigs and elevators were built and operated by Show Group Production Services ( SGPS ) / <unk> . The challenge that presented the most difficulty for SGPS was time constraint , as there were only three weeks of rehearsal . Brian White , co @-@ owner of SGPS , explained , 
 There wasn ’ t a lot of time , but the good news was that it was at the [ L.A. ] Forum , which gave us a lot of height to fly things around , and there was also a lot of room to lay stuff out on the floor . The other good thing was that our offices are only 10 minutes away . So if I had to send a welder down there to make some changes I could do it pretty fast . The biggest thing we had going for us was a great crew . We had some really good people out there . " [ ... ] I ’ d say that about 90 percent of what we built on Miley Cyrus fit the first time in rehearsal . The only reason we had to retro fit anything was because of last minute design changes that came about once everything was up and they could see it all . 
 Special effects and pyrotechnics were provided by <unk> Pyrotechnics Group . Terry Ritz , founder of the organization , and his partner Steve <unk> had created various ideas based on the tour soundtrack that was provided to them by the Wonder World Tour 's personnel . They met with the tour 's choreographer , band manager , and lighting designer , asking them to bring their " hopes , wishes , and dreams . " Out of these meetings , the show was completed and a lighting crew , who monitored the stage with a four @-@ camera monitor system when cues were executed , was selected . The pyrotechnics for the show were described as more elegant and subtle , being composed of pink flames with accentuation of silver and white glitter . Because of the extensive automation executed throughout the concert , two personnel were in charge of running it . Neville <unk> ran the automation from under the stage , and Sean Conner ran all of the flying moves from a position at the front of each venue . Meanwhile , assistant stage manager Seth Posner called cues for each concert . " Normally , in a rock show you don ’ t need someone calling the show . In this one we had to take a more theatrical approach with someone calling cues every step of the way because there was so much going on at once between props and automation " , explained production manager Omar Abderrahman . One of the props that required much attention on the part of Posner was a car made to resemble a tractor , designed and built by effects designer and stage manager Scott " Stryker " Christensen . Because it came along late in the design process , the main elevator was not built to handle the weight of the car , though it was eventually reinforced to support the weight and movement of the car . The car was also modified ; it was made electric , instead of using a combustion engine , for fire @-@ safety and changed to turn around by adjusting its turning radius to automate steering with all four wheels . In order to translate the concert tour overseas to the United Kingdom , the Wonder World Tour paired with Sound Moves , a company that was already providing minor support for the North American leg of the tour . 
 = = Concert synopsis = = 
 The main show commenced with Cyrus emerging from the bottom of the stage inside a large , crystal @-@ like glacier . She wore a black leather hot pantsuit , a tank top , and a white fur vest with a silver sequined hood as she escaped the cocoon to perform the concert 's opening number , " Breakout " . Numerous backup dancers accompanied her and , towards the conclusion , she performed atop movable scaffolding . After removing the fur vest , Cyrus performed " Start All Over " atop the scaffolding and continued the remainder of the first segment of the show with " 7 Things " and " Kicking and Screaming " . Cyrus then executed the show 's second segment with a performance of " Bottom of the Ocean " , which featured an aquatic theme for the stage and Cyrus donning a silver , flowing evening gown that bared a bejeweled bodysuit underneath . The performance ended with Cyrus diving into the stage , succeeded by a simulation of her underwater on the video screens . Cyrus returned to the stage for the show 's third segment atop a tractor @-@ resembling car to perform " Fly on the Wall " . During the performance , Cyrus wore an extravagant white dress with a feathered skirt . Backup dancers were flown up into contact with panels in order to resemble a fly on a window ; meanwhile , Cyrus was flown across the arena . Once back in the stage , Cyrus and backup dancers performed a brief dance interlude of Michael Jackson 's " Thriller " ( 1984 ) . Replacing the feathered bottom with a tutu , Cyrus performed the Hannah Montana @-@ credited song " Let 's Get Crazy " and " Hoedown Throwdown " . The latter was followed by a video in which will.i.am of The Black Eyed Peas spoke about Cyrus , as she left the stage . When the video was completed , the dancers performed a remix of the Black Eyed Peas ' " Boom Boom Pow " ( 2009 ) . 
 The show 's fourth segment opened with " These Four Walls " , in which Cyrus wore a black high @-@ low dress . The song was performed in B @-@ stage with various acoustic musicians . The show proceeded with " When I Look at You " , a performance that featured the trailer for Cyrus ' film The Last Song ( 2010 ) and her performing with a grand piano . It concluded with " Obsessed " , which the singer performed atop a simple suspension bridge . She re @-@ entered the stage , clothed by a black tee , red cheetah @-@ patterned hot pants , and black boots , to perform the second Hannah Montana @-@ credited song " Spotlight " and , later , " G.N.O. ( Girl 's Night Out ) " , replacing the prior hot pants with black ones and adding a denim vest . She followed with a cover of Arrows ' " I Love Rock ' n ' Roll " , where Cyrus mounted a red Harley @-@ Davidson Dyna Fat Bob <unk> 2010 that was suspended above the stage and traveled in a semi @-@ oval path across the venue . Performances of " Party in the U.S.A. " , which made use of a luggage cart , and " Hovering " , which featured Cyrus ' older brother Trace Cyrus , rounded off the segment . The sixth segment of the show featured Cyrus performing " Simple Song " , in which she dressed in a long , white shirt and a black tuxedo , in order to simulate a music conductor . Midway through the performance , Cyrus stepped onto an elevator that rose eight feet from the stage . She exited the stage and returned for the final section . During the encore , Cyrus dressed in a white tank top and shorts , boots , and a metallic vest to perform " See You Again " , later removing the vest to conclude the concert with " The Climb " . Immediately after finishing , she exited through a passageway in the stage as fireworks were fired above . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Mikael Wood of The Los Angeles Times , in reference to Hannah Montana , commented , " Once again , make @-@ believe Miley was more compelling than the real thing . " Wood believed Cyrus possessed charisma , commenting that she portrayed superstar authority , but failed because she was unable or unwilling to " give her fans a deeper idea of who she is and what her music means . For all its eye @-@ popping detail , the concert offered nothing that viewers of her TV show or buyers of her records don 't already know about her . " Dave Paulson of The Tennessean stated , " Cyrus ' spectacle sets her apart from nearly every other A @-@ list act touring today . She 's not a renowned vocalist by any stretch , but her show 's choreography barely provides a moment for her to catch her breath , and she 's still able to deliver . " Michael Hann of the United Kingdom @-@ based Guardian was impressed by the concert , praising the setlist and deeming it enjoyable for both children and adults . He continued , " Good as the best songs are , though , they take a backseat to the staging [ ... ] The one misstep is when a trailer for her next movie is shown during a costume change . It 's a tacky moment and doesn 't reflect the attention to detail that makes the rest of it a laugh @-@ out @-@ loud delight . " Lael Loewenstein of Variety magazine said , " Cyrus knows how to deliver the goods without losing her core audience . " Loewenstein deemed the concert a mission accomplished because of inevitable hits and Cyrus ' charisma , drive , spunk , and a merely @-@ limited vocal range . Erik <unk> of The Milwaukee Journal Sentinel praised the show , stating that it was " a pure visual spectacle " , but commented that producers forgot a place for Cyrus ' personality . 
 Jim Harrington of The Oakland Tribune described the show as a human embodiment of Britney Spears ' " I 'm Not a Girl , Not Yet a Woman " ( 2002 ) . He presumed that the tour was a conscious transition for fans who did not want Cyrus to separate herself from the Hannah Montana franchise . Kirsty Cameron of The Daily Telegraph wrote , " Despite her relatively young age , Cyrus showed her unfailing capability as performer . With the help of her back @-@ up dancers , Cyrus provided her audience with choreographed set pieces and a different spectacle for each song . " James Reed of The Boston Globe noted that the Wonder World Tour presented Cyrus as both a " PG @-@ rated tween pop star and an edgy rocker eager " . He stated that although she played both roles well , it was apparent that she was more at ease with the latter . Reed also felt the concert did little to display Cyrus ' personality and ability to engage with the audience . " We know she 's got impressive vocal chops , but now we need to feel what she 's trying to put across in her songs , something beyond the standard ' You guys are awesome ! ' banter . " Scott Iwasaki of Deseret News reviewed a concert in which Cyrus was ill . He mentioned that because of her illness , her voice went flat . Iwasaki also expressed his viewpoint that " if there [ were ] any worries that Miley Cyrus would become another Britney Spears train wreck , those worries were quelled during Tuesday night 's show . She kept the show family @-@ friendly and , although obviously sick , looked like she had a good time . " Marlin Levison of The Star Tribune believed the concert lacked much profundity until the last performance . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 The Wonder World Tour was commercially successful and represented stability in the touring industry , despite the financial recession . In North America , the tour sold out twenty @-@ nine out of forty @-@ five concert dates and grossed over US $ 45 @.@ 2 million . The tour was able to remain as one of the hottest tours in the United States during its expansion . The Wonder World Tour 's entire , ten @-@ date European leg sold out in only ten minutes . In order to meet demand , an eleventh date was added and scheduled for December 29 , 2009 . In December 2009 , the tour ranked atop Billboard 's Hot Tours , based on the tour 's European performances . For the month , box office grossed US $ 21 @.@ 9 million for eleven shows in four markets . The five concerts held at The O2 Arena in London produced ticket sales that topped $ 11 million ( £ 6 @.@ 8 million ) . On December 19 , 2009 , with an audience of 16 @,@ 196 , Cyrus broke the record for the largest attendance at The O2 Arena ; a record that surpassed the previously tied records by Beyoncé Knowles ' I Am ... Tour ( 2009 – 10 ) , Bon Jovi 's Lost Highway Tour ( 2007 – 08 ) , and Coldplay 's Viva la Vida Tour ( 2008 – 10 ) . In total , the tour grossed over $ 67 @.@ 1 million , $ 15 million which were earned by Cyrus . 
 = = Bus accident = = 
 On November 20 , 2009 , in its attempt to arrive at the destination of Greensboro , North Carolina , one of the buses for the Wonder World Tour overturned on a Virginian highway . The accident occurred around 8 : 15 A.M. in Dinwiddie County , about 40 miles south of Richmond , Virginia . The bus ran off the left side of Interstate 85 , struck an embankment , rolled onto its right side . An eye witness of the accident explained that the bus appeared to have drifted off the road for a fairly long stretch before tipping over . The bus had nine passengers aboard , including members of the lighting crew , though Cyrus was not on board during the incident . Most of the passengers on the bus suffered only minor injuries and escaped the crashed bus through the broken front windshield . One person , Assistant Stage Manager Martin <unk> , required medical attention and was hospitalized overnight . <unk> recovered from his injuries and was later able to return to work on the tour . One person , bus driver Bill " Uncle Bill " Douglas , a 53 @-@ year @-@ old of Austin , Texas , died at the scene of the accident . 
 In response to the accident , the Cyrus family released a statement via Cyrus ' official website ; it stated , " We are deeply saddened by the loss of Bill ' Uncle Bill ' Douglas . Members of our tour are like members of our family . Our thoughts and prayers go out to his family in the midst of this tragedy . He will truly be missed . " Omar Abderrahman , the tour 's production manager , said , " That was real tough . It 's always a tragedy to lose anyone . Uncle Bill was a great driver and a good friend . He ’ d done a lot of tours with me , and we ’ re all going to miss him . " Although the cause for the accident remains undefined , authorities confirmed the roads were wet from overnight rain . However , CBS News reported that speed and weather were not attributed as factors for the accident 's occurrence . Despite the incident , the tour 's following concert on November 22 , 2009 at the Greensboro Coliseum in Greensboro , North Carolina proceeded as scheduled . During the concert , Cyrus dedicated the performance of " The Climb " to Douglas as overhead screens displayed a video commemorating him . 
 = = Broadcast and recordings = = 
 The concerts held on December 13 , 14 , 19 , 20 , and 29 , 2009 at The O2 Arena in London were filmed . On May 26 , 2010 , it was announced that the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) would broadcast an hour @-@ long television special entitled Miley Cyrus : Live from London on June 18 , 2010 , as part of promotion for Cyrus ' third studio album Can 't Be Tamed ( 2010 ) . The special was executively produced by Leticia " Tish " Cyrus , Cyrus ' mother , and Jason Morey , Cyrus ' manager . It was directed by Russell Thomas and produced by Jim Parsons . Miley Cyrus : Live from London was described by Cyrus ' official website with the following statement : " The program captures how Miley , who has grown up in the public eye , has grown as an artist and reveals her natural progression and sophistication . " The concert special was watched by over 2 @.@ 6 million viewers in the United States . Miley Cyrus : Live from London 's airing on ABC was a filtered version of the full @-@ length concert , which became available on the limited , deluxe edition of Can 't Be Tamed , released on June 21 , 2010 . The deluxe edition featured the audio CD , containing the album 's music , and a DVD , which contains nineteen live performances and behind @-@ the @-@ scenes footage with Cyrus . " We anticipate an <unk> , if you will , of those who buy the CD / DVD over just the music because it 's never been seen before " , stated Abbey Konowitch , general manager of Hollywood Records . The performances of " Fly on the Wall " and " Start All Over " were included in Cyrus ' second video album Can 't Be Tamed : Mini DVD ( 2010 ) , released only in the United Kingdom and Japan . 
 = = Set list = = 
 " Breakout " 
 " Start All Over " 
 " 7 Things " 
 " Kicking and Screaming " 
 " Bottom of the Ocean " 
 " Fly on the Wall " 
 " Thriller ( Dance interlude ) 
 " Let 's Get Crazy " 
 " Hoedown Throwdown " 
 " Boom Boom Pow ( Dance interlude ) 
 " These Four Walls " 
 " When I Look at You " 
 " Obsessed " 
 " Spotlight " 
 " G.N.O. ( Girl 's Night Out ) " 
 " I Love Rock ' n ' Roll " 
 " Party in the U.S.A. " 
 " Hovering " ¹ 
 " Simple Song " 
 " See You Again " 
 " The Climb " 
 = = = Set list information = = = 
 ¹ " Wake Up America " as performed at some shows . 
 = = Shows = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Source : 
 = Jon Huntsman presidential campaign , 2012 = 
 The Jon Huntsman presidential campaign of 2012 began in mid @-@ 2011 when Ambassador and former Governor of Utah Jon Huntsman , Jr. announced his candidacy for the Republican Party ( GOP ) nomination for President of the United States in the 2012 election . On May 3 , 2011 , Huntsman announced his intentions to file a political action committee with the Federal Election Commission ( named " H @-@ PAC " ) . Subsequently , Huntsman announced on June 14 , 2011 , he was running for president and made an official announcement in Liberty State Park one week later on June 21 . 
 Huntsman sought to establish himself as an anti @-@ negative candidate and take the " high road " . In his announcement , he also stated " I don 't think you need to run down someone 's reputation in order to run for the office of president . " Huntsman aggressively touted himself as a fiscal conservative , pledging considerable business and personal tax cuts as well as a foreign policy moderate , calling for a decrease in defense spending and withdrawal from Afghanistan , while increasing pressure on Iran and support for Israel . 
 Huntsman announced his withdrawal from the race on January 16 , 2012 , prior to the South Carolina primary and endorsed eventual nominee Mitt Romney . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Experience = = = 
 Huntsman served as Governor of Utah from January 2005 until August 2009 , but resigned during the first year of his second term to serve as United States Ambassador to China , a position to which he was appointed by Democratic President Barack Obama . Speculation of a Huntsman candidacy for the 2012 Republican presidential nomination began circulating in the media as early as 2008 and 2009 , while Huntsman was still unsure about his political future . In August 2010 , a group of political strategists with ties to Huntsman formed a political action committee now called " Horizon PAC " that had the resources to provide a framework for launching Huntsman 's campaign in the event he chose to run . The PAC was formed in part as an effort to draft Huntsman into seeking the GOP nomination . 
 On January 31 , 2011 , Huntsman submitted his formal resignation from his post as U.S. Ambassador to China . The resignation was to take effect April 30 , 2011 , and Huntsman indicated his plans to return to the United States by May 2011 . This move spurred further widespread speculation of Huntsman making a 2012 Republican presidential bid . 
 On May 3 , after having left his post as Ambassador and returned to the United States , Huntsman formed an official fundraising political action committee , building on the efforts of the previously established Horizon PAC . On May 18 , Huntsman opened his 2012 national campaign headquarters in Orlando , Florida . 
 = = = Political positions = = = 
 Huntsman has been described as " a conservative technocrat @-@ optimist with moderate positions who was willing to work substantively with President Barack Obama " by Huffington Post political reporter , Jason <unk> . As Governor , Huntsman listed economic development , health @-@ care reform , education , and energy security as his top priorities . Huntsman oversaw large tax cuts and advocated reorganizing the way that services were distributed so that the government would not become overwhelmed by the state 's fast growing population . Huntsman also proposed a plan to reform health @-@ care , mainly through the private sector , by using tax breaks and negotiation to keep prices down . 
 In a 2008 evaluation of state Governors ' fiscal policies , the libertarian Cato Institute praised Huntsman 's conservative tax policies , ranking him in a tie for fifth place on overall fiscal policy . He was particularly lauded for his efforts to cut taxes , where he received the highest score on tax policy of all 50 governors . The report specifically highlighted his reductions of the sales tax and simplification of the tax code . 
 Huntsman strongly supported civil unions for years but not same @-@ sex marriage ; and supported legislation as Governor that would have allowed civil unions for same @-@ sex couples in the state . In 2007 , in response to the problem of global warming , Huntsman signed the Western Climate Initiative , by which Utah joined with other governments in agreeing to pursue targets for reduced production of greenhouse gases . He also appeared in an advertisement sponsored by Environmental Defense , in which he said , " Now it 's time for Congress to act by capping greenhouse @-@ gas pollution . " 
 On foreign policy , Huntsman has repeatedly stated : " We need to continue working closely with China to convince North Korea to abandon its nuclear weapons program . " He has also named Taiwan , human rights , and Tibet among the " areas where we have differences with China " and vowed " robust engagement " on human rights . 
 On August 31 , Huntsman made a major policy announcement , calling for , amongst other things such as more aggressive action on completing free trade agreements , a tax policy modeled on the Simpson @-@ Bowles plan , specifically : elimination of the Alternative Minimum Tax , elimination of taxes on capital gains and dividends , elimination of all deductions and credits , in favor of significantly lower general rates , with brackets of 8 , 14 and 23 percent , and lowering the general corporate rate from 35 to 25 % . 
 = = Campaign details = = 
 In January 2011 , Newsweek published an article entitled " The Manchurian Candidate " which featured an interview with Huntsman . When asked whether he intended to run for president in 2012 , Huntsman declined to comment . The article generated significant speculation about a likely Huntsman 2012 presidential bid . 
 = = = Announcement = = = 
 Huntsman announced his campaign on June 21 , 2011 in Liberty State Park , with the Statue of Liberty visible behind him while delivering his speech . The location was chosen in homage to President Ronald Reagan , who launched his own presidential campaign from the same location . Referring to Reagan 's announcement , Huntsman remarked in his own speech , " He assured us we could ' make America great again , ' and under his leadership we did . I stand in his shadow as well as the shadow of this magnificent monument to our liberty . " 
 In the lead @-@ up to his official announcement , Huntsman gained attention for his campaign 's unconventional TV ads , produced by veteran GOP strategist Fred Davis III , featuring a lone motocross rider traveling through rugged terrain as music plays in the background , while facts about Huntsman appear on the screen . The ads were widely parodied , including by the Utah Democratic Party and Rick Santorum 's campaign . 
 A notable gaffe made by the Huntsman campaign in the moments before the announcement speech were misspelled press passes distributed to reporters on hand to cover the announcement which read " John Huntsman for President " , erroneously adding an extra " H " to Huntsman 's name . Aides reportedly scrambled in an effort to cease the distribution of the misspelled passes . 
 = = = Staff = = = 
 Susie Wiles , who ran Rick Scott 's successful 2010 gubernatorial campaign in Florida , worked first as executive director of H @-@ PAC and then as Huntsman 's campaign manager . Her appointment dovetailed with Huntsman 's strategic emphasis on winning the early Florida primary . She resigned on July 21 , 2011 , stating , " I signed up to get it started . It ’ s like a phase . This morning I said it ’ s time to move on . " She went on to explain that she had never intended to stay on with the campaign indefinitely , but instead had plans " to resume [ her ] life and get home . " Wiles stated her intention to continue to be a " friend and confidante of Huntsman . " Matt David , previously the campaign 's communications director , replaced Wiles as campaign manager . 
 The campaign hired Neil Ashdown , chief of staff to Huntsman when he was Governor of Utah and Ambassador to China , as deputy campaign manager . Conyers Davis , who worked with former California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger and David Cameron 's Conservative Party was hired as campaign operations director . Matt David served as the campaign 's first communications director , before replacing Wiles as campaign manager , with Jake <unk> as deputy communications director and Tim Miller serving as Huntsman 's spokesperson . Kris Anderson is leading research for the campaign , with Shawn <unk> and Dan Comstock 's M Street Insight doing research consulting work . 
 In June 2011 , C. Boyden Gray joined the Huntsman team as policy chair . Gray served as White House Counsel to President George H. W. Bush and EU Ambassador under George W. Bush . In early July 2011 , Mark McIntosh was appointed as the Huntsman campaign 's policy director . McIntosh had been working as counsel on energy and natural resource issues at Boyden Gray & Associates , and he previously served as Deputy General Counsel for the White House Council on Environmental Quality under President George W. Bush . Randy Schriver and Steve <unk> served as Huntsman 's respective chief foreign policy and economic advisors . 
 John Weaver served as Huntsman 's chief political strategist , with Fred Davis as a key media strategist in charge of developing Huntsman 's online web videos and branding efforts . James Richardson served as the campaign 's director of online communications . 
 = = = Fundraising = = = 
 A day after announcing his campaign for president , Huntsman raised $ 1 @.@ 2 million , and approximately $ 4 @.@ 1 million in the first weeks of his candidacy . Huntsman , who has a speculated net @-@ worth between $ 11 and $ 74 million , was reported to have contributed " less than half " of his campaign 's $ 4 @.@ 1 million haul . Before his entry into the race , Huntsman was adamant about avoiding self @-@ financing a campaign , stating " Unless you can raise it legitimately , you 're not going to win " . However , Huntsman stated he would contribute in order to " prime the pump " during a campaign visit in South Carolina . In September , Huntsman reportedly contributed $ 500 @,@ 000 to his campaign in order to make payroll . One of Huntsman 's greatest contributors was his father Jon Huntsman , Sr. , who donated around $ 2 million to his campaign . 
 With no obligation to do so due to his late entry into the race , the Huntsman Campaign agreed not to file FEC paperwork for the Second Quarter of 2011 ending on June 30 , 2011 as reported by the ABC . 
 = = 2011 developments = = 
 = = = Twitter remark and political positioning = = = 
 Huntsman gained media attention when he responded to Texas Governor Rick Perry 's entrance into the GOP primary by attacking Perry 's views on climate change and evolution through Twitter . Huntsman 's tweet was reportedly " re @-@ tweeted " over 3 @,@ 600 times – the most of any GOP presidential candidate . Although the tweet fed the impression that Huntsman was a moderate and provoked some backlash among strong conservatives , a few populist conservative commentators such as Erick Erickson declined to oppose Huntsman 's candidacy overall , with Erickson writing on December 27 that he " continue [ d ] to hope Perry surprises in Iowa and Huntsman surprises in New Hampshire " and stating on January 10 , 2012 , that he would rather have Huntsman " than Romney or Santorum " . 
 Huntsman was scheduled to speak at the Republican Leadership Conference held in New Orleans in June 2011 , but canceled . He received 25 % of the vote in the annual presidential straw @-@ poll , finishing second behind Ron Paul ( 41 % ) and ahead of Michele Bachmann ( 13 % ) . 
 In interviews following his apparent centrist attacks on Perry and Bachmann , Huntsman reiterated a " center right " position . On a This Week interview in August , Huntsman labeled himself a " center right candidate " for a " center right country " and criticized President Obama and his GOP opponents for representing " fringes " on the political spectrum . Huntsman was frequently described as " the media 's favorite Republican " , with a Florida Today columnist calling him " our man Huntsman " . 
 = = = August debate = = = 
 Huntsman participated in his first presidential debate on August 11 , 2011 , in Iowa . The debate was co @-@ sponsored by the Republican Party of Iowa , Fox News , and the Washington Examiner . Huntsman 's first question , directed by moderator Chris Wallace was : 
 You supported a stimulus package in 2009 . In fact , you said the Obama stimulus package was not big enough . As governor , you signed onto a regional cap @-@ and @-@ trade market . You endorsed civil unions for same @-@ sex couples . And you served as President Obama 's ambassador to China . Some people have suggested that maybe you 're running for president in the wrong party . 
 Huntsman responded by deflecting Wallace 's criticism and argued that his compromise was necessary and that his record as Governor of Utah represented a fiscally conservative position : 
 I 'm proud of my service to this country . If you love your country , you serve her . During a time of war , during a time of economic hardship , when asked to serve your country in a sensitive position where you can actually bring a background to help your nation , I 'm the kind of person who 's going to stand up and do it , and I 'll take that philosophy to my grave ... In terms of the stimulus you talked about , it was failed . And let me tell you what I talked about with respect to the stimulus . I talked about the need for more tax cuts in the stimulus ... We had done historic tax cuts . We created a flat tax in the state of Utah , exactly what needs to happen in this country . We got the economy moving . We became the number @-@ one job creator in this nation and the best managed state . That 's exactly what needs to happen in this nation . I am running on my record , and I am proud to run on my record . 
 = = = September to January = = = 
 In early September , Huntsman began shifting campaign resources from Florida to New Hampshire ; by moving staffers , Huntsman had the largest operational staff there at the time . The development came as the campaign reorganized New Hampshire operations , firing its campaign manager in charge of the state , Ethan Elion . Elion was replaced by Sarah Crawford Stewart , who had served as state @-@ director of Minnesota Governor Tim Pawlenty 's New Hampshire campaign before he suspended his bid after the Ames Straw Poll . 
 Huntsman received a major endorsement in late @-@ September 2011 from Tom Ridge , former Governor of Pennsylvania and Secretary of Homeland Security under George W. Bush . Ridge appeared with Huntsman at an event at Saint Anselm College in New Hampshire who called Huntsman " the only candidate with demonstrated success at the state , national and international levels . " After the endorsement and a series of campaign events in New Hampshire , a Suffolk University poll showed Huntsman in third place in New Hampshire with 10 % of likely voters , behind Mitt Romney ( 41 % ) and Ron Paul ( 14 % ) and ahead of Rick Perry , Michele Bachmann , Sarah Palin ( who had not yet declared an intention of running ) and Newt Gingrich among others . Huntsman made New Hampshire the focus of his campaign , and held over 100 campaign events there . 
 When the state of Nevada threatened to move up its nominating contest which would have interfered with the New Hampshire primary , Huntsman elected to " boycott " Nevada and skip a presidential debate held in Las Vegas on October 18 , 2011 , in protest . 
 In late 2011 , Huntsman was endorsed by several New Hampshire @-@ based newspapers . The Keene Sentinel and the Valley News , both endorsed Huntsman on December 18 over neighboring Governor and front @-@ runner in the state Mitt Romney . In addition , the Concord Monitor endorsed Huntsman on December 22 . Huntsman increased his presence in the state as the year closed , as the pro @-@ Huntsman " Our Destiny " PAC began to increase ad buys in the state A Boston Globe poll released in late December had Huntsman polling in double digits , drawing 11 % versus 17 % for Gingrich and Paul . All three nonetheless remained well back of Romney at 39 % support , however . 
 Although Huntsman emphasized his opposition to negative campaigning , he did run an ad attacking Ron Paul with Twilight Zone theme as background music , and implying that Paul 's views were outside the mainstream . 
 During the January 7 debate , Huntsman was attacked by Romney for serving as President Barack Obama 's Ambassador to China . In response , at the debate the following day , Huntsman responded : " I was criticized last night by Governor Romney for putting my country first , I just want to remind the people here in New Hampshire and throughout the United States that he criticized me while he was out raising money for serving my country in China , yes under a Democrat , like my two sons who are in the United States Navy . They ’ re not asking what the affiliation of the President is . I want to be clear ... I will always put my country first . I think that ’ s important " . 
 = = 2012 Caucuses and primaries = = 
 = = = Iowa = = = 
 Huntsman , who held no events in Iowa , finished seventh in the January 3 Iowa caucuses with 739 votes , or 0 @.@ 6 percent ; ahead of only withdrawn candidate Herman Cain and minor candidate Buddy Roemer . Huntsman reiterated a focus on the January 10 New Hampshire primary . 
 = = = New Hampshire = = = 
 Ahead of the New Hampshire primary , Huntsman received newspaper endorsements from The Citizen as well as the Boston Globe , the largest newspaper in neighboring Massachusetts , rival Romney 's home @-@ state . According to Politico reporter Jonathan Martin , Huntsman campaigned in a dual manner , with a style and manner suggesting moderation while his <unk> aired TV ads which depicted him as conservative . 
 It was in New Hampshire where Huntsman adopted his new " Country First " campaign slogan . The slogan was borrowed from John McCain 's 2008 campaign , though the context of the slogan was different . Huntsman , who , as Governor of Utah at the time , endorsed McCain over Mitt Romney in the 2008 Republican presidential primary , had hoped McCain would return the favor ; however , McCain endorsed Romney in a rally at Manchester 's Manchester Central High School on January 4 . Huntsman later characterized McCain 's endorsement of his main rival as a " petty betrayal " . He told McCain " I don 't care if you support Romney , that 's great – but just to have given me the dignity of waiting until after the New Hampshire primary . " McCain replied , " I didn 't mean to offend . I hope your family is well . " 
 By the weekend before the January 10 primary , polls showed Huntsman in strong competition with Ron Paul for a second place showing in New Hampshire , behind front @-@ runner Romney . A Pulse Opinion Research poll on January 4 showed Huntsman narrowly behind Paul 19 – 16 % , while an American Research Group poll on January 7 showed Huntsman edging Paul 17 – 16 % , though both remained well behind Romney . 
 Huntsman ultimately received 17 % of the vote in New Hampshire for a third @-@ place finish , although exit polls suggested he won just 10 % of Republicans in a primary that was not restricted to registered Republicans . 
 = = = South Carolina = = = 
 Huntsman stayed in the race after his 3rd @-@ place finish in New Hampshire , campaigning in South Carolina ahead of the January 21 primary , though he expressed that his expectations in the state were " very low " , and stated that his primary goal was to " stay relevant " in the race . Nonetheless , Huntsman received the endorsement of South Carolina 's largest newspaper , The State on January 15 . 
 = = Withdrawal = = 
 On January 15 , 2012 , it was announced that Huntsman would be withdrawing from the race the next day and endorsing Mitt Romney . 
 After dropping out , Huntsman still received votes due to him having ballot access to every state besides Arizona and Virginia , due to failure to collect enough signatures . At the end of the GOP primaries , Huntsman placed fifth out of the ten candidates , with a total of 83 @,@ 173 popular votes and 1 delegate at the Republican National Convention . 
 = = Endorsements = = 
 = Robin Olds = 
 Robin Olds ( July 14 , 1922 – June 14 , 2007 ) was an American fighter pilot and general officer in the U.S. Air Force . He was a " triple ace " , with a combined total of 16 victories in World War II and the Vietnam War . He retired in 1973 as a brigadier general . 
 The son of Army Air Forces Major General Robert Olds , educated at West Point , and the product of an upbringing in the early years of the U.S. Army Air Corps , Olds epitomized the youthful World War II fighter pilot . He remained in the service as it became the United States Air Force , despite often being at odds with its leadership , and was one of its pioneer jet pilots . Rising to the command of two fighter wings , Olds is regarded among aviation historians , and his peers , as the best wing commander of the Vietnam War , for both his air @-@ fighting skills , and his reputation as a combat leader . 
 Olds was promoted to brigadier general after returning from Vietnam but did not hold another major command . The remainder of his career was spent in non @-@ operational positions , as Commandant of Cadets at the United States Air Force Academy and as an official in the Air Force Inspector General 's Office . His inability to rise higher as a general officer is attributed to both his maverick views and his penchant for drinking . 
 Olds had a highly publicized career and life , including marriage to Hollywood actress Ella Raines . As a young man he was also recognized for his athletic prowess in both high school and college , being named an All @-@ American as a lineman in college football . Olds expressed his philosophy regarding fighter pilots in the quote : " There are pilots and there are pilots ; with the good ones , it is inborn . You can 't teach it . If you are a fighter pilot , you have to be willing to take risks . " 
 = = Early life = = 
 Olds was born " Robert Oldys , Jr . " in Honolulu into an Army family and spent much of his boyhood in Hampton , Virginia , where he attended elementary and high school . His father was Captain ( later Major General ) Robert Oldys ( later Olds ) , an instructor pilot in France during World War I , former aide to Brigadier General Billy Mitchell from 1922 to 1925 , and a leading advocate of strategic bombing in the Air Corps . His mother , Eloise Wichman Nott Olds , died when Robin was four and he was raised by his father . Olds was the eldest of four brothers , followed by Stevan ( 1924 ) , Sterling ( 1935 ) , and Frederick ( 1936 ) . 
 Growing up primarily at Langley Field , Virginia , Olds virtually made daily contact with the small group of officers who would lead the US Army Air Forces in World War II ( one neighbor was Major Carl Spaatz , destined to become the first Chief of Staff of the USAF ) , and as a result was imbued with an unusually strong dedication to the air service , and conversely , with a low tolerance for officers who did not exhibit the same . On November 10 , 1925 , his father appeared as a witness on behalf of Billy Mitchell during Mitchell 's court @-@ martial in Washington , D.C .. He brought three @-@ year @-@ old Robin with him to court , dressed in an Air Service uniform , and posed with him for newspaper photographers before testifying . 
 Olds first flew at the age of eight , in an open cockpit biplane operated by his father . At the age of 12 , Olds made attending the U.S. Military Academy at West Point an objective to accomplish his goals of becoming an officer , a military aviator , and playing football . 
 His father was made commander of the pioneer B @-@ 17 Flying Fortress 2nd Bombardment Group at Langley Field on March 1 , 1937 , and promoted to lieutenant colonel on March 7 . Olds attended Hampton High School where he was elected president of his class three successive years , and played varsity high school football on a team that won the state championship of Virginia in 1937 . Olds was aggressive , even mean , as a player , and received offers to attend Virginia Military Institute and Dartmouth College on football scholarships . 
 Instead of entering college after graduating in 1939 , Olds enrolled at Millard Preparatory School in Washington , D.C. , a school established to prepare men for the entrance examinations to the military academies . When Germany invaded Poland , Olds attempted to join the Royal Canadian Air Force but was thwarted by his father 's refusal to approve his enlistment papers . Olds completed Millard Prep and applied for admission to the United States Military Academy at West Point . After he received a conditional commitment for nomination from Pennsylvania Congressman J. Buell Snyder , Olds moved to Uniontown , Pennsylvania , where he lived in the YMCA and supported himself working odd jobs . He passed the West Point entrance examination and was accepted into the Class of 1944 on June 1 , 1940 . He entered the academy a month later but after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor , Olds was sent to the Spartan School of Aeronautics in Tulsa , Oklahoma , for flight training . This training ended a year later by Christmas 1942 . Olds returned to West Point , hoping to graduate early and see action in the war . 
 = = = West Point and football = = = 
 As a plebe , Olds played football on a freshman squad that began the season with three losses but finished 3 @-@ 4 @-@ 1 while the varsity won only one game in its second consecutive losing season . As a result , the new academy superintendent , Maj. Gen. Robert L. Eichelberger , replaced the head coach ( an Army officer ) with Earl " Red " Blaik , a 1920 graduate and head coach at Dartmouth , who had recruited Olds in 1939 . 
 Olds played on the varsity college football team in both 1941 and 1942 . At 6 foot 2 inches in height ( <unk> ) and weighing 205 pounds ( 92 kg ) , he played tackle on both offense and defense , lettering both seasons . Army 's record in 1941 was 5 @-@ 3 @-@ 1 , with wins over The Citadel , VMI , Yale , Columbia , and West Virginia , a scoreless tie with Notre Dame , and losses to Harvard , Penn and Navy . The loss to the midshipmen was followed eight days later by the attack on Pearl Harbor . 
 In 1942 he was named by Collier 's Weekly as its " Lineman of the Year " and by Grantland Rice as " Player of the Year . " Olds was also selected as an All @-@ American as the cadets compiled a 6 @-@ 3 record , beating Lafayette College , Cornell , Columbia , Harvard , VMI , and Princeton , and falling to Notre Dame , Penn , and Navy . In the Army – Navy Game of 1942 , which was played at Annapolis instead of Philadelphia , Olds had both upper front teeth knocked out when he received a forearm blow to the mouth while making a tackle . Olds returned to the game and reportedly was cheered by the Navy Third and Fourth Classes , which were assigned as the Army cheering section when wartime travel restrictions prevented the Corps of Cadets from attending . In 1985 Olds was enshrined in the College Football Hall of Fame . 
 Olds developed ambivalent feelings about West Point , admiring its dedication to " Duty , Honor , Country " , but disturbed by the tendency of many tactical officers to distort the purpose of its Honor Code . In March 1943 , Olds was braced by an officer upon returning from leave in New York City , and compelled on penalty of an honor violation to admit he had consumed alcohol . The infraction reduced him in rank from cadet captain to cadet private , characterized by Olds in his memoirs as " only the second cadet in the history of West Point to earn that dubious honor . " 
 He walked punishment tours until the day of his graduation in June . The incident left its mark on Olds such that when he became Commandant of Cadets at the Air Force Academy , use of the Honor Code as an instrument for integrity rather than as a tool for petty enforcement of discipline became a point of emphasis in his administration . During his Academy years Olds also acquired a strong contempt for alumni networking , commonly called " ring knocking " , to the degree that he went out of his way to conceal his West Point background . 
 By an act of Congress on October 1 , 1942 , during Olds ' Second Class year , the academy began a three @-@ year curriculum for the duration of the war for cadets entering after July 1939 . Cadets applying to the Air Corps were classified as Air Cadets , with a modified curriculum that provided flying training but eliminated Military Topography and Graphics required for Ground Cadets . Olds ' class was given an abridged second class course of study until January 19 , 1943 , when it began an abridged first class course . 
 Olds completed primary training in the summer of 1942 at the Spartan School of Aviation in Tulsa , Oklahoma , and basic and advanced training at Stewart Field , New York . 208 cadets including Olds completed the course , while five classmates died in accidents . Olds received his pilot 's wings personally from Gen. Henry H. Arnold on May 30 , 1943 , and graduated on June 1 as a member of the Class of June 1943 , 194th in general merit of 514 graduates . 
 = = World War II fighter pilot = = 
 = = = P @-@ 38 Lightning missions = = = 
 Lieutenant Olds completed fighter pilot training with the 329th Fighter Group , an operational training unit based at Grand Central Air Terminal in Glendale , California . His initial twin @-@ engine training at Williams Field , Arizona , was in the Curtiss AT @-@ 9 , followed by transition fighter training to the Lockheed P @-@ 38 Lightning in its P @-@ 322 variant . After gunnery training at Matagorda , Texas in the first half of August 1943 , he was assigned to P @-@ 38 phase training at Muroc Army Air Field , California . 
 In early 1944 he became part of the cadre assigned to build up the newly activated 434th Fighter Squadron and its parent 479th Fighter Group , based at Lomita , California . Olds logged 650 hours of flying time during training , including 250 hours in the P @-@ 38 Lightning , as the 479th built its proficiency as a combat group . It departed the Los Angeles area on April 15 for Camp Kilmer , New Jersey , and shipped aboard the USS Argentina for Europe on May 3 . The 479th arrived in Scotland on May 14 , 1944 , and entrained for RAF Wattisham , England , where it arrived the next day . 
 The 479th began combat on May 26 , flying bomber escort missions and attacking transportation targets in occupied France in advance of the invasion of Normandy . Olds flew a new P @-@ <unk> Lightning that he nicknamed Scat II . Olds ' crew chief , T / Sgt. Glen A. Wold , said that he showed an immediate interest in aircraft maintenance and learned emergency servicing under Wold . He also insisted his aircraft be waxed to reduce air resistance and helped his maintenance crew carry out their tasks . On July 24 Olds was promoted to captain and became a flight and later squadron leader . Following a low @-@ level bridge @-@ bombing mission to Montmirail , France , on August 14 , Olds shot down his first German aircraft , a pair of Focke @-@ Wulf Fw 190s . 
 On an escort mission to Wismar on August 25 , his flight was on the far left of the group 's line abreast formation and encountered 40 @-@ 50 Messerschmitt Bf 109s near <unk> , flying north at the same 28 @,@ 000 ft ( 8 @,@ 500 m ) altitude in a loose formation of three large <unk> . Olds turned his flight left and began a ten @-@ minute pursuit in which they climbed to altitude above and behind the Germans . Over <unk> , undetected by the Germans , Olds and his wingman jettisoned their fuel drop tanks and attacked , although the second element of the flight had been unable to keep up during the climb . 
 Just as Olds began firing , both engines of his P @-@ 38 quit from fuel exhaustion ; in the excitement of the attack he had neglected to switch to his internal fuel tanks . He continued attacking in " dead @-@ stick mode " , hitting his target in the fuselage and shooting off part of its engine cowling . After fatally damaging the Bf 109 he dived away and restarted his engines . Despite battle damage to his own plane , including loss of a side window of its canopy , Olds shot down two during the dogfight and another on the way home to become the first ace of the 479th FG . His combat report for that date concluded : 
 Still in a shallow dive , I observed another P @-@ 38 and an Me 109 going round and round . It seemed that the 38 needed help so I started down . At about 4 @,@ 000 ft ( 1 @,@ 200 m ) , the Jerry , still way out of my range , turned under me and slightly to the right . I rolled over on my back , following him and gave him an ineffective burst at long range . By this time I was traveling in excess of 500 mph ( 800 km / h ) . My left window blew out , scaring the hell out of me . I thought I had been hit by some of the ground fire I had observed in the vicinity . I regained control of the aircraft and pulled out above a wheat field . I tried to contact the flight to get myself recognized , but observed an Me 109 making a pass at me from about seven o 'clock high . I broke left as well as my plane could and the Jerry overshot . I straightened out and gave him a burst . He <unk> steeply to the left and I shot some more . He passed right over me and I slipped over in an Immelmann . As I straightened out at the top , I saw the pilot bail out . 
 He made eight claims while flying the P @-@ 38 ( five of which are sustained by the Air Force Historical Research Agency ) and was originally credited as the top @-@ scoring P @-@ 38 pilot of the European Theater of Operations . 
 = = = P @-@ 51 Mustang pilot = = = 
 The 479th FG converted to the P @-@ 51 Mustang in mid @-@ September . On his second transition flight , at the point of touchdown during landing , Olds learned a lesson in " false confidence " when the powerful torque of the single @-@ engined fighter forced him to ground loop after the Mustang veered off the runway . Olds shot down an Fw 190 in his new Scat IV on October 6 during a savage battle near Berlin in which he was nearly shot down by his own wingman . He completed his first combat tour on November 9 , 1944 , accruing 270 hours of combat time and six kills . 
 After returning to the United States for a two @-@ month leave , Olds began a full second tour at Wattisham on January 15 , 1945 . He was assigned duties as operations officer of the 434th Fighter squadron . Promoted to major on February 9 , 1945 , Olds claimed his seventh victory southeast of Magdeburg , Germany the same day , downing another Bf 109 . On February 14 , he claimed three victories , two Bf 109s and an Fw 190 , but one of the former was credited only as a " probable " . 
 His final World War II aerial kill occurred on April 7 , 1945 , when Olds in Scat VI led the 479th Fighter Group on a mission escorting B @-@ 24s bombing an ammunition dump in Lüneburg , Germany . The engagement marked the only combat appearance of Sonderkommando Elbe , a German Air Force Squadron formed to ram Allied bombers . South of Bremen , Olds noticed contrails popping up above a bank of cirrus clouds , of aircraft flying above and to the left of the bombers . For five minutes these <unk> paralleled the bomber stream while the 479th held station . Turning to investigate , Olds saw pairs of Me 262s turn towards and dive on the Liberators . After damaging one of the jets in a chase meant to lure the fighter escort away from the bombers , the Mustangs returned to the bomber stream . Olds observed a Bf 109 of Sonderkommando Elbe attack the bombers and shoot down a B @-@ 24 . Olds pursued the Bf 109 through the formation , and shot it down . 
 Olds achieved the bulk of his strafing credits the following week in attacks on Lübeck Blankensee and Tarnewitz airdromes on April 13 , and <unk> airfield in Austria on April 16 , when he destroyed six German planes on the ground . He later reflected on the hazards of such missions : 
 I was hit by flak as I was pulling out of a dive @-@ strafing pass on an airfield called Tarnewitz , up on the Baltic . Five P @-@ 51s made a pass on the airdrome that April day . I was the only one to return home ... When I tested the stall characteristics of my wounded bird over our home airfield , I found it quit flying at a little over 175 mph ( 282 km / h ) indicated and rolled violently into the dead wing ( note : the right flap had been blown away and two large holes knocked in the same wing ) . What to do ? Bailout seemed the logical response , but here 's where sentiment got in the way of reason . That airplane ( note : " Scat VI " ) had taken me through a lot and I was damned if I was going to give up on her ... why the bird and I survived the careening , bouncing and <unk> ride down the length of the field , I guess I 'll never know . 
 Olds had not only risen in rank to field grade but was given command of his squadron on March 25 , less than two years out of West Point and at only 22 years of age . By the end of his combat service he was officially credited with 12 German planes shot down and 11 @.@ 5 others destroyed on the ground . Olds became an ace on both of his combat tours and was twice awarded the Silver Star , for the mission of August 25 and for the achievements of himself and his squadron during his combined tours . 
 = = Career highlights and assignments = = 
 Returning to the United States after the war , Olds was assigned at West Point as an assistant football coach for Red Blaik . Apparently resented by many on the staff for his rapid rise in rank and plethora of combat decorations , Olds transferred in February 1946 to the 412th Fighter Group at March Field , California , to fly the P @-@ 80 Shooting Star , which began a career @-@ long professional struggle with superiors he viewed as more <unk> than warrior @-@ minded . 
 In April 1946 , he and Lieutenant Colonel John C. " Pappy " Herbst formed what he believed was the Air Force 's first jet aerobatic demonstration team . In late May , the 412th was ordered to undertake <unk> COMET , a nine @-@ city transcontinental mass formation flight . Olds and Herbst performed a two @-@ ship acro routine that thrilled the crowds at every stop , the highlight being a three @-@ day layover in Washington , D.C. In June , Olds was one of four pilots who participated in the first one @-@ day , dawn @-@ to @-@ dusk , transcontinental round trip jet flight from March Field to Washington , D.C. 
 The jet demonstration performances with Herbst ended tragically on July 4 , 1946 , when Herbst crashed at the Del Mar Racetrack after his aircraft stalled during an encore of their routine finale in which the P @-@ 80s did a loop while configured to land . Later that same year Olds took second place in the Thompson Trophy Race ( Jet Division ) of the Cleveland National Air Races at Brook Park , Ohio over the Labor Day weekend . In this first " closed course " jet race , six P @-@ 80s competed against each other on a three pylon course 30 miles in length . 
 Olds went to England under the U.S. Air Force / Royal Air Force Exchange Program in 1948 . Flying the Gloster Meteor jet fighter , he commanded No. 1 Squadron at Royal Air Force Station Tangmere between October 20 , 1948 and September 25 , 1949 , the first foreigner to command an RAF unit in peacetime . Following his exchange assignment , Olds returned to March AFB to become operations officer of the 94th Fighter Squadron of the 1st Fighter Group , flying F @-@ 86A Sabres , on November 15 , 1949 . 
 Olds was assigned to command the 71st Fighter Squadron , which was soon detached from the 1st FG to the Air Defense Command and based at the Greater Pittsburgh Airport in Pennsylvania . As a result , he missed service in the Korean War despite repeated applications for a combat assignment . Discouraged and at odds with the Air Force , in which he was seen as an iconoclast , Olds reportedly was in the process of resigning when he was talked out of it by a mentor , Maj Gen Frederic H. Smith , Jr . , who brought him to work at Eastern Air Defense Command headquarters at Stewart AFB . 
 Promoted to Lieutenant Colonel on February 20 , 1951 , and Colonel April 15 , 1953 , while just thirty years of age , Olds served unenthusiastically in several staff assignments until returning to flying in 1955 . At first on the command staff of the 86th Fighter @-@ Interceptor Wing at Landstuhl Air Base , Germany , Olds then commanded its Sabre @-@ equipped 86th Fighter @-@ Interceptor Group from October 8 , 1955 , to August 10 , 1956 . He then was made chief of the Weapons Proficiency Center at <unk> Air Base , Libya , in charge of all fighter weapons training for the United States Air Forces Europe until July 1958 . 
 Olds had administrative and staff duty assignments at the Pentagon between 1958 and 1962 as the Deputy Chief , Air Defense Division , Headquarters USAF . In this assignment he prepared a number of papers , iconoclastic at the time , which soon became prophetic , including identifying the need for upgraded conventional munitions ( foretelling the " bomb shortage " of the Vietnam War ) , and the dearth of any serious tactical air training in conventional warfare . From November 1959 to March 1960 , his section worked intensely to develop a program reducing the entire structure of the ADC with the purpose of generating $ 6 @.@ 5 billion for classified funding to develop the SR @-@ 71 Blackbird . Following his Pentagon assignment , Olds attended the National War College , graduating in 1963 . 
 Olds next became commander of the 81st Tactical Fighter Wing at RAF Bentwaters , England , an F @-@ 101 Voodoo fighter @-@ bomber wing , on September 8 , 1963 . The 81st TFW was a major combat unit in United States Air Forces Europe , having both a tactical nuclear and conventional bombing role supporting NATO . Olds commanded the wing until July 26 , 1965 . As his Deputy Commander of Operations Olds brought with him Colonel Daniel " Chappie " James , Jr . , whom he had met during his Pentagon assignment and who would go on to become the first African @-@ American 4 @-@ star Air Force general . James and Olds worked closely together for a year as a command team and developed both a professional and social relationship which was later renewed in combat . 
 Olds formed a demonstration team for the F @-@ 101 using pilots of his wing , without command authorization , and performed at an Air Force open house at Bentwaters . He asserted that his superior at Third Air Force attempted to have him court @-@ martialed , but the commander of USAFE , General Gabriel P. <unk> , instead authorized his removal from command of the 81st TFW , cancellation of a recommended Legion of Merit award , and transfer to the headquarters of the Ninth Air Force at Shaw Air Force Base , South Carolina . 
 In September 1966 , Olds was tapped to command an F @-@ 4C Phantom wing in Southeast Asia . En route he arranged with the 4453rd Combat Crew Training Wing , Davis @-@ Monthan Air Force Base , Arizona , ( where Col. James was now Deputy Commander of Operations ) to be checked out in the Phantom , completing the 14 @-@ step syllabus in just five days . His instructor was Major William L. Kirk , the 4453rd <unk> 's Standardization and Evaluation officer , who had been one of Olds ' pilots at RAF Bentwaters , and who later commanded the United States Air Forces Europe as a full general . Kirk accompanied Olds for practice firing of AIM @-@ 7 Sparrow and AIM @-@ 9 Sidewinder missiles on the Point Mugu missile range while Olds was en route to Travis Air Force Base for his charter flight overseas . Olds rewarded Kirk by granting him a transfer to his command in Thailand in March 1967 . 
 = = Vietnam = = 
 On September 30 , 1966 , Olds took command of the 8th Tactical Fighter Wing , based at Ubon Royal Thai Air Force Base . A lack of aggressiveness and sense of purpose in the wing had led to the change in command ( Olds ' predecessor had flown only 12 missions during the 10 months the wing had been in combat ) . The 44 @-@ year @-@ old colonel also set the tone for his command stint by immediately placing himself on the flight schedule as a rookie pilot under officers junior to himself , then challenging them to train him properly because he would soon be leading them . 
 Olds ' vice commander was Col. Vermont Garrison , an ace in both World War II and Korea , and in December Olds brought in James to replace an ineffective deputy commander for operations , creating arguably the strongest and most effective tactical command triumvirate of the Vietnam War . The Olds @-@ James combination became popularly nicknamed " Blackman and Robin " . Olds took to the air war over North Vietnam in an F @-@ 4C Phantom he nicknamed " Scat XXVII " , in keeping with his previous combat aircraft that all carried the " Scat " name . 
 = = = MiG Killer = = = 
 After suggesting the idea to Seventh Air Force commander Major General William <unk> , himself a former commander of the 8th TFW , Olds was directed to plan a mission designed to draw the North Vietnamese Mikoyan @-@ Gurevich MiG @-@ 21s into an aerial trap , and " Operation Bolo " resulted . 
 In October 1966 , strike force F @-@ 105 Thunderchiefs were equipped with QRC @-@ 160 radar jamming pods whose effectiveness virtually ended their losses to surface @-@ to @-@ air missiles . As a result , SAM attacks shifted to the Phantoms , unprotected because of a shortage of pods . To protect the F @-@ 4s , rules of engagement that allowed the MiGCAP to escort the strike force in and out of the target area were revised in December to restrict MiGCAP penetration to the edge of SAM coverage . MiG interceptions increased as a result , primarily by MiG @-@ 21s using high speed hit @-@ and @-@ run tactics against bomb @-@ laden F @-@ 105 formations , and although only two bombers had been lost , the threat to the force was perceived as serious . 
 The Bolo plan reasoned that by equipping F @-@ 4s with jamming pods , using the call signs and communications codewords of the F @-@ 105 wings , and flying their flight profiles through northwest Vietnam , the F @-@ 4s could effectively simulate an F @-@ 105 bombing mission and entice the MiG @-@ 21s into intercepting not bomb @-@ laden Thunderchiefs , but Phantoms configured for air @-@ to @-@ air combat . 
 After an intensive planning , maintenance , and briefing period , the mission was scheduled for January 1 , 1967 . Poor weather caused a 24 @-@ hour delay , but even then , a solid overcast covered the North Vietnamese airbases at Phúc Yên , Gia Lam , Kép , and Cat Bai when the bogus strike force began arriving over the target area , five @-@ minute intervals separating the flights of F @-@ 4s . Leading the first flight , Olds overflew the primary MiG @-@ 21 base at Phúc Yên and was on a second pass when MiGs finally began popping up through the cloud base . Although at first seemingly random in nature , it quickly became apparent that the MiGs were ground @-@ controlled intercepts designed to place the supposed F @-@ 105s in a vise between enemies to their front and rear . 
 The F @-@ 4s and their crews , however , proved equal to the situation and claimed seven MiG @-@ 21s destroyed , almost half of the 16 then in service with the VPAF without loss to USAF aircraft . Olds himself shot down one of the seven , for which he and the other aircrew were awarded Silver Stars . Follow @-@ up interceptions over the next two days by MiGs against RF @-@ 4C reconnaissance aircraft led to a similar mission on a smaller scale on January 6 , with another two MiG @-@ 21s shot down . VPAF fighter activity diminished to almost nothing for 10 weeks afterwards , thereby accomplishing the main goal of Operation Bolo : to eliminate or diminish the threat of MiGs to the strike formations . 
 On May 4 , Olds destroyed another MiG @-@ 21 over Phúc Yên . Two weeks later , on May 20 , he destroyed two MiG @-@ 17s in what one of his pilots described as a " vengeful chase " after they shot down his wingman during a large dogfight , bringing his total to 16 confirmed kills ( 12 in World War II and four in Vietnam ) , making him a triple ace . Olds states that following the shoot down of his fourth MiG , he intentionally avoided shooting down a fifth , even though he had at least ten opportunities to do so , because he had learned in the middle of June that Seventh Air Force , at the direction of Secretary of the Air Force Harold Brown , would immediately relieve him of command to return to the United States as a publicity asset . 
 He was awarded a fourth Silver Star for leading a three @-@ aircraft low @-@ level bombing strike on March 30 , 1967 , and the Air Force Cross for an attack on the Paul Doumer Bridge in Hanoi on August 11 , one of five awarded to Air Force pilots for that mission . He flew his final combat mission over North Vietnam on September 23 , 1967 . 
 His 259 total combat missions included 107 in World War II and 152 in Southeast Asia , 105 of those over North Vietnam . Scat XXVII ( F @-@ 4C @-@ 24 @-@ MC 64 @-@ <unk> ) was retired from operational service and placed on display at the National Museum of the United States Air Force , Wright @-@ Patterson Air Force Base , Ohio . 
 = = = Olds 's mustache = = = 
 Olds was known for the extravagantly waxed ( and decidedly non @-@ regulation ) handlebar moustache he sported in Vietnam . It was a common superstition among airmen to grow a " bulletproof mustache " , but Olds also used his as " a gesture of defiance . The kids on base loved it . Most everybody grew a mustache . " Olds started the mustache in the wake of the success of Operation Bolo and let it grow beyond regulation length because " It became the middle finger I couldn 't raise in the PR photographs . The mustache became my silent last word in the verbal battles ... with higher headquarters on rules , targets , and fighting the war . " Returning home , however , marked the end of this flamboyance . When he reported to his first interview with Air Force Chief of Staff General John P. McConnell , McConnell walked up to him , stuck a finger under his nose and said , " Take it off . " Olds replied , " Yes , sir . " 
 For his part , Olds was not upset with the order , recalling : 
 To tell the truth , I wasn 't all that fond of the damned thing by then , but it had become a symbol for the men of the 8th Wing . I knew McConnell understood . During his visits to Ubon over the past year he had never referred to my breach of military standards , just seemed rather amused at the variety of ' <unk> sported by many of the troops . ( It ) was the most direct order I had received in twenty @-@ four years of service . 
 The incident with the mustache is given credit as the impetus for a new Air Force tradition , " <unk> March " , in which aircrew , aircraft maintainers , and other airmen worldwide show solidarity by a symbolic , albeit good @-@ natured " protest " for one month against Air Force facial hair regulations . 
 = = = <unk> advocate = = = 
 " We weren 't allowed to dogfight . Very little attention was paid to strafing , dive @-@ bombing , rocketry , stuff like that . It was thought to be unnecessary . Yet every confrontation America faced in the Cold War years was a ' bombs and bullets ' situation , raging under an uneasy nuclear standoff . " The Vietnam War " proved the need to teach tactical warfare and have fighter pilots . It caught us unprepared because we weren 't allowed to learn it or practice it in training . " 
 Olds often lamented the lack of an internal gun in the F @-@ 4C he flew during his tour in Vietnam , but would not allow his fighters to be equipped with the gun pods then available . While he knew that he would be capable of effectively using them , he was also aware that none of his pilots were trained in the use of a gun or dogfighting . He also reasoned that the drag of the pod would both degrade the performance characteristics of the F @-@ 4 while not gaining it any advantage against the more maneuverable MiG @-@ 17s and MiG @-@ 21s , result in unnecessary losses strafing worthless targets , and reduce the number of bombs carried by the Phantoms , the delivery of which was the 8th 's primary mission . 
 The History Channel , in its series <unk> , recreated Operation Bolo using a computer animation for an episode entitled " Air Ambush " , first telecast on November 10 , 2006 . Olds , then 84 years old , appeared as a commentator , and as background , dogfights he experienced as a P @-@ 38 pilot were also recreated . 
 = = Post @-@ Southeast Asia career = = 
 = = = Air Force Academy 1967 – 71 = = = 
 After relinquishing command of the 8th TFW on September 23 , 1967 , Olds reported for duty to the United States Air Force Academy in Colorado Springs , Colorado , in December 1967 . He served as Commandant of Cadets for three years and sought to restore morale in the wake of a major cheating scandal . Olds was promoted to brigadier general on June 1 , 1968 , with seniority dating from May 28 . 
 = = = Director of Aerospace Safety = = = 
 In February 1971 he began his last duty assignment as director of aerospace safety in the Office of the Inspector General , Headquarters USAF , and after December 1971 as part of the Air Force Inspection and Safety Center , a newly activated separate operating agency located at Norton Air Force Base , California . Olds oversaw the creation of policies , standards , and procedures for Air Force accident prevention programs , and dealt with work safety education , workplace accident investigation and analysis , and safety inspections . 
 = = = 1971 inspector general tour and 1973 retirement = = = 
 Air Force Inspector General and Olds ' West Point classmate Lt Gen Louis L. Wilson , Jr . , sent Olds to Southeast Asia in the autumn of 1971 to determine the state of readiness of Air Force pilots . Olds toured USAF bases in Thailand ( flying several unauthorized combat missions in the process ) and brought back a blunt assessment . Air Force pilots , he reported to the Air Force Chief of Staff , Gen John D. Ryan ( a former SAC general and bomber pilot often at odds with the tactical fighter community ) , " ... couldn 't fight their way out of a wet paper bag , " because of a systemic lack of interest by the USAF in air @-@ to @-@ air combat training for fighter crews . He warned that losses would be severe in any resumption of aerial combat . Olds recalled that Ryan expressed surprise at this assessment and reflected his disagreement . 
 When Operation Linebacker began in May 1972 , American fighter jets returned to the offense in the skies over North Vietnam for the first time in nearly four years . Navy and Marine Corps fighters , reaping the benefits of their TOPGUN program , immediately enjoyed considerable success . In contrast by June , as Olds had predicted , the Air Force 's fighter community was struggling with a nearly 1 : 1 kill @-@ loss ratio . To the new Inspector General , Lt Gen Ernest C. Hardin , Jr . , Olds offered to take a voluntary reduction in rank to colonel so he could return to operational command and straighten out the situation . Olds decided to leave the Air Force when the offer was refused ( he was offered another inspection tour instead ) and he retired on June 1 , 1973 . 
 = = Awards and decorations = = 
 Robin Olds ' ribbons as they appeared at retirement . 
 From top , and from left to right : Command pilot . 
 Row 1 : Air Force Cross ; Air Force Distinguished Service Medal , one oak leaf cluster . 
 Row 2 : Silver Star , three oak leaf clusters ; Legion of Merit ; Distinguished Flying Cross , five oak leaf clusters . 
 Row 3 : Air Medal , with 39 oak leaf clusters . 
 Row 4 : Air Force Commendation Medal ; Presidential Unit Citation , with oak leaf cluster ; Outstanding Unit Award , with two oak leaf clusters ; American Defense Service Medal . 
 Row 5 : American Campaign Medal ; European @-@ African @-@ Middle Eastern Campaign Medal with six campaign stars ; World War II Victory Medal ; National Defense Service Medal , with second service star . 
 Row 6 : Vietnam Service Medal ; Air Force Longevity Service Award , with six oak leaf clusters ; Small Arms Expert Marksmanship Medal ; Légion d 'honneur . 
 Row 7 : Distinguished Flying Cross ( United Kingdom ) ; Croix de Guerre ( France ) , with star ; Vietnam Air Gallantry Cross with Gold Wings ; Republic of Vietnam Campaign Medal . 
 Not shown : 
 Vietnam Air Force Distinguished Service Order , 2nd Class 
 Vietnam Air Force Meritorious Service Medal 
 = = = Air Force Cross citation = = = 
 Colonel Robin Olds 
 U.S. Air Force 
 Date Of Action : August 11 , 1967 
 The President of the United States of America , authorized by Title 10 , Section <unk> , United States Code , takes pleasure in presenting the Air Force Cross to Colonel Robin Olds ( <unk> : 0 @-@ <unk> ) , United States Air Force , for extraordinary heroism in military operations against an opposing armed force while serving as Strike Mission Commander in the 8th Tactical Fighter Wing , Ubon Royal Thai Air Base , Thailand , against the Paul Doumer Bridge , a major north @-@ south transportation link on Hanoi 's Red River in North Vietnam , on 11 August 1967 . On that date , Colonel Olds led his strike force of eight F @-@ 4C aircraft against a key railroad and highway bridge in North Vietnam . Despite intense , accurately directed fire , multiple surface @-@ to @-@ air missile attacks on his force , and continuous harassment by MiG fighters defending the target , Colonel Olds , with undaunted determination , indomitable courage , and professional skill , led his force through to help destroy this significant bridge . As a result the flow of war materials into this area was appreciably reduced . Through his extraordinary heroism , superb airmanship , and aggressiveness in the face of hostile forces , Colonel Olds reflected the highest credit upon himself and the United States Air Force . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Olds was briefly a stepbrother of author Gore Vidal after Olds ' father married for the fourth time in June 1942 , to Nina Gore <unk> . His father died of pneumonia on April 28 , 1943 , after hospitalization for constrictive pericarditis and Libman @-@ Sacks endocarditis , at the age of 46 , just prior to Olds ' graduation from West Point . 
 In 1946 , while based at March Field , Olds met Hollywood actress ( and " pin @-@ up girl " ) Ella Raines on a blind date in Palm Springs . They married in Beverly Hills on February 6 , 1947 , and had two daughters , Christina and Susan , and a son , Robert Ernest , who was stillborn in 1958 . Most of their 29 @-@ year marriage , marked by frequent extended separations and difficult <unk> , was turbulent because of a clash of lifestyles , particularly her refusal to ever live in government housing on base . Robin Olds and Ella Raines separated in 1975 and divorced in 1976 . Robin married Abigail Morgan Sellers Barnett in January 1978 , and they divorced after fifteen years of marriage . 
 In his retirement at Steamboat Springs , Colorado , Olds pursued his love of skiing and served on the city 's planning commission . He was active in public speaking , making 21 events as late in his life as 2005 and 13 in 2006 . 
 Olds ' fondness for alcohol was well known . John Darrell Sherwood , in his book Fast Movers : Jet Pilots and the Vietnam Experience , posits that Olds ' heavy drinking hurt his post @-@ Vietnam career . On July 12 , 2001 , Olds was arrested for driving under the influence of alcohol and resisting arrest near his home in Steamboat Springs . Olds , briefly hospitalized during the incident for facial cuts , pleaded guilty in return for charges of weaving and felony vehicular eluding being dropped . Olds was placed on one year probation , and ordered to pay almost $ 900 in fines and costs , attend an alcohol education course , and perform 72 hours of community service . 
 Days later , on July 21 , 2001 , Olds was enshrined at Dayton , Ohio , in the National Aviation Hall of Fame class of 2001 , along with test pilot Joseph H. Engle , Marine Corps ace Marion E. Carl , and Albert Lee <unk> . He became the only person enshrined in both the National Aviation Hall of Fame and the College Football Hall of Fame . 
 In March 2007 Olds was hospitalized in Colorado for complications of Stage 4 prostate cancer . On the evening of June 14 , 2007 , General Olds died from congestive heart failure in Steamboat Springs , Colorado . Olds was honored with a flyover and services at the United States Air Force Academy on June 30 , where his ashes are kept . General Olds is remembered as the Class Exemplar of the Academy Class of 2011 , which had begun Basic Cadet Training , the first step towards becoming Air Force officers , two days before Olds ' funeral . 
 = Indio Comahue Monument = 
 The Monumento al Indio Comahue ( Monument to the Comahue Indian ) is a monument located in Villa Regina , in the Argentine province of Río Negro . It was constructed to honor the native inhabitants of the Comahue Region . The monument was completed in time for the inaugural Comahue National Fair in 1964 . 
 Commissioned by the organizers of the fair , Bartolo <unk> and Rogelio <unk> , it was designed by Miguel De Lisi and constructed in two months by local bricklayer Aldo Cardozo . Presently it is used as an overlook for its panoramic view . The monument is considered to be a symbol of the town , and as such it is depicted in the coat of arms . 
 = = History = = 
 The monument was erected to commemorate the native inhabitants of Comahue . It was constructed for the first Comahue National Fair , in 1964 . This was a 45 @-@ day event that aimed to highlight the economic potential of the Comahue Region , and at the same time commemorate the 40th anniversary of the founding of Villa Regina . Bartolo <unk> and Rogelio <unk> , who organized the fair , proposed the construction to designer Miguel De Lisi , after seeing his work at the City Hotel in Mar del Plata . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 De Lisi sent the drawings to the local construction team , led by Aldo Humberto Cardozo and Alberto Sartor . The monument had been originally planned to be 10 metres ( 33 ft ) tall , but Cardozo re @-@ scaled it to be nearly 11 metres ( 36 ft ) , and later also added a high base of 2 metres ( 6 ft 7 in ) . The completed monument , now standing at almost 13 metres ( 42 @.@ 4 ft ) , depicts a native who is holding a long spear while watching the horizon . 
 Work started in July 1964 , with the structure being built of reinforced concrete . It had an iron skeleton made up of 4 inch pipes ( 100mm ) , which was reinforced with radial sections that were soldered every 50 centimetres ( 20 in ) . Later , the figure was filled from the feet to the hips with ceramic brick and concrete , with the top half finished using a layer of reinforced concrete . The monument was completed in two months with an estimated weight of 80 tons , and a height of 12 @.@ 90 metres ( 42 @.@ 3 ft ) . In its construction , five hundred bags of cement , 2 @,@ 500 kilograms ( 5 @,@ 500 lb ) of iron , 60 metres ( 200 ft ) of steel , and 80 square metres ( 860 sq ft ) of sand were used . 
 It was later painted by a local man , Carlos <unk> <unk> . The job proved to be very difficult due to strong winds that blew the wooden planks off the scaffolding and into a nearby ditch . A construction team later tied on the planks , solving the problem . The painters first applied a primer coat , then linseed oil , varnish , and finally a coat of copper glitter . The monument was inaugurated during the opening of the Comahue National Fair on September 7 , 1964 . 
 = = The monument and Villa Regina = = 
 The structure is located on the northern hill of the town , which has an elevation of 70 to 80 metres ( 230 to 260 feet ) . The hill is mostly covered in bushes and can be accessed by two paths . Currently it is used as an overlook for its panoramic view of the town . It also serves to mark the finishing line for the annual trekking trail competition , Desafío al Indio Comahue . 
 Considered as the symbol of Villa Regina , the Indio Comahue is depicted in the city 's coat of arms . It was also depicted in the previous seal of the Río Negro Province , designed by the government of the Argentine Revolution . The seal was replaced in 2009 by the one that the overthrown government designed in 1966 , months before the coup d 'état . The Comahue National Fair was relaunched in 2004 , and is currently celebrated every two years . 
 = 2012 Football League Cup Final = 
 The 2012 Football League Cup Final was a football match between Cardiff City and Liverpool on 26 February 2012 at Wembley Stadium , London . It was the final match of the 2011 – 12 Football League Cup , the 52nd season of the Football League Cup , a football competition for the 92 teams in the Premier League and the Football League . Cardiff were appearing in their first final , while Liverpool were appearing in the final for the eleventh time ; they had previously won seven and lost three finals . 
 As Cardiff were in the Football League they played one more round than Liverpool who received a bye in the first round . Therefore , Cardiff progressed through six rounds to reach the final , whereas Liverpool progressed through five . Matches up to the semi @-@ final were contested on a one @-@ off basis with the exception of the semi @-@ finals which were contested over two @-@ legs , with a match at each team 's home ground . Both Liverpool and Cardiff 's matches were close affairs ; their biggest margins of victory was by two goals . Liverpool beat Manchester City to reach the final , whereas Cardiff progressed via a penalty shoot @-@ out against Crystal Palace . 
 Watched by a crowd of 89 @,@ 041 , Cardiff took the lead in the first half when Joe Mason scored . The score remained the same through half @-@ time until Liverpool equalised in the 60th minute , when Martin Škrtel scored . With the score 1 – 1 at full @-@ time , the match went to extra @-@ time as neither side were able to score a second goal . The first half of extra @-@ time was goalless , but three minutes into the second half Liverpool took the lead when Dirk Kuyt scored . However two minutes before the end of extra @-@ time Cardiff equalised to make the score 2 – 2 , courtesy of a goal from Ben Turner . With the score at 2 – 2 at the end of extra @-@ time the match went to a penalty shoot @-@ out . Despite missing their first two penalties , Liverpool won the shoot @-@ out 3 – 2 to win the League Cup for a record eighth time . 
 Liverpool 's manager Kenny Dalglish stated in the aftermath , that the victory would lead to more trophies . The club reached the 2012 FA Cup Final , but were beaten 2 – 1 by Chelsea . Their league form faltered after the victory and they finished the season in 8th place . Despite this , victory in the final ensured Liverpool had qualified for the 2012 – 13 UEFA Europa League . Cardiff manager Malky Mackay was proud of his team despite their defeat . They finished the season in 6th place in the 2011 – 12 Football League Championship , reaching the playoffs where they were beaten by West Ham United over two @-@ legs . 
 = = Route to the final = = 
 = = = Cardiff City = = = 
 Cardiff entered the 2011 – 12 Football League Cup in the first round where they faced Oxford United . The match played at the Kassam Stadium saw Cardiff take the lead in the 10th minute when Craig Conway scored . Oxford equalised 20 minutes later courtesy of a Simon <unk> goal . Neither side was able to score a winning goal during the remainder of the match , which went into extra @-@ time at 1 – 1 . Two goals from Peter Whittingham and Nathaniel Jarvis secured a 3 – 1 victory for Cardiff . Their opponents in the second round were Huddersfield Town . Two goals in the first 16 minutes courtesy of Gabor <unk> and Jon Parkin gave Cardiff an early 2 – 0 lead , which they held until the 55th minute when Huddersfield reduced the deficit to 2 – 1 courtesy of a Jordan Rhodes goal . Daniel Ward equalised for Huddersfield in the 69th minute before Rhodes scored his second goal of the match to give Huddersfield a 3 – 2 lead in the 87th minute . Cardiff equalised two minutes into stoppage time when Don Cowie headed the ball in from close range . With the score at 3 – 3 after 90 minutes the match went to extra @-@ time . A goal each from Conway and Cowie gave Cardiff a 5 – 3 victory and progression to the third round . 
 <unk> City were the opponents in the third round . Cardiff playing at their home ground the Cardiff City Stadium took the lead in the 32nd minute when Cowie scored . Leicester equalised seven minutes later when Steve Howard scored from close range . Leicester then took the lead in the 65th minute courtesy of a Lloyd Dyer goal . Cardiff equalised when Rudy Gestede with nine minutes of the match remaining . The score remained 2 – 2 until full @-@ time and throughout extra @-@ time , which mean the match would be decided by a penalty shoot @-@ out . Cardiff won the shoot @-@ out 7 – 6 to progress to the fourth round . 
 Cardiff were drawn at home against Burnley in the fourth round . They won the match 1 – 0 courtesy of a Joe Mason goal in the first half . The result was the first time in the competition Cardiff 's match didn 't go into extra @-@ <unk> and it was the first they had reached the quarter @-@ finals of the League Cup since 1965 . Their opponents in the quarter @-@ finals were Blackburn Rovers . Two goals from Kenny Miller and Anthony Gerrard secured a 2 – 0 victory for Cardiff and their progression to the semi @-@ finals . 
 Crystal Palace were Cardiff 's opponents in the semi @-@ final which was played over two @-@ legs . The first leg was played at Palace 's home ground Selhurst Park . Cardiff started the match the better of the two sides but were unable to convert their chances . Palace took the lead in the 43rd minute when Anthony Gardner headed in Darren Ambrose 's cross . Neither side scored again and the match ended 1 – 0 . The second leg at the Cardiff City Stadium started well for Cardiff when they went ahead in the seventh minute after an own @-@ goal from Palace defender Gardner , which levelled the aggregate score at 1 – 1 . Palace were reduced to ten men in the second half when Paddy McCarthy was sent @-@ off . Despite their numerical advantage Cardiff were unable to a second goal during the 90 minutes and extra @-@ time and the tie went to a penalty shoot @-@ out . Cardiff goalkeeper Tom Heaton saved two penalties as Cardiff won the shoot @-@ out 3 – 1 to progress to their first League Cup final . 
 = = = Liverpool = = = 
 Liverpool entered the competition in the second round , as one of the twelve teams from the Premier League who were not involved in European competition during the season . They were drawn against Exeter City in the second round . The match , played at Exeter 's home ground , St James Park was won by Liverpool ; goals from Luis Suárez , Maxi Rodríguez and Andy Carroll helped the team win 3 – 1 . 
 Liverpool 's opponents in the third round were Brighton & Hove Albion . The match was played at Brighton 's home ground , the Falmer Stadium . Liverpool took the lead in the 7th minute when Craig Bellamy scored . Dirk Kuyt extended the lead in the second half , scoring in the 82nd minute . Brighton pulled a goal back courtesy of an Ashley Barnes penalty kick , but were unable to score an equaliser ; the match finished 2 – 1 to Liverpool . 
 Stoke City were Liverpool 's opponents in the fourth round . The match , held at Stoke 's home ground the Britannia Stadium saw Stoke take the lead towards the end of the first @-@ half when Kenwyne Jones scored . Liverpool equalised in the 54th minute courtesy of a goal from Suárez , and he scored the winner in the 84th minute to give Liverpool a 2 – 1 victory and a place in the fifth round . Liverpool were drawn against Chelsea in the subsequent round . At Stamford Bridge , Carroll missed a penalty in a goalless first half . Despite this Liverpool scored twice after the interval , courtesy of goals from Maxi and Martin Kelly . They won the match 2 – 0 to reach the semi @-@ finals . 
 Liverpool were drawn against Manchester City in the semi @-@ finals which were held over two @-@ legs . The first leg was at City 's home ground , the Etihad stadium . Liverpool won the match 1 – 0 , courtesy of a Steven Gerrard penalty . The second leg was held at Liverpool 's home ground Anfield . City took the lead in the first half when Nigel de Jong scored , ten minutes later Gerrard equalised when he scored a penalty . At half @-@ time , the score was 1 – 1 with Liverpool leading 2 – 1 on aggregate . City took the lead in the match when Edin Džeko scored in the 67th minute . The goal meant the aggregate score was 2 – 2 but City would progress to the final if the score remained the same due to the away goals rule . Liverpool needed to find an equaliser , and seven minutes after Džeko 's goal they did , when Bellamy scored . City tried to score an equaliser but to no avail , and the match finished 2 – 2 , with Liverpool progressing to the final courtesy of a 3 – 2 aggregate victory . 
 = = Match = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Cardiff were appearing in their first League Cup final ; they had previously reached the semi @-@ final of the competition in the 1965 – 66 season , when they were beaten by West Ham United 5 – 1 on aggregate . They were also the first team from outside the Premier League to reach the final since 2001 , when Birmingham City lost to Liverpool . Liverpool were appearing in their eleventh final ; they had won seven ( 1981 , 1982 , 1983 , 1984 , 1995 , 2001 , 2003 ) and lost three ( 1978 , 1987 , 2005 ) . The last meeting between the two teams was in the 2007 – 08 Football League Cup on 31 October 2007 , Liverpool won 2 – 1 to progress to the fifth round . 
 This was the fourth time in as many years that Cardiff City had played at Wembley Stadium . They played at the stadium twice during the 2007 – 08 FA Cup ; they beat Barnsley 1 – 0 in the semi @-@ final before losing 1 – 0 to Portsmouth in the final . Their last match at the stadium was the 2010 Championship play @-@ off Final against Blackpool , which they lost 3 – 2 . The final represented the first time Liverpool had visited the new Wembley Stadium ; their previous appearances in the final in 2001 , 2003 and 2005 had been played at the Millennium Stadium in Cardiff while Wembley was being rebuilt . Their last visit to Wembley was in 1996 when they reached the final of the FA Cup , match they lost 1 – 0 to Manchester United at the old Wembley Stadium . 
 A week before the final Cardiff played Ipswich Town in the 2011 – 12 Football League Championship – it was their last match before the final , which they lost 3 – 0 . Cardiff had a few injury concerns ahead of the final . Captain Mark Hudson had a calf problem , while midfielder Stephen McPhail had missed Cardiff 's last four matches as he was suffering from Sjögren 's syndrome , an immune system disorder . Goalkeeper Heaton was also a doubt with a knock on his ankle , but he was considered likely to start the match . Cardiff manager Malky Mackay acknowledged that Liverpool went into the match as favourites , but he was confident his team could provide a shock : " Obviously we are underdogs but we have a chance in the final , Maybe only a one in 10 chance but that 's still a chance if you turn up motivated , fit and organised and I think I can promise that . " 
 Liverpool 's last match before the final was against Brighton & Hove Albion in the FA Cup , which they won 6 – 1 . Despite the margin of victory , Liverpool manager Kenny Dalglish was adamant that the result meant nothing in regards to the final : " Defeating Brighton has got us to the next round , but it doesn 't really help us in the Carling Cup , we 've got a cup final but we won 't get carried away . " Despite missing the match against Brighton , Dalglish was confident that Daniel Agger and Craig Bellamy would be fit for the final . Going into the match Liverpool had not won a trophy since they beat West Ham United in the 2006 FA Cup Final . Dalglish stated that victory : " means a lot to me , more importantly it means a lot to a lot of people who have had to endure a few years when we 've not been [ to Wembley ] . " 
 Both clubs received an allocation of approximately 31 @,@ 000 tickets . Cardiff fans would be housed in the East End of the stadium , while Liverpool fans were allocated the West End of the stadium . Ticket prices were increased from last year 's final , with the most expensive tickets costing £ 90 up £ 4 from the previous year . The least expensive tickets cost £ 40 , which was £ 2 more than last year . It was decided that before the match started national anthems would not be played . This decision was made to avoid spectators jeering the anthems , as happened during the 2008 FA Cup Final between Portsmouth and Cardiff . 
 = = = First @-@ half = = = 
 Cardiff set up in a 4 – 4 – 1 – 1 formation with Rudy Gestede in the striker position supported by Kenny Miller . Liverpool lined up in a 4 – 2 – 3 – 1 formation , with Andy Carroll starting as the lone striker , with Luis Suárez playing behind him and Jordan Henderson and Stewart Downing either side . Cardiff kicked @-@ off , but Liverpool had the first chance of the match . Steven Gerrard passed the ball to Stewart Downing on the left hand side of the pitch , he passed to Glen Johnson whose shot hit the crossbar , the ball rebounded to Gerrard , but he sent his shot over the Cardiff goal . Liverpool had the best of the opening minutes of the match , with Cardiff unable to keep possession of the ball . Liverpool had another chance in the sixth minute , Downing went past Cardiff defender Kevin McNaughton down the left of the pitch and crossed the ball into the penalty area , which was cleared for a corner kick . The resulting corner found Andy Carroll , but his header was deflected out for another corner which was caught by Cardiff goalkeeper Tom Heaton . 
 Cardiff began to exert themselves in the match and had their first chance in the 10th minute . Peter Whittingham and Aron Gunnarsson exchanged the ball before it was passed to Rudy Gestede who found Kenny Miller in the Liverpool penalty area , however his resulting shot went over the Liverpool goal . Carroll had a chance to score in the 19th minute but his header was saved by Heaton . Cardiff immediately went on the attack and scored the first goal of the match . Martin Škrtel 's clearance from McNaughton 's initial cross went back to the Cardiff player who passed to Miller , he passed the ball to Joe Mason who had run onto the pass from the right hand side of the pitch . His subsequent shot went through the legs of Liverpool goalkeeper Pepe Reina and into the Liverpool goal to give Cardiff a 1 – 0 lead . Liverpool responded by pushing men forward in an attempt to level the score . The first chance after Cardiff 's goal saw defender Daniel Agger advance from his own half towards the Cardiff goal but his shot from 30 yards ( 27 m ) was blocked and went out for a throw @-@ in . Liverpool had another chance from a similar distance a few minutes later but Carroll sent his shot over the crossbar . Liverpool had a penalty appeal turned down in the 32nd minute when Ben Turner was adjudged not to have handled the ball . Immediately afterwards Johnson 's cross was cleared by Mark Hudson , the ball fell to Charlie Adam who sent his shot just wide of the Cardiff goal . Just before half @-@ time Liverpool had a chance to equalise , but Agger 's header from Gerrard 's free @-@ kick was saved by Heaton . 
 = = = Second @-@ half = = = 
 Liverpool had the first attack of the half when they were awarded a free @-@ kick for foul on Jose Enrique . The subsequent free @-@ kick was cleared by Whittingham only as far as Henderson whose shot was wide of the Cardiff goal . Two minutes later Cardiff had a chance to extend their lead ; Whittingham went past Agger and passed to Don Cowie , who back heeled the ball to Miller , his subsequent shot went wide of the Liverpool goal . Henderson received the first yellow card of the match after his tackle on Mason was deemed to be too high . Cardiff had another chance in the 56th minute ; a Gunnarsson long throw was punched away by Reina , but the clearance fell to Hudson , who headed the ball into the Liverpool penalty area to Gestede , his subsequent header was blocked by the Liverpool goalkeeper . Liverpool made the first substitution of the match a minute later when Henderson was replaced by Craig Bellamy . Two minutes after the substitution Liverpool equalised . Downing took a corner kick , which was headed on by Carroll to Suarez whose header hit the post , it rebounded to Škrtel , his shot went into the Cardiff goal to level the match at 1 – 1 . Cardiff had the first chance after Liverpool 's goal , but Mason 's shot was saved by Reina . 
 The minutes after Škrtel 's goal saw Liverpool dominate but they were unable to score a second goal , despite a number of chances . Liverpool conceded a free @-@ kick 22 yards ( 20 m ) from their goal after Miller was fouled . Whittingham 's subsequent shot hit Liverpool players and went out for a Cardiff throw @-@ in . The resulting throw from Gunnarsson was flicked on by Gestede , but it was headed away by Liverpool . Minutes later <unk> had a chance to score , but Turner 's header from Cowie 's pass went wide of the Liverpool goal . Two minutes later Liverpool had another chance to score , but Charlie Adam 's shot was saved by Heaton . Liverpool made their second substitution of the match in the 87th minute when Jamie Carragher replaced Agger . Two minutes before the end of the match Cardiff had a chance to score . Liverpool conceded a free @-@ kick , which was passed to Miller , who was in space , but his went over the Liverpool goal . With the scores level at 1 – 1 , the match went into extra time after the referee brought an end to the 90 minutes of play . 
 = = = Extra time = = = 
 Before the start of extra time Cardiff made their first substitution of the match , goalscorer Mason was replaced by Filip Kiss . Liverpool had the first chance to score in extra time , but Suarez 's header was cleared off the line by Andrew Taylor . Cardiff appeared to be playing for a penalty shoot @-@ out , as they were positioning the majority of their team behind the ball and in front of their goal . Cardiff captain Hudson was replaced in the 98th minute by Anthony Gerrard after suffering from cramp . Liverpool had another chance in the 101st minute , when a pass by Gerrard was cleared for a corner kick by Taylor . The resulting corner was met by Carroll , but his header was wide of the Cardiff goal . Immediately after the attack Carroll was replaced by Dirk Kuyt . Just before the end of the first half of extra time Liverpool had another chance . Bellamy went past two men down the left hand side of the pitch before exchanging passes with Kuyt , however his subsequent shot went wide . 
 Just after the start of the second half of extra time Cardiff made their final substitution , replacing McNaughton with Darcy Blake . Two minutes later Kuyt made a run from deep in the Liverpool half , his initial shot was blocked , but the ball rebounded towards him . As the ball came back to him he shot again and the ball went past Heaton and into the Cardiff goal to give Liverpool a 2 – 1 lead . Cardiff were struggling after the goal with a number of their players suffering from cramp . Nevertheless , they had a chance in the 111th minute , when a Gunnarsson long throw was only half @-@ cleared by Liverpool , but they were unable to convert the chance . Towards the end of the half Cardiff began to exert more pressure on Liverpool . Turner , who had been moved into the striker position won a corner for Cardiff , which was punched away by Reina for a throw @-@ in . Cardiff won another from the throw , which found Kiss , whose shot was cleared off the line of the Liverpool goal by Kuyt for another corner . The subsequent corner was headed on by Gunnarsson to Turner , who beat Kuyt to the ball and put his shot past Reina into the Liverpool goal to level the score at 2 – 2 . Turner was shown a yellow card for removing his shirt during the celebration of the goal . Liverpool won a corner with a minute remaining but they were unable to score and the referee brought extra time to an end with the scores level , resulting in a penalty shoot @-@ out . 
 = = = Penalty shoot @-@ out = = = 
 Liverpool were the first team to take a penalty , but Gerrard 's effort was saved by Heaton . Cardiff 's first penalty was taken by Miller , but he also missed with his shot hitting the post . Adam took the next penalty for Liverpool , he also missed , placing his shot over the Cardiff goal . Cowie took the next penalty for Cardiff and scored to give them a 1 – 0 lead . Liverpool also scored with their next penalty courtesy of Kuyt to level the shoot @-@ <unk> 1 – 1 . Gestede was next for Cardiff , but his penalty hit the post . Liverpool took the lead in the shoot @-@ out when Downing converted his penalty . Whittingham was next for Cardiff and he scored to level the shoot @-@ out at 2 – 2 . Johnson took the next penalty for Liverpool and scored , to give Liverpool a 3 – 2 lead and leave Cardiff needing to score or Liverpool would win . The Cardiff was taken by Anthony Gerrard , but he missed his penalty , which meant Liverpool won the shoot @-@ out 3 – 2 and won their eighth League Cup . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = = = Statistics = = = 
 = = Post match = = 
 Liverpool 's victory meant they won the trophy for the eighth time , extending their record number of victories in the competition . Midfielder Stewart Downing was awarded the Alan Hardaker Trophy as the man of the match . Liverpool manager Kenny Dalglish was delighted to have won the League Cup and was adamant that the club would continue to win trophies : " Although we have won something today , that is not us finished , we don 't want to stop here . We want to keep going . We 've won it and we are going to really enjoy it . I know how much the players have enjoyed it and it gives you a wee flavour to come back and do it again . " The victory meant that Dalglish became the seventh manager to win all three major domestic trophies in English football . Goalscorer Dirk Kuyt was equally delighted to have won the competition : " We wanted this so desperately , this is why I came to Anfield . To get my first medal is great . " Meanwhile , captain Steven Gerrard had mixed emotions , due to his cousin Anthony Gerrard missing the deciding penalty : " One of Anthony or I was going to be sad , one was going to be celebrating . It happens . I 've got mixed emotions at the moment because I feel for Anthony and Cardiff . " 
 Cardiff manager Malky Mackay was proud of his players despite their defeat : " We wanted to come here and win today but the players have done the club proud , I think today we were playing against a top team and I think we have got a lot to be proud of . " Anthony Gerrard , who missed the decisive penalty took to Twitter to apologise to Cardiff fans stating that the miss would " ... haunt me for the rest of my days ! " Despite Gerrard 's apology , Cardiff goalkeeper Tom Heaton was adamant that none of the players should take the blame for the defeat : " There is definitely no blame attached to any of the lads who missed . They all had the strength of character to stand up and take a penalty in front of 90 @,@ 000 people and the world watching in a pressure situation . They should be credited and congratulated for taking them . Sadly , it wasn ’ t our day . ” 
 Liverpool 's first match after the final was against Arsenal , a match the club needed to win to stay in touch with the top four . Two goals from Robin van Persie , after Liverpool had scored in the first half meant that Liverpool lost 2 – 1 and were 10 points behind the team in 4th place , which would ensure qualification for the UEFA Champions League the following season . Liverpool 's league form continued to falter after the final ; they won four of their last thirteen matches and ended the season in eighth place . Despite their poor league form , Liverpool reached the final of the FA Cup against Chelsea . But they were unable to win a second trophy and lost 2 – 1 . Cardiff played West Ham United in their first match after the final , which they lost 2 – 0 . Despite the loss , they only needed to win one more in their remaining thirteen matches to finish in 6th place and qualify for the Championship playoffs . They faced third placed West Ham United , in the playoffs , which were contested over two @-@ legs , with one at each team 's home ground . Cardiff were unable to secure a second Wembley final , as West Ham United won 5 – 0 on aggregate . 
 = Wide Awake in Europe = 
 Wide Awake in Europe is a live extended play ( EP ) by rock band U2 . The release was created by the organizers of Record Store Day to bring customers into independent record shops for holiday shopping . A limited number of 5 @,@ 000 EPs were produced , and were released on Black Friday in 2010 , mostly to record shops in North America . The EP features three live tracks on a 12 @-@ inch vinyl record , taken from three different concerts during the U2 360 ° Tour in 2009 and 2010 . The EP comprises the songs " I 'll Go Crazy If I Don 't Go Crazy Tonight " , " Moment of Surrender " , and " Mercy " , the latter a previously unreleased track that was debuted on tour . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 The potential release of an EP was first announced by U2 bassist Adam Clayton in an August 2010 U2.com video , after stating that the band was not yet ready to release another album . In mid @-@ October , listings for the EP appeared on Amazon.com , with a release date of 22 November . Details of the release were officially announced by website <unk> on 26 October with the track listing and release date information , along with details about its exclusive release to independent record stores , despite its listing on Amazon.com. U2.com officially announced the release on 16 November , and " Moment of Surrender " from the release was streamed on the website exclusively for the site 's subscribers , beginning the following the day . On the day of the EP 's release , U2.com streamed all three tracks for the site 's subscribers for a 48 @-@ hour period . 
 The EP was created by the creators of Record Store Day for an exclusive release as part of the " Back to Black Friday " program , along over 30 releases from other artists . The program 's objective was to draw customers to independent record shops on Black Friday and throughout the 2010 holiday shopping season , as opposed to big @-@ box stores and shopping malls . The EP was released by Interscope Records on 26 November 2010 , exclusively for independent record shops in the North America , with a select number of copies available in Europe . U2.com stated copies would be available in the United Kingdom and Ireland , although the London newspaper Daily Mail reported that it was only available at Tower Records in Dublin . 
