 = Saint Vincent and the Grenadines at the 2008 Summer Olympics = 
 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines sent a delegation to compete at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing , China . The year 's team included two athletes engaged in track and field events ( Kineke Alexander and Jared Lewis ) , and was accompanied by the team coach , manager , and chaperone . Saint Vincent and the Grenadines ' appearance in Beijing marked its sixth consecutive Olympic appearance since its 1988 debut in Seoul , South Korea , and its smallest delegation to date . Alexander bore the flag of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines in the opening ceremony and neither athlete medaled in their events or advanced to later rounds . 
 = = Background = = 
 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines debuted in the Olympic Games at the 1988 Summer Olympics in Seoul , South Korea and , as of 2008 , has participated in every edition since . The Beijing Games marked the smallest Vincentian delegation in the country 's history , the size having declined over the years from its largest delegation of eight participants at the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta . At the conclusion of the 2008 Summer Olympics , Saint Vincent and the Grenadines ' team has yet to medal in an event . The delegation arrived in Beijing on 28 July 2008 , and stayed in the Olympic Village for the duration of their time in China . The <unk> arrived early , three days after the Village itself opened , to make adjusting to the new environment easier . The delegation was accompanied by coach Gideon <unk> ; team manager Leroy Llewellyn ; and chaperone Jacintha Ballantyne . Kineke Alexander was the flagbearer at the opening ceremony , leading Saint Vincent and the Grenadines as the 64th nation in line . 
 = = Athletics = = 
 The athletes competing on behalf of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines competed in track and field . Kineke Alexander participated in the women 's 400 m sprint , while Jared Lewis took part in the men 's 100 m sprint . Neither medaled or advanced to subsequent rounds . 
 Key 
 Note – Ranks given for track events are within the athlete 's heat only 
 Q 
 = Qualified for the next round 
 q = 
 Qualified for the next round as a fastest loser or , in field events , by position without achieving the qualifying target 
 NR 
 = National record 
 N / A = 
 Round not applicable for the event 
 Bye = Athlete not required to compete in round 
 Men 
 Mississauga Track and Field Club member Jared Lewis qualified for the men ’ s 100 m sprint . At the Beijing Olympics , the first round of Lewis ’ event took place on 14 August . Lewis was placed in Heat 3 , competing against athletes such as Trinidad and Tobago ’ s Richard Thompson , who would later win silver in the event . Lewis ran his event in 11 @.@ 00 seconds , ranking seventh among of eight competitors , 0 @.@ 29 seconds ahead of Kiribati ’ s <unk> <unk> and 0 @.@ 54 seconds slower than Indonesia ’ s Suryo Agung Wibowo . Thompson , who took first place in the heat , was 0 @.@ 76 seconds faster than Lewis . Overall , Lewis tied Danny D 'Souza of the Seychelles for 63rd place out of 80 people and did not advance to the second round , which took place on the same day . 
 Women 
 University of Iowa student Kineke Alexander qualified for the 400 m sprint , an event in which she earned eight all @-@ American honors during college competitions . Her participation in the Beijing Olympics marked her Olympic debut . At the Games Alexander competed in the first round of the event on 16 August . She was placed in Heat 6 and ranked fourth , completing the race in 52 @.@ 87 seconds . She was 0 @.@ 01 seconds faster than Grenada 's Trish Bartholomew ( 5th place ) , 0 @.@ 10 seconds slower than Sudan 's Nawal El Jack ( 3rd place ) , and 1 @.@ 35 seconds slower than heat leader Novelene Williams of Jamaica . Overall , in the first round , Alexander ranked 32 out of 50 competitors , finishing just ahead of Bartholomew and India 's Mandeep Kaur and just behind Poland 's Monika <unk> . The overall round one leader , the United States ' Sanya Richards , ran 2 @.@ 33 seconds faster than Alexander . Alexander did not advance to the semifinal round , as she was neither in the top three places in her given heat nor in the top three fastest of those who did fall below third place in their heats . 
 = Gorilla ( advertisement ) = 
 Gorilla is a British advertising campaign launched by Cadbury Schweppes in 2007 to promote Cadbury Dairy Milk @-@ brand chocolate . The 90 @-@ second television and cinema advertisement , which formed the centrepiece of the £ 6 @.@ 2 million campaign , was created and directed by Juan Cabral and starred actor Garon Michael . The campaign itself , which comprised appearances on billboards , print newspapers and magazines , television and cinema spots , event sponsorships and an internet presence , was handled by advertising agency Fallon London , with the online segment contracted out to Hyper . 
 The advertisement , which first appeared on British television on 31 August 2007 , has since gone on to appear in a number of other countries , including Canada , Australia , South Africa and New Zealand . It has been well received by the public – a version uploaded to video sharing website YouTube received 500 @,@ 000 page views in the first week after the launch . Polling company YouGov reported that public perception of the brand had noticeably improved in the period following the launch , reversing the decline experienced in the first half of 2007 . 
 = = Description = = 
 The ad consists of a simple , 90 @-@ second tracking shot across a music studio , with Phil Collins ' " In the Air Tonight " playing in the background . A large gorilla sitting at a drum kit plays along with the song 's famous drum fill . 
 = = Background = = 
 Gorilla formed a major part of the pitch by Fallon London to secure the contract with Cadbury Schweppes in 2006 . Their proposal was to step away from pushing the product through traditional advertising means , and instead produce " entertainment pieces " which would appeal to a broader range of consumers and spread through viral marketing – that is , through word of mouth . To this end , Cadbury ended its ten @-@ year sponsorship of the popular soap Coronation Street . 
 Public perception of the Cadbury brand had slipped through 2006 @-@ 7 after a series of public relations blunders and product recalls . In mid @-@ 2006 , a number of Cadbury lines were found to contain salmonella bacteria , originating from a leaking pipe at the company 's factory in <unk> . The incident was widely reported in the media , and had a number of knock @-@ on effects : 40 people became ill , and a product recall costing £ 20 million was initiated . The failure of Cadbury to inform the Food Standards Agency for five months after the problem was discovered resulted in a £ 1 million fine from Birmingham 's Crown Court , and the Food Standards Agency advised the company to improve their " out of date " contamination testing procedures . 
 Other public relations blunders in the run @-@ up to the campaign included the distribution of a number of Easter eggs containing traces of nuts without nut allergy warnings , a £ 5 million campaign for Trident chewing gum which was cancelled after complaints that it was offensive , and the temporary closure of Granary Burying Ground , a historic cemetery near Boston , United States , as a result of a treasure hunt organised as a sales promotion . In mid @-@ 2007 , Cadbury announced that it would be cutting around 7 @,@ 500 jobs . An internal memo which later leaked revealed that many of the jobs would be moved to Poland , causing an outcry from the manufacturers ' trade unions . 
 = = Production = = 
 It was hoped that the new campaign would serve to boost sales within the UK and prompt higher brand engagement from the public . Much effort was put into making the first advertisement of the new marketing strategy a hit . The creative idea was " founded upon the notion that all communications should be as effortlessly enjoyable as eating the bar itself . " Argentine @-@ born Fallon creative director Juan Cabral , who had created the immensely successful Balls and Paint spots for Sony 's BRAVIA line of high @-@ definition television sets , wrote and directed the piece , acting as creative director , art director , copywriter and director . It marked his directorial debut . Other people involved in the campaign at Fallon included senior planner Tamsin Davies , account executive Chris Willingham , executive creative director Richard <unk> , and agency producer Nicky Barnes . Matthew Fone was the production company producer . Actor Garon Michael was hired to fill the central role for his previous work in similar roles , having played great apes in the feature films Congo , Instinct and the 2001 remake of Planet of the Apes . 
 The gorilla suit was created by Stan Winston Studios in California and the ' Meerkat of Moorgate ' - the City of London 's most famous FX trader - Anthony Wood ( known in the East End simply as ' Angry Ant ' ) was the man inside it . Once his secret was out , Anthony immediately released his own cover of ' I can feel it coming in the air tonight ' , with a B side of Tina Turner 's Private Dancer , that Rolling Stone magazine called the best thing to happen to music since Victoria Beckham stopped singing . 
 It took three months to produce , though pieces had been used in a large number of other projects prior to Gorilla . The " fur " of the suit is composed of knotted yak hairs . The exposed facial features are silicone , and are moved <unk> , through 27 remote @-@ controlled motors and several levers . Two technicians were needed , in addition to the actor inside the suit , to produce the range of motions displayed in the commercial . The suit was cooled by ice @-@ water tubing and a handheld fan pointed at the mouth between takes . While much of the suit had existed prior to the project , several adaptations were made , including custom @-@ made hands for the drum sequence , foam muscle around the chest and shoulders , a new styling for the pelt , and the addition of a gold tooth , grey hairs , and a studio earpiece to give a more " wizened rock star " appearance . 
 Shooting took place over several days at Music Bank , the famous rehearsal studios in London . Actor Michael spent forty hours practising the drumming beforehand , but with vision inside the suit limited to a camera feed piped to a small screen inside the head , precision was almost impossible . Many takes ended with the wooden drum sticks broken against the rims , sending shards of wood flying off @-@ camera . This , combined with the difficulty of choreographing the delicate movements of the gorilla head with Michael 's acting , meant that 35 takes were required to produce the final 90 @-@ second scene . 
 The spot was lensed by director of photography Daniel <unk> , and edited by Jo Guest at Final Cut , London . Post production was handled by London companies The Moving Picture Company ( main body , producer Graham Bird ) and Golden Square ( end frame , producer Jessica Mankowitz ) . Sound was designed and arranged by <unk> <unk> at Wave Studios , London . 
 = = Release and marketing = = 
 The television premiere of the advertisement was on Friday 31 August 2007 , during the finale of the eighth series of the United Kingdom reality television show Big Brother , watched by around 14 % of British viewers . Additional 90 @-@ second spots were commissioned through September , switching to 10 @-@ second cuts in October . The 90 @-@ second version was rebroadcast as the final commercial in the break before the final of the 2007 Rugby World Cup between England and South Africa on 20 October , with the face of the bass drum emblazoned with an English flag and the slogan " Bring It Home " . Another variant of the advert was broadcast a week earlier before the semi @-@ final of the 2007 Rugby World Cup between England and France on 13 October , with the face of the bass drum emblazoned with an English flag and the slogan " Come On Lads " . The spot cost Cadbury an estimated £ 700 @,@ 000 . 
 Billboard and print campaigns were set up to run alongside the television commercial , and a sponsorship deal with the " Great Gorilla Run " charity fun run through London on 23 September 2007 was set up through Sputnik Communications . An online presence was established with a competition on the Glass and a Half Full Productions website offering tickets to Las Vegas . The Glass and a Half Full Productions website was created by Hyper as part of a UK @-@ focussed digital marketing strategy . 
 Following the positive reception of the commercial in the United Kingdom and online , Cadbury Canada arranged to show the advertisements in 850 cinemas across Canada throughout November 2007 . Further online tie @-@ ins were launched , including an online game and a competition to win a gorilla suit , a purple drum kit and a year 's supply of bananas and Cadbury chocolate bars . 
 The advertisement premiered on New Zealand television on Monday , 30 June 2008 . The advertisement also helped " In the Air Tonight " re @-@ enter the New Zealand RIANZ Singles Chart at number three in July 2008 and went on to number one the following week , beating its original 1981 # 6 peak . 
 In August 2008 , the ad commenced airing on Australian television . It was also re @-@ released in the United Kingdom and Ireland with a new backing track ( Bonnie Tyler 's " Total Eclipse of the Heart " . According to UK newspaper The Guardian " The new version pays homage to the internet mash @-@ up artist who remixed the original with Tyler 's Total Eclipse of the Heart " 
 In July 2009 , the Cadbury World visitor attraction in Birmingham opened a new area , Advertising Avenue . Towards the end of the attraction , in the Music Shop , a chocolate DJ ( ' D.J. Choc ' ) invites guests to enjoy four selected clips of favourite Cadbury TV adverts - three of these are broadcast on flatscreen monitors , culminating with the lights in a previously @-@ un @-@ noticed drum booth coming on , with a full @-@ sized <unk> gorilla drumming to In the Air Tonight . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The campaign was well received by the British public . The commercial was uploaded to video sharing website YouTube shortly after it first aired , and was viewed over 500 @,@ 000 times in the first week . As of November 2007 , it has been viewed over six million times across a large number of video sharing <unk> . 70 Facebook groups appreciating the ad have been set up , with one , named " We love the Cadbury 's drumming gorilla " , boasting 200 members . A number of spoofs and parodies were quickly uploaded by amateurs with the tacit approval of Cadbury , and the British branch of Wonderbra created and uploaded their own , Dan <unk> @-@ directed version of the advertisement , replacing the gorilla with Wonderbra model ( and musician ) <unk> with the Cadbury strapline " A glass and half full of joy " being replaced with " Two cups full of joy . " While Cadbury tacitly permitted limited display and modification of the commercial without authorisation , the Wonderbra spot was later removed from YouTube following notification from Phil Collins Limited that the piece infringed their copyright to " In The Air Tonight . " Gorilla was further parodied as an introduction to the second half of the 2007 Children in Need special , with an actor dressed as Pudsey Bear taking the central role . British comedy series The Mighty Boosh features a drumming gorilla named Bollo , played by Dave Brown , and the actor appeared as Bollo in a viral video auditioning for the Cadbury advert to promote the third series of the show . This video was later included as an easter egg on the DVD release of series three . 
 There was much speculation when the advert first appeared on how it was made – whether the gorilla was real , animatronic , or a man in a suit . Many believed that Phil Collins himself was the drummer . When asked about Gorilla , Collins jokingly commented that " Not only is he a better drummer than me , he also has more hair . Can he sing too ? " " In the Air Tonight " became a popular online download following its appearance in the commercial , reaching a chart position of 14 within the UK Singles Chart despite not being given a physical re @-@ release , and becoming the third @-@ most @-@ downloaded track of the day on the iTunes Store . 
 Despite reservations that the campaign might prove too abstract and have little effect , Cadbury reported that sales of Dairy Milk had increased 9 % from the same period in 2006 . Measurements of public perception of the brand carried out by market research firm YouGov showed that 20 % more people looked favourably on the brand in the period after the advert 's general release than in the previous period . Spokesmen for the company have expressed amazement at the success of the campaign . Notwithstanding the fact that the spot was originally only broadcast online and within the United Kingdom , the commercial appeared in the news in many English @-@ speaking countries such as Canada and Australia , and plans were made for limited expansion of the campaign into these markets . From 23 June 2008 , Gorilla was also broadcast in New Zealand with further marketing both on the Cadbury NZ website , and in shopping centres and supermarkets , with models and men in gorilla suits handing out samples of Dairy Milk chocolate . 
 The advertisement has won numerous awards , including the Epica d ’ Or for Film 2007 , the Grand Cristal at Festival de la <unk> de <unk> , Gold at the British Television Advertising Awards 2008 , Gold at the Advertising Creative Circle Awards 2008 , Gold at the International ANDY Awards , Black and Yellow Pencils at the D & AD Awards 2008 , Gold at the Clio Awards 2008 , Bronze at the One Show 2008 , the FAB Award 2008 , Gold at the Fair Go Ad Awards 2008 , and the Film Grand Prix Lion at Cannes Lions 2008 , widely considered the most prestigious prize within the advertising community . 
 VH1 Classic UK also made an ident which shows a man play " In The Air Tonight " , and when the famous drum solo comes on , he holds a pair of drumsticks and bangs the pillows in front of him in the tune of the drum solo . 
 = = Sequels and remixes = = 
 On 30 March 2008 , Cadbury began rolling out the sequel to the Gorilla campaign . Using many of the same ideas , Airport Trucks , again written and directed by Juan Cabral , features heavily customised airport ground support equipment racing at night to Queen 's " Don 't Stop Me Now " . 
 On 5 September 2008 , a second Gorilla advertisement , featuring Bonnie Tyler 's " Total Eclipse of the Heart " , was broadcast on Channel 4 during the Big Brother 9 final . The new version paid homage to the internet mash @-@ up artist who remixed the original with Tyler 's " Total Eclipse of the Heart " . This advert was immediately followed by a version of Airport Trucks with Bon Jovi 's " Livin ' on a Prayer " . In mid March 2009 , a version of the advert was shown in Australia , with the gorilla playing the drums along to John Farnham 's " You 're the Voice " . This version of the ad was heavily criticised by the Australian public because it was seen as an inferior copy of the original and tried to make use of a potential resurgence of John Farnham due to the singer being mentioned in Cold Play concerts at the time . 
 In January 2009 , a new advert for Cadbury Dairy Milk was launched featuring dancing eyebrows . 
 September 2009 saw the move to Fairtrade cocoa beans in Cadbury 's Dairy Milk , and a new record label based on Gorilla 's campaign ( " A Glass and a Half " ) saw the advert / song <unk> . 
 = Dirleton Castle = 
 Dirleton Castle is a medieval fortress in the village of Dirleton , East Lothian , Scotland . It lies around 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) west of North Berwick , and around 19 miles ( 31 km ) east of Edinburgh . The oldest parts of the castle date to the 13th century , and it was abandoned by the end of the 17th century . 
 Begun in around 1240 by John De Vaux , the castle was heavily damaged during the Wars of Scottish Independence , when it was twice taken by the English . In the 14th century , Dirleton was repaired by the Haliburton family , and it was acquired by the Ruthvens in 1505 . The Ruthvens were involved in several plots against Mary , Queen of Scots , and King James VI , and eventually forfeited the castle in 1600 . Dirleton ceased to be a residence , although Oliver Cromwell was forced to besiege the castle to flush out a band of " <unk> " ( marauders ) , during the Third English Civil War in 1650 . The damaged castle was then acquired by John Nisbet , Lord Dirleton , who decided to build a new country house on the nearby Archerfield Estate . The Nisbet family of Dirleton continued to maintain the castle 's gardens , before handing Dirleton into state care in 1923 . The ruins and gardens are now maintained by Historic Scotland . 
 Dirleton Castle stands on a rocky outcrop , at the heart of the rich agricultural lands of the barony of Dirleton , and guards the coastal approach to Edinburgh from England , via the port of North Berwick . The ruins comprise a 13th @-@ century keep , and a 16th @-@ century house which the Ruthvens built adjacent . Only the basement levels survive of the 14th- and 15th @-@ century additions built by the Haliburtons , although these comprised a large hall and tower house along the east range . Other buildings within the courtyard have also been demolished . Surrounding the castle are gardens , which may have been first laid out in the 16th century , although the present planting is largely of the 20th century . The garden walls enclose a 16th @-@ century doocot , or pigeon house . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = de Vaux = = = 
 The Norman family of de Vaux originated in Rouen , northern France , and settled in England following the Norman Conquest of 1066 . Two de Vaux brothers , or cousins , were among a number of Anglo @-@ Norman knights invited to Scotland , and granted land , by King David I of Scotland in the 12th century . Hubert de Vaux was given the barony of <unk> in Cumbria , at that time part of Scotland , while John de Vaux was granted the barony of Dirleton . John built a castle at <unk> , probably to the north @-@ west of modern Dirleton , and another , named Tarbet Castle , on the island of Fidra , although neither survives . 
 In 1220 , Fidra was gifted to the monks of Dryburgh Abbey by William de Vaux . William 's son , another John , had been held hostage in England as surety for the good conduct of King William the Lion in 1213 , and succeeded to the barony in the 1220s . He then began the construction of a replacement for Tarbet at Dirleton , which was recorded as a " castellum " in 1225 , although this may refer to an earlier timber structure . In 1239 , de Vaux was appointed seneschal , or steward , to Marie de Coucy , on her marriage to King Alexander II . Marie de Coucy was the daughter of Enguerrand III , Lord of Coucy ( <unk> ) , builder of the Château de Coucy , in Picardy ( <unk> ) , which probably served as a model for Dirleton . The 13th @-@ century stone castle , of which only the donjon , or keep , remains , represented a show of de Vaux 's status , and would have required peaceful times to permit a prolonged construction project . 
 Peaceful times ended in 1296 , with the outbreak of the Wars of Scottish Independence . Dirleton , which guarded the route between Edinburgh and the English border , changed hands several times through the invasions of the English under King Edward I. During the campaign of summer 1298 , the castle was besieged by English forces under Antony Bek , the Bishop of Durham . Dirleton withstood the assault for several months , until the English victory at Falkirk allowed them to bring up large siege engines , after which the castle was soon reduced . Dirleton was garrisoned by the English , but must have been retaken by the Scots before 1306 , when the English commander Aymer de Valence , 2nd Earl of Pembroke recaptured Dirleton once more . It was finally retaken by the Scots some time before 1314 , and was slighted , or deliberately damaged , to prevent its reuse by the English . 
 = = = Haliburton = = = 
 The castle and lands of Dirleton passed to the Berwickshire family of Haliburton ( or Halyburton ) when John Haliburton ( <unk> ) married the heiress of the de Vaux family , shortly before 1350 . The castle had been repaired by 1363 , when it was seized by William Douglas , 1st Earl of Douglas , during his brief rebellion against King David II , although it was later returned to the Haliburtons . In the 1420s , Sir Walter Haliburton ( d. before 1447 ) acted as a hostage in exchange for the release of King James I , who had been held captive by the English since 1406 . He was rewarded in 1439 by being appointed Treasurer of Scotland . Either Walter , or his eldest son John ( d. before 1454 ) , was ennobled as a Lord of Parliament in the 1440s , with the title Lord Dirletoun . The Haliburtons carried out extensive works at Dirleton , heightening the original towers , and constructing a new gatehouse to the south @-@ east . A large hall and tower house were added to the castle in the 15th century , forming the east range . King James IV visited Dirleton in 1505 , and gave money to the masons then engaged on works in the north @-@ east part of the castle . Later that year , Patrick , the last Haliburton of Dirleton , died , and his estates were divided among his three daughters , Janet , Margaret , and <unk> . 
 = = = Ruthven = = = 
 The eldest daughter , Janet , married William Ruthven , 2nd Lord Ruthven ( d . 1552 ) in 1515 , and the castle and lordship of Dirleton passed to the Ruthven family . The son of William and Janet , Patrick , 3rd Lord Ruthven ( c . 1520 – 1566 ) , was one of the leaders of the group who murdered David Riccio , private secretary to Mary , Queen of Scots , in 1566 . Patrick was forced to flee to England , where he died , leaving Dirleton to his son William ( c . 1541 – 1584 ) , who was created Earl of Gowrie in 1581 . Lord Gowrie led a plot , later known as the Raid of Ruthven , in which the 16 @-@ year @-@ old King James VI was seized , in August 1582 . Ruthven then ruled in the king 's name , while James was held captive . Although Gowrie was pardoned the following year , he was executed in 1584 for his part in another plot to seize Stirling Castle , and his lands were forfeited to the crown . A keen amateur <unk> , Lord Gowrie is thought to have laid out the gardens at Dirleton , and planted numerous trees . Except today , it is known that most of the stories told about the Ruthvens and the plot of Gowrie House , and the attempted kidnap of King James , was made up by the king , after he and his men murdered John Ruthven 3rd Earl of Gowrie and his brother Alexander , in a plot for revenge , murder and also to get the king out of paying a large debt he owed the Ruthven Earl , and most evidence was forged at the kings order . 
 James VI granted Dirleton to the Earl of Arran , who entertained the King there in 1585 . The following year , the castle was restored to Lady Dorothea , widow of the first Earl , and by 1600 had passed to John Ruthven , 3rd Earl of Gowrie ( c . 1577 – 1600 ) , their second son . However , in August that year , in an event known as the " Gowrie Conspiracy " , Lord Gowrie and his younger brother were killed attempting to kidnap or assassinate James VI at Perth . Lord Gowrie is said to have persuaded Robert Logan of <unk> to join the plot by offering , as a bribe , Dirleton Castle , which Logan described as " the pleasantest dwelling in Scotland " . However , the failure of the plot led to the attainder of the Ruthven family , and the castle was forfeited once again . Dirleton was granted to Thomas Erskine of Gogar , who had killed Lord Gowrie and helped to save the King , although Lady Dorothea was permitted to live there until her death in 1605 , after which the castle ceased to be a noble residence . Erskine was later created the 1st Earl of Kellie , but sold the castle to Sir James Douglas in 1625 . Douglas sold it on to Alexander <unk> of Prestongrange , who sold it in turn , in 1631 , to James Maxwell of <unk> ( d. c . 1650 ) , who was created Earl of Dirletoun in 1646 . 
 = = = Cromwell = = = 
 Oliver Cromwell 's army invaded Scotland in 1650 , during the Third English Civil War , and defeated the Scots Royalists at Dunbar on 3 September . With this victory , Cromwell gained effective control of southern Scotland , but bands of Royalist moss @-@ troopers continued to harry the English supply lines . One such band was based at Dirleton , and Cromwell ordered General Monck and General Lambert , with 1 @,@ 600 troops , to capture the castle . This was achieved on 10 November , using mortars to destroy the drawbridge and inner gate . The captain of the moss @-@ troopers was hanged from the walls with two of his comrades . The castle was slighted once more , and although briefly used as a field hospital , it was then left to decay . The soldier and engineer responsible for Cromwell 's effective use of artillery was a German , Major Joachim <unk> . He also designed fortresses near Inverness and in Ayr , and directed the mortar fire at the siege of Stirling Castle in August 1651 . He later spent a year spying for Cromwell 's Secretary of State , John Thurloe . 
 = = = Nisbet = = = 
 Dirleton Castle and estate were purchased , from the widowed Countess of Dirletoun , by the lawyer John Nisbet ( c . 1609 – 1687 ) in 1663 . Nisbet , who took the title Lord Dirleton when he was appointed as a judge , built a new house at Archerfield , to the north @-@ west of the village . The <unk> continued to maintain the gardens around the castle as part of the park around Archerfield , and installed the bowling green . The 19th @-@ century garden walls were added by Mary Nisbet , Lady Elgin ( 1778 – 1855 ) , wife of the Earl of Elgin , as part of a " beautification " of Dirleton village . In the mid @-@ 19th century , two new parterres were laid out by the head gardener , David Thompson . Although neither survived , the west garden was restored , based on 19th @-@ century plans , in 1993 . The north garden was replaced in the 1920s with an Arts and Crafts @-@ style garden of herbaceous borders . Also in the 1920s , the castle was passed into state care , and is now maintained by Historic Scotland , an agency of the Scottish Government . 
 The castle and grounds are protected as a Scheduled Ancient Monument , while the gardens appear on the Inventory of Gardens and Designed Landscapes in Scotland , the national register of historic gardens . The castle , doocot , and boundary walls are Category A listed buildings , the highest level of protection for a historic building in Scotland . 
 = = = The Barony of Dirleton = = = 
 The Barony of Dirleton was re @-@ erected by the Crown for the benefit of Camilo <unk> @-@ Pereira of Fulwood and Dirleton , who is the present Baron of Dirleton . He was born in Brazil and educated in the US , Brazil , and Israel . After serving in the Israeli Defense Forces , he served as an assistant community envoy and spokesman in the Israeli Consulate in Philadelphia . Late on he was also a member of the Israel Police and Security Forces . From 1993 to 2000 he was acting Hon. Consul of Mozambique in United States , and Consul from 2000 to 2006 . Presently he heads the Barony of Fulwood Foundation and The Brazilian Art Exchange Foundation , The Florida Bureau of Mediation , Breeze Broadcast Group , and <unk> Communication Group . He is a Patron of the Royal Academy of Arts in London and The Nelson Mandela Metropolitan Museum in South Africa . The Baron is married to Maxine Ann <unk> @-@ Pereira of Fulwood and Dirleton . They have four children : Jay , Sara , Elio and <unk> . 
 = = Description = = 
 The castle is built on a natural rocky outcrop , on a low ridge overlooking the farmland of East Lothian . It comprises a kite @-@ shaped courtyard , 40 metres ( 130 ft ) by 27 metres ( 89 ft ) , flanked by buildings on the south and east sides . The most substantial remains are the Ruthven Lodging , the gatehouse , and the de Vaux keep to the south , while only the basement of the east range survives . Fragments of the north and west curtain walls outline the courtyard , which was formerly divided in two by further 16th @-@ century buildings . The castle was originally approached from the south , via a bridge and 3 @.@ 4 @-@ metre ( 11 ft ) drawbridge , across a 15 @-@ metre ( 49 ft ) wide ditch . In the 16th century , steps were built to access the Ruthven lodging from the west . 
 = = = The keep = = = 
 The keep , or donjon , survives largely intact from the 13th century , and forms the south @-@ west part of the present castle . Described by architectural historian W. D. Simpson as a " cluster keep " , it comprises a large round tower to the south , a smaller round tower to the west , with the two joined by a square tower . The masonry is of squared ashlar , or dressed stone blocks . Internally , the original use of the rooms is difficult to interpret , although the round towers may have served as private suites for Lord Dirleton and his Lady . The large tower contains a six @-@ sided chamber at ground level , possibly a kitchen , with a seven @-@ sided main chamber above . This room has a pointed vaulted ceiling , window seats in the large windows around the south wall , and a carved fireplace at the north . To the east is a postern , or side door , and beyond is a well . Adjacent to the well is a floor hatch , which would have allowed food to be transferred directly from the kitchen to a servery above . A room in the square tower to the west , possibly the lord 's bedroom , has holes in the ceiling to allow smoke from braziers to escape . The more ruined west round tower probably contained another hall , with chambers above and storage below . In the 17th century , the top of the main round tower was lowered and remodelled to form a gun platform . 
 Only fragments of the rest of the 13th @-@ century castle remain . A fourth tower , where the Ruthven lodging now stands , may have completed the " cluster keep " . Bases of round towers at the south @-@ east and north @-@ east corners of the castle are visible below the later walls . Parts of the north @-@ west wall are 13th @-@ century work , as is the blocked postern in the basement of the east range . The overall plan of the castle , however , was not greatly changed through later rebuilding work . Dirleton is the earliest dated example in Scotland of a castle with round towers that project beyond the curtain wall , as opposed to those at Dunstaffnage , for example , where the towers are contained within the walls . This new form was subsequently used in other 13th @-@ century Scottish castles , including Bothwell and Kildrummy . 
 = = = The east range and gatehouse = = = 
 The gatehouse , kitchens , and east range were built by the Haliburtons in the 14th and 15th centuries . The gatehouse , built in the 14th century to the east of the keep , is similar to the one at nearby Tantallon Castle . It is fronted by a high , pointed arch , formerly with bartizans , small round turrets , at the top . The gate was protected by a drawbridge over the outer ditch , a portcullis , and three sets of doors . Guard rooms open off the entrance passage , and a round opening in the roof , known as a " murder hole " , allowed defenders to drop objects on to any attacker who breached the outer gate . 
 The large kitchens occupy the south @-@ east angle of the castle . The 9 @-@ metre ( 30 ft ) high main kitchen has two 4 @-@ metre ( 13 ft ) wide fireplaces for cooking , and a circular vent in the vaulted ceiling . Hatches in the floor give access to a well ( 11 @.@ 5 metres ( 38 ft ) deep ) and cellars below . The adjacent passage linked the kitchen to the hall in the east range . 
 The east range itself runs the length of the east side of the castle , and originally comprised a large hall , with a square tower house at the north @-@ east corner . Although only the basement survives , this once formed one of the finest noble residences of its time in Scotland , and would have been similar to the contemporary buildings at Doune Castle . The basement is a single tunnel vault , with low walls subdividing the area into stores . Two large ovens and a well lie at the south end , while at the east is the 13th @-@ century postern , blocked when the wall was thickened to support the new buildings above , and re @-@ used as a fireplace . At the north end of the basement is a vaulted prison for freemen , and below this , a rock @-@ cut pit , 3 metres ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) square , to house prisoners of the peasant classes . Above the prison , but still within the basement , is a vaulted chapel with various ceremonial recesses , such as a sacristy and a piscina , or water basin . A private chamber for the priest is next door . The hall above is 22 metres ( 72 ft ) by 7 @.@ 5 metres ( 25 ft ) , and once had a high timber roof , and a minstrel 's gallery at the south end . An ornately carved stone buffet , or cupboard , is located on this wall , which formed part of the servery next to the kitchen . At the north @-@ east corner of the castle , a tower house provided accommodation for the Lord 's family and guests . Again , only the lowest floor remains , above the chapel . This probably formed a private chamber for the Lord , and was connected to the adjacent hall . 
 = = = The Ruthven Lodging = = = 
 Constructed by the Ruthvens after they acquired the castle around 1515 , the Ruthven Lodging represents the final stage of building at Dirleton . In the later part of the 16th century , it served as the main residence of Lady Dorothea , wife of the first Earl of Gowrie , and their 15 children . The three @-@ storey building is constructed , like the Haliburton range , from undressed stone , although the Ruthven Lodging is decorated with string courses , horizontal mouldings running around the walls . The large windows were protected by iron grilles and small gun holes . The rectangular Lodging is immediately to the north of the de Vaux building , separated by a narrow irregular courtyard , which is accessed via a passage in the ground floor of the Lodging . The remainder of the ground floor was occupied by cellars , with family rooms and bedrooms on the upper floors . The first @-@ floor dining room was paved with patterned floor tiles , and may once have had a painted timber ceiling . 
 = = The gardens = = 
 The castle is set within extensive gardens , bounded by a 19th @-@ century wall . The gardens were first laid out in the 16th century , but have undergone many changes . A bowling green lies to the west of the castle , fringed by yew trees , which may once have formed a hedge around a parterre in this area . West of the bowling green is a flower garden , laid out in 1993 to an 18th @-@ century design , and containing yew , cedar , monkey puzzle and Lawson 's cypress trees . To the north is the 1920s Arts and Crafts garden , which is home to a 215 @-@ metre ( 705 ft ) -long herbaceous border , and is overlooked by a castellated 19th @-@ century gazebo , or summer house . The border is recognised by the Guinness Book of Records as being the longest in the world . The rest of the gardens comprise lawns , with numerous mature specimen trees , including redwood , beech , and sycamore . 
 There is a well @-@ preserved 16th @-@ century beehive @-@ shaped doocot , or pigeon house , in the castle grounds . The doocot is 7 @.@ 6 metres ( 25 ft ) high , and contains around 1000 nesting boxes for pigeons , which were an important source of food for the castle 's inhabitants . To the north @-@ east , now located outside the castle gardens , is a 16th @-@ century gateway which formerly served the castle , but now serves the adjacent farm . 
 = Watching the River Flow = 
 " Watching the River Flow " is a song by Bob Dylan . It was written and recorded during sessions in spring 1971 at Blue Rock Studios in New York City and produced by Leon Russell . The recording was issued as a single on June 3 , 1971 , backed with " Spanish is the Loving Tongue " . It reached the Top 40 in a number of countries and No. 41 in the United States . It was included on Bob Dylan 's Greatest Hits Vol . II , released on November 17 , 1971 , and has appeared on various other Dylan compilation albums . Since 1987 , Dylan has performed the composition often at his concerts . Critics have written that , in this song , Dylan sang about the temptation to withdraw from public life , and the problem of lack of inspiration . 
 The song has been covered by artists including the Earl Scruggs Revue , Steve Gibbons , Colin James , and Russell himself . In 2011 , musician Ben Waters released a version featuring five past and present members of the Rolling Stones as part of a tribute album for former Rolling Stones pianist Ian Stewart . 
 = = Writing and recording = = 
 Between 1967 and 1970 , Dylan recorded and released four albums that incorporated country rock elements : John Wesley Harding , Nashville Skyline , Self Portrait , and New Morning ; all four were produced by Bob Johnston . At some point during the New Morning sessions , Dylan apparently decided that he did not want to work with Johnston anymore . For his next recording session , Dylan asked Leon Russell , who had made a name for himself through his work with Joe Cocker , to help him find a new sound . Russell suggested that Dylan come record with him at Blue Rock Studios in New York City . It was the first time for Dylan to work with an independent producer , as opposed to an in @-@ house Columbia one . 
 The session took place on March 16 – 19 , 1971 . Russell assembled a musical backing group that included Carl Radle , Jesse Ed Davis , and Jim Keltner . Dylan recorded a number of covers , among them " That Lucky Old Sun " and " Spanish Harlem " , as well as two originals : " When I Paint My Masterpiece " and " Watching the River Flow " – the final song put on tape at the session . Russell recalls that when developing the song , the basic track was recorded first , before any words or melody were written . The track was based on in @-@ studio jams done during the session . The music of " Watching the River Flow " has been described by different critics as a " Blues @-@ powered sound " , " featur [ ing ] some blistering guitar work ... and rollicking piano work from Russell " , and as " an energetic , funky @-@ gospel rocker " . Later during the session , Dylan wrote the lyrics and melody , which took him ten minutes . Biographer Clinton Heylin notes that Dylan borrowed lines from " The Water is Wide " and " Old Man River " for the composition . 
 Four and a half months after the recording session , on August 1 , Russell backed Dylan on bass during his set at the Concert for Bangladesh , organized by George Harrison . In November 1971 , Russell accompanied Dylan into the studio again to record Dylan 's next single , " George Jackson " . At this session also , Russell played bass . Russell has not recorded with Dylan since , although they did tour together in 2011 . 
 = = Release = = 
 " Watching the River Flow " was released as a single on June 3 , 1971 , with " Spanish is the Loving Tongue " as its B @-@ side . ( " Spanish is the Loving Tongue " later also appeared on Dylan in 1973 , but this was a different recording . ) In the USA , Columbia 's promotion of the single included a full @-@ page advertisement in Billboard magazine with the caption " ' Watching the River Flow . ' A unique new single by Bob Dylan . " The advertisement showed a picture of Dylan holding a camera to his eye . 
 The song was a Top 40 hit in Canada , the Netherlands ( on both of two competing charts ) , and the United Kingdom , as well as reaching No. 41 on the U.S. Billboard charts . Billboard writer Paul Grein notes that it was the second consecutive American Dylan single , after 1970 's " Wigwam " , to miss the Top 40 by one spot . On November 17 , 1971 , " Watching the River Flow " appeared on Bob Dylan 's Greatest Hits Vol . II . It was later included on the compilations Greatest Hits , Vol . 1 – 3 ( 2003 ) , Playlist : The Very Best of Bob Dylan ' 70s ( 2009 ) , The Essential Bob Dylan [ Limited Tour Edition ] ( 2009 ) , and Beyond Here Lies Nothin ' : The Collection ( 2011 ) . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Dylan first performed the song live on November 21 , 1978 , in El Paso , Texas and again , two days later , in Norman , Oklahoma . He did not play it in concert again until July 19 , 1987 in Eugene , Oregon ; from that point on , he has often included the song in his sets . In total , he has performed the song 500 times . 
 = = Critical comments = = 
 Dylan biographer Robert Shelton has written that , in the early 1970s , Dylan was frequently criticized for " selling out " . " Watching the River Flow " , for Shelton , expresses Dylan 's desire just to be an observer , and not a political activist . 
 Writing about " Watching the River Flow " in 1971 , Greil Marcus discusses the importance of pushing past one 's initial impression of the song . " The first impression is that Bob Dylan is setting up the usual private scene : ' I 'll sit here and watch the river flow . ' Well that 's certainly a boring idea . It 's the implicit message of just about everything James Taylor has written . " Marcus goes on to say that Dylan is exploring " his myth of retirement and withdrawal " , and the problem of retaining his privacy while making public art . For Marcus , the song is about Dylan " growing up without growing away " from both his audience and his own past . Marcus argues that the reason the single was not a hit in the USA was because " the time has passed when people are interested in hearing Bob Dylan say he 'll just sit there and watch the river flow ... even though that 's not quite what he 's saying . " For Marcus , " Watching the River Flow " is a compelling work , but the subtlety of the song may have prevented it from reaching a wide audience . 
 Literary critic Christopher Ricks , in his book on Dylan , writes that what is striking about this song is how Dylan conveys a restlessness which is at odds with the bucolic notion of enjoying watching the river flow . Ricks notes that the phrasing and the musical arrangements conflict with the lyrics ; the choppy rhythms , and " stroppy stomping " of the backing track , disrupt the theme of contentedly watching the river . He notes that the third and the last verse both begin with the words " People disagreeing " , bringing conflict into the song . For Ricks , " Watching the River Flow " is " tarred with a realism that qualifies and complicates the lure of the lazy " . 
 Dylan critic Clinton Heylin has placed the writing and release of " Watching the River Flow " in the context of conflicting critical estimates of Dylan 's work in the late 1960s and early 1970s . Heylin writes that in the song " Ballad of Easy Rider " , co @-@ written by Dylan and Roger McGuinn two years earlier , Dylan had claimed that he was content to watch while " The river flows , flows to the sea / Wherever it flows , that 's where I want to be " . In " Watching the River Flow " , Dylan writes that he is restless , wishing he was " back in the city / Instead of this old bank of sand " . In June 1970 , Dylan had released Self Portrait , an album that received very negative reviews ; Dylan 's next album that year , New Morning , was viewed much more favorably by critics , with Ralph Gleason proclaiming " We 've got Dylan back again ! " For Heylin , by beginning " Watching the River Flow " with the question " What 's the matter with me ? / I don 't have much to say " , Dylan sought to subvert critics like Gleason . Heylin writes that both " Watching the River Flow " and " When I Paint My Masterpiece " confront " the same subject matter , a continuing dearth of inspiration , in a refreshingly honest matter . " Pointing to the fact that Dylan made no attempt to record either a single or an album in the following year of 1972 , Heylin believes that " Dylan had now concluded that he must simply sit by that bank of sand " and await the return of his muse . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The musicians who recorded " Watching the River Flow " are : 
 Bob Dylan – vocal , guitar , harmonica 
 Leon Russell – piano , production 
 Jesse Ed Davis – guitar 
 Don Preston – guitar 
 Carl Radle ( called Charlie Radle on the session notes ) – bass 
 Jim Keltner – drums 
 = = Covers = = 
 On April 18 , 2011 , musician Ben Waters released Boogie 4 Stu , a tribute to former Rolling Stones pianist Ian Stewart , which included a recently recorded version of " Watching the River Flow " featuring Rolling Stones Mick Jagger , Keith Richards , Charlie Watts , and Ronnie Wood , as well as former member Bill Wyman . The five Stones recorded their contributions separately , in different studios at different times , but the track constituted the first time since 1992 that Wyman had recorded on the same song as his former bandmates . The choice of the song was based on Ian Stewart 's judgment that " Watching the River Flow " was " the only decent thing Bob Dylan ever did " . 
 The song has also been covered by numerous other artists , including Joe Cocker , the Earl Scruggs Revue , Colin James , Steve Gibbons , the Heart of Gold Band , Chris Farlowe , Asylum Street <unk> , Gordon Johnson , the Lamont Cranston Band , Seatrain , and <unk> Kane . Leon Russell released his own version in 1999 on the compilation Tangled Up in Blues . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Monster ( Lady Gaga song ) = 
 " Monster " is a song by American recording artist Lady Gaga , from her third EP , The Fame Monster ( 2009 ) . Inspired by her " Fear of Attachment Monster " , the record was written by Gaga , RedOne and Space Cowboy , with RedOne producing the track . Gaga had explained that " Monster " describes her fear of sex and relationships , and described the lyrics as being in love with the bad boy all the time , but instead of running away , one keeps going back to the same person . She added that the fear in " Monster " erupted from her need to have a stable relationship . Incorporating the usage of heavy bass lines , descending keyboard lines and " massive " choruses , " Monster " contains zombie like metaphors , and a reference to Gaga 's debut single " Just Dance " . 
 " Monster " received generally positive reviews from critics who appreciated the song 's musical arrangement and frequently rated it as a top track from The Fame Monster , while some disliked its lyrics . " Monster " enjoyed brief commercial success in 2010 , charting on four singles charts , as well as the Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs and Latin Pop Airplay . Gaga has mostly performed " Monster " on her 2009 – 11 The Monster Ball Tour . The performance included the portrayal of homicide and was criticized following a real @-@ life incident at Manchester in the United Kingdom . She also performed " Monster " on The Oprah Winfrey Show . 
 = = Writing and production = = 
 " Monster " was written by Lady Gaga , RedOne and Space Cowboy , with RedOne producing the track . The song was recorded at the Record Plant Studio in Los Angeles , California . In an interview with MTV News , Gaga said that " Monster " describes her fear of sex and relationships and the literal meaning is about a " guy with a big dick " . She elaborated , " It 's the fear of attachment and the fear of loving something that 's bad for you ... If you listen to the lyrics , it 's like being in love with the bad boy all the time , and you keep going back for more . " Gaga added that the fear in " Monster " erupted from her need to have a stable relationship . " I keep falling in love with the monster ... But what I really need is the security and the safety and the womanhood , responsibility of my femininity . And so that 's what that song is about . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Monster " begins with Gaga 's voice uttering the line , " Don 't call me Gaga " . It contains stuttering synths and 1980s drums that , according to PopMatters ' Evan Sawdey , create a playful environment . It uses heavy bass lines , descending keyboard lines and " massive " choruses , while a male voice sounding like Timbaland sings about Gaga being " hot as hell " . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , " Monster " is set in the time signature of common time , and composed in the key of C major , with a tempo of 120 beats per minute and Gaga 's vocal range spanning from the low note of E3 to the high note of B4 . " Monster " has a basic sequence of F – G – Am – Em as its chord progression . Lyrically , " Monster " contains zombie @-@ like metaphors about having one 's heart eaten . The song also features references to " Just Dance " , Gaga 's debut single , with the line " I wanna ‘ Just Dance ’ / But he took me home instead " . Michael Hubbard from MusicOMH believed that the lines in the last verse " get a bit gruesome at the end " with the lines saying " He tore my clothes right off / He ate my heart and then he ate my brain . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song received generally positive reviews from critics . Michael Hubbard from musicOMH called " Monster " " a potential single " , praising its musical composition , but criticizing the lyrics . Evan Sawdey from PopMatters also criticized the metaphors contained in the lyrics of the song , but ultimately called it " one surprisingly effective pop cocktail " . Ben Patashnik from NME felt that it was " slightly too disposable " . Scott Plagenhoef of Pitchfork Media saw similarities between Gaga 's voice on " Monster " and the work of Kylie Minogue . Brian Linder from IGN felt that the track was lighter compared to the other songs on The Fame Monster , and complimented the line " We French kissed on a subway train / He tore my clothes right off / He ate my heart and then he ate my brain " , calling it a lyrical gem . He also added that " Monster " was a " dance floor riot " . Jaime Gill from Yahoo ! felt that " ' Monster ' is a squirmy little beast that wriggles into your brain slowly and is almost impossible to remove . " Monica Herrera from Billboard called the song " 80s adoring " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United Kingdom , " Monster " debuted on the UK Singles Chart at sixty @-@ eight , on December 12 , 2009 , but slipped off the chart the next week . On August 16 , 2010 , the song debuted at number thirty on the New Zealand Singles Chart due to digital downloads and radio airplay , and later peaked at number twenty @-@ nine . The song was present on the chart for seven weeks . In Hungary , it debuted on the Mahasz Single Top 10 lista chart at number six on November 23 , 2009 , but fell off the next week . " Monster " debuted and peaked on the Australian ARIA Singles Chart at number eighty on the issue dated November 30 , 2009 . The song debuted on the United States Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs at number forty @-@ nine on September 18 , 2010 , before moving to its highest position of number twenty @-@ nine on October 9 , 2010 , where it remained for another week . It fell off the chart after eight weeks . On the Latin Pop Airplay chart , the song was initially seen at number thirty @-@ two , and later peaked at number twenty @-@ two . " Monster " has spent fourteen weeks on the chart . According to Nielsen Soundscan , the song has sold 207 @,@ 000 digital downloads in the US . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 On January 15 , 2010 , Gaga performed " Monster " as part of a three song medley on The Oprah Winfrey Show . The performance began with Gaga appearing on the stage wearing a dress , that looked both like a pantsuit and dress . Her hair was in spikes and she held a spiked ball and chain in her hand . " Monster " was the first song of the medley that she performed , others being " Bad Romance " and " Speechless " . She also performed the song on all legs of The Monster Ball Tour . The performance was preceded by a video interlude featuring snarling dogs and brooding ravens . " Monster " began with Gaga emerging in a black feathered jacket and performing dance moves reminiscent of Michael Jackson . The backdrop featured the close @-@ up of a black bird 's wings . 
 During the 2010 shows of the tour , the performance of " Monster " was changed a little to include an ending , where Gaga is portrayed as getting killed by a murderer , after which she lies " dying " in a pool of blood . Her performances of that scene in Manchester , England triggered protests from family groups and fans in the aftermath of the Cumbria shootings , in which 12 people were murdered by a taxi driver . " What happened in Bradford is very fresh in people 's minds and given all the violence which happened in Cumbria just hours earlier , it was insensitive , " said Lynn Costello of Mothers Against Violence . Chris Rock later defended her flamboyant , provocative behavior . " Well , she 's Lady Gaga , " he said . " She 's not ' Lady Behave Yourself . ' Do you want great behavior from a person named Gaga ? Is this what you were expecting ? " 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Lady Gaga – vocals , songwriter , co @-@ producer , vocal arrangement , background vocals 
 RedOne – songwriter , producer , vocal editing , vocal arrangement , background vocals , audio engineering , instrumentation , programming , recording at Record Plant Studios , Los Angeles , California 
 Space Cowboy – songwriter , recording , background vocals 
 Johnny Severin – vocal editing and audio engineering 
 Dave Russel – audio engineering 
 Robert Orton – audio mixing at Sarm Studios , London , England 
 Gene Grimaldi – audio mastering at Oasis Mastering , Burbank , California 
 Credits adapted from The Fame Monster album liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = The Division Bell = 
 The Division Bell is the fourteenth studio album by English progressive rock group Pink Floyd . It was released in the UK by EMI Records on 28 March 1994 , and the US by Columbia Records on 4 April . 
 The music was written mostly by David Gilmour and Rick Wright ; lyrically , the album deals with themes of communication . Recording took place in several locations , including the band 's Britannia Row Studios , and Gilmour 's houseboat , Astoria . The production team included Pink Floyd stalwarts such as producer Bob Ezrin , engineer Andy Jackson and saxophonist Dick Parry . Gilmour 's new wife , Polly Samson , co @-@ wrote many of the album 's lyrics , and Wright performed his first lead vocal on a Pink Floyd album since 1973 's The Dark Side of the Moon . 
 The album reached number one in the UK and the US , but received mixed reviews . Its release was followed immediately by a tour of the US and Europe . The Division Bell was certified gold , platinum and double platinum in the US in 1994 , and triple platinum in 1999 . 
 = = Concept = = 
 The Division Bell deals with themes of communication and the idea that talking can solve many of life 's problems . In the Studio radio host Redbeard suggested that the album offered " the very real possibility of transcending it all , through shivering moments of grace " . Songs such as " Poles Apart " and " Lost for Words " have been interpreted as references to the estrangement between Pink Floyd and former band member Roger Waters , who left in 1985 ; however , Gilmour denied this , and said : " People can invent and relate to a song in their personal ways , but it 's a little late at this point for us to be conjuring Roger up . " The title refers to the division bell rung in the British parliament to announce a vote . Drummer Nick Mason said : " It does have some meaning . It 's about people making choices , <unk> or <unk> . " 
 Produced a few years after the collapse of the Eastern Bloc , " A Great Day for Freedom " juxtaposes the general euphoria of , for instance , the fall of the Berlin Wall , with the subsequent wars and ethnic cleansing , particularly in Yugoslavia . Audio samples of Stephen Hawking , originally recorded for a BT television advertisement , were used in " Keep Talking " ; Gilmour was so moved by Hawking 's sentiment in the advert that he contacted the advertising company for permission to use the recordings on the album . Mason said it felt " politically incorrect to take ideas from advertising , but it seemed a very relevant piece . " At the end of the album Gilmour 's stepson Charlie is heard hanging up the telephone receiver on Pink Floyd manager Steve O 'Rourke , who had pleaded to be allowed to appear on a Pink Floyd album . 
 = = Recording = = 
 In January 1993 , Gilmour , Mason and Wright began improvising new material in sessions at a remodelled Britannia Row Studios . Although the band were initially apprehensive about recording together , because Roger Waters had left the group after the album The Final Cut . They were in need of a new bass player , and after the first day their confidence improved and soon , bassist Guy Pratt ( who had , since the end of the Momentary Lapse of Reason Tour , started a relationship with Wright 's daughter , Gala ) was asked to contribute . According to Mason , " an interesting phenomenon occurred , which was that Pratt 's playing tended to change the mood of the music we had created on our own " . Without the legal problems experienced during production of their 1987 album , A Momentary Lapse of Reason , Gilmour was at ease ; if he felt the band were " getting somewhere " , he would press the record key of a two @-@ track DAT recorder . At one point Gilmour surreptitiously recorded Wright playing the keyboard , and captured material which later formed the basis for three pieces of music . 
 The improvisations the band recorded helped spur their creative process , and after about two weeks they had around 65 pieces of music . With engineer Andy Jackson back on the team , and Bob Ezrin employed as co @-@ producer , production moved to Gilmour 's houseboat and recording studio , Astoria . The band listened to and voted on each track , and whittled the material down to about 27 pieces of music . Eliminating some tracks , and merging others , they arrived at a list about fifteen strong songs , before cutting another four to produce a tracklist of eleven . Song selection was based upon a system of points , whereby all three members would award marks out of ten to each candidate song , a system skewed somewhat by Wright 's decision to award his songs ten points each , and the other songs no points . Wright was not contractually a full member of the band , a situation which upset him . Wright later reflected : " It came very close to a point where I wasn 't going to do the album , because I didn 't feel that what we 'd agreed was fair . " Despite his frustration he chose to remain , and received his first songwriting credits on any Pink Floyd album since 1975 's Wish You Were Here . 
 Gilmour 's new wife , Polly Samson , also received songwriting credits . Initially , her role was limited to providing encouragement for her husband , but she later helped Gilmour write " High Hopes " ( a song about Gilmour 's childhood and early life in Cambridge ) . Her role expanded to co @-@ writing a further six songs , something which did not sit well with Ezrin . In an interview for Mojo magazine Gilmour admitted that Samson 's contributions had " ruffled the management 's [ feathers ] " , but Ezrin later reflected that her presence was inspirational for Gilmour , and that she " pulled the whole album together " . She also helped Gilmour , who , following his divorce , had developed a cocaine addiction . 
 Keyboard player Jon Carin and drummer / percussionist Gary Wallis were brought in to complete the band before recording began . Five backing vocalists were also hired , including Sam Brown , and Momentary Lapse tour singer Durga McBroom . The band then moved to Olympia Studios , recorded most of the ' winning ' tracks over the space of a week . After a summer break , they returned to Astoria to record more backing tracks . Ezrin worked on the various drum sounds , and previous collaborator and orchestral composer Michael Kamen provided the album 's string arrangements which were recorded at Abbey Road Studio Two by Steve McLaughlin . Dick Parry played saxophone on his first Pink Floyd album for almost 20 years , on " Wearing the Inside Out " , and Chris Thomas was booked to undertake the final mix . Between September and December recording and mixing sessions were held at Metropolis Studios in Chiswick , and the Creek Recording Studios in London . In September , the band performed at a celebrity charity concert at Cowdray House , in Midhurst . The album was mastered at the Mastering Lab in Los Angeles , by Doug Sax and James Guthrie . 
 Jackson edited unused material from the Division Bell sessions , described by Mason as ambient music , into an hour @-@ long composition tentatively titled The Big <unk> , but Pink Floyd decided not to release it . Some of The Big <unk> was used to create the band 's final album , The Endless River ( 2014 ) . 
 = = = Instrumentation = = = 
 With the aid of Gilmour 's guitar technician , Phil Taylor , Carin located some of Pink Floyd 's older keyboards from the warehouse in which they had been stored , including a Farfisa organ . Some of the sounds sampled from these instruments were used on the tracks " Take It Back " , and " Marooned " . Carin was joined on keyboards by Ezrin , Durga McBroom supplied backing vocals alongside Sam Brown , Carol Kenyan , Jackie Sheridan , and Rebecca Leigh @-@ White . 
 Gilmour used several styles on the album . " What Do You Want from Me " is influenced by Chicago blues , and " Poles Apart " contains folksy overtones . Gilmour 's improvised guitar solos on " Marooned " used a <unk> Whammy pedal to pitch @-@ shift the guitar notes over a full octave . On " Take It Back " , he used an <unk> , an electronic device which simulates the sound of a bow on the strings , on a Gibson J @-@ 200 guitar through a Zoom effects unit . 
 = = Packaging and title = = 
 To avoid competing against other album releases ( as had happened with A Momentary Lapse ) Pink Floyd set a deadline of April 1994 , at which point they would begin a new tour . By January of that year however , the band still had not decided on a title for the album . The list of names being considered included Pow Wow and Down to Earth . At a dinner one night , writer Douglas Adams , spurred on by the promise of a payment to his favourite charity , the Environmental Investigation Agency , suggested " the division bell " ( used in the lyrics for " High Hopes " ) , and the name stuck . 
 Longtime Floyd collaborator Storm Thorgerson provided the album artwork . He erected two large metal heads , each the height of a double @-@ decker bus , in a field near Ely . The sculptures were positioned close together , and photographed in profile , to give the illusion that not only were they either facing or talking to each other , they also presented the viewer with a third face . The sculptures were devised by Keith Breeden , and constructed by John Robertson . Ely Cathedral is visible on the horizon . The sculptures are now in the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in Cleveland , Ohio . 
 The album was released in the UK and US on CD , vinyl , and compact cassette , each with its own format and label @-@ specific design . It was also available in mini @-@ disc format . Two 7 @.@ 5 @-@ metre ( 25 ft ) stone sculptures were made by Aden Hynes for the cassette releases , and photographed in the same style as the metal heads . The artwork inside the CD liner notes revolves around a similar theme , with the image of the two heads formed by various other objects , such as newspapers ( " A Great Day for Freedom " ) , coloured glass ( " Poles Apart " ) , and boxing gloves ( " Lost for Words " ) . Pages two and three portray a picture from the Chilean Cerro Tololo Inter @-@ American Observatory . The CD case itself had the name of Pink Floyd printed in Braille on the left front side . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 On 10 January 1994 a press reception to announce The Division Bell and world tour was held at a former US Naval Air Station in North Carolina , in the US . A purpose @-@ built Skyship 600 airship , manufactured in the UK , toured the US until it returned to <unk> , and was destroyed by a thunderstorm on 27 June . Pieces of the aircraft were sold as souvenirs . The band held another reception , in the UK , on 21 March . This time they used an A60 airship , translucent , and painted to look like a fish , which took journalists on a tour of London . The airship , which was lit internally so it glowed in the night sky , was also flown in northern Europe . 
 The Division Bell was released in the UK by EMI Records on 28 March 1994 , and in the US on 4 April , and went straight to # 1 in both countries . The Division Bell was certified silver and gold in the UK on 1 April 1994 , platinum a month later and 2x platinum on 1 October . In the US , it was certified gold and double platinum on 6 June 1994 , and triple platinum on 29 January 1999 . 
 Despite strong sales , The Division Bell received mixed reviews . Tom Sinclair of Entertainment Weekly gave it a " D " , writing that " avarice is the only conceivable explanation for this glib , vacuous cipher of an album , which is notable primarily for its stomach @-@ turning merger of progressive @-@ rock pomposity and New Age noodling " . Rolling Stone 's Tom Graves criticised Gilmour 's performance , stating that his guitar solos had " settled into rambling , indistinct asides that are as forgettable as they used to be indelible ... only on ' What Do You Want from Me ' does Gilmour sound like he cares " . Nevertheless , the album was nominated in the 1995 Brit awards for the " Best Album by a British Artist " , but lost to Blur 's Parklife . In March the same year the band was awarded with a Grammy for the " Best Rock Instrumental Performance " on " Marooned " . 
 In Uncut 's 2011 Pink Floyd : The Ultimate Music Guide , Graeme Thomson wrote that The Division Bell " might just be the dark horse of the Floyd canon . The opening triptych of songs is a hugely impressive return to something very close to the eternal essence of Pink Floyd , and much of the rest retains a quiet power and a meditative quality that betrays a genuine sense of unity . " 
 Uncut reviewed the album once again in 2014 to celebrate the 20th anniversary reissue , and in their review praised the album for its production , citing that the album sounded much " more like a classic Pink Floyd album than 1983 's The Final Cut " and throughout the album noted the empathy and connection between Wright and Gilmour , stating that these moments were " at the album 's musical heart " . 
 = = Tour = = 
 Two days after the album 's release , the band 's Division Bell Tour began at Joe Robbie Stadium , in suburban Miami . The set list began with 1967 's " Astronomy Domine " , before moving to tracks from 1987 's A Momentary Lapse of Reason , and The Division Bell . Songs from Wish You Were Here and The Dark Side of the Moon featured , as well as The Wall . Backing musicians included Sam Brown , Jon Carin , Claudia Fontaine , Durga McBroom , Dick Parry , Guy Pratt , Tim Renwick , and Gary Wallis . The tour continued in the US through April , May and mid @-@ June , before moving to Canada , and then returning to the US in July . As the tour reached Europe in late July , Waters was invited to join the band , but he declined , and later expressed his annoyance that some Floyd songs were being performed again in large venues . On the first night of the UK leg of the tour on 12 October , a 1 @,@ 200 capacity stand collapsed , but with no serious injuries ; the performance was rescheduled . 
 During the tour an anonymous person named Publius posted a message on an internet newsgroup , inviting fans to solve a riddle supposedly concealed in the new album . The veracity of the message was demonstrated when white lights in front of the stage at a performance in East Rutherford spelled out the words Enigma Publius . During a televised concert at Earls Court in October 1994 , the word enigma was projected in large letters on to the backdrop of the stage . Mason later acknowledged that the Publius Enigma did exist , and that it had been instigated by the record company rather than the band . As of 2014 the puzzle remains unsolved . 
 The tour ended at Earls Court on 29 October 1994 , and was the group 's final concert performance until Live 8 . Estimates placed the total number of tickets sold at over 5 @.@ 3 million , and gross income at about $ 100 million . A live album of the tour , named Pulse , and a concert video , also named Pulse , ( which was shot on 20 October 1994 ) were released in June 1995 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lead vocals performed by David Gilmour , except where noted . 
 = = = LP = = = 
 = = = 20th anniversary double @-@ LP edition = = = 
 = = = Reissues = = = 
 Since its release in 1994 , The Division Bell has been reissued twice . The first was part of the 2011 Why Pink Floyd ... ? campaign which saw it remastered by Andy Jackson and released as a standalone CD and as part of the Discovery box set which collects all of the 14 studio albums together for the first time . The second reissue occurred on 30 June 2014 , which saw the album released as a " 20th anniversary deluxe edition " box set and a 20th anniversary double @-@ LP vinyl reissue . The box set contains the 2011 remaster of the album ; a 5 @.@ 1 surround sound remix by Andy Jackson ; 2 @-@ LP record on 180g vinyl ; a red 7 " " Take It Back " single ; a clear 7 " " High Hopes / Keep Talking " single ; a blue , laser @-@ etched 12 " " High Hopes " single ; book and assorted art cards . The 2014 reissues saw the first release of the full album on vinyl as the 1994 vinyl release saw only edited versions of the songs to keep it to a single LP . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Ernest Joyce = 
 Ernest Edward Mills Joyce AM ( ca . 1875 – 2 May 1940 ) was a Royal Naval seaman and explorer who participated in four Antarctic expeditions during the Heroic Age of Antarctic Exploration , early in the early 20th century . He served under both Robert Falcon Scott and Ernest Shackleton . As a member of the Ross Sea party in Shackleton 's Imperial Trans @-@ Antarctic Expedition , Joyce earned an Albert Medal for his actions in bringing the stricken party to safety , after a traumatic journey on the Great Ice Barrier . He was awarded the Polar Medal with four bars , one of only two men to be so honoured , the other being his contemporary , Frank Wild . 
 Joyce came from a humble seafaring background and began his naval career as a boy seaman in 1891 . His Antarctic experiences began 10 years later , when he joined Scott 's Discovery Expedition as an Able Seaman . In 1907 Shackleton recruited Joyce to take charge of dogs and sledges on the Nimrod Expedition . Subsequently Joyce was engaged in a similar capacity for Douglas Mawson 's Australasian Antarctic Expedition in 1911 , but left the expedition before it departed for the Antarctic . In 1914 Shackleton recruited Joyce for the Ross Sea party ; despite his heroics this expedition marked the end of Joyce 's association with the Antarctic , and of his exploring career , although he made repeated attempts to join other expeditions . 
 Throughout his career Joyce was known as an abrasive personality who attracted adverse as well as positive comments . His effectiveness in the field was widely acknowledged by many of his colleagues , but other aspects of his character were less appreciated – his capacity for bearing grudges , his boastfulness and his distortions of the truth . Joyce 's diaries , and the book he wrote based on them , have been condemned as self @-@ serving and the work of a fabulist . He made no significant material gains from his expeditions , living out his post @-@ Antarctic life in humble circumstances before dying suddenly in 1940 . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Details of Joyce 's early life are sketchy . It has been said that he was born about 1875 at Bognor , England , but the exact date has not been verified . The birth of an Ernest Edward Joyce was registered ( see <unk> index , volume 2b page 381 ) in Westhampnett district , which includes Bognor , in the first quarter of 1876 , and the 1881 census shows an Ernest E Mill Joyce aged 5 , born Feltham [ sic ] or <unk> , a village by Bognor . His father and grandfather had both been sailors , his father probably within the coastguard service After the father 's early death his widow , with three children to support on her limited earnings as a seamstress , sent the young Ernest to the Lower School of Greenwich Royal Hospital School for Navy Orphans at Greenwich . Here , in austere surroundings , he received a vocational education that would prepare him for a lower @-@ deck career in the Royal Navy . After leaving the school aged 15 in 1891 , he joined the navy as a boy seaman , progressing over the next ten years to Ordinary Seaman and then Able Seaman . 
 No detailed records of his naval service between 1891 and 1901 appear to have survived . The last @-@ named year saw him serving on HMS Gibraltar in Cape Town where , in September , Scott 's expedition ship Discovery stopped on the way to the Antarctic . Scott was short @-@ handed , and requested volunteers ; from a response of several hundreds , Joyce was one of four seamen chosen to join Discovery . He sailed south with her on 14 October 1901 . 
 = = Discovery Expedition , 1901 – 04 = = 
 The Discovery expedition was Joyce 's Antarctic baptism , although for the next three years he kept a relatively low profile ; Scott scarcely mentions him in The Voyage of the Discovery , and Edward Wilson 's diaries not at all . It seems that he took readily to Antarctic life , gaining experience in sledging and dog @-@ driving techniques and other aspects of Antarctic exploration . He did not figure in the main journeys of the expedition , although towards the end he joined Arthur <unk> and Frank Wild in an attempt to climb Mount Erebus , ascending to some 3 @,@ 000 feet ( 910 m ) . Joyce was at times badly affected by frostbite ; on one occasion two officers , Michael Barne and George Mulock , held Joyce 's frostbitten foot against the pits of their stomachs and kneaded the ankle for several hours to save it from amputation . However , such experiences left Joyce undaunted ; the polar historian Beau Riffenburgh writes that Joyce was repeatedly drawn to the Antarctic by " a curious combination of affection and antipathy " that " impelled [ him ] to return again and again " . 
 During the expedition Joyce encountered several men who would feature prominently in Antarctic polar history during the following years , including Scott , Wilson , Frank Wild , Tom Crean , William Lashly , Edgar Evans and , most significantly , Ernest Shackleton . Joyce made several sledging trips with Shackleton and created an impression of competence and reliability . He also impressed Scott as " sober , honest , loyal and intelligent " , and expedition organiser Sir Clements Markham later described him as " an honest and trustworthy man " . His reward , at the conclusion of the expedition , was promotion to Petty Officer 1st Class on Scott 's recommendation . However , he had been bitten by the bug of Antarctic exploration , and ordinary naval duty no longer appealed . He left the navy in 1905 but found shore life unsatisfying and re @-@ enlisted in 1906 . When the chance came a year later to join Shackleton 's Nimrod Expedition , he took it immediately . 
 = = British Antarctic Expedition ( Nimrod ) 1907 – 09 = = 
 When Shackleton was selecting the crew for his Antarctic expedition in Nimrod , Joyce was one of his earliest recruits . Most accounts tell the story that Shackleton saw Joyce on a bus that was passing his expedition offices , sent someone out to fetch him , and recruited him on the spot . To join the expedition , Joyce bought his release from the Navy ; in later years he would claim that Shackleton had failed to recompense him for this , despite a promise to do so , one of several disputes over money which eventually strained his relations with Shackleton . Joyce , Shackleton and Frank Wild were the only members of the expedition with previous Antarctic experience , and on the basis of his Discovery exploits , Joyce was put in charge of the new expedition 's general stores , sledges and dogs . Before departure in August 1907 , he and Wild took a crash course in printing at Sir Joseph <unk> 's printing firm in Hampshire , as Shackleton intended to publish a book or magazine while in the Antarctic . 
 Nimrod left New Zealand on 1 January 1908 , and as a fuel @-@ saving measure was towed towards the Antarctic pack ice by the tug <unk> . On 23 January , by now under her own power , she reached the Ross Ice Shelf ( then known as the " Great Ice Barrier " , or " Barrier " ) , where Shackleton planned to base his headquarters in an inlet discovered during the Discovery voyage . This proved impossible ; the inlet , where Scott and Shackleton had taken balloon flights in February 1902 , had greatly expanded to become an open bay , christened the " Bay of Whales " . Shackleton was convinced that the ice was not secure enough as a landing ground , and could find no feasible alternative site on nearby King Edward VII Land . Before leaving for the Antarctic Shackleton had promised Scott that he would not base his expedition in or near Scott 's former headquarters in McMurdo Sound . Shackleton was now forced to break this agreement , and take Nimrod to the safer waters of McMurdo Sound . The site finally chosen as a base was at Cape Royds , some 20 miles ( 32 km ) north of Scott 's old Discovery headquarters at Hut Point . During the extended and often difficult process of unloading the ship Joyce remained ashore , looking after the dogs and ponies , and helping to build the expedition hut . In March Joyce assisted the party that made the first successful ascent of Mount Erebus , although he did not make the climb himself . 
 During the following winter Joyce , with Wild 's help , printed copies of the expedition book Aurora Australis , edited by Shackleton . About 25 or 30 copies of the book were printed , sewn and bound . Otherwise Joyce was busy preparing equipment and stores for the next season 's journey to the Pole in which , in view of his experience , he fully expected to be included . However , various mishaps had reduced the number of ponies to four , so Shackleton cut the southern party to that number . One of those dropped was Joyce , on advice from expedition doctor Eric Marshall , who noted that Joyce had a liver problem and the early stages of heart disease . Frank Wild , who along with Marshall and Jameson Adams was selected for the southern journey , wrote in his diary after the party 's bid to reach the Pole had fallen short : " If we only had Joyce and Marston here instead of these two useless grub @-@ scoffing beggars " – ( Marshall and Adams ) – " we would have done it easily . " Joyce showed no particular resentment at his exclusion ; he assisted the preparatory work and accompanied the polar party on the southward march for the first seven days . In the following months he took charge of enhancing the depots , to ensure adequate supplies for the returning southern party . He deposited a special cache of luxuries at Minna Bluff , together with life @-@ saving food and fuel , earning Wild 's spontaneous praise when the cache was discovered . 
 Shackleton and his party returned safely from their polar journey , on Nimrod 's last feasible date for sailing home . They had established a new Farthest South at 88 ° 23 ′ S , only 97 nautical miles ( 180 km ; 112 mi ) from the South Pole . Joyce had been ready to remain at the base with a rearguard , to wait for the party or to establish its fate if it did not return in time to catch the ship . Nimrod finally reached London in September 1909 and was prepared , under Joyce 's direction , as a floating exhibition of polar artefacts . Shackleton paid him a salary of £ 250 a year for this ( 2008 equivalent approx . £ 18 @,@ 000 ) , a generous amount for the time . 
 = = Australasian Antarctic Expedition , 1911 = = 
 Joyce was not invited to join Scott 's Terra Nova Expedition , although several of Shackleton 's men were , including Frank Wild who declined . Instead , Joyce and Wild both signed up for Douglas Mawson 's Australasian Antarctic Expedition . In 1911 Joyce travelled to Denmark to acquire dogs for this expedition , and took them on to Tasmania . Joyce did not subsequently sail with Mawson . According to one account he was " dismissed " before the expedition left Australia , while another suggests that Joyce was dropped when Mawson reduced his expedition from three shore parties to two . Whatever the reason , it appears that there was a falling @-@ out ; Mawson reportedly distrusted Joyce , saying that " he spent too much time in hotels " , which suggests that drink was an issue . Joyce remained in Australia , obtaining work with the Sydney Harbour Trust . 
 = = Imperial Trans @-@ Antarctic Expedition , 1914 – 17 = = 
 = = = Membership of Ross Sea party = = = 
 In February 1914 Joyce , still in Australia , was contacted by <unk> who outlined plans for his Imperial Trans @-@ Antarctic Expedition . Shackleton wanted Joyce in the expedition 's supporting Ross Sea party ; should the plans change to a one @-@ ship format , Shackleton promised to find a different role for Joyce within the expedition . Joyce would later claim without justification that Shackleton had offered him a place on the main transcontinental party . In his subsequent book , The South Polar Trail published in 1929 , Joyce also misrepresented the nature of his appointment to the Ross Sea party , omitting Shackleton 's order that placed him under an officer and claiming that he had been given sole authority over dogs and sledging . 
 The task of the Ross Sea party , under the command of another Nimrod veteran , Aeneas Mackintosh , was to establish a base in McMurdo Sound and then lay a series of supply depots across the Ross Ice Shelf to assist the transcontinental party . Shackleton saw this task as routine ; he wrote : " I had not anticipated that the work would present any great difficulties " . However , the party had been assembled rather hurriedly , and was inexperienced . Only Joyce and Mackintosh had been to the Antarctic before , and Mackintosh 's participation in polar work had been brief ; he had been invalided from the Nimrod Expedition before the initial landing , after an accident led to the loss of his right eye and had returned only for the final stages of the expedition 
 = = = Major setbacks = = = 
 Aurora 's departure from Australia was delayed by a series of organisational and financial setbacks , and the party did not arrive in McMurdo Sound until 16 January 1915 — very late in the season for depot @-@ laying work . Mackintosh , who believed that Shackleton might attempt to cross the continent in that first season , insisted that sledging work should begin without delay , with a view to laying down supply depots at 79 ° and 80 ° S. Joyce opposed this ; more time , he maintained , should be set aside to acclimatise and train men and dogs . However he was overruled by Mackintosh , who was unaware that Shackleton had ruled out a crossing that season . 
 Mackintosh further vexed Joyce by deciding to lead this depot @-@ laying party himself , unmoved by Joyce 's claim to have independent authority over this area . The party was divided into two teams , and the journey began on 24 January , in an atmosphere of muddle . Initial attempts at travelling on the Barrier were thwarted by the condition of the surface , and Mackintosh 's team got lost on the sea ice between Cape Evans and Hut Point . Joyce privately gloated over this evidence of the captain 's inexperience . The teams eventually reached the 79 ° mark , and laid the " Bluff depot " there ( Minna Bluff was a prominent visible landmark at this latitude ) on 9 February . It seemed that Joyce 's party had the enjoyed the easier journey . Mackintosh 's plan to take the dogs on to the 80 ° mark led to more words between him and Joyce , who argued that several dogs had already died and that the remainder should needed to be kept for future journeys , but again he was overruled . On 20 February the party reached the 80 ° latitude and laid their depot there . The outcome of this journey was 105 lb ( 48 kg ) of provisions and fuel at 80 ° S and 158 lb ( 72 kg ) at 79 ° S. But a further 450 lb ( 200 kg ) , intended for the depots , had been dumped on the journey , to save weight . 
 By this time men and dogs were worn out . On the return journey , in appalling Barrier weather , all the dogs perished , as Joyce had predicted , and the party returned to Hut Point on 24 March exhausted and severely frostbitten . After being delayed for ten weeks at Hut Point by the condition of the sea ice , the party finally got back to their base at Cape Evans on 2 June . They then learned that Aurora , with most of the shore party 's stores and equipment still aboard , had been torn from its moorings in a gale , and blown far out to sea with no prospect of swift return . Fortunately , the rations for the next season 's depot @-@ laying had been landed before the ship 's involuntary departure . However , the shore party 's own food , fuel , clothing and equipment had been largely carried away ; replacements would have to be improvised from supplies left at Cape Evans after Scott 's 1910 – 13 Terra Nova expedition , augmented by seal meat and blubber . In these circumstances Joyce proved his worth as a " master scavenger " and improviser , unearthing from Scott 's abandoned stores , among other treasures , a large canvas tent from which he fashioned roughly tailored clothing . He also set about stitching 500 calico bags , to hold the depot rations . 
 = = = Depot @-@ laying journey = = = 
 The party set out on 1 September 1915 . The men were under @-@ trained and half @-@ fit , in primitive clothing and with home @-@ made equipment . With only five dogs remaining from the previous season 's debacle , the task would mostly be one of <unk> . Before beginning the march south — a return distance of 800 nautical miles ( 1 @,@ 500 km ; 920 mi ) — approximately 3 @,@ 800 pounds ( 1 @,@ 700 kg ) of stores had to be taken to the base depot at Minna Bluff . This phase of the task lasted until 28 December . Mackintosh had divided his forces into two parties , himself in charge of one and Joyce of the other . The two men continued to disagree over methods ; finally , Joyce confronted Mackintosh with incontrovertible evidence that his party 's methods were much the more effective , and Mackintosh capitulated . " I never came across such an idiot in charge of men " , Joyce wrote in his diary . 
 The weaker members of the party — Arnold Spencer @-@ Smith and Mackintosh himself — were by this time showing signs of physical breakdown , as the long march south began from Bluff Depot towards Mount Hope at 83 ° 30 ′ S , where the final depot was to be laid . The party was reduced to six when three men were forced to turn back because of a Primus stove failure . With Mackintosh and Joyce in the final party were Spencer @-@ Smith , Ernest Wild ( younger brother of Frank ) , Dick Richards and Victor Hayward . With four dogs they trekked southward , increasingly afflicted by frostbite , snow blindness and , eventually , scurvy . Spencer @-@ Smith collapsed , and thereafter had to be carried on the sledge . Mackintosh , barely able to walk , fought on until the final depot was laid at Mount Hope . On the homeward journey the effective leadership of the party fell increasingly to Joyce , as Mackintosh 's condition deteriorated until , like Spencer @-@ Smith , he had to be carried on the sledge . The journey became a protracted struggle which eventually cost the life of Spencer @-@ Smith and took the others to the limits of their endurance . Mackintosh suffered further physical and mental collapse , and had to be left in the tent while Joyce , himself suffering from severe snow blindness , led the rest to the safety of Hut Point . He and Ernest Wild then returned for Mackintosh , and the five survivors were all back at Hut Point on 18 March 1916 . 
 = = = Rescue = = = 
 All five men were showing symptoms of scurvy with varying severity . However , a diet of fresh seal meat , rich in Vitamin C , enabled them to recover slowly . By mid @-@ April they were ready to consider travelling the final 13 miles ( 21 km ) across the frozen sea to the base at Cape Evans . 
 Joyce tested the sea @-@ ice on 18 April and found it firm , but the following day a blizzard from the south swept all the ice away . The ambience at Hut Point was gloomy , and the unrelieved diet of seal was depressing . This seemed particularly to affect Mackintosh , and on 8 May , despite the urgent pleadings of Joyce , Richards and Ernest Wild , he decided to risk the re @-@ formed ice and walk to Cape Evans . Victor Hayward volunteered to accompany him . Joyce recorded in his diary : " I fail to understand how these people are so anxious to risk their lives again " . Shortly after their departure a blizzard descended , and the two were never seen again . 
 Joyce and the others learned the fate of Mackintosh and Hayward only when they were finally able to reach Cape Evans in July . Joyce immediately set about organising searches for traces of the missing men ; in the subsequent months parties were sent to search the coasts and the islands in McMurdo Sound , but to no avail . Joyce also organised journeys to recover geological samples left on the Barrier and to visit the grave of Spencer @-@ Smith , where a large cross was erected . In the absence of the ship , the seven remaining survivors lived quietly , until on 10 January 1917 , the refitted Aurora arrived with Shackleton aboard to take them home . They learned then that their depot @-@ laying efforts had been futile , Shackleton 's ship Endurance having been crushed by the Weddell Sea ice nearly two years previously . 
 = = Later life = = 
 = = = Post @-@ expedition career = = = 
 After his return to New Zealand Joyce was hospitalised , mainly from the effects of snow blindness , and according to his own account had to wear dark glasses for a further 18 months . During this period he married Beatrice <unk> from Christchurch . He was now probably unfit for further polar work , although he attempted , unsuccessfully , to rejoin the Navy in 1918 . In September 1919 he was seriously injured in a car accident , which led to months of convalescence followed by a return to <unk> 1920 he signed up for a new Antarctic expedition to be led by John Cope of the Ross Sea party , but this venture proved abortive . He continued to maintain his claims to financial compensation from Shackleton , which caused a breach between them , and he was not invited to join Shackleton 's Quest expedition which departed in 1921 . He applied to join the British Everest expedition of 1921 – 22 , but was rejected . 
 He was in the public eye again in 1923 when he was awarded the Albert Medal for his efforts to save the lives of Mackintosh and Spencer @-@ Smith during on the 1916 depot @-@ laying journey . Richards received the same award ; Hayward , and also Ernest Wild who had died of typhoid during naval service in the Mediterranean in 1918 , received the award posthumously . In 1929 Joyce published a contentious version of his diaries under the title The South Polar Trail , in which he boosted his own role , played down the contributions of others , and incorporated fictitious colourful details . Thereafter he indulged in various schemes for further expeditions , and wrote numerous articles and stories based on his exploits before settling into a quiet life as a hotel porter in London . Bickel asserts that Joyce lived into his eighties , beyond the date ( 1958 ) of the first Antarctica crossing by Vivian Fuchs and his party ; in fact , he died from natural causes , aged about 65 , on 2 May 1940 @.@ is not supported by any other sources . Joyce is commemorated in Antarctica by Mount Joyce at 75 ° 36 ′ S 160 ° 38 ′ E. 
 = = = Assessment = = = 
 Polar chronicler Roland Huntford sums up Joyce as a " strange mixture of fraud , flamboyance and ability " . This mixed assessment is endorsed in the assortment of views expressed by those associated with him . Dick Richards of the Ross Sea party described him as " a kindly soul and a good pal " , and others shared the favourable opinions expressed by Scott and Markham , confirm Joyce as a " jolly good sort " , though unsuited for command . On the other hand , Eric Marshall of the Nimrod Expedition had found him " of limited intelligence , resentful and incompatible " , while John King Davis , when refusing to join the Imperial Trans @-@ Antarctic Expedition , told Shackleton : " I absolutely decline to be associated with any enterprise with which people of the Joyce type are connected " . 
 Joyce 's versions of events recorded in his published diaries have been described as unreliable and sometimes as outright invention — a " self @-@ aggrandizing epic " . Specific examples of this " <unk> " include his self @-@ designation as " Captain " after the Ross Sea expedition ; his invented claim to have seen Scott 's death tent on the Barrier ; the misrepresentation of his instructions from Shackleton regarding his sledging role , and his claim to independence in the field ; his claim to have been offered a place on the transcontinental party when Shackleton had made it clear he did not want him there , and his habit , late in life , of writing anonymously to the press praising " the famous Polar Explorer Ernest Mills Joyce " . This self @-@ promotion neither surprised nor upset his former comrades . " It is what I would have expected " , said Richards . " He was bombastic [ ... ] but true @-@ hearted and a staunch friend " . Alexander Stevens , the party 's chief scientist , concurred . They knew that Joyce , for all his swaggering style , had the will and determination to " drag men back from certain death " . Lord Shackleton , the explorer 's son , named Joyce ( with Mackintosh and Richards ) as " one of those who emerge from the ( Ross Sea party ) story as heroes " . 
 = Interstate 40 in Arizona = 
 Interstate 40 ( I @-@ 40 ) is an east – west Interstate Highway that has a 359 @.@ 6 @-@ mile ( 578 @.@ 72 km ) section in the U.S. state of Arizona connecting sections in California to New Mexico . It enters Arizona from the west at a crossing of the Colorado River southwest of Kingman . It travels eastward across the northern portion of the state connecting the cities of Kingman , Ash Fork , Williams , Flagstaff , Winslow , and Holbrook . I @-@ 40 continues into New Mexico , heading to Albuquerque . The highway has major junctions with U.S. Route 93 ( US 93 ) in Kingman , the main highway connecting Phoenix and Las Vegas , Nevada , and I @-@ 17 in Flagstaff , the Interstate linking Phoenix and Flagstaff . 
 For the majority of its routing through Arizona , I @-@ 40 follows the historic alignment of U.S. Route 66 . The lone exception is a stretch between Kingman and Ash Fork where US 66 took a more northerly , less direct route that is now State Route 66 . Construction of I @-@ 40 was ongoing in the 1960s and 1970s and reached completion in 1984 . With the completion of I @-@ 40 in 1984 , the entire routing of US 66 had been bypassed by Interstate Highways which led to its decertification a year later in 1985 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = California to Flagstaff = = = 
 I @-@ 40 enters Arizona from California at a bridge that crosses the Colorado River at Topock in Mohave County . It heads east from Topock and begins to curve towards the north at Franconia and completes the curve to the north at Yucca . The interstate continues to head north until it reaches Kingman . In this city , I @-@ 40 has a junction with US 93 at exit 48 . US 93 heads towards the northwest from this junction to Hoover Dam and Las Vegas . US 93 south begins to run concurrently with I @-@ 40 as they both head east through Kingman . The two separate at exit 71 as US 93 heads towards the south towards Phoenix while I @-@ 40 heads east towards Flagstaff . I @-@ 40 continues towards the east , passing through the town of Seligman and then at Ash Fork , where it meets State Route 89 , the main highway that heads south to Prescott . Next , it passes through Williams at exit 165 with SR 64 , and heads north towards Grand Canyon National Park . I @-@ 40 continues to the east to Flagstaff , where it has a junction with I @-@ 17 at exit 195 . I @-@ 17 heads south from the interchange with I @-@ 40 to Phoenix . 
 = = = Flagstaff to New Mexico = = = 
 East of Flagstaff , I @-@ 40 heads towards the east @-@ southeast direction as it goes through the town of Winslow . It continues towards this direction until it reaches Holbrook , where it curves towards the northeast . Along this stretch , it passes through Petrified Forest National Park and continues to the northeast , passing through Chambers , and enters the Navajo Indian Reservation . The highway still continues to the northeast to the New Mexico border southwest of Gallup , New Mexico as it continues on towards Albuquerque . 
 = = History = = 
 With the exception of a stretch between Kingman and Flagstaff , I @-@ 40 directly replaced the famed US 66 across northern Arizona . Where possible , US 66 was upgraded to Interstate standards to become I @-@ 40 directly . Exceptions to this were through the central business districts of the cities and towns that US 66 passed through , and I @-@ 40 had to be built as a bypass outside the cities . On October 26 , 1984 , after the last section of I @-@ 40 was completed in Williams , US 66 was removed from the state highway system of Arizona . The portions through cities that did not overlap I @-@ 40 would become business loops of I @-@ 40 . 
 = = = Before the U.S. Highways = = = 
 The routing of a road near the current corridor of I @-@ 40 in Arizona was first surveyed and built between 1857 and 1859 . Lt. Edward Beale and his soldiers built the road along the 35th parallel that would come to be known as the Beale Wagon Road from Ft . Smith , Arkansas to the Colorado River to serve as a military wagon road . The road was a popular route for immigrants during the 1860s and 1870s until the transcontinental railroad was built across northern Arizona in the 1880s . In the early 1900s , the road became part of the National Old Trails Road , a transcontinental route from Baltimore , Maryland to California , and the National Park to Park Highway , an auto trail linking the national parks of the west . 
 = = = U.S. Route 66 = = = 
 In the 1920s , as a nationwide system of highways called the United States Numbered Highways was being developed , the route through was given the designation of U.S. Route 60 . This designation was controversial since designations that are multiples of 10 are assigned to transcontinental east – west routes and this route was a diagonal route from Chicago to Los Angeles . As a compromise to states east of Chicago that felt US 60 should go through their state , a different route was given the number 60 , while the route from Chicago to Los Angeles was given the number 66 . 
 By 1927 , the routing of US 66 through Arizona had been laid out , but none of it had been paved yet . By 1935 , nearly the entire route had been paved , with the lone exceptions being a short stretch northeast of Valentine and a stretch between Peach Springs and Seligman . By 1938 , the entire route in Arizona had been paved . In 1953 , US 66 was realigned between the California border and Kingman to an alignment to the southeast to avoid the mountain curves and grades of the original alignment . By 1961 , several sections of the highway had been expanded to a four @-@ lane divided highway in anticipation of the coming Interstate Highway . Four @-@ lane sections included a section near Ash Fork , another section east of Winslow and a section east of Holbrook near the Petrified Forest National Monument . 
 = = = Planning = = = 
 In Flagstaff , several different alternatives were considered as a potential routing of the new Interstate through the area . The alternatives consisted of a routing north of downtown , south of downtown , through downtown along the Santa Fe Railroad right @-@ of @-@ way near the alignment of US 66 , and a more elaborate alternative of a routing above downtown on a long overpass . In January 1959 , the Flagstaff Chamber of Commerce recommended to the Bureau of Public Roads that the route south of downtown be used which was approved by the Flagstaff City Council and the Board of Supervisors for Coconino County . This recommendation was accepted and would become the planned routing of I @-@ 40 in Flagstaff . Business owners along US 66 were opposed to this routing as it would draw motorists away from main through route of the time , US 66 . As a result , they created the No By @-@ Pass Committee and sent a proposal to the Chamber of Commerce ’ s Roads and Highways Committee to conduct a study of the feasibility of a route for I @-@ 40 through downtown along the Santa Fe railroad right @-@ of @-@ way . The Committee sent an inquiry to the railroad concerning the proposal . The railroad rejected the proposed rerouting of their main rail lines citing that it would result in worse grades than what currently exists and in order to reduce those grades , considerable lengthening of the rail line would be required . With a routing through town now out of the question , the business owners along US 66 drafted a city ordinance , known as Initiative 200 , that was filed with the city of Flagstaff in November 1959 to appear on the general election ballot in March 1960 . The ordinance would in effect ban all new commercial businesses on I @-@ 40 , all routes leading from I @-@ 40 to US 66 , and the area between I @-@ 40 and US 66 . In a record voter turnout , voters overwhelmingly voted against the ordinance by a vote of 2 @,@ 280 to 556 . 
 In 1965 , the routing of I @-@ 40 west of Kingman was being reconsidered from the planned route through Needles , California to a route to the north passing through Searchlight in southern Nevada and connecting with I @-@ 15 further north of its present connection with I @-@ 15 . The rationale for the proposal was that it would be an overall shorter route and would cost much less to construct . The proposal was met with stiff opposition including all four U.S. senators from California and Arizona sending the Secretary of Commerce letters requesting that the routing through Needles be retained . This proposal was eventually abandoned in 1966 and the routing through Needles was kept . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 The construction of the 360 @-@ mile ( 579 km ) route of I @-@ 40 across Arizona took nearly 25 years to complete with the last segment being completed in 1984 , much longer than the ambitious goal of finishing by 1972 . By the end of 1960 , 15 miles ( 24 km ) had been completed with an additional 23 miles ( 37 km ) miles being worked on . In 1964 , construction was still on schedule with 58 miles ( 93 km ) complete and an additional 71 miles ( 114 km ) under construction . Funding was becoming an issue at this time as the state lacked the available funds to stay on pace with a 1972 completion goal . By 1967 , Arizona had completed almost half of the highway with 155 @.@ 3 miles ( 249 @.@ 9 km ) complete and another 82 @.@ 4 miles ( 133 km ) under construction . In 1968 , the bypass around Flagstaff was complete with three interchanges , two at each end of where US 66 split off from I @-@ 40 to enter the city and one at the I @-@ 17 interchange . An additional interchange at Butler Avenue was completed a year later . One of the big improvements of I @-@ 40 over US 66 was the construction of the segment between Kingman and Ash Fork . The 94 @-@ mile ( 151 km ) section is a more direct route between the two cities and travels as far as 20 miles ( 32 km ) south of the US 66 alignment , bypassing Hackberry and Peach Springs and creating ghost towns . Construction of the $ 69 @.@ 1 million segment was also to be a much safer route as the US 66 alignment had one of the highest fatality rates of any section of highway in Arizona . This section of the Interstate was complete in 1975 . Construction of the $ 7 @.@ 7 million bypass around Winslow began in 1977 . I @-@ 40 was completed in Arizona in 1984 , with the completion of a 6 @-@ mile ( 10 km ) section in Williams . This was also the last section of US 66 to be bypassed by the Interstate , which led to it being decertified by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials ( AASHTO ) the following year . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 = Hurricane Joan – Miriam = 
 Hurricane Joan was a powerful hurricane that caused death and destruction in over a dozen countries in the Caribbean and Central America . Moving on a due west course for nearly two weeks in October 1988 , Hurricane Joan caused widespread flooding and over 200 deaths after moving into Central America . Widespread suffering and economic crises were exacerbated by Joan , primarily across Nicaragua , as heavy rains and high winds impacted those near the hurricane 's path . 
 After crossing Central America into the Pacific , the cyclone was renamed Tropical Storm Miriam , with the system 's dissipation occurring southwest of Mexico . Joan @-@ Miriam was the final hurricane of the 1988 Atlantic hurricane season and the final named storm of the Pacific hurricane season . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 One of the latest Cape Verde @-@ type hurricanes to form in any season , Joan formed from an area of convection in the intertropical convergence zone that moved off the coast of Africa early in October . It developed banding and was upgraded to Tropical Depression Seventeen on October 10 and later designated as Tropical Storm Joan while located at low latitude in the central Atlantic Ocean . 
 Joan gradually strengthened as it passed over the southern Windward Islands on October 15 . It continued heading west in response to a strong Ridge , and passed over the Guajira Peninsula on October 17 . After entering the extreme southwestern Caribbean Sea , Joan strengthened into a hurricane . It then slowly executed a small counterclockwise loop , possibly in response to the nearby Tropical Depression Eighteen . Upwelling caused by the quasi @-@ stationary hurricane weakened the system . As the nearby depression dissipated , Joan resumed its westward track . A strong anticyclone over the southwestern Caribbean Sea created an extremely favorable environment , and Joan underwent rapid deepening at a rate of 38 millibars in the space of a day . With a minimum pressure of 932 millibars , Joan was one of the strongest October hurricanes since 1961 . At the time , it was located at 12 ° N , the southernmost Category 4 hurricane ever recorded at the time . That record has since been broken by Hurricane Ivan . 
 Joan made landfall just south of Bluefields on October 22 . It passed over the northern portion of Lake Nicaragua , passed over Managua , and entered the Pacific Ocean near Leon on October 23 . Joan remained a hurricane or tropical storm during its entire passage over Central America , and was a minimal tropical storm when it reached the Pacific . As per the policy at the time , Joan was renamed Miriam . 
 Tropical Storm Miriam hugged the coast of Central America and reached its peak of 986 millibars on October 24 . Ordinarily , a pressure this low would indicate a Category 1 hurricane , but due to its disorganized convection , Miriam was not upgraded to a hurricane . Land interaction and wind shear weakened Miriam to a tropical depression on October 26 . Low @-@ level winds carried the system out to sea , and its convection dissipated on October 28 . 
 Miriam 's remnants continued out to sea , and they regenerated on October 30 . The tropical depression hung on for the next few days , until its second , and final , dissipation on November 2 . 
 = = = Unusual path = = = 
 Hurricane Joan 's path through the southern Caribbean in late October was highly unusual . Most October storms in the Atlantic gravitate towards the northern portion of the Caribbean , and often recurve quickly . Joan took the southernmost path of a tropical cyclone since a June system in 1933 , although Hurricane Irene in 1971 took a path that was just north of Joan 's . Joan @-@ Miriam was also unusual in that it survived passage from the Atlantic to Pacific Ocean . Only seven other storms have been known to survive the passage between the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Tropical Storm watches and later warnings were issued for the Windward Islands as far north as Martinique on October 13 . They were dropped over the subsequent two days as Joan passed through . Along the coast of South America , additional warnings were raised and later dropped as Joan paralleled the coast . 
 The first hurricane watches were issued for parts of Panama , and Providencia starting on October 18 . The watch area was expanded to include Costa Rica and Nicaragua on October 19 as the watches were upgraded to warnings . These warnings provided several hours ' worth of lead time , allowing evacuations and preparations to be made . In addition , flash flood and mudslide warnings were issued for western Panama , Costa Rica , Honduras , and Nicaragua starting on October 21 . 
 In response to Miriam , the flood and mudslide warnings issued because of Joan were not lifted until October 23 and 25 . Tropical Storm warnings were issued for the Pacific coast of Nicaragua , El Salvador , and the Gulf of Fonseca on October 24 . They were dropped the next day . Guatemala was placed under a warning on October 24 . In addition , new flash flood and mudslide warnings were raised for Guatemala and the Mexican state of Chiapas on October 24 and 25 , respectively . All warnings and watches were discontinued later on October 25 as Miriam turned away from the coast . 
 Despite the dangers from the intense hurricane , evacuations in Bluefields were met with resistance and disbelief from residents . In Managua , 70 @,@ 000 people were evacuated to safe areas . In the remaining areas of Nicaragua , 300 @,@ 000 people were evacuated . In Costa Rica , a total of 55 @,@ 000 people were evacuated . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Hurricane Joan killed at least 216 people , with 118 unaccounted for . The total cost of damage was around $ 2 billion ( 1988 USD ) . All of the deaths and most of the damage were due to the Joan portion of Hurricane Joan – Miriam . 
 = = = Lesser Antilles = = = 
 No casualties were reported in the Windward Islands , including Grenada , where , on October 15 , Joan made landfall . Passing just south , Joan brought rough seas and winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) with gusts to 55 mph ( 90 km / h ) to the islands of Aruba , Bonaire , and Curaçao on October 16 , damaging coastal facilities and roofs . Structural damage from the storm was estimated at $ 1 @.@ 5 million ( 1988 USD ) . Increased moisture in Joan 's wake caused persistent rainfall on the islands for several days , leading to widespread flooding . In Trinidad and Tobago , Joan was described as a " minor inconvenience " . Sustained winds up to 51 mph ( 82 km / h ) with gusts up to 64 mph ( 103 km / h ) were recorded on Grenada . Heavy rains amounted to 6 in ( 152 @.@ 4 mm ) in St. George 's . Significant flooding was reported throughout the island , resulting in hundreds of thousands of dollars in damage . A rare invasion of African desert locusts in the Windward Islands were blamed on the storm . 
 = = = South America = = = 
 In Venezuela , 11 people were killed due to flash @-@ flooding caused by heavy rains . Landslides and flooding killed 25 people in Colombia . The rains and flooding left 27 @,@ 000 people homeless . Throughout Colombia , damages amounted to $ 1 billion . 
 = = = Nicaragua = = = 
 Most of the destruction was in Nicaragua . Throughout the country , 148 people perished , 184 were badly hurt , and 100 were unaccounted for . Roughly 23 @,@ 300 homes were destroyed , with 6 @,@ 000 being damaged . Many settlements on the Atlantic coast of the country were completely destroyed . The national electric company had 620 miles ( 1 @,@ 000 km ) of downed power lines , at the cost of 2 @.@ 5 million USD ( 1988 dollars ) . A port being constructed with Bulgarian help at El Bluff was severely damaged . On a brighter note , public health measures managed to keep the death toll lower than it could have been . 
 Bluefields was hit with extreme impact . Almost all of the 7 @,@ 500 structures in the city were demolished or had their roofs blown off . The majority of the main buildings in the city were destroyed . The hurricane also wreaked havoc on agriculture in the country . Around 15 @,@ 700 head of cattle , 20 @,@ 000 pigs , and 456 @,@ 000 chickens were killed . The hurricane caused severe disruption in most of Nicaragua 's remaining rain forests in the areas it hit , and also stripped trees of leaves . In the southeast rain forests , Joan toppled or snapped 80 percent of the trees and completely destroyed 500 @,@ 000 hectares ( 1 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 acres ) of canopy . Hurricane Joan caused transportation difficulties in the country . Floodwaters destroyed 30 bridges and seriously damaged 36 others . Roads totaling 404 miles ( 650 km ) in length were washed away . 
 In an unfortunate coincidence , Hurricane Joan hit shortly after an armed conflict in the region had started to cool off . The hurricane destroyed much of the infrastructure in Nicaragua , contributing to a recession that was already underway . The losses to cash crops severely reduced exports to under 200 million dollars ( 1988 USD ) . These factors combined to aggravate a recession and deepen the economic crisis . Government spending to rebuild infrastructure negated recently introduced anti @-@ inflation measures . Hurricane Joan was a partial cause of Nicaraguans being , on average , worse @-@ off than they were in the 1970s . In all , the storm left at least 250 @,@ 000 people homeless . Total damages in the country amounted to $ 751 @.@ 1 million . Joan was the first major hurricane to strike Nicaragua since Edith in 1971 . 
 = = = Rest of Central America = = = 
 In Costa Rica , 28 people were killed , 75 were injured , and 18 were missing . Rainfall caused 20 rivers to burst their banks , flooding 75 settlements , including the city of Quepos , Costa Rica on the Pacific coast . At Ciudad <unk> , Costa Rica , the Rio <unk> broke through a dike . In total , 7 @,@ 500 Costa Ricans were rendered homeless . Damages in Costa Rica amounted to $ 65 million . 
 In the remaining portions of Central America , heavy rainfall , locally exceeding 300 millimetres ( 12 in ) , was reported . These rains caused flooding and landslides , especially in mountainous regions . Those heavy rains caused seven deaths in Panama and left $ 60 million in damages . 
 = = = Mexico = = = 
 In Mexico , heavy rainfall associated with Tropical Storm Miriam caused the cancellation of flights from the airport at Tuxtla Gutiérrez . The highest rainfall reported recorded was 10 @.@ 37 inches ( 263 mm ) at Lazaro Cardenas . In small settlements , rivers were flooded and mudslides were reported . Casualties from the flooding are not known . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The response to requests for international aid was moderate . American church groups , Cuba , and Mexico collectively contributed around 2 @,@ 500 tons of food and medicine . The Canadian , Swedish , West German , Spanish , and Dutch Governments contributed aid amounting to 2 million dollars ( 1988 ) each . No aid was sent by the United States government . The Soviet Union contributed an unknown sum . The slow response to requests for aid was contributed to by the Sandinista Government 's actions , which was viewed by a few anonymous diplomats from other countries who commented to the press , as undermining the peace process championed by Óscar Arias . Those actions were the July 10 arrests of opposition activists and the closing down of independent radio stations . In addition , the government also barred foreign humanitarian groups from receiving American aid , as well as turning back a relief shipment days before the storm . 
 On October 28 , 1988 , the United Nations General Assembly passed without a vote Resolution 17 of its 43rd session in response to the disaster . The resolution called on countries to contribute to the relief effort . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 The name Joan was retired in 1989 and replaced by Joyce on the list for the 1994 season . The name will never again be used for a North Atlantic hurricane . Because the impact of the Miriam portion of the tropical cyclone was minimal , the name Miriam was not retired in the Pacific and is still on the list of names for that basin , and was most recently used in the 2012 season . 
 = Saturday ( novel ) = 
 Saturday ( 2005 ) is a novel by Ian McEwan set in Fitzrovia , London , on Saturday , 15 February 2003 , as a large demonstration is taking place against the United States ' 2003 invasion of Iraq . The protagonist , Henry Perowne , a 48 @-@ year @-@ old neurosurgeon , has planned a series of chores and pleasures culminating in a family dinner in the evening . As he goes about his day , he ponders the meaning of the protest and the problems that inspired it ; however , the day is disrupted by an encounter with a violent , troubled man . 
 To understand his character 's world @-@ view , McEwan spent time with a neurosurgeon . The novel explores one 's engagement with the modern world and the meaning of existence in it . The main character , though outwardly successful , still struggles to understand meaning in his life , exploring personal satisfaction in the post @-@ modern , developed world . Though intelligent and well read , Perowne feels he has little influence over political events . 
 The book , published in February 2005 by Jonathan Cape in the United Kingdom and in April in the United States , was critically and commercially successful . Critics noted McEwan 's elegant prose , careful dissection of daily life , and interwoven themes . It won the 2005 James Tait Black Memorial Prize for fiction . It has been translated into eight languages . 
 = = Composition and publication = = 
 Saturday is McEwan 's ninth novel , published between Atonement and On Chesil Beach , two novels of historical fiction . McEwan has discussed that he prefers to alternate between writing about the past and the present . 
 While researching the book , McEwan spent two years work @-@ shadowing Neil Kitchen , a neurosurgeon at The National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery in Queen Square , London . Kitchen testified that McEwan did not flinch in the theatre , a common first reaction to surgery ; " He sat in the corner , with his notebook and pencil " . He also had several medical doctors and surgeons review the book for accuracy , though few corrections were required to the surgical description . Saturday was also proof @-@ read by McEwan 's longstanding circle of friends who review his manuscripts , Timothy Garton Ash , Craig Raine , and Galen Strawson . 
 There are elements of autobiography in Saturday : the protagonist lives in Fitzroy Square , the same square in London that McEwan does and is physically active in middle age . Christopher Hitchens , a friend of McEwan 's , noted how Perowne 's wife , parents and children are the same as the writer 's . McEwan 's son , Greg , who like Theo played the guitar reasonably well in his youth , emphasized one difference between them , " I definitely don 't wear tight black jeans " . 
 Excerpts were published in five different literary magazines , including the whole of chapter one in the New York Times Book Review , in late 2004 and early 2005 . The complete novel was published by the Jonathan Cape Imprint of Random House Books in February 2005 in London , New York , and Toronto ; Dutch , Hebrew , German , French , Spanish , Polish , Russian , and Japanese translations followed . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The book follows Henry Perowne , a middle @-@ aged , successful surgeon . Five chapters chart his day and thoughts on Saturday the 15 February 2003 , the day of the demonstration against the 2003 invasion of Iraq , the largest protest in British history . Perowne 's day begins in the early morning , when he sees a burning aeroplane streak across the sky . This casts a shadow over the rest of his day as reports on the television change and shift : is it an accident , or terrorism ? 
 En route to his weekly squash game , a traffic diversion reminds Perowne of the anti @-@ war protests occurring that day . After being allowed through the diversion , he collides with another car , damaging its wing mirror . At first the driver , Baxter , tries to extort money from him . When Perowne refuses , Baxter and his two companions become aggressive . Noticing symptoms in Baxter 's behaviour , Perowne quickly recognises the onset of Huntington 's disease . Though he is punched in the sternum , Perowne manages to escape unharmed by distracting Baxter with discussions of his disease . 
 Perowne goes on to his squash match , still thinking about the incident . He loses the long and contested game by a technicality in the final set . After lunch he buys some fish from a local fishmonger for dinner . He visits his mother , suffering from vascular dementia , who is cared for in a nursing home . 
 After a visit to his son 's rehearsal , Perowne returns home to cook dinner , and the evening news reminds him of the grander arc of events that surround his life . When Daisy , his daughter , arrives home from Paris , the two passionately debate the coming war in Iraq . His father @-@ in @-@ law arrives next . Daisy reconciles an earlier literary disagreement that led to a <unk> with her maternal grandfather ; remembering that it was he who had inspired her love of literature . Perowne 's son Theo returns next . 
 Rosalind , Perowne 's wife , is the last to arrive home . As she enters , Baxter and an accomplice ' <unk> ' force their way in armed with knives . Baxter punches the grandfather , intimidates the family and orders Daisy to strip naked . When she does , Perowne notices that she is pregnant . Finding out she is a poet , Baxter asks her to recite a poem . Rather than one of her own , she recites Dover Beach , which affects Baxter emotionally , effectively disarming him . Instead he becomes enthusiastic about Perowne 's renewed talk about new treatment for Huntington 's disease . After his companion abandons him , Baxter is overpowered by Perowne and Theo , and knocked unconscious after falling down the stairs . That night Perowne is summoned to the hospital for a successful emergency operation on Baxter . Saturday ends at around 5 : 15 a.m. on Sunday , after he has returned from the hospital and made love to his wife again . 
 = = Themes = = 
 = = = Happiness = = = 
 McEwan 's earlier work has explored the fragility of existence using a clinical perspective , Hitchens hails him a " chronicler of the physics of every @-@ day life " . Saturday explores the feeling of fulfilment in Perowne : he is respected and respectable but not quite at ease , wondering about the luck that has him where he is and others homeless or in menial jobs . The family is materially well @-@ off , with a plush home and a Mercedes , but justifiably so — Perowne and his wife work hard . McEwan tells of his success rate and keeping cool under pressure ; there is a trade off , as he and his wife work long hours and need to put their diaries side by side to find time to spend together . 
 Perowne 's composure and success mean the implied violence is in the background . His personal contentment , ( at the top of his profession , and " an unashamed beneficiary of the fruits of late capitalism " ) provides a hopeful side to the book , instead of the unhappiness in contemporary fiction . McEwan 's previous novels highlighted the fragility of modern fulfilled life , seemingly minor incidents dramatically upsetting existence . Saturday returns to a theme explored in Atonement , which plotted the disruption of a lie to a middle @-@ class family , and in The Child in Time , where a small child is kidnapped during a day 's shopping . This theme is continued in Saturday , a " tautly wound tour @-@ de @-@ force " set in a world where terrorism , war and politics make the news headlines , but the protagonist has to live out this life until he " collides with another fate " . In Saturday Perowne 's medical knowledge captures the delicate state of humanity better than novelists ' imaginations : his acquaintance with death and neurological perspective better capture human frailty . 
 = = = Political engagement = = = 
 The burning aeroplane in the book 's opening , and the suspicions it immediately arouses , quickly introduces the problems of terrorism and international security . The day 's political demonstration and the ubiquity of its news coverage provide background noise to Perowne 's day , leading to him to ponder his relationship with these events . Christopher Hitchens pointed out that the novel is set on the " actual day the whole of bien @-@ <unk> Britain moved into the streets to jeer at George Bush and Tony Blair " and placed the novel as " unapologetically anchored as it is in the material world and its several discontents " . The Economist newspaper set the context as a " world where terrorism and war make headlines , but also filter into the smallest corners of people 's lives . " McEwan said himself , " The march gathered not far from my house , and it bothered me that so many people seemed so thrilled to be there " . The characterisation of Perowne as an intelligent , self @-@ aware man : " .. a habitual observer of his own moods ' [ who ] is given to reveries about his mental processes , " allows the author to explicitly set out this theme . 
 " It 's an illusion to believe himself active in the story . Does he think he 's changing something , watching news programmes , or lying on his back on the sofa on Sunday afternoon , reading more opinion columns of ungrounded certainties , more long articles about what really lies behind this or that development , or what is surely going to happen next , predictions forgotten as soon as they are read , well before events disprove them ? " 
 Physically , Perowne is neither above nor outside the fray but at an angle to it ; emotionally his own intelligence makes him apathetic , he can see both sides of the argument , and his beliefs are characterised by a series of hard choices rather than sure certainties . 
 He is concerned for the fate of Iraqis ; through his friendship with an exiled Iraqi professor he learned of the totalitarian side of Saddam Hussein 's rule , but also takes seriously his children 's concerns about the war . He often plays devil 's advocate , being <unk> with this American friend , and hawkish with his daughter . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 McEwan establishes Perowne as anchored in the real world . Perowne expresses a distaste for some modern literature , puzzled by , even disdaining magical realism : 
 " What were these authors of reputation doing – grown men and women of the twentieth century – granting supernatural powers to their characters ? " Perowne earnestly tried to appreciate fiction , under instruction from his daughter he read both Anna Karenina and Madame Bovary , but could not accept their artificiality , even though they dwelt on detail and ordinariness . 
 Perowne 's dismissive attitude towards literature is directly contrasted with his scientific world @-@ view in his struggle to comprehend the modern world . Perowne explicitly ponders this question , " The times are strange enough . Why make things up ? " . 
 Perowne 's world view is rebutted by his daughter , Daisy , a young poet . In the book 's climax in chapter four , while he struggles to remain calm offering medical solutions to Baxter 's illness , she quotes Matthew Arnold 's poem Dover Beach , which calls for civilised values in the world , temporarily placating the assailant 's violent mood . McEwan described his intention as wanting to " play with this idea , whether we need stories " . Brian Bethune interpreted McEwan 's approach to Perowne as " mercilessly [ mocking ] his own protagonist ... But Perowne 's blind spot [ literature ] is less an author 's little joke than a plea for the saving grace of literature . " 
 Similarly he is irreligious , his work making him aware of the fragility of life and consciousness 's reliance on the functioning brain . His morality is nuanced , weighing both sides of an issue . When leaving the confrontation with Baxter , he questions his use of his medical knowledge , even though it was in self @-@ defense , and with genuine Hippocratic feeling . While shopping for his fish supper , he cites scientific research that shows greater consciousness in fish , and wonders whether he should stop eating them . An Iraqi professor he treated has told him of the brutality of Saddam Hussein 's rule , but also takes seriously his children 's concerns about the war . 
 = = Genre and style = = 
 Saturday is a " post 9 / 11 " novel , dealing with the change in lifestyle faced by Westerners after the 11 September attacks in the United States . As such , Christopher Hitchens characterised it as " unapologetically anchored as it is in the material world and its several discontents " . " Structurally , Saturday is a tightly wound tour de force of several strands " ; it is both a thriller which portrays a very attractive family , and an allegory of the world after 11 September 2001 which meditates on the fragility of life . 
 In this respect the novel correctly anticipates , at page 276 , the July 7 , 2005 bombings on London 's Underground railway network , which occurred a few months after the book was published : 
 London , his small part of it , lies wide open , impossible to defend , waiting for its bomb , like a hundred other cities . Rush hour will be a convenient time . It might resemble the Paddington crash – twisted rails , buckled , upraised commuter coaches , stretchers handed out through broken windows , the hospital 's Emergency Plan in action . Berlin , Paris , Lisbon . The authorities agree , an attack 's inevitable . 
 The book obeys the classical unities of place , time and action , following one man 's day against the backdrop of a grander historical narrative – the anti @-@ war protests happening in the city that same day . The protagonist 's errands are surrounded by the recurring leitmotif of hyper real , ever @-@ present screens which report the progress of the plane and the march Perowne has earlier encountered . Saturday is in tune with its protagonist 's literary tastes ; " magical realism " it is not . The 26 @-@ hour narrative led critics to compare the book to similar novels , especially Ulysses by James Joyce , which features a man crossing a city , and Virginia Woolf 's Mrs. Dalloway , of which Michiko Kakutani described Saturday as an " up @-@ to @-@ the @-@ moment , post @-@ 9 / 11 variation . " 
 The novel is narrated in the third person , limited point of view : the reader learns of events as Perowne does . Using the free indirect style the narrator inhabits Perowne , a neurosurgeon , who often thinks rationally , explaining phenomena using medical terminology . This allows McEwan to capture some of the " white noise that we almost forget as soon as we think it , unless we stop and write it down . " Hitchens highlighted how the author separates himself from his character with a " <unk> historical present ( " He rises … " " He strides … " ) that solidifies the context and the actuality . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Saturday was both critically acclaimed and commercially successful , a best @-@ seller in Britain and the United States . It spent a week at No. 3 on both the New York Times Best Seller List on 15 April 2005 , and Publishers Weekly ( 4 April 2005 ) lists . A strong performance for literary fiction , Saturday sold over 250 @,@ 000 copies on release , and signings were heavily attended . The paperback edition sold another quarter of a million . 
 Ruth Scurr reviewed the book in The Times , calling McEwan " [ maybe ] the best novelist in Britain and is certainly operating at the height of his formidable powers " . She praised his examination of happiness in the 21st century , particularly from the point of view of a surgeon : " doctors see real lives fall to pieces in their consulting rooms or on their operating tables , day in , day out . Often they mend what is broken , and open the door to happiness again . " Christopher Hitchens said the " sober yet scintillating pages of Saturday " confirmed the maturation of McEwan and displayed both his soft , humane , side and his hard , intellectual , scientific , side . 
 Reviewers celebrated McEwan 's dissection of the quotidian and his talent for observation and description . Michiko Kakutani liked the " myriad of small , telling details and a reverence for their very ordinariness " , and the suspense created that threatens these . Tim Adams concurred in The Observer , calling the observation " wonderfully precise " . Mark Lawson in The Guardian said McEwan 's style had matured into " scrupulous , sensual rhythms , " and noted the considered word choice that enables his work . Perowne , for example , is a convincing neurosurgeon by the end of the book . This attention to detail allowed McEwan to use all the tricks of fiction to generate " a growing sense of disquiet with the tiniest finger @-@ flicks of detail " . 
 The " set @-@ piece " construction of the book was noticed by many critics ; Mrs Scurr praised it , describing a series of " vivid tableaux " , but John Banville was less impressed , calling it an assembly of discrete set pieces , though he said the treatment of the car crash and its aftermath was " masterful " , and said of Perowne 's visit to his mother : " the writing is genuinely affecting in its simplicity and empathetic force . " From the initial " dramatic overture " of the aircraft scene , there were " astonishing pages of description " , sometimes " heart @-@ stopping " , though it was perhaps a touch too artful at times , according to Michael Dirda in The Washington Post . Christopher Hitchens said that McEwan delivered a " virtuoso description of the aerodynamics of a squash game , " enjoyable even " to a sports hater like myself " , Banville said he , as a literary man , had been bored by the same scene . Zoe Heller praised the tension in the climax as " vintage McEwan nightmare " but questioned the resolution as " faintly preposterous " . 
 John Banville wrote a scathing review of the book for The New York Review of Books . He described Saturday as the sort of thing that a committee directed to produce a ' novel of our time ' would write , the politics were " banal " ; the tone arrogant , self @-@ satisfied and incompetent ; the characters cardboard cut @-@ outs . He felt McEwan strove too hard to display technical knowledge " and his ability to put that knowledge into good , clean prose " . 
 Saturday won the James Tait Black Prize for fiction ; and was nominated on the long @-@ list of the Man Booker Prize in 2005 . 
 = = Influence = = 
 According to songwriter Neil Finn , the Crowded House song " People Are Like Suns " , from Time on Earth ( 2007 ) , begins with lyrics inspired by the beginning of Saturday , stating " ... when I wrote it , I was reading Ian McEwan 's novel Saturday , which begins with a man on his balcony watching a plane go down , so the first lines borrow something from that image . " 
 = 1963 Syrian coup d 'état = 
 The 1963 Syrian coup d 'état , referred to by the Syrian government as the 8 March Revolution ( Arabic : <unk> <unk> من <unk> ) , was the successful seizure of power in Syria by the military committee of the Syrian Regional Branch of the Arab Socialist Ba 'ath Party . The planning and the unfolding conspiracy was inspired by the Iraqi Regional Branch 's successful military coup . 
 The coup was planned by the military committee , rather than the Ba 'ath Party 's civilian leadership , but Michel Aflaq , the leader of the party , consented to the conspiracy . The leading members of the military committee throughout the planning process and in the immediate aftermath of taking power were Muhammad Umran , Salah Jadid and Hafez al @-@ Assad . The committee enlisted the support of two Nasserists , Rashid al @-@ Qutayni and Muhammad al @-@ Sufi , and the independent Ziad al @-@ Hariri . The coup was originally planned for 7 March , but was postponed one day after the government discovered where the conspirators were planning to assemble . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Events leading up to the coup = = = 
 Modern Syria was first established in 1920 as the Arab Kingdom of Syria under King Faisal . This state was planned to be a new Arab kingdom , and not just Syrian , and the state espoused Arab nationalism and pan @-@ Islamic policies . However the British , who had helped establish the state after World War I , made a secret agreement with France and established the French Mandate of Syria and Lebanon . The area thereby functioned as one of France 's colonies , and the newly established state was viewed unfavorably by most Syrians , with many of them regarding it as a vessel of European imperialism . At this stage , some movements tried to establish a Syrian identity , most notably the Syrian Social Nationalist Party , or became advocates of communism and Islamism . The majority of Syrians continued to see themselves as Arabs rather than Syrians . 
 The mandate was feudal in character , and it rested on a semi @-@ liberal oligarchic social base . This system remained unchanged until the establishment of the United Arab Republic ( UAR ) . This system created a class society reflecting urban – rural living patterns . An estimated three thousand families owned half of the land in Syria . The majority of small to medium properties were owned by the middle class . Some two @-@ thirds of peasants were landless . Agricultural revenues were highly skewed – the top two percent of the population received 50 percent of the income , while the middle class ( merchants or middle landowning groups ) , which was 18 percent of the population , earned 25 percent of agricultural revenues . The bottom 80 percent received the remainder . The landowner – peasant alliance was based on class differences , and social antagonism between each other – this would lead to the landowner 's downfall . 
 The mandate was dissolved in 1946 because of a British ultimatum to France , and Syria became an independent country on 17 April 1946 . The same elite that had governed Syria during the mandate continued in power and they governed in the same manner . The failure in the 1948 Arab – Israeli War led to the downfall of the traditional elite and the rise of the military in politics . Husni al @-@ Za 'im became the first military dictator of Syria in 1949 , but in 1950 , military officer Adib Shishakli gained power behind the scenes , and by 1953 had established another military dictatorship . The military 's introduction to the Syrian political scene destroyed the oligarchy enabling the middle class to participate in Syrian politics . However , while their powers were weakened , the traditional elite retained the majority of the wealth produced . 
 It was in this environment that the ideology of Ba 'athism came into being . The Arab Ba 'ath Movement was established by Michel Aflaq and Salah al @-@ Din al @-@ Bitar in the 1940s , others who played a notable role in the early stages of the Ba 'athist movement were Zaki al @-@ Arsuzi , <unk> al @-@ Ghanim and <unk> al @-@ Sayyid . Akram al @-@ Hawrani founded the Arab Socialist Party ( ASP ) in 1953 – the Ba 'ath Party was established through a merger of the ASP and the Arab Ba 'ath Party . Of the 150 delegates to the founding congress of the Arab Ba 'ath Party in 1947 , the majority were either middle @-@ class professionals or intellectuals . By the 1950s the party had managed to acquire an urban middle class base . However , the Ba 'ath Party was not a purely middle class party , and from the very beginning , it sent party cadres to rural areas to recruit new members and form new party organisations . In 1956 , the Ba 'ath Party organized the first labour protest in Syrian history . While the Ba 'ath Party was strong , its decision to recruit members from across society led to tribalism and <unk> within the party . Party leaders then opted to overlook democratic norms and procedures . 
 The Ba 'ath Party faced a major dilemma : take power through competitive elections or through forceful takeover . Even the liberal and democratic @-@ inclined founding leaders were partial to forceful takeover , citing the corrupt electoral process . Before taking power , the Ba 'ath Party gambled that it would be allowed to share power with Gamal Abdel Nasser in the United Arab Republic ( UAR ) . The UAR would prove to be Egypt @-@ dominated , and the Ba 'ath Party was forced to dissolve itself , but in 1961 the UAR collapsed because of a military coup in Syria . The establishment and the dissolution of the UAR was a catastrophe for the Ba 'ath Party as it divided among those who supported the UAR , those who opposed it and those who opposed or supported the traditional leaders of the party . In 1962 , Aflaq convened a Ba 'ath Party congress and re @-@ established the party . Several branches had not followed orders and had not dissolved during the UAR years . Instead they had become deeply hostile to pan @-@ Arabist thought and had become radical socialists instead . The military committee , which would launch the 8 March Revolution , shared most of their views . 
 = = = Economic and social context = = = 
 The 8 March Revolution has often been viewed as a mere military coup , but it had many of the ingredients of national revolts from below . The revolution was led by an anti @-@ oligarchical alliance of a radicalised lower middle class , strategic members of the officer corps , marginalised minorities and a significant number of peasants who were mobilised for agrarian conflict . In an international context , the revolution took place because the state boundaries established by France were artificial and the hostility within the newly established Syria to the creation of Israel . The traditional elite that took power in Syria when the country gained independence had come to power during the French Mandate of Syria and Lebanon . The external imposition of arbitrary state boundaries on Syria with no corresponding popular acceptance led to discontent . The national struggle was shaped by ideologies such as Arab nationalism , pan @-@ Islamism and Greater <unk> . The plebeian character of the struggle , and the radical ideologies , spawned radical solutions to the agrarian problem . 
 The growth of the new middle class in Syria fueled discontent since the traditional elite dominated the agrarian sector – the largest sector of the economy – and created most of the wealth . The new middle class consisted of capitalists and entrepreneurs who opposed the traditional elite – the monopolisation of power by the traditional elite led to the radicalisation of the new middle class . The military , which in many countries is conservative and elitist , became radicalised in Syria because the military wanted greater power , believing that the traditional elite were unable to defend the country . A significant group of military personnel were recruited from the new middle class or from the hinterlands . 
 In Syria , ethnic minorities were often underprivileged , and a specific ethnicity often belonged to a specific social class . The Alawites , the Druzes and the Isma <unk> for instance , were ethnic groups with low social class who began to embrace a radical form of Arab nationalism , e.g. Ba 'athism . Without the peasantry there could not have been a Ba 'athist revolution in Syria . The new middle class alone could only produce instability , but together with the peasantry , the revolution became possible . The inequality between urban and rural dwellers , together with capitalist penetration of the agrarian sector and the traditional elites ' monopolisation of most large revenue sources , led to the establishment of peasant movements who fought for change , or opposed the system . The Syrian branch of the Arab Socialist Ba 'ath Party was able to recruit young peasants from radical peasant movements , and because of it , was able to mobilise large sectors of the population . 
 = = Planning = = 
 In 1962 , the military committee of the Syrian Regional Branch of the Arab Socialist Ba 'ath Party spent most of its time <unk> to take power through a conventional military coup . The military committee decided it had to capture al @-@ Kiswah and Qatana , two military camps , seize control of the 70th Armoured Brigade at al @-@ Kiswah , the Military Academy in the city of Homs and the Damascus radio station . While the conspirators of the military committee were all young , the sitting regime had been slowly disintegrating and the traditional elite had lost effective political power . 
 For the coup to be successful , the military committee needed to gain the support of some of the Syrian officer corps . The collapse of the UAR , coupled with mutinies , purges and transfers left the officer corps in complete disarray and open to anti @-@ government agitation . At the time , the officer corps was split into five different factions ; the Damascus faction which supported the ancien régime , supporters of Akram al @-@ Hawrani , a Nasserist faction , a Ba 'athist faction and a group of independents . The Damascus faction was the enemy of the military committee because of their support for Nazim al @-@ Kudsi 's regime and the <unk> were considered as rivals because of their stance against pan @-@ Arabism . The Nasserists became allies of the Ba 'ath , even while they supported Gamal Abdel Nasser and the reestablishment of the UAR . 
 The military committee 's alliance with the Nasserists led to the establishment of secret contact with Colonel Rashid al @-@ Qutayni , the head of the military intelligence , and Colonel Muhammad al @-@ Sufi , the commander of the Homs Brigade . The military committee ordered a group of junior officers to recruit the leading independent Colonel Ziad al @-@ Hariri , the commander of the front facing Israel , to their cause . The group was successful , and they promised al @-@ Hariri that " If we succeed , you can become chief of staff . If we fail , you can disown us . " Al @-@ Hariri supported the committee because Khalid al @-@ Azm , the Prime Minister of Syria , was planning to demote him . 
 While it planned the coup , the military committee and its members were frowned upon by civilian Ba 'athists . The reason for the army – party alliance in the first place was to safeguard the party from repression . The military committee did not look favourably on the civilian leadership led by Michel Aflaq , objecting to his dissolution the Ba 'ath Party during the UAR years . While Aflaq needed the military committee to seize power , the committee needed Aflaq to hold on power – without Aflaq they would have no support base . At the 5th National Ba 'ath Party Congress , held on 8 May 1962 , it was decided to reestablish the party and keep Aflaq as Secretary General of the National Command . Muhammad Umran , a leading member of the military committee , was a delegate at the 5th National Congress , and told Aflaq of the military committee 's intentions – Aflaq consented to the coup , but no agreement was made between him and the committee on how to share power after the coup . 
 = = The coup = = 
 On 8 February 1963 , the Iraqi Regional Branch , led by Ali Salih al @-@ Sa 'di , took power in Iraq by overthrowing Abd al @-@ Karim Qasim . He was a far more formidable opponent than al @-@ Kudsi , and the Iraqi Regional Branch managed to take power through an alliance not only with military officers , but also with segments of the middle class . Qasim 's downfall changed the rules of Arab politics – the Nasserists had monopolised the Arab nationalist movement since the UAR , but the takeover made the Ba 'ath Party a force to be reckoned with . In contrast to the Iraqi regional branch , the Syrian regional branch did not have mass support or a significant support base in the middle class . While Aflaq cautioned the plotters because of the party 's lack of support , they failed to share his worries , and launched the coup on 7 March . However , that day the military intelligence raided the apartment where the plotters were planning to assemble . Assad was given the task of reporting to other units that the coup had been postponed to 8 March . 
 On the night of 7 – 8 March , tanks and units loyal to the conspiracy began moving on Damascus . Al @-@ Hariri led a brigade from the Syrian front towards Israel , while Ba 'athists were able to gain control of a second brigade stationed in Suwayda . Caught in a pincer movement , the commander of the 70th Armoured Brigade , Lieutenant General Abd al @-@ Karim surrendered to the plotters – Umran took over as acting commander of the 70th Armoured Brigade . The potentially hostile unit stationed in Qatana , south @-@ west of Damascus , did not intervene – probably because <unk> Bashir had taken control over communications in the Damascus area . With the forces in al @-@ Kiswah defeated and Qatana neutralised , al @-@ Hariri 's forces marched upon Damascus and began to set up road @-@ blocks in the city , while at the same time seizing critical facilities such as the central post office . Captain Salim Hatum , a party officer , seized the radio station . The Ministry of Defence headquarters were seized without a fight , and General <unk> al @-@ Din , the commander @-@ in @-@ chief , was put under arrest . Both al @-@ Kudsi and al @-@ Hawrani were easily tracked down and arrested . Salah Jadid bicycled into the city that morning , and captured the Bureau of Officers ' Affairs , which later became his personal fiefdom . 
 Assad led a small group of conspirators to capture the al @-@ Dumayr air base , 40 kilometers ( 25 mi ) north @-@ east of Damascus – the only force that resisted the coup . Some of its planes were ordered to bomb rebel positions . The plan was that Assad would lead a company from al @-@ Hariri 's brigade to capture the air base before dawn to prevent air strikes . The surrender of the 70th Armoured Brigade took longer than expected , putting Assad 's forces behind schedule . When Assad 's forces reached the outskirts of the base , it was broad daylight . Assad sent an emissary to tell the commanders that he would start shelling the base if they did not surrender . They negotiated their surrender even though , according to Assad himself , their forces could have defeated them in combat . 
 Later that morning the <unk> convened at the army headquarters to celebrate . The coup had been generally bloodless , and was met by indifference in the population at large . Saber <unk> , a Druze who was later known as " the poet of the revolution " , wrote and announced the first communique of the plotters . The ninth communique reinstated the five members of the military committee in the armed forces . The senior members of the newly established regime were Umran , Jadid and at last , Assad . 820 people were reported killed during the takeover and another 20 were executed shortly afterwards . 
 = = Immediate aftermath = = 
 The first act of the new rulers of Syria was to establish the twenty @-@ man National Council for the Revolutionary Command ( NCRC ) , composed of twelve Ba 'athists and eight Nasserists and independents . On 9 March , the NCRC ordered Salah al @-@ Din al @-@ Bitar , one of the Ba 'ath Party founders , to form a government , and to implement the policies of the NCRC . Later , six civilians were given membership in NCRC , three Ba 'athists ( Aflaq , al @-@ Bitar and Mansur al @-@ Atrash ) and three Nasserists . However , this did not change the balance of power , and the officers still controlled the country . From the beginning , the military committee members formed state policies behind the backs of other NCRC members – when the civilian leadership found out , al @-@ Atrash said : " Why do not these gentlemen speak ? May I suggest they appoint a liaison officer to communicate their views to us ? " From that day , Umran gave the civilians a faint idea of what the committee members were planning . 
 At the beginning , there were no signs of the quarrels that would destroy the military committee . At the time , the members were bound together by their goal of building a prosperous nation . On 9 March the NCRC released Lu 'ay al @-@ Atassi from jail , promoted him to the rank of lieutenant general , appointed him commander @-@ in @-@ chief and NCRC chairman , the de facto head of state . Hariri was appointed chief of staff . While Atassi and Hariri held powerful posts , they did not possess enough personal or political power to threaten the NCRC . The Nasserist officers were also given notable offices with Muhammad al @-@ Sufi becoming Minister of Defence and Rashid al @-@ Qutayni becoming deputy chief of staff . However , the Military Committee , which had expanded its membership with five new members , ensured that the Ba 'athists controlled the real levers of powers . The committee decided state policies before the sessions of the NCRC , and by doing so became the real seat of power . 
 Umran was first given the command of the 5th Brigade in Homs , but was promoted in June to become commander of the 70th Armoured Brigade . As head of the Bureau of Officers ' Affairs , Jadid appointed friends to senior positions , purged his enemies and appointed several Ba 'athists to senior positions . Ahmad Suwaydani , one of the new members of the Military Committee , was appointed Head of Military Intelligence and Mazyad <unk> became Head of the Military Police . The Military Academy at Homs was put under Ba 'athist control — several hundred Ba 'athists , including Assad 's brother Rifaat al @-@ Assad , were given a crash course in military teaching before being given command . Assad became the de facto head of the Syrian Air Force , a dizzying promotion for a man in his thirties . Considering that the members of the Military Committee were all too young to be perceived as the real leaders of Syria by the populace , the Military Committee appointed Colonel Amin al @-@ Hafiz to the post of Minister of the Interior . 
 = = = Purges and failed coup of 18 July = = = 
 Pressure from consistent pro @-@ Nasser demonstrations in northern Syria and Damascus and from pro @-@ union Ba 'athist leaders like Jamal al @-@ Atassi , the Nasserists and the Arab Nationalist Movement ( ANM ) , coupled with the weakness of the Ba 'athists at the popular level in Syria , led to unification efforts between the new government and the governments of Egypt and Iraq . The latter 's anti @-@ UAR government had also been overthrown by pro @-@ UAR officers in 1963 . On 17 April a new stage @-@ based unity agreement was reached that would include the three states in a federal union with Nasser as President and Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Armed Forces . 
 However , between 28 April @-@ 2 May , the Ba 'athist @-@ dominated Military Committee virtually renounced the agreement when it purged over 50 Nasserist officers from their high @-@ ranking positions in the armed forces , leading to a wide @-@ scale propaganda campaign by Egypt via radio denouncing the Ba 'ath ( Nasserist @-@ leaning newspapers had been previously shut down . ) Mass pro @-@ union rioting in Aleppo , Damascus , Hama and other parts of the country followed . The purges prompted the protest resignations of Nasserist officials , including Defense Minister al @-@ Sufi , Deputy Chief of Staff al @-@ Qutayni , and four other Nasserist cabinet members . 
 Later , on 19 June , Chief of Staff al @-@ Hariri led a high @-@ ranking delegation that included Prime Minister al @-@ Bitar , Aflaq and Education Minister Sami <unk> to Algeria for a state visit . While al @-@ Hariri was away , the Committee used the opportunity to undertake a purge of about 30 elite officers — mostly political independents — under al @-@ Hariri 's command . Al @-@ Hariri was ordered to take a direct flight to the Syrian embassy in the United States , where he was reassigned as the embassy 's military attache . Instead , he returned to Syria via a flight to Beirut on 23 June to protest the Committee 's move against him . Unsuccessful , he left the country for France in a self @-@ imposed exile on 8 July . The Committee 's virtual ousting of al @-@ Hariri was to the chagrin of al @-@ Bitar , who viewed al @-@ Hariri as the last military counterweight able to check the Committee 's domination over his government . 
 The Nasserists still maintained a relatively high level of strength in the military , despite the purges , and on 18 July , under the leadership of <unk> Alwan and the help of Egyptian intelligence , they attempted to launch a daytime coup against the new government . The Army Headquarters , personally defended by al @-@ Hafiz , and the broadcast station were attacked , and the ensuing battle left hundreds of people dead , including several civilian bystanders . The coup attempt failed and 27 participating officers were arrested and executed . The executions were a rare punitive action used to deal with the participants of a failed coup in Syria , with the typical punishment being exile , imprisonment or reassignment to a foreign diplomatic post . President Lu 'ay al @-@ Atassi subsequently resigned , signalling his disapproval of the executions . After evading the authorities for a short period , Alwan and his chief co @-@ conspirators Raef al @-@ <unk> and Muhammad <unk> were apprehended and brought to military trial , where they were found guilty of treason and sentenced to death . They were released exactly a year later and exiled , after lobbying by Nasser and Iraqi President Abdul Salam Arif . 
 The failure of Alwan 's revolt marked the end of significant Nasserist influence in Syria 's military and civilian institutions , and with the pro @-@ Nasser forces largely defeated , the Military Committee became the sole power center of the country . Relations with Egypt immediately soured , with Nasser , still popular with the Syrian masses , issuing broadcasts denouncing the Ba 'athists as " murderers " and " fascists , " and representing the forces of heresy and atheism , a derogatory reference to the party 's embrace of strict secularism and the numerous leadership positions held by non @-@ Sunni Muslims . Nasser also announced his withdrawal from the 17 April unity agreement . 
 = You 'll Never Eat Lunch in This Town Again = 
 Y 'all Never Eat Lunch in This Town Again is an autobiography by Julia Phillips , detailing her career as a film producer and disclosing the power games and debauchery of New Hollywood in the 1970s and 1980s . It was first published in 1991 and became an immediate cause célèbre and bestseller . The book was reissued in 2002 after the author 's death . 
 = = Background = = 
 In partnership with her husband Michael , Julia Phillips was one of the most successful film producers in Hollywood during the 1970s . Their second film , The Sting , grossed almost $ 160 million and won seven Academy Awards , making Julia the first woman to win a Best Picture Oscar . Their third film , Taxi Driver , brought them a second Oscar nomination and won the Palme d 'Or in 1976 . In 1977 they co @-@ produced their most financially successful movie , Steven Spielberg 's $ 300 million @-@ grossing Close Encounters of the Third Kind . 
 However , Julia had long indulged in a self @-@ destructive lifestyle of excessive drug consumption , and it had begun to affect her work . François Truffaut , one of French cinema 's most iconic directors and a star of Close Encounters , blamed her for that film 's budget difficulties , and she was eventually fired during post @-@ production because of her cocaine dependence . 
 Phillips , by now divorced , spent the following years on a downward spiral which included , by her own account , spending $ 120 @,@ 000 on cocaine , before entering therapy to recover from her addiction . Then , in 1988 , having been out of Hollywood for eleven years , she sold all her assets to produce The Beat , about a kid in a tough neighbourhood trying to teach poetry to local gangs . It was a critical and commercial disaster , grossing less than $ 5 @,@ 000 at the box office , and Phillips turned to penning her scathing memoir to escape her financial difficulties . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The book begins by briefly introducing the reader to Phillips in 1989 , before quickly travelling back to her childhood in 1940s Brooklyn . It then covers her early life and first successes in the film industry : she and Michael earned $ 100 @,@ 000 from their debut feature , Steelyard Blues , moved to Malibu , California , and had a daughter , Kate . The most notorious chapters follow as Phillips enjoys her greatest career successes , perhaps most infamously when she recalls the amalgam of drugs she was under the influence of on the night she won her Oscar ( " a diet pill , a small amount of coke , two joints , six halves of Valium , and a glass and a half of wine " ) . She also reveals the personal <unk> and vices of the biggest Hollywood A @-@ listers of the day , including Steven Spielberg , Martin Scorsese , Richard Dreyfuss , Goldie Hawn , and David Geffen . Many of these people were pivotal figures in the emergence of New Hollywood in the 1960s and ' 70s , but Phillips disparagingly refers to them as " a rogues ' gallery of nerds " . Later episodes in her life , including <unk> , and her abusive relationship with a violent drug addict which caused her to miss her own mother 's funeral , are also discussed candidly . 
 Most significant , from Phillips ' own point of view , is her exposé of the " Boys ' Club " in the higher echelons of Hollywood , where she claimed it was her gender that led to her ultimate ostracism . " If I had been a man , they would have closed ranks around me " , she said , referring to her drug addiction . " They hated the woman thing . And I wasn 't even regarded as a woman , I was a girl . " Writing about her in The Independent in 2002 , film critic David Thomson expressed Phillips ' attitude as : " you [ Hollywood ] guys don 't take women seriously ; you like us around ... [ but ] we aren 't allowed to be players " . Those same few men , like " Valley viper " Mike Ovitz who headed the Creative Artists Agency were , in her eyes , responsible for a qualitative decline in standards and the increasing banality of movies since the 1970s . 
 = = Reception = = 
 On its release most critics agreed that the book was both scandalous and career @-@ ending . ( Even with a quarter of the 1 @,@ 000 @-@ page original manuscript excised , it took lawyers at Random House fourteen months to approve it for publication . ) Lewis Cole , in The Nation , described it as being " [ not ] written but spat out , a breakneck , formless performance piece ... propelled by spite and vanity " . Newsweek 's review called it a " 573 @-@ page primal scream " , while one Hollywood producer said it was " the longest suicide note in history " . In the 2003 documentary version of Easy Riders , Raging Bulls , based on Peter Biskind 's 1998 anecdotal history of New Hollywood , Richard Dreyfuss recalled his initial fury at Phillips ' revelations , before more circumspectly listening to " a little voice inside my head [ saying ] ' Richard , Richard , the truth was so much worse ' . " Despite Phillips ' criticisms of Steven Spielberg in the book , Spielberg nevertheless invited her to a 1997 screening of Close Encounters of the Third Kind as a way of " keeping his friends close and his enemies closer . " 
 After Phillips ' death from cancer in 2002 the book was reissued in paperback by Faber and Faber , and gained renewed attention . Tim Appelo wrote in his Salon.com tribute that it was " mordant , merciless , [ and ] outdid Capote in shrieking truth to decadent power " , while David Thomson praised it as " compulsive , hilarious entertainment " . 
 Commercially , Phillips ' memoir became an enormous success . It quickly moved to the top of the New York Times Non Fiction Best Seller list and stayed at No. 1 for thirteen weeks . Additionally , several prominent Los Angeles bookstore owners reported it to be the fastest @-@ selling book they had ever seen . But Phillips was excoriated by Hollywood , and her autobiography 's publication cost her the chance to adapt Anne Rice 's Interview with a Vampire with David Geffen . Furthermore , in an example of life imitating art , pre @-@ eminent Los Angeles restaurant Morton 's fulfilled the book 's titular prediction by declining her future patronage . 
 Shortly before her death , when asked if she had been too cruel in her writing , Phillips replied , " We all have our standards . People behaved in an ugly and despicable fashion towards me . I felt no constraints . Nothing I did in my book is as mean as any of the people I wrote about . " She was similarly unrepentant about her subsequent expatriation , saying " I wasn 't a pariah because I was a drug @-@ addicted , alcoholic , rotten person and not a good mother . I was a pariah because I hit them with a harsh , fluorescent light and rendered them as contemptible as they truly are . " 
 = Liu Geping = 
 Liu Geping ( Chinese : <unk> ; 8 August 1904 – 11 March 1992 ) was a Chinese communist revolutionary and politician of Hui Muslim heritage . He is best known as the founding Chairman of the Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region and later for seizing power in Shanxi during the Cultural Revolution , where he made himself the top leader of the province . 
 Liu spent his early days as a communist agitator , leading peasant uprisings and building the party organization in rural areas . A political survivor , he was arrested several times during the Warlord Era and served two prison terms . After the founding of the People 's Republic of China in 1949 , he held important roles in the party and government but was branded a traitor in 1960 . He later returned to work , only to be purged again several years later during the Cultural Revolution . He was rehabilitated after the Cultural Revolution and spent the rest of his life in ceremonial positions . 
 = = Republic of China = = 
 = = = Warlord Era = = = 
 Liu Geping was born on 8 August 1904 into a large landowning family of Muslim Hui ethnicity in Dadi East Village ( <unk> ) , <unk> County , Hebei Province . He also used the names Liu Zimin ( <unk> ) and Liu <unk> ( <unk> ) . In 1918 he joined the army of Li Chun , a warlord of the Zhili Clique , and entered its military school in Nanjing . The next year he participated in the May Fourth Movement as an activist . He joined the Chinese Socialist Youth League in 1922 , and returned home to spread revolutionary values . Instrumental in the founding of the first socialist youth cell in the area , in December 1925 he co @-@ led an armed peasant uprising against the Beiyang government , the first of its kind in northern China . 
 In July 1926 , Liu joined the Communist Party of China and then spearheaded a series of educational initiatives aimed at increasing the influence of the party in the Tianjin @-@ Hebei region . After founding schools and party organizations in dozens of counties , he took part in the founding of a 300 @-@ strong " Southern Tianjin Revolutionary Army " , which aimed to topple warlords and incite armed uprisings . In June 1928 he led a peasant uprising in <unk> County , occupying the county seat and taking guns from the local police . He was arrested that year for his agitation and spent the next three years in prison . After he was released , the Communist Party sent him to Shaanxi to work for Yang <unk> 's army . 
 = = = Japanese invasion and Civil War = = = 
 After the Mukden incident and subsequent Japanese incursions into China , Liu became a founding member of the " Hui People Against Japanese Invasion " organization . In 1932 he returned home to work on military operations and to coordinate underground party activities . He was again arrested on April 20 , 1934 , after organizing the <unk> River ( <unk> ) uprising in <unk> . He was held in <unk> Prison ( <unk> ) in Beijing , along with 61 other Communist Party leaders including Bo Yibo , An <unk> , and Liu <unk> ( no relation ) . To secure their release , the Communist Party Central Committee advised them to sign an announcement denouncing communism . Most complied and were released by the Kuomintang government , but Liu Geping was among the few who refused and served his full sentence . 
 After his release in 1944 , Liu took on more leadership roles within the Tianjin branch of the Communist Party . He then went to Shandong to found an organization for ethnic Hui to aid soldiers on the front lines of the Chinese Civil War . In March 1949 , he went south with the People 's Liberation Army to East China and served as vice @-@ principal of the newly established East China People 's Revolution University . 
 = = People 's Republic of China = = 
 = = = Early PRC = = = 
 In September 1949 , Liu Geping was selected as an ethnic minority representative to attend the first meeting of the Communist @-@ led Chinese People 's Political Consultative Conference ; he was ranked first among minority delegates . At the founding ceremony of the People 's Republic of China on 1 October 1949 , he was selected to speak in Tiananmen Square as the official representative of China 's minority peoples . 
 Liu joined the government and became deputy director of the State Ethnic Affairs Commission . In this capacity Liu frequently visited western areas with high minority populations . He was a delegate to the 1st National People 's Congress in 1954 . After the congress , Liu and the Tibetan communist <unk> were assigned to accompany the 14th Dalai Lama , also a delegate , on his tour of Chinese cities , which had a great impact on the Dalai Lama . 
 In 1956 , Liu was elected a member of the 8th Central Committee of the Communist Party of China . In 1958 , Liu began heading up the party organization of the Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region on an interim basis . He became the first Chairman of the autonomous region government in October 1958 . Because he took a moderate approach to policies toward ethnic minorities , he was branded an " ethnic <unk> " in 1960 . In September he was dismissed from all of his positions and sent back to Beijing to take part in " rehabilitation " at the Central Party School . 
 = = = Cultural Revolution = = = 
 In December 1965 , Liu regained favour and was named Vice @-@ Governor of Shanxi province . At the beginning of the Cultural Revolution , having gained the support of leftist radicals in Beijing , Liu successfully overthrew his superior Wei Heng and became Chairman of the Shanxi Revolutionary Committee , the de facto top leader . Wei was imprisoned and committed suicide . Meanwhile , the Central Cultural Revolution Group , led by Kang Sheng and Jiang Qing , began to investigate the case of the 61 communist leaders who were instructed to denounce communism at <unk> Prison in the 1930s . The officials , notably Bo Yibo and An <unk> , were branded as the " 61 Renegades Clique " and persecuted . In contrast , Liu Geping was heralded as a hero for his refusal to sign the denunciation . He was invited to make speeches all over the country and was re @-@ elected to the 9th Central Committee of the Communist Party of China in April 1969 . However , Liu had also become involved in major disputes with the military leaders in Shanxi and was engaged in factional violence in the province . He was dismissed from office in July 1969 , just three months after his re @-@ election to the Central Committee . In 1970 , he was sent to perform manual labour at a pottery factory in Tangshan . He was allowed to return to Beijing in 1975 . 
 = = = Later life = = = 
 After the end of the Cultural Revolution in 1976 and the pivotal 3rd Plenary Session of the 11th Central Committee of the Communist Party of China , the post @-@ Mao Communist Party cleared Liu 's name and declared that he " did not have any political problems . " In 1983 , he was named a member of the National Committee of the 6th Chinese People 's Political Consultative Conference , a ceremonial position . 
 Liu died in Beijing on 11 March 1992 . He was given full funeral rites at the <unk> Revolutionary Cemetery . His body was taken back to his native village and buried according to Muslim Hui rituals . 
 = Bharattherium = 
 Bharattherium is a mammal that lived in India during the Maastrichtian ( latest Cretaceous ) . The genus has a single species , Bharattherium bonapartei . It is part of the gondwanathere family Sudamericidae , which is also found in Madagascar and South America during the latest Cretaceous . The first fossil of Bharattherium was discovered in 1989 and published in 1997 , but the animal was not named until 2007 , when two teams independently named the animal Bharattherium bonapartei and Dakshina jederi . The latter name is now a synonym . Bharattherium is known from a total of eight isolated fossil teeth , including one incisor and seven molariforms ( molar @-@ like teeth , either premolars or true molars ) . 
 Bharattherium molariforms are high , curved teeth , with a height of 6 to 8 @.@ 5 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 24 to 0 @.@ 33 in ) . In a number of teeth tentatively identified as fourth lower molariforms ( mf4 ) , there is a large furrow on one side and a deep cavity ( infundibulum ) in the middle of the tooth . Another tooth , perhaps a third lower molariform , has two furrows on one side and three infundibula on the other . The tooth enamel has traits that have been interpreted as protecting against cracks in the teeth . The hypsodont ( high @-@ crowned ) teeth of sudamericids like Bharattherium are reminiscent of later grazing mammals , and the discovery of grass in Indian fossil sites contemporaneous with those yielding Bharattherium suggest that sudamericids were indeed grazers . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 A gondwanathere tooth , catalogued as VPL / JU / NKIM / 25 , was first discovered in the Maastrichtian ( latest Cretaceous , about 70 – 66 million years ago ) Intertrappean Beds of Naskal , India , in 1989 , but it was not identified as such until another gondwanathere , Lavanify , was found on Madagascar in the middle 1990s . The discoveries of Lavanify and VPL / JU / NKIM / 25 were announced in Nature in 1997 . Gondwanatheres were previously known only from Argentina ; these discoveries extended the range of the gondwanathere family Sudamericidae across the continents of the ancient supercontinent of Gondwana . 
 In 2007 , two teams of scientists independently named the Indian gondwanathere on the basis of new material ; both teams included VPL / JU / NKIM / 25 in their newly named species . <unk> Prasad and colleagues named the animal Bharattherium bonapartei on the basis of an additional tooth , VPL / JU / IM / 33 , from another Intertrappean locality , <unk> . The generic name , Bharattherium , combines Bharat , Sanskrit for " India " , with the Ancient Greek <unk> , meaning " beast " , and the specific name , bonapartei , honors Argentine paleontologist José Bonaparte , who was the first to describe a gondwanathere fossil . G.P. Wilson and colleagues named Dakshina jederi on the basis of six teeth ( in addition to VPL / JU / NKIM 25 ) , and identified some additional material as indeterminate gondwanatheres . Of these teeth , three ( GSI / SR / PAL @-@ G059 , G070 , and G074 ) are from a third Intertrappean site at Gokak and three ( GSI / SR / PAL @-@ <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> ) are from Naskal . Dakshina , the generic name , derives from Sanskrit <unk> " of the south " , and refers both to the animal 's occurrence in southern India and to the distribution of gondwanatheres in the southern continents . The specific name , jederi , honors University of Michigan paleontologist Jeffrey A. Wilson , nicknamed " <unk> " , who played an important role in the project that led to the discovery of Dakshina . Wilson and colleagues also described three other gondwanathere teeth from Gokak ( GSI / SR / PAL @-@ <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> ) , which they tentatively identified as a different species of gondwanathere on their small size . In 2008 , Prasad commented that Bharattherium bonapartei and Dakshina jederi represented the same species and that Bharattherium , which was published first , was the correct name . 
 = = Description = = 
 Bharattherium bonapartei is known from a total of eight isolated teeth . Among the seven teeth in their sample , Wilson and colleagues tentatively identified five as fourth lower molariforms ( mf4 ) — because gondwanathere premolars and molars cannot be distinguished , they are collectively known as " molariforms " — one as a third lower molariform ( mf3 ) and one as a lower incisor ( i1 ) . These determinations were made on the basis of comparisons with a sample of the South American gondwanathere Sudamerica ameghinoi , in which all eight molariform positions are known . However , the large number of <unk> led Wilson and colleagues to suspect that the criteria used for distinguishing Sudamerica tooth positions may not apply directly to Bharattherium . Prasad and colleagues did not assign their two Bharattherium teeth to any tooth position , but suggested that they may represent different tooth positions and that one may come from the upper and the other from the lower side of the jaw . As is characteristic of sudamericids , Bharattherium molariforms are hypsodont ( high @-@ crowned ) and have a flat occlusal ( chewing ) surface atop a high tooth , with furrows that extend down the height of the tooth . Bharattherium molariforms are the smallest of any sudamericid ; those of Lavanify , for example , are about 35 % larger . Unlike Sudamerica molariforms , those of Bharattherium taper towards the top . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 GSI / SR / PAL @-@ G074 , a well @-@ preserved right mf4 that Wilson and colleagues selected as the holotype of Dakshina jederi , is 7 @.@ 57 mm high and has a crown of 3 @.@ 66 × 2 @.@ 99 mm . It is curved , with the base more distal ( towards the back ) than the top . The occlusal surface is rectangular . On the lingual side ( towards the tongue ) , there is a deep furrow ( filled in part with cementum ) that extends from the top to near the base of the tooth . There is also a much smaller indentation on the buccal side ( towards the cheeks ) . The occlusal surface is mostly covered with enamel surrounding a dentine lake , but there is a V @-@ shaped islet in the middle , with the tip of the V towards the lingual side , that forms the remnant of an infundibulum — a deep cavity in the tooth . <unk> — wave @-@ like bands and grooves — are visible in the enamel . 
 The right mf4 GSI / SR / PAL @-@ G070 , which is damaged on the buccal , distal , and lingual sides , is 8 @.@ 40 mm high , but has an occlusal surface of only 2 @.@ 49 × 1 @.@ 75 mm . Unlike in GSI / SR / PAL @-@ G074 , the dentine on the occlusal surface is not exposed , and the occlusal surface is oval in shape . Furthermore , the V @-@ shaped islet is larger and the lingual furrow is less prominent at the occlusal surface , because it tapers near the tip of the tooth . In the heavily damaged left mf4 GSI / SR / PAL @-@ <unk> ( height 7 @.@ 16 mm ) , only the distal side is well preserved . The infundibulum is exposed internally ; it extends 4 @.@ 01 mm down the crown . The occlusal surface is poorly preserved , but its dimensions are at least 2 @.@ 14 × 2 @.@ 42 mm . GSI / SR / PAL @-@ <unk> , a right mf4 , is damaged on the mesial side and has a height of 5 @.@ 86 mm and an occlusal surface of at least 2 @.@ 66 x 2 @.@ 04 mm . Cementum fills the V @-@ shaped islet . 
 VPL / JU / NKIM / 25 was the first Indian gondwanathere fossil to be described ; it is damaged on one side . Wilson and colleagues identified it as a left mf4 ( implying that the damaged side is buccal ) with strong similarities to GSI / SR / PAL @-@ G070 , including a curved crown and a V @-@ shaped enamel islet atop a deep infundibulum . The occlusal surface is oval . The tooth is 6 mm high and Wilson and colleagues estimate that the occlusal surface is 2 @.@ 5 × 1 @.@ 8 mm , close to the dimensions of GSI / SR / PAL @-@ G070 . They suggest the tooth probably had enamel on all sides of the crown , but Prasad and colleagues point to a possible enamel @-@ dentine junction on the damaged side as evidence that enamel may be absent there . 
 GSI / SR / PAL @-@ G059 , identified as a left mf3 , has a height of 5 @.@ 97 mm at the mesial side , but only 2 @.@ 02 mm at the distal side because of curvature . On the lingual side , two long furrows are visible , and on the buccal side breakage exposes three long infundibula , of which the most mesial one is the longest and the most distal one the shortest . In the occlusal surface , these three infundibula merge into a single islet . In addition , three dentine lakes are visible in the occlusal surface , which has dimensions of 4 @.@ 58 × at least 2 @.@ 52 mm . Although in Sudamerica , mf2 , mf3 , and the upper molariforms <unk> and <unk> all have three lophs , like GSI / SR / PAL @-@ G059 , its curvature matches the mf3 of Sudamerica best . 
 VPL / JU / IM / 33 , the holotype of Bharattherium bonapartei , is 7 @.@ 33 mm high , 2 @.@ 66 mm long , and 2 @.@ 0 mm wide . The occlusal surface is about rectangular and is mostly covered by a V @-@ shaped dentine lake , which encloses a small heart @-@ shaped enamel islet at the top of an cementum @-@ filled infundibulum . A vertical furrow is also present . Near the top of the tooth , enamel covers the entire crown , but further down there is no enamel on the concave face of the tooth . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The left i1 GSI / SR / PAL @-@ <unk> is flat on the medial side ( towards the middle of the head ) but convex on the lateral side ( towards the side of the head ) and bears a shallow groove on the lateral side . At the base , the tooth is broadest on the lower end . The tooth is slightly curved upward towards the tip . Measured on the lower side , the tooth is 11 @.@ 76 mm long , but breakage means the true length is probably larger . The depth of the tooth is about 3 @.@ 39 mm . Wilson and colleagues identified this incisor as Dakshina on the basis of its size ; the upper and lower incisor that they assigned to an indeterminate gondwanathere are smaller . 
 = = = Enamel microstructure = = = 
 The microstructure of the enamel of VPL / JU / NKIM / 25 has been studied . Unlike other gondwanatheres , it has enamel consisting of three layers — radial enamel , tangential enamel , and PLEX . The rows of small , round enamel prisms are separated by interprismatic matrix that forms crystals oriented at right angles relative to the prisms . <unk> arise at the enamel @-@ dentine junction , run through the enamel , and meet the outer enamel at a high angle . These features of the enamel are apparently adaptations that protect the tooth from cracks . 
 = = Relationships = = 
 Bharattherium is identifiable as a sudamericid because it has hypsodont molariforms with cementum @-@ filled furrows . Among the four known sudamericid genera — Gondwanatherium and Sudamerica from Argentina ; Lavanify from Madagascar ; and Bharattherium — it shares with Sudamerica and Lavanify the presence of furrows that extend down to the base of the tooth . In addition , it shares several features with Lavanify , suggesting the two are closely related . Wilson and colleagues list three features shared by the two : the presence of an infundibulum ( seen in only one of two specimens of Lavanify ) , interprismatic matrix , and perikymata . Prasad and colleagues also interpreted the interprismatic matrix as a shared character , but added the absence of enamel on one side of the tooth crown . Wilson and colleagues identified the presence of a V @-@ shaped enamel lake on mf4 and of three layers in the enamel as <unk> ( uniquely derived characters ) of the Indian sudamericid . 
 = = Range and ecology = = 
 Remains of Bharattherium have been found at three widely separated Late Cretaceous sites in peninsular India — Naskal , Andhra Pradesh ; Gokak , Karnataka ; and <unk> , Madhya Pradesh . All sites are in the Intertrappean Beds ( part of the Deccan Traps ) and are Maastrichtian ( latest Cretaceous ) in age . The Intertrappean Beds have yielded a variety of fossil animals , including eutherian mammals such as <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . In the perhaps slightly older <unk> Beds , a possible member of the ancient and enigmatic mammalian group <unk> has been found , <unk> . Members of the family Sudamericidae , in which Bharattherium is classified , are also known from the Cretaceous of Argentina , Madagascar , and possibly Tanzania and from the Paleogene of Argentina and Antarctica , and the second gondwanathere family , Ferugliotheriidae , is known with certainty only from the Cretaceous of Argentina . Thus , Bharattherium is an example of a Gondwanan faunal element in India and indicates biogeographic affinities with other Gondwanan landmasses such as Madagascar and South America . 
 In modern mammals , hypsodont teeth are often associated with diets that include abrasive vegetation such as grasses . <unk> in sudamericids has been interpreted as indicating semiaquatic , terrestrial habits and a diet with items like roots or bark , because it was thought that grasses had not yet appeared when sudamericids lived . However , grass remains have been found at Intertrappean sites contemporary with those where Bharattherium was found , suggesting that sudamericids like Bharattherium were indeed the first grazing mammals . 
 = Never Let Me Down = 
 Never Let Me Down is the seventeenth studio album by David Bowie , released in April 1987 by EMI America . Bowie conceived the album as the foundation for a theatrical world tour , writing and recording most of the songs in Switzerland . He considered the record a return to rock ' n ' roll music . Three singles were released from the album , " Day @-@ In Day @-@ Out " , " Time Will Crawl " and " Never Let Me Down " , which all reached the UK Top 40 . 
 One of Bowie 's better @-@ selling albums , Never Let Me Down was certified Gold by the RIAA in early July 1987 , less than three months after its release date , and charted in the top 10 in several European countries , although it only reached number 34 on the US charts . Despite its commercial success , this album was poorly received by fans and critics , who often regard the mid @-@ to @-@ late 1980s as a low point of creativity and musical integrity for Bowie . Bowie later distanced himself from the album , but admitted a fondness for many of the songs and eventually remixed the track " Time Will Crawl " ( one of his all @-@ time favourites ) for inclusion on his career retrospective release , <unk> ( 2008 ) . 
 In support of this album , Bowie embarked on the Glass Spider Tour , a world tour that was at that point the biggest , most theatrical and most elaborate tour he had undertaken in his career . The tour , like the album it supported , was commercially successful but critically panned . The critical failure of the album and tour were factors that led Bowie to look for a new way to motivate himself creatively , leading him to create the band Tin Machine in 1989 and to retire his back catalogue from live performances during his 1990 Sound + Vision Tour . Bowie did not release another solo album until Black Tie White Noise in 1993 . 
 = = Album development = = 
 Following the rise in fame and success from his 1983 album Let 's Dance and its subsequent Serious Moonlight Tour , Bowie felt disconnected from his new found large fan base , and after the poor reception of Tonight ( 1984 ) , he was looking to make the next album differently . As a result , Bowie said he wanted to return to recording with a small rock group like he had early in his career , and that he made the album as a " move back to rock ' n ' roll music . Very directly . " Bowie felt that the sound and style of his new album was reminiscent of his album Scary Monsters ( 1980 ) and was less like its immediate predecessors . 
 Bowie spent the middle of 1986 in his home in Switzerland writing the songs with his friend Iggy Pop . Bowie wrote Never Let Me Down with the intention of performing the songs in a theatrical show . He then recorded a few demos with Erdal <unk> before working on the album with the full band . For the first time since his Scary Monsters album , Bowie played instruments on the record in addition to singing . For some tracks on the album , Bowie played keyboards , synthesizer , rhythm guitar and on two of the album 's tracks ( " New York 's in Love " and " ' 87 and Cry " ) , he played lead guitar . 
 The album took three months to write and record . Bowie acknowledged that the songs on the album lacked a cohesive musical style , which he claimed reflected his eclectic musical tastes at the time , and stated that the album was " a reflection of all the styles of writing I 've used over the last few years . " 
 = = Song development = = 
 Bowie wrote the album 's lead track " Day @-@ In Day @-@ Out " because of his concern about the treatment of the homeless in the US , and he wanted to make a statement about it . Some networks banned the song 's video , which Bowie found ludicrous . This track was also the lead single for the album . A version of the song sung in Spanish was released in 2007 when the " Day @-@ In Day @-@ Out " EP was released digitally . 
 " Time Will Crawl " , which Bowie named as his favourite track from the album , was inspired by events from the Chernobyl disaster and the idea that someone from ones ' own neighborhood could be responsible for the end of the world . Bowie said his vocals on this song " owed a lot to Neil Young " , and noted that the variety of voices he used on the album were a nod to the musicians who had influenced him in the past . Bowie performed the song for the BBC show Top of the Pops , although that performance has never been aired . This track was the second single released from the album . 
 The title track , " Never Let Me Down " , is about Bowie 's long @-@ time personal assistant , Coco Schwab . Bowie wrote the song as a direct reference to his relationship with Coco as a counterpoint to the rest of the songs on the album , which he felt were mostly allegorical . The song was the last one written for the album , written and recorded in one day during the last week of mixing the album at New York 's Power Station studios . Bowie attributed his vocal performance on this track to John Lennon . Bowie 's performance of this song for the Top of the Pops was shown on the first airing of the US version of the show . This track was re @-@ recorded and released as the third single from the album . One reviewer later called it one of Bowie 's " most underrated songs . " 
 Bowie called the song " Beat of Your Drum " a Lolita song , a " reflection on young girls ... ' Christ , she ’ s only 14 years old , but jail ’ s worth it ! ' " 
 The song " Zeroes " , which Rolling Stone magazine called the most heartening and successful track on the album , is , according to Bowie , a nostalgia trip : " I wanted to put in every 60s cliche I could think of ! ' Stopping and preaching and letting love in , ' all those things . I hope there 's a humorous undertone to it . But the subtext is definitely that the trappings of rock are not what they 're made out to be . " 
 The track " Glass Spider " is a kind of mythological story based on a documentary Bowie had seen about black widow spiders that said that the spiders lay the skeletons of their prey out on their webs . Bowie also thought that the Glass Spider 's web would make a good enclosure for the tour , thus giving the supporting tour its name and stage dressing . 
 Actor Mickey Rourke asked Bowie to be involved in one of the songs , the two having met in London where Rourke was based while filming the movie A Prayer for the Dying . Bowie had him perform the mid @-@ song rap to the song " Shining Star ( Makin ' My Love ) . " Bowie jokingly referred to Rourke 's performance as " method rapping " . Bowie described the song as one that " reflects back @-@ to @-@ street situations , and how people are trying to get together in the face of so many disasters and catastrophes , socially around them , never knowing if they 're going to survive it themselves . The one thing they have got to cling on to is each other ; although it might resolve into something terrible , it 's the only thing that they 've got . It ’ s just a little love song coming out of that environment . " He rejected the notion that his " high , little " voice ( which he attributed to Smokey Robinson ) in the song was a new character ( to follow behind Ziggy Stardust or the Thin White Duke ) , instead saying it was just what the song needed , as he had tried the song in his regular voice and did not like the outcome : " That never bothered me , changing voices to suit a song . You can fool about with it . " " Shining Star " was one of Bowie 's early choices to be a single for the album , but EMI had the final say and did not release the song as a single . A 12 " remix of the song was made available on iTunes when the " Never Let Me Down " EP was released digitally for the first time in 2007 . 
 Bowie called " New York 's in Love " a sarcastic song about the vanity of big cities . 
 Bowie originally wrote the song " ' 87 & Cry " as a statement about Margaret Thatcher , who was the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom at the time . The song referred to the distinction between the authoritarian government and the citizens ( the " dogs " ) , and Bowie admitted that the lyrics verged on the surreal , describing people " eating the energies of others to get to what they wanted . " The track was released as the b @-@ side to the album 's third single , " Never Let Me Down " . 
 " Too Dizzy " was the first song Bowie and new collaborator Erdal <unk> wrote together for the album , and was written in homage to the 50s . Bowie said " a real Fifties subject matter was either love or jealousy , so I thought I ’ d stick with jealousy because it ’ s a lot more interesting " . Bowie at the time called the song a " throwaway " and seemed surprised that he included it on the album . The song has been deleted from subsequent reissues of Never Let Me Down . 
 When asked about his choice of including Iggy Pop 's song " Bang Bang " on the album ( instead of perhaps co @-@ writing a new song ) , Bowie stated " Iggy 's done so many good songs that people never get to hear ... I think it 's one of his best songs , ' Bang Bang , ' and it hasn 't been heard , and now it might be . " " Bang Bang " was released as a promotional CD single in 1987 . 
 Overall , Bowie summed up the album after it was released in 1987 as an effort to " reestablish what I used to do , which was a guitar @-@ oriented album . I think the next album will be even more so . " His follow @-@ up effort was to be the guitar @-@ oriented rock @-@ band album Tin Machine ( 1989 ) . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Initial sales of the album were strong but dropped off disappointingly as contemporary reviews of the album were mixed . Critic Ira Robbins wrote " although this casual loud @-@ rock outing ... seems on first blush to be slapdash and slight , the first side is actually quite good , offering provocative pop @-@ culture lyrics delivered with first @-@ take enthusiasm and carefree backing . " In 1987 , Spin magazine called the album " an inspired and brilliantly crafted work . It 's charged with a positive spirit that makes art soul food ; imbued with the contagious energy that gives ideas a leg to dance on " , but in 1989 a different reviewer for the magazine called the album " disappointing " . Rolling Stone magazine called the work an " odd , freewheeling pastiche of elements from all the previous Bowies , " " unfocused , " and possibly " the noisiest , <unk> Bowie album ever . ... Being noisy and sloppy isn 't necessarily a bad thing , but sad to say , Never Let Me Down is also something of a mess . " Another critic held a general optimism for the potential of the songs on the album , complaining only that the " oppressive production " ruined the songs . Billboard magazine 's 1987 retrospective issue called Never Let Me Down " arguably the year 's most underrated release " and considered the album a " Critic 's Choice " for the year . 
 Bowie was not concerned with the album 's relative poor performance in the charts , saying " I 've made about 20 albums during my career , and so far this is my third biggest seller . So I can 't be that disappointed , yet , it is a letdown that it hasn 't been as buoyant as it should be . ... But I don ’ t really feel that negative about it . As far as I 'm concerned it 's one of the better albums I 've made . As I 've said . Never Let Down has been a pretty big seller for me . So I 'm quite happy . " Despite growing criticism in the press , Bowie said that Never Let Me Down was one of the most enjoyable and energetic albums he had made in a long time . 
 = = Public image = = 
 Bowie , having just turned 40 the year the album was released , was a common sight on magazine covers during the year . He appeared alongside Tina Turner on the cover of In Fashion magazine ( to the tagline ' Forever cool ' ) , Musician magazine and on the cover of Rolling Stone 's US 20th Anniversary " Style " issue , part of a series of contemporary photographs of Bowie taken by photographer Herb Ritts . Articles about Bowie 's album and tour appeared inside such teen @-@ oriented publications such as Mademoiselle and Teen magazines , the former calling Bowie " a leading candidate for the coolest character in rock . " Bowie was chosen as one of the top male pop stars of the year ( 1987 ) in Billboards end @-@ of @-@ year retrospective issue . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Bowie knew he 'd be taking this album on tour , and in early interviews said " I 'm going to do a stage thing this year , which I 'm incredibly excited about , ' cause I 'm gonna take a chance again " , but when pressed for details , he refused to give up any , saying " I 'll just be doing what I always did , which is keeping things interesting . " 
 Bowie performed several of the album 's songs during a press tour that preceded his highly theatrical Glass Spider Tour , which played to a combined audience of as many as six million fans . Bowie wanted to produce a live show that picked up where his aborted 1974 Diamond Dogs Tour left off . Although considered financially successful and well attended , the tour itself was critically dismissed . Bowie designed his next few tours specifically to avoid the problems that the Glass Spider Tour was criticized for by avoiding overly theatrical stage presentations and focusing on his music . Despite the criticism , Bowie maintained that performing on this tour was the most fun he had had on tour up to that point in his career . 
 = = Album legacy = = 
 Initially after the album 's release , Bowie was excited to return to the studio to record more material , having written more songs than were recorded for the album . He said he wanted to record more " experimental " music , referring to his work in the 1970s with Brian Eno . However , due to the poor critical reception of the album and subsequent tour , Bowie put those plans on hold and instead formed his rock band Tin Machine , which he used to rejuvenate himself creatively and artistically . 
 His view on the album soured as the years passed . In 1990 , during interviews for his Sound + Vision Tour , Bowie commented that he felt like he was in a " mire " while making this album , and expressed disappointment at having lost good songs by allowing the album 's production to give the songs too much of a session man feel . 
 A year later , while working with Tin Machine on their second album , he mused on his previous few albums : " You can tell I was terribly unhappy in the late ' 80s . ... I was in that netherworld of commercial acceptance . It was an awful trip . 1983 , ' 84 , ' 85 , ' 86 , ' 87 - those five years were simply dreadful . ... Never Let Me Down had good songs that I mistreated . I didn 't really apply myself . I wasn 't quite sure what I was supposed to be doing . I wish there had been someone around who could have told me . " 
 In 1993 , while doing press tours for his album Black Tie White Noise , Bowie acknowledged that , while the album sold more than any of his previous albums ( except Let 's Dance ) , he felt that while making it he had almost lost his interest in making music altogether . He elaborated , " In the end I didn 't lose the songs , but I lost the sound . ... I literally threw them away by giving them to very good people to arrange but not being involved myself , almost to the point of indifference . " 
 In 1995 , Bowie spoke more at length about how he felt his creativity and music had suffered after the success of Let 's Dance : 
 [ The great public esteem at that time ] meant absolutely nothing to me . It didn 't make me feel good . I felt dissatisfied with everything I was doing , and eventually it started showing in my work . Let 's Dance was an excellent album in a certain genre , but the next two albums after that [ Tonight and Never Let Me Down ] showed that my lack of interest in my own work was really becoming transparent . My nadir was Never Let Me Down . It was such an awful album . I 've gotten to a place now where I 'm not very judgmental about myself . I put out what I do , whether it 's in visual arts or in music , because I know that everything I do is really heartfelt . Even if it 's a failure artistically , it doesn 't bother me in the same way that Never Let Me Down bothers me . I really shouldn 't have even bothered going into the studio to record it . [ laughs ] In fact , when I play it , I wonder if I did sometimes . 
 No song from this album has been performed on any of Bowie 's tours after 1987 . However , Bowie had Mario J. McNulty remix the track " Time Will Crawl " in 2008 for his compilation of self @-@ selected favourite songs , <unk> , and later included the same mix on his career @-@ spanning 50th anniversary compilation , Nothing Has Changed . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 This was the first album to have different length songs on the vinyl release than on the cassette and CD , with almost all the songs appearing on the latter having a longer running time than on the former . 
 = = = LP : EMI <unk> <unk> ( UK ) = = = 
 All songs written and composed by David Bowie ( except where noted ) . 
 The shortened LP version of the album was released digitally for the first time in 2007 on iTunes ( minus " Too Dizzy " ) . 
 = = = CD : EMI CDP 7 <unk> 2 ( UK ) = = = 
 All songs written and composed by David Bowie ( except where noted ) . 
 = = = LP / CD : EMI <unk> @-@ <unk> / <unk> @-@ <unk> ( Japan ) = = = 
 The original Japanese release of the album included an exclusive re @-@ recording of the song " Girls " sung in Japanese . On the LP the song was slotted at the end of side one . 
 = = Reissues = = 
 The track " Too Dizzy " has been deleted from subsequent reissues of the album , reportedly at Bowie 's request because it is his least favourite track on the album . 
 = = = 1995 reissue [ Virgin <unk> 98 ( UK ) ] = = = 
 Virgin Records rereleased the album on CD with three bonus tracks . 
 = = = 1999 reissue ( EMI ) = = = 
 EMI released the second reissue in 1999 featuring 24 @-@ bit digitally remastered sound but no bonus tracks , and also without " Too Dizzy " . 
 = = = 2007 reissue = = = 
 A 2007 Japanese re @-@ release of the album , based on the EMI 1999 re @-@ issue , included " Too Dizzy " on the track listing although the song itself doesn 't appear on the CD . 
 = = = 2009 reissue = = = 
 In 2009 , the album was re @-@ issued in SHM @-@ CD format . The reissue had the same track listing as the 2007 reissue . 
 = = Production credits = = 
 Producers : David Bowie 
 David Richards 
 Musicians : David Bowie – vocals , guitar , keyboards , tambourine , background vocals 
 Carlos Alomar – guitar , guitar synthesizer , tambourine , background vocals 
 Erdal <unk> – keyboards , drums , bass , trumpet , background vocals , violins 
 Peter Frampton – lead guitar 
 Philippe <unk> – piano , keyboards 
 Carmine Rojas – bass 
 Earl Gardner – flugelhorn 
 Errol " Crusher " Bennett – percussion 
 Stan Harrison – alto saxophone 
 Laurie Frink – trumpet 
 Steve Elson – baritone saxophone 
 Lenny Pickett – tenor saxophone 
 Robin Clark , Lani Groves , Diva Gray , Gordon <unk> – background vocals 
 Sid McGinnis – lead guitar on " Bang Bang " , " Time Will Crawl " and " Day @-@ In Day @-@ Out " 
 Mickey Rourke – mid @-@ song rap on " Shining Star ( Makin ' My Love ) " 
 = = Singles = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Dance ( Alexandra Stan song ) = 
 " Dance " is a song recorded by Romanian recording artist Alexandra Stan for her sophomore studio album , Unlocked ( 2014 ) . The track was made available for digital download on 16 July 2014 , as the album 's third single . " Dance " was written by Stan , Cosmin <unk> , Alexandru Cotoi , Lee Anna McCollum , Mika Moupondo and Erik Lidbom , while production was handled by both Cazan and Lidbom . A music video for the song was directed by Khaled Mokhtar and debuted on Stan 's YouTube channel on 18 July 2014 , where it has since amassed over seven million views . The clip was shot during three days in Bucharest , Romania and sees Stan and her backup dancers performing choreographed dances , which were choreographed by Romanian performer Emil Rengle . 
 The recording was met with good reviews . Digital Journal praised the song for being " catchy " , and Stan for providing " honey @-@ rich " vocals . In an interview , Alexandra Stan explained that " Dance " is a " very sexy club song and club image " . The track was performed during Stan 's Unlocked Tour ( 2014 ) . The song became a success in Japan , where it ranked at number 25 on the Japan Hot 100 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Dance " was recorded at Fonogram Studios in Bucharest , Romania . The song is a dance track , also incorporating house music influences into its sound . The track opens with acoustic guitar chords , which are then followed by a pop strophe . The refrain consists of a saxophone drop , which is backed by cut saws and plucks . " Dance " ends with the last lyrics of the song being backed by acoustic guitar . Lyrically , the track speaks about the art of dancing , but also features references to friendship and romance . Markos Papadatos from Digital Journal pointed out the opening lyrics of the song for beginning rebellious , but turning into positive and optimistic . He also compared the instrumentation of " Dance " with that one of Kesha 's " Die Young " . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Markos Papadatos from Digital Journal compared " Dance " to Stan 's 2010 song " Mr. Saxobeat " , confessing that the song " has a catchy melody " . He went on praising Stan 's " honey @-@ rich " voice on the verses " Why don 't you dance dance dance / and fall in love with friends / let 's start a new romance " . Furthermore , Papadatos said that the track deserves to top the Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs charts . Concerning the music video of " Dance " , he praised Khaled Mokhtar for doing a " brilliant job directing [ the clip ] " , and Emil Rengle for choreographing " the dancers and Stan in the video exceptionally well " . He went on saying that Stan " looks breathtakingly beautiful in this video " . Papadatos gave the music video and the song itself an A rating . Everything Express writer Robin Catling described the track as a " summery David Guetta @-@ inspired Euro @-@ dance number that rattles along " . He <unk> the song 's quality , saying that " even S @-@ Club 7 had better material than this " . Direct Lyrics praised " Dance " for having " enough summer flavour to do well this upcoming hot season " and confessed that they like the track better than its predecessor , " Cherry Pop " . Los 40 Principales cited the video for " Dance " as one of Stan 's best clips ever . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Unlocked and The Collection . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Charlene Robinson = 
 Charlene Edna " Lenny " Robinson ( also Mitchell ) is a fictional character from the Australian soap opera Neighbours played by Kylie Minogue . Charlene was introduced to the show along with several new characters , as part of a revamp by Network Ten to increase ratings . Minogue auditioned for the role in 1985 , shortly after finishing her high school exams . She attended the audition dressed as the character and casting director Jan Russ cast her in the role . Minogue was initially contracted for a week , but this was later extended through to mid @-@ 1988 . She made her first screen appearance during the episode broadcast on 17 April 1986 . 
 Charlene was portrayed as a feisty , quick tempered and outspoken tomboy . She had a difficult relationship with her mother and did not like being patronised . Minogue thought viewers liked the character as she was an average Australian teenager . Reinforcing her tomboyish image , Charlene trained as a mechanic and she often wore khaki overalls and baggy sweatshirts . Her relationship with Scott Robinson ( Jason Donovan ) was central to many of her storylines . They became a popular couple with viewers and the relationship helped boost ratings for Neighbours . Despite breaking up several times during their first 12 months together , the couple stayed together and their relationship eventually culminated in a wedding during " Episode 523 " , which was first broadcast on 1 July 1987 . 
 During her time as Charlene , Minogue also started singing and released two successful pop singles during 1987 followed by her debut album the following year . In mid @-@ 1988 , Minogue decided to leave Neighbours to concentrate on her music career . She filmed her final scenes in June 1988 and Charlene made her final screen appearance on 26 July . Minogue won four Logie Awards for her portrayal of Charlene , including the Gold Logie , becoming the youngest person to do so . Critical reaction to the character has been positive . Soap Opera author Dorothy Hobson said Charlene broke stereotypes when it came to careers for women in the 1980s . 
 = = Creation and casting = = 
 After the Seven Network dropped Neighbours in 1985 , rival channel Network Ten picked the series up . It initially attracted low ratings and Ten began working hard to publicise the series . They revamped the show and added several new cast members . Kylie Minogue had had a fairly successful career as a child actress , having appeared in various television dramas , including Skyways and The Henderson Kids , but she was considering giving up acting after failing to find further work . After finishing her school exams in 1985 , Minogue then auditioned for the role of Charlene . She attended the audition dressed as the character and won the role . Of hiring Minogue , Neighbours casting director Jan Russ commented " Kylie had done a couple of things before I saw her , but she was only 18 and as shy as a mouse . She really hadn 't evolved into anything at that stage , but the camera loved her and I knew I had my Charlene . " Minogue initially signed up to play Charlene for one week , this was then extended to 13 weeks and then through to mid @-@ 1988 . She made her debut screen appearance in the episode broadcast on 17 April 1986 . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Backstory and characterisation = = = 
 In her fictional backstory , Charlene was born in Coffs Harbour as the youngest child of Fred ( Nick Waters ) and Madge Mitchell ( Anne Charleston ) , and sister of Henry ( Craig McLachlan ) . When she was a teenager , Charlene drank alcohol , fell pregnant to her first boyfriend and had an abortion . In their 1989 book The Neighbours Factfile ' , Neil Wallis and Dave Hogan described Charlene 's life as " one long series of scrapes and scraps " . After her parents divorced , Charlene remained living with her father , but when he felt he was incapable of looking after her , Charlene followed her mother to Erinsborough . Hilary Kingsley , author of Soap Box , observed that Charlene left behind her " life as Lolita " upon moving to the suburb . 
 Charlene was a self @-@ described tomboy , who preferred to be known by her nickname " Lenny " . She was known for her quick temper and her " heart of gold " . She always stuck up for those who were considered the underdog . In her book Neighbours : The First 10 Years , Josephine Monroe wrote that Charlene did not like to be patronised and had a sharp tongue . Monroe observed that Charlene 's feisty side helped endure her to viewers . In keeping with her tomboyish nature , Charlene trained as a mechanic after leaving school and got an apprenticeship with Rob Lewis ( Ernie Bourne ) . The character 's style often consisted of khaki overalls , baggy sweatshirts and her hair set in a perm . A reporter for the Daily Mail said this look helped to launch Minogue " into the public eye " as Charlene . 
 Minogue thought people liked Charlene because she was portrayed as an average Australian teenager , experiencing a difficult relationship with her mother . She continued , " She is a bit of a rebel and they probably relate to that , and while she has her problems she will always come out on top . " Minogue shared some similarities with her character , but thought Charlene was far more outspoken and tomboyish than she was . Minogue liked that Charlene often said what she thought , but joked that if she were in trouble and tried to punch someone like Charlene did , she would probably get " flattened " . Minogue also said Charlene was sensitive , but she was unlikely to show it and would " rather die than be caught crying . " 
 = = = Relationship with Scott Robinson = = = 
 Charlene 's first scenes were with Scott Robinson ( played by Jason Donovan ) . He thought she was trying to break into the Ramsay house and confronted her , which resulted in Charlene punching him . Minogue ended up punching Donovan for real during the take . Producers soon created a story arc for the characters that saw them enter into a romantic relationship . Scott and Charlene 's relationship helped boost ratings for Neighbours and the show 's publicist , Brian Walsh , capitalised on Minogue and Donovan 's increasing popularity with viewers and rumoured off @-@ screen romance . Of Scott and Charlene , Minogue commented " People like Scott and Charlene being a couple . It 's probably the most normal relationship in the show . " Kelly Bourne from TV Week observed that Scott and Charlene struck a chord with fans , who could identify with them . 
 Scott and Charlene had problems during their first 12 months together and they broke up several times . One such break @-@ up occurred after Charlene 's mother thought she should date other boys , while Scott had to repeat his final year of school without her . Scott was initially unsure how to win Charlene back , but after speaking with his grandmother , Helen ( Anne Haddy ) , who mentioned that her husband gave her a friendship ring , Scott went out and bought one for Charlene . While they were enjoying a barbecue at Charlene 's caravan by Lassiter 's lake , the couple argued about Charlene spending time with Warren Murphy ( Ben Mendelsohn ) and Scott decided to leave . When Charlene started to go after Scott , she found herself trapped by a fire that had been accidentally started by Greg Davis ( Alex Papps ) . Greg had been storing petrol under the caravan and spilled it as he was removing the cans , causing the petrol to head towards the still burning barbecue . Scott rescued " a terrified " Charlene from the flames , but an explosion threw them both to the ground and Charlene was knocked unconscious . 
 Donovan commented that Scott loved Charlene , so when he saw she was in danger , he forgot to think about himself and he just went in to rescue her . Donovan added that Scott was " devastated " when he saw Charlene had been injured . At the hospital , Scott gave Charlene the friendship ring and declared that they would live together . Minogue told Bourne that Charlene was flattered by the gift , while Donovan stated that it proved that they loved each other and were not going to break up again . Minogue agreed with Donovan , saying " There is that underlying love whether they are together or not . " After learning about the couple 's plans to move in together , their friends and neighbours expressed their shock at how serious the couple had become . When Charlene showed the ring to Daphne Clarke ( Elaine Smith ) and told her how she and Scott wanted to live together , Daphne was taken back . Scott 's friend Mike Young ( Guy Pearce ) also voiced his opposition , but Scott was determined that no one would stop them from moving in together . Bourne noted that Daphne 's shock at the couple 's plans was " the start of a major controversy , splitting apart the inhabitants of Ramsay Street . " 
 When older Neighbours viewers expressed their concern about a young unwed couple moving in together , producers decided to have them marry instead . On @-@ screen , neither family approved of Scott and Charlene 's plan to move in together , but when Scott learned his father was only 18 when he got married , Scott found the solution to their problem and asked Charlene to marry him . Minogue said Charlene was shocked at first , but she became " very excited " about the idea of getting married . She continued , " She knows they want to live together and they have had so much trouble getting their parents ' approval that I suppose getting married seems the logical thing to do . They will be together anyway , so they may as well finalise it . " After getting over her initial shock , Madge gave the couple her blessing to get married . Minogue and Donovan both agreed that they would not get married so young , and Donovan thought that younger couples should live together first . He also believed that Scott was rushing into things . Scott and Charlene were married during " Episode 523 " , which was first broadcast on 1 July 1987 to two million Australian viewers . The episode became " a TV phenomenon " and Minogue said it was what Scott and Charlene 's romance had been building up to . 
 After returning from their honeymoon , Scott and Charlene moved in with Madge and Henry , and they struggled financially . Just three months after their wedding , producers decided to throw temptation at the couple to keep their relationship interesting . Andrew Mercado , author of Super Aussie Soaps , quipped that " a happy soap couple is considered the kiss of death " . Scott was the first to cheat when he kissed Jane Harris ( Annie Jones ) , while she helped him study for his HSC . After Jane confessed to Charlene , she threw Scott out and refused to talk to him . In a bid to reunite the couple , Jane told Charlene that she would steal Scott away from her unless she did something about it . The couple soon reunited . The following year , Charlene had a brief affair with her driving instructor Steve Fisher ( Michael Pope ) . 
 = = = Other storylines = = = 
 One evening in July 1986 , Charlene came home with a newborn baby and shocked her mother by claiming that he was her son . Charlene told Madge a story , so convincing that Madge believed she had become a grandmother . However , Charlene soon revealed that the baby was actually her half @-@ brother Sam ( Thomas <unk> ; Scott <unk> ) . She explained to Madge that she had been helping to care for him , after his mother Susan ( Gloria <unk> ) , turned to Charlene for help . Susan had had an affair with Charlene 's father Fred , until he threw her out . Charlene knew Madge would not be happy looking after another woman 's child , so she claimed he was her son . Soap Box author Hilary <unk> noted the situation helped expose Charlene 's " soft heart " and her sensitive side . 
 In the same year , Charlene acted as a backing singer for Scott and Mike Young 's band . Scott and Mike entered a demo tape into a song competition , and the judges , Molly Meldrum and Brian Hanson ( Jon Finlayson ) , sought out Charlene as they were impressed with her vocal ability . Molly and Brian invited Charlene to their music studio to record some tracks , but she soon realises that she is not interested in singing and wants to complete her HSC instead . Scott also apologised to Charlene for being jealous of her talent . 
 = = = Departure = = = 
 Minogue ventured into music during her time on the show and her cover of " The Loco @-@ Motion " spent several weeks at the top of the Australian music chart . In late 1987 , Minogue flew to England to record " I Should Be So Lucky " , before returning home to continue with Neighbours . The press speculated that she would soon have to make a decision between acting and singing . Shortly after , Minogue chose to concentrate on her burgeoning music career and decided to leave Neighbours after two and a half years . She filmed her final scenes in June 1988 . Charlene 's exit storyline saw her move to Brisbane , after her grandfather , Dan ( Syd <unk> ) , bought her and Scott a house there . Scott was initially unable to go with his wife , so she said goodbye to him , on the understanding that he would join her as soon as he could get a job transfer . All of the cast gathered in the street , while Charlene said goodbye to her brother , mother and friends . She then got into her green Mini and drove out of Ramsay Street . 
 In November 2004 , Minogue was invited to film a cameo appearance for the show 's 20th anniversary the following year . A report then emerged that Minogue was willing to film an appearance as Charlene while she was on tour in the UK , but the producers had refused the offer . However , in a statement from production company Grundy Television , the producers said that they " made every effort to accommodate Minogue " , including filming the cameo anywhere in the world , but that their offer was turned down . In May 2010 , Minogue pondered a return to Neighbours during an interview published in The Sun . Minogue commented on how fun it would be to appear as Charlene again , after years of saying no , and added " I 've decided how it would work . Charlene would screech up the drive in her souped @-@ up Mini which she 's been working on all the time " . 
 In 2014 , Scott and Charlene 's son , Daniel Robinson ( Tim Phillipps ) , was introduced to Neighbours . While Phillipps has yet to have any contact with Minogue , Daniel has been seen making several phone calls to Charlene on @-@ screen . Phillipps also said Scott and Charlene were still together and had become " really loving , supportive parents " to Daniel and his sister , Madison ( Sarah Ellen ) , who was introduced in 2016 . In August 2014 , a Network Ten spokeswoman told the Australian Associated Press that Minogue had been invited to return to Neighbours for the show 's 30th anniversary celebrations in 2015 , but she chose not to return . However , Minogue agreed to take part in the documentary special Neighbours 30th : The Stars <unk> , which aired in Australia and the UK in March 2015 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 For her portrayal of Charlene , Minogue won Most Popular Actress at the 1987 Logie Awards . She had also been nominated for Most Popular New Talent , but lost to her co @-@ star Donovan . The following year , Minogue became the youngest person , at nineteen , to be awarded the Gold Logie Award for Most Popular Personality on Australian Television . She also won the Most Popular Personality On Victorian Television and Most Popular Actress Logie awards . In 1989 , she earned another nomination for the Gold Logie Award for Most Popular Personality on Australian Television . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Reception for the character has been positive . The BBC 's official Neighbours website stated that Charlene most memorable moments were " her wedding to Scott and punching Scott in the face during their first meeting . " The Independent said Minogue 's " elfin prettiness " won Charlene a huge following in Australia and Britain . During a TV Week feature on Minogue , a columnist said she " brought to life one of the most loved and memorable characters of Australian TV . " Colleen Last from MSN TV branded Charlene " iconic " and " beloved " . During a column on the " Top five ex @-@ Neighbours stars " , The Daily Telegraph 's Robin Wilks placed Minogue at number one , commenting that " Kylie was once best @-@ known as the sharp @-@ tongued , permanently <unk> tomboy Charlene " . The Age 's Jo Roberts said that the " slightly goofy " Charlene was a " <unk> @-@ headed teenager with an oil rag and hoop earrings " . 
 In Tony Johnston 's 2005 book , Neighbours : 20 Years of Ramsay Street , Charlene placed sixth in the twenty classic characters chapter . Johnston said Charlene and her mother represented " the old and the new " , that her career choice was unusual and her " razor @-@ sharp tongue " put the fear into all the men who lusted after her . Johnston added that the younger female viewers admired Charlene , while the boys loved her feisty nature . In her book Soap Opera , Dorothy Hobson believed Charlene broke stereotypes , especially when it came to careers for women in the 1980s . She wrote , " The sight of one of the most attractive female characters , dressed in overalls , with her cascading blonde curls tied up on top of her head , was one of the most positive images for breaking the stereotypes of what jobs are suitable for girls . " Hobson also praised Charlene 's on @-@ screen relationship with Scott branding the positive images for young people as " immense " . The BBC News noted that Charlene became one of Neighbours ' most popular characters . 
 Hilary Kingsley , author of Soap Box , dubbed Charlene " soap 's teen queen " and the " darling of the show " . Kingsley also said the character was an inspiration to girls all over the country with mother problems , calling Charlene and Madge " a marvellous double act " . Sky included Charlene in their feature on the twenty @-@ five most memorable Neighbours characters . They stated , 
 Charlene was only in the show for two years , but she remains one of the iconic characters because ( a ) she 's Kylie Blooming Minogue , and ( b ) she married Jason ' Scott Robinson ' Donovan . Charlene 's name has become the by @-@ word for girl @-@ next @-@ door characters in Soapland , thanks to her tireless efforts to promote the cause of denim dungarees while working as a mechanic , and as a crucial member of the most successful set of teens that Ramsay Street has seen . 
 In October 2006 , Minogue and Donovan , as Charlene and Scott , were included on a postage stamp issued by the Australia Post to celebrate 50 years of television . The Holy Trinity Church experienced an increase in interest after Scott and Charlene 's wedding aired . Backpackers visit the nave where the couple were wed , while some viewers have held their own weddings there . Charlene 's wedding dress was donated to the Tasmanian Museum and Art Gallery by Grundy Television in 1989 . It has since gone on display in the Powerhouse Museum and travelled to the UK . In 2013 , The Daily Telegraph included Scott and Charlene in their list of the " 20 best TV couples " . They called them " a supercouple " and " a bit of a Romeo and Juliet " pairing . 
 = General Aircraft Hotspur = 
 The General Aircraft GAL.48 Hotspur was a military glider designed and built by the British company General Aircraft Ltd during World War II . When the British airborne establishment was formed in 1940 by order of Prime Minister Winston Churchill , it was decided that gliders would be used to transport airborne troops into battle . General Aircraft Ltd were given a contract by the Ministry of Aircraft Production in June 1940 to design and produce an initial glider for use by the airborne establishment , which resulted in the Hotspur . 
 Conceived as an " assault " glider which necessitated a compact design and no more than eight troops carried , tactical philosophy soon favoured larger numbers of troops being sent into battle aboard gliders . Due to this , the Hotspur was mainly relegated to training where it did excel and it became the basic trainer for the glider schools that were formed . 
 The Hotspur was named after Sir Henry Percy , a significant captain during the Anglo @-@ Scottish wars who was also known as " Hotspur " . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Operational requirements = = = 
 The German military had pioneered using airborne formations , conducting several successful airborne operations during the Battle of France in 1940 , including the Battle of Fort Eben @-@ Emael . Impressed by the success of German airborne operations , the Allied governments decided to form their own airborne formations . This decision would eventually lead to the creation of two British airborne divisions , as well as a number of smaller units . The British airborne establishment began development on 22 June 1940 , when the Prime Minister , Winston Churchill , directed the War Office in a memorandum to investigate the possibility of creating a corps of 5 @,@ 000 parachute troops . When the equipment to be used by the airborne forces was under development , War Office officials decided that gliders would be an integral component , to transport troops and heavy equipment . 
 On 21 June 1940 the Central Landing Establishment was formed at Ringway airfield near Manchester ; although tasked primarily with training parachute troops , it was also directed to investigate using gliders to transport troops into battle . It had been decided that the Royal Air Force and the Army would cooperate in forming the airborne establishment , and as such Squadron Leader L.A. Strange and Major J.F. Rock were tasked with gathering potential glider pilots and forming a glider unit ; this was achieved by searching for members of the armed forces who had pre @-@ war experience of flying gliders , or were interested in learning to do so . The two officers and their newly formed unit were provided with four obsolete Armstrong Whitworth Whitley bombers and a small number of Tiger Moth and Avro 504 biplanes for towing purposes . 
 As this unit was in the process of being formed , in June the Ministry of Aircraft Production contracted General Aircraft Ltd to design and produce an initial glider type for use by the airborne establishment . It would be used for both assault and training purposes , and would be capable of transporting eight airborne troops . The glider had to be capable of a long approach during landing , due to the prevailing belief at the time that gliders would have to be released a considerable distance from the target and glide in to ensure the sound of the towing aircraft did not alert the enemy . It therefore had to be aerodynamically stable , but also cheap and easy to construct as it would only be used once . The Hotspur was intended to have an operational range of 100 miles ( 160 km ) when released at high altitude , although in practice this was reduced to 80 miles ( 130 km ) when released from a height of 20 @,@ 000 feet ( 6 @,@ 100 m ) . 
 = = Design = = 
 The GAL.48 was primarily designed by F.F. <unk> ( team leader ) to the Air Ministry specification <unk> / 40 , and was to be similar in design to the German DFS 230 assault glider which had been used in the Battle of the Netherlands . The first prototype of the glider , designated GAL.48 and which would receive the service name Hotspur Mk I , flew in November , only four months after General Aircraft Ltd had been given the requirement for the glider . An initial order of 400 Hotspurs was placed with General Aircraft Ltd in September by the Ministry of Aircraft Production , nearly two months before the prototype first flew . 
 The Hotspur Mark I was constructed from wood and was designed to accommodate eight fully armed airborne troops . Its wingspan was 62 feet ( 18 @.@ 90 m ) and it was 39 feet 3 @.@ 5 inches ( 11 @.@ 98 m ) in length . With a full load ( approximately 1 @,@ 880 pounds ( 850 kg ) ) , it weighed approximately 3 @,@ 600 pounds ( 1 @,@ 600 kg ) . The Mk I was distinguished from its other variants by the addition of cabin portholes along its fuselage , and hooks on the nose and tail to allow multiple Hotspurs to be towed together . The two pilots , and later the pilot and instructor when the Hotspurs were used as training gliders , sat in tandem in the cockpit . It had a jettisonable undercarriage , and its unusual fuselage functioned like a lid ; once the Hotspur had landed , the troops inside would throw off the top half of the fuselage and then climb out of the lower half , much like leaving a small boat . A total of 18 Hotspur Mk Is were produced , 10 by <unk> and eight by Slingsby Aircraft . 
 The first operational Hotspur arrived at the Central Landing Establishment between February and April 1941 , with 15 being delivered by 22 August . Towing trials began in February 1941 with a Boulton & Paul Overstrand bomber . 
 = = = Further development = = = 
 Even as the initial 400 gliders were being produced , several problems with the Hotspur 's design were uncovered , the primary one being that the glider did not carry sufficient troops . Although it had been designed to transport eight airborne troops and a cargo of 1 @,@ 880 pounds ( 850 kg ) , this was found to be inadequate . Tactically it was believed that airborne troops should be landed in groups far larger than eight , and the number of aircraft therefore required to tow the gliders needed to land larger groups would be unfeasible ; there were also concerns that the gliders would have to be towed in tandem if used operationally , which would be extremely difficult during nighttime and through cloud formations . Its disappointing glide ratio was also a contributing factor to reevaluate the assault glider concept . 
 Due to the limitations inherent in the Hotspur design , the decision was made to continue with the development of several other types of gliders , including a 15 @-@ seater which would become the Airspeed Horsa and a tank @-@ carrying glider , which would become the General Aircraft Hamilcar . The Hotspur remained in production primarily as a training aircraft and as a " stop @-@ gap " in case the other programmes failed . 
 Three variants on the original Hotspur Mk I were created . The first was the heavily modified Mk II ( Specification <unk> / 40 and <unk> / 40 ) , which was redesigned partially to address changes in operational requirements and also to bolster the ground handling of the initial series of aircraft . In operations , rather than releasing the glider from a long distance away and allowing it to glide gently to the ground , it was decided that the towing aircraft would approach the landing zone and only then release the glider , requiring a more robust glider . The Hotspur Mk I wings had also shown considerable flex and the type had proved difficult to handle on the ground . In order to reduce stresses on the airframe , the fuselage was strengthened and wings were " shortened " by over eight ft each , resulting in a wingspan of 45 feet 10 @.@ 75 inches ( 13 @.@ 99 m ) with the tips made square @-@ cut and ailerons moved from the end of the wings to an inset position . 
 While maintaining its original all @-@ wood construction and overall fuselage and empennage dimensions , the Mk II incorporated a modified fuselage which included altering the cockpit enclosure and a " deeper " canopy . Instead of using the " lid " ( where the two pilots still boarded via the hinged Plexiglass canopy ) , two side doors were added from which troops would enter and depart . The seating was re @-@ arranged , and a braking parachute added to the rear . Its other dimensions remained the same , however , with a length of 39 feet 3 @.@ 5 inches ( 11 @.@ 98 m ) and a gross weight of approximately 3 @,@ 600 pounds ( 1 @,@ 600 kg ) , with eight airborne troops and some 1 @,@ 880 pounds ( 850 kg ) of equipment . 
 A total of 50 of the early @-@ production Mk IIs were modified into trainers as the Mark III , by adding dual controls and instruments for the student pilot and an externally braced tailplane . 
 The third variant of the Hotspur was the <unk> " Twin Hotspur " , which did not progress past the prototype phase . The Twin Hotspur was a 1942 attempt to create a glider capable of carrying 15 airborne troops as an interim glider until production of the Horsa reached sufficient levels . It was created by connecting two Hotspur fuselages together , using a constant @-@ chord centre wing section of 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 66 m ) length , and a constant @-@ chord tailplane . Two pilots sat tandem @-@ style in the port fuselage . In August 1942 , the sole " Twin Hotspur " prototype ( <unk> ) underwent testing , towed behind an Armstrong Whitworth Whitley tug . The project was abandoned before production could begin , primarily because the glider 's flight characteristics were criticised by its pilots . 
 = = = Production = = = 
 When Hotspur production ended in early 1943 , a total of 1 @,@ 015 gliders had been produced . The primary sub @-@ contractor , Harris <unk> was responsible for 996 Mk IIs and Mk IIIs while the parent company produced only 10 Mk Is and a single Mk II prototype . Slingsby was the only other sub @-@ contractor involved in production with eight Mk Is completed . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 Due to changing operational requirements , no Hotspurs were used in combat operations , and were instead exclusively used for training purposes ; it was the glider in which all pilots belonging to the Glider Pilot Regiment received their initial instruction . Although relatively heavy with a high sink rate , the Hotspur exhibited good flying characteristics and could even be flown <unk> , allowing novice pilots to quickly gain proficiency . The first glider pilots were curiously named " glider coxswains " . 
 Glider pilots first trained at an Elementary Flying Training School on de Havilland Tiger Moths or Miles <unk> before converting to glider training . At the Glider Schools , a Hotspur MK III was first employed for dual instruction with the rear seats weighted for ballast and only the instructor and student aboard . The gliders were usually towed by Hawker Hector or Hawker Audax biplanes ( later Miles Master and Westland Lysander " tugs " ) during training . Some 8 to 11 dual @-@ instruction flights usually preceded the student 's first solo flight . At Operational Training Glider Schools , the flights were made with troops instead of ballast in Hotspur MK IIs . Release at high altitudes and night @-@ flying was also part of the training . 
 A total of 250 Hotspurs were retained for operational use if they were required , but the rest were used as training gliders . In 1942 , 22 Hotspur Mk IIs were sent to Canada , eventually six were redeployed to the United States Navy and one to the United States Army Air Forces . 
 In the build @-@ up to Operation Overlord in early 1944 , a scheme was considered in which Hotspurs would have been used to transport cargo and equipment . A Canadian fighter squadron - 401 Squadron - was selected for trials , the intention was to enable faster redeployment of fighter squadrons by using gliders to carry spare pilots , ground crew and essential supplies . The squadron operated the Supermarine Spitfire IX , some of which were modified to tow gliders by means of a tow @-@ point attached to the tail wheel ; some pilots were trained to fly the Hotspur , including fighter ace Don C. <unk> . The Spitfires were found to be reasonably effective as glider tugs , although their engines were prone to overheating because the glider 's maximum tow speed was 160 miles per hour ( 260 km / h ) , comparatively slow for a Spitfire . Despite this , the scheme was judged to be practical , although it never saw operational use . 
 At war 's end , the type was retired and relatively few Hotspurs were preserved for display . 
 = = Variants = = 
 Hotspur Mk I 
 Single prototype , production run of 18 aircraft 
 Hotspur Mk II 
 Production series , modified with reduced wingspan , inset ailerons , new seating arrangement , deeper cockpit canopy , side doors , braking parachute ; fuselage strengthened 
 Hotspur Mk III 
 Production series , dual controls and instruments , external tailplane bracing 
 Twin Hotspur 
 Two standard Hotspur fuselages and outer wing panels joined together with common centre section and tailplane ; single prototype made . This variant did not enter series production . 
 = = Operators = = 
 United Kingdom 
 British Army 
 Royal Air Force 
 Canada 
 Royal Canadian Air Force 
 United States 
 United States Army Air Forces 
 United States Navy 
 = = Survivors = = 
 A Hotspur Mark II ( <unk> ) replica is on display at the Museum of Army Flying in Hampshire , England . The front fuselage of a Hotspur was preserved at the Parachute Regiment And Airborne Forces Museum in Aldershot prior to the museum 's 2007 closing , in anticipation of a move to the Imperial War Museum Duxford . 
 = = Specifications ( Hotspur Mk II ) = = 
 Data from The Encyclopedia of Weapons of World War II 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : 2 
 Capacity : 8 troops 
 Length : 39 ft ( 11 @.@ 89 m ) 
 Wingspan : 45 ft 10 ¾ in ( 13 @.@ 99 m ) 
 Height : 10 ft ( 3 @.@ 05 m ) 
 Wing area : 272 ft ² ( 25 @.@ 3 m ² ) 
 Empty weight : 1 @,@ 661 lb ( 753 kg ) 
 Max. takeoff weight : 3 @,@ 598 lb ( 1 @,@ 632 kg ) 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : 90 mph ( 145 km / h ) 
 Landing speed : 56 mph ( 90 km / h ) 
 Range : 83 miles from a 20 @,@ 000 ft release ( 134 km from a 6 @,@ 100 m release ) 
 Wing loading : 13 @.@ 23 lb / ft ² ( 64 @.@ 6 kg / m ² ) 
 = De Akkermolen = 
 De Akkermolen ( Dutch pronunciation : [ də <unk> ] ; English : The Field Mill ) is a 17th @-@ century windmill in Zundert , Netherlands . Built around 1605 to replace an earlier windmill , it was used as a gristmill until it was severely damaged in 1950 . The mill was bought by the local government and restored in 1961 , and it was listed as a national heritage site in 1974 . 
 = = History = = 
 An earlier windmill had existed on the same location and was mentioned in 1557 as " the mill in the <unk> Field " ( de <unk> in de <unk> <unk> ) , and this earlier windmill was in its turn a replacement of a nearby watermill , De <unk> , which was mentioned in 1438 . The earlier windmill was destroyed in 1584 by Spanish troops and the building of a new mill took several years . The new windmill was first mentioned in 1605 . 
 The mill was owned by the margrave of Bergen op Zoom and was a <unk> ( nl ) , meaning peasants in the locality were obligated to use this mill to grind their wheat . In 1794 it became property of William V , Prince of Orange and baron of Breda . <unk> were taken out of common law during the French revolution , meaning that people could choose where they wanted to grind their wheat , and in 1830 the mill became private property . The mill was in constant use as a gristmill until the wooden <unk> broke in 1950 , which caused the sails to crash into the ground , making the future of the mill uncertain . The mill was bought in 1959 by the municipal government of Zundert and restored in 1961 . It ceased to be an active gristmill , but was in functioning order . The mill needed another restoration in 1991 when it was taken apart and rebuilt . 
 = = Description = = 
 De Akkermolen was built as an open trestle post mill , meaning that the whole body of the mill that houses the machinery is mounted on an uncovered single vertical post or trestle , around which it can be rotated to bring the sails into the wind . The mill is made out of painted wood , the body is partially covered in tar and it has a roof of bituminous waterproofing . The mill has four common sails of 23 @.@ 00 metres ( 75 ft 6 in ) span , that drive a wheel of 71 cogs , driving the lantern pinion stone nut , which has 15 staves . The stone nut drives a pair of Cullen millstones from Mayen ( " Cullen " for " Cologne " , where such millstones were marketed from ) , 17 hands in diameter or 1 @.@ 50 metres ( 4 ft 11 in ) . 
 Inside the mill inscriptions can be found by the miller and his assistants from 1804 . 
 The mill was listed as a national heritage site ( nr <unk> ) on 11 July 1974 . It is open to the public on the first Saturday of the month or by appointment . 
 = <unk> Siddiqui = 
 <unk> Siddiqui ( Urdu : <unk> <unk> <unk> [ <unk> <unk> ̪ d ̪ <unk> ] ; 19 October 1897 – 14 April 1994 ) , HI , MBE , SI , DPhil , <unk> , FRS , was a Pakistani organic chemist , versatile scholar , and a leading scientist in the natural product chemistry . He is credited for pioneering the isolation of unique chemical compounds from the Neem ( Azadirachta indica ) , Rauwolfia , and various other flora . As the founder director of <unk> Research Institute of Chemistry , he revolutionised the research on pharmacology of various domestic plants found in South Asia to extract novel chemical substances of medicinal importance . 
 In addition to his scientific talents , Siddiqui was also an avid painter , a poet , and a great connoisseur of Western music . His paintings were exhibited in the United States , Germany , India , and Pakistan . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Harris was born in <unk> ( Barabanki District ) near Lucknow on 19 October 1897 . He received his early education from Lucknow , both in the Urdu and Persian languages , and soon developed interest in literature , poetry , and calligraphy from his father Sheikh Muhammad Zaman . He graduated in Philosophy and Persian language , from <unk> Anglo @-@ Oriental College ( that would later become Aligarh Muslim University ) in 1919 . 
 In 1920 , Siddiqui proceeded to University College London to study medicine . However , after one year of pre @-@ medical studies , he moved to Frankfurt University in 1921 to study chemistry . In 1924 , he married his German classmate , Ethel Wilhelmina <unk> . He received Doctor of Philosophy under the supervision of Prof Julius Von Bram in 1927 . 
 On his return , he established the Ayurvedic and Unani <unk> Research Institute at the <unk> College Delhi , under the guidance of Hakim Ajmal Khan . He was appointed its first Director . However , soon after the death of Hakim Ajmal Khan , Siddiqui left the post . In 1940 , he joined Indian Council for Scientific and Industrial Research where he worked until 1951 when he migrated to Pakistan on the request of Prime Minister Liaquat Ali Khan . 
 = = Pioneering research = = 
 Siddiqui 's first breakthrough in research came when he successfully isolated an antiarrhythmic agent in 1931 from the roots of Rauwolfia serpentina . He named the newly discovered chemical compound as <unk> , after his mentor Hakim Ajmal Khan who was one of the illustrious practitioners of Unani system of medicine in South Asia . Later on , Siddiqui also extracted other alkaloids from Rauwolfia serpentina that included <unk> , <unk> ( <unk> ) , <unk> , <unk> , Serpentine and <unk> . Many of these are still used worldwide for treatment of mental disorders and cardiovascular ailments , especially as antiarrhythmic agents in Brugada syndrome . 
 = = = Discoveries from Neem = = = 
 Siddiqui was the first scientist to bring the <unk> , antifungal , antibacterial , and antiviral constituents of the Neem tree to the attention of natural products chemists . In 1942 , he extracted three bitter compounds from neem oil , which he named as <unk> , <unk> , and nimbidin respectively . The process involved extracting the water @-@ insoluble components with ether , petrol ether , ethyl acetate and dilute alcohol . The provisional naming was <unk> ( sulphur @-@ free crystalline product with melting point at 205 ° C , empirical composition <unk> ) , <unk> ( with similar principle , melting at 192 ° C ) , and nimbidin ( cream @-@ coloured containing amorphous sulphur , melting at 90 – 100 ° C ) . Siddiqui identified nimbidin as the main active antibacterial ingredient , and the highest yielding bitter component in the neem oil . These compounds are stable and found in substantial quantities in the Neem . They also serve as natural insecticides . 
 In acknowledgement of these revolutionary discoveries , he was awarded the Order of the British Empire in 1946 . 
 In his later career , Siddiqui continued to discover and isolate numerous unique anti @-@ bacterial compounds from various parts ( leaves , bark , etc . ) of the Neem and other plants . He had more than 50 chemical compounds patented in his name in addition to those discovered as a result of his joint research with other colleagues and students . Most of these discoveries still remain vital natural ingredients of various medicines as well as biopesticides . 
 = = Research leadership = = 
 Siddiqui migrated to Pakistan in 1951 , four years after the emergence of Pakistan in 1947 , after being offered and appointed as " science advisor " to the government by Prime minister Liaquat Ali Khan . He was appointed as Director of the Pakistan Department of Research that was reformulated in 1953 as Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research ( PCSIR ) . The aim of PCSIR was to support the industrial infrastructure through research and development . The regional laboratories of the institution were located in Dhaka , Rajshahi and Chittagong ( East Pakistan ) , and in Lahore and Peshawar ( West Pakistan ) . In 1953 , he founded the Pakistan Academy of Sciences as a non @-@ political think tank of distinguished scientists in the country . In 1956 , when Government of Pakistan established Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission ( <unk> ) as an atomic research agency , Siddiqui was designated as its technical member . 
 In recognition of his scientific leadership , Frankfurt University granted him the degree of <unk> Honoris causa in 1958 . Also in 1958 , the Government of Pakistan awarded him with Tamgha @-@ e @-@ Pakistan . In 1960 , he became the President of Pan @-@ Indian Ocean Science Association . The same year , he was elected Fellow of the Royal Society . In 1962 , he was awarded the Sitara @-@ e @-@ Imtiaz for distinguished merit in the fields of science and medicine . Siddiqui remained the director and chairman of PCSIR until the time of his retirement in 1966 . In that year , the President of Pakistan awarded him the Pride of Performance Medal for the respectable completion of his service . In 1967 , Siddiqui was invited by University of Karachi to set up a Postgraduate Institute of Chemistry in affiliation with the Department of Chemistry . He was designated as the institute 's Founder Director , whereas the additional research staff was provided by PCSIR . 
