 In 1976 , the institute was offered a generous donation from Hussain Jamal Foundation , as a Harris <unk> Ebrahim Jamal Research Institute of Chemistry . In due time , Siddiqui transformed the institute into a distinguished centre of international excellence in the field of chemistry and natural products . In March 1975 , he headed the National Commission for Indigenous Medicines His tireless efforts for the promotion of science and technology earned him Hilal @-@ e @-@ Imtiaz by the Government of Pakistan in 1980 . In 1983 , he played a major role in the establishment of the Third World Academy of Sciences and became its Founding Fellow . He remained the director of the Hussain Ebrahim Jamal Research Institute of Chemistry until 1990 . Later on , he continued research in his personal laboratory . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Siddiqui died on 14 April 1994 due to cardiac arrest after a brief illness in Karachi . He was buried in the Karachi University Graveyard . Despite his death , the academic and research institutes that he founded during more than 65 years of his research career are still contributing to the international level research in natural products chemistry . 
 As a person of multiple talents , Siddiqui was also a refined poet , musician , and a painter . In August 1924 , he held his first international exhibition of paintings in Frankfurt . Later in 1927 , his works of art were exhibited at the <unk> Gallery , Frankfurt . During his stay in Germany , he also translated Rainer Maria Rilke 's poetry into Urdu , which was published in the journal of Jamia Millia Islamia . Though , his passion for arts was superseded by the enthusiasm in scientific research , he continued to patronise arts and culture . In 1966 , he was at the forefront for setting up the Central Institute of Arts and Crafts in Karachi . He also compiled a selection of poetry of Mir Taqi Mir into <unk> @-@ e @-@ Meer . In 1983 , he published a portfolio collection of charcoal drawings from 1920 to 1950s . 
 On 14 April 1999 , the Pakistan Post , as part of its ' Scientists of Pakistan ' series , issued a commemorative stamp to honour the contributions and services of Siddiqui . In the same year , the street leading to PCSIR Laboratories Complex in Karachi was named as <unk> @-@ e @-@ Dr. Salim @-@ uz @-@ Zaman Siddiqui . Siddiqui was also remembered by his students and colleagues , many of whom continued to dedicate their international research and publications to his memory . In 2002 , a research article was published in the journal Tetrahedron in which , authors <unk> and Naz dedicated their break @-@ through research to the memory of Siddiqui , their mentor . 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 Siddiqui was a founder @-@ member of the Indian and Pakistan Academies of Sciences , and later a founder member of the international body the Third World Academy of Sciences . The following are the honours he received , in reverse chronological order : 
 Gold medal of the Soviet Academy of Sciences 
 Hilal @-@ e @-@ Imtiaz , 1980 
 President of Pakistan 's Pride of Performance Medal , 1966 
 Sitara @-@ e @-@ Imtiaz , 1962 
 Fellow of the Royal Society , 1961 
 President , Pan @-@ Indian Ocean Science Association , 1960 
 Tamgha @-@ e @-@ Pakistan , 1958 
 D. Med . Honoris causa from the Frankfurt University , 1958 
 Foundation Fellow , Pakistan Academy of Sciences , 1953 
 MBE in 1946 . 
 = Doni Tondo = 
 The Doni Tondo or Doni Madonna , sometimes called The Holy Family , is the only finished panel painting by the mature Michelangelo to survive . Now in the Uffizi in Florence , Italy , and still in its original frame , the painting was probably commissioned by Agnolo Doni to commemorate his marriage to Maddalena Strozzi , the daughter of a powerful Tuscan family . The painting is in the form of a tondo , or round frame , which is frequently associated during the Renaissance with domestic ideas . 
 The work was most likely created during the period after the Doni 's marriage in 1503 or 1504 , as well as after the excavation of the Laocoön about 1506 , yet before the Sistine Chapel ceiling frescoes were begun in 1508 , dating the painting to approximately late 1506 or 1507 . The Doni Tondo features the Christian Holy family ( the child Jesus , Mary , and Saint Joseph ) along with John the Baptist in the foreground and contains five ambiguous nude male figures in the background . The inclusion of these nude figures has been interpreted in a variety of ways . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Virgin Mary is the most prominent figure in the composition , taking up much of the center of the image . Mary sits directly on the ground without a cushion between herself and the ground , to better communicate the theme of her relationship to the earth . The grass directly below the figure is green , which sharply contrasts to the <unk> ground surrounding her , although the green is now darker and less visible than it was originally . Saint Joseph has a higher position in the image compared to Mary , perhaps as the head of the family , although this is an unusual feature in compositions of the Holy Family . Mary is located between his legs , as if he is protecting her . There is some debate as to whether Mary is receiving the Christ child from Joseph or vice versa . Saint John the Baptist , the patron saint of Florence , is very commonly included in Florentine works depicting the Madonna and Child . He is in the middle @-@ ground of the painting , between the Holy Family and the background . The elements around the family include plants and perhaps water . 
 The painting is still in its original frame , one that Michelangelo might have influenced or helped design . The frame is ornately carved and rather unusual for the five heads it contains which protrude three @-@ dimensionally into space . Similar to the nudes of the background , the meanings of these heads has been subject to speculation . The frame also contains carvings of crescent moons , stars , vegetation , and lions ’ heads . These symbols are , perhaps , references to the Doni and Strozzi families , taken from each one ’ s coat of arms . As depicted on the frame , “ the moons are bound together with ribbons that interlock with the lions , ” possibly referencing the marriage of the two families . 
 There is a horizontal band separating the foreground and background , whose function is to separate the Holy Family from the background figures and St. John the Baptist . The background figures are five nudes , whose meaning and function are subject to much speculation and debate . The Holy Family is much larger in size than the nudes in the background , and there appears to be water in between the land where the Holy Family and the nudes are situated . The Holy Family all gaze at Christ , but none of the nudes look directly at him . The far background contains a landscape . 
 = = Technique = = 
 The Doni Tondo is believed to be the only existing panel picture Michelangelo painted without the aid of assistants ; and , unlike his Manchester Madonna and Entombment ( both National Gallery , London ) , the attribution to him has never been questioned . The juxtaposition of bright colors foreshadows the same use of color in Michelangelo ’ s later Sistine ceiling frescoes . The folds of the drapery are sharply modeled , and the skin of the figures is so smooth , it looks as if the medium is marble . The surface treatment of the massive figures resembles a sculpture more than a painting . The nude figures in the background have softer modeling and look to be precursors to the <unk> , the male nude figures in the Sistine Ceiling frescoes . Michelangelo ’ s technique includes shading from the most intense colors first to the lighter shades on top , using the darker colors as shadows , a technique called <unk> . By applying the pigment in a certain way , Michelangelo created an " unfocused " effect in the background and focused detail in the foreground . The most vibrant color is located within the Virgin ’ s garments , signifying her importance within the image . X @-@ rays of the painting show that Michelangelo incorporated every known pigment used at the time . The masculinity of Mary could be explained by Michelangelo ’ s use of male models for female figures , as was done for the Sistine Chapel . 
 Michelangelo used a limited palette of pigments comprising lead white , azurite , verdigris and few others . He avoided ochres and used very little vermilion . 
 = = Influences = = 
 The composition is , most likely , partially influenced by the cartoon ( term referring to a two @-@ dimensional preliminary drawing ) for Leonardo da Vinci ’ s The Virgin and Child with St. Anne . Like this earlier ' cartoon ' , Michelangelo ’ s figures seem to be compacted into very little pictorial space and a similar bilaterally symmetrical triangular composition is employed . Michelangelo saw the drawing in 1501 while in Florence working on the David . 
 The Doni Tondo is also associated with Luca Signorelli ’ s Medici Madonna in the Uffizi . Michelangelo probably knew of the work and its ideas , and he wanted to incorporate those ideas into his own work . Signorelli ’ s Madonna similarly uses a tondo form , depicts nude male figures in the background , and displays the Virgin sitting directly on the earth . 
 Three aspects of the painting can be attributed to an antique sardonyx cameo and a 15th @-@ century relief from the circle of Donatello , available to Michelangelo in the Palazzo Medici : the circular form , the masculinity of Mary , and the positioning of the Christ Child . The Virgin ’ s right arm mirrors the arm of the satyr in the cameo , and the cameo also depicts an infant located on the shoulders of the satyr , a position similar to the Christ Child on Mary ’ s shoulders . 
 Additionally , some scholars suggest that Michelangelo was inspired by the famous Greco @-@ Roman group of Laocoön and His Sons , excavated in 1506 , which Michelangelo would have seen . The body positioning and muscular <unk> of the nude figures in the background of the Doni Tondo resemble the twisting contortions of the figures captured by the serpent in the Laocoön . 
 Furthermore , the inclusion of the five protruding heads in the paintings frame is often seen as referencing a similar motif found on Ghiberti 's Porta del Paradiso , the bronze doors of the Florence baptistry which Michelangelo was known to greatly admire . 
 = = Plant symbolism = = 
 The plant in front of John the Baptist has aspects of both hyssop and cornflower , yet is most likely a hyssop because it grows from a wall . <unk> is an attribute of Christ and symbolizes Heaven while hyssop symbolizes both the humility of Christ and baptism . There is a citron tree in the background , which represents the Cedar of Lebanon . Michelangelo uses the hyssop and tree as a visual representation of a quote by <unk> <unk> , " From the Cedar of Lebanon to the hyssop which grows on a stony wall we have an explanation of the Divinity which Christ has in his Father and of the humanity that he derives from the Virgin Mary . " The clover in the foreground represents the Trinity and salvation . The anemone plant represents the Trinity and the Passion of Christ . 
 = = Scholarly theories = = 
 There are a multitude of interpretations for the various parts of the work . Most interpretations differ in defining the relationship between the Holy Family and the figures in the background . 
 Paul Barolsky argues that the Doni Tondo is a " devotional image [ … ] more than an example of style , symbolism , [ or ] iconography " . Barolsky bases much of his thesis on the language used by Giorgio Vasari in his work Lives of the Most Excellent Italian Painters , Sculptors , and Architects , from Cimabue to Our Times . His support for the idea of devotion comes from Christ being presented in the painting like a gift , which he links to the painting ’ s patron due to a perceived pun on the Italian word for " gift , " " <unk> , " and the patron ’ s name , Doni . Furthering the Christ @-@ as @-@ gift metaphor , Mary ’ s holding of Christ in the painting is seen to reference the elevating of the host during mass . 
 Mirella D ’ Ancona argues that the image reflects Michelangelo ’ s views on the roles of the members of the Holy Family in human salvation and the soul ’ s immortality . The Virgin ’ s placement and emphasis is due to her role in human salvation . She is both the mother of Christ and the best intercessor for appealing to him . Michelangelo , who had been strongly influenced by the Dominican Fra Girolamo Savonarola in Florence , is using the picture to defend the <unk> point of view , a philosophy of the Dominican order rejecting the idea of the Immaculate Conception of Mary . The <unk> view is that the Virgin did not receive her sanctification at birth but at the moment of the incarnation of Christ ; thus , the image depicts the moment of Mary ’ s sanctification by showing the Christ Child blessing her . Michelangelo depicts Christ as if he is growing out of Mary ’ s shoulder to take human form , one leg hanging limply and the other not visible at all , therefore making him a part of Mary . Moreover , his muscles and balance convey an upward movement , as if he is growing out of her , although he is above Mary , asserting his superiority to her . Furthermore , she argues that the nudes are to be interpreted as sinners who have removed their clothes for cleansing and purification through baptism . The water , which separates the sinners from the Holy Family , just beyond the horizontal band in the middle of the painting , can therefore be seen as the “ waters of separation ” mentioned in the Bible . She also argues that the five figures may represent the five parts of the soul : the higher soul ( soul and intellect ) on the left and the lower soul ( imagination , sensation , and nourishing faculty ) on the right , a visual depiction of the views of <unk> Ficino , whom Michelangelo references in other works . Additionally , in looking at them as separate groupings , she suggest that the two figures on Mary ’ s right represents the human and divine natures of Christ , while the three on her left represent the Trinity . 
 Andrée Hayum argues that the commissioning of the tondo by the Doni family helped to emphasize the " secular and domestic ideals " of the painting rather than seeing it as a " devotional object . " In choosing a tondo as the format for the picture , Michelangelo is referencing the form ’ s long association with depicting the " Adoration of the Magi , the Nativity , [ and ] the Madonna and Child . " Hayum also finds many allusions to Noah throughout the work . She posits a referencing of the Madonna to Noah ’ s daughter @-@ in @-@ law , a sibyl , which thus makes Joseph an embodiment of Noah himself . Hayum further supports this by acknowledging the direct link between Joseph and Noah as depicted in Michelangelo ’ s Sistine Ceiling paintings . This link to Noah also gives an explanation to the nudes in the background , whose forms may have inspired the sons in the Drunkenness of Noah . The allusion to the Noah story also brings up themes of baptismal water , thus giving rise to an interpretation of the nudes similar to D ’ Ancona ’ s : " catechumens awaiting baptism " from John the Baptist , whose " isolation within a pit @-@ like space " indicates his special role as <unk> . 
 Roberta Olson states that the painting depicts the " importance of the family " and is related to " Doni ’ s hoped @-@ for descendants . " One of the ways in which the painting depicts a " good marriage " is by the seemingly " reciprocal action " of the handling of Jesus between Joseph and Mary . Much importance is given to Joseph by way of the colors of his clothes : yellow , indicating the divine aspect of the family as well as " truth , " and purple , standing for royal lineage tracing from the House of David . Additionally , Joseph is important to the painting by referencing the middle name of the " Doni ’ s third child who lived beyond infancy . " Themes of baptism also are referenced by the influence of Ghiberti 's Porta del Paradiso on the paintings frame . Located on the doors of the Florentine Baptistry , these sculptural reliefs give reference to the rite of baptism , important for the Doni 's and their desire for a child as a product of the good marriage <unk> by the Holy Family , perhaps one reasoning behind the commissioning of the work . 
 = <unk> = 
 The Dole Gudbrandsdal , <unk> or Dole is a <unk> and harness @-@ type horse from Norway . The Dole Trotter is alternately considered a subtype of the Dole Gudbrandsdal and a separate breed ; it is also considered a part of the <unk> trotter type . The Dole Gudbrandsdal is a small draft horse , known for its pulling power and agility , while the Dole Trotter is a smaller , faster horse used for harness racing ; the two types are commonly interbred . Both types are strictly critiqued before entry into the studbook , which has over time resulted in an improvement in the breed type . The Dole is originally from the Gudbrandsdal Valley , and is probably descended in part from the Friesian horse . Over time the breed has had Thoroughbred , Arabian and other blood added in , especially during the creation of the Dole Trotter in the 19th century . The first studbook was created in 1941 , and the current breed association formed in 1947 . Although originally used mainly as a pack horse , today the heavier Dole type is used mainly for agricultural purposes . The Dole Gudbrandsdal been crossed with other breeds to develop horses for harness racing and riding . 
 = = Breed characteristics = = 
 The Dole horses generally stand 14 @.@ 1 to 15 @.@ 3 hands ( 57 to 63 inches , 145 to 160 cm ) hands high , weigh 1 @,@ 190 to 1 @,@ 390 pounds ( 540 to 630 kg ) , and are usually bay , brown or black , with gray , palomino , chestnut and dun occurring less frequently . White markings may occur on the head and legs , especially on the trotter type . The head is heavy with a straight profile , the neck rather short and muscular , the withers moderately pronounced and broad , the chest wide and deep , and the shoulder strong , muscular and sloping . The back is long and the croup broad , muscular and slightly sloping . The legs are short but sturdy and well @-@ muscled , with broad , solid joints and tough hooves . At one point in the breed 's history it was prone to weak legs and low fertility , but these problems have since been corrected . Dole horses closely resemble the British Fell and Dales ponies , which developed from the same ancestral stock . 
 When presented for grading and studbook inspection , the heavy @-@ type Dole Gudbrandsdals are tested for pulling power and trotting . In the lighter type , x @-@ rays showing the knee and lower legs to be free of defects must be presented , and stallions must have satisfactory results on the track before they may be used for breeding . However , three @-@ year @-@ old stallions may be issued temporary licenses before they begin their racing career if their conformation , breeding , and trotting ability are considered acceptable . Trotting @-@ type mares with proper conformation that are not fast enough during grading may be registered as draft @-@ type Doles . These strict and organized standards have improved the quality of the Dole breed over the past few decades . Although the Dole horse is one of the smallest draft breeds , it shows great pulling power , and is also hardy and agile . They are especially known for their excellent trots , as is shown by the lighter sub @-@ type of the breed . During the late 20th century , interbreeding between the two types became quite common ; due to this , the breed became much more uniform in type , with fewer differences between the trotter and draft sections . 
 = = Breed history = = 
 The Dole is thought to have originated in the Gudbrandsdal , an inland valley in the county of Oppland . It is likely that the Dole is in part a descendant of the Friesian , as the two breeds are similar in conformation , and the Frisian people were known traders in the area between 400 and 800 AD . There was also equine movement between western Norway and northern England during the 9th century through the mid @-@ 11th century ; this extended period of trade between these areas likely influenced the strong resemblance between the Dole , Friesian , Fell Pony and Dale Pony breeds . 
 Two stallions , named Odin and Mazarin , had a large influence on the development of the Dole breed . Odin ( son of Partisan ) , was a stallion of Thoroughbred ( some sources say Norfolk Trotter ) breeding , imported to Norway in 1834 . Odin was said to cost ₤ 257 at the time and to have been bred to over 100 mares in his first four years in Norway . All Dole Trotter horses today contain Odin bloodlines . Mazarin was an Arabian imported to Norway in 1934 . In 1849 , another influential stallion was foaled , named <unk> Balder 4 ; he was a grandson of Odin and is considered the foundation stallion of the heavier Dole type . A stallion named <unk> 825 was used by breeders to maintain and improve some horses of the heavier Dole type for draft uses . 
 In the 19th century , harness racing began to rise in popularity in Norway and breeders looked to create a horse suitable for that sport . The Dole Trotter , a smaller , lighter , faster variation of the draft @-@ type Dole Gudbrandsdal , was then developed . <unk> of Thoroughbred blood , as well as that of various trotting and heavy draft breeds , was used to create this new type . The Dole Trotter was especially influenced between 1840 and 1860 by two other stallions , <unk> and Dovre ( an Arabian ) ; the latter is the foundation stallion of the Dole Trotter type . The two types are commonly interbred , especially since 1960 . 
 In 1872 , the Dole Gudbrandsdal was split into two types - a class for heavier agriculture and driving horses and a class for lighter racing and riding horses . In 1875 , the Norwegian Trotting Association was formed by enthusiasts of the second type . In 1902 , the first Dole Gudbrandsdal stud book was published , containing stallions from both types born between 1846 and 1892 . In 1903 , the Norwegian Trotting Association split their registration between purebred Norwegian trotters and trotting crosses . At the same time , standards for entry were tightened and the first inspection committee was created . In 1965 , the Norwegian or Dole Trotter studbook was taken over by the Norwegian Trotting Association , as part of the new <unk> trotter program approved by the Norwegian Ministry for Agriculture . The Dole Trotter studbook is still coordinated with the original Dole Gudbrandsdal registry , and horses have to meet many of the same standards . The Dole Trotter is alternately considered a subtype of the Dole Gudbrandsdal and a separate breed . 
 Interest in the Dole Gudbrandsdal continued through World War II , and the horses were used heavily during Norway 's occupation by Germany . Breed numbers and interest diminished after the war as increasing mechanization reduced demand for draft animals ; however , a breeding center was established in 1962 to help maintain population numbers . In 1947 , the National <unk> Association was formed to promote and preserve the breed . As of 2002 , there are approximately 4 @,@ 000 registered Dole Gudbrandsdals , with around 175 new foals registered annually . 
 = = Uses = = 
 When originally developed , Dole Gudbrandsdals were used as pack horses on overland trade routes across Norway , the main one of which connected Oslo with the North Sea and ran through the Gudbrandsdal Valley . The Dole Gudbrandsdal is used mainly for heavy draft and agricultural work , as well as timber hauling , while the lighter Dole Trotter is used mainly for harness racing . The Dole Gudbrandsdal was an influential breed in the formation of the North Swedish Horse , and the two breeds are very similar in conformation . When the Dole and North Swedish breeds are crossed , they produce a lighter @-@ weight horse with more forward gaits that is often used for harness racing . The Dole Gudbrandsdal has also been crossed with Swedish Warmbloods to produce riding @-@ type horses , and it has been theorized that Dole / Thoroughbred crosses may produce nice hunter horses . 
 = What Is and What Should Never Be ( Supernatural ) = 
 " What Is and What Should Never Be " is the twentieth episode of the paranormal drama television series Supernatural 's second season . It was first broadcast on May 3 , 2007 on The CW . The narrative follows series protagonist Dean Winchester ( Jensen Ackles ) who finds himself in an alternate reality after a confrontation with a djinn [ sic ] . The creature appears to have fulfilled Dean 's greatest wish : that his mother had not been killed when he was a child . Dean is happy in the new world until it becomes apparent that his previous work as a hunter of supernatural creatures has been undone . At this point , he rejects the alternate reality , and attempts to find a method to bring himself back . 
 The episode was written by Raelle Tucker , and marked the directorial debut of series creator Eric Kripke . It featured the return of deceased characters Mary Winchester ( Samantha Smith ) and Jessica Moore ( Adrianne Palicki ) . Kripke enjoyed expanding upon the character of Mary , who was only briefly depicted in earlier episodes . The production schedule had to be altered to accommodate Palicki , who was simultaneously working on the TV series Friday Night Lights . 
 Despite obtaining low ratings , the episode acquired positive critical reviews that both praised Ackles ' performance and welcomed the return of Smith and Palicki to the series . Tucker also received a Constellation Award for her work on the episode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode begins in an abandoned warehouse , where Dean ( Ackles ) is attacked by the djinn that he is hunting . He suddenly finds himself in a world in which his mother ( Smith ) was not killed by the demon Azazel . He and his brother Sam ( Jared Padalecki ) were not raised to be hunters of supernatural creatures , but are no longer close , as Dean is irresponsible , disloyal , and drinks too much in this alternate reality ; when a confused Dean calls him for help , Sam thinks that he is drunk . In the new reality , Dean is dating the beautiful Carmen ( Michelle Borth ) , and Sam is at law school and engaged to Jessica ( Palicki ) — another victim of Azazel . Although Dean enjoys his new life , a ghostly young woman seems to be haunting him and he is confronted by an image of corpses in his closet . He realizes that all the people that he and Sam had saved as hunters are now dead , that he and Sam have a distant and somewhat adversarial relationship . After visiting the grave of his father John , who died the previous year of a stroke , Dean decides that he must give up his new @-@ found happiness to save them . 
 In need of something silver — a weakness of the djinn — Dean breaks into his mother 's house to steal a sterling silver knife . However , he is caught by Sam , who thinks he 's stealing from their mother . While Dean at first pretends that he needs the knife to repay a gambling debt , he eventually reveals the truth . Although Sam does not believe him , he accompanies his brother to the djinn 's warehouse lair . There Dean discovers that the young woman he has been having visions of is a victim of the djinn . It 's clear that she is alive but in an hallucinatory state — a way for the djinn to keep its victims <unk> while it feeds — Dean realizes that he , too , is within an illusory world . Knowing that a person wakes up if he or she dies in a dream , he decides to kill himself . Carmen , Jessica , and his mother appear and try to talk him out of it . Dean resists the urge to stay , and awakens in the real world after stabbing himself . Sam , who is already in the warehouse trying to rescue him , is attacked by the djinn , but Dean kills the creature . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Series creator Eric Kripke 's first experience as director was slated for the twentieth episode of the season , and Raelle Tucker was scheduled to pen it . Kripke wanted a script that was as " director @-@ proof as possible " , but that would " play with structure and really do something different " . He shot down every idea the writers pitched to him until Tucker suggested an alternate reality episode . Drawing inspiration from the Buffy the Vampire Slayer episode " Normal Again " , Kripke was excited by the concept . He felt Dean 's definitive moment was the death of his mother Mary , so the " diversion path " of the new reality would be based on the question , " What if mom never died ? " This change allows Sam and Dean to live normal lives , though at the cost of their relationship . The point of the false reality , in Kripke 's opinion , was to show that the brothers would not be close if they had not become hunters . The staff tried to persuade him to remove this aspect , but he thought it would be " lame " for Sam and Dean to have a " 7th Heaven relationship " . Once the story was fully developed , Tucker was given free rein over the script ; this surprised her because she expected Kripke to " be more of a backseat driver than he was " . 
 The opportunity to bring back the character of Mary Winchester excited Kripke . Though she is a driving force behind the brothers ' quest to kill the demon Azazel and is referenced numerous times throughout the first two seasons , her two appearances in the series were very brief . The episode allowed the character to be expanded upon , depicting her as a " really perfect and idyllic mother " . However , Kripke felt that Dean would realize something was amiss if he was granted a " perfect dream world " , so John Winchester , who died in the second season premiere , remained dead . 
 The final version of the episode differed from the original concept . It was initially intended for Dean to be a " huge loser " in his new life ; being a hunter is what gives him structure and purpose . Without hunting , he would be a jobless <unk> . Kripke compared the new reality to a Charles Bukowski novel , but noted that the selfless Dean still preferred the new universe , with Sam happy and living a good life . However , executive producer Robert Singer and others convinced him to change this , because they did not think Dean would be happy suddenly waking up in such a reality . Another variation stemmed from Dean 's lack of someone to confide in — normally Sam is his confidant . Because the writers found it difficult to communicate Dean 's feelings , early drafts of the script included a number of internal monologues . These were ultimately replaced by a scene in which he discusses the djinn with a professor . The studio wanted the scene of Dean and his girlfriend Carmen kissing on the sofa to include sex . However , Kripke could not work it into the script , because he found it unrealistic that she would deliberately be late for her job as a hospital nurse . 
 = = = Djinn = = = 
 The writers wanted to use a wish to create the new reality , and chose a genie to facilitate it . The Islamic djinn — the origins of genie folklore — became the episode 's monster , but featured the " bastardized western conception " of wish @-@ granting to fit the episode . To avoid the typical portrayal of genies in popular culture — such as those from Aladdin and I Dream of Jeannie — they chose to create a " logical twist on the lore " by making the creature vampiric . Tucker originally intended for the creature 's feeding method to be mystical — it would inhale its victim 's life essence from his or her mouth . However , Kripke preferred to style it more like a horror movie , and had the djinn feed from a shunt in its victim 's neck . 
 The creature 's appearance was inspired by an image of a woman with a henna @-@ tattooed back that Kripke found on the internet . He thought it would be intriguing to have the villain 's entire body tattooed . The actor who portrayed the djinn — Mackenzie Gray — had a shaved head , so special effects makeup artist Toby Lindala only used a minor prosthetic to cover Gray 's eyebrows . Lindala found the tattoos to be a " particular challenge " because they were " intricate designs " . The production schedule could not accommodate the six hours needed to apply the makeup each day , so the actor was booked with the condition that the make @-@ up not be removed for four days . Gray 's personal life was affected by this , as people on the street were scared by his appearance . Lindala was surprised that Gray was able to keep the tattoos undamaged outside of filming . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography for the episode took place in Vancouver , British Columbia . Kripke wanted Adrianne Palicki to reprise her role of Jessica Moore — Sam 's deceased girlfriend — but she was busy filming for the Texas @-@ based television series Friday Night Lights . Because Jessica was an integral aspect of the storyline , the production schedule was adjusted to accommodate the actress . The first five days of filming commenced for " What Is and What Should Never Be " , and production then shifted to " All Hell Breaks Loose , Part One " until Palicki became available for the final three days of filming . However , she was not present for filming of the episode 's climax . Instead , the actress filmed her part in front of a blue screen , and was later digitally added into the scene . 
 Because the series usually has a dark atmosphere , often consisting of " sets with grime and a sense of danger " , Kripke wanted there to be a contrast between the two worlds . Therefore , he requested that production designer Jerry Wanek build the " most beautiful , warm , affectionate sets you ’ ve ever seen " . Cinematographer Serge Ladouceur also made the usual shadows and " moody lighting " more colorful and warm . Though it rained almost constantly through filming , perfect weather arose for filming of one of the main contrasting scenes — Dean mowing the lawn . Kripke wanted it to appear " too perfect to be real " , and was able to film the " sunny , beautiful scene " . The " creepy " warehouse used as a lair by the djinn was a redesigned warehouse set from the television series Kyle XY . 
 One of the first directors Kripke had become acquainted with and learned from was David Nutter . Kripke thus wanted to include homages to Nutter 's work on the pilot ; some scenes of the new reality were meant to be recreations from the first episode . The crew attempted to match the camera angles , lighting , and music as much as possible . While Sam and Jessica sleeping together in bed was supposed to be an exact replica of a similar scene , the fight between the brothers differed . Because the new Sam is " pretty much a <unk> " , Dean is able to take him down instantly . Tucker noted that it was also a " sneaky way " of hinting that the new reality was merely an illusion , as he is " re @-@ experiencing that moment from the pilot because his fantasy world is being generated by what he already knows and has lived " . 
 Many of the photos present throughout the Winchester home were photoshopped by graphic artist Mary @-@ Ann Liu . Each one was discussed and refined , as Kripke felt they were important to show the new Winchester family history . Some pictures , such as Dean at the prom and Sam at graduation , were edited versions of photos from Ackles ' and Padalecki 's childhood . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The episode 's synthesized orchestral score was written by Christopher Lennertz . As of production of the fourth season , the episode has been his favorite one to score . Lennertz used a solo bassoon for the emotional scenes in the alternate reality rather than the cello he normally uses for Sam and Dean 's relationship . He noted that it " set a very interesting lead tone for the episode " . Following the series ' tradition , the episode also featured rock songs . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " What Is and What Should Never Be " was viewed by an estimated 3 @.@ 11 million viewers , one of the lowest ratings for the season . Conversely , writer Raelle Tucker won the Constellation Award for " Best Overall 2007 Science Fiction Film or Television Script " for her work on the episode , and the episode garnered positive reviews from critics . Tina Charles of TV Guide " adored " the episode , and considered it to be Jensen Ackles ' best performance of the series . She experienced an " emotional roller coaster the entire hour " , finding Dean 's monologue at his father 's grave to be " crushing " but the lawnmower scene to be " hilarious " . Likewise , Diana Steenbergen of IGN gave the episode a rating of 9 @.@ 2 out of 10 , praising the quick pace , " heavy " character development , and " ton and a half of angst " . She , too , felt that Ackles " hits the ball out of the park " , and noted that the episode 's humor stemmed from Ackles ' willingness to be a " big goofball " . Actresses Samantha Smith and Adrianne Palicki were " a treat " , although Steenbergen would have liked Jeffrey Dean Morgan to return . 
 Tom Burns of UGO deemed the episode as " one of the strongest hours of Supernatural all season " , feeling that " the actors really stepped up their game ... and sold every moment " . He also noted the " unapologetically emotional " Ackles , who " [ wore ] his joy , sadness , and anxiety all over this face , but always [ kept ] things real and in character " . Though Burns believed that " wish @-@ world " stories have been overused in fiction , he felt that Ackles ' " hardcore acting chops " allowed the episode to " escape from mediocrity " . The " outstanding " and " well crafted " episode was given a 7 out of 7 by TV Squad 's Brett Love . He considered the djinn as " one of the better representations " of genies in popular culture , and noted that the creature had the " perfect creepy look to it " . He was pleased to see Smith and Palicki return , and found the character of Carmen to be " a nice addition to the family " . Don Williams of BuddyTV agreed , and ranked the episode third in his list of the best episodes of the first three seasons . Deeming it the best standalone episode , he noted that it " can be embraced by anyone who enjoys clever writing , great acting , or a shirtless Jensen Ackles " . 
 = Laurence Fox = 
 Laurence Paul Fox ( born 26 May 1978 ) is an English actor , singer @-@ songwriter and guitarist , best known for his leading role as DS James Hathaway in the British TV drama series Lewis from 2006 to 2015 . His debut album , Holding Patterns , was released in February 2016 . 
 = = Early years and education = = 
 The third of five children of actor James Fox and his wife Mary Elizabeth Piper , His father James was the son of Major Robin Fox , theatrical agent , who married Angela Muriel <unk> Worthington , a natural daughter of Frederick Lonsdale . Laurence Fox was born in 1978 in Yorkshire . At the age of thirteen he entered Harrow School where , according to him , he was " shy around women , sensitive and a bit naïve " . Although he made friends and liked the drama teacher , he hated the school 's strict regimen and felt despised and out of place among pupils with titles and wealth . Constantly in trouble for smoking , fighting , going into town and seeing girls , he was eventually expelled a few weeks before his A @-@ levels . According to him , " It was something to do with a girl at a dance . I went back to take the exams , but I wasn 't allowed to speak to anyone . " With hindsight , Fox has said that his experience at Harrow enabled him to portray " toffs " – the upper @-@ class boys looking down on him and whom he disliked – with much insight and cynicism . 
 Despite doing well in his A @-@ level examinations , because of his report from Harrow he was unable to obtain a place at any university . After working as a gardener for two years , and a stint as an office worker which he loathed , he discovered that he enjoyed acting and enrolled at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art ( RADA ) . During his time there he appeared in numerous theatre productions , including the lead roles of <unk> <unk> in Ibsen 's The Wild Duck , Marcus Andronicus in Titus Andronicus , and Stephen Daedalus in an adaptation of James Joyce 's novel Ulysses . However , he was disappointed to find that he was treated " like a nonce " for being an Old <unk> . He also made himself more unpopular by being outspoken and taking on roles in his second and third years despite the practice being forbidden by school policy . One of these was his first break into film – the 2001 horror @-@ thriller The Hole . Fox feels that in landing the role his name " probably helped – it 's a combination of timing , luck and contacts " . Nonetheless , " [ t ] he name opens some doors , but then you have to show you can do the job " . 
 = = Career = = 
 Fox , who graduated from RADA on 1 July 2001 , followed up The Hole by appearing in Robert Altman 's 2001 Academy Award @-@ winning film Gosford Park . He then donned uniforms in a slew of film and television features , including roles as a German airman in Island at War ( 2004 ) , an SS officer in The Last Drop ( 2005 ) , and as British soldiers in the 2002 films <unk> and Ultimate Force , and in Colditz ( 2005 ) . In the last made @-@ for @-@ television film , Fox played Capt. Tom Willis who , after an unsuccessful attempt to break out of a prisoner @-@ of @-@ war camp , is brought to Oflag IV @-@ C in Colditz Castle , one of the most infamous German POW camps for officers in World War II . Actor Kevin Whately caught Fox 's performance in the last ten minutes of the film , which he characterised as " this young English boy going bonkers and wandering out to be shot " , and thought " He 's interesting . " The next day , at a lunch meeting with " all the powers that be " regarding a new project , Whately mentioned that Fox " would be worth taking a look at " . 
 As a result , Fox was cast in the ITV detective drama Lewis as Detective Sergeant James Hathaway , a Cambridge @-@ educated former trainee priest who becomes the partner of Detective Inspector Robert Lewis , played by Whately . The pilot of this spin @-@ off from Inspector Morse ( 1987 – 2000 ) , was ITV 's highest rated drama of 2006 . 
 Real people that Fox has portrayed include Prince Charles , in Whatever Love Means ( 2005 ) ; Wisley , one of Jane Austen 's suitors , in Becoming Jane ( 2007 ) ; and Sir Christopher Hatton , the Lord Chancellor of England in Elizabeth : The Golden Age , also released in 2007 . In addition , in that year Fox was seen on ITV as Cecil Vyse in Andrew Davies ' adaptation of A Room with a View based on E.M. Forster 's 1908 novel . He has expressed a desire to appear in a western , and to star as James Bond – the closest he got to the latter was losing the role of villain Gustav Graves in Die Another Day ( 2002 ) to Toby Stephens . 
 On stage , Fox appeared in Mrs. Warren 's Profession by George Bernard Shaw at the Strand Theatre ( now the Novello Theatre ) in London in 2002 , and John Ford 's 17th @-@ century play ' Tis Pity She 's a Whore in 2005 . Between 2006 and 2007 he starred in Treats by Christopher Hampton with his future wife , Billie Piper . In April 2007 , Fox lost his temper with a paparazzi photographer outside the Garrick Theatre in London where he was performing in Treats and was arrested for assault . He was later released after receiving a police caution . Newspaper reports stated that the caution would remain on his record for three years and might prevent his obtaining a visa to perform in the US . In 2013 , Fox played Guy Haines in Strangers on a Train at London 's Gielgud Theatre . On 9 May 2015 he portrayed a wartime soldier composing a letter at VE Day 70 : A Party to Remember in Horse Guards Parade , London that was broadcast live on BBC1 . 
 When filming , Fox often plays the jester to amuse the cast and crew . He has said , " I 'd just rather have a good time than I would be Daniel Day @-@ Lewis . There ain 't no method to my acting . " 
 In March 2016 Laurence Fox apologised for swearing at a member of the audience who had been muttering audibly in the front row during a performance of The Patriotic Traitor at London 's Park Theatre on 8 March . The audience saw Fox step out of character - that of French statesman Charles de Gaulle - and chastise the heckler with robust language . " If someone is hell @-@ bent on heckling , they are ruining it for everybody , " he explained to Sarah Montague on the Today programme on 10 March 2016 . " It becomes an un @-@ performable play , the play stops at that moment . " 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Fox dated British actress Billie Piper in 2006 while they performed together in the stage play Treats . On 31 December 2007 Fox married Piper in the 12th century parish church of St. Mary 's in Easebourne , West Sussex . During a 21 February 2008 interview on ITV breakfast show GMTV , Fox revealed that after a " drunken lunch " during their honeymoon in Mexico he and Piper got matching tattoos to celebrate their marriage . His tattoo , on his forearm , reads " Mrs Fox 31 December 2007 , " while hers states " Mr Fox . " As of 2007 Fox and Piper lived in a country cottage in the market town of Midhurst in West Sussex . In March 2008 it was reported that Piper had expressed to family and friends a desire to adopt children as well as to have children of her own with Fox . On 27 April 2008 The Sun , quoting an unnamed source , announced that Piper was three months ' pregnant and that she and Fox were " absolutely over the moon " . On 21 October 2008 , Piper gave birth to a son , Winston James Fox , by emergency Caesarean section . Piper gave birth to their second son , Eugene Pip , on 5 April 2012 . On 24th March 2016 , Fox announced on his Facebook page that the pair had split after eight years of marriage . He stated that no third party was involved in the separation . On 12 May 2016 , it was announced that Fox and Piper had divorced after more than eight years of marriage . 
 Fox 's siblings are Tom ( born 1975 ) , Robin ( 1976 ) , Lydia ( 1979 ) , and Jack ( 1985 ) ; Lydia Fox is herself an actress . His uncles are the actor Edward Fox and the theatrical and film producer Robert Fox . The actors Emilia Fox and Freddie Fox are his first cousins , being the children of Edward Fox . Fox is also Richard Ayoade 's brother @-@ in @-@ law . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 Some information in this table was obtained from Laurence Fox : Filmography , Internet Movie Database ( IMDb ) , retrieved 16 March 2008 . 
 = = = Television = = = 
 Some information in this table was obtained from Laurence Fox : Filmography , Internet Movie Database ( IMDb ) , retrieved 16 March 2008 . 
 = = = Theatre = = = 
 Some information in this table was obtained from the following websites : Laurence Fox , Royal Academy of Dramatic Art , archived from the original on 3 February 2008 , retrieved 18 March 2008 ; Laurence Fox : Other works , Internet Movie Database ( IMDb ) , retrieved 16 March 2008 . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Albums 
 Sorry for My Words ( 2013 ) . 
 Holding Patterns ( 2016 ) 
 Singles 
 " Gunfight " ( 2012 ) 
 " So Be Damned " ( 2013 ) . 
 " Headlong " ( 2015 ) 
 " Rise Again " ( 2016 ) 
 = Lavaca Bay = 
 Lavaca Bay ( / <unk> / ) is a northwestern extension of the Matagorda Bay system found mostly in Calhoun County , Texas , United States . The ports of Port Lavaca and Point Comfort have been established on the bay , and are the main areas of human habitation . Linnville was located on the bay until its abandonment after the Great Raid of 1840 , and the major port of Indianola was found near the confluence with the main Matagorda Bay , until the town 's final destruction following the massive hurricane of 1886 . Smaller communities include Olivia , Alamo Beach and Magnolia Beach . Lavaca Bay is approximately 82 miles ( 130 km ) northeast of Corpus Christi , about 121 miles ( 190 km ) southwest of Houston , and 145 miles ( 230 km ) southeast of San Antonio . 
 The bay is noted for its superfund site , caused by mercury pollution from the heavy industry in Point Comfort ( specifically Alcoa ) , across the bay from the largest settlement of Port Lavaca . Although fishing has declined in recent years due to fears of contamination , the bay supports a large finfish population , and the efforts of environmental organizations and the federal government have pressured Alcoa to reduce the polluted areas . 
 = = History = = 
 Lavaca Bay was formed when the sea level rose following the last ice age , flooding the Lavaca River @-@ Garcitas Creek basin . The name comes from the Spanish adaptation of the French <unk> or cow , given to the area by French explorer René @-@ Robert Cavelier , Sieur de La Salle for the sightings of Plains Bison , which were once common near the bay and the creeks that feed it . It is believed La Salle established his Fort St. Louis colony near the bay on Garcitas Creek . The first sizable human settlement on the bay shore was at the town of New Port , established in 1831 by Irish merchant John J. Linn as part of De León 's colony . The site was later renamed Linnville , and grew to a population of 200 by 1839 . It was described as " a place of considerable business " in Sketches of Texas in 1840 , and was used extensively during the early years of the Republic of Texas . Future San Antonio Mayor Samuel Maverick owned a warehouse in the town , along with many other prominent Texans . The town was destroyed during the Great Raid of 1840 , orchestrated by the Comanche Indians , and was later abandoned . 
 Port Lavaca or <unk> , developed after the abandonment of Linnville . It grew substantially following the destruction of Indianola , and became a prominent shipping location and national leader in shrimp production . Across the bay and currently connected by Texas State Highway 35 , the town of Point Comfort is found . It was incorporated in 1953 at a citywide vote and is known for its large aluminium and petrochemical plants built in the 1960s . The small town of Olivia , which was founded in 1892 as a Swedish Lutheran community , is located on the shores of Keller Bay . The unincorporated towns of Alamo Beach , established around 1900 , and Magnolia Beach , founded sometime thereafter , and named for the Magnolia figs produced in the area , are found north of the remains of the ghost town of Indianola . 
 = = Features = = 
 Lavaca Bay is the largest extension of the Matagorda Bay system , and includes its own extensions of Chocolate Bay to the southwest , Cox Bay to the east , and Keller Bay to the southeast . The Lavaca River as well as Garcitas Creek and Venado Creek supply the bay with freshwater from the north . Channels have been dredged to connect the bay to the Intracoastal Waterway , which runs to the south . On average , the bay is about 4 feet ( 1 m ) in depth . 
 Unlike most of the Matagorda Bay system , Lavaca Bay has a mostly muddy bottom with large amounts of oyster reefs and spoils islands formed by the dredging of several canals . The shores are lined with grassy bluffs and a thick cover of trees . The Lavaca River enters near the Port Lavaca Causeway as it traverses Lavaca Bay from Port Lavaca to Point Comfort at the center of the bay , which is also its narrowest width . The river flows 115 miles ( 190 km ) southeast from its source in northeast Gonzales County , draining approximately 2 @,@ 280 square miles ( 5 @,@ 900 km2 ) into Lavaca Bay . South of the Port Lavaca Causeway in Point Comfort , on the bay 's eastern shore , a heavy industrial sector is located , which lines the coast to Cox Bay , which extends to the east . South of Cox Bay is the larger Keller Bay extension , which extends the bay to its easternmost point near Olivia . Below the extension , is a narrow peninsula , bounded by Matagorda Bay to the south , which extends west to mouth of Lavaca Bay . Across the mouth on the western shore , past the Matagorda Ship Channel , which runs through the middle of the bay to Point Comfort , the town of Magnolia Beach is found . To the northwest is the town of Alamo Beach , located on <unk> Point , from which a major oyster reef begins across the bay to Point Comfort . The point is located on the northeastern extreme of a headland that juts to the north , forming Chocolate Bay to the west . Port Lavaca is found north of Chocolate Bay , back at the Port Lavaca Causeway . North of the causeway is a large circular extension , forming the northern boundary of the Lavaca Bay . The northwestern extreme is formed by Garcitas Cove , fed by Garcitas Creek , which flows 48 miles ( 77 km ) from its source in DeWitt County . To the east is Venado Creek , which converges with the bay , northwest of the mouth of the Lavaca River . 
 = = Ecosystem = = 
 Lavaca Bay hosts a wide range of finfish including Black drum , Flounder , Redfish , Sheepshead and Speckled trout , however it suffers from mercury pollution . An Alcoa plant in Point Comfort dumped an estimated 67 pounds ( 30 kg ) of mercury into the bay per day in the 1960s , affecting 64 square miles ( 170 km2 ) . A mercury superfund was established at the site , and the processing of oysters and blue crab in certain locations was prohibited . A study revealed that the bay 's detritus is more than ten times as contaminated as nearby Keller Bay . 
 The pollution issue is a main concern of citizens of Calhoun County , and has attracted demonstrations against industry in Point Comfort . However , Alcoa has worked with state and federal officials , spending $ 110 million to reduce the size of the superfund site , as part of a 2005 settlement . Cooperation aims to create 70 additional acres of salt marsh and 11 acres of oyster reef habitat . 
 Locals have estimated that the only area still affected by contamination is just offshore from the Alcoa plant . Signs warning boaters of the water 's toxicity are found at the site . The stigma attached to the bay due to reports of pollution has discouraged fishing , enabling a healthy population to develop . 
 = = Industry = = 
 Industry is heavy along the bay , with an abundance of natural gas and oil wells at all corners . Natural gas was discovered at the site in 1934 , and oil was discovered the next year . Point Comfort is home to several industrial plants along the shore , including Alcoa , Union Carbide , Du Pont , and Formosa , which contribute to the local economies . Despite the restrictions on the bay that prevent the production of fish and shellfish along the superfund site , seafood harvesting is a major industry . However , it is not as prominent as it was in the 1920s , when Port Lavaca led the nation in shrimp production , leading to the construction of a quick @-@ freezing plant . Today , shrimping is only allowed south of the Port Lavaca Causeway , due to the north 's classification as a nursery location . Shellfish production is allowed in Keller Bay and Lavaca Bay south of Point Comfort , but is restricted along the eastern and northern coast and Chocolate Bay , and is conditionally approved in the remaining locations , including along the shore of Port Lavaca . A small tourism industry also fuels economic growth , spurred by the Port Lavaca State Fishing Pier found alongside the Port Lavaca Causeway . The pier once served as the causeway across the bay but was replaced in the 1960s and converted into a fishing pier of 3 @,@ 200 feet ( 980 m ) , billed as the longest in the world . 
 = Aruba at the 2008 Summer Olympics = 
 Aruba competed at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing , China . Their participation marked their sixth Olympic appearance , and included the smallest number of athletes that had ever represented Aruba in its history . Two Arubans competed in the Olympic games : Jan Roodzant participated as a swimmer , and Fiderd Vis participated in judo . The Aruban delegation arrived in Beijing between August 1 and August 4 , including the athletes , coaches , and various officials from both the IOC and the Aruban Olympic Committee ( Comité Olimpico <unk> , COA ) , Aruba 's local Olympic committee . Fiderd Vis came to Beijing on special invitation from the IOC , which had observed his progress while he trained in Brazil . Vis was the flagbearer in the opening ceremony , while Roodzant was so in the closing ceremony . Both athletes were eliminated in the preliminary rounds on August 12 , 2008 ; consequently , Aruba did not earn any medals . 
 = = Background = = 
 Aruba had competed in five consecutive Olympic Games by 2008 ; its entrance into the Beijing Olympics marked its sixth consecutive appearance since the 1988 Summer Olympics in Seoul , South Korea . In the summer of 2008 , the fewest athletes in Aruba 's history thus far participated in the Olympics , with two men participating in two events . This compares with Aruba 's participation in the previous 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens , where Aruba was represented by four athletes of three sports . Aruba 's 2008 Olympic representatives included no female athletes , which had occurred only once previously in Atlanta 's 1996 Summer Olympics ( three male athletes participating in three distinct sports ) . 
 On August 1 , 2008 , the Aruban athletes left for Beijing aboard KLM Flight 765 . Vis and Roodzant were accompanied by their trainers and COA officials Edmundo Josiah and Chu Halabi . COA president Leo Maduro and COA officials Mary Hsing and Ling Wong left for Beijing three days later . Alongside IOC member Nicole <unk> , this group formed the Aruban delegation to the 2008 Summer Olympic Games . 
 The Aruban delegation arrived at the Olympic Village on August 6 , 2008 , alongside the delegations of Paraguay , Cuba , and Tuvalu . As part of the welcoming ceremony , the Chinese military hoisted the Aruban flag , and the Aruban national anthem " Aruba <unk> Tera " was performed . The Aruban delegation and the governing body of the Olympic Village exchanged gifts . 
 Aruba 's athletes were 109th to enter the Beijing National Stadium during the march of nations of the opening ceremony . Fiderd Vis , the only judoka representing Aruba , was the flagbearer . During the closing ceremony , the swimmer Jan Roodzant was the flagbearer . 
 = = Judo = = 
 Fiderd Vis was the only Aruban participating as a judoka in the Beijing Olympics . He was trained by Alberto Thiel . 
 To train for the Olympics , Fiderd Vis left Aruba to train in Brazil , taking advantage of an agreement between the COA and the Brazilian Olympic Committee and another between the COA and the Brazilian Judo Confederation fostered after Aruba 's participation in the 2007 Pan American Games in Rio de Janeiro . Vis left for Brasília on Wednesday , June 4 , 2008 to participate in Campeonato <unk> . He later traveled to São Paulo to train with Brazilian judokas . Having seen Vis 's progress , the International Olympic Committee extended to him a special invitation that guaranteed his participation in the Beijing Olympics . The COA accepted the invitation , and Fiderd Vis became Aruba 's second and final athlete for the year 's Olympic Games . 
 Vis faced Guo Lei of China on August 12 in the fourteenth match of the preliminary round of 32 . He was defeated , and did not advance . 
 = = Swimming = = 
 Netherlands @-@ born Jan Roodzant was the only Aruban swimmer to participate in the Beijing Summer Olympics . 
 Roodzant spent the year prior to the Olympics with trainer Ismael <unk> , preparing in Gainesville , Florida , receiving specialist training alongside the University of Florida 's swim team . He returned to Aruba for a few days , starting February 26 , 2008 , but soon returned to the United States to resume his training . Roodzant <unk> to qualify for FINA by doing well at the CARIFTA Swimming Championships ; in qualifying for FINA , Roodzant secured a spot in the Beijing Olympics . 
 Roodzant completed his last practice in Beijing on August 11 , 2008 , the day before his competition . Roodzant was assigned to heat 2 for his race . He was the fastest swimmer in his heat during the preliminaries of August 12 , with a time of <unk> in the men 's 100 metre freestyle event . Overall , however , he was 53rd out of 64 in the event , and as a result , he did not advance . 
 = Change Your Life ( Little Mix song ) = 
 " Change Your Life " is a song recorded by British girl group Little Mix for their debut studio album , DNA ( 2012 ) . It was written by Richard " Biff " Stannard , Tim Powell , Ash Howes and Little Mix , while its production was handled by Stannard and Powell . " Change Your Life " was written while the group were on The X Factor Tour and it was the first song composed for the album . It was written based on the group 's experience on The X Factor and their fans . Syco serviced the song , the third single from DNA , to radio stations in the United Kingdom on 5 January 2013 . It was released for digital download on 15 February 2013 . The song has themes of girl power , perseverance and self @-@ empowerment . 
 A mid @-@ tempo pop power ballad , " Change Your Life " exhibits the influence of soul and urban contemporary music . Instrumentation includes tumbling R & B piano lines and a pulsating , driving backbeat . The contemporary sound provided by its instrumentation has similarities to several songs produced by Coldplay and Ryan Tedder . " Change Your Life " attracted mixed to positive reviews from critics , most of whom considered it a highlight on DNA , commending the group 's harmonies and the song 's inspirational lyrics . Some reviewers , however , felt that it was weak and poor alternative to the album 's lead single , " Wings " ( 2012 ) . 
 " Change Your Life " reached number 12 in Ireland and the United Kingdom , becoming Little Mix 's fourth consecutive top 20 hit in both countries . It also became their second top ten hit in Australia , peaking at number 8 . " Change Your Life " was certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association . The accompanying music video was released on 31 January 2013 . Filmed backstage at the group 's DNA Tour and on their tour bus , it shows the group bonding with each other . Met with mixed reviews , critics likened it to Spice Girls ' 1997 music video , " Mama " . Little Mix have performed " Change Your Life " on television shows Dancing on Ice , The Graham Norton Show and This Morning and during their DNA Tour ( 2013 ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 After winning the eighth series of The X Factor , Little Mix worked with Richard " Biff " Stannard , Tim Powell and Ash Howes on their debut single , " Cannonball " , which went on to reach number one on the UK Singles Chart in December 2011 . The group then embarked on The X Factor Tour in January 2012 , while on tour the group met up with Stannard , Powell and Howes to develop songs for their debut album , DNA . The first song they developed was " Change Your Life " based on the group 's experience on The X Factor and their fans . It was recorded at the Biffco Studios in Brighton , England . In a January 2012 interview with the Daily Mirror , Perrie Edwards was quoted as saying , " We 're going a bit urban , old school with a bit of pop . We wanna bring back old school harmonies . And Jesy beat @-@ boxes and Leigh @-@ Anne raps , so we 're trying out different things " . It was written as a song with an uplifting message . Jade Thirlwall told Robert Copsey of Digital Spy that the group loved the message of the song and that they were looking forward to releasing it . Serban Ghenea mixed the track at MixStar Studios in Virginia Beach , Virginia , and Tom Coyne was responsible for the song 's mastering . 
 Little Mix premiered " Change Your Life " before the release of DNA , performing it live for the first time on Children in Need 2012 on 17 November 2012 . The group were set to appear on Google + on 12 December 2012 , but due to technical problems , they had to cancel it . To keep their fans happy , the artwork and release of " Change Your Life " as the third single from DNA was revealed instead . Little Mix 's management posted the information on the group 's Facebook , writing , " Sad news Mixers ! The girls can 't do the Hangout today because of technical problems ... BUT they have a little surprise for you instead ... the new ' Change Your Life ' cover AND they 'll be doing a Twitter Q & A at 6pm ! Not such sad news after all ! Mixers HQ x " . Syco solicited the single to radio stations in the United Kingdom on 5 January 2013 . A digital EP was then released in Ireland and the United Kingdom on 15 February 2013 . The EP features remixed versions of " Change Your Life " by Bimbo Jones and Sonny J , as well as an edited single mix of the song . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Change Your Life " is a mid @-@ tempo pop power ballad with a length of three minutes and 21 seconds . Having elements of soul and urban contemporary music , its Instrumentation includes tumbling R & B piano lines and a pulsating , driving backbeat . The song begins with an emotionally frayed spoken @-@ word introduction by Leigh @-@ Anne Pinnock , " She captures her reflection then she throws the mirror to the floor / Her image is distorted , screaming ' Is it worth it anymore ? " 4Music said that the spoken @-@ word introduction is reminiscent of All Saints ' 1997 single , " Never Ever " . The chorus , " Change , change your life , take it all / We gonna stick together , know we get through it all " , is pledged by the group in harmony over a spiralling piano lines , cascading keyboard lines and rousing , chugging strings . According to the digital sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , Little Mix 's vocal range in the song span from the note of A3 to E5 . Written in the key of A major , the track is set in common time at a moderate tempo of 80 beats per minute . 
 Lyrically , the song is motivational , inspirational and a reaffirmation of sisterhood . It has themes of girl power , perseverance and self @-@ empowerment . Similar to the lead single of DNA , " Wings " ( 2012 ) , its lyrical content regards standing up to criticism and remaining strong in the face of adversity . However , unlike " Wings , " it shows a greater vulnerability and sympathy for those dealing with self @-@ confidence issues . According to Digital Spy 's Lewis Corner , " Change Your Life " reinvigorates the girl power boom of the late 90 's . Dann Stubbs of NME likened the song 's piano instrumental to those of British band Coldplay . PopDust 's Andrew Unterberger opined that the production on " Change Your Life " is reminiscent to that of Ryan Tedder 's work . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Digital Spy 's Lewis Corner awarded " Change Your Life " four out of five stars , commending Little Mix 's " pitch @-@ perfect " harmonies and Richard Stannard 's ability to create a pop anthem . Dan Stubbs of NME complimented the song 's lyrics and deemed the chorus " monumental " . Christopher Hooton of Metro called the track " catchy and anthemic " . Jon Hornbuckle from So So Gay felt that " Change Your Life " was an obvious single choice and that its anthemic chorus is the definition of girl power in 2013 . Adrian Thrills of the Daily Mail positively reviewed the song , " The vocals are unexpectedly potent , with the harmony singing of Perrie , Jesy , Leigh @-@ Anne and Jade blending impressively on the big ballad ' Change Your Life ' " . Entertainment Wise 's Amy Gravelle said that the track succeeds in surpassing generic pop ballads , adding , " Which is surprising , for a band that have gone through the same mental trials and tribulations of other X Factor contestants who have failed at the first album hurdle " . 
 Vicky Newman from Shields Gazette called " Change Your Life " a brilliant song , reasoning : " Leigh @-@ Anne 's urban roots match perfectly with Jesy 's soulful voice , and the harmonies from Jade and Perrie transform it into a hit " . Nicky Diaz from The Miami Hurricane said that the song lets the group 's vocals and harmonies shine , calling it a stand @-@ out track on DNA . A reporter from 4Music described the song as " very dramatic , very serious , lovely stuff " . The reporter concluded , " The power @-@ ballad song and empowering message don 't disappoint " . " Change Your Life " was listed as one of two highlights from DNA by John Meagher of the Irish Independent . A writer from <unk> deemed the song " inspiring " , opining that the song is one of the album 's " truly amazing moments " . PopDust 's Andrew <unk> awarded " Change Your Life " three out of five stars , describing the group 's vocal performance as the song 's best attribute . Fiona Shepherd of The Scotsman gave the song a negative review , " ' Change Your Life ' reprises the message of ' Wings ' to lesser returns " . Kate Lucey from Sugar deemed the song one of the album 's weaker tracks . Lucey wrote , " ' Change Your Life ' and ' Always Be Together ' would most likely feature on the end credits of a film by the Olsen Twins that went straight to DVD , why these two have been put so early on in the album we 'll never know . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Change Your Life " debuted at number 116 on the UK Singles Chart on 1 December 2012 , due to strong digital downloads following the release of DNA . It re @-@ entered the chart on 2 February 2013 at number 36 , selling a total of 9 @,@ 019 digital copies that week . The song climbed to number 31 the following week before receiving a 140 % sales increase following Little Mix 's performance of it on BBC One 's The Graham Norton Show , climbing 19 places to its peak of number 12 the week after . " Change Your Life " marks Little Mix 's fourth consecutive top 20 hit in the United Kingdom . " Change Your Life " debuted at number 13 on the Irish Singles Chart on 7 February 2013 , marking the chart 's highest debut for that week . It climbed to its peak of number 12 the following week , before dropping to number 17 the week after . The song spent a total of ten weeks on the chart . In Scotland , " Change Your Life " debuted at number 28 on the Scottish Singles Chart of 2 February 2013 . On 23 February 2013 , the song peaked at number eight , becoming Little Mix 's fourth consecutive top ten single in the country . 
 In Slovakia , " Change Your Life " debuted and peaked at number 60 on the Slovakian Airplay Chart issued in the eighth week of 2013 . It remained on the chart for four non @-@ consecutive weeks . " Change Your Life " debuted at number 43 on the Australian Singles Chart of 24 March 2013 . After weeks of gaining new peaks , the song peaked at number eight on 21 April 2013 , becoming Little Mix 's second top ten hit in the country . It has since spent a total of 12 weeks on the chart and was certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association for sales of 70 @,@ 000 copies . " Change Your Life " debuted and peaked at number 35 on the New Zealand Singles Chart dated 8 April 2013 , marking the group 's second most successful single there to @-@ date . The song debuted and peaked at number 21 on the South Korea Gaon International Chart on 27 April 2013 , selling 5 @,@ 094 copies that week . It is Little Mix 's highest @-@ charting single in South Korea to @-@ date and has since spent four weeks on the chart and sold a total of 14 @,@ 586 copies in the country . " Change Your Life " debuted and peaked on the French Singles Chart at number 132 on 4 May 2013 , marking the group 's second most successful single there to @-@ date . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 On 13 December 2012 , the group posted a lyric video of " Change Your Life " on their Vevo account . It was originally speculated that the music video would have visuals reflecting the theme of self @-@ belief and overcoming self @-@ doubt . On 15 January 2013 , Jade Thirlwall told Robert Copsey of Digital Spy that the music video will showcase Little Mix 's individual personalities , " We always want our videos to be the best we can do , " Thirlwall explained . She also revealed that the video will be more mellow and real than the group 's previous music videos . " We 're just chilling and portraying the song and performing it how it should be ; there are no fireworks or backflips , it 's just us delivering a great song , " Thirlwall added . Little Mix wanted to showcase who they are with the video by centering it more around themselves than in previous music videos . The official music video for " Change Your Life " was set to be released on 18 January 2013 , but it premiered on Vevo on 31 January instead . It was filmed in two days . Scenes from the video were filmed at the Rhyl Pavilion Theatre in Rhyl when the group were performing a show there as part of their DNA Tour at the end of January in 2013 . A spokesman for the theatre said , " We are very proud to be featured as part of Little Mix 's ' Change Your Life ' video and feel it 's a huge achievement for the Rhyl Pavilion " . The video features cameos from Jade Thirlwall 's mother , Norma Thirlwall , and Perrie Edwards ' mother , Debbie <unk> . Norma Thirlwall said , " After a while , everyone forgot the cameras were there , so it looks really natural " . Following a product placement deal brokered by <unk> <unk> 's content division , Liquid Thread , the video also sees the Samsung Galaxy features exclusivity in its technology category . Andrew Wynd , head of media , corporate marketing for Samsung Electronics , opined , " It has been fantastic to be able to seamlessly showcase some of [ the Samsung Galaxy 's ] functionality in the Little Mix video . " Rupert Britton , content strategy director for Liquid Thread also commented on the deal : 
 We are thrilled with the brand integration in the new Little Mix video ' Change Your Life ' . It 's about aspiring to change your life for the better , and Samsung and the Galaxy camera fit very naturally with this ethos . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The music video for " Change Your Life " shows the backstage environment of the group 's first solo tour , the DNA Tour . A reporter from the Daily Mail wrote that the video sees Little Mix " embracing their usually casual but edgy style " . Jade Thirlwall is pictured wearing a banana @-@ print top and Perrie Edwards matches her purple hair with a soft blue dress . Other looks include Jesy Nelson sporting a camouflage jacket and Leigh @-@ Anne Pinnock wearing an oversized football shirt . Christopher Hooton of Metro described the group 's look in the video as " new <unk> @-@ meets @-@ 90s @-@ star " . Hooton also mentioned that the music video features the band " goofing around " . The group is first pictured sitting around backstage while waiting to have their hair and make @-@ up done . In another scene , Little Mix are filmed on their tour bus . This scene features Jade Thirlwall scribbling in a notebook as the other group members play around , laugh and take pictures of each other sleeping using the Samsung Galaxy . The group then look at the pictures they took together . In a different scene , Perrie Edwards is seen cuddling a puppy . Little Mix are also pictured singing " Change Your Life " to each other in a studio and preparing to go on stage at their Rhyl Pavilion tour date . Other scenes features the group in a dance rehearsal , using funny facial expressions and bonding with their mothers backstage . During the dance rehearsal , the group is seen practising dance moves to their DNA Tour setlist with their tour choreographer and backing dancers . In other scenes , the group is seen playing with their own Little Mix dolls and Thirlwall , sporting blue hair , is wheeled away in a cardboard box . Before going onstage , Leigh @-@ Anne Pinnock is seen smiling as a make @-@ up artist applies her final touches while Thirlwall is pictured applying her own make @-@ up . The group then centre themselves as they show each other support by hugging one another before heading to the stage . After the show , the foursome is seen showing their solidarity by embracing one another again . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Alicia Adejobi from Entertainment Wise wrote that the music video proves that " girl power is well and truly back " . Adejobi went on to highlight the scene where the group bonds with their mothers , deeming it the video 's most touching segment and particularly reminiscent of the Spice Girls ' music video for " Mama " ( 1997 ) . Kate Lucey of Sugar gave the video a mixed review , " It 's a little bit of a let down after the <unk> that was the ' DNA ' video , but we 'll let it slide , they 've been busy . " However , Lucey , complimented Jesy Nelson 's sass and Perrie Edwards ' style in the music video . 4Music opined , " We are slightly frustrated by the simple backstage tour @-@ style video . " A reporter from the Daily Mail positively reviewed the music video , " Even though [ Little Mix ] have had personal setbacks , the band seems as solid as ever [ in the video ] " . The reporter deemed the video as their most personal yet , and praised the group 's softer and fun @-@ loving sides in it . The Daily Mail reporter went on to say that the video proves how close the group are and that it manifests that Little Mix are stronger than ever . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Little Mix performed " Change Your Life " for the first time on the BBC 's Children in Need telethon on 17 November 2012 . Lizzie Cox of Sugar wrote that the performance was mind @-@ blowing . Following Perrie Edwards having her tonsils removed in December 2012 and Jade Thirlwall losing her voice , the group managed to perform the song live on Dancing on Ice on 20 January 2013 . Despite their throat problems , Little Mix " whacked out a belter of a performance " , according to Kate Lucey of Sugar who labelled the performance " flawless " . 4Music positively reviewed the performance , " The girls looked and sounded amazing " . The performance also received praise from the group 's fans on Twitter . On 31 January 2013 , Little Mix appeared on The Graham Norton Show for an interview and a performance of " Change Your Life " . Carl Smith from Sugar praised the group 's cute look during the performance and Jade Thirlwall 's Minnie Mouse @-@ inspired head @-@ piece . On 14 February 2013 , Little Mix did an interview and performed the single on ITV 's This Morning . 
 " Change Your Life " is performed as part of the encore during Little Mix 's setlist for their 2013 DNA Tour . Before the performance , the group change into their final costume for the setlist . After the performance , Little Mix then thank the crowd for coming , make <unk> to the audience and thank their band . Shields Gazette who were at the tour 's date at the Newcastle City Hall , wrote that the crowd chanted the group 's name until they re @-@ appeared for the performance of the song . A writer for newspaper praised the performance , " It was an all @-@ round stunning performance from a band , who are destined to be huge [ all over the world ] . " Lewis Corner of Digital Spy who was at the tour 's date at the Hammersmith Apollo , opined , " The girls seemed genuinely humbled by the [ crowd 's ] rapturous response . " Corner added , " It 's lucky Little Mix seem to enjoy touring so much , because they 've got the whole world to travel yet . " A journalist for the Express & Star who attended the tour 's date at the Civic Hall in Wolverhampton deemed the " Change Your Life " performance " powerful " . The journalist also mentioned that the crowd were in riotous voice during the performance and further opined , " Little Mix may have been born out of a TV talent show but they are growing into a class act . " 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording and mixing 
 Recorded at Biffco Studios , Brighton , England ; mixed at MixStar Studios , Virginia Beach , Virginia . 
 Personnel 
 Songwriting – Richard " Biff " Stannard , Tim Powell , Ash Howes , Perrie Edwards , Jesy Nelson , Leigh @-@ Anne Pinnock , Jade Thirlwall 
 Production – Richard " Biff " Stannard , Tim Powell 
 Mixing – Serban Ghenea 
 Mastering – Tom Coyne 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of DNA , Sony Music Entertainment , UK . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital ( Remixes ) EP 
 " Change Your Life " ( Single Mix ) – 3 : 21 
 " Change Your Life " ( Sonny J Mason Radio Mix ) – 4 : 21 
 " Change Your Life " ( Bimbo Jones Radio Edit ) – 2 : 48 
 " Change Your Life " ( Instrumental ) – 3 : 20 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Chris Paul = 
 Christopher Emmanuel Paul ( born May 6 , 1985 ) is an American professional basketball player for the Los Angeles Clippers of the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) . The point guard has won the NBA Rookie of the Year Award , two Olympic gold medals , and led the NBA in assists four times and steals six times . He has also been selected to nine NBA All @-@ Star teams , eight All @-@ NBA teams , and eight All @-@ Defensive teams . 
 Paul was a McDonald 's All @-@ American in high school . He attended Wake Forest University for two years of college basketball where he helped the Demon Deacons achieve their first ever number one ranking . He was selected fourth overall in the 2005 NBA draft by the New Orleans Hornets and traded to the Clippers in 2011 . 
 Off the court , Paul has served as the National Basketball Players Association president since August 2013 . One of the highest @-@ paid athletes in the world , he holds endorsement deals with companies such as Nike and State Farm . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Paul was born on May 6 , 1985 in Winston @-@ Salem , North Carolina to Charles Edward Paul and Robin Jones . He has an older brother named Charles " C.J. " Paul . A former athlete himself , Charles , Sr. taught his sons basketball and football and coached them in various youth leagues throughout their childhoods . Growing up , the Paul brothers spent their summers working at a service station owned by their grandfather Nathanial Jones , to whom Paul attributes many life lessons , and describes as his " best friend " . On the opening speech of 2016 ESPY 's , Paul revealed that one of his uncles is a police officer . 
 = = High school career = = 
 Paul attended West Forsyth High School in Clemmons , North Carolina . During his freshman and sophomore seasons , he played on the junior varsity team . For his junior year , he averaged 25 points , 5 @.@ 3 assists , and 4 @.@ 4 steals per game , helping West Forsyth reach the state semifinals . Over the ensuing summer , he led the Winston @-@ Salem @-@ based Kappa Magic to the National U @-@ 17 AAU title , earning tournament MVP honors in the process . During his senior season , Paul received national attention for scoring 61 points in a game ; his 61 @-@ year @-@ old grandfather was slain earlier in the year and Paul honored him by scoring one point for each year of his life . Paul finished the season with averages of 30 @.@ 8 points , 5 @.@ 9 rebounds , 9 @.@ 5 assists , and 6 steals per game , leading West Forsyth to a 27 – 3 record and the Class 4A Eastern Regional finals . He was then named a McDonald 's All @-@ American , first @-@ team Parade All @-@ American , and North Carolina 's Mr. Basketball by The Charlotte Observer . 
 = = College career = = 
 As a freshman , Paul averaged 14 @.@ 8 points , 5 @.@ 9 assists , and 2 @.@ 7 steals per game for Wake Forest University , setting school freshman records for three @-@ point percentage , free throws , free throw percentage , assists , and steals . Behind his play , the Demon Deacons qualified for the NCAA Tournament , losing in the Sweet Sixteen to St. Joseph 's . At the conclusion of the season , Paul was named ACC Rookie of the Year and Third Team All @-@ ACC . 
 For two weeks early in Paul 's sophomore season , Wake Forest was ranked number one in the nation for the first time in school history . In the final game of the year , Paul punched NC State guard Julius Hodge in the groin and received a one @-@ game suspension for the ACC Tournament , an incident that marred Paul 's image for a short time . The Demon Deacons again qualified for the NCAA Tournament but suffered a second round upset at the hands of West Virginia . With final averages of 15 @.@ 3 points , 4 @.@ 5 rebounds , 6 @.@ 6 assists , and 2 @.@ 4 steals per game , Paul was eventually named First Team Consensus All @-@ America , and with a 3 @.@ 21 grade point average ( GPA ) , he was also named to ESPN 's Academic All @-@ America Team . On April 15 , 2005 , he announced he would be hiring an agent and turning professional . On March 2 , 2011 , Wake Forest retired his jersey . 
 = = = College career statistics = = = 
 Cited from Sports Reference . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = New Orleans Hornets ( 2005 – 2011 ) = = = 
 = = = = Early seasons ( 2005 – 07 ) = = = = 
 Paul was selected fourth overall in the 2005 NBA draft by the New Orleans Hornets . Due to the devastation caused by Hurricane Katrina , the Hornets played most of their games in Oklahoma City that year . Paul finished the season leading all rookies in points , assists , steals , and double @-@ doubles , and became only the second rookie in NBA history to lead the league in total steals . With final averages of 16 @.@ 1 points , 5 @.@ 1 rebounds , 7 @.@ 8 assists , and 2 @.@ 2 steals per game , he was named Rookie of the Year , falling just one vote shy of winning the award unanimously . The only other rookie to receive a first place vote was Deron Williams , with whom Paul enjoyed a brief rivalry early in their careers . 
 At the 2007 All @-@ Star Weekend , Paul set new Rookie Challenge records with 17 assists and 9 steals . For his sophomore season , he increased his scoring and passing averages to 17 @.@ 3 points and 8 @.@ 9 assists per game , but played in only 64 games due to injury . 
 = = = = Rise to stardom ( 2007 – 11 ) = = = = 
 Paul was selected to his first NBA All @-@ Star Game in the 2007 – 08 , playing in front of his home fans in New Orleans . Behind his leadership , the Hornets were near the top of the Western Conference standings all year , temporarily occupying first place on March 17 following a win against the Chicago Bulls . New Orleans finished the season with a franchise @-@ record 56 wins and the second seed in the West . Paul led the NBA with 11 @.@ 6 assists and 2 @.@ 7 steals per game to go along with 21 @.@ 1 points per game , finishing second in NBA Most Valuable Player Award voting and being named to his first All @-@ NBA and All @-@ Defensive teams . In his playoff debut , he scored 35 points against the Dallas Mavericks . In Game 2 , he set a franchise playoff @-@ record 17 assists . The Hornets defeated the Mavericks in five games , with Paul registering 24 points , 11 rebounds , and 15 assists in the final game . New Orleans were eliminated in the next round by the San Antonio Spurs . 
 Prior to the start of the 2008 – 09 season , Paul signed a contract extension with the Hornets worth $ 68 million . On December 17 , he set the NBA record for consecutive games with a steal at 106 . On several occasions he came within a few steals of recording a quadruple @-@ double , including a 27 @-@ point , 10 rebound , 15 assist , and 7 steal game against the Philadelphia 76ers on January 26 . His final averages were 22 @.@ 8 points , 5 @.@ 5 rebounds , 11 assists , and 2 @.@ 8 steals per game . Despite Paul 's individual accomplishments , New Orleans ' record fell from the year before and they were eliminated in the first round of the playoffs by the Denver Nuggets . 
 After a slow start to the 2009 – 10 season , the Hornets fired coach Byron Scott . Paul stirred up controversy when he announced his displeasure with the move , commenting that team management should have " consulted with me and asked how I felt before it happened . " In early February , Paul tore cartilage in his left knee and was sidelined for over a month by surgery , forcing him to miss the All @-@ Star Game . In total , he played in only 45 games and his averages dropped to 18 @.@ 7 points , 3 @.@ 8 rebounds , 10 @.@ 7 assists , and 2 @.@ 1 steals per game . Without Paul , the Hornets struggled , missing the playoffs . 
 Paul had another injury scare on March 6 of the 2010 – 11 season , suffering a concussion after colliding with Cavalier guard Ramon Sessions and being carried off the court in a stretcher . He returned two games later , registering 33 points and 15 assists against the Sacramento Kings . With Paul playing a full season , the Hornets qualified for the playoffs and were matched up with the defending champion Los Angeles Lakers in the first round . Paul had a " historically great " performance in the series , contributing 33 points , 14 assists , and 4 steals in Game 1 and 27 points , 13 rebounds , and 15 assists in Game 4 . His final averages were 22 points , 6 @.@ 7 rebounds , 11 @.@ 5 assists , and 1 @.@ 8 steals per game on 54 @.@ 5 percent shooting . New Orleans were eliminated in six games , and ownership , fearing that Paul would leave the franchise via free agency , began actively pursuing a trade that would provide the team equitable compensation in return for his services . 
 = = = Los Angeles Clippers ( 2011 – present ) = = = 
 = = = = Trade to Los Angeles ( 2011 ) = = = = 
 On December 8 , 2011 , the Hornets agreed to a three @-@ team trade sending Paul to the Los Angeles Lakers . The NBA , who owned the team at the time , nullified the deal , with commissioner David Stern claiming New Orleans would be better off keeping Paul . The teams involved in the trade attempted to lobby the league to reverse its ruling and reconstruct the deal to no avail . On December 12 , the Hornets agreed to a trade sending Paul to the Los Angeles Clippers , but the deal broke down after the NBA added additional demands to the original terms . Two days later , the teams finally made the trade , sending Paul and two future second round draft picks to the Clippers for Eric Gordon , Chris Kaman , Al @-@ Farouq <unk> , and the Minnesota Timberwolves ' unprotected first round pick in the 2012 draft . Upon the deal 's completion , Paul announced that he would opt into the final year of his contract and remain in Los Angeles for at least two more seasons . 
 = = = = Playoff contention ( 2011 – present ) = = = = 
 Paul 's arrival to Los Angeles rejuvenated the Clippers franchise , with teammate Blake Griffin later commenting , " It put us on the map . " Early in Paul 's debut season , the team developed a reputation for their fast paced offense and spectacular alley @-@ oop dunks , usually from Paul to Griffin or DeAndre Jordan , earning them the nickname " Lob City " . Paul finished the year averaging 19 @.@ 8 points , 9 @.@ 1 assists , and 2 @.@ 5 steals per game , becoming the first Clipper to be named to the All @-@ NBA First Team since the franchise moved to Los Angeles in the 1980s . Behind his play and the emergence of Griffin as an All @-@ NBA performer , Los Angeles qualified for the playoffs , losing to the San Antonio Spurs in the Conference Semifinals . 
 At the 2013 All @-@ Star Game , Paul led the West to victory with a 20 @-@ point and 15 assist performance , earning his first All @-@ Star Game MVP Award . He finished the season averaging 16 @.@ 9 points , 9 @.@ 7 assists , and 2 @.@ 4 steals per game , helping the Clippers to a franchise @-@ record 56 wins . Seeded fourth in the West entering the playoffs , Los Angeles were defeated in the first round by the Memphis Grizzlies . Shortly after their early postseason exit , the Clippers announced they would not renew coach Vinny Del Negro 's contract and rumors arose of Paul forcing Del Negro out . Los Angeles later denied any player involvement in the coaching decision . 
 Prior to the start of the 2013 – 14 season , Paul re @-@ signed with the Clippers for five years on a contract worth approximately $ 107 million . Despite a shoulder injury that sidelined him for over a month , Los Angeles set another new franchise record for wins with 57 . His final averages were 19 @.@ 1 points , 10 @.@ 7 assists , and 2 @.@ 5 steals per game . In Game 1 of the second round of the playoffs , he hit a career postseason @-@ high eight three @-@ pointers to help the Clippers take an early series lead over the Oklahoma City Thunder . In Game 5 and with the series tied 2 – 2 , he made a string of late mistakes leading to an eventual Thunder victory , later commenting , " It 's me ... Everything that happened at the end is on me . " Oklahoma City eventually eliminated Los Angeles in six games . 
 In 2014 @-@ 15 , Paul played in all 82 games for the first time in his career , averaging 19 @.@ 1 points and a league @-@ high 10 @.@ 2 assists per game . In Game 7 of the first round of the playoffs , he hit a go @-@ ahead shot with a second left to lift the Clippers over the Spurs despite a hamstring injury . The injury forced him to miss the first two games of the next series versus the Houston Rockets , and Los Angeles eventually lost in seven games despite holding a 3 – 1 series lead . The defeat marked ten consecutive seasons and seven consecutive playoff appearances without a Conference Finals appearance for Paul . 
 = = National team career = = 
 Paul made his debut for the United States national team at the 2006 FIBA World Championship in Japan . He finished the competition with a tournament @-@ high 44 assists , helping Team USA win the bronze medal . At the 2008 Olympics in Beijing , he played a key role off the bench , scoring 13 points in a gold medal game victory against Spain . Team USA finished the competition with a perfect 8 − 0 record . Paul was promoted to the starting point guard position for the 2012 Olympics in London , averaging 8 @.@ 2 points , 5 @.@ 1 assists , and 1 @.@ 6 steals per game en route to another gold medal and undefeated tournament . 
 = = Player profile = = 
 Standing at 6 feet tall ( 1 @.@ 83 m ) and weighing 175 pounds ( 79 kg ) , Paul plays point guard exclusively . In his 2014 NBA preview , ESPN 's Kevin Pelton called Paul the league 's best point guard , adding , " a title he 's held throughout his career when healthy " . His career averages are 18 @.@ 7 points , 4 @.@ 4 rebounds , 9 @.@ 9 assists , and 2 @.@ 3 steals per game . He has earned All @-@ NBA honors seven times ( 2008 – 09 , 2011 – 15 ) , All @-@ Defensive honors seven times ( 2008 – 09 , 2011 – 15 ) , and led the NBA in steals six times ( 2008 – 09 , 2011 – 14 ) and in assists four times ( 2008 – 09 , 2014 – 2015 ) . In 2013 , he was ranked the third best player in the league by ESPN and Sports Illustrated . 
 Paul prefers playing in the half court versus playing up @-@ tempo . He creates scoring opportunities by constantly changing speeds ; upon beating his defender one @-@ on @-@ one or shedding him in the pick @-@ and @-@ roll , he will often slow down and box him out , denying him from regaining front side position and forcing the defense to help at all times . His ability to penetrate deep into the paint leads to easy shots for his teammates , and in 2013 he was second in the league in assisted three pointers . A deft midrange shooter , he is especially proficient from the right elbow , leading the league in shooting percentage from that area in 2015 . On defense , he aggravates opponents with active hands and high effort , and has been ranked as one of the best perimeter defenders in the NBA . 
 = = Off the court = = 
 Paul married his college sweetheart Jada Crawley on September 10 , 2011 . Together they have two children , Christopher Emmanuel Paul , Jr . ( born May 23 , 2009 ) and Camryn Alexis Paul ( born August 16 , 2012 ) . The family resides in a Mediterranean @-@ style mansion in Bel Air , which Paul bought from Avril Lavigne for $ 8 @.@ 5 million in 2012 . On November 11 , 2011 , Paul appeared with his family on Family Feud . 
 Paul is a Christian and attends church every Sunday whenever possible . In one interview , Paul commented , " I am so thankful that my parents raised me and C.J. to depend on God 's guidance and our faith in Him , and to always be thankful for what we receive . " He enjoys bowling and owns a franchise in the Professional Bowlers Association ( PBA ) League called <unk> He has hosted and participated in numerous celebrity and youth bowling events as the head of the <unk> Foundation , which benefits programs in Louisiana affected by Hurricane Katrina , as well as charities in Winston @-@ Salem . 
 Paul 's brother C.J. played college basketball at Hampton University and University of South Carolina Upstate . In 2004 , they played against each other when Wake Forest had a preseason exhibition with USC @-@ Upstate . C.J. now works as Chris 's personal manager . Paul is close friends with footballer Reggie Bush ; the two lived in the One River Place complex in the New Orleans Central Business District while Bush was playing for the Saints . They also shared a personal chef . 
 In 2014 , Forbes ranked Paul as one of the highest @-@ paid athletes in the world with $ 24 @.@ 2 million in earnings including $ 5 @.@ 5 million in endorsements . Some of the companies he does business with are Nike and State Farm . He was the cover athlete for the video game NBA <unk> . 
 Paul was selected president of the National Basketball Players Association on August 21 , 2013 after having served on the executive committee for four years . He was a key figure in the banning of Clippers owner Donald Sterling from the NBA following racist remarks Sterling made in 2014 ; in one interview , Paul mentioned a possible boycott if Sterling continued to own the team . Paul played a significant role in the election of Michele Roberts as the Executive Director of the Players Association , giving a strong recommendation to the executive committee responsible for filling the position . 
 = = NBA career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season = = = 
 = = = Playoffs = = = 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 = = = NBA = = = 
 9 × NBA All @-@ Star : 2008 , 2009 , 2010 , 2011 , 2012 , 2013 , 2014 , 2015 , 2016 
 8 × All @-@ NBA Team : 
 First Team : 2008 , 2012 , 2013 , 2014 
 Second Team : 2009 , 2015 , 2016 
 Third Team : 2011 
 8 × NBA All @-@ Defensive Team : 
 First Team : 2009 , 2012 , 2013 , 2014 , 2015 , 2016 
 Second Team : 2008 , 2011 
 NBA All @-@ Star Game Most Valuable Player Award : 2013 
 NBA Rookie of the Year : 2006 
 NBA All @-@ Rookie First Team : 2006 
 = = = College = = = 
 First team consensus All @-@ American : 2005 
 No. 3 retired by Wake Forest 
 2x All @-@ ACC Team 
 All @-@ ACC First Team : 2005 
 All @-@ ACC Third Team : 2004 
 All @-@ ACC Defensive Team : 2004 
 All @-@ ACC Freshman Team : 2004 
 ACC Rookie of the Year : 2004 
 All @-@ ACC Tournament Second Team : 2004 
 = = = United States National Team = = = 
 2x Olympic gold medalist : 2008 , 2012 
 FIBA World Championship bronze medalist : 2006 
 USA Basketball Male Athlete of the Year : 2004 
 = The Woman Hater ( 1910 Thanhouser film ) = 
 The Woman Hater is a 1910 American silent short drama produced by the Thanhouser Company . The film focuses on Tom Taylor , a woman @-@ hater , who sells his property to a financier at a play . In order to finalize the transaction , Taylor must go to the financier 's hotel and becomes the subject of a bet by Lou Bennett that she can win his affections . Lou succeeds in the bet , but Taylor finds out and is preparing to leave forever when Lou speaks to him . Little is known about the production or the cast other than a single credit of Violet Heming as Lou Bennett . The film was released on June 14 , 1910 , but is not know to have been reviewed by any trade publications . The film is presumed lost , but another production of the same name released the same year was rediscovered in New Zealand in 2010 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Though the film is presumed lost , a synopsis was published in the The Moving Picture World on June 18 , 1910 . It states : " Tom Taylor , the owner of a pretty rustic cottage , where he lives all alone , believes himself to be a woman hater , and reproaches his friend John Sparks , when the latter tries to ornament the cottage with posters of women . Taylor 's property is valuable , and at the opening of the play a financier purchases it at a satisfactory figure . To close the deal , Taylor is obliged to go to the financier 's hotel , and there he attracts the attention of four pretty young girl guests . One of them , Lou Bennett ( played by Violet Heming ) , asks John to introduce Tom . This John declines to do on the grounds that Tom is a woman hater . Lou bets the other girls that she can make Tom fall in love with her and propose to her within a week . They take the bet , not knowing Tom 's name or where he lives . They follow his horse , borrowing a buggy built for two , that is waiting outside the hotel . Lou meets Tom , and wins her bet - he falls in love with her . But , incidentally , the girl loses her own heart . Tom finds that he has been tricked , and is preparing to go away forever , when Lou arrives , speaks with him , and all ends nicely . " 
 = = Production = = 
 The writer of the scenario was Lloyd Lonergan . Lonergan was an experienced newspaperman employed by The New York Evening World while writing scripts for the Thanhouser productions . He was the most important script writer for Thanhouser , averaging 200 scripts a year from 1910 to 1915 . The film director is unknown , but it may have been Barry O 'Neil . Film historian Q. David Bowers does not attribute a cameraman for this production , but two possible candidates exist . Blair Smith was the first cameraman of the Thanhouser company , but he was soon joined by Carl Louis Gregory who had years of experience as a still and motion picture photographer . The role of the cameraman was uncredited in 1910 productions . 
 Only one credit for the film is known : Violet Heming as Lou Bennett . The other members cast in the production are unknown , but the cast may have included the leading players of the Thanhouser productions , Anna Rosemond and Frank H. Crane . Rosemond was one of two leading ladies for the first year of the company . Crane was also involved in the very beginnings of the Thanhouser Company and acted in numerous productions before becoming a director at Thanhouser . 
 = = Release = = 
 The single reel drama , approximately 1000 feet in length , was released on June 14 , 1910 . Theater advertisements for the film were found in newspapers in Indiana , Pennsylvania , Maryland , and Ohio . The film was alternatively known and advertised as Taming a Woman Hater . One theater in Pennsylvania would advertise Thanhouser 's Jane Eyre as a magnificent and costly production and follow it up with The Woman Hater with the generic advertisement promotion that it was a great film . It is unknown if published trade reviews for this work exist , but there is an absence of a citation Bowers . Given this absence , it is possible that additional details or commentary can be obtained from advertisements or local newspapers outside of typical trade publications . The film was labeled a comedy in an advertisement , using the name Taming a Woman Hater in The New York Dramatic Mirror on June 18 , 1910 . 
 Identification of the film in showings and reviews is complicated by the existence of Pat Power 's The Woman Hater . Though it bears the same name , the film was released on November 26 , 1910 . It was the Powers film that was rediscovered in New Zealand in 2010 . 
 = Hurricane Rick ( 1997 ) = 
 Hurricane Rick was the second @-@ latest hurricane ever to make landfall in Mexico . The eighteenth named storm , ninth and final hurricane of the 1997 Pacific hurricane season , Rick was a short @-@ lived Category 2 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale that weakened before making landfall in Mexico on November 10 . It hit almost a month after the more powerful Hurricane Pauline made landfall in the same country . Most of the damage associated with Pauline was exacerbated by the weaker Rick , which struck during rebuilding efforts . 
 Damage from Rick was fairly minor . As Rick was heading towards Mexico , the people on the coastline evacuated due to the impact of Pauline making them more prepared to deal with another hurricane , leading to no casualties . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Hurricane Rick 's ultimate origin was a tropical wave that left Africa on October 15 . While crossing the Atlantic , the wave was mainly tracked by continuity due to its lack or organization . After entering the Pacific , part of it developed cloudiness on November 5 when it was south of the Gulf of Tehuantepec . Organization and a circulation developed , and satellite tracking began on November 6 . The disturbance became better organized and formed into Tropical Depression Nineteen @-@ E on November 7 . 
 At first moving northwest , the depression was turned north by a trough . Around noon on November 8 , when it was about 375 miles ( 604 km ) southwest of Acapulco , the depression was upgraded to Tropical Storm Rick . The storm developed a cold central dense overcast , turned northeast , and became a hurricane on November 9 . An eye appeared that day , accompanied by a well @-@ center visible on Acapulco radar . The hurricane reached its peak intensity of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) and 973 mbar , making it a low @-@ end Category 2 on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale ; However , some sources disagree , saying that Rick was a Category 3 major hurricane at its peak . After weakening to 85 mph ( 137 km / h ) , it made landfall on Oaxaca on November 10 . Around the time of landfall , hurricane force winds extended 35 miles ( 56 km ) and tropical storm force winds extended 115 miles ( 185 km ) from the center , respectively . Rick continued to weaken while moving parallel to Mexico 's coast along the Gulf of Tehuantepec before dissipating into a <unk> swirl of clouds over Chiapas on November 11 . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 The pre @-@ Rick tropical depression was a threat to Mexico . Hours before upgrading , Mexican officials issued a tropical storm watch for the area between Lázaro Cárdenas , Michoacán and Puerto Escondido , Oaxaca . Three hours before Rick was upgraded to a hurricane , the watch was upgraded to a warning and a hurricane watch was issued and shortly afterward raised to a warning . On November 9 , the hurricane warning was extended to Zihuatanejo and Huatulco ; warnings for areas west of Zihuatanejo and Lázaro Cárdenas were dropped at the same time . However , warnings for areas west of and including Acapulco remained until lifted three hours later . On November 10 , warnings were extended from Punta Maldonado to Tapachula ; all warnings west of Punta Maldonado were dropped at that time . Then , Mexico 's Interior Ministry declared a state of emergency along the Oaxaca coast . Six hours later , the warnings were downgraded to tropical storm warnings . These warnings remained until they were dropped when Rick was downgraded to a depression . 
 The people in the coastal areas , most of which were already affected by the more catastrophic Pauline a month ago , were ready for Rick . All major ports along the coast were closed ahead of time in preparation , as well as airports in Huatulco and Puerto Escondido where power failures occurred because of Hurricane Rick . One hundred and thirty Red Cross workers , including twenty that were based in Mexico , who were in the area in the aftermath of Pauline , kept in the area to handle the second hurricane . Many people from Puerto Ángel , Huatulco , and Puerto Escondido ( where National Operations Director Bernardino Heredia was overseeing recovery efforts ) beach areas were evacuated . During the Puerto Ángel evacuation , helicopters landed carrying soldier and rifles , which one tourist likened to a third @-@ world revolution . In Chiapas , officials watched for flooding along the rivers and upstream river valleys , where the rains from three previous systems caused the ground to saturate and in the state capital of Tuxtla Gutiérrez , families were evacuated due to rising rivers . 
 = = Impact = = 
 The damage from Rick was minor in comparison to Pauline . In Oaxaca , the hurricane was responsible for dumping 10 inches ( 250 mm ) of rain onto the state , which in turn resulted in mudslides and flash floods in areas earlier ravaged by Pauline . These rains also resulted in the sea level rising three feet above normal levels due to high waves generated during its passage . The hurricane was also responsible for rendering bridges and roads unpassable in the state , which had only recently been repaired after they were damaged by two prior hurricanes : 1995 's Hurricane Roxanne in the Atlantic and Pauline , which had weakened bridges a month prior , allowing Rick to topple them , including a bridge near Puerto Escondido which left a 15 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) deep gap in the road . Among the major roads that were cut off were a mountain road from Puerto Angel to Oaxaca City , a route used to link the coast with Mexico City , and a route from Puerto Escondido with Acapulco . A total of 10 @.@ 47 inches ( 266 mm ) of rainfall , the highest total caused by Rick , was recorded in <unk> / San Pedro <unk> , which was near the point where the hurricane made landfall . Telephone communications and traffic were cut off to many villages in the wake of the hurricane . 
 Although Rick was much weaker than Pauline , there were some areas where Rick 's impact was greater than that of Pauline 's . One such place was the village of El <unk> , located 10 miles ( 16 km ) southeast of Puerto Escondido . There , eight houses were destroyed and roofs were torn off of many others , which residents attributed to more rain than in Pauline , even though the winds were roughly equal . Although there were no casualties , the hurricane caused more than 2000 people to become homeless . Most of what Pauline had left behind was destroyed by Rick , which one resident said was like " Pauline came to harvest the corn , and Rick came to harvest the peanuts . " 
 In the United States , Rick had a temporary economic impact when , during its time off the shore of Chiapas and Oaxaca , it caused the price of coffee to rise 4 @.@ 7 percent to $ 1 @.@ <unk> per pound on the Coffee , Sugar and Cocoa Exchange in New York , the highest total it reached since October 16 . Mexico is the United States 's largest source of coffee imports and Oaxaca and Chiapas are the largest coffee growing regions in Mexico . Like the impact in El <unk> , Rick 's effects were much worse than Pauline 's because Rick threatened the coffee crop when the beans were more susceptible to winds that could blow them off . 
 = = Records = = 
 Rick was one of only eight known hurricanes to form in the East Pacific in November . The others were Nina in 1957 , Tara in 1961 , Iwa in 1982 , Nora in 1991 , Sergio in 2006 , Kenneth in 2011 , and Sandra in 2015 . Rick was the second one of these to make landfall , although it was the third weakest of them , just slightly stronger than Nina and Iwa ( Tara 's central pressure is unknown ) . Rick is also the second @-@ latest hurricane in official records to have hit either coast of Mexico , behind only Tara . 
 = St. Gatien = 
 St. Gatien ( 1881 – after 1906 ) was a British Thoroughbred racehorse and sire . In 1884 he was involved in the second and final dead heat in the history of the Epsom Derby , part of an unbeaten sequence of twelve races . St. Gatien went on to become a dominant performer in long distance races , winning the Gold Cup and the Alexandra Plate at Royal Ascot , the Cesarewitch Handicap carrying a record weight , and three successive running of the Jockey Club Cup . 
 In a racing career which lasted from 1883 until October 1886 he ran nineteen times , won sixteen races and was never beaten at level weights . He was regarded by contemporary experts as one of the greatest horses of the 19th century . At the end of the 1886 season he was retired to stud where he had success in England , Germany and the United States . 
 = = Background = = 
 St. Gatien , bred by Major E. Brace , was a " grand , lengthy " bay horse with a white blaze and three white socks . Brace made several unsuccessful attempts to sell the colt for as little as £ 100 , before putting him into training with Robert Sherwood at his Exeter House stable at Newmarket , Suffolk . Sherwood agreed to train the horse at a reduced rate of thirty shillings a week instead of the usual fifty as he had very few horses in his stable at the time . At the end of 1883 , Brace succeeded in selling St. Gatien for £ 1 @,@ 400 to Jack Hammond , a former stable @-@ boy who had made his fortune as a professional gambler . In 1885 , St. Gatien was moved to the stable of James Waugh . 
 St. Gatien ’ s pedigree was obscure and controversial as his dam , a former carriage @-@ horse called Saint <unk> , may have been covered by two stallions in the year of his conception . She was originally sent to a stallion named <unk> at Worcester Park , but when the covering appeared to have been unsuccessful , she was covered by The Rover , a " <unk> @-@ legged , broken down " horse , who happened to be at the same farm . Most contemporary commentators believed that St. Gatien ’ s sire was The Rover , but it is possible that he was sired by <unk> . Neither stallion got any other horses of notable racing merit . The success of St. Gatien provoked interest in The Rover , who was found to have been sold for £ 50 and was standing in Ireland at a fee of three guineas . On 19 November 1884 The Rover was killed when his throat was cut in his stable at Listowel . His death was the subject of a court case the following year in which his bankrupt owner was accused of the “ malicious destruction ” of the stallion to prevent him falling into the hands of his creditors . 
 St. Gatien was ridden in most of his races by Charles Wood , who won the Championship in 1887 . Wood was a controversial figure who was later “ warned off ” ( banned from racing ) for almost nine years for his involvement in illegal betting and suspected race @-@ fixing . 
 = = Racing career = = 
 = = = 1883 : two @-@ year @-@ old season = = = 
 St. Gatien was unbeaten in three minor races as a two @-@ year @-@ old . His wins were in the Teddington Plate at Kempton , the John O ’ Gaunt Plate at Manchester Racecourse and the Little John Plate at Nottingham . The combined value of the three was less than £ 500 . 
 = = = 1884 : three @-@ year @-@ old season = = = 
 = = = = Epsom Derby = = = = 
 In April , St. Gatien made his first appearance in the betting lists for the Epsom Derby , being backed at odds of 40 / 1 . A correspondent for Bell 's Life had little to say in his favour at this time , pointing out that the races he had won had been very poorly contested . The Sportsman noted that he was supposedly a difficult horse to ride , but admitted that his connections ( his owner and trainer and their associates ) were among the " shrewdest people on the turf " and would be unlikely to waste their money backing a horse with no chance . 
 St. Gatien , who had not been entered for the 2000 Guineas , made his three @-@ year @-@ old debut in the Epsom Derby . The customary huge crowd was in attendance , despite the “ cold and cheerless ” weather . St. Gatien was not a popular choice with the public but was reportedly backed by the " sharps " ( those with inside knowledge ) and started at odds of 100 / 8 in a field of fifteen runners , the filly Queen Adelaide going off the 5 / 2 favourite . St. Gatien was one of the early leaders before being settled by his jockey , Charles Wood . At <unk> corner , St. Gatien moved into contention again on the outside as the field was led by Borneo and Richmond . Shortly after the turn into the straight Wood sent St. Gatien into the lead , closely followed by Sam <unk> on Harvester . The two colts pulled clear of their opponents and a “ tremendous struggle ” ensued as they raced “ locked together ” throughout the closing stages . Well inside the final furlong St. Gatien took a half length advantage but Harvester produced a final effort and the two leaders crossed the line together . Queen Adelaide finished strongly to take third after being blocked at a crucial stage . The judge was unable to separate St. Gatien and Harvester and after a brief delay a dead heat was called . The common practice at the time was for dead heats to be settled by the two horses immediately running again over the same course , although the prize could be shared if both owners agreed . Hammond , who stood to take £ 30 @,@ 000 in winning bets , offered to divide the stakes and Harvester ’ s owners accepted , 
 Shortly after the race a protest was lodged against St. Gatien on the grounds of " insufficient entry " - apparently a reference to his uncertain <unk> but this was quickly withdrawn . 
 = = = = After Epsom = = = = 
 On his first start after the Derby , St. Gatien was sent to Royal Ascot for the Gold Vase , in which he faced the top class older horses Corrie Roy ( who started favourite ) and Tristan at weight @-@ for @-@ age over two miles . Corrie Roy made the running until the straight , when Wood moved St. Gatien up to challenge . The Derby winner quickly took control the race and pulled away to win easily by four lengths from Corrie Roy , with Tristan a remote third . Later at the same meeting Corrie Roy won the Alexandra Plate , while Tristan beat Harvester in the Hardwicke Stakes . 
 St. Gatien , who had not been entered in the St. Leger , did not reappear until October 7 when he ran in the Cesarewitch Stakes at Newmarket . In the two and a quarter mile handicap he was assigned a weight of 122 pounds , meaning that he carried more weight than the other runners except the six @-@ year @-@ old Corrie Roy and the four @-@ year @-@ old Florence , the winner of the Grosser Preis von Baden . No three @-@ year @-@ old had ever won the race with such a weight , the previous record being 118 carried by Robert the Devil in 1880 . St. Gatien , who looked " magnificent " before the race , was restrained by Wood towards the back of the twenty runner field before being moved into contention two furlongs out . He was unable to obtain a clear run and had to be switched to the outside as the lead was disputed by Polemic and the French @-@ trained <unk> . Once in the clear , St. Gatien 's acceleration decided the race in a " very few strides " and he drew clear with " ridiculous ease " to win impressively by four lengths from Polemic ( carrying 85 pounds ) and <unk> ( 117 ) . His win was described by one correspondent as " the greatest that has ever been accomplished within in the memory of racing men , " while others took the race as evidence for a radical reformation of the weight @-@ for @-@ age scale . Jack Hammond reportedly took £ 40 @,@ 000 in winning bets on this occasion . 
 Although St. Gatien was entered in the Cambridgeshire Handicap at the next Newmarket meeting , he would have been required to carry 139 pounds , and his connections decided not to run , instead targeting the ten furlong Free Handicap at the same meeting on October 22 . He started odds @-@ on favourite and successfully conceded three pounds to Duke of Richmond , winning comfortably by three quarters of a length . On his final start of the year he won at Newmarket for the third time when taking the Jockey Club Cup . 
 Hopes for a meeting between St. Gatien and the other outstanding horse of his generation St. Simon were put in doubt when it appeared that the latter would be retired . Although St. Simon did stay in training in 1885 , he was unable to run and the much @-@ anticipated meeting of the " two Saints " never materialised . 
 = = = 1885 : four @-@ year @-@ old season = = = 
 Before the start of the 1885 season , Hammond announced that although St. Gatien would be entered for the most important handicap races , he would be mainly aimed at the major weight @-@ for @-@ age staying races . In spring however , all of Hammond 's plans were placed in jeopardy when St. Gatien fell seriously ill with what was described as " <unk> @-@ pneumonia " , placing his future as a racehorse in considerable doubt . 
 St. Gatien made a full recovery , and made his debut in the Gold Cup over two and a half miles at Royal Ascot on June 18 . Much interest in the Gold Cup was created by a " sealed entry " in the race by the Duke of Portland , with hopes that it would contain the name of St. Simon . St. Simon did not appear , but St. Gatien 's opponents for the race included Eole , the outstanding older horse in America in 1883 , and the 1884 2000 Guineas winner Scot Free . St. Gatien , who started the 1 / 3 favourite was always going easily and overtook Eole a furlong out before pulling clear to win " in a canter " by three lengths . On the following day he faced Eole again in the three mile Alexandra Plate which also attracted the leading French colt Hermitage . St. Gatien raced in last place for much of the way before moving up to take the lead two furlongs out and drawing away to win by six lengths . 
 At about this time there was a serious disagreement between Jack Hammond and Robert Sherwood , which resulted in Hammond removing all his horses , including St. Gatien from Sherwood 's stable and moving them across Newmarket to the Middleton Cottage stable of James Waugh . 
 In autumn Lord Hastings , the owner of the 1885 Derby winner Melton issued a challenge to Jack Hammond for a £ 1 @,@ 000 match race between his horse and St. Gatien , with Melton to receive nine pounds . The challenge was declined , as St. Gatien had already been heavily backed for the Cambridgeshire Handicap , a race in which he had been assigned 136 pounds and Hammond did not want to disrupt the horse 's preparation . St. Gatien returned to the racecourse after a break of four months in Her Majesty 's Plate over two miles at Newmarket on October 12 . The race proved meaningless as a contest , his only opponent being a three @-@ year @-@ old filly called Jane who had finished runner @-@ up in the 1000 Guineas . St. Gatien started at odds of 1 / 33 and won with predictable ease by twenty lengths . 
 In the Cambridgeshire over nine furlongs on 27 October , St. Gatien , now undefeated in eleven races , started 2 / 1 favourite in a field of twenty @-@ seven . He was prominent throughout the race but could never get on level terms with the filly <unk> who won impressively by two lengths carrying 124 pounds . St. Gatien was involved in a close race for the minor places and finished fifth , just behind Bendigo , Eastern Emperor and Caltha . He had no chance with the winner , but may have been unlucky not to finish second . Two days after losing his unbeaten record , St. Gatien returned to his favoured staying distance in the Jockey Club Cup . He started at odds of 1 / 8 and won the race very easily , beating <unk> by fifteen lengths . 
 After St. Gatien 's defeat in the Cambridgeshire , Hammond responded to the earlier challenge of Lord Hastings by suggesting a level @-@ weight match race between St. Gatien and Melton at some point in the following season for a stake of between £ 5 @,@ 000 and £ 20 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = 1886 : five @-@ year @-@ old season = = = 
 Much of the interest in the 1886 season concerned the newly inaugurated Eclipse Stakes at Sandown in July , which offered a then record prize of £ 10 @,@ 000 . From the start of the year , St. Gatien was seen as one of the leading contenders for the new race together with Bendigo and Minting . For the second year in succession , St. Gatien 's spring preparation was disrupted , this time by injury , although he was able to resume his training in time for Royal Ascot . It was reported that St. Gatien had been defeated by Melton in a private trial race in early 1886 , but there are few details and it is unclear whether or not this was a serious contest . 
 At Ascot , St. Gatien bypassed the staying events and ran instead in a Rous Memorial Stakes over one mile . He raced in third before taking the lead in the straight and in a well @-@ contested finish , he held off the three @-@ year @-@ old St. Michael , to whom he was conceding twenty @-@ four pounds , to win by a head . The Eclipse Stakes took place on July 23 over ten furlongs , at weight @-@ for @-@ age , with the winners of major races carrying extra weight " penalties " . St. Gatien started at 9 / 4 in a field of twelve , with Bendigo , receiving three pounds , going off the 6 / 4 favourite . St. Gatien started well and was settled by Wood to race just behind the leaders . In the straight he made his challenge but could never reach the lead and finished third , beaten three lengths and half a length by Bendigo and Candlemas . 
 St. Gatien returned to Newmarket on October 12 to attempt to win a second Cesarewitch . On this occasion , he was assigned a weight of 131 pounds , twenty @-@ three pounds more than any of the seventeen other runners . He made little show in the race and finished unplaced behind Stone Clink . Two days later , St. Gatien was given a chance to redeem his reputation when he met Stone Clink again in Her Majesty 's Plate over two miles . This race was at level weights and St. Gatien had no difficulty justifying his position as 4 / 9 favourite , taking the lead a furlong from the finish and winning very easily by three lengths . 
 St. Gatien 's last race came on October 29 when he finally met Melton in an official race . The race was effectively a match , with the only other runner starting at 100 / 1 . St. Gatien , who started a slight favourite , gave Melton three pounds and was never in danger of defeat . After taking the lead just after half way he " polished off " Melton in the easiest fashion and won unchallenged by eight lengths to record his third successive victory in the race . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 In May 1886 The Sporting Times carried out a poll of one hundred experts to create a ranking of the best British racehorses of the 19th century . St. Gatien was ranked seventh , having been placed in the top ten by thirty @-@ six of the contributors . Lists published later in the year by Baily 's Magazine and others also placed St. Gatien among the best of " modern times " . At least one English writer considered him the " Horse of the Century " and believed that on the day he won his third Jockey Club Cup , he would have beaten Ormonde . In 1884 , St. Gatien earned £ 7 @,@ 342 , the highest for any horse in Britain . 
 Mathew Dawson , who trained the winners of twenty @-@ eight Classics said of St. Gatien and St. Simon that " two better animals never trod the turf . " The " vexed question " of which of the two was the better , was never resolved on the racecourse . 
 = = Stud career = = 
 St. Gatien retired to the Heath Stud at Newmarket where he stood at an initial fee of 50 guineas . He remained in England until the summer of 1890 when he was sold to the German government for £ 14 @,@ 000 and exported to stand at <unk> . He returned to England to stand at the Cobham stud until 1898 when he was exported to the United States and sold privately to James Ben Ali Haggin . He stood at Rancho del Paso , California until its closure in 1905 . St. Gatien was repurchased by Haggin for $ 500 at the Rancho del Paso dispersal sale in December 1905 , and he was relocated to Haggin 's Elmendorf Farm . He was sold to George J. Long in January 1906 and was moved to Louisville , Kentucky . The best of St. Gatien 's progeny was probably <unk> ( out of <unk> ) , who was a leading two @-@ year @-@ old in Britain where his wins included the Dewhurst Stakes . He was exported to the United States where he was twice Leading sire in North America . 
 = = Pedigree = = 
 The following pedigree assumes that St. Gatien was sired by The Rover 
 = No. 8 Service Flying Training School RAAF = 
 No. 8 Service Flying Training School ( No. 8 SFTS ) was a flying training school of the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) that operated during World War II . It was formed in December 1941 , and graduated its first course in March 1942 . Responsible for intermediate and advanced instruction of pilots under the Empire Air Training Scheme ( EATS ) , the school was based at RAAF Station Bundaberg , Queensland , and operated Avro Anson aircraft . It spawned two maritime patrol squadrons in early 1943 , raised in response to increased Japanese submarine activity off Australia 's east coast . Some of the school 's aircraft were also attached to the Australian Army in 1944 – 45 . No. 8 SFTS completed its final training course in December 1944 , and was disbanded in July 1945 . 
 = = History = = 
 RAAF aircrew training expanded dramatically following the outbreak of World War II , in response to Australia 's participation in the Empire Air Training Scheme ( EATS ) . The Air Force 's pre @-@ war flight training facility , No. 1 Flying Training School at RAAF Station Point Cook , Victoria , was supplanted in 1940 – 41 by twelve Elementary Flying Training Schools ( EFTS ) , eight Service Flying Training Schools ( SFTS ) , and Central Flying School ( CFS ) . While CFS turned out new flight instructors , the EFTS provided basic training to prospective pilots who , if successful , would go on to an SFTS for further instruction that focussed on operational ( or " service " ) flying . The course at SFTS typically consisted of two streams , intermediate and advanced , and included such techniques as instrument flying , night flying , advanced aerobatics , formation flying , dive bombing , and aerial gunnery . The total duration of training varied during the war as demand for aircrew rose and fell . Initially running for 16 weeks , the course was cut to 10 weeks ( which included 75 hours flying time ) in October 1940 . A year later it was raised to 12 weeks ( including 100 hours flying time ) , and again to 16 weeks two months later . It continued to increase after this , peaking at 28 weeks in June 1944 . 
 No. 8 Service Flying Training School ( No. 8 SFTS ) was formed at RAAF Station Bundaberg , Queensland , on 14 December 1941 , under the control of No. 2 Training Group . Its inaugural commanding officer was Wing Commander I.C.C. Thomson . The new school was reported to have cost £ 300 @,@ 000 to establish , and joined No. 12 Elementary Flying Training School ( No. 12 EFTS ) , which was already based — temporarily — at Bundaberg . No. 8 SFTS received its first aircraft in January 1942 : 27 Avro Ansons released by other units . The same month , No. 12 EFTS transferred to its permanent home at RAAF Station Lowood . The standard intake of pilots at No. 8 SFTS each month was 50 , and the initial course of students graduated in March 1942 . By July that year , the total number of aircraft operated by the school had increased to 87 . 
 Flying accidents were commonplace at training establishments and No. 8 SFTS was no exception ; taxiing collisions , crash landings in the surrounding cane fields , and runway overshoots were regular occurrences . At least two aircraft were damaged each month in the early part of 1942 . The school 's first fatality , however , was from drowning , when staff were called out to assist victims of local flooding in February , and an aircraftman died during an attempted rescue . On 1 June 1942 , an Anson crashed into the sea off <unk> , near Bundaberg ; the pilot and two crew were reported as missing , believed killed . Three more aircrew were lost when an Anson apparently went down in the sea on 5 October . On 25 February 1943 , an Anson crashed during a night @-@ flying exercise , killing both pilots . The school suffered a ground fatality on 25 April 1944 , when a mechanic walked into the spinning propeller of an Anson he was servicing . Two more pilots were killed when an Anson dived into the ground on 8 December , following an apparent structural failure . 
 The outbreak of the Pacific War in December 1941 had led to aircraft at many SFTSs being classified as Second Line ( Reserve ) aircraft in the defence of Australia . Following directions issued in May 1942 , No. 71 Reserve Squadron was raised at Bundaberg , using resources allocated from No. 8 SFTS . One of the Ansons assigned to the squadron crashed on 5 June 1942 after running out of fuel in bad weather at night , killing the pilot and two crew members . In response to Japanese submarine activity off Australia 's east coast , the Federal government formally established two RAAF maritime patrol units in the first half of 1943 with personnel and aircraft from No. 8 SFTS . No. 71 Squadron was formed as a separate entity to the flying school on 26 January at Lowood , maintaining detachments at RAAF Stations Bundaberg and Amberley in Queensland , as well as at Richmond and , later , Coffs Harbour in New South Wales . No. 66 Squadron was formed at Bundaberg on 20 May . The squadrons undertook anti @-@ submarine , convoy escort , search @-@ and @-@ rescue , and army / naval cooperation duties . With the lessening of Japanese submarine activity towards the end of 1943 , the staff and aircraft of No. 66 Squadron were judged to be more urgently needed for training purposes ; the unit was disbanded on 6 January 1944 and its assets divided between No. 8 SFTS and No. 1 Operational Training Unit at RAAF Station East Sale , Victoria , as well as No. 71 Squadron . No. 71 Squadron was itself disbanded on 28 August 1944 at Coffs Harbour . 
 One of the flying school 's graduates in August 1944 was David Evans , who went on to become Chief of the Air Staff . His passing @-@ out parade was delayed by a month because , as Evans later discovered , the British government had peremptorily decided in April that it no longer required graduates from Australia , leaving the RAAF with a surplus of some 7 @,@ 000 aircrew . With training at No. 8 SFTS winding down , in October 1944 a civil operator , Aircraft Pty Ltd , began using Bundaberg for its flights between Brisbane and Rockhampton . The following month , six of the school 's Ansons were detached to the Australian Army , carrying out exercises with I Corps at Mareeba until March 1945 . The last course to graduate at No. 8 SFTS did so on 13 December 1944 ; all pilots still under instruction were transferred to No. 6 Service Flying Training School at RAAF Station Mallala , South Australia , to finish their course . The school spent the next few months preparing the base to be handed over to elements of the Netherlands East Indies Air Force before disbanding on 25 July 1945 . 
 = St. Johns River = 
 The St. Johns River ( Spanish : Río de San Juan ) is the longest river in the U.S. state of Florida and its most significant for commercial and recreational use . At 310 miles ( 500 km ) long , it winds through or borders twelve counties , three of which are the state 's largest . The drop in elevation from headwaters to mouth is less than 30 feet ( 9 m ) ; like most Florida waterways , the St. Johns has a very low flow rate 0 @.@ 3 mph ( 0 @.@ 13 m / s ) and is often described as " lazy " . It is believed to be one of the few rivers that flow north , although there are hundreds of the kind worldwide . Numerous lakes are formed by the river or flow into it , but as a river its widest point is nearly 3 miles ( 5 km ) across . The narrowest point is in the headwaters , an unnavigable marsh in Indian River County . The St. Johns drainage basin of 8 @,@ 840 square miles ( 22 @,@ 900 km2 ) includes some of Florida 's major wetlands . It is separated into three major basins and two associated watersheds for Lake George and the Ocklawaha River , all managed by the St. Johns River Water Management District . 
 A variety of people have lived on or near the St. Johns , including Paleo @-@ indians , Archaic people , Timucua , <unk> , French and Spanish settlers , Seminoles , slaves and freemen , Florida crackers , land developers , tourists and retirees . It has been the subject of William Bartram 's journals , Marjorie Kinnan Rawlings ' books , and Harriet Beecher Stowe 's letters home . Although Florida was the location of the first permanent European colony in what would become the United States , it was the last U.S. territory on the east coast to be developed ; it remained an undeveloped frontier into the 20th century . When attention was turned to the state , however , much of the land was rapidly overdeveloped in a national zeal for progress . The St. Johns , like many Florida rivers , was altered to make way for agricultural and residential centers . It suffered severe pollution and human interference that has diminished the natural order of life in and around the river . In all , 3 @.@ 5 million people live within the various watersheds that feed into the St. Johns River . The St. Johns , named one of 14 American Heritage Rivers in 1998 , was included on a list of America 's Ten Most Endangered Rivers in 2008 . Restoration efforts are under way for the basins around the St. Johns as Florida continues to deal with population increases in the river 's vicinity . 
 = = Geography and ecology = = 
 Starting in Indian River County and meeting the Atlantic Ocean at Duval County , the St. Johns is Florida 's primary commercial and recreational waterway . It flows north from its headwaters , originating in the direction of the Lake Wales Ridge , which is only slightly elevated at 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) above sea level . Because of this low elevation drop , the river has a long backwater . It ebbs and flows with tides that pass through the barrier islands and up the channel . Uniquely , it shares the same regional terrain as the parallel Kissimmee River , although the Kissimmee flows south . 
 = = = Upper basin = = = 
 The St. Johns River is separated into three basins and two associated watersheds managed by the St. Johns River Water Management District . Because the river flows in a northerly direction , the upper basin is located in the headwaters of the river at its southernmost point . Indian River County is where the river begins as a network of marshes , at a point west of Vero Beach aptly named the St. Johns Marsh in central Florida . The St. Johns River is a blackwater stream , meaning that it is fed primarily by swamps and marshes lying beneath it ; water seeps through the sandy soil and collects in a slight valley . The upper basin measures approximately 2 @,@ 000 square miles ( 5 @,@ 200 km2 ) ; the St. Johns transforms into a navigable waterway in Brevard County . The river touches on the borders of Osceola and Orange Counties , and flows through the southeast tip of Seminole County , transitioning into its middle basin a dozen miles ( 19 km ) or so north of Titusville . 
 The upper basin of the St. Johns was significantly lowered in the 1920s with the establishment of the Melbourne Tillman drainage project . This drained the St. Johns ' headwaters eastward to the Indian River through canals dug across the Ten @-@ Mile Ridge near Palm Bay . As of 2015 , these past diversions are being partially reversed through the first phase of the Canal 1 <unk> project . 
 The river is at its narrowest and most unpredictable in this basin . Channel flows are not apparent and are usually unmarked . The most efficient way to travel on this part of the river is by <unk> . Approximately 3 @,@ 500 lakes lie within the overall St. Johns watershed ; all are shallow , with maximum depths between 3 and 10 feet ( 1 and 3 m ) . The river flows into many of the lakes , which further confuses navigation . Eight larger lakes and five smaller ones lie in the upper basin ; one of the first is named Lake Hell ' n <unk> ( sometimes polished to read as Lake Helen or Hellen <unk> ) , referencing oaths yelled by boatmen and fishermen in the early 19th century , frustrated when trying to navigate through floating islands of macrophytes , or muck and weeds , as the islands changed location with the creeping flow . Lakes Washington , Winder , and Poinsett — named for Joel Roberts Poinsett , a diplomat who brought the <unk> to the United States — are located further along this stretch of the river . The northernmost points of the upper basin contain the <unk> Wildlife Management Area , created in 1977 to assist with filtration of waters flowing into the larger St. Johns . 
 Wetlands in the upper and middle basin are fed by rainwater , trapped by the structure of the surrounding land . It is an <unk> and nutrient @-@ poor environment ; what grows usually does so in peat which is created by centuries of decaying plant material . Water levels fluctuate with the subtropical wet and dry seasons . Rain in central and north Florida occurs seasonally during summer and winter , but farther south rain in winter is rare . All plants in these basins must tolerate water fluctuation , both flooding and drought . <unk> ( Magnolia virginiana ) , cypress ( Taxodium ) , and swamp tupelo ( Nyssa biflora ) trees often find great success in this region on raised land called hammocks . Trees that live in water for long periods usually have buttressed trunks , tangled , braided roots , or protrusions like cypress knees to obtain oxygen when under water , but the majority of plant life is aquatic . Wetland staples include the American white waterlily ( Nymphaea odorata ) , pitcher plants , and Virginia iris ( Iris <unk> ) . In the southernmost points of the river , Cladium , or sawgrass , grows in vast swaths of wet prairie that at one time extended into the Everglades . These wetland flora are remarkably successful in filtering pollutants that otherwise find their way into the river . 
 = = = Middle basin = = = 
 For 37 miles ( 60 km ) the river passes through a 1 @,@ 200 @-@ square @-@ mile ( 3 @,@ 100 km2 ) basin fed primarily by springs and stormwater runoff . This basin , spreading throughout Orange , Lake , Volusia , and Seminole Counties , is home to the greater Orlando metropolitan area , where two million people live and major tourist attractions are located . The topography of the middle basin varies between clearly distinguishable banks along the river and broad , shallow lakes . Two of the largest lakes in the middle basin are created by the river : Lake Harney and Lake Monroe . The shallow 9 @-@ square @-@ mile ( 23 km2 ) Lake Harney is fed by the long narrow Puzzle Lake ; immediately north is the Econlockhatchee River , which joins to increase the volume of the St. Johns to where navigation becomes easier for larger boats . The river veers west , touching on Lake Jesup before it empties into Lake Monroe , passing the city of Sanford . It is at this point that the St. Johns ' navigable waterway dredged and maintained by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers with channel markers maintained by the U.S. Coast Guard begins . Lake Monroe , a large lake at 15 square miles ( 39 km2 ) with an average depth of 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) , drains a surrounding watershed of 2 @,@ 420 square miles ( 6 @,@ 300 km2 ) . Sanford has adapted to the lake by building some of its downtown area on the waterfront ; citizens use boat transportation and Sanford 's public dock to commute into town . 
 <unk> an 8 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) deep channel about 100 yards ( 91 m ) wide after leaving Lake Monroe , the St. Johns meets its most significant tributary in the middle basin , the spring @-@ fed Wekiva River , discharging approximately 42 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 US gallons ( 160 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 L ) a day into the St. Johns . Near this confluence are the towns of <unk> and <unk> . Forests surrounding the Wekiva River are home to the largest black bear ( Ursus americanus floridanus ) population in Florida ; several troops of Rhesus monkeys ( Macaca mulatta ) have adapted to live near the river as well . The monkeys ' introduction to Florida is unclear ; they were reportedly brought either to serve in backdrop scenes of Tarzan movies filmed around the Silver River in the 1930s , or to lend an air of authenticity to " jungle cruises " provided by an enterprising boat operator around the same time . 
 Of most vital importance to marshes are invertebrate animals , the foundation of food webs . Amphibious invertebrates such as apple snails ( Pomacea paludosa ) , crayfish , and grass shrimp consume plant material , hastening its decomposition and acting as a food source for fish and birds . Insect larvae use water for breeding , feeding upon smaller copepods and amphipods that live in microscopic algae and periphyton formations . Mosquitos , born in water , are in turn the favorite food of 112 species of dragonflies and 44 species of damselflies in Florida . These animals are water hardy and adaptable to dry conditions when water levels fluctuate from one season to the next or through drought and flood cycles . 
 Of vertebrates , numerous species of frog , salamander , snake , turtle , and alligator ( Alligator mississippiensis ) proliferate in marsh waters . Most of these animals are active at night . Frog choruses are overwhelming ; during alligator mating season the grunts of bulls join in . The marshes around the St. Johns River upper basin teem with birds . A recent study counted 60 @,@ 000 birds in one month , nesting or feeding in the upper basin . Wading and water birds like the white ibis ( Eudocimus albus ) , wood stork ( Mycteria americana ) , and purple gallinule ( Porphyrio <unk> ) depend on the water for raising their young : they prey upon small fish and tadpoles in shallow water and puddles in the dry season . In successful seasons , their colonies can number in the thousands , creating a cacophony of calls and fertilizing trees with their droppings . 
 = = = Lake George = = = 
 The river turns north again as it rolls through a 46 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ( 190 km2 ) basin spreading across Putnam , Lake , and Marion Counties , and the western part of Volusia County . Slightly north of the Wekiva River is Blue Spring , the largest spring on the St. Johns , producing over 64 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 US gallons ( 240 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 L ) a day . Florida springs stay at an even temperature of 72 ° F ( 22 ° C ) throughout the year . Because of this , Blue Spring is the winter home for West Indian manatees ( Trichechus manatus latirostris ) , and they are protected within Blue Spring State Park . Manatees are large , slow @-@ moving herbivorous aquatic mammals whose primary threats are human development and collisions with swiftly moving watercraft . Many parts of the St. Johns and its tributaries are no @-@ wake zones to protect manatees from being critically or fatally injured by boat propellers . Human interaction with manatees in Blue Spring State Park is forbidden . 
 Bordering to the north of Blue Spring State Park is <unk> Island State Park , accessible only by boat . In 1955 an extremely rare Timucua totem representing an owl was found buried and preserved in the St. Johns muck off of <unk> Island . The figure may signify that its creators were part of the owl clan . Representing different clans of the Timucua , two more totems — in all , the only totems in North America to have been found outside of the Pacific Northwest — shaped like a pelican and otter were found in 1978 after being snagged by a barge at the bottom of the river . River otters ( Lutra canadensis ) can be found through the length of the St. Johns and its tributaries , living in burrows or in the roots of trees bordering waterways . They eat crayfish , turtles , and small fish , and are active usually at night , playful but shy of human contact . 
 The St. Johns creeps into the southern tip of Lake George , the second largest lake in Florida at 72 square miles ( 190 km2 ) , 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) wide and 12 miles ( 19 km ) long . The watershed surrounding Lake George expands through 3 @,@ 590 square miles ( 9 @,@ 300 km2 ) , lying within Ocala National Forest and Lake George State Forest , that protect an ecosystem dominated by pine and scrub more than 380 @,@ 000 acres ( 1 @,@ 500 km2 ) and 21 @,@ 000 acres ( 85 km2 ) in size , respectively . Flatwoods forests dominate the Lake George watershed , with slash pines ( Pinus elliottii ) , saw palmetto ( Serenoa repens ) , and over 100 species of groundcover or herbal plants that grow in poor , sandy soil . Flatwoods pine forests stay relatively dry , but can withstand short periods of flooding . Larger land animals such as wild turkeys ( Meleagris gallopavo ) , sandhill cranes ( Grus canadensis ) , and the largest population of southern bald eagles ( Haliaeetus leucocephalus leucocephalus ) in the contiguous U.S , find it easier to live in the flatwoods . Typical mammals that live in these ecosystems , such as raccoons ( Procyon lotor ) , opossums ( Didelphis virginiana ) , bobcats ( Lynx rufus ) , and white tailed @-@ deer ( Odocoileus virginianus ) , are ones that prefer dry , flat areas with good ground cover and available nesting sites . 
 = = = Ocklawaha River = = = 
 The Ocklawaha River flows north and joins the St. Johns as the largest tributary , and one of significant historical importance . The Ocklawaha ( also printed as <unk> ) drainage basin expands through Orange , Lake , Marion , and Alachua Counties , comprising a total of 2 @,@ 769 square miles ( 7 @,@ 170 km2 ) . Ocala , Gainesville , and the northern suburbs of the Orlando metropolitan area are included in this basin . There are two headwaters for the Ocklawaha : a chain of lakes , the largest of which is Lake Apopka in Lake County , and the Green Swamp near Haines City in Polk County , drained by the <unk> River . The Silver River , fed by one of Florida 's most productive springs expelling 54 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 US gallons ( 200 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 L ) daily , is located about midway along the 96 @-@ mile ( 154 km ) Ocklawaha . 
 Confederate Captain John William Pearson named his milita after the Ocklawaha River called the Ocklawaha Rangers in the American Civil War . Prior to the civil war , Pearson ran a successful health resort in Orange Springs . After the civil war , Pearson 's Orange Springs resort declined in popularity due to the increasing attention to nearby Silver Springs — the source of the Silver River — at the turn of the 20th century , popularizing the Ocklawaha . Georgia @-@ born poet Sidney Lanier called it " the sweetest <unk> in the world " in a travel guide he published in 1876 . The river gave Marjorie Kinnan Rawlings access to the St. Johns from her homestead at Orange Lake . The region served as a major fishing attraction until a decline in water quality occurred in the 1940s , and since then further degradation of the river and its sources have occurred . In particular , Lake Apopka earned the designation of Florida 's most polluted lake following a chemical spill in 1980 that dumped DDE in it . It has experienced chronic algal blooms caused by citrus farm fertilizer and wastewater runoff from nearby farms . 
 The proliferation of largemouth bass ( <unk> <unk> ) , black crappie ( <unk> <unk> ) , and bluegill ( Lepomis <unk> ) in central Florida is a major attraction for fishermen from all over the country . The St. Johns is home to 183 species of fish , 55 of which appear in the main stem of the river . One , the southern tessellated darter ( <unk> <unk> ) is found only in the Ocklawaha . Some are marine species that either migrate upriver to spawn or have found spring @-@ fed habitats that are high in salinity , such as a colony of Atlantic stingrays ( Dasyatis sabina ) that live in Lake Washington in the upper basin . Ocean worms , snails , and white @-@ fingered mud crabs ( <unk> harrisii ) have also been found far upriver where tidal influences are rare . In contrast , American eels ( Anguilla rostrata ) live in the St. Johns and Ocklawaha and spawn in the Sargasso Sea in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean . After a year living in the ocean , many of them find their way back to the St. Johns to live , then , prompted by the phases of the moon , make the return journey to spawn and die . 
 = = = Lower basin = = = 
 From the intersection of the Ocklawaha River , 101 miles ( 163 km ) to the Atlantic Ocean , the St. Johns lies within the lower basin , draining a total area of 2 @,@ 600 square miles ( 6 @,@ 700 km2 ) in Putnam , St. Johns , Clay , and Duval Counties . Twelve tributaries empty into the river in the lower basin . The St. Johns River widens considerably on the north end of Lake George ; between Lake George and Palatka the river ranges between 600 and 2 @,@ 640 feet ( 180 and 800 m ) wide . Between Palatka and Jacksonville , that widens further to between 1 and 3 miles ( 1 @.@ 6 and 4 @.@ 8 km ) . This portion of the river is the most navigable and shipping is its primary use . The Army Corps of Engineers maintains shipping channels at least 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) deep and 100 feet ( 30 m ) wide . North of Palatka , the channels are expanded to 40 feet ( 12 m ) deep and between 400 and 900 feet ( 120 and 270 m ) wide . 
 The towns and cities along the lower basin of the river are some of the oldest in Florida , and their histories have centered on the river . Both Palatka and Green Cove Springs have been popular tourist destinations in the past . Several smaller locations along the river sprang up around ferry landings , but when rail lines and then Interstate highways were constructed closer to the Atlantic Coast , many of the towns experienced significant economic decline , and ferry landings were forgotten . 
 The final 35 miles ( 56 km ) of the river 's course runs through Jacksonville , the largest city by area in the contiguous United States , with a population of more than a million . Much of the economic base of Jacksonville depends on the river : 18 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 short tons ( 16 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 t ) of goods are shipped in and out of Jacksonville annually . Exports include paper , phosphate , fertilizers , and citrus , while major imports include oil , coffee , limestone , cars , and lumber . The Port of Jacksonville produces $ 1 @.@ 38 billion in the local economy and supports 10 @,@ 000 jobs . The U.S. Navy has two bases in the Jacksonville area : Naval Station Mayport , at the mouth of the river , serves as the second largest Atlantic Fleet operation and home port in the country . Naval Air Station Jacksonville is one of the service 's largest air installations , home to two air wings and over 150 fixed @-@ wing and rotary @-@ wing aircraft , and the host for one of only two full @-@ fledged Naval Hospitals remaining in Florida . 
 Using an unofficial nickname of " The River City " , Jacksonville has a culture centered on the St. Johns . An annual footrace named the Gate River Run accepts 18 @,@ 000 participants who travel a course along and over the river twice . The largest <unk> tournament in the U.S. is held on a St. Johns tributary , where sport fishers concentrate on king mackerel ( Scomberomorus <unk> ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) , dolphin ( <unk> <unk> ) and <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) . The home stadium for the Jacksonville Jaguars faces the river , as does most of the commercial center of downtown . Eight bridges span the St. Johns at Jacksonville ; all of them allow tall ships to pass , although some restrict passing times when train or automobile traffic is heavy . 
 \ \ 
 Tides cause seawater to enter the mouth of the St. Johns River and can affect the river 's level into the middle basin . As a result , much of the river in Jacksonville is part seawater , making it an estuarine ecosystem . The animals and plants in these systems can tolerate both fresh and salt water , and the fluctuations in saline content and temperatures associated with tidal surges and heavy rainfall discharge . Marine animals such as dolphins and sharks can be spotted at times in the St. Johns at Jacksonville as can manatees . Fish such as mullet ( <unk> ) , flounder ( Paralichthys <unk> ) , shad ( <unk> <unk> ) , and blue crabs ( Callinectes sapidus ) migrate from the ocean to freshwater springs upriver to spawn . 
 Although freshwater invertebrates inhabiting and comprising algae and periphyton make the foundation of food webs in the middle and lower basin , zooplankton and phytoplankton take that role in the estuarine habitat . <unk> gather at the St. Johns estuary in large numbers , feeding on the bottom of the river and ocean floors . The abundance and importance of oysters ( Crassostrea <unk> ) is apparent in the many middens left by the Timucua in mounds many feet high . Oysters and other mollusks serve as the primary food source of shorebirds . The large trees that line the river from its source to south of Jacksonville begin to transition into salt marshes east of the city . Mayport is home to approximately 20 shrimping vessels that use the mouth of the St. Johns to access the Atlantic Ocean . 
 = = Formation and hydrology = = 
 = = = Geologic history = = = 
 Lying within a coastal plain , the St. Johns River passes through an area that was at one time barrier islands , coastal dunes , and estuary marshes . The Florida Peninsula was created primarily by forces and minerals from the ocean . It lies so low that minor fluctuations in sea levels can have a dramatic effect on its geomorphology . Florida was once part of the supercontinent Gondwana . Lying underneath the visible rock formations is a basement of igneous granite and volcanic composition under a sedimentary layer formed during the Paleozoic era 542 to 251 million years ago . During the Cretaceous period ( 145 to 66 million years ago ) , the basement and its sedimentary overlay were further covered by calcium carbonate and formations left by the evaporation of water called evaporites . What covers the peninsula is the result of simultaneous processes of deposits of sands , shells , and coral , and erosion from water and weather . As ocean water has retreated and progressed , the peninsula has been covered with sea water at least seven times . Waves compressed sands , calcium carbonate , and shells into limestone ; at the ocean 's edge , beach ridges were created by this depositional forming . North @-@ south axis rivers , such as the St. Johns , were created by past beach ridges which were often divided by swales . As ocean water retreated , lagoons formed in the swales , which were further eroded by acidic water . Barrier islands , furthermore , formed along the Atlantic Coast , surrounding the lagoon with land and forming a freshwater river . 
 From its origins to approximately the area of Sanford , the St. Johns flows north . It takes a sharp turn west near Sanford for a few miles — which is referred to as the St. Johns River offset , but shortly changes direction to flow north again . Geologists hypothesize that the west @-@ flowing offset may have formed earlier than the north flowing portions , possibly during the late Tertiary or early Pleistocene era 66 to 12 million years ago . Some fracturing and faulting may also be responsible for the offset . Although seismic activity in Florida is mostly insignificant , several minor earthquakes have occurred near the St. Johns River , caused by the trough created by Pangaean rifting . 
 = = = Springs and aquifers = = = 
 All of Florida 's abundant fresh water is the result of precipitation that returns to the atmosphere in a process called evapotranspiration that involves evaporation and transpiration of moisture from plants . As rains fall , most of the water is directed to lakes , streams , and rivers . However , a significant amount of fresh water is held underground but close to the surface in aquifers . A surficial aquifer consisting mostly of clay , shells , and sand is over a confining layer of denser materials . Wells are drilled in the surficial aquifer , which supplies better quality water in areas where the deepest aquifer has a high mineral content . Occasionally the confining layer is fractured to allow breaches of water to percolate down to recharge the layer below . The Floridan Aquifer , underneath the confining layer , underlies the entire state and portions of Georgia , Alabama , and South Carolina . It is particularly accessible in the northern part of Florida , serving as the fresh water source of metropolitan areas from St. Petersburg north to Jacksonville and Tallahassee . 
 Acidic rainwater erodes the limestone and can form underground caverns . When the overlay of these caverns is particularly thin — less than 100 feet ( 30 m ) — sinkholes can form . Where the limestone or sand / clay overlay dissolves over the aquifer and the pressure of the water pushes out , springs form . The upper and middle basins of the St. Johns River are located in a portion of the peninsula where the aquifer system is thinly confined , meaning springs and sinkholes are abundant . Springs are measured in magnitude of how much water is discharged , which is dependent upon season and rainfall . The greatest discharge is from first magnitude springs that emit at least 100 cubic feet ( 2 @.@ 8 m3 ) of water per second . There are four first magnitude springs that feed the St. Johns River : Silver Springs in Marion County , emitting between 250 and 1 @,@ 290 cubic feet ( 7 @.@ 1 and 36 @.@ 5 m3 ) / second ; Silver Glen Spring straddling Marion and Lake Counties , emitting between 38 and 245 cubic feet ( 1 @.@ 1 and 6 @.@ 9 m3 ) / second ; Alexander Springs in Lake County , emitting between 56 and 202 cubic feet ( 1 @.@ 6 and 5 @.@ 7 m3 ) / second ; and Blue Spring in Volusia County , emitting between 87 and 218 cubic feet ( 2 @.@ 5 and 6 @.@ 2 m3 ) / second . 
 = = = Rainfall and climate = = = 
 The St. Johns River lies within a humid subtropical zone . In summer months , the temperature ranges from 74 and 92 ° F ( 23 and 33 ° C ) , and between 50 and 72 ° F ( 10 and 22 ° C ) in the winter , although drops may occur in winter months to below freezing approximately a dozen times . Water temperatures in the river correlate to the air temperatures . The average range of water temperatures is between 50 and 95 ° F ( 10 and 35 ° C ) , rising in the summer months . Where the river widens between Palatka and Jacksonville , wind becomes a significant factor in navigation , and both <unk> waves and calm surface waters are common . 
 Rain occurs more frequently in late summer and early fall . Tropical storms and nor 'easters are common occurrences along the Atlantic coast of Florida ; the St. Johns River lies between 10 and 30 miles ( 16 and 48 km ) inland , so any storm striking the counties of Indian River north to Duval produces rain that is drained by the St. Johns River . Tropical Storm Fay in 2008 deposited 16 inches ( 410 mm ) of rain in a 5 @-@ day period , most of it located near Melbourne . The St. Johns near Geneva in Seminole County rose 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) in four days , setting a record . The river near Sanford rose 3 feet ( 1 m ) in 36 hours . Fay caused severe flooding in the middle basin due not only to the deluge but the flat slopes of the river . Typically , however , the St. Johns basin receives between 50 and 54 inches ( 1 @,@ 300 and 1 @,@ 400 mm ) of rain annually , half of it in summer months . The rate of evapotranspiration corresponds to rainfall , ranging between 27 and 57 inches ( 690 and 1 @,@ 450 mm ) a year , most of it occurring in the summer . 
 = = = Flow rates and water quality = = = 
 The entire river lies within the nearly flat Pamlico terrace , giving it an overall gradient of 0 @.@ 8 inches ( 2 @.@ 0 cm ) per mile ( km ) ; it is one of the flattest major rivers on the continent . Its proximity to the ocean in the lower basin affects its rise and fall with tides and salinity . Tides regularly affect water levels as far south as Lake George ; when combined with extreme winds , the river 's tidal effects can extend to Lake Monroe 161 miles ( 259 km ) away and have on occasion reached Lake Harney . Tides typically raise the river level about 1 @.@ 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 37 m ) at Jacksonville , decreasing some to 0 @.@ 7 feet ( 0 @.@ 21 m ) at Orange Park where the river widens , and increasing back to 1 @.@ 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 37 m ) at Palatka as it narrows . As a result of tidal effects , discharge measurements in the lower basin are often inaccurate . However , the estimated rate of discharge between the Ocklawaha River and the center of Jacksonville ranges from 4 @,@ 000 to 8 @,@ 300 cubic feet ( 110 to 240 m3 ) per second . The <unk> discharge at the mouth at Mayport averages 15 @,@ 000 cubic feet ( 420 m3 ) per second , but with tides it exceeds 50 @,@ 000 cubic feet ( 1 @,@ 400 m3 ) per second , and following heavy rains combined with tides can top 150 @,@ 000 cubic feet ( 4 @,@ 200 m3 ) per second . Farther upriver , the discharge rate ranges from 1 @,@ 030 cubic feet ( 29 m3 ) per second near Lake Poinsett to 2 @,@ 850 cubic feet ( 81 m3 ) per second near DeLand . The confluence of numerous springs , the Econlockhatchee River , and the Wekiva River causes the average discharge to increase by 940 cubic feet ( 27 m3 ) per second between Lake Harney and DeLand , representing the greatest annual average increase of streamflow along the St. Johns . 
 As distance between the mouth of the St. Johns and the middle and upper basins increases , the salinity in the river gradually decreases . Marine water measures at 35 parts per thousand ( ppt ) or more while fresh water measures below 2 ppt . What ranges in between is characterized as brackish water . Near the center of Jacksonville , average measures have been collected at 11 @.@ 40 ppt . Farther south at the Buckman Bridge , joining the south side of Jacksonville to Orange Park , it decreases to 2 @.@ 9 ppt and falls again to 0 @.@ 81 ppt at the Shands Bridge near Green Cove Springs . 
 Dissolved oxygen in fresh water is measured to indicate the health of plant and animal life . It enters water through the atmosphere and from aquatic plant photosynthesis , and is affected by water pressure and temperature . Rapid decomposition of organic materials will decrease the amount of dissolved oxygen in the river , as will nutrients added to the water artificially by wastewater treatment runoff or drainage from fertilized agricultural fields . The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the State of Florida recommend no less than 5 mg of oxygen per liter . Several locations on the St. Johns or its tributaries reported at or below these minimums in the 1990s , including the mouth of the Wekiva River , the St. Johns at the town of Christmas , and in the early 2000s at Blue Spring and Blackwater Creek . Sustained low levels of dissolved oxygen may create algal blooms , which may also cause a further decrease in dissolved oxygen . 
 Like all blackwater streams in Florida , the color of most of the St. Johns is black , owing to the tannins in leaf litter and decaying aquatic plants . Spring fed streams , on the other hand , are remarkably clear and visibility is very high , even when the river bottom is dozens of feet below . 
 = = Human history = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ Columbian people = = = 
 Humans arrived on the Florida Peninsula about 12 @,@ 000 years ago when the ocean was about 350 feet ( 110 m ) lower than today , and the peninsula was double its current size . These earliest people are called Paleo @-@ Indians . They were primarily hunter – gatherers who followed large game , such as mastodons , horses , camels , and bison . Much of the land was far from water — most fresh water was contained in glaciers and polar ice caps . As a result , Florida was an arid landscape with few trees , dominated by grasslands and scrub vegetation . 
 Around 9 @,@ 000 years ago , the climate warmed , melting much of the polar ice caps and many glaciers , creating a wetter environment and submerging half the peninsular shelf . As Paleo @-@ Indians now did not have to travel as far to find water , their camps became more permanent , turning into villages . With evidence of a wide variety of tools constructed around this time , archeologists note the transition into Archaic people . The Archaic people made tools from bone , animal teeth , and antlers . They wove fibers from plants such as cabbage palms and saw palmettos . A few burial sites have been excavated — including the <unk> Archaeological Site in Brevard County near Titusville — that provide evidence of burial rituals . Archaic peoples interred their dead in shallow peat marshes , which preserved much of the human tissue . Further climate change between 5 @,@ 000 and 3 @,@ 000 years ago led to the Middle Archaic period ; evidence suggests that human habitation near the St. Johns River first occurred during this era . Populations of indigenous people increased significantly at this time , and numerous settlements near the St. Johns have been recorded from this era ; the banks of the St. Johns and its arteries are dotted with middens filled with thousands of shells , primarily those of <unk> <unk> — a freshwater snail — and oysters . 
 The advent of regional types of pottery and stone tools made of flint or limestone marked further advancements around 500 BCE . The Archaic people transitioned into settled groups around Florida . From the central part of the state north , along the Atlantic Coast lived people in the St. Johns culture , named for the most significant nearby natural formation . Around 750 CE , the St. Johns culture learned to cultivate corn , adding to their diet of fish , game , and gourds . Archeologists and anthropologists date this agricultural advancement to coincide with a spread of archeological sites , suggesting that a population increase followed . When European explorers arrived in north Florida , they met the Timucua , numbering about 14 @,@ 000 , the largest group of indigenous people in the region . The later Seminole people called the river <unk> or <unk> . These forms may derive from the Creek wi @-@ <unk> , " big water " , a compound usually applied to large rivers that run through lakes ; the St. Johns forms and borders numerous lakes . Alternately , the Seminole name may derive from <unk> ( from wi @-@ <unk> , " water " and " coming " ) , perhaps a reference to the river 's slow discharge and the tidal effects on it . The name is sometimes rendered as " Chain of Lakes " in English . 
 = = = Colonial era = = = 
 The first known European reference to Florida is in a 1502 map by <unk> , which maps Florida and aptly describes the unique vegetation rafts in the St. Johns Rivers by originally naming the river the Rio de las <unk> ( River of Rafts ) . Later , in 1513 Juan Ponce de León arrived near Cape Canaveral , and not until 1562 did Europeans settle the north Atlantic coast of the peninsula . Early Spanish explorers named the river Rio de <unk> ( River of Currents ) . The St. Johns River became the first place colonized in the region and its first battleground : when French explorer Jean Ribault erected a monument south of the river 's mouth to make the French presence known , it alarmed the Spanish who had been exploring the southern and western coast of the peninsula for decades . Ribault was detained after he returned to Europe . 
 In 1564 , René <unk> de Laudonnière arrived to build Fort Caroline at the mouth of the St. Johns River ; they called the river Rivière de Mai because they settled it on May 1 . An artist named Jacques LeMoyne documented what he saw among the Timucuan people in 1564 , portraying them as physically powerful and not lacking for provisions . Fort Caroline did not last long , though relations with the local Timucua and <unk> were friendly . The colony was unable to support itself ; some of the French deserted . Those who remained were killed in 1565 by the Spanish , led by Pedro Menéndez , when they marched north from St. Augustine and captured Fort Caroline . The river was renamed San Mateo by the Spanish in honor of the Apostle Matthew , whose feast was the following day . Capturing Fort Caroline allowed the Spanish to maintain control of the river . 
 The French and Spanish continued to spar over who would control the natural resources and native peoples of the colony , foreshadowing a history during which eight different countries would control the river . The Timucua , who had initially befriended the French , were not encouraged to make the Spanish allies because of colonial governor Pedro Menéndez de Avilés ' abhorrence of French Protestantism and his view that the Timucuan beliefs were " Satanic " . By 1573 , the Timucua were in outright rebellion , testing the governor 's patience and forcing Spanish settlers to abandon farms and garrisons in more interior parts of Florida ; the Spanish could not persuade the Timucua to keep from attacking them . 
 Over a hundred years later , missionaries had more success , setting up posts along the river . Spanish Franciscan missionaries gave the river its current name based on San Juan del Puerto ( St. John of the Harbor ) , the mission established at the river 's mouth following the demise of the French fort . The name first appeared on a Spanish map created between 1680 and 1700 . 
 The Timucua , as other groups of indigenous people in Florida , began to lose cohesion and numbers by the 18th century . A tribe located in modern @-@ day Georgia and Alabama called the Creeks assisted with this ; in 1702 , they joined with the Yamasee and attacked some of the Timucua , forcing them to seek protection from the Spanish who forced them into slavery . The Creeks began assimilating other people and spread farther south until they were known by 1765 as Seminoles by the British , a term adapted from <unk> that meant " runaways " or " wild ones " . The Seminoles employed a variety of languages from the peoples the Creeks had assimilated : <unk> , Muskogee , as well as Timucua . Between 1716 and 1767 , the Seminoles gradually moved into Florida and began to break ties with the Creeks to become a cohesive tribe of their own . The St. Johns provided a natural boundary to separate European colonies on the east bank and indigenous lands west of the river . 
 After Florida came under the Kingdom of Great Britain 's jurisdiction in 1763 , Quaker father and son naturalists John and William Bartram explored the length of the river while visiting the southeastern United States from 1765 to 1766 . They published journals describing their experiences and the plants and animals they observed . They were charged by King George III to find the source of the river they called the <unk> or San Juan , and measured its widths and depths , taking soil samples as they traveled southward . William returned to Florida from 1773 to 1777 and wrote another journal about his travels , while he collected plants and befriended the Seminoles who called him " <unk> <unk> " ( flower hunter ) . William 's visit took him as far south as Blue Spring , where he remarked on the crystal clear views offered by the spring water : " The water is perfectly diaphanous , and here are continually a prodigious number and variety of fish ; they appear as plain as though lying on a table before your eyes , although many feet deep in the water . " Bartram 's journals attracted the attention of such prominent Americans as James Madison and Alexander Hamilton . The success of these journals inspired other naturalists such as André Michaux to further explore the St. Johns , as he did in 1788 , sailing from Palatka south to Lake Monroe , and gave names to some of the plants described by the <unk> ' journals . Michaux was followed by William Baldwin between 1811 and 1817 . Subsequent explorers , including John James Audubon , have carried William 's Travels Through North & South Carolina , Georgia , East & West Florida with them as a guide . 
 In 1795 , Florida was transferred back to Spain which lured Americans with cheap land . A former loyalist to Britain who left South Carolina during the American Revolutionary War , a planter and slave trader named Zephaniah Kingsley seized the opportunity and built a plantation named Laurel Grove near what is now Doctors Lake , close to the west bank of the St. Johns River , south of where Orange Park is today . Three years later , Kingsley took a trip to Cuba and purchased a 13 @-@ year @-@ old Wolof girl named Anna Madgigine Jai . She became his common @-@ law wife , and managed Laurel Grove while Kingsley traveled and conducted business . The plantation grew citrus and sea island cotton ( Gossypium <unk> ) . In 1814 , they moved to a larger plantation on Fort George Island , where they lived for 25 years , and owned several other plantations and homesteads in what is today Jacksonville and another on Drayton Island at the north end of Lake George . Kingsley later married three other freed women in a polygamous relationship ; Spanish @-@ controlled Florida allowed interracial marriages , and white landowners such as James Erwin , George Clarke , Francisco Sánchez , John Fraser , and Francis Richard , Jr . — early settlers along the river — all were married to or in extramarital relationships with African women . 
 = = = Territorial Florida and statehood = = = 
 The first years following Florida 's annexation to the United States in 1821 were marked with violent conflicts between white settlers and Seminoles , whose bands often included runaway African slaves . The clashes between American and Seminole forces during the establishment of the Florida territory are reflected in the towns and landmarks along the St. Johns named for those who were directly involved . Even before Florida was under U.S. jurisdiction , Major General Andrew Jackson was responsible for removing the Alachua Seminoles west of the Suwannee River , either killing them or forcing them farther south towards Lake County , in 1818 . Jackson 's efforts became the First Seminole War , and were rewarded by the naming of a cattle crossing across a wide portion of the St. Johns near the Georgia border — previously named <unk> — to Jacksonville . The result of Jackson 's offensive was the transfer of Florida to the U.S. Following the Seminole Wars , a gradual increase in commerce and population occurred on the St. Johns , made possible by steamship travel . Steamboats heralded a heyday for the river , and before the advent of local railroads , they were the only way to reach interior portions of the state . They also afforded the citizens of Jacksonville a pastime to watch competing races . By the 1860s , weekly trips between Jacksonville , Charleston , and Savannah were made to transport tourists , lumber , cotton , and citrus . The soil along the St. Johns was considered especially successful for producing sweeter oranges . 
 Florida 's involvement in the U.S. Civil War was limited compared to other Confederate states because it had a fraction of the populations of states that had been developed . Florida provided materials to the Confederacy by way of steamboats on the St. Johns , although the river and the Atlantic coasts were blockaded by the U.S. Navy . One action in Florida 's role in the Civil War was the sinking of the USS Columbine , a Union paddle steamer used for patrolling the St. Johns to keep materials from reaching the Confederate Army . In 1864 , near Palatka , Confederate forces under the command of Capt. John Jackson Dickison captured , burned , and sank the USS Columbine , making her perhaps the only ship commandeered by the Confederacy . The same year and farther downriver , Confederates again sank a Union boat , the Maple Leaf , which struck a floating keg filled with explosives and settled into the muck near Julington Creek , south of Jacksonville . Part of the shipwreck was recovered in 1994 , when it was discovered that many Civil War @-@ era artifacts , including daguerreotypes and wooden matches , had been preserved in the river muck . 
 Although the Spanish had colonized Florida for two centuries , the state remained the last part of the east coast of the United States to be developed and explored . Following the Civil War , the State of Florida was too far in debt to build roads and rail lines to further its progress . Florida Governor William Bloxham in 1881 appealed directly to a Pennsylvania @-@ based industrialist named Hamilton Disston , initially to build canals to improve steamboat passage through the Caloosahatchee River , and later to drain lands in the central part of the state for agriculture . Disston was furthermore persuaded to purchase 4 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 acres ( 16 @,@ 000 km2 ) of land in central Florida for $ 1 million , which at the time was reported to be the largest purchase of land in human history . Disston was ultimately unsuccessful in his drainage attempts , but his investment sparked the tourist industry and made possible the efforts of railroad magnates Henry Morrison Flagler and Henry Bradley Plant to construct rail lines down the east coast of Florida , including a rail link between Sanford and Tampa . Disston was responsible for creating the towns of Kissimmee , St. Cloud , and several others on the west coast of Florida . 
 A New York Times story reporting on Disston 's progress in 1883 stated that before Disston 's purchase and the subsequent development , the only places worth seeing in Florida were Jacksonville and St. Augustine , with perhaps an overnight trip on the St. Johns River to Palatka ; by 1883 tourist attractions had extended 250 miles ( 400 km ) south . More attention was paid to the St. Johns with the increasing population . Florida was portrayed as an exotic wonderland able to cure failing health with its water and citrus , and the region began to be highlighted in travel writings . To relieve his bronchitis , Ralph Waldo Emerson stayed briefly in St. Augustine , calling north Florida " a grotesque region " that was being swarmed by land speculators . Emerson poignantly disliked the public sale of slaves , adding to his overall distaste . Following the Civil War , however , famed author Harriet Beecher Stowe lived near Jacksonville and traveled up the St. Johns , writing about it with affection : " The entrance of the St. Johns from the ocean is one of the most singular and impressive passages of scenery that we ever passed through : in fine weather the sight is magnificent . " Her memoir Palmetto Leaves , published in 1873 as a series of her letters home , was very influential in luring northern residents to the state . 
 One unforeseen aspect of more people coming to Florida proved to be an overwhelming problem . A woman living in a winter home near Palatka introduced water hyacinths ( <unk> crassipes ) to the St. Johns in an attempt to beautify her backyard . Ten years later , the purple @-@ flowered hyacinths had grown to reside in 50 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 acres ( 200 @,@ 000 km2 ) of the river and its arteries , becoming a serious invasive species . <unk> grow so densely that they prevent the navigation of watercraft , fishing , and sunlight from reaching the depths of the river , affecting both plant and animal life . The government of Florida found the plants to be so vexing that it spent almost $ 600 @,@ 000 between 1890 and 1930 in an unsuccessful bid to rid the creeks and rivers of north Florida of them . 
 = = = Land boom = = = 
 An Englishman named Nelson Fell , persuaded by Disston 's advertisements to make his fortunes in Florida , arrived in the 1880s . An engineer by trade , Fell purchased 12 @,@ 000 acres ( 49 km2 ) near Lake Tohopekaliga to create a town named <unk> , which had a population of more than 200 English immigrants by 1888 . A spate of poor luck and tense British @-@ American relations followed , prompting Fell to spend some years investing in infrastructure in Siberia , but he returned in 1909 with ideas of developing wetlands in central Florida . He was further encouraged by the political promises of Governor Napoleon Bonaparte Broward to drain the Everglades during his 1904 campaign . In 1910 Fell purchased 118 @,@ 000 acres ( 480 km2 ) of land for $ 1 @.@ 35 an acre and started the Fellsmere Farms Company to drain the St. Johns Marsh in 1911 and send water into the Indian River Lagoon , promoting the engineered canals and other structures as wondrously efficient in providing land to build a massive metropolis . Some progress was made initially , including the establishment of the town of Fellsmere in which land was sold for $ 100 an acre , but sales lagged because of a scandal regarding land sale fraud and faulty draining reports from the Everglades . The company then found itself short of funds due to mismanagement . Torrential rains ruptured the newly constructed levees and dikes and forced the company by 1916 to go into receivership . Fell left Florida for Virginia in 1917 . 
 Marjorie Kinnan Rawlings used the St. Johns as a backdrop in her books South Moon Under and The Yearling , and several short stories . In 1933 she took a boat trip along the St. Johns with a friend . In the upper basin , she remarked on the difficulty of determining direction due to the river 's ambiguous flow , and wrote in a chapter titled " Hyacinth Drift " in her memoir Cross Creek that she had the best luck in watching the way the hyacinths floated . Rawlings wrote , " If I could have , to hold forever , one brief place and time of beauty , I think I might choose the night on that high lonely bank above the St. Johns River . " 
 Florida in the 20th century experienced a massive migration into the state . Undeveloped land sold well and draining to reclaim wetlands has often gone unchecked , and often encouraged by government . The St. Johns headwaters decreased in size from 30 square miles ( 78 km2 ) to one between 1900 and 1972 . Much of the land was reclaimed for urban use , but agricultural needs took their toll as fertilizers and runoff from cattle ranching washed into the St. Johns . Without wetlands to filter the pollutants , the chemicals stayed in the river and flushed into the Atlantic Ocean . Boaters destroyed the floating islands of muck and weeds in the upper basin with dynamite , causing the lakes to drain completely . 
 What could have been the most serious human impact on nature in central Florida was the Cross Florida Barge Canal , an attempt to connect the Gulf and Atlantic coasts of the state by channeling the Ocklawaha River , first authorized in 1933 . The canal was intended to be 171 miles ( 275 km ) long , 250 feet ( 76 m ) wide , and 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) deep . Canal construction was top among the engineering priorities in the state , and by 1964 the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers began construction on the Cross Florida Barge Canal . Flood control was the primary impetus behind its construction , though the broader reasoning and feasibility of the project remained unclear . The Army Corps of Engineers was also constructing hundreds of miles of canals in the Everglades at the same time and by the 1960s was being accused of wasting tax money through its unnecessary construction projects . In 1969 the Environmental Defense Fund filed suit in federal court to stop construction on the canal , citing irreparable harm that would be done to Florida waterways and the Floridan Aquifer , central and north Florida 's fresh water source . 
 A separate canal , the St. Johns @-@ Indian River Barge Canal , was planned to link the river with the Intracoastal Waterway ; the project never broke ground , and was canceled soon after the Cross Florida Barge Canal was suspended . 
 = = = Restoration = = = 
 When steamboats were superseded by the railroad , the river lost much of its significance to the state . The influx of immigrants to Florida settled primarily south of Orlando , adversely affecting the natural order of wetlands there . Within the past 50 years , however , urban areas in the northern and central parts of the state have grown considerably . In the upper basin , population increased by 700 percent between 1950 and 2000 , and is expected to rise another 1 @.@ 5 million by 2020 . 
 Nitrates and phosphorus used as lawn and crop fertilizers wash into the St. Johns . Broken septic systems and seepage from cattle grazing lands create pollution that also finds its way into the river . Storm water washes from street drains directly to the river and its tributaries : in the 1970s , the Econlockhatchee River received 8 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 US gallons ( 30 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 L ) of treated wastewater every day . Wetlands were drained and paved , unable to filter pollutants from the water , made worse by the river 's own slow discharge . Algal blooms , fish kills , and deformations and lesions on fish occur regularly in the river from Palatka to Jacksonville . Although most of the pollutants in the river are washed from the southern parts of the river , the Jacksonville area produces approximately 36 percent of them found in the lower basin . 
 The State of Florida implemented a program named Surface Water Improvement and Management ( <unk> ) in 1987 to assist with river cleanups , particularly with nonpoint source pollution , or chemicals that enter the river by soaking into the ground , as opposed to direct piped dumping . <unk> assists local jurisdictions with purchasing land for wetlands restoration . The St. Johns River Water Management District ( SJRWMD ) is charged by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection ( DEP ) with restoring the river . The first step in restoration , particularly in the upper basin , is the purchase of public lands bordering the river ; ten different reserves and conservation areas have been implemented for such use around the St. Johns headwaters . Around Lake Griffin in the Ocklawaha Chain of Lakes , the SJRWMD has purchased 6 @,@ 500 acres ( 26 km2 ) of land that was previously used for muck farming . More than 19 @,@ 000 acres ( 77 km2 ) have been purchased along Lake Apopka to restore its wetlands , and the SJRWMD has removed nearly 15 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 pounds ( 6 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 kg ) of gizzard shad ( <unk> <unk> ) , a fish species that stores phosphorus and adds to algae problems . The SJRWMD has also set minimum levels for the lakes and tributaries in the St. Johns watersheds to monitor permitted water withdrawals and declare water shortages when necessary . 
 To assist with river cleanup and the associated funds for improving water quality in the St. Johns , Mayor John Delaney of Jacksonville waged a campaign to get it named as an American Heritage River , beginning in 1997 . The designation by the Environmental Protection Agency is intended to coordinate efforts among federal agencies to improve natural resource and environmental protection , economic revitalization , and historic and cultural preservation . The campaign was controversial as the Republican mayor defended asking for federal government assistance , writing " Other rivers have relied heavily on federal help for massive environmental clean @-@ ups . It 's the St. Johns ' turn now . " Twenty @-@ two towns along the St. Johns and environmental , sporting , recreation , boating , and educational organizations also supported its designation , but several prominent Republican politicians expressed concerns over increased federal regulations and restrictions on private property ownership along the river ; the Florida House of Representatives passed a resolution asking President Bill Clinton not to include the St. Johns . Despite this , Clinton designated the St. Johns as one of only 14 American Heritage Rivers out of 126 nominated in 1998 for its ecological , historic , economic and cultural significance . 
 The continuing increase of population in Florida has caused urban planners to forecast that the Floridan Aquifer will no longer be able to sustain the people living in north Florida . By 2020 , 7 million people are predicted to live in the St. Johns basins , double the number living there in 2008 . Proposals to use 155 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 US gallons ( 590 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 L ) a day from the St. Johns , and another 100 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 US gallons ( 380 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 L ) from the Ocklawaha River , for fresh water are controversial , prompting a private organization named St. Johns Riverkeeper to nominate it to the list of the Ten Most Endangered Rivers by an environmental watchdog group named American Rivers . In 2008 , it was listed as # 6 , which was met with approval from Jacksonville 's newspaper , The Florida Times @-@ Union , and skepticism from the SJRWMD . 
 The St. Johns River is under consideration as an additional water source to meet growing public water needs . In 2008 , the river 's Water Management District undertook a Water Supply Impact Study of the proposed water withdrawals and asked the National Research Council to review science aspects of the study as it progressed . This resulted in a series of four reports that assessed the impact of water withdrawal on river level and flow , reviewed potential impacts on wetland ecosystems , and presented overall perspectives on the Water Management District study . The National Research Council found that , overall , the District performed a competent job in relating predicted environmental responses , including their magnitude and general degree of uncertainty , to the proposed range of water withdrawals . However , the report noted that the District 's final report should acknowledge such critical issues as include future sea @-@ level rises , population growth , and urban development . Although the District predicted that changes in water management would increase water levels and flows that exceed the proposed surface water withdrawals , these predictions have high uncertainties . 
 The report also noted concerns about the District 's conclusion that the water withdrawals will have few deleterious ecological effects . This conclusion was based on the model findings that increased flows from upper basin projects and from changes in land use ( increases in impervious areas ) largely compensated for the impacts of water withdrawals on water flows and levels . Although the upper basin projects are positive insofar as they will return land to the basin ( and water to the river ) , the same cannot be said about increased urban runoff , the poor quality of which is well known . 
 = Arsène Wenger = 
 Arsène Wenger , OBE ( French pronunciation : ​ [ <unk> <unk> ( ɡ ) <unk> ] ; born 22 October 1949 ) , is a French football manager and former player . He has been the manager of Arsenal since 1996 , where he has since become the club 's longest @-@ serving manager and most successful in terms of major titles won . Football pundits give Wenger credit for his contribution to the revolutionising of football in England in the late 1990s through the introduction of changes in the training and diet of players . 
 Wenger was born in Strasbourg and raised in Duttlenheim . He was introduced to football by his father , the manager of the local village team . After a modest playing career , in which he made appearances for several amateur clubs , Wenger obtained a manager 's diploma in 1981 . Following an unsuccessful period at Nancy which culminated in his dismissal in 1987 , Wenger joined AS Monaco ; the club won the league championship in 1988 . In 1991 , Wenger guided Monaco to victory in the Coupe de France , but their failure to regain the league title in later seasons led to his departure from the club by mutual consent in 1994 . He briefly coached Japanese J.League side Nagoya Grampus Eight , which won the Emperor 's Cup and Japanese Super Cup during his stint . 
 In 1996 , Wenger was named manager of Arsenal and two years later the club completed a league and FA Cup double . The club won another league and cup double in 2002 and retained the FA Cup a year later . In 2004 , Wenger managed Arsenal to an undefeated league season , a feat last accomplished by Preston North End , 115 years previously . Arsenal later eclipsed Nottingham Forest 's record of 42 league matches unbeaten and went seven more matches before losing in October 2004 . The club made their first appearance in a Champions League final in 2006 , though they lost to Barcelona . After a period of nine years without a trophy , which coincided with the club relocating to the Emirates Stadium , Wenger guided Arsenal to further FA Cup success in 2014 and 2015 . Alongside George Ramsay , he is the most successful manager in the competition 's history with six . 
 The nickname " Le Professeur " is used by fans and the British media to reflect Wenger 's studious demeanour . His approach to the game emphasises an attacking mentality , with the aim that football ought to be entertaining on the pitch . Wenger 's Arsenal teams have been criticised for their indiscipline ; his players received 100 red cards between September 1996 and February 2014 , though the team has won awards for sporting fair play . At Monaco , Wenger earned a reputation for spotting young talent , and he has remained focused on developing a youth system . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Wenger was born on 22 October 1949 in Strasbourg , Alsace , France , to Alphonse and Louise Wenger . Arsène was the third of their three children . He lived in <unk> during the 1950s , but spent most of his time in the neighbouring village of Duttlenheim , ten miles south @-@ west of Strasbourg . Alphonse , like many Alsatians , was conscripted into the German army by force ( <unk> de force ) following the earlier annexation of the French region of Alsace @-@ Lorraine by Germany . He was sent to fight on the Eastern Front in October 1944 , at the age of 24 . 
 The <unk> owned an automobile spare parts business and a bistro titled La croix d 'or . It meant that they had difficulty looking after their children , but Duttlenheim was a village where everyone took care of the young ; Wenger compared it in later years to a kibbutz . Before Wenger started school at the age of six , he expressed himself in the local Alsatian dialect of Low Alemannic German . The primary school which Wenger attended was run by the Catholic Church . As one of its brightest students he later was accepted into a secondary school in Obernai . 
 According to his father , who also managed the village team , Wenger was introduced to football " at about the age of six " . He was taken to games in Germany , where he held an affection for Borussia Mönchengladbach . Alsace was an area steeped in religion ; Wenger and the village boys often needed to seek permission from the Catholic priest to miss vespers ( evening prayers ) in order to play football . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 Because the population of Duttlenheim was short in numbers , it proved difficult to field a team of 11 players of equal ages ; Wenger did not play for FC Duttlenheim until the age of 12 . Claude Wenger , a team @-@ mate of Arsène noted his lack of pace as a player . Marcel <unk> , president of FC Duttlenheim said Wenger had " an ability to guard the ball ... he seemed to have a complete vision of the pitch and he certainly had an influence among his team @-@ mates . " As a young teenager he was called Petit ; the nickname ceased when he had a growth spurt and broke into FC Duttlenheim 's first team , aged 16 . The team did not have a coach to prepare the players tactically , rather a person who supervised training sessions . Wenger took it upon himself to manage the side – Claude recalled : " Arsène wasn 't the captain and yet he was . It was ' You do this , you do that , you do this you do that . ' He was the leader . " 
 In 1969 Wenger was recruited to nearby third division club Mutzig . The club was famed for playing the " best amateur football " in Alsace and managed by Max Hild , who would later go on to become Wenger 's mentor . Wenger 's emergence at Mutzig aged 20 was considered too late for him to build a reputable playing career . Football was not seen as his future ; the plan was for him to run the family 's spare parts business . He was however of the age to start increasing his tactical knowledge of the sport . He frequently read France Football and alongside Hild made trips to Germany to watch Bundesliga matches and observe the different managerial styles . During Wenger 's three years at Mutzig , the club beat FC Strasbourg 06 3 – 0 to win the Coupe d 'Alsace . He also represented Alsace in a competition held annually between the regional leagues . 
 Wenger took his studies further and in 1971 enrolled at the <unk> des sciences <unk> et de gestion ( Faculty of Economic and Management Sciences ) at the University of Strasbourg to read politics and economics after a brief stint in medicine . In 1973 he joined semi @-@ professional club Mulhouse and balanced his football career with his education . Wenger completed an economics degree a year later . He was selected to represent the national French students squad and visited Nigeria , Lebanon , and Uruguay – where the World Students Championship was held in 1976 . Wenger did not participate in the event as he was injured ; Jean @-@ Luc <unk> , captain of the team recalled : " By the end of that trip , Arsène had almost taken on the role of assistant coach and team joker rolled into one . " 
 At Mulhouse , Wenger was managed by Paul Frantz who like Hild had a profound impact on his career . It was he who formalised Wenger 's beliefs on the importance of nutrition , <unk> and working on a player 's strong points . Wenger played in midfield for Mulhouse , often positioned on the right . In their final game of the 1974 – 75 season , the club beat AS Nancy to avoid relegation , but shortly afterwards Frantz resigned . Wenger also made the decision to leave , as the regular commutes to Mulhouse from Strasbourg overwhelmed him . In 1975 he rekindled his friendship with Hild and signed for amateur club <unk> Strasbourg ( Vauban ) . Hild needed a midfielder " who could organise play and also have a sort of hold over the team " and decided to recruit Wenger . Vauban was formed in 1971 and made steady progress up the French football league system thereafter ; Wenger 's three seasons at the club culminated with promotion to the third division . 
 In 1978 Hild joined RC Strasbourg as coach of the reserve team . The role required him to scout , so Hild wanted an experienced player to work with the youth while he was away . Both Hild and Frantz recommended Wenger , which convinced manager Gilbert Gress to appoint him . Wenger 's playing career at the age of 28 began to wane , but he never anticipated a role in the first @-@ team . Working for RC Strasbourg however presented him his first full @-@ time job at the club he supported as a young boy . Hild moved Wenger from midfield to central defence , where he was positioned as a sweeper in reserve games . In November 1978 he made his debut for the first team against MSV Duisburg in the UEFA Cup ( a match Strasbourg lost 4 – 0 ) and a month later played against champions AS Monaco in the First Division . At the end of the 1978 – 79 season RC Strasbourg won the league ; Wenger did not join in the celebrations as he was preoccupied with the youth team . He made his final appearance for the senior side in 1979 . 
 Wenger spent the last two years of his playing career predominantly running RC Strasbourg ’ s reserve and youth team . He became conscious of the importance of speaking English and during his holidays enrolled on a three @-@ week language course at Cambridge . Wenger also studied for his coaching badge at the Centre de <unk> , d <unk> et de performance <unk> ( <unk> ) in Strasbourg – this consisted of a course to coach children , followed by an intensive six @-@ day course which led up to the national coaching badge . The latter programme took place in Vichy and was spread over three weeks . Wenger was able to put Frantz ’ s teachings , particularly <unk> into practise . In 1981 he received his manager ’ s diploma in Paris . 
 = = Managerial career = = 
 = = = 1984 – 1994 : Nancy and Monaco = = = 
 Wenger ’ s management skills at Strasbourg impressed many French coaches , and in 1983 he moved to Ligue 2 club Cannes , where he became Jean @-@ Marc <unk> ’ s assistant . Earning a steady wage of £ 300 per week , he was responsible for collecting information about opposition teams , and instilled discipline in the players through training sessions . Wenger ’ s commitment to football was well documented ; when asked what the young coach did during his spare time , general manager Richard Conte replied : " Videos , videos , videos . He was always watching videos of his opponents , of his own team . It didn 't matter what time of night . " Cannes failed to win promotion to Ligue 1 , but they reached the quarter @-@ finals of the Coupe de France . Wenger 's work in raising the standard of the squad did not go unnoticed , and in 1984 he accepted Aldo Platini 's offer to become manager of Nancy . 
 The challenge of sustaining Nancy as a Ligue 1 club was difficult as Wenger inherited a squad of sub @-@ standard quality and he was given limited money to spend . He nevertheless relished the prospect of conducting business in the transfer market , and enjoyed freedom to trial theories he read about . In his first season at Nancy , Wenger hired a <unk> to explain the benefits of healthy eating and made it imperative that players did not snack before games . He took the squad away from their usual summer training camp to Val <unk> , so that the players could acclimatise to the high @-@ altitude . Platini attested the move to their strong league starts . From a managerial perspective , Wenger struggled to keep his emotions in check ; losing made him " physically sick " , to the point where he once stopped the team bus to vomit after a game . Wenger guided the club to a respectable 12th @-@ place finish , all the more surprising given he constantly tinkered his team . Players were moved out of their favoured positions , which for some maximised their potential . Éric Bertrand , a striker signed from the lower divisions , was converted into a fullback , and by the end of Wenger 's time at Nancy , Éric Di Meco switched from a left winger to wing back . 
 Nancy 's bottom @-@ half finish proved a false down as the club finished 18th in the 1985 – 86 season , which meant they had to win a play @-@ off match to avoid relegation . They retained their league status with a 3 – 2 aggregate win against Mulhouse . The club however sold several of their best players to avoid financial predicament and provided Wenger with little funds to work from which irritated him . In Wenger 's final season in charge , Nancy finished 19th and were relegated to Ligue 2 . Despite the setback , he was contacted by AS Monaco over their vacant managerial job . Talks had begun during the summer of 1986 , but Nancy chairman Gérard <unk> refused to release Wenger from his contract , and Monaco were not prepared to offer compensation . Once Nancy 's relegation was confirmed , Wenger was permitted to leave the club by mutual consent and in 1987 was confirmed as Monaco manager . 
 Before joining Monaco , Wenger had identified several players to build his desired team . Tottenham Hotspur midfielder Glenn Hoddle , granted a free transfer , and Patrick <unk> , out of contract at Bordeaux were signed . Striker Mark Hateley left Milan to join Monaco and was " encouraged to learn " that his fellow Englishman Hoddle would play in the same side as him . Monaco won the league in Wenger 's debut season , six points ahead of runners @-@ up Bordeaux . Although the team scored more goals in 1988 – 89 due to the purchase of Liberian striker George Weah , Monaco failed to retain the league and finished third behind Olympique de Marseille and Paris Saint @-@ Germain . The club reached the final of the Coupe de France , the national knockout cup competition in the same season , but lost 4 – 3 to Marseille . 
 Monaco again finished third in 1989 – 90 ; striker Ramón Díaz scored 15 goals in his first season at the club . The club beat league winners Marseille in the Coupe de France final through a last minute goal from substitute Gérald Passi . In 1991 – 92 , Monaco finished in second place and lost the 1992 European Cup Winners ' Cup Final 2 – 0 to Werder Bremen . Although Monaco acquired the services of German striker Jürgen Klinsmann , the club could not regain the championship and concluded the subsequent seasons in third and ninth positions . Monaco did reach the semi @-@ finals of the Champions League in April 1994 , but lost to eventual winners Milan . As a result of his work at Monaco , Wenger was sought after by German club Bayern Munich , who wanted him to be their next manager . Monaco refused to let him leave and Wenger chose to stay , but a poor start to the 1994 – 95 season meant he was dismissed on 17 September 1994 , with the team in 17th spot in the table . In 2001 , Wenger said that the impact of bribery and corruption had influenced his decision to leave France , as Marseille were found guilty of match fixing in 1994 . 
 = = = 1994 – 1996 : Nagoya Grampus Eight = = = 
 Shortly after his dismissal , Wenger travelled to the United Arab Emirates to attend a series of conferences held by FIFA . Wenger was a member of the football governing body 's technical committee , responsible for analysing the 1994 World Cup , and made a presentation to coaches of emerging football nations . His speech was closely followed by Japanese delegates , whose country had invested millions into the restructuring of its football league system . Representatives of Toyota , the majority owner of Nagoya Grampus Eight soon met with Wenger and offered him the chance to become the club 's manager . Wenger deliberated , even though the idea of working abroad appealed to him ; negotiations between the two parties lasted for two months . In that time he sought the advice of his closest friends and family , and flew to Japan to watch Nagoya Grampus ' striker Gary Lineker make his final appearance before his professional retirement . In December 1994 , Wenger agreed to become manager of Nagoya Grampus , on a two @-@ year contract worth ¥ <unk> annually . 
 With the new season of the J.League commencing in March 1995 , Wenger set about assembling his squad and backroom staff . He hired former Valenciennes manager Boro Primorac , whom he had befriended during the match @-@ fixing scandal , as his assistant . Alexandre Torres joined Nagoya after Wenger identified the defender by watching Brazilian football on the television , and the manager brought in Franck <unk> and his former player Passi . Nagoya finished bottom of the J.League the season before Wenger 's arrival , and continued their poor form into the following campaign , losing several matches in a row . In response to the situation , Wenger altered his managerial style , becoming less amicable with his players and openly questioning their desire . To boost morale , he took his squad to Versailles for their mid @-@ season break , where they went through a rigorous , but creative training regime . Players were expected to make decisions for themselves on the pitch , instead of relying on the manager ; Wenger was reported to have shouted to his players " Don 't look at me to ask me what to do with the ball ! " and " Decide for yourself ! Why don 't you think it out ? " One player who greatly benefited from Wenger 's guidance was Dragan Stojković , a midfielder whose disciplinary record improved . 
 Wenger 's methods had the desired effect – Nagoya won 17 games and lost nine in the second stage of the competition to finish runners @-@ up . He shortly received the J. League Manager of the Year award for 1995 , while Stojković claimed the player 's honour . In January 1996 , Wenger guided the club to their first piece of silverware as Nagoya defeated <unk> Hiroshima to win the Emperor 's Cup . Two months later they triumphed in the Super Cup , beating Yokohama Marinos 2 – 0 . The success bolstered Nagoya 's status in Japanese football , as well as Wenger 's reputation ; he was somewhat startled by the praise and <unk> that came his way . Midway through the 1996 league season , Wenger 's former club Strasbourg enquired about the possibility of him returning to manage them . He turned down the offer as was earlier approached by Arsenal . Dein had remained in contact with Wenger after their first meeting , and frequently sent him video tapes of matches to garner his opinions ; " He was my personal pundit , " the vice @-@ chairman recalled . The Arsenal board rebuffed Dein 's suggestion to appoint Wenger as early as 1995 , but concerns over George Graham 's successor Bruce Rioch meant they were more open @-@ minded about hiring him since his stint in Japan . 
 Wenger managed Nagoya for the final time on 28 August 1996 and delivered a farewell speech , thanking the fans in Japanese . Assessing his time in Japan , biographer Jasper Rees felt Wenger had left a mixed legacy at the club , as the immediate success was followed by fluctuating league finishes ; it was not until 2010 that Nagoya ( under Stojković ) won their first title . Wenger continues to speak fondly of his career in Japan and once likened the country to his ancestral home : " It has beautiful things that we have lost in Europe , beautiful things that make life good . " He also credited the culture for improving his temperament and rediscovering his passion for the game . Wenger returned to Japan as a television pundit for the 2003 FIFA Confederations Cup , and a decade later took Arsenal to face Nagoya in a pre @-@ season friendly . 
 = = = Arsenal = = = 
 = = = = 1996 – 97 : Appointment and first season = = = = 
 In August 1996 , Arsenal dismissed Rioch as club manager . Rioch 's position had become untenable after a dispute with the board over transfers , and his working relationship with Dein worsened during the course of his tenure . Arsenal appointed Stewart Houston and later Pat Rice in temporary charge of the first team , while they searched for a full @-@ time successor . Although Barcelona player and manager Johan Cruyff was favourite to take over , the board looked elsewhere , eventually backing Dein 's proposal to hire Wenger . The appointment was delayed for several weeks as Wenger was under contract at Nagoya Grampus and the club wanted time to make a final decision . In the meantime the Arsenal board refused to confirm the identity of their next manager , but speculation grew that it would be Wenger once the club signed French midfielders Patrick Vieira and Rémi Garde . On 22 September 1996 , Wenger was unveiled as Arsenal manager , after Nagoya Grampus granted him his release . He officially assumed the role on 1 October 1996 . At his first press conference , he told reporters : " The main reason for coming is that I love English football , the roots of the game are here . I like the spirit round the game and at Arsenal I like the spirit of the club and its potential . " 
 Wenger 's arrival at Arsenal was greeted with perplexity by some of the club 's players , supporters and the local media . Although he was touted as a future technical director of The Football Association ( FA ) , he was a relative unknown in English football . Glenn Moore 's report in The Independent , dated 24 September 1996 , highlighted the mood : " It is a measure of the insularity of the English game that when Arsène Wenger 's name emerged as Arsenal 's favoured candidate for their vacant manager 's job many supporters were asking : ' Arsène who ? ' " Unlike his predecessors , Wenger was given control over transfers , contracts and training sessions , and the Arsenal board chose not to meddle in team affairs . One of his first acts as manager was to assure the experienced players they had a future at the club , but he noted the squad was " a bit tight , " and needed competition for places . Wenger adopted a hands @-@ on approach to training sessions which energised the squad and made steps to change the drinking culture that afflicted Arsenal . Although he initially allowed players to have a pint of beer , they were forbidden to drink on days off and in the players ' lounge . He later banned his players from casually drinking together . Wenger also promoted pasta as the pre @-@ match dish , encouraged boiled chicken instead of red meat and discouraged junk food . Players received optional vitamin injections and Creatine , which reduced fatigue and improved their stamina . 
 Wenger 's first match was a 2 – 0 away victory over Blackburn Rovers on 12 October 1996 , but he did suggest " one or two changes " to caretaker manager and later assistant Pat Rice in the team 's defeat to Borussia Mönchengladbach , a UEFA Cup match played on 25 September 1996 . The interference upset club captain Tony Adams , who on his first meeting with the manager expressed his disappointment : " I said to him that he had put our entire season in jeopardy by doing what he had done . " Wenger chose to take the criticism on board , and made an effort listening to Adams ' assessment of the club . This particular approach of management resonated with the other players , who were sceptical of his ideas at first . The English players often set up pranks on Wenger to relieve hostility and nicknamed him " Inspector Clouseau " because of his clumsy nature . Adams said his sense of humour helped build team spirit : " Not only does Wenger love a good laugh , but he can laugh at himself . He is this gangly wise man . " 
 Malicious rumours concerning Wenger 's private life surfaced during November 1996 , to the extent that the City of London reported that his exit from Arsenal was imminent . Having returned from a trip to Strasbourg to visit his parents , Wenger attended a press meeting and strongly refuted the claims : " If something comes out that is wrong I will attack . It is a serious matter if you can just create things that are not right . " Arsenal 's press officer Clare Tomlinson , who was present at the news conference , recalled Wenger phoning the next day and demanding why he could not take action against the press for printing the story . The culprit responsible for spreading gossip in the City later apologised to Wenger . Around this time Arsenal led the Premier League , but poor form in February 1997 caused Wenger to rule out his team 's chances of winning the title . They finished third in his first season and missed out on Champions League qualification ( occupied by Newcastle United , in second ) by goal difference – the tiebreaker used to determine the ranking between teams equal on points . 
 = = = = 1997 – 2001 : Early success = = = = 
 In preparation for the forthcoming season , Wenger took the Arsenal squad to Austria , which would become the club 's usual pre @-@ season base . The players were given a night out as a reward for vigorous training , which midfielder Ray Parlour revealed was spent at local pub with the other English players , while the " French lads " headed to the coffee shop and smoked . " How are we going to win the league this year ? We 're all drunk and they 're all smoking , " he recollected . Wenger in the meantime continued fine @-@ tuning the squad ; having vetoed John Hartson 's move to West Ham United in February 1997 , he convinced French teenager Nicolas Anelka to join Arsenal . He raided his old club Monaco to acquire the services of Christopher Wreh , Gilles Grimandi and Emmanuel Petit . The latter two were defenders , but Wenger thought both were capable of playing in midfield . To address the shortcomings of playing expansive football , winger Marc Overmars was purchased from Ajax , while Paul Merson moved to Middlesbrough . Wenger assessed Arsenal lost the Premier League because of their poor home performances , and felt they needed more pace and power . 
 Arsenal began the 1997 – 98 season well , but struggled in November ; though they beat Manchester United at Highbury without the suspended Dennis Bergkamp , it was their only league win in the month . Defeat at home to Blackburn Rovers left the club in sixth position before Christmas and seemingly out of contention for the title . Wright was booed off by supporters over his performance , which he responded to by criticising the crowd from the dressing room window . Wenger called for an urgent team meeting , where " home truths were spoken , fingers pointed , players were <unk> up . " The squad dictated how the conversation went , which the senior defenders made it clear they wanted Vieira and Petit to provide cover . 
 Such was the likelihood Manchester United would go on to retain the title , bookmaker Fred Done paid out on punters with two months of the season left . Arsenal however steadily closed the gap and victory against Wimbledon in March 1998 set up a title clash between themselves and the reigning champions . Wenger in the lead up to the game maintained it was possible for Arsenal to win the league , " Two or three weeks ago , the title was just a dream for us and people laughed when I said we could still do it , " and suggested Manchester United were responsible for making the title race " interesting " . At Old Trafford , Overmars scored the decisive goal to give Arsenal a 1 – 0 win . The victory was followed by nine consecutive league wins , the last of which was a home fixture against Everton that secured Arsenal 's status as champions . Wenger became the first foreign manager to win the double , when his team beat Newcastle United in the 1998 FA Cup Final . 
 Wenger sanctioned Wright 's transfer to West Ham in the summer and made Anelka his first @-@ choice striker ahead of the 1998 – 99 season . His decision not to bolster Arsenal 's attack , coupled with Bergkamp 's fear of flying meant the club entered the Champions League with just one recognised striker . Their time in the competition was brief , making an exit at the group stage , and domestically their form was indifferent . Needing to strengthen their attacking options , Arsenal signed Nwankwo Kanu in January 1999 , and his presence reinvigorated the team as they embarked on a run similar to last season . They however finished second behind Manchester United , losing their slender advantage once they lost their penultimate match . United also eliminated Arsenal in a FA Cup semi @-@ final replay after extra time ; Wenger afterwards said : " … it was a smashing game , and in the end the luckiest won . " In August 1999 , Anelka joined Real Madrid having threatened to strike if Arsenal did not grant him a move abroad . Wenger renewed his forward line by signing Davor Šuker from Real , and the club spent £ 11 @.@ 5 million on Thierry Henry , who joined after seven " injury @-@ interrupted " months at Juventus . It was Wenger 's intention to partner Anelka with Henry , but the former 's departure meant the plan was scrapped . 
 The following seasons were comparatively barren . Arsenal again exited the Champions League at the group stage , but dropped down to the UEFA Cup . Wenger guided his team to the final , where they lost to Galatasaray on penalties . In the league , Arsenal finished 18 points behind Manchester United as runners @-@ up , and though they closed the gap to eight points in 2000 – 01 , they never posed a serious title challenge . The trophy drought continued past 2001 , when Michael Owen scored two late goals for Liverpool to beat Arsenal in the FA Cup Final . Wenger rued his team ’ s inability to make possession count , but refused to blame individuals , namely Henry for missing chances . 
 = = = = 2001 – 06 : Second double , Invincibles , and leaving Highbury = = = = 
 The cup defeat prompted Wenger make changes to his squad . He signed young England internationals Richard Wright and Francis Jeffers , midfielder Giovanni van Bronckhorst from Rangers as a partner for Vieira , and convinced defender Sol Campbell to join from local rivals Tottenham Hotspur on a free transfer . Campbell 's arrival strengthened a defence which was going through a transition phase from 1999 and 2001 ; Steve Bould and Nigel Winterburn moved on in this period , club graduate Ashley Cole displaced Sylvinho as Wenger ’ s first choice left back , while Lauren acted as Lee Dixon 's understudy . Midfielders Fredrik Ljungberg and Robert Pirès – brought in during preceding transfer windows , had now established themselves into the first team . The 2001 – 02 season brought much success as Wenger led Arsenal to the double once more . The crowning moment was the win against Manchester United at Old Trafford in the penultimate game of the season . Sylvain Wiltord scored the winning goal to secure the club 's 12th league championship and third double ; four days earlier , Arsenal beat Chelsea 2 – 0 in the 2002 FA Cup Final . The team scored in every single league fixture and were unbeaten away from home that season . 
 Wenger appointed Vieira as club captain following Adams ' retirement , and made few additions to his double @-@ winning squad , signing defender Pascal Cygan , midfielder Gilberto Silva and utility player Kolo Touré . He was confident his side would retain the league and told the media : " Nobody will finish above us in the league . It wouldn 't surprise me if we were to go unbeaten for the whole of the season . " Arsenal set a new top @-@ flight record in their opening game of the 2002 – 03 season ; a 2 – 0 victory against Birmingham City was their 14th league win in succession . They continued their fine start by overhauling Nottingham Forest 's top @-@ flight record of 22 away league matches without defeat and later surpassed Manchester United 's Premier League total of 29 matches unbeaten . Arsenal lost to Everton in October 2002 , which began a run of four matches without a win . Though Wenger 's team built an eight @-@ point lead over challengers Manchester United by March 2003 , they were overhauled in the final weeks of the season . The title race shifted in United 's favour when Bolton Wanderers came from behind to draw 2 – 2 against Arsenal . Wenger showed moments of exasperation during the match by loosening his tie and bellowing orders from the touchline . Journalist Phil McNulty wrote that Wenger 's demeanor " ... spoke of someone who had the title in his grasp but now saw it slipping from his fingers . " Arsenal beat Southampton 1 – 0 to retain the FA Cup at the end of the campaign . 
 During pre @-@ season , Wenger arranged a meeting with the players to examine why they lost the league . Martin Keown felt the manager harmed their chances by boasting they could go the season unbeaten . " Look , I said that because I think you can do it . But you must really want it , " was Wenger 's reply , as he believed the squad had the right mixture of technique , intelligence and physique . Arsenal did little transfer business given the financial demands that came with their new stadium project ; their only major signing was Jens Lehmann , who replaced David Seaman as goalkeeper . Wenger retained his best players , despite interest shown by Chelsea 's new owner Roman Abramovich . Six games into the league season , Arsenal were involved in a brawl against Manchester United ; the ill @-@ feeling stemmed from Vieira 's dismissal late on . Several players were charged and fined accordingly by the FA and Wenger apologised for his team 's overreaction . The team restored their image with an entertaining performance against Newcastle ; Henry Winter in his match report wrote : " [ Henry 's opening goal ] encapsulated all that is good about Arsenal , the slick passing and intelligent movement . " Wenger led his side to league triumph without a single defeat – an accomplishment last achieved by Preston North End 115 years before , in the Football League . " Somebody threw me a T @-@ shirt after the trophy was presented which read ' Comical Wenger says we can go the whole season unbeaten . ' I was just a season too early ! , " he remarked during the club 's victory parade . 
 Arsenal 's run of 49 league games unbeaten came to an end with a 2 – 0 defeat at Manchester United on 24 October 2004 . The team under Wenger 's management enjoyed another relatively strong league campaign in 2004 – 05 , but finished second to Chelsea , who ended the season 12 points in front . Consolation again came in the FA Cup ; Arsenal defeated Manchester United on penalties , after a goalless final . The emergence of Cesc Fàbregas in the starting lineup prompted Wenger in July 2005 to sell Vieira . He noticed the two as a midfield pairing was ineffective , and felt keeping Fàbregas would benefit the club 's future . The 2005 – 06 season marked the beginning of a transitional period for Arsenal as it was the club 's final season at Highbury . The team finished fourth in the Premier League and outside the top two for the first time under Wenger 's tenure . In Europe however , Wenger assembled an inexperienced defence that beat Real Madrid , Juventus and Villarreal and conceded no goals in the knockout stages of the Champions League . They progressed to the final in May 2006 , but ended the competition as runners @-@ up to Barcelona . 
 = = = = 2006 – 11 : Stadium move and transition = = = = 
 In the summer of 2006 , Wenger oversaw Arsenal 's relocation to the Emirates Stadium . During the construction phase , he described the move as " vital " to the club 's financial future and believed Arsenal were better able to attract the best players . Moving to the new stadium , however , presented several problems in the short term , as the club prioritised financing it over the team . Wenger sold some of his experienced players such as Campbell , Lauren and Pirès , sanctioned Cole 's move to Chelsea in part exchange for defender William Gallas , and integrated young players like Theo Walcott and Alex Song into the first team . His youthful team contested the League Cup final in February 2007 and were the youngest to play in a major English cup final , averaging 21 years . They ultimately came up short against Chelsea , who won the match 2 – 1 . Arsenal finished fourth in the 2006 – 07 league season ; Wenger had ruled out their title chances following defeat to Bolton in November 2006 . The team 's lack of directness and efficiency of possession was a familiar theme during the campaign ; Guardian journalist Daniel Taylor observed two matches into the league season : " The most watchable side are frequently the most frustrating . Arsenal are wonderfully incisive yet infuriatingly blunt . " 
 In April 2007 Dein left Arsenal due to " irreconcilable differences " about the future of the club . Wenger described it as a " sad day for Arsenal , " and sought assurances from the board over his future as well as reasons for Dein 's departure . The instability at board level influenced club captain Henry 's decision to leave Arsenal in June 2007 , which led to uncertainty over Wenger 's position . In September 2007 , Wenger signed a new three @-@ year extension , insisting that he remained committed to " the club of my life . " Arsenal flourished in Henry 's absence , with Emmanuel Adebayor , Mathieu Flamini and Fàbregas playing a more prominent role in the 2007 – 08 season . Defeat to Middlesbrough in December 2007 ended a run of 22 league matches unbeaten , but Arsenal soon built a five @-@ point lead over Manchester United . A career @-@ threatening injury to striker Eduardo against Birmingham City on 23 February 2008 acted as a turning point in Arsenal 's season . Wenger , incensed at the aggressive tactics of opponents , called for a ban on tackler Martin Taylor in his post @-@ match interview ; he later retracted the comment . Arsenal 's form subsequently suffered , and a run of three consecutive draws in March allowed first Manchester United and then Chelsea to overhaul them as they finished the season in third . 
 Arsenal made a troubled start to Wenger 's twelfth season . The club relieved Gallas of his captaincy , after he openly questioned his team @-@ mates , and Wenger appointed Fàbregas as his successor . Arsenal secured fourth position in the league and reached the semi @-@ finals of the Champions League and FA Cup , but it was a fourth season without silverware . Wenger was subject to criticism from Arsenal fans ; he praised the travelling supporters , though referred to a section of the home crowd as treating him " like a murderer " . Arsenal finished third in the league in 2009 – 10 and the team were eliminated in the quarter @-@ finals of the Champions League by Barcelona . Wenger had reached a landmark in October 2009 , surpassing George Allison to become Arsenal 's longest @-@ serving manager . 
 In August 2010 , Wenger signed a further three @-@ year contract to continue his managerial career at Arsenal . His team were on course for a quadruple trophy haul in 2010 – 11 , before defeat to Birmingham City in the 2011 Football League Cup Final , when a mix @-@ up between goalkeeper Wojciech Szczęsny and defender Laurent Koscielny allowed Obafemi Martins to score the winning goal . This was followed by a run of just two wins in 11 Premier League games , to take them from title contenders to a fourth @-@ place finish ; they made exits in the FA Cup and the Champions League to Manchester United and Barcelona respectively . 
 = = = = 2011 – present : Rebuilding and renewed success = = = = 
 Wenger 's preparations for the 2011 – 12 season were disrupted by player unrest . Though he insisted none of his top players would leave the club , Fàbregas eventually moved to Barcelona , while Gaël Clichy and Samir Nasri joined Manchester City . Suspensions and injuries left Wenger fielding an understrength side against Manchester United on 29 August 2011 ; Arsenal were trounced 8 – 2 , which represented their worst defeat in 115 years . Needing to address the squad 's lack of depth , Wenger completed a series of deals in the final days of the summer transfer window . He mostly brought in experienced players , such as Yossi Benayoun on loan from Chelsea , Everton 's Mikel Arteta and Germany international Per Mertesacker . By October , Arsenal had made their worst start to a season in 58 years , losing four of their opening seven matches . However , the team soon harmonised , and in the same month club captain Robin van Persie scored a hat @-@ trick as Arsenal beat Chelsea 5 – 3 . Despite another season of no silverware , Wenger guided Arsenal to third position in the Premier League , thus qualifying for the Champions League for a 15th successive campaign . Van Persie had scored 37 goals , in his first injury @-@ free season for the club . He , however , grew disillusioned with Arsenal 's transfer policy , and decided not to renew his contract , with one year remaining . When Ferguson learnt of the situation , he called Wenger to push through a deal and Van Persie agreed to join Manchester United in August 2012 . The club purchased strikers Olivier Giroud and Lukas Podolski in anticipation of the sale . 
 The 2012 – 13 season was Wenger 's first without his assistant Rice , who retired in late Spring . Bould was named as his replacement , who specialised in defensive work . Arsenal struggled to find consistency in the league and were 12 points behind leaders Manchester United by November 2012 . A month later , Wenger came under strong criticism following his side 's exit in the League Cup to Bradford City , when a full @-@ strength team lost on penalties to opposition three divisions below . Another cup defeat , this time to Blackburn Rovers in the FA Cup , ended Arsenal 's realistic trophy chances for an eighth season , as their Champions League opponents were Bayern Munich . Before the first leg , Wenger had criticised the media for reporting he was about to sign a contract extension , and said of the <unk> game : " We lost it in the last 20 minutes so there are a lot of superficial analyses that you cannot accept . Because one guy says something , everybody goes the same way . " 
 Arsenal 's chances of finishing in the top four appeared over by March , after defeat to Tottenham Hotspur . With ten league matches remaining , they were seven points behind their rivals , and Wenger admitted his side could not afford any more dropped points . He made changes to the side for their second leg against Bayern , dropping captain Thomas Vermaelen and Szczęsny , in place of Koscielny and Łukasz Fabiański . Though Arsenal were eliminated on the away goals rule , Wenger 's adjustments worked in the league as his team went on a run to overhaul Tottenham for a second successive season . A win on the final day against Newcastle United secured fourth position , which Wenger described as a relief . 
 Arsenal opened the 2013 – 14 season with a home defeat to Aston Villa , which prompted boos from the supporters . The club 's transfer inactivity over the summer was criticised , but Wenger assessed : " We could have won the game today with the players on the pitch , I 'm convinced of that . " In the final week of the transfer window , he re @-@ signed Flamini and sanctioned the club record signing of Mesut Özil from Real Madrid , totalling £ 42 @.@ 5 million . Wenger was instrumental in the latter deal ; he phoned and spoke to the German in his native language , convincing him that a move to England would enhance his career . Arsenal 's form thereafter improved and Aaron Ramsey 's goalscoring spree elevated the team to first position by the New Year . Poor performances in the big games , however , blighted Arsenal 's title credentials ; a 5 – 1 defeat to Liverpool in February 2014 , with four goals conceded in the first 20 minutes , was followed by a 6 – 0 loss to Chelsea , a month later . The game at Stamford Bridge was Wenger 's 1,000th match in charge of Arsenal , and he described it as " … a good hiding . You don 't prepare all week to experience that . " Arsenal consolidated fourth position in the league , and Wenger guided his team to FA Cup success , as they came from two goals down to beat Hull City in the final . At the end of the season , Wenger signed another three @-@ year extension to his Arsenal contract . He strengthened the squad by signing Alexis Sánchez from Barcelona in July 2014 , and during the course of 2014 – 15 promoted Francis Coquelin and Héctor <unk> into the first team . Wenger won his sixth FA Cup in May 2015 , which placed him alongside George Ramsay as the most successful manager in the competition 's history . 
 = = Approach and philosophy = = 
 = = = Tactics = = = 
 Wenger was inspired by Borussia Mönchengladbach as a child and later influenced by Total Football , a playing style developed by <unk> Michels at Ajax in the 1970s . He recollected the team as having " perfect players everywhere and that was the sort of football I wanted to be playing myself . " At Monaco for a number of years , he employed a 4 – 4 – 2 formation , though he did trial 4 – 3 – 3 , akin to Michels ' . Wenger is an advocate of 4 – 4 – 2 as " no other formation is as efficient in covering space , " but has used it sparingly in recent seasons . 
 Throughout his managerial career , Wenger has trusted his players to perform and learn from their own mistakes , a quality Vieira regards as his biggest strength and weakness . Wenger encourages sportsmen to show intuition , and makes observations rather than explicitly giving orders . Campbell reflected that his former manager " puts a lot of onus on players to change the game " and " he wants certain players – especially in the last third – to be able to produce it and give something different . " When Wenger joined Arsenal , he spoke of his desire to see " ... real , modern football . That means compact lines , of zones , of quick , coordinated movements with a good technique . " He characteristically focuses on the strengths of his teams , rather than looking for areas to exploit the opposition . 
 During a match against Borussia Mönchengladbach in 1996 , Wenger presided over Rice 's caretaker duties and ordered the team to switch from their preferred 3 – 5 – 2 formation to 4 – 4 – 2 . The tactical change did not have its desired effect , as Arsenal lost the game having led before Wenger 's half @-@ time instruction . For much of the 1996 – 97 season , Arsenal continued to play 3 – 5 – 2 as it was the only formation the defenders were comfortable with , and injuries unsettled the side . In Wenger 's second season at the club , he reinstated 4 – 4 – 2 and focused on strengthening the front six , by signing wingers Overmars and Luís Boa Morte and partnering Vieira with Petit . According to Jonathan Wilson , the system was similar to 4 – 3 – 3 , as Overmars often pushed higher up the field and Parlour played alongside Vieira and Petit to solidify the midfield . Needing to compensate deficiencies in attack the following season , Wenger relied on his experienced defence to direct games , which conceded 17 goals in 38 league matches . From then on , Wenger deployed an unconventional 4 – 4 – 2 with a greater emphasis on attack and movement ; his teams between 2001 and 2004 were dominant on the left flank . 
 By the 2005 – 06 season , clubs in England were increasingly in favour of using the 4 – 5 – 1 system . Wenger , having earlier suggested he would never resort to a negative system , later adopted the formation for Champions League matches . The decision to pack the midfield and play a lone striker resulted in Arsenal reaching the final . With Fábregas breaking into the first team , Wenger chose to deviate from their counter @-@ attacking style , to a more possession based one . In 2009 – 10 , he instituted a fluid 4 – 3 – 3 formation to benefit from Fàbregas ' creativity , and since the player 's departure remodelled the system to 4 – 1 – 4 – 1 and 4 – 2 – 3 – 1 . 
 Wenger has been able to implement his entertaining vision of football , particularly at Arsenal . His team 's 5 – 1 win against Portsmouth in March 2004 was likened to " the magnificently fluid Ajax of the early 70s , " and greeted with a standing ovation by the opposition supporters , as the Arsenal players left the field . Wenger 's style of play has however been criticised for inefficiency and a lack of variation to go with technique . He is not renowned for making game @-@ changing substitutions , nor has his tactics helped his teams overcome flexible opponents . His ideals are noticeably different to the pragmatic approach of his rivals , though he has assembled teams to produce disciplined performances , markedly the 2005 FA Cup Final against Manchester United . Defeats in the big games during 2013 – 14 led to Wenger compromising his attack @-@ minded principles in favour of keeping it tight . The team 's approach has been less predictable than when it was built around Fàbregas ; Sir Alex Ferguson commented in his autobiography that he devised a template to beat Arsenal which involved " good players who can intercept . " 
 = = = Preparation = = = 
 Wenger leads training sessions , but delegates responsibility to his coaching staff , who predominantly work with the players . He splits the squad into groups , observing and supervising the drills . A typical training session under Wenger lasts 90 minutes , which is timed and staged precisely , and includes coordination techniques , positional play and small @-@ sided games . Wenger spends the day before a match focusing on the mental and tactical approach of his squad and varies his training style . 
 Wenger regards a well @-@ balanced diet as an essential part of a player 's preparation . He was influenced by his time in Japan , where " ... the whole way of life there is linked to health . Their diet is basically boiled vegetables , fish and rice . No fat , no sugar . You notice when you live there that there are no fat people . " At Arsenal , Wenger brought in <unk> to explain the benefits of a healthy lifestyle , and acquired the help of Philippe <unk> , an osteopath for the France national team to realign the players ' bodies each month . <unk> , exercises designed to strengthen the muscles , were introduced and Wenger routinely made players stretch before and after matches . Until 2004 , he encouraged his players to take Creatine for increased stamina , later stopping when he noticed side @-@ effects . The innovations had a desirable effect on the team as it prolonged the careers of his defence , and made Arsenal stronger in the second half of seasons . Though Wenger 's methods were common in Italian football , they had been unsuccessfully trialled in England until his arrival . 
 In later years , Wenger 's training regime has come under criticism , given his squad 's poor injury record . From 2004 – 05 to 2014 – 15 , Arsenal 's players lost 13 @,@ 161 days through injury , significantly more than Chelsea 's ( 7 @,@ 217 ) . In 2014 , Wenger acquired the help of fitness coach Shad Forsythe to solve the problem ; statistics revealed a year later that Arsenal 's average injury length dropped more than 25 % in Forsythe 's first season . 
 = = = Recruitment and spending policy = = = 
 Youth development and scouring for talent abroad is central to Wenger 's recruitment policy . He relies on a network of scouts and personal contacts to find and attract talented footballers to play under him . Wenger 's strategy is aided by data ; for instance , the decision to sign Flamini in 2004 came about as he was looking at statistics to find an understudy to Vieira . To examine the mental state of a young footballer , he uses psychometric tests conducted by psychologist Jacques <unk> once every two years . Wenger prides himself on nurturing talent , saying in an interview : " I believe one of the best things about managing people is that we can influence lives in a positive way . That 's basically what a manager is about . When I can do that , I am very happy . " 
 In his early managerial years , Wenger recognised the potential of football in Africa , which influenced his transfer dealings at Monaco . On the recommendation of Claude Le Roy , he signed Liberian George Weah , who later became the first African to be named FIFA World Player of the Year . Weah , while receiving his award from FIFA president João Havelange and vice @-@ president Lennart Johansson invited Wenger up to the stage , spontaneously giving his medal to the manager , as a token of his appreciation . During his final years at Monaco , Wenger worked with Roger Mendy , a Senegalese defender regarded in 1991 as one of the ten best African footballers by France Football , and Nigerian Victor <unk> , a forward who earnt the accolade of African Player of the Year . Wenger also fast @-@ tracked young players such as Petit and Lilian Thuram , and handed debuts to Henry and David Trezeguet . 
 In England , Wenger has used his extensive knowledge of the European transfer market and rulings – particularly in his native France – to recruit players . His first purchase as Arsenal manager was Anelka from Paris Saint @-@ Germain for £ 500 @,@ 000 , a deal which upset the French club as they received little remuneration . The player 's subsequent sale to Real Madrid just two years later for £ 23 @.@ 5 million highlighted Wenger 's shrewdness in the transfer market , as he used the money to fund the club 's new training centre in London Colney . He remained in contact with <unk> 's Abidjan @-@ based academy , where he discovered future Arsenal players Touré and Emmanuel Eboué , and successfully persuaded Fàbregas , <unk> and Ignasi Miquel , amongst other La Masia graduates to leave Barcelona and join him . Wenger 's recruitment of young players came under criticism from Bayern Munich chairman Karl @-@ Heinz Rummenigge , who disputed it was tantamount to child trafficking . Wenger refuted the analogy and said : " Look at Santa Cruz at Blackburn . Ask him what age he came to Bayern Munich . Then you have an answer for Rummenigge . " 
 When Arsenal moved to the Emirates Stadium , Wenger prioritised investing in youth instead of purchasing experienced players . He described it as a way of creating an " identity " with Arsenal : " I felt it would be an interesting experiment to see players grow together with these qualities , and with a love for the club . It was an idealistic vision of the world of football . " The departure of Dein , coupled with the saturation of the transfer market , meant Wenger struggled to recruit players as efficiently as before . The youth set @-@ up did not replicate the success of the late 1990s and early 2000s , though Arsenal consistently finished fourth or higher in the league between 2006 and 2011 . The club earnt a reputation of functioning as a " feeder club " to bigger teams , as Wenger struggled to keep hold of his best players . He described this period as " very sensitive , " because of the financial restrictions that came with the stadium move . Since the 2011 – 12 season , Wenger has reverted to buying proven talent , and blended experience with youth in domestic cup competitions . Arsenal have benefited from increased revenue since the Emirates move , and negotiating new sponsorship deals has allowed Wenger to make marquee signings such as Özil and Sánchez . 
 Observing Wenger 's transfer policy in 2009 , Sir Alex Ferguson commented that it lacked balance and needed defensive players to <unk> the Arsenal team . The players Wenger recruits have often been criticised for their character and leadership capabilities ; footballer Joey Barton suggested it was because the manager discouraged them from commanding : " Sometimes you need someone to <unk> and that might be a shouter and <unk> . It may not be Arsene 's way , but I think they lack that . " Wenger is perceived as frugal given his inactivity in transfer windows , but he has denied the stereotype : " Of course people say always to buy but you cannot make careers and lives of people and on top of that buy every time you have an injured player . You know I have the wrong reputation . I 'm not scared to spend money . The job of a manager is not to spend as much money . " 
 = = Relations with others = = 
 Wenger 's relations with his fellow football managers and officials have not always been genial . In a joint @-@ interview with The Times and Daily Mail in 2009 , he explained that his reluctance to trust other managers had been mistaken for discourtesy : " There are managers I respect , and I respect what they do , but you cannot be completely friendly and open up . " He is well known for his rivalry with former Manchester United manager Sir Alex Ferguson ; beginning in 1997 , the dispute reached its culmination in the " Pizzagate " incident at Old Trafford in October 2004 . After Manchester United ended Arsenal 's 49 @-@ game unbeaten Premier League run after being awarded a dubious penalty , a member of the Arsenal squad allegedly threw a pizza at the opposition in the tunnel . Wenger accused United striker Ruud van Nistelrooy of being " a cheat " in a post @-@ match television interview , and was reprimanded with a £ 15 @,@ 000 fine by the Football Association . Both managers later agreed to tone down their words , in an attempt to defuse the rivalry . In his autobiography , Ferguson wrote that the events of " Pizzagate " had “ scrambled Arsène ’ s brain ” and caused their relationship to break down for almost five years . By 2009 , Wenger noted his rivalry with Ferguson had become " respectful , " as Arsenal had ceased competing with Manchester United for major honours . 
 During October and November 2005 , Wenger became embroiled in a war of words with Chelsea manager José Mourinho . Mourinho accused Wenger of having an " unprofessional obsession " with Chelsea and labelled him a " voyeur . " Mourinho was quoted as saying , " He 's worried about us , he 's always talking about us – it 's Chelsea , Chelsea , Chelsea , Chelsea . " Wenger responded by pointing out he was only answering journalists ' questions about Chelsea , and described Mourinho 's attitude as " disrespectful . " Mourinho later apologised and clarified that he regretted his " voyeur " comment ; Wenger accepted the apology . In 2014 Mourinho reopened his feud with Wenger by calling him a " specialist in failure . " This was in response to Wenger 's comments that Chelsea were favourites for the Premier League and managers did not want to take responsibility if they failed to win the title . Wenger said Mourinho 's comments were " silly and disrespectful " and had embarrassed Chelsea . When asked if he regretted his remark , Mourinho replied : " You have to ask him if he regrets the comments he made . " In October 2014 , during a Premier League match between Arsenal and Chelsea , Wenger was involved in a touchline spat with Mourinho . Wenger later apologised for his behaviour . 
 Wenger has directed his anger towards referees when decisions have not gone his team 's way . In August 2000 , he was charged with " alleged threatening behaviour and physical intimidation " towards fourth official Paul Taylor , after Arsenal 's 1 – 0 defeat at Sunderland on the opening day of the 2000 – 01 season . An FA disciplinary commission found Wenger guilty ; he received a 12 @-@ match touchline ban and a fine of four weeks ' salary . He successfully appealed the ban , but was reprimanded and fined £ 10 @,@ 000 for his actions . Following the 2007 Football League Cup Final , he called a linesman a liar , for stating Emmanuel Adebayor aimed a punch at Chelsea 's Frank Lampard . This led to an investigation by the FA , a fine of £ 2 @,@ 500 and a warning . 
 In March 2011 , Wenger was charged with improper conduct by UEFA , over comments made to referee Massimo Busacca , after his team 's defeat to Barcelona . He was fined € 10 @,@ 000 and suspended for one UEFA club competition match ; however , the ban was later extended to a further two games , after Wenger was found guilty of communicating with Arsenal 's bench while serving a touchline ban against Udinese . A year later , Wenger was charged for post @-@ match comments made about referee Damir <unk> , in Arsenal 's defeat to Milan in the Champions League . He was fined £ 33 @,@ 000 and handed a three @-@ match touchline ban in the competition . 
 = = <unk> and legacy = = 
 At Arsenal , Wenger has enjoyed a great deal of support and backing from the club board of directors , who have demonstrated exceptional faith in the manager and his long @-@ term vision . His arrival at the club prompted a change in their football style – once derided as " Boring , boring Arsenal " for a lack of creativity , pundit Alan Hansen described the 2004 team as " quite simply the most fluid , devastating team the British Isles has seen , " while manager Brian Clough once quipped : " Arsenal caress a football the way I dreamed of caressing Marilyn Monroe . " Wenger himself reflected that his greatest legacy at Arsenal would be the style he implemented . Supporters regularly display banners such as " Arsène knows " and " In Arsène we trust " during home matches , though equally there have been a growing number of protests against his management . 
 Dein described Wenger as the most important manager in the club 's history : " Arsène 's a miracle worker . He 's revolutionised the club . He 's turned players into world @-@ class players . Since he has been here , we have seen football from another planet . " Former Watford manager Graham Taylor said of Wenger in 2002 : " I believe his biggest contribution to football is getting across the idea that players have to prepare right and look after themselves " . Wenger 's loyalty towards financial fair play and handling of Arsenal 's debt since their stadium move has earnt him praise , not least from American baseball general manager Billy Beane , who in particular lauded his transfer strategy . A survey in 2007 found Wenger was the only Premier League manager to have made a profit on transfers , and between 2004 and 2009 , he made an average profit of £ 4 @.@ 4 million per season on transfers , far more than any other club . 
 Though Wenger has established Arsenal as UEFA Champions League regulars , he has yet to win the European Cup , or translated his domestic success in other continental competitions – often considered a blemish om his managerial <unk> writer Michael Calvin argues despite the European failings , Wenger should still be considered one of the greats in football : " [ He ] has been the best , most influential manager of the modern era . His job has involved managing change , and all the hypocrisy which comes with that . In a world where incoherence is routinely hailed as innovation , he has been a true visionary . " Wenger 's stubbornness to follow his idealistic vision of football has been heavily criticised during his second decade at Arsenal ; Henry Winter in 2016 reasoned the Frenchman 's methods no longer gave him an advantage over others , and he needed to adapt or resign . Winter also suggested the club was content with lucrative top @-@ four finishes , and the manager needed tough individuals to challenge him . Ferguson however expressed admiration in Wenger 's consistency and obstinate nature : " He stays with what he believes in . And I think people who do that are outstanding coaches . " 
 Wenger was awarded France 's highest decoration , the Légion d 'Honneur , in 2002 . In the Queen 's Birthday Honours List of 2003 , he and fellow Frenchman Gérard Houllier were awarded honorary OBEs for their services to football . At Arsenal 's valedictory campaign at Highbury throughout the 2005 – 06 season , supporters showed appreciation by holding a " Wenger Day " as one of various themed matchdays . It was held on his 56th birthday , on 22 October 2005 , in a league match against Manchester City . Wenger was inducted into the English Football Hall of Fame in 2006 , along with former England manager Ron Greenwood . Furthermore , a commissioned bronze bust of Wenger , similar to the earlier version of Herbert Chapman , was unveiled as a tribute to him by the board of directors of Arsenal , at the club 's annual general meeting in October 2007 . Wenger had an asteroid , <unk> <unk> , named after him by the astronomer Ian P. Griffin , who states Arsenal as his favourite football club . 
 = = = Increase in worldwide players = = = 
 Wenger was one of the first managers in English football to scout abroad for talent . His double @-@ winning team of 1998 was described by editor Jason Cowley as " ... model of racial and multicultural integration . They were the first truly globalised team . " Richard Jolly writing for The National added that Wenger aided the Premier League 's globalisation and " showed the merit of hiring foreign managers on the basis of their record abroad . " Wenger himself felt he had changed attitudes towards foreign managers in England : 
 There was a history and belief in England that the foreign manager could not be successful . Now you have a different feeling , now you think only foreign managers can be successful . That is wrong as well . I believe I contributed to the change in attitude about foreign managers . That can look pretentious but I don 't think it is at all . I can show some articles where people tried to prove that the foreign managers can never win an English championship . That has changed and I have certainly contributed to that . But I am also one of the few who also defends English managers . 
 The continued influx of foreign players at Arsenal has , however , attracted criticism . In a league match against Crystal Palace on 14 February 2005 , Arsenal fielded a 16 @-@ man squad that featured no British players for the first time in the club 's history . This prompted Professional Footballers ' Association ( PFA ) chief executive Gordon Taylor to express it would begin " a worrying pattern for English football " . A year later , manager Alan Pardew commented that Arsenal 's Champions League success was " not necessarily a triumph for British football " . Wenger saw the issue of nationality as irrelevant and said , " When you represent a club , it 's about values and qualities , not about passports " . Other pundits including Trevor Brooking , the director of football development at the FA , have defended Wenger . Brooking has stated that a lack of English players in " one of England 's most successful clubs " was more of a reflection on England 's limited talent pool rather than on Wenger , an opinion shared by youth team coach and ex @-@ Liverpool player Craig Johnston . 
 Several English players have started their careers at Arsenal under Wenger , such as Ashley Cole , David Bentley and Matthew Upson , and many continue to build careers at the club , namely Theo Walcott , Kieran Gibbs , Alex Oxlade @-@ Chamberlain and Jack Wilshere . Wenger commented that an advantage of building his team around British players was the guarantee of stability . 
 = = = Team indiscipline and fair play = = = 
 In his early years at Arsenal , Wenger was scrutinised for the club 's poor disciplinary record ; Winter in 2003 described it as " ... little short of a crime @-@ wave , " while chairman Peter Hill @-@ Wood admitted the players ' conduct was unacceptable . Between September 1996 and February 2014 , the team received 100 red cards . Wenger has often tried to defend his players , involved in controversial incidents on the field , by saying that he has not seen the incident ; this is an option he resorts to when there is no " rational explanation " to defend him , and that he has the player 's best interests in mind . However , in both 2004 and 2005 , Arsenal topped the Premier League 's Fair Play League tables for sporting behaviour and finished second in 2006 . Their record as one of the most sporting clubs in the division continued up to 2009 , where the team featured in the top four of the Fair Play table . Wenger 's team again topped the fair play table for the 2009 – 10 season . 
 In February 1999 , Wenger offered Sheffield United a replay of their FA Cup fifth round match immediately after the match had finished , due to the controversial circumstances in which it was won . The decisive goal was scored by Overmars after Kanu failed to return the ball to the opposition ; it was kicked into touch to allow Sheffield United 's Lee Morris to receive treatment for an injury . Arsenal went on to win the replayed match 2 – 1 . 
 = = = Stade Arsène Wenger = = = 
 In May 2016 , the Stade Arsène Wenger was officially opened near Strasbourg , where Wenger was born . The stadium is the new home of USL <unk> and holds a capacity of 500 people . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Wenger was married to former basketball player Annie <unk> , with whom he has one daughter , Léa ( born 1997 ) , and lives in Totteridge , London . Wenger and <unk> separated in 2015 . He spends his leisure time predominantly studying football matches — " I watch games on most days " — and has an interest in politics . Away from managerial duties , he acted as a football consultant for French television station TF1 from 2004 to 2014 , and since 2016 has worked for beIN Sports . Wenger is a world brand ambassador for FIFA World Cup sponsor Castrol . As part of the arrangement , he has conducted several training camps for international youth teams worldwide to provide input to the Castrol Performance Index , FIFA 's official ratings system . 
 He has authored a book on football management exclusively for the Japanese market , <unk> no <unk> ( <unk> , lit . The Spirit of Conquest ) in English , published by Japan Broadcast Publishing ( a subsidiary of NHK ) in August 1997 . The book highlights his managerial philosophy , ideals and values , as well as his thoughts on Japanese football and the game as a whole . 
 Wenger is a Roman Catholic , and he attributes his outlook and values to his religious upbringing . He grew up speaking French and German , and has learnt English , Spanish and Italian . He also knows some Japanese . 
 In 2010 , Wenger appealed for privacy after a British newspaper alleged he had an affair with a French singer . Wenger said in a statement that he wished to deal with the matter privately . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Playing statistics = = = 
 Source : 
 = = = Managerial statistics = = = 
 As of match played 15 May 2016 . 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Playing honours = = = 
 Strasbourg 
 Ligue 1 : 1978 – 79 
 = = = Managerial honours = = = 
 = Alben W. Barkley = 
 Alben William Barkley ( November 24 , 1877 – April 30 , 1956 ) was a lawyer and politician from Kentucky who served in both houses of Congress and as the 35th Vice President of the United States from 1949 to 1953 . In 1905 , he was elected county attorney for McCracken County , Kentucky . He was chosen county judge in 1909 and U.S. Representative from Kentucky 's First District in 1912 . As a Representative , he was a liberal Democrat , supporting President Woodrow Wilson 's New Freedom domestic agenda and foreign policy . 
 Endorsing Prohibition and denouncing parimutuel betting , Barkley narrowly lost the 1923 Democratic gubernatorial primary to fellow Representative J. Campbell Cantrill . In 1926 , he unseated Republican Senator Richard P. Ernst . In the Senate , he supported the New Deal approach to addressing the Great Depression and was elected to succeed Senate Majority Leader Joseph T. Robinson upon Robinson 's death in 1937 . 
 During his 1938 re @-@ election bid , his opponent A. B. " Happy " Chandler accused him of using Works Progress Administration employees to campaign for him ; Barkley claimed Chandler used state employees in the same way . Neither candidate was charged with any wrongdoing , but in 1939 , Congress passed the Hatch Act , making it illegal for federal employees to campaign for political candidates . 
 When World War II focused President Franklin D. Roosevelt 's attention on foreign affairs , Barkley gained influence over the administration 's domestic agenda . He resigned as floor leader after Roosevelt ignored his advice and vetoed the Revenue Act of 1943 ( the veto was promptly overridden ) . The Democratic caucus supported and unanimously re @-@ elected Barkley to the position of Majority Leader . 
 Barkley had a better working relationship with Harry S. Truman , who ascended to the presidency after Roosevelt 's death in 1945 . With Truman 's popularity waning entering the 1948 Democratic National Convention , Barkley gave a keynote address that energized the delegates . Truman selected him as his running mate for the upcoming election and the Democratic ticket scored an upset victory . Barkley took an active role in the Truman administration , acting as its primary spokesman , especially after the Korean War necessitated the majority of Truman 's attention . 
 When Truman announced that he would not seek re @-@ election in 1952 , Barkley began organizing a presidential campaign , but labor leaders refused to endorse his candidacy because of his age , and he withdrew from the race . He retired but was coaxed back into public life , defeating incumbent Republican Senator John Sherman Cooper in 1954 . Barkley died of a heart attack while giving a speech at the Washington and Lee Mock Convention on April 30 , 1956 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Willie Alben Barkley , the eldest of John Wilson and Electa Eliza ( Smith ) Barkley 's eight children , was born November 24 , 1877 . His grandmother , midwife Amanda Barkley , delivered him in the log house she lived in with her husband , Alben , in Wheel , Kentucky . Barkley 's parents were tenant farmers who grew tobacco , and his father was an elder in the local Presbyterian church . Both parents were religious , opposed to playing cards and alcohol . Occasionally , Barkley 's parents would leave him in the care of his grandparents for extended periods . During these times , his grandmother related stories of her relatives . Childhood playmates included future U.S. Vice President Adlai Stevenson and James A. McKenzie , a future U.S. Representative from Kentucky . 
 Barkley worked on his parents ' farm and attended school in Lowes , Kentucky , between the fall harvest and spring planting . Unhappy with his birth name , he adopted " Alben William " as soon as he was old enough to express his opinion in the matter . In the difficult economy of late 1891 , relatives convinced Barkley 's father to sell his farm and move to Clinton , to pursue opportunities as a tenant wheat farmer . Barkley enrolled at a local seminary school , but did not finish his studies before entering Marvin College , a Methodist school in Clinton that accepted younger students , in 1892 . The college 's president offered him a scholarship that covered his academic expenses in exchange for his work as a janitor . He allowed Barkley to miss the first and last month of the academic year to help on the family farm . Barkley was active in the debating society at Marvin . He earned a Bachelor of Arts degree in 1897 , and his experiences at Marvin persuaded him to convert to Methodism , the denomination with which he identified for the rest of his life . 
 After graduation , Barkley went to Emory College ( now part of Emory University ) in Oxford , Georgia , the alma mater of several administrators and faculty members at Marvin . During the 1897 – 1898 academic year , he was active in the debating society and the Delta Tau Delta fraternity , but he could not afford to continue his education and returned to Clinton after the spring semester . He took a job teaching at Marvin College but did not make enough money to meet his basic living expenses . He resigned in December 1898 to move with his parents to Paducah , Kentucky , the county seat of McCracken County , where his father found employment at a cordage mill . 
 In Paducah , Barkley worked as a law clerk for Charles K. Wheeler , an attorney and congressman for the district , accepting access to Wheeler 's law library as payment for his services . Despite their political differences – Wheeler supported William Jennings Bryan and Free Silver , while Barkley identified with the Gold Democrats – he hoped that being acquainted with and taught by Wheeler would aid him in his future endeavors , but congressional duties frequently kept Wheeler away from the office . After two months , Barkley accepted an offer to clerk for Judge William Sutton Bishop and former congressman John Kerr Hendrick , who paid him $ 15 per month . He read law while completing his duties and was admitted to the bar in 1901 . Barkley practiced in Paducah where a friend of Hendrick 's appointed him reporter of the circuit court . He continued studying law in the summer of 1902 at the University of Virginia School of Law . 
 Barkley joined the Broadway Methodist Episcopal Church , where he was a lay preacher , and several fraternal organizations , including Woodmen of the World , the Benevolent and Protective Order of Elks , the Independent Order of Odd Fellows , and the Improved Order of Red Men . On June 23 , 1903 , he married Dorothy Brower ( November 14 , 1882 to March 10 , 1947 ) . They had three children — David Murrell Barkley ( 1906 – 1983 ) , Marion Frances Barkley ( 1909 – 1996 ) , and Laura Louise Barkley ( 1911 – 1987 ) . Laura Louise married Douglas MacArthur II , a U.S. diplomat and nephew of General Douglas MacArthur . 
 = = Early political career = = 
 On December 19 , 1904 , Barkley declared his candidacy for county attorney of McCracken County well before the March 1905 Democratic primary . The Republicans did not nominate a candidate , so the Democratic primary was the de facto general election . Barkley faced two opponents in the primary – two @-@ term incumbent Eugene A. Graves and Paducah Police Court Judge David Cross . He organized his own campaign and made speeches across the county , showcasing his eloquence and likeability . Graves received more votes than Barkley in Paducah , but McCracken County 's rural farmers gave Barkley the victory , 1 @,@ 525 votes to 1 @,@ 096 ; Cross came in third with 602 votes . This was the only time Barkley ever challenged an incumbent Democrat . 
 Taking office in January 1906 , Barkley saved taxpayers over $ 35 @,@ 000 by challenging improper charges to the county . He prosecuted two magistrates for approving contracts in which they had a conflict of interest . Even Republicans admitted that he performed well , and he was chosen president of the State Association of County Attorneys . During the 1907 gubernatorial election , he was the Democratic county spokesman , and despite his previous support for the Gold Democrats , he backed William Jennings Bryan in the 1908 presidential election . Friends encouraged him to run for county judge , a powerful position which controlled county funds and patronage , and he announced his candidacy on August 22 , 1908 . After the chairman of the county 's Democratic Club Executive Committee endorsed him , the incumbent judge , Richard T. Lightfoot , retired rather than challenge him . 
 On January 16 , 1909 , Democrat Hiram Smedley , county clerk since 1897 , was indicted for embezzlement . Smedley resigned , and Barkley was appointed to a three @-@ man commission to investigate the losses . The commission found $ 1 @,@ 582 @.@ 50 missing , and the county 's Fiscal Court authorized Barkley to settle with the company that held Smedley 's surety bond . In May 1909 , Smedley was arrested and charged with 20 counts of forgery , prompting an audit of the county 's finances that showed a shortage of $ 16 @,@ 000 , only $ 6 @,@ 000 of which was accountable to Smedley . The scandal gave Republicans an issue for the upcoming campaign . In a series of debates , Barkley 's opponent , Thomas N. Hazelip , claimed that the county 's entire Democratic organization was corrupt and made charges against past Democratic administrations . Barkley responded that he had no more responsibility for those wrongdoings than Hazelip had for the murder of William Goebel , a Democratic governor who had allegedly been assassinated by Republican conspirators in 1900 . He pointed to his improvement of the county 's finances through inspection of charges presented to his office and showed evidence that he had fulfilled his obligations as county attorney , a fact Hazelip conceded . In spite of the scandal , Democrats won every county @-@ wide office , although by reduced margins , but Republicans captured a 5 @-@ to @-@ 3 majority on the Fiscal Court . Barkley 's victory margin — 3 @,@ 184 to 2 @,@ 662 — was the smallest of any county officer . 
 At the Fiscal Court 's January 1910 meeting , Barkley laid out an agenda to reduce the county 's debt , improve its roads , and audit its books annually . Despite the Republican majority on the Court , most of the measures he proposed during his term were adopted . He appointed a purchasing agent and an inspector of weights and measures for the county and allocated a salary for the county 's almshouse keeper instead of relying on fees to fund the position . He replaced the corvée system – wherein residents either paid a tax or donated labor to build and repair county roads – with private contracts . The widening and gravelling of county roads provided rural residents access to Paducah 's amenities but reduced funds for programs like free textbooks for indigents and prevented Barkley from reducing the county 's debt as planned . When he named his father as the county 's juvenile court probation officer , opponents charged him with nepotism . 
 = = U.S. Representative = = 
 Prompted by First District Representative Ollie M. James ' decision to seek election to the U.S. Senate in 1912 , Barkley declared his candidacy for the district 's congressional seat in December 1911 . Courting the votes of the district 's farmers , Barkley advocated lower taxes and increased regulation of railroads by the Interstate Commerce Commission . After one challenger withdrew in March , three more candidates entered the race – Trigg County Commonwealth 's Attorney Denny Smith , Ballard County Judge Jacob Corbett , and John K. Hendrick , Barkley 's former employer . All were conservative Democrats who branded Barkley a socialist because he supported federal funding of highway construction . Hendrick attacked Barkley 's youth , inexperience and ambition to seek higher offices . Barkley admitted his eventual desire for a Senate seat and countered that Hendrick had also frequently sought office : " When the Pope died some years ago , nobody would tell Hendrick , for fear he would declare for that office . " Charging that Barkley 's membership in Woodsmen of the World was politically motivated , Hendrick ended up attacking the organization itself , angering the approximately 5 @,@ 000 club members in the First District . In June , the nomination of Woodrow Wilson for president and adoption of a progressive platform at the 1912 Democratic National Convention bolstered Barkley 's candidacy . He won 48 @.@ 2 % of the votes in the primary and went on to win the general election . 
 = = = Domestic matters = = = 
 Initially conservative , working with Wilson ( who was elected president ) inspired Barkley to become more liberal . On April 24 , 1912 , he first spoke on the House floor , favoring the administration @-@ backed Underwood – Simmons Tariff Act which lowered tariffs on foreign goods . He endorsed Wilson 's New Freedom agenda , including the 1913 Federal Reserve Act and the 1914 Federal Trade Commission Act . Because of his support for the administration , he was assigned to the powerful Interstate and Foreign Commerce Committee and became the first freshman to preside over a session of the House . As a member of the Interstate Commerce Commission , he supported the Clayton Antitrust Act and sought to end child labor in interstate commerce through the Keating – Owen Act in 1916 . He also supported measures to extend credit to and fund road improvements in rural areas . 
 A speaker for the Anti @-@ Saloon League , Barkley co @-@ sponsored the 1916 Sheppard – Barkley Act which banned alcohol sales in Washington , D.C. It was passed in 1917 . He sponsored an amendment to the Lever Food and Fuel Act forbidding the use of grain – rendered scarce by World War I and a poor harvest in 1916 – to make alcoholic beverages . The amendment passed the House , but a conference committee amended it to allow production of beer and wine . Both measures increased Barkley 's national visibility and set the stage for future prohibition legislation , including the Eighteenth Amendment . By 1917 , the state Democratic Party was divided over prohibition , and the prohibitionist faction tried to enlist Barkley for the 1919 gubernatorial race . The Memphis Commercial Appeal noted in late 1917 that Barkley had not declined the invitations , but his continued silence reduced the prohibitionists ' enthusiasm . He also showed little interest in the faction 's attempts to recruit him to challenge incumbent anti @-@ prohibition Senator Ollie James in the 1917 Democratic primary . 
 By 1919 , James had died in office and Governor Augustus Owsley Stanley was elected to his vacant seat . The divisive prohibition issue and recent Republican gains in the state made the Democratic gubernatorial primary of particular interest . Stanley was the leader of the party 's anti @-@ prohibitionists . Prohibitionists , led by former governor J. C. W. Beckham , did not support James D. Black , who became governor when Stanley went to the Senate and was seeking re @-@ election . At the time of Black 's election as lieutenant governor in 1915 , he had sided with the prohibitionists ; he was chosen to run with Stanley to balance the party 's ticket , so the anti @-@ prohibitionists did not entirely trust him either . Attempting to unite the party and prevent a Republican victory , Black invited Barkley , who had not been linked to either leader despite his support for prohibition , to be temporary chairman of the 1919 state Democratic convention . Barkley 's convention address attacked Republicans and praised the Democrats ' record without making reference to prohibition , but many in the Beckham faction refused to accept Black , and he was defeated in the general election by Republican Edwin P. Morrow . Chairing the convention introduced Barkley to state political leaders outside the First District . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 Barkley supported U.S. neutrality in World War I and endorsed Wilson 's plan to purchase merchant ships for the U.S. instead of paying foreign carriers to travel waters containing German U @-@ boats . His position was popular in his district , as 80 % of the dark tobacco grown in western Kentucky was sold overseas , and higher shipping costs adversely affected profits . The House authorized the purchase , but Republicans and conservative Democrats in the Senate regarded the idea as socialistic and blocked its passage with a filibuster . 
 Wilson supporters , including Barkley , campaigned for his re @-@ election in 1916 , using the slogan " he kept us out of war " . By early 1917 , Germany had lifted all restrictions on attacks on neutral shipping supplying Britain and France , outraging many Americans . The publication in February of the Zimmermann Telegram , in which a German official proposed to Mexico that , if the U.S. entered the war , Mexico should declare war on them and the Germans would work to return Texas , Arizona , and New Mexico to Mexican control , also brought the United States closer to war . Wilson asked Congress for a declaration of war on April 2 , 1917 , and Barkley voted for the resolution when it came before the House two weeks later . At 40 years old , he considered resigning his seat to enlist in the U.S. Army , but Wilson persuaded him not to do so . 
 After the declaration of war , Barkley supported bills implementing conscription and raising revenue for the fight . Between August and October 1918 , he joined an unofficial congressional delegation that toured Europe , surveying the tactical situation and meeting with leaders there . Like Wilson , he supported U.S. ratification of the Treaty of Versailles and participation in the League of Nations , but both measures failed after the election of a more conservative Congress in 1918 . 
 = = = Relations with Harding administration = = = 
 Barkley supported William Gibbs McAdoo for president at the 1920 Democratic National Convention , but the nomination went to James M. Cox . He campaigned for Cox and his running mate , Franklin D. Roosevelt , but his speeches focused more on Wilson 's progressive record than Cox 's fitness for office . Republican Warren G. Harding defeated Cox in the general election , and Barkley found common ground with him on issues such as the creation of the Veterans ' Bureau and the passage of the progressive Sheppard – Towner Act . Barkley thought the administration was too favorable to big business interests , however , and in 1922 , he proclaimed that if Harding had returned the country to normalcy , " then in God 's name let us have <unk> " . 
 = = = Gubernatorial election of 1923 = = = 
 By the time of his 1922 re @-@ election bid , Barkley was the ranking Democrat on the Interstate and Foreign Commerce Committee . In the election , he carried every First District county , including the Republican strongholds of Caldwell and Crittenden counties . Despite the victory he lacked the political organization needed for higher office . According to Barkley biographer James K. Libbey , the establishment of such an organization , and not necessarily a desire to become governor , may have motivated him to announce his candidacy for the Democratic gubernatorial nomination on November 11 , 1922 . Critics charged that this was his intent , and he did little to deny it . 
 Opposing Barkley in the primary was Congressman J. Campbell Cantrill , who along with Stanley , led the conservative wing of the party , opposing prohibition and women 's suffrage . Beckham , leader of the liberal wing , intended to run , and his surrogates , particularly Louisville Courier @-@ Journal editor Robert Worth Bingham , began a " Business Man for Governor " campaign in late 1922 . Beckham had served as governor from 1900 to 1907 and later in the U.S. Senate , but he was out of office ( a " Business Man " ) , in contrast to Cantrill and Barkley . While Bingham 's campaign forced Barkley to declare his candidacy earlier than planned , the tactic was not successful outside Louisville ; Beckham supporters backed Barkley , more to prevent Cantrill 's nomination than because they desired Barkley 's . Barkley 's leadership team included his own supporters , influential members of the Beckham faction , and erstwhile Cantrill supporters . 
 Recognizing the need to broaden his appeal beyond western Kentucky , Barkley opened his campaign in the central Kentucky town of Danville on February 19 , 1923 . He employed the slogan " Christianity , Morality , and Good Government " , and he and Cantrill – colleagues in the House – agreed to refrain from personal attacks . Due to Percy Haly 's influence on Barkley and Barkley 's own admiration for Woodrow Wilson , he denounced the influence of the coal , racing , and railroad trusts in state politics . " Woodrow Wilson drove the crooks and <unk> out of New Jersey , Governor Pinchot is driving them out of Pennsylvania , and if I am elected Governor of Kentucky I promise to drive them out of Frankfort , " he declared . In contrast to his usual preference for low taxes , he advocated a tax on coal deposits . In addition to reducing the coal trust 's political influence , he believed the increased revenue , which would largely be generated by out @-@ of @-@ state coal buyers , would result in lower property taxes on farmers . Friends in the Anti @-@ Saloon League convinced him that banning parimutuel betting would cripple the racing trust . Many Catholics and Protestants – notably those affiliated with the Louisville Churchmen 's Federation – favored prohibition and opposed parimutuel betting on religious grounds , and endorsed Barkley 's candidacy , but Bingham , typically a Beckham ally , was slow to endorse him . Like Bingham , Lexington Herald editor Desha Breckinridge had helped create the parimutuel betting system , and Barkley 's positions were enough to convince him to back Cantrill , despite the fact that Breckinridge generally disliked Cantrill . 
 Barkley campaigned across the state , earning the nickname " Iron Man " for making up to 16 speeches in a day . His proposals for a statewide highway system and improvements in education were popular , but coal mining and horse racing interests , based mostly in eastern Kentucky , opposed him . Counties east of a line from Louisville to <unk> generally supported Cantrill , while those west of the line mostly went for Barkley , who lost the primary by 9 @,@ 000 votes ( out of 241 @,@ 000 cast ) , marking his only election loss . He supported Cantrill in the general election , gaining goodwill within the Democratic Party . Cantrill died on September 2 , and the Democratic State Committee had to name his replacement . Barkley was not acceptable to many of the members of the committee , and he refused to accept nomination by party leaders instead of the voters . On September 11 , the committee nominated Congressman William J. Fields , and Barkley supported him in the general election , which he won over Republican Charles I. Dawson . 
 = = = Later House career = = = 
 Barkley 's party loyalty in the governor 's race made him a formidable candidate to challenge Stanley , who by 1924 had angered members of both party factions , but Barkley had spent most of his funds in his campaign against Cantrill , and he did not want to risk his reputation as a party unifier by challenging a Democrat . Instead , he decided to rebuild his war chest to unseat Kentucky 's incumbent Republican senator , Richard P. Ernst , in 1926 . In the meantime , he refrained from using his influence in state races to avoid losing any goodwill with Kentucky voters . 
 At the 1924 Democratic National Convention , Barkley again supported William G. McAdoo for president . Urban interests at the convention promoted New York Governor Al Smith , and a bitter convention fight ensued . During the course of 103 ballots , chairman Thomas J. Walsh needed a rest and temporarily yielded his position to Barkley . The convention was the first to be broadcast nationally , and Barkley 's service as chair augmented his national recognition and appeal . The two Democratic factions agreed to compromise , nominating John W. Davis , who Libbey called a " competent nonentity " ; Davis lost in the general election to Calvin Coolidge . Barkley won another term in the House by a 2 @-@ to @-@ 1 margin over his Republican opponent in 1924 , but Democratic divisions cost Stanley his Senate seat , and Barkley became even more convinced of the value of party loyalty . 
 = = U.S. Senator = = 
 Because of Barkley 's role in crafting the Railway Labor Act , the Associated Railway Labor Organizations endorsed him to unseat Ernst even before he formally announced his candidacy on April 26 , 1926 . Since the 1923 gubernatorial contest , he had distanced himself from Haly and promised the conservatives that he would not push a ban on parimutuel betting if elected . Consequently , he had no opposition in the primary . Congressman ( and later Chief Justice ) Fred M. Vinson managed his general election campaign . 
 Coolidge supported Ernst , and Commerce Secretary Herbert Hoover campaigned in the state on his behalf . Ernst had opposed a bonus for veterans of World War I , an unpopular position in Kentucky , and at 68 years old , his age worked against him . Barkley contrasted his impoverished upbringing with Ernst 's affluent lifestyle as a corporate lawyer , and also attacked him for supporting Michigan Senator Truman Handy Newberry , who resigned due to allegations of election fraud . Republican voters were angered that Ernst did not support Republican Kentucky Congressman John W. Langley when Langley was charged with illegally aiding a large bootlegging operation in Louisville . Ernst tried to resurrect the issues of Barkley 's support for the coal tax and opposition to parimutuel betting , but in the general election , Barkley won by a vote of 287 @,@ 997 to 266 @,@ 657 . 
 In the Senate , Barkley was assigned to the Committee on the Library , and the committees on Finance and Banking and Currency ; later , he was added to the Commerce Committee . In early 1928 , Vice President Charles G. Dawes assigned him to a special committee to investigate the campaign expenditures of the leading candidates in the upcoming presidential election . 
 Democrats considered nominating him for vice president that year , calculating that his party loyalty and appeal to rural , agricultural and prohibitionist constituents , could balance a ticket headed by likely presidential nominee Al Smith , an urban anti @-@ prohibitionist . When the Kentucky delegation arrived at the 1928 Democratic National Convention , they approached Smith supporters with a view to pairing Barkley to their candidate . They were received cordially , but Smith 's advisors thought placing candidates with such differing views on the ticket would seem contrived to the electorate . They did not tell Barkley of their decision until after he seconded Smith 's nomination for president . Smith then announced Arkansas Senator Joseph T. Robinson as his preferred running mate . The Kentuckians nominated Barkley in spite of Smith 's preference , but the overwhelming majority of delegates voted for Robinson , and Barkley announced that Kentucky was changing its support in order to make the nomination unanimous . 
 Barkley and his wife Dorothy took a vacation after the convention , returning to Kentucky in August 1928 to find that , in his absence , Barkley had been chosen state chairman of Smith 's campaign . He campaigned for Smith , but Herbert Hoover won a landslide victory . After the election , Barkley led a coalition of liberal Democrats and Republicans that opposed Hoover 's use of protective tariffs , a debate that took particular urgency following the Wall Street Crash of 1929 . Barkley opposed the Smoot – Hawley Tariff Act , claiming it would cost Americans both jobs and exports , but Congress approved it , and Hoover signed it on June 17 , 1930 . When Congress adjourned , Barkley accompanied Sherwood Eddy and fellow senators Burton K. Wheeler and Bronson M. Cutting to the Soviet Union in August 1930 . He was impressed by the industrial development brought about by Joseph Stalin 's First Five @-@ Year Plan but did not advocate closer diplomatic ties with the Communist nation , as some of his colleagues did . 
 Barkley maintained that Hoover 's response to the continuing depression and the severe drought in 1930 were inadequate and pointed out that the $ 45 million in loans to farmers that he approved amounted to less than half the losses sustained by Kentucky 's farmers alone . He was angered that Hoover refused to call a special legislative session to adopt relief measures after the regular congressional adjourned in early March 1931 . He planned a series of speeches condemning Hoover beginning in June but was injured in an automobile accident on June 22 , limiting his political activities for the remainder of the year . 
 = = = Second term and ascension to floor leader = = = 
 Barkley supported Franklin D. Roosevelt for the Democratic presidential nomination in 1932 , but facing a re @-@ election bid himself , he did not announce his support , fearing that his message might not resonate with Kentucky voters . Roosevelt supporters offered Barkley the keynote address and temporary chairmanship of the 1932 Democratic National Convention if he would endorse their candidate . Both opportunities would help Barkley 's re @-@ election chances , so he announced his support for Roosevelt on March 22 , 1932 . In his keynote , Barkley warmly recalled the Wilson administration and denounced more than a decade of Republican dominance . Applause frequently punctuated the speech , with the longest interruption – a 45 @-@ minute near @-@ riot – erupting after Barkley called for a platform plank directing Congress to repeal prohibition . According to Libbey , the remark was not a repudiation of his prohibitionist position but a desire for the people to express their will on repeal . Prohibitionist constituents still supported Barkley because , for most of them , the depression trumped all other concerns . 
 George B. Martin , who had served six months in the Senate in 1918 after being appointed to fill a vacancy , opposed Barkley in the 1932 primary , but Barkley defeated him by a two @-@ to @-@ one margin . In the general election , he defeated Republican Congressman Maurice H. Thatcher by a vote of 575 @,@ 077 to 393 @,@ 865 , marking the first time in the 20th century that a Kentucky senator won a second consecutive term . Democrats gained control of the Senate during the 1932 elections ; Joseph Robinson was chosen majority leader , and he appointed Barkley as his assistant . Together , they secured passage of New Deal legislation , including the Agricultural Adjustment Act , the National Industrial Recovery Act , and the Federal Emergency Relief Act . In July 1934 , the Democratic National Committee chose Barkley to respond to Republican National Committee chairman Henry P. Fletcher 's radio attacks on the New Deal . Later that year , he embarked on a tour of twenty states , defending the New Deal and stumping for Democratic candidates in the 1934 midterm elections . 
 Barkley was again the keynote speaker at the 1936 Democratic National Convention . During his address , he alluded to the Supreme Court 's decision in Schechter Poultry Corp. v. United States – which struck down the National Industrial Recovery Act as unconstitutional – asking " Is the court beyond criticism ? May it be regarded as too sacred to be disagreed with ? " These remarks help set an anti @-@ Supreme Court tone for Roosevelt 's second term . On February 5 , 1937 , Roosevelt proposed legislation authorizing the president to appoint an additional justice for each one over the age of 70 . Many saw this proposal as an attempt to avoid further nullification of New Deal provisions as unconstitutional by appointing more sympathetic justices , and they dubbed the measure Roosevelt 's " court @-@ packing plan " . 
 Barkley and Mississippi Senator Pat Harrison were the leading candidates to succeed Robinson as Democratic floor leader when he died on July 14 , 1937 . Harrison 's tenure in the Senate was eight years longer than Barkley 's , and he was supported by conservative Southern Democratic senators opposed to Roosevelt 's court @-@ packing plan . Harrison had helped secure Roosevelt 's nomination at the 1932 Democratic National Convention by convincing Mississippi Governor Martin <unk> Conner to keep his state 's delegation loyal to Roosevelt , but Roosevelt preferred Barkley because of his support of the New Deal . A letter from Roosevelt praising Barkley 's legislative accomplishments and addressed to " My Dear Alben " was seen as an endorsement . Although Roosevelt remained publicly neutral , he pressured Illinois ' William H. Dieterich and Missouri 's Harry S. Truman to support Barkley instead of Harrison ; Dieterich acquiesced , but Truman remained loyal to Harrison . Many senators resented Roosevelt 's interference in a traditionally legislative prerogative . Ultimately , Barkley was elected by a single vote . 
 = = = Challenge by Happy Chandler = = = 
 Barkley faced a primary challenge in his 1938 re @-@ election bid from A. B. " Happy " Chandler , Kentucky 's popular governor who had a strong political organization throughout the state . According to historian James C. Klotter , Chandler was confident of his ascension to the presidency and saw the Senate as a stepping stone . Chandler twice asked Roosevelt to appoint Kentucky 's junior Senator , M. M. Logan , to a federal judgeship so he could arrange his own appointment to Logan 's Senate seat . On one of these occasions – the retirement of Supreme Court Justice George Sutherland – Barkley advised Roosevelt to appoint Solicitor General Stanley Reed instead . Chandler 's mentor , Virginia Senator Harry F. Byrd , and the bloc of Democrats who opposed Roosevelt 's New Deal , then encouraged Chandler to announce his candidacy for Barkley 's seat . 
 The New York Times saw the primary as " the Gettysburg of the party 's internecine strife " over control of the Democratic National Convention in 1940 . Early on , Chandler portrayed himself as a supporter of Roosevelt – since Roosevelt was popular in Kentucky – but opposed to the New Deal . He pointed to his fiscal conservatism as governor , including reorganizing and downsizing the executive branch and reducing the state 's debt . Polls showing Barkley with a comfortable lead and an overwhelming victory by New Deal supporter Claude Pepper in Florida 's May Senate primary convinced Chandler to shift his focus from the New Deal . He criticized Barkley as " a stranger to the state " and obliquely referred to " fat , sleek senators who go to Europe and have forgotten the people of Kentucky except when they run for election " . Forty years old – 20 years Barkley 's junior – he referred to Barkley as " Old Alben " . 
 Early in the contest , congressional business restricted Barkley 's campaign to weekends , so he enlisted allies like Fred Vinson to speak on his behalf . Chandler 's political enemies such as former governor Ruby Laffoon , whom Chandler had crossed as lieutenant governor , and John Y. Brown , Sr. , who felt that Chandler had broken a promise to support him for a seat in the Senate , also supported Barkley . Although labor leaders had backed Chandler 's gubernatorial bid , they endorsed Barkley because of Roosevelt 's support for labor unions . After the congressional session , Barkley resumed his " Iron Man " campaign style , making between 8 and 15 speeches each day and traveling , on average , 4 @,@ 500 miles ( 7 @,@ 200 km ) per week . This countered Chandler 's implication that Barkley 's age was a disadvantage , a charge that was further blunted when the younger Chandler fell ill in July , temporarily halting his campaigning . Chandler indirectly charged that a Barkley supporter had poisoned his ice water , causing the illness . Barkley ridiculed the suggestion , promising to appoint " an ice water guard " for his campaign . During speeches , he would lift a glass of water to his lips , then mockingly inspect it and refuse to drink it . Louisville police dismissed Chandler 's claim as " a political bedtime story " . 
 Recognizing that the defeat of his hand @-@ picked floor leader would be a repudiation of his agenda , Roosevelt began a tour of the state in Covington on July 8 , 1938 . Chandler , the state 's chief executive , was invited to welcome the president . Although clearly campaigning for Barkley , Roosevelt made courteous remarks about Chandler in the spirit of party unity , but in Bowling Green , he chastised Chandler for " dragging federal judgeships into a political campaign " . 
 As nearly every 20th century Kentucky governor had done , Chandler printed campaign materials with state funds , solicited campaign funds from state employees , and promised new government jobs in exchange for votes . A later investigation determined that Chandler had raised at least $ 10 @,@ 000 from state employees . Federal New Deal employees countered by working on Barkley 's behalf . Barkley and George H. Goodman , director of the Works Progress Administration ( WPA ) in Kentucky , denied that WPA employees played a role in the campaign , but journalist Thomas Lunsford Stokes concluded that " the WPA ... was deep in politics " in Kentucky , winning the 1939 Pulitzer Prize for Reporting for his investigation . A Senate committee investigated Stokes ' findings , and WPA administrator Harry Hopkins claimed the committee 's report refuted all but two of Stokes ' twenty @-@ two charges . Nevertheless , Congress passed the Hatch Act of 1939 which restricted federal employees ' participation in political activities . 
 Barkley won the August 6 election by a vote of 294 @,@ 391 to 223 @,@ 149 , carrying 74 of Kentucky 's 120 counties , with large majorities in western Kentucky , the city of Louisville , and rural areas . It was the first loss of Chandler 's political career , and the worst suffered by a primary candidate in Kentucky 's history to that time . Barkley defeated his Republican opponent , Louisville Judge John P. Haswell , securing 62 % of the general election vote . Encouraged by Barkley 's success , Roosevelt campaigned against conservative Democratic incumbents in southern states , but all of these candidates won , which damaged Roosevelt 's image . 
 = = = Floor leadership = = = 
 With his caucus divided between conservatives and liberals , Barkley failed to secure passage for Roosevelt 's court @-@ packing plan . After the successive failures of several administration @-@ backed domestic bills , the press dubbed the Senate Majority Leader " bumbling Barkley " . He was able to salvage an appropriations bill to cover overspending by the WPA , although it allocated much less funding than Roosevelt had wanted . He helped secure the Hatch Act and The Washington Daily News called a 1940 amendment that prohibited campaigning by federally funded state employees a " monument to Alben Barkley 's persistence and parliamentary skill " . Despite this mixed record , Roosevelt believed some Democratic partisans hoped to nominate Barkley for president at the 1940 Democratic National Convention , but the German invasion of Poland on September 1 , 1939 , deepened his resolve to seek a third term . 
 Barkley disagreed with Roosevelt 's selection of Agriculture Secretary Henry A. Wallace as his running mate ; Libbey felt that " there is enough evidence from Barkley 's tortuous private and public statements about the qualifications of Wallace to infer that Barkley wanted the vice presidency for himself " , although he did not promote this idea to Roosevelt . Barkley was chosen permanent chairman of the convention ; chants of " We want Roosevelt " interrupted his July 16 speech for 20 minutes , indicating that he had created a popular mandate for Roosevelt 's renomination , which occurred the next day . Roosevelt went on to win an unprecedented third term in a landslide . 
 Supporting Roosevelt 's provision of aid to Allied Powers during World War II , Barkley sponsored the Lend @-@ Lease Act in the Senate . In November 1943 , he helped draft the Connally – Fulbright Resolution for the creation of an international peace @-@ keeping body at the end of the war , an idea he had favored since Woodrow Wilson 's support of the League of Nations . Supreme Court Justice and fellow Kentuckian Louis Brandeis influenced Barkley to adopt Zionism ; during and after the war , Barkley advocated creation of a Jewish homeland in Palestine and introduced a 1943 resolution demanding that the Nazis to be punished for persecuting Jews . U.S. entry into the war diverted Roosevelt 's attention away from domestic affairs . Vice President Wallace , House Speaker Sam Rayburn , Democratic House Floor Leader John William McCormack , and Barkley – the president 's " Big Four " – helped develop and pass the administration 's legislative agenda . Barkley regularly met with the chairmen of the Senate 's standing committees , forming a sort of legislative cabinet . With their support , he secured passage of the War Powers Act and the Emergency Price Control Act . He also advocated passage of a measure to outlaw poll taxes , but the bill was defeated . 
 = = = Split with Roosevelt = = = 
 In April 1943 a confidential analysis by Isaiah Berlin of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee for the British Foreign Office described Barkley as " a Democratic party " wheelhorse " who will pull the Administration waggon through thick and thin . Although he is the Majority Leader in the Senate , he is not an adroit negotiator , but a loyal supporter of the President come hell or high water . " 
 Tension developed between Roosevelt and Barkley during the war , however . In 1943 , Roosevelt refused to appoint Barkley to a vacancy on the Supreme Court , and Barkley criticized the War Production Board for awarding contracts for the production of war @-@ related materials to large companies rather than small businesses . Their most notable clash occurred in February 1944 when Roosevelt requested that Congress approve tax increases to generate over $ 10 billion in revenue for the war . Barkley and the Senate Finance Committee negotiated a bill containing only $ 2 @.@ 3 billion in tax increases . Feeling the measure was insufficient , Roosevelt convened the " Big Four " on February 21 and told them he would veto it . They urged him not to do so , assuring him that the bill they had drafted was the best one that they could pass . Roosevelt vetoed the bill the next day , marking the first time a U.S. president vetoed a revenue bill . 
 When Barkley entered the Senate chamber on February 23 , word had spread that Roosevelt 's veto had angered him . He announced that he would resign as floor leader and encouraged his legislative colleagues to override the veto . He stated that Roosevelt 's characterization of the bill as " providing relief not for the needy , but for the greedy " was " a calculated and deliberate assault upon the legislative integrity of every member of the Congress of the United States " . Roosevelt sent a letter to Barkley insisting he had not intended to impugn Congress ' integrity and urging him not to resign . The next morning , Barkley resigned and left the Democratic Conference Room ; minutes later , the caucus unanimously re @-@ elected him . Many members who had seen Barkley as Roosevelt 's advocate in Congress now looked upon him as Congress ' advocate with Roosevelt . Subsequently , Congress overwhelmingly overrode the veto . 
 Delegates to the 1944 Democratic National Convention favored dropping vice president Henry Wallace from their ticket in favor of Barkley , but Roosevelt refused to consider him , telling a July 11 meeting of Democratic leaders that he was too old . Instead , he took the recommendation of Democratic National Committee chairman Robert E. Hannegan and choose Harry S. Truman . Despite his differences with Roosevelt , Barkley faced no serious challengers in the 1944 Democratic primary and defeated his Republican challenger , Fayette County Commonwealth 's Attorney James Park , by a vote of 464 @,@ 053 to 380 @,@ 425 . 
 = = = Truman succeeds Roosevelt = = = 
 Truman ascended to the presidency when Roosevelt died in April 1945 , just before the end of World War II . In the war 's aftermath , Americans wanted to know why the U.S. seemed ill @-@ prepared for the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor . Barkley sponsored a resolution to create the Joint Committee on the Investigation of the Pearl Harbor Attack and was chosen as chairman of the ten @-@ person committee . The committee 's report , delivered on July 20 , 1946 , exonerated Roosevelt of any blame for the attack and highlighted weaknesses in communications between branches of the U.S. armed forces , leading to the creation of the United States Department of Defense . Barkley also helped ensure U.S. participation in the United Nations and advocated approval of billions of dollars in loans to rebuild Europe . Look magazine named him the second most fascinating person in the country behind Dwight D. Eisenhower . 
 In the 1946 elections , Republicans wrested control of both houses of Congress from the Democrats for the first time since the Great Depression and gained control of the majority of state governments . The power of labor unions had expanded under Roosevelt and the Democrats , and when a 1946 railroad worker strike exacerbated a post @-@ war recession the Republican majorities – over Barkley 's objection – curbed union power via the Taft – Hartley Act . They also passed the Twenty @-@ second Amendment , limiting the president to two terms , a posthumous slap at Roosevelt . 
 Barkley 's wife became an invalid due to heart disease . Barkley had closed his law practice when he was elected to the Senate , so to pay for his wife 's care , he supplemented his $ 10 @,@ 000 annual salary with speaking engagements . He was the Democratic Speakers Bureau 's most requested orator , surpassing Truman . A Pageant magazine poll of legislators chose Barkley and Republican Robert A. Taft as the hardest @-@ working members of their respective parties . The Barkleys sold their Washington , D.C. home and moved into an apartment to reduce expenses . <unk> Clifford , wife of Truman 's Naval Advisor Clark Clifford , nicknamed Barkley " Sparkle <unk> " for his care of his wife , who died March 10 , 1947 . When Barkley won the Collier Award in May 1948 , he donated the $ 10 @,@ 000 prize to the University of Louisville School of Medicine in his wife 's honor . 
 Civil rights bills , unpopular with Southern Democrats , were central to Truman 's Fair Deal . Because Barkley could still appeal to Southern Democrats , Truman asked him to be the keynote speaker at the 1948 Democratic National Convention for an unprecedented third time . Because of the Republican resurgence and Truman 's difficulty appealing to some Democrats , Republican presidential nominee Thomas E. Dewey was expected to win the upcoming presidential election . Democrats were energized by Barkley 's keynote address , which promoted New Deal accomplishments and called the Republican @-@ controlled Eightieth Congress a " do nothing " Congress . He mentioned Truman only once , leading Truman to suspect that Barkley sought to supplant him as the party 's presidential nominee , but no such attempt occurred . Despite these suspicions and his contention that a ticket consisting of a Missourian and a Kentuckian lacked regional geographic balance , convention delegates persuaded Truman to take Barkley as his running mate . Truman had wanted Supreme Court Justice William O. Douglas , but Douglas declined . 
 Barkley was disappointed that he was not Truman 's first choice as running mate , but over the next six weeks , he crisscrossed the country by plane , making over 250 campaign speeches in 36 states . Playing off Barkley 's keynote speech , Truman called a special congressional session on July 26 , 1948 , challenging Republicans to enact their agenda . They were unable to pass any significant legislation , seeming to confirm Barkley 's characterization of them as a " do @-@ nothing Congress " . 
 = = Vice Presidency = = 
 In an upset victory , Truman and Barkley were elected over the Republican ticket by over 2 million votes , and Democrats regained majorities in both houses of Congress . Seventy @-@ one years old at the time of his inauguration , he was the oldest man ever elected Vice President , breaking Charles Curtis ' record at 69 . His grandson , Stephen M. Truitt , suggested the nickname " Veep " as an alternative to " Mr. Vice President " . The nickname was used by the press , but Barkley 's successor , Richard Nixon , discontinued using it , saying it belonged to Barkley . 
 Despite their personal differences , Truman and Barkley agreed on most issues . Because of Barkley 's legislative experience , Truman insisted his vice @-@ president attend cabinet meetings . Barkley chaired the Senate Democratic Policy Committee and attended Truman 's weekly legislative conferences . When Congress created the National Security Council , it included the vice president as a member . Barkley acted as the administration 's primary spokesperson , making 40 major speeches in his first eight months in office . Truman commissioned the United States Army Institute of Heraldry to create a seal and flag for the vice president , advocated raising his salary , and increased his expense budget . Mark O. Hatfield 's biographical sketch of Barkley noted that he was " the last [ vice president ] to preside regularly over the Senate , the last not to have an office in or near the White House , [ and ] the last to identify more with the legislative than the executive branch " . 
 Despite the Democrats ' advantage in the Senate , conservative Democrats united with the Republican minority to oppose much of Truman 's agenda , most notably , civil rights legislation . In March 1949 , Democratic floor leader Scott W. Lucas introduced an amendment to Senate Rule XXII to make cloture easier to achieve ; hoping to end a ten @-@ day filibuster against a civil rights bill . Conservative Republicans and Southern Democrats opposed the rule change and tried to obstruct it . Lucas asked for a cloture vote on the rule change , but opponents contended that the motion was out of order . Barkley studied the original debate on Rule XXII , which governed both cloture motions , before ruling in Lucas ' favor . Georgia Senator Richard Russell , Jr. appealed Barkley 's decision , and the chamber voted 46 – 41 to overrule . Sixteen Republicans , mostly from Northeast and West Coast states , voted to sustain the ruling ; most Southern Democrats voted with the remaining Republicans to overrule it . 
 On July 8 , 1949 , Barkley met Jane ( Rucker ) Hadley , a St. Louis widow approximately half his age , at a party thrown by Clark Clifford . After <unk> 's return to St. Louis , Barkley kept contact with her via letters and plane trips . Their courtship received national attention , and on November 18 , 1949 , they married in the Singleton Memorial Chapel of St. John 's Methodist Church in St. Louis . Barkley is the only U.S. vice president to marry while in office . 
 Barkley 's most notable tie @-@ breaking vote as vice president was cast on October 4 , 1949 , to save the Young – Russell Amendment which set a 90 % parity on the price of cotton , wheat , corn , rice , and peanuts . His friends , Scott Lucas and Clint Anderson , opposed the amendment , but Barkley had promised support during the 1948 campaign . 
 In 1949 , Emory University chose Barkley to deliver its commencement address and awarded him an honorary Doctor of Laws . The following year , the university 's debating society renamed itself the Barkley Forum . The university also created the Alben W. Barkley Distinguished Chair in its Department of Political Science . 
 Barkley tried to mentor Scott Lucas and Ernest McFarland , his immediate successors as floor leader , by teaching them to work with the vice president as he had during Truman 's vice presidency , but Truman 's unpopularity made cooperation between the executive branch and the legislature difficult . After the U.S. entered the Korean War , Truman focused on foreign affairs , leaving Barkley to campaign for Democratic candidates in the 1950 midterm elections . He traveled over 19 @,@ 000 miles ( 31 @,@ 000 km ) and spoke in almost half of the states during the campaign . He felt ill when he arrived in Paducah on election day , and a doctor diagnosed him with a " tired heart " . Returning to Washington , D.C. , he spent several days in Naval Hospital , but was able to preside when the Senate opened its session on November 28 , 1950 . Democrats lost seats in both houses but maintained majorities in each . 
 On March 1 , 1951 – exactly 38 years from his first day in Congress – Barkley 's fellow congressmen presented him with the Congressional Gold Medal in honor of his legislative service . Truman surprised Barkley , appearing on the Senate floor to present the medallion and a gavel made of timbers used to renovate the White House after the burning of Washington in 1814 . 
 In November 1951 , Barkley and his wife ate Thanksgiving dinner with U.S. troops at Kimpo Air Base in Seoul . On his seventy @-@ fourth birthday , Barkley traveled to the front lines on a fact @-@ finding mission for the president . On June 4 , 1952 , he cast another notable tie @-@ breaking vote to save the Wage Stabilization Board . 
 = = = Campaign for president = = = 
 At the March 29 , 1952 , Jefferson – Jackson Day fundraiser , Truman announced that he would not seek re @-@ election , although he was exempt from the Twenty @-@ second Amendment 's term limits . After the announcement , the District of Columbia Democratic Club formed a Barkley for President Club with Iowa Senator Guy Gillette as chairman . Prominent Kentuckians – including Senator Earle C. Clements , Governor Lawrence Wetherby , and Lieutenant Governor Emerson " Doc " Beauchamp – supported the candidacy . Exactly two months after Truman 's announcement , Barkley declared his availability to run for president while maintaining he was not actively seeking the office . 
 Barkley 's distant cousin , Illinois Governor Adlai Stevenson ( grandson of the former vice president ) , was considered his primary competition for the nomination , but had not committed before the convention . Richard Russell , Jr. and Tennessee Senator Estes Kefauver were also interested in the nomination . Kentucky 's delegation to the 1952 Democratic National Convention announced that they would support Barkley , and Truman encouraged Missouri 's delegates to do so . Democratic National Committee chairman Frank E. McKinney , former chairman James Farley , and Senate Secretary Leslie Biffle also supported him . Two weeks before the convention , Stevenson advisor Jacob <unk> told Barkley that Stevenson was not going to be nominated and favored nominating Barkley . Barkley 's advisors believed that Kefauver and Russell would knock each other out of the early balloting , allowing Barkley to capture the nomination . 
 To dispel concerns about his age ( 74 ) , failing eyesight , and heart problems , Barkley arrived in Chicago for the 1952 Democratic National Convention and briskly walked seven blocks from the bus station to his campaign headquarters . The attempt was rendered moot on July 20 when a group of labor leaders , including United Automobile Workers President Walter Reuther , issued a statement calling Barkley too old and requesting that Democrats nominate someone younger like Stevenson . At a meeting with labor leaders the next morning , Barkley failed to persuade them to retract the statement , which caused delegations from large industrial states like Illinois , Indiana , and Pennsylvania to waver on their commitments to Barkley . On July 21 , he announced his withdrawal from the race . Invited to make a farewell address on July 22 , he received a 35 @-@ minute ovation when he took the podium and 45 @-@ minute one at the speech 's end . In a show of respect , a Missouri delegate nominated Barkley for president and House Majority Leader McCormack seconded it , but Stevenson was easily nominated . A month after the convention , Barkley hosted a Stevenson picnic and campaign rally at his home in Paducah and later introduced him at a rally in Louisville . Despite Barkley 's predictions of a Democratic victory , Stevenson lost in overwhelming fashion to Republican Dwight Eisenhower . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 Barkley 's term as vice president ended on January 20 , 1953 . After the election , he had surgery to remove his cataracts . He contracted with NBC to create 26 fifteen @-@ minute commentary broadcasts called " Meet the Veep " . Low ratings prompted NBC 's decision not to renew the series in September 1953 . In retirement , Barkley remained a popular speaker and began working on his memoirs with journalist Sidney <unk> . He re @-@ entered politics in 1954 , challenging incumbent Republican Senator John Sherman Cooper . In a 1971 study of Barkley 's Senate career , historian Glenn Finch argued that Barkley was the only person who could beat Cooper . Few issues differentiated the candidates , and the campaign hinged on party politics ; visits to Kentucky by President Eisenhower , Vice President Richard Nixon , and Senator Everett Dirksen on Cooper 's behalf reinforced this notion . Barkley resumed his Iron Man campaign style , campaigning for up to sixteen hours a day , countering the " too old " charge that cost him the presidential nomination . He won the general election by a vote of 434 @,@ 109 to 362 @,@ 948 , giving Democrats a one @-@ vote advantage in the Senate . 
 Veteran West Virginia Senator Harley M. Kilgore offered to exchange seats with Barkley , putting Barkley on the front row with the chamber 's senior members and himself on the back row with the freshman legislators , but Barkley declined the offer . In honor of his previous service , he was assigned to the prestigious Committee on Foreign Relations . In this position , he endorsed Eisenhower 's appointment of Cooper as U.S. Ambassador to India and Nepal . His relative lack of seniority did not afford him much influence . 
 In an April 30 , 1956 , keynote address at the Washington and Lee Mock Convention , Barkley spoke of his willingness to sit with the other freshman senators in Congress , he ended with an allusion to Psalm 84 : 10 , saying " I 'm glad to sit on the back row , for I would rather be a servant in the House of the Lord than to sit in the seats of the mighty . " He then collapsed onstage and died of a heart attack . He was buried in Mount Kenton Cemetery near Paducah . 
 = = Memory = = 
 A dam constructed by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers on the Cumberland River in 1966 , and the lake it forms , were named Barkley Dam and Lake Barkley in Barkley 's honor . Barkley Regional Airport in Paducah is also named for him . In 1984 , the federal government declined to purchase The Angles , his Paducah home , and it was sold at auction . In February 2008 , Paducah 's American Justice School of Law changed owners after failing to secure accreditation from the American Bar Association . It was renamed the Alben W. Barkley School of Law , but remained unaccredited , and closed in December 2008 . 
 = 1968 Illinois earthquake = 
 The 1968 Illinois earthquake ( a " New Madrid event " ) was the largest recorded earthquake in the U.S. Midwestern state of Illinois . Striking at 11 : 02 a.m. on November 9 , it measured 5 @.@ 4 on the Richter scale . Although there were no fatalities , the event caused considerable structural damage to buildings , including the toppling of chimneys and shaking in Chicago , the region 's largest city . The earthquake was one of the most widely felt in U.S. history , affecting 23 states over an area of 580 @,@ 000 square miles ( 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 km2 ) . In studying its cause , scientists discovered the Cottage Grove Fault in the Southern Illinois Basin . 
 Within the region , millions felt the rupture . Reactions to the earthquake varied : some people near the epicenter did not react to the shaking , while others panicked . A future earthquake in the region is extremely likely ; in 2005 , seismologists and geologists estimated a 90 % chance of a magnitude 6 – 7 tremor before 2055 , likely originating in the Wabash Valley seismic zone on the Illinois – Indiana border or the New Madrid fault zone . 
 = = Background = = 
 The first recorded Illinois earthquake is from 1795 , when a small earthquake shook the frontier settlement of Kaskaskia . Data from large earthquakes — in May and July 1909 , and November 1968 — suggest that earthquakes in the area are of moderate magnitude but can be felt over a large geographical area , largely because of the lack of fault lines . The May 1909 Aurora earthquake affected people in an area of 500 @,@ 000 square miles ( 1 @,@ 300 @,@ 000 km2 ) ; the 1968 Illinois earthquake was felt by those living in an area of about 580 @,@ 000 square miles ( 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 km2 ) . Contradicting the idea that the region 's earthquakes are felt over a wide area , a 1965 shock was only noticed near <unk> , even though it had the same intensity level ( VII ) as those of 1909 and 1968 . Before 1968 , earthquakes had been recorded in 1838 , 1857 , 1876 , [ a ] 1881 , 1882 , 1883 , 1887 , 1891 , 1903 , 1905 , 1912 , 1917 , 1922 , [ b ] 1934 , 1939 , 1947 , 1953 , 1955 , and 1958 . Since 1968 , other earthquakes have occurred in the same region in 1972 , 1974 , 1984 , and 2008 . 
 = = Geology = = 
 The quake struck on Saturday , November 9 , 1968 at 11 : 02 a.m. The quake 's epicenter was slightly northwest of Broughton in Hamilton County , and close to the Illinois – Indiana border , about 120 miles ( 190 km ) east of St. Louis , Missouri . Surrounding the epicenter were several small towns built on flat glacial lake plains and low hills . Scientists described the rupture as " strong " . During the quake , surface wave and body wave magnitudes were measured at 5 @.@ 2 and 5 @.@ 54 respectively . The magnitude of the quake reached 5 @.@ 4 on the Richter scale . The earthquake occurred at a depth of 25 km ( 16 mi ) . [ c ] 
 A fault plane solution for the earthquake confirmed two nodal planes ( one is always a fault plane , the other an auxiliary plane ) striking north – south and dipping approximately 45 degrees to the east and to the west . This faulting suggests dip slip reverse motion and a horizontal east – west axis of confining stress . At the time of the earthquake , no faults were known in the immediate epicentral region ( see below ) , but the motion corresponded to movement along the Wabash Valley Fault System roughly 10 miles ( 16 km ) east of the region . The rupture also partly occurred on the New Madrid Fault , responsible for the great New Madrid earthquakes in 1812 . The New Madrid tremors were the most powerful earthquakes to hit the contiguous United States . 
 Various theories were put forward for the cause of the rupture . Donald Roll , director of seismology at Loyola University Chicago , proposed that the quake was caused by massive amounts of silt being deposited by rivers , generating a " seesaw " effect on the plates beneath . " The weight of the silt depressed one end of the block and tipped up the other , " he said . However , scientists eventually realized the cause was a then @-@ unknown fault , the Cottage Grove Fault , a small tear in the Earth 's rock in the Southern Illinois Basin near the city of Harrisburg , Illinois . 
 The fault , which is aligned east – west , is connected to the north – south trending Wabash Valley Fault System at its eastern end . <unk> mapping completed by geologists revealed monoclines , anticlines , and synclines , all of which suggest deformation during the Paleozoic era , when strike @-@ slip faulting took place nearby . The fault runs along an ancient Precambrian terrane boundary . It was active mainly in the Late Pennsylvanian and Early Permian epochs around 300 million years ago . 
 = = Damage = = 
 The earthquake was felt in 23 states and affected a zone of 580 @,@ 000 square miles ( 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 km2 ) . The shaking extended east to Pennsylvania and West Virginia , south to Mississippi and Alabama , north to Toronto , Canada , and west to Oklahoma . Isolated reports were received from Boston , Mobile , Alabama , Pensacola , Florida , southern Ontario , Arkansas , Minnesota , Tennessee , Georgia , Kansas , Ohio , Mississippi , Kentucky , North Carolina , South Carolina , Missouri , West Virginia , Alabama , Nebraska , Iowa , Oklahoma , South Dakota , Pennsylvania , Michigan , and Wisconsin , presumably because of shaking . The worst affected areas were in the general area of Evansville , Indiana , St. Louis , and Chicago , but there was no major damage . There were no deaths ; the worst injury was a child knocked unconscious by falling debris outside his home . 
 Damage was confined to Illinois , Indiana , Kentucky , Tennessee , and south @-@ central Iowa , and largely consisted of fallen chimneys , foundation cracks , collapsed parapets , and overturned tombstones . In one home in Dale , Illinois , near Tuckers Corners and southwest of McLeansboro , the quake cracked interior walls , plaster , and chimneys . Using a type of victim study , the local post office surveyed residents and implemented a field inspection which indicated the strongest shaking ( MM VII ) took place in the Wabash Valley , Ohio Valley , and other nearby south @-@ central Illinois lowlands . Outside this four @-@ state zone , oscillating objects including cars , chimneys , and the Gateway Arch were reported to authorities . 
 McLeansboro in particular experienced minor damage over an extensive area . Its local high school reported 19 broken windows in the girls ' gymnasium , along with cracked plaster walls . Most of the high school 's classrooms sustained fractured walls . The facade of the town 's First United Methodist Church was damaged , and a brick and concrete block fell off the top . Hamilton County Courthouse withstood several structural cracks , including one on the ceiling above the judge 's seat . The town 's residents also reported collapsing chimneys ; three chimneys toppled at one home , leading to further damage . 
 Most of the buildings that experienced chimney damage were 30 to 50 years old . The City Building in Henderson , Kentucky , 50 miles ( 80 km ) east @-@ southeast of the epicenter , sustained considerable structural damage . Moderate damage — including broken chimneys and fractured walls — occurred in towns in south @-@ central Illinois , southwest Indiana , and northwest Kentucky . For instance , a concrete @-@ brick cistern caved in 6 @.@ 2 miles ( 10 @.@ 0 km ) west of Dale . 
 In <unk> , Iowa , about 80 miles ( 130 km ) south of Des Moines on the Missouri border , the quake was felt as a long shaking . The quake damaged the town 's water tower which began to leak 300 US gallons ( 1 @,@ 100 L ) of water an hour . 
 Donald Roll correctly predicted the earthquake would have no aftershocks . He later said , " That was kind of a safety valve . The pressure which has been built up has been released . " He also described the earthquake as " a very rare occurrence " . 
 = = Response = = 
 Millions in the area experienced the earthquake , the first major seismic event in decades . Following the tremor , businesses in the area emptied . Many residents did not believe that the earthquake was over magnitude 5 . Others did not realize an earthquake was taking place , for example , some residents thought their furnaces had exploded , and one man thought that the shaking was caused by his son " jumping up and down " . At the <unk> Factory in McLeansboro , 30 miles ( 48 km ) from the epicenter , workers rushed out of the building , thinking a 1 @,@ 100 @-@ US @-@ gallon ( 4 @,@ 200 l ) water tank inside had fallen . 
 People 's reactions varied : some described themselves as " shocked " ; others admitted to being " shaky " or nervous for the rest of the day . Harold <unk> , a worker at the <unk> Factory , said , " I do not care to tell anyone I was frightened . But I was not shaking in my shoes . My shoes were moving . " One woman hypothesized that the shaking was a " bomb " . Grace <unk> suggested the earthquake was sudden , saying , " I was just scared to death . My husband and I were in the house . The Venetian shades began to shake one way , then another . When that awful blast came , he grabbed me and we ran outside . Things were falling and breaking in the house . I said to him , ' This is it . ' I thought the world had come to an end . Outside , wires were moving . There was no wind . The ground was quivering under our feet . I was so scared . I did not know I was scared . " People in the community of Mount Vernon , Illinois were frightened by the shaking . However , some did not notice the earthquake ; Jane <unk> said her party was " in a car ... to Evansville and didn 't know about it until we got there " . 
 = = Future threats = = 
 In 2005 , scientists determined there was a 90 % probability of a magnitude 6 – 7 earthquake in the New Madrid area during the next 50 years . This could cause potentially high damage in the Chicago metropolitan area which has a population near ten million people . Pressure on the fault where the 1811 – 1812 Madrid earthquakes occurred was believed to be increasing , but a later study by Eric Calais of Purdue University and other experts concluded the land adjacent to the New Madrid fault was moving less than 0 @.@ 2 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 0079 in ) a year , increasing the span between expected earthquakes on the fault to 500 – 1 @,@ 000 years . Scientists anticipating a future earthquake suggest the Wabash Valley Fault as a possible source , calling it " dangerous " . 
 Douglas Wiens , a professor of earth and planetary sciences , reported : " The strongest earthquakes in the last few years have come from the Wabash Valley Fault " , and said the fault needs more scientific observation . Steven <unk> of the United States Geological Survey is one of several scientists who have found sediments suggesting Wabash Valley Fault earthquakes around magnitude 7 on the Richter scale . Michael <unk> , an associate professor of earth and planetary sciences , denigrated the Madrid fault zone and said , " in 20 years there have been three magnitude 5 or better earthquakes on the Wabash Valley Fault . There is evidence that sometime in the past the Wabash Valley Fault has produced as strong as magnitude 7 earthquakes . On the other hand , the New Madrid Fault has been very quiet for a long time now . Clearly , the Wabash Valley Fault has gotten our deserved attention . " 
 = Christian Ehrhoff = 
 Christian Ehrhoff ( born 6 July 1982 ) is a German professional ice hockey defenceman , currently a member of the Chicago Blackhawks of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . He is known primarily as an offensive defenceman with strong skating and shooting abilities . 
 Prior to playing in the NHL , Ehrhoff spent several years playing professionally in Germany , starting with EV Duisburg of the third @-@ tier Oberliga and the Krefeld Penguins of the premiere Deutsche Eishockey Liga ( DEL ) . He spent three years with Krefeld , winning the German championship in 2003 . 
 Selected 106th overall by the San Jose Sharks in the 2001 NHL Entry Draft , Ehrhoff moved to North America for the 2003 – 04 season . He spent one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half seasons with the Cleveland Barons , the Sharks ' American Hockey League ( AHL ) affiliate , before joining San Jose on a full @-@ time basis beginning in 2005 – 06 . After playing six seasons within the Sharks organization , he was traded to the Vancouver Canucks in August 2009 . During his two seasons with the club , he won back @-@ to @-@ back Babe Pratt Trophies as the team 's top defenceman and helped them to the 2011 Stanley Cup Finals , where they lost to the Boston Bruins . 
 Internationally , Ehrhoff has played for the German national team in numerous tournaments , including three Winter Olympics , four World Championships and a World Cup . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Ehrhoff was born and raised in Moers , a city on the left bank of the Rhine . His father , Achim , is a drummer in a band , and he has a sister named Katrin . Ehrhoff first played hockey at the age of six , deciding to play the sport after watching an NHL game on television . As his hometown did not have a hockey program , he played minor hockey 20 kilometres away in the Krefeld Penguins ' system . He won a national championship with the club around the age of 12 ; Ehrhoff has recalled scoring in the final on a penalty shot . Following the NHL growing up , Ehrhoff has singled out Wayne Gretzky , Pavel Bure and Uwe Krupp as his childhood heroes . He was inspired to play in the style of an offensive defenceman after watching a video of Bobby Orr as a 10 @-@ year @-@ old . 
 At the age of 16 , he considered moving to North America to further his hockey career in the major junior Canadian Hockey League ( CHL ) , but his father had developed Hodgkin 's lymphoma at the time . Ehrhoff consequently decided to stay in Germany and continued in Krefeld 's system at the junior level ; his father eventually overcame the cancer . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Germany ( 1999 – 2003 ) = = = 
 After playing in the junior system of the Krefeld Penguins , Ehrhoff signed a professional contract with the team in 1999 , at the age of 17 . He debuted in nine games with Krefeld in Germany 's premiere Deutsche Eishockey Liga ( DEL ) , while primarily playing with EV Duisburg of the third @-@ tier Oberliga on loan . Over the course of the season , he practiced mornings with Krefeld and evenings with Duisburg . He finished his first professional season with 15 points in 41 games with Duisburg and a goal in nine games for Krefeld . The following season , he joined Krefeld full @-@ time and had 14 points in 58 games for the team in addition to three points in six games with Duisburg . After the conclusion of the season , Ehrhoff was selected 106th overall in the 2001 NHL Entry Draft by the San Jose Sharks . One of three Germans selected by the Sharks in the draft , Ehrhoff was happy to be taken by the team , as they also had another German , Marco Sturm , on their roster at the time . 
