 = = = Other uses = = = 
 Today , poison is used for a wider variety of purposes than it used to be . For example , poison can be used to rid an unwanted infestation by pests or to kill weeds . Such chemicals , known as pesticides , have been known to be used in some form since about 2500 BC . However , the use of pesticides has increased staggeringly from 1950 , and presently approximately 2 @.@ 5 million tons of industrial pesticides are used each year . Other poisons can also be used to preserve foods and building material . 
 = = = In culture = = = 
 Today , in many developing peoples of countries such as certain parts of Africa , South America and Asia , the use of poison as an actual weapon of hunting and attack still endures . 
 In Africa , certain arrow poisons are made using floral ingredients , such as of that taken from the plant <unk> . This plant contains <unk> , which is a cardiac glycoside , oleander , and milkweeds . Poisoned arrows are also still used in the jungle areas of Assam , Burma and Malaysia . The ingredients for the creation of these poisons are mainly extracted from plants of the <unk> , Strychnos and <unk> genera , and <unk> <unk> ( a tree of the mulberry and breadfruit family ) , for example , is used in the Java island of Indonesia , as well as several of its surrounding islands . The juice or liquid extracts are smeared on the head of the arrow , and inflicts the target paralysis , convulsions and / or cardiac arrest , virtually on strike due to the speed in which the extracts can affect a victim . 
 As well as plant based poisons , there are others that are made that are based on animals . For example , the larva or pupae of a beetle genus of the Northern Kalahari Desert is used to create a slow @-@ acting poison that can be quite useful when hunting . The beetle itself is applied to the arrow head , by squeezing the contents of the beetle right onto the head . Plant sap is then mixed and serves as an adhesive . However , instead of the plant sap , a powder made from the dead , eviscerated larva can be used . 
 = Sarah Lancashire = 
 Sarah Lancashire ( born 10 October 1964 ) is an English television , film and theatre actress , from Oldham . She trained at the Guildhall School of Music and Drama , graduating in 1986 . To support herself , she taught drama at Salford University for five years alongside her acting career . Following a stint in the musical Blood Brothers in London 's West @-@ End in 1990 , Lancashire was cast as Raquel <unk> in the long @-@ running ITV soap opera Coronation Street in 1991 . After leaving the series in 1996 , Lancashire found further success with roles in Where the Heart Is ( 1997 – 1999 ) , Clocking Off ( 2000 ) and the television film Seeing Red ( 2000 ) . In the summer of 2000 , Lancashire signed a two @-@ year golden handcuffs contract with ITV , making her the highest paid actress in UK television . 
 In 2004 , Lancashire made her directorial debut on the anthology series The Afternoon Play . Subsequent acting roles included costume dramas such as the 2007 television adaption of Oliver Twist , Lark Rise to Candleford ( 2008 – 2011 ) and the 2012 television series The Paradise . In 2011 , she played the female lead in the musical Betty Blue Eyes , for which she received an Olivier Award nomination . For her role as Caroline in the contemporary drama series Last Tango in Halifax ( 2012 – ) , Lancashire won the British Academy Television Award for Best Supporting Actress in 2014 . In 2014 , Lancashire earned further accolades for her leading role as sergeant Catherine Cawood in the crime thriller series Happy Valley . 
 = = Life and Career = = 
 = = = Early life , training , career beginnings and motherhood ( 1964 – 1990 ) = = = 
 Lancashire was born on 10 October 1964 in Oldham , Lancashire . Her father Geoffrey Lancashire ( 1933 – 2004 ) was a television scriptwriter noted for his work on the soap opera Coronation Street and situation comedies such as The Cuckoo Waltz . Her mother Hilda worked as Geoffrey 's personal assistant . She has three brothers , one her elder , one younger and a twin . Lancashire was educated at Oldham Hulme Grammar School between 1976 and 1981 . At the age of 17 , she started to suffer from clinical depression . 
 Lancashire states that she was never driven by the ideas of fame and status . Her background had inspired an initial interest in working behind the scenes in television . She did not give serious thought to the performing until the age of 18 . After winning a place at the Guildhall School of Music and Drama — where her contemporaries included Shirley Henderson , Maggie O 'Neill and <unk> Cusack — Lancashire realised that she enjoyed acting . She graduated in 1986 , describing her time as a student there as " tremendous " but " seriously hard work and quite intimidating " . After rejection from several repertory theatre companies , Lancashire was given her first acting role by Howard Lloyd @-@ Lewis , artistic director of the Manchester Library Theatre Company , which provided her with an Equity Card . Lancashire performed two plays with the company , Pacific Overtures and The Beauty Game , which she states formed " the start of my career as an actor " . She found her first professional acting experience " terrifying " as a result of the live audiences , recalling that , " because I wore a bathing costume in some of the scenes , I got heckled ! " She also realised that taking risks or underperforming could have had consequences for her acting career . 
 At the age of 22 , Lancashire married her first serious boyfriend , Gary Hargreaves , a music lecturer 11 years her senior , whom she had met four years earlier . Recalling the circumstances of her marriage in 2001 , Lancashire stated that she only married because she fell pregnant and possessed both a traditional mindset and a fear of the stigma of having a child out of wedlock . Thomas , her first child with Hargreaves , was born in 1987 ; a second son , Matthew , was born in 1989 . During her early career , Lancashire found herself with large breaks between theatre appearances . To support herself financially , she worked as a drama teacher for five years at Salford University alongside her acting work . In 1987 , she made a brief appearance in Coronation Street as Wendy Farmer , a prospective lodger of series regular Jack Duckworth ( Bill Tarmey ) . In the late 1980s , she also appeared in an episode of the children 's anthology series <unk> , and a single episode of the ITV sitcom Watching . In 1990 , Lancashire received her " big break " — the role of Linda in a production of Willy Russell 's Blood Brothers at the Albery Theatre in London 's West End . Though she thoroughly enjoyed the experience , she found it difficult to reconcile performing in London with raising two young children in Manchester . 
 = = = Coronation Street and personal struggles ( 1991 – 1996 ) = = = 
 Two weeks after finishing her run in Blood Brothers , Lancashire auditioned for the role of new Coronation Street character Raquel <unk> , a colleague of supermarket employee Curly Watts ( Kevin Kennedy ) . Lancashire joined on a three @-@ month contract , continuing to teach at Salford University for another year . Raquel first appeared on 25 January 1991 and departed on 10 May ; having moved to London to try to launch a modelling career . Lancashire had initially been reserved about Raquel 's characterisation , noting that her " acidic side " could have rendered her the " street bitch " had it been embellished . She took care to highlight Raquel 's potential , playing against what had been written to make her more comic , evoking audience sympathy . Between 26 September and 19 October 1991 , Lancashire played the title role in an adaption of Educating Rita at the Queen 's Theatre , Hornchurch . Following Raquel 's reintroduction on 30 December 1991 , Lancashire committed herself to Coronation Street full @-@ time . She would remain in the series until 1996 , earning a reported annual salary of £ 90 @,@ 000 . 
 Two years into the role , she experienced a 14 @-@ month nervous breakdown but did not confide in anyone besides her close family or take any time off work , which in retrospect she deemed " the worst thing [ she ] could have done . During the worst part of her experience Lancashire described herself as " hysterical at the thought of getting out of bed " . Her mother Hilda forced her to seek medical assistance for her condition , which Lancashire states " gave me my life back " , her twenties having been " a write @-@ off " . Lancashire felt her first marriage had also contributed to her unhappiness ; in 2001 , she stated that though her marriage lasted ten years , it " was 10 years longer than it should have done " . In 1995 she separated from <unk> ; the pair would ultimately later divorce . She described leaving her marriage as a " cleansing experience " and a " renaissance " ; one that enabled her to rediscover her sense of identity . Other steps that Lancashire took to combat her depression included remaining single for five years , attending therapy sessions , and taking prescriptions of the anti @-@ depressant drug , <unk> . 
 In December 1995 Lancashire starred in the spin @-@ off straight @-@ to @-@ video film Coronation Street – The Cruise , a 75 minute special detailing Raquel and Curly 's honeymoon . The special was advertised as being exclusive to video , and 750 @,@ 000 copies were sold , to the value of £ 10 million . Lancashire departed Coronation Street in 1996 due to her heavy work schedule and desire to pursue other projects . She had also tired of the fame the role brought her , shying away from personal appearances and interviews with television magazines . Her final scenes attracted 20 million viewers . Lancashire 's performance in the role saw her nominated in the Most Popular Actress category at the 2nd National Television Awards in October 1996 . 
 = = = Popular success in other roles ( 1997 – 2000 ) = = = 
 Lancashire 's next role was district nurse Ruth Goddard in the ITV drama series Where the Heart Is , which began airing in 1997 . Also in 1997 she filmed a situation comedy for the BBC , Bloomin ' Marvellous , in which she played Liz , one half of an argumentative married couple trying for a baby . However , due to poor viewing figures and a damning critical response the sitcom was not renewed . Regarding the negative reception to the series , her co @-@ star Clive Mantle <unk> remarked " I 've seen murderers and rapists get a better press than we did " . Lancashire continued to star as Ruth Goddard in Where the Heart Is for its second and third series in 1998 and 1999 . In 1998 she was nominated for her second National Television Award for Most Popular Actress . In February 1999 she made a guest appearance in the British dark comedy anthology series Murder Most Horrid alongside comedian Dawn French . The pair played two <unk> whose journey ends with fatal repercussions . In April it was announced that Lancashire would be quitting Where the Heart Is , despite an offered pay rise . At the time , Where the Heart is was the third most popular drama on British Television , regularly attracting 12 million viewers . Lancashire 's decision was reportedly influenced by the series filming away from home , and a fear that remaining in the series long term would harm her career . In January 2000 she expanded on her decision , stating that Ruth " was too chocolate @-@ boxy , no longer a challenge " . 
 On 2 January 2000 , Lancashire returned to Coronation Street for a single episode in which Raquel asks Curly for a divorce . Lancashire felt it was an apt time to return , as she was now a more confident actress and wanted to portray Raquel again before she aged significantly . The series ' producer at the time , Jane <unk> , deemed Raquel one of Coronation Street 's most popular ever characters and her return an opportunity for her " millions of fans " to learn what had become of her . Lancashire and Kennedy were the sole actors in the episode , the first to feature just two characters . From late January , Lancashire appeared as factory employee Yvonne <unk> , a widow with a dysfunctional personal life , in the BBC One drama series Clocking Off . Lancashire used her own experiences as a single mother in her characterisation . In March , she played actress Coral Atkins in the television film Seeing Red . Lancashire found shooting the drama , which detailed Atkins ' decision to quit her acting career in order to set up a care home for abused children , " mentally draining " . Lancashire then spent eight weeks filming the BBC One legal sitcom Chambers in which she played " ambitious " and " bigoted " barrister Ruth Quirke . The series was aired from June 2000 . Lancashire 's final role in 2000 was in the two part drama thriller My Fragile Heart . Lancashire 's output in 2000 earned her several awards . She was voted best actress at the TV Quick Awards in September 2000 for her roles in Clocking Off and Seeing Red , and in October was voted Most Popular Actress at the 6th National Television Awards for Seeing Red . In March 2001 she was named Drama Performer of the Year by the Television and Radio Industries Club , with mention of her work in Clocking Off and Seeing Red . 
 = = = " Golden <unk> " contract with ITV ( 2001 – 2003 ) = = = 
 Following Lancashire 's success in connecting with a television audience , ITV sought to secure her exclusively to their network in a two @-@ year golden handcuffs deal , which was finalised in July 2000 . Lancashire became the first actress to be given such a contract with ITV . The deal , worth £ 1 @.@ 3 million , made Lancashire the highest paid actress in British Television . Discussing the exclusive signing ITV controller of drama Nick Elliott identified Lancashire as being someone with " a great range [ who ] creates a tremendous empathy with an audience " . He also admitted that heavy interest in Lancashire from the BBC had been a factor in giving her the contract , and blocking her from working with other networks . Her last role on BBC One during this period was comedy drama Gentleman 's Relish , an adaptation of the Miles Gibson novel Kingdom Swann . The television film , which aired on New Year 's Day 2001 , was Lancashire 's first in the costume drama genre ; she played a housekeeper harbouring romantic feelings for her employer ( Billy Connolly ) . 
 Her first role under her new contract with ITV was the six part drama The Glass opposite John Thaw . The series , which aired between May and June 2001 saw Lancashire star as a saleswoman for a double @-@ glazing company who ends up caught in a love triangle with her boss and his nephew . Retrospectively , the series was judged not to be a success ; it averaged 5 @.@ 8 million viewers , less than rival show on BBC One , Messiah . In August 2001 , Lancashire married television executive Peter Salmon , in a low @-@ key ceremony held at <unk> Hall , Nottinghamshire . Salmon had proposed to Lancashire in New York during a holiday at Easter time 2001 . The two began a romantic relationship in the summer of 2000 , though they had first met several years earlier whilst she was portraying Raquel on Coronation Street and he was employed by Granada Studios , which produces the soap opera . In October Lancashire starred in an adaptation of the Michelle <unk> novel Back Home as Peggy Dickinson , a woman adjusting to life in post @-@ war Britain after having been separated from her family during the war . 
 In April 2002 Lancashire starred in the two part psychological thriller The Cry , which she described as her " most naked role yet " . She played a social worker grieving her second still @-@ born child who is determined to protect a baby she perceives to be at risk of abuse . Lancashire drew on her own experiences of clinical depression in her depiction of her character 's mentality . Her performance saw her awarded with a Golden Nymph award for Best Performance by an Actress in a Mini @-@ Series at the Monte @-@ Carlo Television Festival . In April it was reported that Lancashire had been lined up play the lead role in comedy drama Life Begins , which creator Mike Bullen had written with Lancashire in mind . However , by June , Lancashire had exited the drama , unwilling to commit to a potentially long running series . Later that month BBC News and newspaper The Guardian reported that Lancashire had exited her exclusive deal with ITV , which would not be renewed after it expired in the Autumn . The decision was reportedly influenced by Lancashire 's desire to reduce her workload and to have the freedom to take on other roles . In September 2002 she appeared in a two @-@ part crime drama pilot , Rose and Maloney , as legal investigator Rose Linden . On 22 December she appeared in the television movie Birthday Girl as Rachel Jones , who plans a party to celebrate being in remission from a serious illness , only to discover that the disease has returned . Lancashire 's final role to air under her ITV contract was Gertrude Morel in an adaptation of D.H. Lawrence 's 1913 novel Sons and Lovers , airing in January 2003 . Lancashire felt a strong connection with the project , stating : " whatever the reason I do what I do , I felt I had come to a point where I could stop searching after this " . Paul Hoggart , reviewer for The Times wrote that Lancashire " steals the show " with a " performance of immense subtlety and quiet strength , proof , if we still needed it , that she has matured into a terrific actress . " 
 = = = Directorial debut , career variety ( 2004 – 2010 ) = = = 
 While pregnant with her third child , Lancashire began an 18 @-@ month career break , the longest of her working life . In April 2003 , Lancashire gave birth to her third son , Joseph . Lancashire 's first job after returning to work was her directorial debut on an episode of the BBC One anthology series The Afternoon Play . For " Viva Las Blackpool " she was given the Best Newcomer Award ( sponsored by BBC Birmingham ) at the Birmingham Screen Festival and the Best New Talent Award at the Royal Television Society ( Midlands ) awards in 2004 . The venture also earned her first British Academy Television Awards nomination in 2005 for Best new Director of Fiction . Lancashire next filmed three two @-@ part stories for Rose and Maloney , following on from the pilot episode in 2002 . The delay between shooting for the pilot and its follow @-@ up was a result of Lancashire 's career break and problems reconciling her availability with that of co @-@ star Phil Davis . 
 In 2005 Lancashire starred in The <unk> ' Club as a housewife in 1970s Birmingham . Also in 2005 she appeared in the BBC television film <unk> as Angela Cannings , a British woman who was wrongfully convicted of killing her two baby sons . Lancashire was proud to be involved with the project , having greatly admired Cannings strength of character during her ordeal , and being able to relate to her sense of anguish as a parent . In December 2005 , Lancashire returned to West End theatre , taking on the role of Miss Adelaide in the Donmar Warehouse production of Guys and Dolls at the Piccadilly Theatre . Lancashire was due to stay with the production until March 2006 , but due to a severe chest infection made her last appearance on 4 January . Lancashire 's only television acting role in 2006 was as house @-@ wife and cake @-@ maker Elaine in the BBC comedy drama Angel Cake . In November she presented an episode of the Five documentary series Disappearing Britain in which she interviewed people with memories of Wakes Week holidays in Blackpool during the early 20th century . In February 2007 she made an appearance in the E4 teen drama series Skins . This was followed by a leading role in the BBC Two television drama Sex , the City and Me as solicitor Ruth Gilbert . In October , Lancashire appeared in her first feature film , David Nicholls ' And When Did You Last See Your Father ? in which she played aunt Beaty . In December , she played the supporting role of Mrs Corney in the BBC 's 2007 adaption of Charles Dickens ' 1838 novel Oliver Twist . Whilst ambivalent about the serial as a whole , The Daily Mirror 's Jane Simon singled Lancashire out for praise stating that she " really sets the tone for the cold , unfeeling world into which orphaned Oliver is born . " 
 Between 2008 and 2011 Lancashire narrated the BBC One series Lark Rise to Candleford , a costume drama based on Flora Thompson 's memoir of her Oxfordshire childhood in the 1880s . In April , she appeared in the opening episode of the 2008 series of Doctor Who , as " an enigmatic and powerful businesswoman " who Lancashire described as a " warped Mary Poppins " . She was amongst a number of high @-@ profile actors the series ' executive producer Russell T Davies secured for the fourth series of the science @-@ fiction drama as part of his intention to make it " bigger and <unk> " . In 2009 , Lancashire starred in the BBC One musical drama series All the Small Things . She played Esther Caddick , a full @-@ time mother who starts a choir after her husband leaves her for a more glamorous woman . In July that year the actress was made a honorary Doctor of Letters by the University of Huddersfield . Following this , she reunited with director Coky Giedroyc , who had directed her in Oliver Twist , for a 2009 television adaptation of Emily Brontë 's 1847 novel Wuthering Heights in which she played housekeeper Nelly Dean . In 2010 Lancashire portrayed Rosemary Nicholls , mother of a murder victim , in the three @-@ part BBC drama Five Daughters ; a depiction of the Ipswich serial murders from the perspective of the victims and their families . Also in 2010 she guest @-@ starred in the police drama series Inspector George Gently . 
 = = = Continued success : Last Tango in Halifax and Happy Valley = = = 
 In March 2011 Lancashire began starring in a new Cameron Mackintosh musical , Betty Blue Eyes , at the Novello Theatre . In the production , a loose adaptation of the 1984 film A Private Function , she starred as Joyce Chilvers , an aspirational housewife who Lancashire describes as " brittle " and " capricious " . Despite positive reviews the musical closed in London on 24 September 2011 , after a run of just six months . For her performance Lancashire was nominated for the Laurence Olivier Award for Best Actress in a Musical . In 2012 she appeared as lady 's maid Miss <unk> in the penultimate episode of the 2010 revival of Upstairs Downstairs . In September 2012 Lancashire began appearing as Head of <unk> Miss Audrey in the six @-@ part series The Paradise set in a department store in Northern England in the late 19th century . Lancashire described her character as " a true archetypal spinster " who has long denied herself a romantic life and who begins to feel undermined by a younger colleague . 
 Since November 2012 Lancashire has appeared opposite Anne Reid and Derek Jacobi in the BBC drama series Last Tango in Halifax . In the series she plays Caroline , an Oxford @-@ educated headmistress who feels that her mother 's second marriage gives her " permission " to be herself . Caroline 's same @-@ sex relationship with a fellow teacher resulted in Lancashire receiving more fan mail than for any other role , largely from women telling her that the series had helped them to come out . Due to the under @-@ representation of gay characters in television , Lancashire felt it particularly important that Caroline 's experience would not be depicted inaccurately . In her portrayal she opted to focus on the " humanity " of the character , rather than her sexuality . Filming of the second series clashed with filming of the second series of The Paradise , which necessitated Lancashire leaving The Paradise partway through its second series . For her role as Caroline she was nominated for the British Academy Television Award for Best Supporting Actress in both 2013 and 2014 , winning in 2014 . At the 2015 Hay Festival Lancashire stated that of all the roles she has taken on in her career Caroline is the one she is most proud of , citing the " extraordinary impact " of the character . 
 In 2014 , Lancashire collaborated again with Last Tango in Halifax writer Sally Wainwright in the crime drama series Happy Valley . Wainwright was keen to write another role for Lancashire after being " blown away " by her performances in Last Tango in Halifax . Lancashire portrays single @-@ grandparent Catherine Cawood , a police sergeant still dealing with the aftermath of her daughter 's rape , and subsequent suicide , eight years earlier . Mark Lawson of The Guardian identified the performance as a career best for Lancashire , stating that she perfectly conveyed " the script 's <unk> contradictory notes of tragedy , comedy , love , guilt , weakness and courage " . For this role she earned the TV Choice Award for Best Actress in 2014 , and the Royal Television Programme Award for Best Actress in 2015 . In September 2014 the Radio Times listed her as one of the thirty most powerful women in British television and radio . In April 2015 she received her fourth BAFTA television nomination , her first in the Best Actress category . In June 2015 she was named Best Actress in a Drama Series at the 2015 Monte Carlo Television Festival . 
 In March 2015 Lancashire began filming a television adaptation of Ronald Harwood 's 1980 play The Dresser . In the teleplay , which aired in October 2015 , Lancashire portrayed stage manager Madge , whose unrequited love for ' Sir ' ( Anthony Hopkins ) , the head of a repertory theatre company , pits her at odds with his dresser and confidant , Norman ( Ian McKellen ) . Lancashire appeared in the 2016 feature film Dad 's Army , based on the situation comedy series of the same name . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = Substitute check in United States = 
 A substitute check ( also called an Image Replacement Document or IRD ) is a negotiable instrument used in the United States to represent the digital reproduction of an original paper check . As a negotiable payment instrument , a substitute check maintains the status of a " legal check " in lieu of the original paper check as authorized under the United States law Check Clearing for the 21st Century Act ( Check 21 Act ) . Instead of presenting the original paper checks , financial institutions and payment processing centers electronically transmit data from a substitute check by either the settlement process through the United States Federal Reserve System or by clearing the deposit based on a private agreement between member financial institutions of a clearinghouse that operates under the Uniform Commercial Code ( UCC ) . 
 Substitute checks are recognized as legal checks as long as the instruments meet specific requirements . These requirements include the faithful reproduction of the paper check and warranty of the instrument by the " reconverting bank " — the financial institution that created the substitute check or the first financial institution that transferred or presented it during the check clearing process . Substitute checks are also subject to the UCC , existing federal and state check laws , and regulations specific to consumer rights that affect the acceptance of these instruments . Although a substitute check is subject to the UCC and existing state and federal check laws , the Check 21 Act takes precedence over these other laws and regulations for this instrument . 
 = = Specifications and standards = = 
 The Accredited Standards Committee X9 ( ASC X9 ) , a standards development committee accredited by the American National Standards Institute ( ANSI ) , maintains , promotes , and supports technical financial standards for procedures , delivery , and transactions for financial products and services that include Image Replacement Documents , and other financial instruments . American National Standard ( ANS ) X9.100 @-@ 140 covers specifications for the content , processing , and quality of Image Replacement Documents specifically . 
 Certain standards that exist for paper checks also apply to Image Replacement Documents . These standards include ANS X9.100 @-@ 160 @-@ 2 ( Magnetic Ink Printing ( MICR ) Part 2 External Processing Code ( EPC ) Field Use ) , ANS X9.100 @-@ 181 ( Specifications for TIFF Image Format for Image Exchange ) , ANS X9.100 @-@ 187 ( Specifications for Electronic Exchange of Check and Image Data - Domestic ) , and Draft Standard for Trial Use ( <unk> ) <unk> ( Electronic Exchange of Check and Image Data ) . 
 = = Eligible payment items for truncation and reconversion = = 
 Under the Check 21 Act , all U.S. paper checks and check @-@ like instruments are eligible for truncation and reconversion to substitute checks , including consumer ( personal ) checks , commercial ( business ) checks , money orders , traveler 's checks , cash advance or convenience checks tied to credit and charge card accounts , controlled disbursement checks , and payable through drafts , in addition to government warrants and U.S. Treasury checks . The Check 21 Act permits any financial institution ( such as a commercial bank or credit union ) that participates in the check collection process to remove or truncate the original paper check from the forward collection or return process and reconvert the paper check to a substitute check without first requiring an existing agreement between the bank of first deposit ( BOFD ) and the " paying bank . " 
 The elimination of the paper checks from the clearing process saves the banking and treasury management industries handling , sorting , transporting , storing , safeguarding , and mailing costs . After the financial institution truncates the original paper check and <unk> it to a substitute check , the financial institution can store or archive the paper check , return the paper check to its own customer according to state law , or later destroy the paper check . 
 = = Legal requirements = = 
 A properly prepared substitute check is considered the legal equivalent of the original paper check that can be accepted for payment or proof of payment in the same manner as the original check . Every substitute check must adhere to the following requirements before it can be recognized as the legal equivalent of the original check : 
 The substitute check must accurately represent all information depicted on the front and back of the original paper check at the time the financial institution truncates that check , including the names of the payor and payee , courtesy and legal amounts , endorsements , and encoding information , among other details . 
 The substitute check must accurately represent the MICR line of the original check . 
 The substitute check must bear the legend " This is a LEGAL <unk> of your check . You can use it the same way you would use the original check . " 
 The financial institution or processor must provide a warranty for the substitute check . This warranty must be provided by the financial institution when it removes or truncates the original paper check from the forward collection or return process and <unk> the paper check to a substitute check . 
 The financial institution or processor that truncated the original check must follow ASC X9.100 @-@ 140 standards in the capture of check images and MICR data when it produces the substitute check . 
 Image statements that include a series of pictures or images of original paper checks and / or substitute checks , photocopies of the original checks , and images of checks posted online are not recognized as the legal equivalents of substitute checks . Unlike a substitute check , a photocopy of a check cannot be presented through the check clearing process for settlement because the photocopy of the check does not adhere strictly to the requirements for substitute checks under the Check 21 Act . 
 Since substitute checks are considered legal checks , substitute checks are subject to existing check laws and regulations . Other laws and regulations that govern substitute checks in the United States include the <unk> Funds Availability Act , Article 3 ( <unk> Instruments ) , and Article 4 ( Bank Deposits and Collections ) of the Uniform Commercial Code ( UCC ) , along with a variety of state and federal regulatory laws . U.S. federal laws that also affect substitute checks include Federal Reserve regulations that provide for <unk> the amount of the substitute check in the case of fraud and duplicate payments caused by settlement of both the substitute check and the original check used for creating the substitute check . If any state law , federal law , or provision of the UCC conflicts with the Check 21 Act , the Check 21 Act takes precedence to the extent of the inconsistencies among those laws and provisions . 
 = = Clearing process = = 
 = = = Forward collection process = = = 
 Each substitute check processed for forward collection is encoded with a " 4 " as the External Processing Code ( EPC ) in position 44 of the MICR line as required under ANS <unk> An example of the forward collection process for substitute checks involves the following steps for financial institutions that process deposits through the Federal Reserve System : 
 The payee endorses the original paper check and presents it to the depository financial institution . 
 The depository financial institution ( Bank 1 – referred to as the bank of first deposit or BOFD ) stamps its endorsement on the rear of the original check . 
 Bank 1 captures an image of the front and back of the original check and the MICR line data from the front of the check . Bank 1 then removes or truncates the original check from the clearing process and uses the check image , MICR data , its own electronic endorsement , and the electronic endorsements to create a substitute check . 
 Bank 1 electronically transmits the check image and the MICR line data captured from the original check to the paying bank ( Bank 2 ) for settlement . If no agreement exists between Bank 1 and Bank 2 to exchange check images and data , Bank 1 must provide either the original check or the legal equivalent of the substitute check to Bank 2 . 
 As the paying bank , Bank 2 uses check image and MICR data or information from the substitute check received from Bank 1 to process the item during the normal course of settlement . 
 After the settlement process , Bank 2 provides a copy of the substitute check to the customer who wrote the original check or includes information about the substitute check in that customer 's monthly or periodic statement . 
 Any financial institution that participates in the forward collection ( or return ) process can become the reconverting financial institution if it creates the substitute check for <unk> and settlement . 
 = = = Return process for dishonored checks = = = 
 If a substitute check must be returned unpaid because of insufficient funds ( a dishonored or bounced check ) , the paying bank ( Bank 2 ) stamps the item NSF ( non @-@ sufficient funds ) as the reason for the return . In this case , Bank 2 encodes a " 5 " as the EPC on the MICR line to identify the substitute check according to ANS <unk> , along with the routing number of the depository financial institution and the dollar amount of the substitute check . Bank 2 encodes this information on a return strip , perforated strip , or carrier document that the financial institution attaches to the unpaid substitute check . The paying bank then returns the unpaid substitute check through the routing process to the BOFD ( Bank 1 ) for further handling . Once Bank 1 receives the returned substitute check , the financial institution issues a charge back notice to its customer who deposited or offered the check for settlement . 
 = = External sources = = 
 Accredited Standards Committee ( ASC ) X9 Financial Industry Standards : Statement on Check 21 adoption ( October 23 , 2004 ) 
 Anatomy of a substitute check . ( 2004 ) . Federal Reserve Financial Services . 
 Ways to Use Check 21 . ( March 2004 ) . Electronic Check Clearing House Organization ( <unk> ) 
 ( diagram of the forward collection and return processes for a substitute check ) 
 Substitute Checks : Development of Processing and Quality Standards . Electronic Check Clearing House Organization ( <unk> ) 
 ( callouts to identify parts of a substitute check from the forward collection and return processes included at the end of the document ) 
 = Vindolanda tablets = 
 The Vindolanda tablets are the oldest surviving handwritten documents in Britain . They are also probably the best source of information about life on the northern frontier of Roman Britain . Written on fragments of thin , post @-@ card sized wooden leaf @-@ tablets with carbon @-@ based ink , the tablets date to the 1st and 2nd centuries AD ( roughly contemporary with Hadrian 's Wall ) . Although similar records on papyrus were known from elsewhere in the Roman Empire , wooden tablets with ink text had not been recovered until 1973 , when archaeologist Robin Birley discovered these artefacts at the site of a Roman fort in Vindolanda , northern England . 
 The documents record official military matters as well as personal messages to and from members of the garrison of Vindolanda , their families , and their slaves . Highlights of the tablets include an invitation to a birthday party held in about 100 AD , which is perhaps the oldest surviving document written in Latin by a woman . Held at the British Museum , the texts of 752 tablets have been transcribed , translated and published as of 2010 . Tablets continue to be found at Vindolanda . 
 = = Description = = 
 The wood tablets found at Vindolanda were the first known surviving examples of the use of ink letters in the Roman period . The use of ink tablets was documented in contemporary records and Herodian in the third century AD wrote " a writing @-@ tablet of the kind that were made from lime @-@ wood , cut into thin sheets and folded face @-@ to @-@ face by being bent " . 
 The Vindolanda tablets are made from birch , alder and oak that grew locally , in contrast to stylus tablets , another type of writing tablet used in Roman Britain , which were imported and made from non @-@ native wood . The tablets are 0 @.@ 25 – 3 mm thick with a typical size being 20 cm × 8 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 in × 3 @.@ 1 in ) ( the size of a modern postcard ) . They were scored down the middle and folded to form diptychs with ink writing on the inner faces , the ink being carbon , gum arabic and water . Nearly 500 tablets were excavated in the 1970s and 1980s . 
 First discovered in March 1973 , the tablets were initially thought to be wood shavings until one of the excavators found two stuck together and peeled them apart to discover writing on the inside . They were taken to the epigraphist Richard Wright , but rapid oxygenation of the wood meant that they were black and unreadable by the time he was able to view them . They were sent to Alison Rutherford at Newcastle University Medical School for multi @-@ spectrum photography , which led to infra @-@ red photographs showing the scripts for researchers for the first time . The results were initially disappointing as the scripts were undecipherable . However , Alan Bowman at Manchester University and David Thomas at Durham University analysed the previously unknown form of cursive script and were able to produce transcriptions . 
 = = = Chronology = = = 
 Vindolanda fort was garrisoned before the construction of Hadrian 's Wall and most of the tablets are slightly older than the Wall , which was begun in 122 AD . The original director of excavations Robin Birley identified five periods of occupation and expansion : 
 c . AD 85 – 92 , first fort constructed . 
 c . AD 92 – 97 , fort enlargement . 
 c . AD 97 – 103 , further fort enlargements . 
 c . AD 104 – 120 , hiatus and re @-@ occupation . 
 c . AD 120 – 130 , the period when Hadrian 's Wall was constructed 
 The tablets were produced in periods 2 and 3 ( c . AD 92 – 103 ) , with the majority written before AD 102 . They were used for official notes about the Vindolanda camp business and personal affairs of the officers and households . The largest group is correspondence of Flavius Cerialis , prefect of the ninth cohort of Batavians and that of his wife , <unk> <unk> . Some correspondence may relate to civilian traders and contractors ; for example Octavian , the writer of Tablet 343 , is an entrepreneur dealing in wheat , hides and sinews , but this does not prove him to be a civilian . 
 = = = Selected highlights = = = 
 The best @-@ known document is perhaps Tablet 291 , written around AD 100 from Claudia Severa , the wife of the commander of a nearby fort , to <unk> <unk> , inviting her to a birthday party . The invitation is one of the earliest known examples of writing in Latin by a woman . There are two handwriting styles in the tablet , with the majority of the text written in a professional hand ( thought to be the household scribe ) and with closing greetings personally added by Claudia Severa herself ( on the lower right hand side of the tablet ) . 
 The tablets are written in Roman cursive script and throw light on the extent of literacy in Roman Britain . One of the tablets confirms that Roman soldiers wore underpants ( <unk> ) , and also testifies to a high degree of literacy in the Roman army . 
 There are only scant references to the indigenous Britons . Until the discovery of the tablets , historians could only speculate on whether the Romans had a nickname for the Britons . <unk> ( diminutive of Britto ; hence ' little Britons ' ) , found on one of the Vindolanda tablets , is now known to be a derogatory , or patronising , term used by the Roman garrisons that were based in Northern Britain to describe the locals . 
 = = = Transcription = = = 
 The tablets are written in forms of Roman cursive script , considered to be the forerunner of joined @-@ up writing , which varies in style by author . With few exceptions , they have been classified as Old Roman Cursive . 
 The writing from Vindolanda appears as if it were written in a different alphabet to the Latin capitals used for inscriptions from other periods . The script is derived from the capital writing of the late first century BC and the first century AD . The text rarely shows the unusual or distorted letter @-@ forms or the extravagant ligatures to be found in Greek papyri of the same period . Additional challenges for transcription are the use of abbreviations such as " h " for homines ( men ) or " cos " for consularis ( consular ) , and the arbitrary division of words at the end of lines for space reasons such as <unk> ( letters ) being split between the " e " and the rest of the word . 
 The ink is often badly faded or survives as little more than a blur , so that in some instances transcription is not possible . In most cases the infra @-@ red photographs provide a far more legible version of what was written than the original tablets . However , the photographs contain marks which appear similar to writing , but which certainly are not letters ; additionally , they contain a great many lines , dots and other dark marks which may or may not be writing . Consequently , the published transcriptions have often had to be interpreted subjectively in deciding which marks should be regarded as writing . 
 = = Comparison to other sites = = 
 Wooden tablets have been found at twenty Roman settlements in Britain . However , most of these sites did not yield the type of tablet found at Vindolanda , but rather " stylus tablets " , marked with pointed metal styli . A significant number of ink tablets have been identified at Carlisle ( also on Hadrian 's Wall ) 
 The fact that letters were sent to and from places on Hadrian 's Wall and further afield ( Catterick , York , and London ) raises the question of why more letters have been found at Vindolanda than other sites , but it is not possible to give a definitive answer . The anaerobic conditions found at Vindolanda are not unique and identical deposits have been found in parts of London . One possibility , given the fragile condition of the tablets found at Vindolanda , is that archaeologists excavating other Roman sites have overlooked evidence of writing in ink . 
 = = Imaging = = 
 The tablets were photographed using infra @-@ red sensitive cameras in 1973 by Susan M. <unk> in the British Museum and more comprehensively in 1990 at Vindolanda by Alison Rutherford . The tablets were scanned again using improved techniques in 2000 – 2001 with a Kodak Wratten 87C infra @-@ red filter . The photographs are taken in infra @-@ red to enhance the faded ink against the wood of the tablets , or between ink and dirt , to make the writing more visible . 
 In 2002 the tablet images were used as part of a research programme to extend the use of the <unk> iterative computer vision system to aid the transcription of the Vindolanda tablets through a series of processes modelled on the best practice of <unk> and to provide the images in an XML marked up format identifying the likely placement of characters and words with their transcription . 
 In 2010 there was a collaboration between Centre for the Study of Ancient Documents at University of Oxford , the British Museum and the Archaeological Computing Research Group at University of Southampton using <unk> texture mapping for detailed recording and edge detection . 
 = = Online catalogue = = 
 The images , at a resolution suitable for web page display , and text of the tablets from Tab.Vindol. II were published on @-@ line . Tablets from both Tab.Vindol. II and Tab.Vindol. III were published in a new online catalogue in 2010 . 
 = = Exhibition and impact = = 
 The tablets are held at the British Museum , where a selection of them is on display in its Roman Britain gallery ( Room 49 ) . The tablets featured in the list of British archaeological finds selected by experts at the British Museum for the 2003 BBC Television documentary Our Top Ten Treasures . Viewers were invited to vote for their favourite , and the tablets came top of the poll . 
 The Vindolanda Museum , run by the Vindolanda Trust , has funding so that a selection of tablets on loan from the British Museum can be displayed at the site where they were found . The Vindolanda Museum put nine of the tablets on display in 2011 . This loan of items to a regional museum is in line with British Museum 's current policy of encouraging loans both internationally and nationally ( as part of its Partnership UK scheme ) . 
 = Damon Hill = 
 Damon Graham Devereux Hill , OBE ( born 17 September 1960 ) is a British former racing driver . He is the son of Graham Hill , and is the only son of a Formula One world champion to win the title . He started racing on motorbikes in 1981 , and after minor success moved on to single @-@ seater racing cars . But although he progressed steadily up the ranks to the International Formula 3000 championship by 1989 , and was often competitive , he never won a race at that level . 
 Hill became a test driver for the Formula One title @-@ winning Williams team in 1992 . He was promoted to the Williams race team the following year after Riccardo Patrese 's departure and took the first of his 22 victories at the 1993 Hungarian Grand Prix . During the mid @-@ 1990s , Hill was Michael Schumacher 's main rival for the Formula One Drivers ' Championship , which saw the two clash several times on and off the track . Their collision at the 1994 Australian Grand Prix gave Schumacher his first title by a single point . Hill became champion in 1996 with eight wins , but was dropped by Williams for the following season . He went on to drive for the less competitive Arrows and Jordan teams , and in 1998 gave Jordan their first win . 
 Hill retired from racing after the 1999 season . He has since launched several businesses and has made appearances playing the guitar with celebrity bands . In 2006 , he became president of the British Racing Drivers ' Club , succeeding Jackie Stewart . Hill stepped down from the position in 2011 and was succeeded by Derek Warwick . He presided over the securing of a 17 @-@ year contract for Silverstone to hold Formula One races , which enabled the circuit to see extensive renovation work . Hill currently works as part of the Sky Sports F1 broadcasting team . 
 = = Personal and early life = = 
 Hill was born in Hampstead , London , to Graham and Bette Hill . Graham Hill was a racing driver in the international Formula One series . He won the world drivers ' championship in 1962 and 1968 and became a well @-@ known personality in the United Kingdom . Graham Hill 's career provided a comfortable living . By 1975 the family lived in a " 25 @-@ room country mansion " in Hertfordshire and Damon attended the independent The Haberdashers ' Aske 's Boys ' School . The death of his father in an aeroplane crash in 1975 left the 15 @-@ year @-@ old Hill , his mother , and sisters Samantha and Brigitte in drastically reduced circumstances . Hill worked as a labourer and a motorcycle courier to support his further education . 
 Hill is married to Susan George ( ' Georgie ' – born 29 April 1961 ) and they have four children : Oliver ( born 4 March 1989 ) , Joshua ( born 9 January 1991 ) , Tabitha ( born 19 July 1995 ) and Rosie ( born 1 February 1998 ) . Oliver was born with Down 's syndrome and Hill and Georgie are both patrons of the Down 's Syndrome Association . In 2008 , Hill also became the first patron of St. Joseph 's Specialist School and College , a school for children with severe learning disabilities and autism in Cranleigh , Surrey . Joshua started racing in 2008 , competing in the British Formula Renault Championship in 2011 . On 9 July 2013 Joshua announced his retirement from motor racing . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ Formula One = = = 
 Hill started his motorsport career in motorcycle racing in 1981 . He used the same simple , easily identifiable helmet design as his father : eight white oar blades arranged vertically around the upper surface of a dark blue helmet . The device and colours represent the London Rowing Club for which Graham Hill rowed in the early 1950s . Although he won a 350 cc clubman 's championship at the Brands Hatch circuit , his racing budget came from working as a building labourer and he " didn 't really look destined for great things " according to Motorcycle News reporter Rob McDonnell . His mother , who was concerned about the dangers of racing motorcycles , persuaded him to take a racing car course at the Winfield Racing School in France in 1983 . Although he showed " above @-@ average aptitude " , Hill had only sporadic single @-@ seater races until the end of 1984 . He graduated through British Formula Ford , winning six races driving a Van Diemen for <unk> Racing in 1985 , his first full season in cars , and finishing third and fifth in the two UK national championships . He also took third place in the final of the 1985 Formula Ford Festival , helping the UK to win the team prize . 
 For 1986 , Hill planned to move up to the British Formula Three Championship with title @-@ winning team West Surrey Racing . The loss of sponsorship from Ricoh , and then the death of his proposed team @-@ mate Bertrand Fabi in a testing accident , ended Hill 's proposed drive . Hill says " When Bert was killed , I took the conscious decision that I wasn 't going to stop doing that sort of thing . It 's not just competing , it 's doing something more exciting . I 'm at my fullest skiing , racing or whatever . And I 'm more frightened of letting it all slip and reaching 60 and finding I 've done nothing . " Hill borrowed £ 100 @,@ 000 to finance his racing and had a steady first season for Murray Taylor Racing in 1986 before taking a brace of wins in each of the following years for Intersport . He finished third in the 1988 championship . 
 In Europe in the 1990s , a successful driver would usually progress from Formula Three either directly to Formula One , the pinnacle of the sport , or to the International Formula 3000 championship . However , Hill did not have enough sponsorship available to fund a drive in F3000 . He says " I ended up having to reappraise my career a bit . The first thing was to realise how lucky I was to be driving anything . I made the decision that whatever I drove I would do it to the best of my ability and see where it led . " He took a one @-@ off drive in the lower level British F3000 championship and shared a Porsche 962 at Le Mans for Richard Lloyd Racing , where the engine failed after 228 laps . He also competed in one race in the British Touring Car Championship at Donington Park , driving a Ford Sierra <unk> . Midway through the season , an opportunity arose at the uncompetitive <unk> F3000 team . The team tested Hill and Perry McCarthy . Their performances were comparable but according to the team manager , John Wickham , the team sponsors preferred the Hill name . Although his best result was a 15th place , Hill 's race performances for <unk> led to an offer to drive a Lola chassis for Middlebridge Racing in 1990 . He took three pole positions and led five races in 1990 , but did not win a race during his Formula 3000 career . 
 = = = Formula One = = = 
 = = = = Brabham ( 1992 ) = = = = 
 Hill started his Grand Prix career during the 1991 season as a test driver with the championship @-@ winning Williams team while still competing in the F3000 series . However , midway through 1992 Hill broke into Grand Prix racing as a driver with the dying Brabham team . The formerly competitive team was in serious financial difficulties . Hill started the season only after three races , replacing Giovanna Amati after her sponsorship had failed to materialise . Amati had been unable to get the car through qualifying but Hill matched his team @-@ mate , Eric van de <unk> , by qualifying for two races , the mid @-@ season British and Hungarian Grands Prix . Hill continued to test for the Williams team that year and the British Grand Prix saw Nigel Mansell win the race for Williams , while he finished last in the Brabham . The Brabham team collapsed after the Hungarian Grand Prix and did not complete the season . 
 = = = = Williams ( 1993 – 96 ) = = = = 
 When Mansell 's team @-@ mate Riccardo Patrese left Williams to drive for Benetton in 1993 , Hill was unexpectedly promoted to the race team alongside triple world champion Alain Prost ahead of more experienced candidates such as Martin Brundle and Mika Häkkinen . Traditionally , the reigning driver 's world champion carries the number " 1 " on his car and his team @-@ mate takes the number " 2 " . Because Mansell , the 1992 champion , was not racing in Formula One in 1993 , his Williams team were given numbers " 0 " and " 2 " . As the junior partner to Prost , Hill took " 0 " , the second man in Formula One history to do so , after Jody Scheckter in 1973 . 
 1993 
 The season did not start well when Hill spun out of second place shortly after the start of the South African Grand Prix and failed to finish the race after colliding with Alex Zanardi on lap 16 . At the Brazilian Grand Prix , Hill qualified and spent the early stages of the race running second behind Prost , and then took the lead when Prost crashed out , but was relegated back to second by another triple world champion , Ayrton Senna . Nevertheless , the race still gave Hill his first podium finish . 
 In the next round in Europe , Hill again finished second behind Senna and ahead of a lapped Prost . In his first full season , Hill benefited from the experience of his veteran French team @-@ mate . He continued to impress as the season went on , and in San Marino Hill took the lead at the start , though he was passed by Prost and Senna and ultimately retired with brake failure . More bad luck struck him in Spain where he kept pace with Prost for most of the race only for his engine to fail . 
 After strong podiums in Monaco and Canada , Hill took his first career pole in France , finishing second to Prost after team orders prevented him from seriously challenging for the win . He looked set to win his home race in Britain before another engine failure put him out and led the German Grand Prix comfortably only to suffer a puncture with two laps left , handing the win to Prost . 
 At the Hungarian race , Hill did take his first career win after leading from start to finish . In doing so he became the first son of a Formula One Grand Prix winner to take victory himself , and he followed it with two more wins , first at Spa where he took the lead after pitstop problem for Prost , and then at the Italian Grand Prix where Prost 's engine failed towards the end . This third consecutive win clinched the constructors ' championship for Williams and moved him temporarily to second in the drivers ' standings . 
 At the Portuguese Grand Prix Hill charged from the back of the grid to third , having stalled on the warm up lap from pole . He finished off the season finishing fourth in Japan and third in Australia , but it was not enough to hold 2nd place in the championship as Ayrton Senna passed him by winning the last two races . Prost finished the season as champion . Hill ended the season in Australia by setting the lap record for the Adelaide Street Circuit . As of 2015 ( the full Grand Prix track has not been used since 2000 ) , Hill 's lap record of 1 : 15 @.@ 381 for the 3 @.@ 780 km ( 2 @.@ 349 mi ) long track still stands . 
 1994 
 In 1994 , Ayrton Senna joined Hill at Williams . As the reigning champion , this time Prost , was again no longer racing , Hill retained his number ' <unk> . The pre @-@ season betting was that Senna would coast to the title , but with the banning of electronic driver aids , the Benetton team and Michael Schumacher initially proved more competitive and won the first three races . At the San Marino Grand Prix on 1 May , Senna died after his car went off the road . With the team undergoing investigation from the Italian authorities on manslaughter charges , Hill found himself team leader with only one season 's experience in the top flight . It was widely reported at the time that the Williams car 's steering column had failed , though Hill told BBC Sport in 2004 that he believed Senna simply took the corner too fast for the conditions , referring to the fact that the car had just restarted the race with cold tyres after being slowed down by a safety car . 
 Hill represented Williams alone at the next race , the Monaco Grand Prix . His race ended early in a collision involving several cars on the opening lap of the race . For the following race , the Spanish Grand Prix , Williams ' test driver David Coulthard was promoted to the race team alongside Hill , who won the race just four weeks after Senna 's death . Twenty @-@ six years earlier Graham Hill had won in Spain under similar circumstances for Lotus after the death of his team @-@ mate Jim Clark . Championship leader Schumacher finished second with a gearbox fault restricting him to fifth gear , having led the early laps . 
 Schumacher led by 66 points to 29 by the midpoint of the season . At the French Grand Prix , Frank Williams brought back Nigel Mansell , for the French , European , Japanese and Australian Grands Prix with Coulthard doing the majority of the 1994 season . Mansell earned approximately £ 900 @,@ 000 for each of his four races , while Hill was paid £ 300 @,@ 000 for the entire season , though Hill 's position as lead driver remained unquestioned . Hill came back into contention for the title after winning the British Grand Prix , a race his father had never won . Schumacher was disqualified from that race and banned for two further races for overtaking Hill during the formation lap and ignoring the subsequent black flag . Four more victories for Hill , three of which were in races where Schumacher was excluded or disqualified , took the title battle to the final event at Adelaide . At Schumacher 's first race since his ban , the European Grand Prix , he suggested that Hill ( who was eight years his senior ) was not a world @-@ class driver . However , during the penultimate race at the Japanese Grand Prix , Hill took victory ahead of Schumacher in a rain @-@ soaked event . This put Hill just one point behind the German before the last race of the season . 
 Neither Hill nor Schumacher finished the season @-@ closing Australian Grand Prix , after a controversial collision which gave the title to Schumacher . Schumacher ran off the track hitting the wall with the right @-@ hand side of his Benetton while leading . Coming into the sixth corner Hill moved to pass the Benetton and the two collided , breaking the Williams ' front left suspension wishbone , and forcing both drivers ' retirement from the race . BBC Formula One commentator Murray Walker , a great fan and friend of Hill , has often maintained that Schumacher did not cause the crash intentionally , but <unk> co @-@ owner Patrick Head feels differently . In 2006 he said that at the time of the incident " Williams were already 100 % certain that Michael was guilty of foul play " but did not protest Schumacher 's title because the team was still dealing with the death of Ayrton Senna . In 2007 , Hill explicitly accused Schumacher of causing the collision deliberately . 
 Hill 's season earned him the 1994 BBC Sports Personality of the Year . 
 1995 
 Coming into the 1995 season , Hill was one of the title favourites . The Williams team were reigning constructors ' champions , having beaten Benetton in 1994 , and with young David Coulthard , who was embarking on his first full season in Formula One , as team @-@ mate , Hill was the clear number one driver . The year started badly when he spun off in Brazil due to a mechanical problem , but wins in the next two races put him in the championship lead . However , Schumacher won seven of the next twelve races , and took his second title with two races to spare , while Benetton took the constructors ' championship . Schumacher and Hill had several on @-@ track incidents during the season , two of which led to suspended one @-@ race bans . Schumacher 's penalty was for blocking and forcing Hill off the road at the Belgian Grand Prix ; Hill 's was for colliding with Schumacher under braking at the Italian Grand Prix . Hill 's season finished positively when he won the Australian Grand Prix by finishing two laps ahead of the runner @-@ up , Olivier Panis in a Ligier . 
 1995 was a disappointing season for Hill : some of the Williams team had been frustrated with his performances and Frank Williams began to consider bringing in Heinz @-@ Harald Frentzen to replace him . With Hill already under contract for 1996 , his place at the team was secure for one more season , but it proved to be his last at Williams . 
 1996 
 In 1996 the Williams car was clearly the quickest in Formula One and Hill went on to win the title ahead of his rookie teammate Jacques Villeneuve , becoming the only son of a Formula One champion to win the championship himself . Taking eight wins and never qualifying off the front row , Hill enjoyed by far his most successful season . At Monaco , where his father had won five times in the 1960s , he led until his engine failed , curtailing his race and allowing Olivier Panis to take his only Formula One win . Near the end of the season , Villeneuve began to mount a title challenge and took pole in the Japanese Grand Prix , the final race of the year . However , Hill took the lead at the start and won both the race and the championship after the Canadian retired . 
 Hill equalled the record for starting all 16 races of the season from the front row , matching Ayrton Senna in 1989 and Alain Prost in 1993 . Sebastian Vettel holds the record for the highest number of front row starts in a season , with 18 in 2011 . 
 Despite winning the title , Hill learned before the season 's close that he was to be dropped by Williams in favour of Frentzen for the following season . Hill left Williams as the team 's second most successful driver in terms of race victories , with 21 , second only to Mansell . Hill 's 1996 world championship earned him his second BBC Sports Personality of the Year Award , making him one of only three people to receive the award twice – the others being boxer Henry Cooper and Mansell . Hill was also awarded the Segrave Trophy by the Royal Automobile Club . The trophy is awarded to the British national who accomplishes the most outstanding demonstration of the possibilities of transport by land , sea , air , or water . 
 = = = = Arrows ( 1997 ) = = = = 
 Hill became the fourth driver in nine years to win the World Drivers ' Championship for Williams and not drive for the team the following season , as occurred with Nelson Piquet ( 1987 champion – 1988 driver for Lotus ) , Nigel Mansell ( 1992 champion – 1993 driver in the US @-@ based Indy Car World Series instead of F1 ) and Alain Prost ( 1993 champion – retired in 1994 ) . As world champion , Hill was in high demand and had offers for a race seat from McLaren , Benetton and Ferrari but not adequately financially valued despite his status . As a consequence , he opted to sign for Arrows , a team which had never won a race in its 20 @-@ year history and had scored only a single point the previous year . Hill 's title defence in 1997 proved unsuccessful , getting off to a poor start when he only narrowly qualified for the Australian Grand Prix and then retired on the parade lap . The Arrows car , which used tyres from series debutant Bridgestone and previously unproven Yamaha engines , was generally uncompetitive , and Hill did not score his first point for the team until the British Grand Prix at Silverstone in July . His best result for the year then came at the Hungarian Grand Prix . On a day when the Bridgestone tyres had a competitive edge over their Goodyear rivals , Hill qualified third in a car that had not previously placed higher than 9th on the grid . During the race , he passed his rival and new championship contender , Michael Schumacher , on the track and was leading late in the race , 35 seconds ahead of the eventual 1997 World Champion , Villeneuve , until a hydraulic problem drastically slowed the Arrows . Villeneuve thus passed Hill , who finished second and achieved the team 's first podium since the 1995 Australian Grand Prix . This new podium ultimately turned out to be Arrows ' last ever podium finish . 
 = = = = Jordan ( 1998 – 99 ) = = = = 
 Only after one year with Arrows , Hill came close to signing a deal with Alain Prost 's team , before deciding to instead <unk> with the Jordan team for the 1998 season . His new teammate was Ralf Schumacher , younger brother of Michael . In the first half of the season , the Jordan 198 car was off the pace and unreliable until improvements in performance from the Canadian Grand Prix . During that race , Hill moved up to second place as others retired or pitted for fuel . On lap 38 , Michael Schumacher , who was delayed by a stop @-@ and @-@ go penalty after forcing Frentzen 's Williams off the track , caught Hill on the home straight ; Hill moved across the track three times to block Schumacher , who took the place after missing his braking point and running over kerbs at the last chicane . Hill then ran fourth after his only pit stop before retiring due to an electrical failure . After the race , Schumacher accused Hill of dangerous driving . Hill responded by stating that Schumacher " cannot claim anyone drives badly when you look at the things he 's been up to in his career . He took Frentzen out completely . " At the German Grand Prix , Hill scored his first point of the year and at the Belgian Grand Prix , in very wet conditions , he took the Jordan team 's first ever win . At that race , Hill was leading late in the race , with teammate Schumacher closing rapidly , when he suggested that team principal Eddie Jordan order Ralf Schumacher to hold position instead of risking losing a 1 – 2 finish . Jordan followed the suggestion , ordering Schumacher not to overtake . In all , only eight drivers finished the race . The victory was his first since being dropped by the Williams team , which won no races that season . Hill finished the year with a last lap move on Frentzen at the Japanese Grand Prix , which earned him fourth place in the race and Jordan fourth position in that year 's constructors ' championship . 
 Hopes were high for 1999 , but Hill did not enjoy a good season . Struggling with the newly introduced four @-@ grooved tyres , he was outpaced by his new teammate , Heinz @-@ Harald Frentzen , who was Hill 's replacement at Williams two years prior . After a crash at the Canadian Grand Prix , Hill announced plans to retire from the sport at the end of the year , but after failing to finish the French Grand Prix that Frentzen won , he considered quitting the sport immediately . 
 Jordan persuaded Hill to at least stay for the British Grand Prix . Going into that race weekend , Hill announced he would retire after the Grand Prix , leading Jordan to test Jos Verstappen in case Hill had to be quickly replaced . Following a strong fifth place at his home event , however , Hill changed his mind and decided to see out the year . His best result for the remainder of the season was sixth place , which he achieved in both Hungary and Belgium . With three races of 1999 to go , there were rumours that the Prost Grand Prix team would release Jarno Trulli early after he signed for Jordan 's 2000 campaign as Hill 's replacement . At the same time , his teammate , Frentzen , became a title contender going into the final few races of the season and , eventually , finished third in the championship . In so doing , both Hill and Frentzen helped Jordan to achieve its best @-@ ever finish with a third position in the constructor 's championship . Hill 's last race was the Japanese Grand Prix where he spun off the track and pulled into the pits to retire a healthy car . 
 = = After racing = = 
 In retirement Hill has continued to be involved with cars and motorsport . He founded the Prestige and Super Car Private Members Club P1 International with Michael Breen in 2000 ; Breen bought Hill out in October 2006 . Hill also became involved in a BMW dealership , just outside Royal Leamington Spa , that bore his name and an Audi dealership in Exeter . In April 2006 , Hill succeeded Jackie Stewart as President of the British Racing Drivers ' Club ( BRDC ) . 
 In 2009 he received an Honorary Fellowship from the University of Northampton recognising his successful career and his connection with Northampton through Silverstone and the BRDC . 
 Hill also made a UK television advert with F1 commentator Murray Walker for Pizza Hut , in which Walker commentated on Hill 's meal as if it were a race . Hill has also appeared on many British television programmes , including Top Gear , This is Your Life , TFI Friday , Shooting Stars and Bang Bang , It 's Reeves and Mortimer . 
 Hill has raced both cars and motorcycles at the Goodwood Festival of Speed and in 2005 he tested the new GP2 Series car . Hill was back behind the wheel of a single @-@ seater race car in the summer of 2006 , when he took a 600 bhp ( 450 kW ) Grand Prix Masters machine for a test run around the Silverstone circuit . Hill said that he enjoyed the experience and " I wouldn 't rule [ a return to racing ] out , but I can 't honestly say that right now I need to race . That is the bit that is missing . I love driving , I love pushing the limit and all the rest of it but racing for me ... I don 't have an ambition to do it and I think that 's an important part of the equation . " 
 Hill served as the driver representative on the stewards panel at the 2010 Monaco Grand Prix where he and the rest of the panel decided to relegate former rival Michael Schumacher for overtaking under yellow flag conditions . The decision led to Hill receiving hate mail . 
 Between 18 and 19 May 2012 , Hill along with Mark Blundell , Perry McCarthy , Martin Donnelly and Julian Bailey participated in the first round of the VW Scirocco R @-@ Cup at Brands Hatch to raise funds for the <unk> Charity . Hill only managed to complete seven laps of the circuit . 
 On 7 October 2012 , Hill drove his father Graham Hill 's BRM in celebration of winning the 1962 F1 World Championship , where Graham became the first British driver to win the Drivers ' World Championship with a British team . 
 = = = Broadcaster = = = 
 Hill has also regularly appeared in the British media . He has contributed many articles to F1 Racing magazine and has twice appeared in ITV F1 's commentary box , covering for Martin Brundle at the 2007 and 2008 Hungarian Grands Prix . In January 2012 , British Sky Broadcasting announced that they had signed Hill to join their F1 presentation team on Sky Sports F1 as a pundit for the 2012 Formula One season . 
 = = = Music career = = = 
 Hill was interested in music from an early age and formed the punk band " Sex Hitler and the Hormones " with some friends while at school . After achieving success in Formula One , he was able to play guitar with several famous musicians , including his friend George Harrison , and appeared on " Demolition Man " , the opening track of Def Leppard 's album Euphoria . Hill also made a regular appearance at the British Grand Prix alongside other Formula One musicians such as Eddie Jordan . After his retirement at the end of the 1999 season , Hill devoted more time to music and played with celebrity bands including Spike Edney 's SAS band , and Pat Cash 's Wild Colonial Boys . Hill also formed his own band , The <unk> , which was active between 1999 and 2003 and played cover versions of well @-@ known songs from The Rolling Stones , The Beatles and The Kinks . Since becoming president of the BRDC in 2006 , Hill says he has abandoned the guitar , being " too busy doing school runs and looking after pets . " 
 = = Racing record = = 
 = = = Complete International Formula 3000 results = = = 
 ( key ) ( Races in bold indicate pole position ) ( Races in italics indicate fastest lap ) 
 = = = Complete 24 Hours of Le Mans results = = = 
 = = = Complete Formula One results = = = 
 ( key ) ( Races in bold indicate pole position ) ( Races in italics indicate fastest lap ) 
 = Internal Security Act ( Singapore ) = 
 The Internal Security Act ( ISA ) of Singapore ( Cap . 143 , 1985 Rev. Ed . ) is a statute that grants the executive power to enforce preventive detention , prevent subversion , suppress organized violence against persons and property , and do other things incidental to the internal security of Singapore . The present Act was originally enacted by the Parliament of Malaysia as the Internal Security Act 1960 ( No. 18 of 1960 ) , and extended to Singapore on 16 September 1963 when Singapore was a state of the Federation of Malaysia . 
 Before a person can be detained under the ISA by the Minister for Home Affairs , the President must be satisfied that such detention is necessary for the purposes of national security or public order . In the landmark case of Chng Suan Tze v. Minister for Home Affairs ( 1988 ) , the Court of Appeal sought to impose legal limits on the power of preventive detention by requiring the Government to adduce objective facts which justified the President 's satisfaction . Two months after the decision , a series of legislative and constitutional amendments was enacted that effectively reversed the Chng Suan Tze decision . These amendments were subsequently confirmed to be valid by the High Court and Court of Appeal in Teo Soh Lung v. Minister for Home Affairs ( 1989 – 1990 ) , which held it is sufficient for the President to be subjectively satisfied that a detainee is a threat to national security in order for a detention order to be issued under the ISA . Notable ISA cases include Operation <unk> in 1963 which led to the arrest of some 100 left @-@ wing politicians and trade unionists , including members of the socialist opposition party , the Barisan Sosialis . Chia Thye Poh , an alleged Communist , was detained and subject to other restrictions on his liberty under the ISA from 1966 to 1998 . The Chng Suan Tze and Teo Soh Lung cases resulted from a 1987 security operation called Operation Spectrum in which 22 Roman Catholic church and social activists and professionals accused of being members of a Marxist conspiracy were detained under the ISA . 
 The ISA also empowers the authorities to prohibit political and quasi @-@ military organizations , ban subversive documents and publications , shut down entertainments and exhibitions that are or are likely to be detrimental to the national interest , and to suppress organized violence by declaring parts of Singapore to be security areas . 
 = = History and developments = = 
 British colonial Malaya introduced the Emergency Regulations Ordinance 1948 on 7 July 1948 during the Malayan Emergency in response to a Communist uprising and guerrilla war . The regulations allowed the police to arrest anybody suspected of having acted or being likely to act in a way that would threaten security without evidence or a warrant , hold them incommunicado for investigation , and detain them indefinitely without the detainee ever being charged with a crime or tried in a court of law . 
 The successor to the Emergency Regulations Ordinance , the Preservation of Public Security Ordinance 1955 ( " PPSO " ) , was introduced a result of the 1955 Hock Lee bus riots by the Labour Party government in Singapore . There was strong opposition to the PPSO by the party then in opposition , the People 's Action Party ( " PAP " ) . In 1958 , Lee Kuan Yew of the PAP accused the Lim Yew Hock government of using the PPSO to stifle political dissent . 
 In 1960 , three years after Malaya 's independence , the Emergency was declared over . However , the Malayan Internal Security Act 1960 ( " ISA " ) was passed in place of the PPSO with much of the same powers . During parliamentary debates on the Act , Malayan Prime Minister Tunku Abdul Rahman stated that the ISA would only be applied against only the remaining Communist insurgents . The Malayan Communist Party and its insurgents eventually surrendered in 1989 . Nonetheless , the ISA was retained in Malaysia . 
 The drafter of the Malayan ISA was Hugh Hickling , a British lawyer , author and professor . In 1989 , he commented that he " could not imagine then that the time would come when the power of detention , carefully and deliberately interlocked with Article 149 of the Constitution , would be used against political opponents , welfare workers and others dedicated to nonviolent , peaceful activities " . Nonetheless , he commented that he supported review of the ISA but it was not for him to say if the law should be scrapped , as " you 've got a multi @-@ racial society [ in Malaysia ] in which emotions can run high very quickly " . 
 When Singapore joined the Federation of Malaya in 1963 , the Malayan ISA was extended to Singapore . The Act was retained in Singapore even after its separation from Malaysia in 1965 . The current version of the Act is known as Chapter 143 of the 1985 Revised Edition . In September 2011 , the debate over whether the ISA should be retained was re @-@ opened after Malaysia announced that it was considering repealing the ISA . Prime Minister Najib Razak stated that the Act would be abolished and replaced by new laws to safeguard peace and order . 
 The legitimacy and relevance of the ISA were subsequently debated by former ISA detainees , the Singapore Government , and others . Member of Parliament for Pasir Ris – Punggol Group Representation Constituency , Dr. <unk> <unk> , commented in Parliament on 18 August 2011 that " while he felt it inappropriate to detain a citizen without trial , he is convinced by the hard logic that the safety and security of Singapore must be paramount " . However , he agreed that there needed to be more safeguards to prevent abuse of the ISA and that " the ISA needs to be discussed in a more transparent manner , even as the facts associated with a given detainee need to be kept secret " . 
 The following day , 19 October 2011 , Deputy Prime Minister , Coordinating Minister for National Security and Minister for Home Affairs Teo Chee Hean explained the relevance of the ISA and its powers of preventive detention . He noted that in the 1960s preventive detention was primarily used to counter the subversive Communist threat posed by the Malayan Communist Party which was hiding within legal organizations . For the past two decades , though , preventive detention has helped safeguard Singapore 's national security by countering threats posed by espionage and terrorism . Preventive detention allows for a comprehensive assessment of a threat , as opposed to a criminal case tried before a court which requires the court to consider only the specific acts that relate to the charge . <unk> those who have not yet committed overt deeds that warrant prosecution also allows pre @-@ emptive action to be taken to neutralize threats before they materialize into actual harm . In addition , the Minister said that detention without trial is preferable in situations where open prosecutions in court are not practicable due to the confidentiality of certain intelligence . Such intelligence might have been obtained through foreign security agencies on the understanding that the source and details would not be disclosed to an open court . What is more , disclosure of confidential intelligence could compromise ongoing or future operations through the revelation of existing sources and methods of intelligence gathering . However , if confidential information were withheld from the court , a criminal case could be weakened due to evidential requirements , which may result in the acquittal of an otherwise guilty accused . Finally , court proceedings may stall investigations as part of a broader network , and could exacerbate situations where communal sensitivities are involved . 
 Opposition political parties in Singapore have called for the ISA to be abolished . In its manifesto for the 2011 general election , the Workers ' Party said that specific anti @-@ terrorism and anti @-@ espionage laws , which allow arrests and detention without trial only under strict conditions , should be enacted to replace the ISA . The National Solidarity Party took a similar stance in February 2013 . 
 = = Legislative authority for enactment = = 
 The legislative authority for the enactment of the ISA is Article 149 of the Constitution of Singapore , which appears in Part XII ( " Special Powers against Subversion and Emergency Powers " ) . Entitled " Legislation against subversion " , Article 149 states : 
 ( 1 ) If an Act recites that action has been taken or threatened by any substantial body of persons , whether inside or outside Singapore — 
 ( a ) to cause , or to cause a substantial number of citizens to fear , organised violence against persons or property ; 
 ( b ) to excite disaffection against the President or the Government ; 
 ( c ) to promote feelings of ill @-@ will and hostility between different races or other classes of the population likely to cause violence ; 
 ( d ) to procure the alteration , otherwise than by lawful means , of anything by law established ; or 
 ( e ) which is prejudicial to the security of Singapore , 
 any provision of that law designed to stop or prevent that action or any amendment to that law or any provision in any law enacted under clause ( 3 ) is valid notwithstanding that it is inconsistent with Article 9 , 11 , 12 , 13 or 14 , or would , apart from this Article , be outside the legislative power of Parliament . 
 ( 2 ) A law containing such a recital as is mentioned in clause ( 1 ) shall , if not sooner repealed , cease to have effect if a resolution is passed by Parliament annulling such law , but without prejudice to anything previously done by virtue thereof or to the power of Parliament to make a new law under this Article . 
 ( 3 ) If , in respect of any proceedings whether instituted before or after 27th January 1989 , any question arises in any court as to the validity of any decision made or act done in pursuance of any power conferred upon the President or the Minister by any law referred to in this Article , such question shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of any law as may be enacted by Parliament for this purpose ; and nothing in Article 93 shall invalidate any law enacted pursuant to this clause . 
 To satisfy the requirements of Article 149 ( 1 ) , the preamble to the Malaysian ISA , which has been retained in Singapore 's ISA , contains the following recital : 
 Whereas action has been taken by a substantial body of persons to cause a substantial number of citizens to fear organised violence against persons and property : 
 And Whereas action has been taken and threatened by a substantial body of persons which is prejudicial to the security of Malaya : 
 And Whereas Parliament considers if necessary to stop or prevent that action : 
 Now therefore pursuant to Article 149 of the Constitution be it enacted by the <unk> Yang Maha Mulia Seri Paduka Baginda Yang di @-@ Pertuan Agong with the advice and consent of the Dewan Negara and Dewan Ra <unk> in Parliament assembled , and by the authority of the same , as follows ... 
 = = Provisions relating to internal security = = 
 Part II of the ISA , the first substantive part of the Act , contains provisions relating to internal security . It is divided into six chapters : 
 I. Prohibition of organisations and associations of a political or quasi @-@ military character and uniforms , etc . 
 II . Powers of preventive detention . 
 III . Special powers relating to subversive publications , etc . 
 IV . Control of entertainments and exhibitions . 
 V. Other powers for the prevention of subversion . 
 VI . Miscellaneous . 
 = = = Prohibition of political or quasi @-@ military organizations = = = 
 Chapter I of Part II of the ISA empowers the Minister for Home Affairs to take action against political or quasi @-@ military organizations and associations . It is a criminal offence to be a member or adherent of any association of persons who are organized , trained or equipped to enable them to be employed " in usurping the functions of the police or of the Singapore Armed Forces " or " for the purpose of enabling them to be employed for the use or display of physical force in promoting any political or other object , or in such a manner as to arouse reasonable apprehension that they are organised or trained or equipped for that purpose " . It is a more serious crime to promote or conspire with someone else to promote , or to participate in the control or management of , the association , or to organize or train any member or adherent of the association . 
 The Minister is empowered to prohibit any uniform or dress to be worn in public by members or adherents of a political or quasi @-@ military association involved in the activities mentioned in the previous paragraph , or any uniform or dress indicating an association with a political organization or with the promotion of a political object . Wearing such a uniform or dress in contravention of the Minister 's order is an offence . In addition , if the Minister considers it to be in the national interest to do , he may prohibit the " manufacture , sale , use , wearing , display or possession of any flag , banner , badge , emblem , device , uniform or distinctive dress or any part thereof " . Currently , the only emblem or device that is prohibited is one " in the form of a 5 @-@ pointed red star or a hammer and sickle in circumstances which raise a reasonable presumption that the emblem or device was intended or was likely to be used in a manner prejudicial to the interests of Singapore or to promote or foster a purpose prejudicial to or incompatible with peace , welfare or good order in Singapore " . 
 It is a crime for a person to be present at or to attend any meeting or assembly organized for the participants to train or drill themselves or to be trained or drilled " in the use of arms ... or for the purpose of practising military exercises , movements or evolutions " . It is also a crime to train or drill other people in these manners or to take part in the control or management of an association whose members are so trained . The prohibition does not apply to members of the Singapore Armed Forces , the police , a legally constituted volunteer or local force , a visiting force lawfully present in the country , or any organization or association exempted by the Minister . 
 = = = Preventive detention = = = 
 Chapter II of Part II of the ISA , which allows for preventive detention ( also known as detention without trial ) , is the most conspicuous feature of the Act . It confers on the executive a discretionary power to arrest and detain without trial , when necessary , a person with a view to prevent " that person from acting in any manner prejudicial to the security of Singapore or any part thereof or to the maintenance of public order or essential services therein " . For the purposes of this provision , essential services means services relating to water , electricity , public health , fire , prisons , post , telephony , telegraphy , <unk> ( including broadcasting and television ) , ports , docks , harbours , public transport , and the bulk distribution of fuel and lubricants . 
 Instead of detaining a person for the purposes mentioned above , the executive may impose other restrictions upon the person 's liberty such as curfews , requiring the reporting of his or her movements , prohibiting the person from speaking at public meetings or taking part in political activities , and travelling beyond Singapore or any part of the country . 
 = = = = Procedure = = = = 
 = = = = = Before detention = = = = = 
 Before a person can be detained under the ISA , the President must be satisfied that such detention is necessary for the purposes of national security or public order . This is a precondition for the valid exercise by the Minister for Home Affairs of the power to order the detention . The detention order is supplemented by section 74 of the ISA which empowers the police to arrest and detain any person pending enquiries without a warrant under section 8 . 
 = = = = = Initial detention = = = = = 
 Once an individual has been detained , there are administrative processes which the executive is required to follow under sections 9 , 11 and 12 of the Act . The detainee is to be informed of the grounds of detention as soon as possible , unless their disclosure is against the national interest . He or she is to be served with a copy of the detention order as well as the grounds and allegations of fact on which the detention order was made . 
 The detainee is also to be informed within 14 days of his or her right to make representations against the order to an advisory board , which is required to hear and consider the detainee 's representations . Each advisory board is chaired by a Supreme Court judge appointed by the President , and has two other members appointed by the President in consultation with the Chief Justice . The board has the powers of a court to summon and examine witnesses , and to order that documents be produced . It evaluates the evidence and must make recommendations to the President concerning the matter within three months of the date of detention . When the advisory board recommends the release of the detainee against the Minister 's decision , the President exercises personal discretion whether the detainee should be released . Before exercising his discretion , the President is required to consult the Council of Presidential Advisers . 
 Non @-@ citizens detained under the ISA do not have a right to make representations to an advisory board . They may , within two months from the date of the detention order , make written representations to the Minister . The Minister may , but is not bound to , refer the representations to an advisory board . Any decision on such representations by the Minister is final and cannot be called into question in any court . The burden of proving that a person is a citizen lies on the person claiming to be one , and again the Minister 's decision on the matter is final . 
 = = = = = Extension and suspension of detention = = = = = 
 The initial order of the Minister for Home Affairs may direct that an individual be detained for up to two years . This may be further extended by directions issued by the President for further periods of up to two years at a time . The Minister is empowered with discretion to suspend a detention order , but also has the authority to revoke the suspension at any time , which reactivates the detention order . Detention orders must be reviewed at least once every 12 months by an advisory board which thereafter makes its recommendation to the Minister . If an advisory board recommends the release of a detainee and the Minister disagrees , the President may exercise personal discretion to order the release . The requirement for regular reviews of detention orders does not apply to detainees who are not citizens . When a detention order is extended , the Minister is not required to provide the detainee with the grounds justifying the extension order or give the detainee an opportunity to appeal against the extension . 
 = = = = Scope of judicial review of ISA orders = = = = 
 Under administrative law , judicial review is an exercise in which the High Court scrutinizes the executive 's decisions and orders to ensure that they conform with the law . If the decisions and orders are not authorized by statute or if they have been made in contravention of administrative law principles , the Court can invalidate them . Similarly , if any exercise of power by an executive body contravenes the Constitution , the Court has a duty to declare it invalid . With regards to the ISA and the powers to detain without trial , the scope of judicial review was subject to a succession of changes between 1988 and 1990 . These changes revolved around the issue of whether the discretion of the President and the Home Affairs Minister should be assessed objectively or subjectively . During that period , the scope of judicial review was expanded by common law developments but was subsequently curtailed by legislative and constitutional amendments . 
 = = = = = Before 1988 : Lee Mau Seng v. Minister for Home Affairs = = = = = 
 Prior to 1988 , the Singapore case of Lee Mau Seng v. Minister for Home Affairs ( 1971 ) was authority for the application of the subjective discretion test for judicial review of executive power exercised under the ISA . The subjective test precludes the court from inquiring into the facts and grounds that are relied upon by the executive body in exercising its discretion . It is based on the literal interpretation of the words " [ i ] f the President is satisfied " that appear in section 8 of the ISA , such that no more is required than the subjective satisfaction of the President . This reasoning applies similarly to section 10 of the ISA , which requires the Minister 's satisfaction for the suspension of detention orders . 
 = = = = = 1988 – 1989 : Chng Suan Tze v. Minister for Home Affairs = = = = = 
 In the case of Chng Suan Tze v. Minister for Home Affairs ( 1988 ) , the Court of Appeal expanded the scope of judicial review by adopting an objective test when reviewing the exercise of executive discretion . In contrast to the subjective test , the objective test permits the court to examine whether the decision @-@ maker 's satisfaction was based on objective facts which fell within the scope of the purposes specified by the ISA . The subjective satisfaction or mere ipse dixit of the executive body is insufficient . However , the adoption of this objective test was only part of the obiter dicta of the case . The ratio decidendi of the case was based on narrower technical grounds . 
 The subjective test was rejected for several reasons by the Court of Appeal . It held that applying the subjective test to sections 8 and 10 of the ISA would render the provisions unconstitutional . The word law in Article 12 ( 1 ) of the Constitution was held in Ong Ah Chuan v. Public Prosecutor ( 1980 ) to encompass fundamental rules of natural justice . Hence , Parliament cannot pass legislation which authorizes the executive to exercise power in breach of these fundamental rules or to exercise power in an arbitrary manner . If the subjective test were to be adopted , it would in effect allow the executive to exercise arbitrary powers of detention , therefore rendering sections 8 and 10 of the ISA inconsistent with Article 12 ( 1 ) . When the case was decided , Article 149 ( 1 ) of the Constitution , which protects the validity of anti @-@ subversion laws notwithstanding inconsistencies with specified fundamental liberties , did not cover inconsistencies with Article 12 . Also , the Court noted that adopting the objective test would be consistent with Article 93 of the Constitution , which vests judicial power in the courts . It did not , however , directly address the argument by counsel that the subjective test , in conferring arbitrary powers of detention , would be inconsistent with Article 93 . 
 Further , the Court rejected the subjective test on the basis that " the notion of a subjective or unfettered discretion is contrary to the rule of law " . The rule of law requires the courts to examine the exercise of discretionary power and ensure that executive power is exercised within its legal limits . 
 The Court of Appeal also held that legal precedents from other Commonwealth jurisdictions supported a rejection of the subjective test in favour of the objective test . The subjective test was applied in Liversidge v. Anderson ( 1941 ) and subsequently affirmed in Greene v. Secretary of State for Home Affairs ( 1941 ) . However , these decisions had been departed from in subsequent decisions by the Privy Council and House of Lords . These courts had rejected the subjective test applied by the majority in Liversidge , preferring the objective test applied by Lord Atkin in his dissenting judgment . In the light of these developments , the Malaysian case of Karam Singh v. Menteri Hal <unk> Dalam Negeri ( Minister for Home Affairs ) , Malaysia ( 1969 ) , which had applied the test in Liversidge and which the respondents ' counsel had relied on in support of the subjective test , could no longer be considered good law . Additionally , Teh Cheng Poh v. Public Prosecutor ( 1978 ) decided by the Privy Council on appeal from Malaysia , was referred to by the Court in support of the objective test . The case concerned the exercise of discretionary power under the Malaysian Internal Security Act , which the ISA of Singapore is derived from . 
 Although sections 8 and 10 of the ISA concern matters of national security , the Court held that this concern does not preclude the objective review of executive discretion . Following the case of Council of Civil Service Unions v. Minister for the Civil Service ( 1983 ) , the Court of Appeal decided that it is up to the courts to determine whether a decision is in fact based on grounds of national security . Similarly , it should also be within the court 's purview to determine whether the matters relied upon in exercising powers under the ISA fall within the scope of purposes specified by sections 8 and 10 . 
 = = = = = 1989 amendments and Teo Soh Lung v. Minister for Home Affairs = = = = = 
 Parliament subsequently passed the Constitution of the Republic of Singapore ( Amendment ) Act 1989 and the Internal Security ( Amendment ) Act 1989 . They took effect on 27 and 30 January 1989 respectively . Section 8B ( 1 ) of the amended ISA provides that the law pertaining to the judicial review of decisions made by the President or the Minister was restored to the legal position applicable in Singapore on 13 July 1971 , the date when Lee Mau Seng was decided . In Teo Soh Lung v. Minister for Home Affairs ( 1990 ) , the Court of Appeal held that these amendments reinstated the legal position set out in Lee Mau Seng as the applicable law governing judicial review in Singapore , thus prompting a return to the subjective test in reviewing the exercise of executive discretion under the ISA . 
 The possible inconsistencies the subjective test had with respect to Articles 12 and 93 of the Constitution were sought to be resolved with the passing of the Constitution of the Republic of Singapore ( Amendment ) Act 1989 . Article 149 ( 1 ) was amended to shield any anti @-@ subversion laws enacted pursuant to this provision from inconsistency with Articles 11 and 12 . This was in addition to Articles 9 , 13 and 14 which had already been present in Article 149 ( 1 ) before the amendment . Furthermore , a new Article 149 ( 3 ) provided that nothing in Article 93 would invalidate any provisions that were enacted pursuant to Article 149 . Hence , the ruling in Chng Suan Tze that the subjective test was inconsistent with the Constitution was legislatively reversed , and the subjective test was restored as the valid and relevant law in Singapore . 
 The Internal Security ( Amendment ) Act 1989 also introduced section 8B ( 2 ) , which is an ouster clause providing that no judicial review of orders made under the ISA shall be available save in relation to questions relating to the procedural requirements of the ISA . In Teo Soh Lung , the Court of Appeal held that it was not necessary for it to decide if the subjective test in Lee Mau Seng precluded judicial review in the case . Hence , the position remains to be confirmed by the courts . In addition , the Court decided that it was unnecessary to consider the effect of section 8B ( 2 ) on issues not related to national security and the constitutionality of the 1989 amendments to the ISA . 
 Parliament also introduced into the ISA section 8D , which dictates that the Internal Security ( Amendment ) Act 1989 is to be applied retrospectively to proceedings instituted " before or after " 30 January 1989 . Article 11 ( 1 ) of the Constitution states : " No person shall be punished for an act or omission which was not punishable by law when it was done or made , and no person shall suffer greater punishment for an offence than was prescribed by law at the time it was committed . " Though the 1989 amendments to the ISA did not retrospectively introduce any criminal offences , the legislature saw fit to amend Article 149 ( 1 ) by inserting a reference to Article 11 to forestall any possible arguments on section 8D 's inconsistency with the Article . As the Minister for Law S. Jayakumar said in Parliament : " The reference to Article 11 is necessary to ensure the retrospective application of the Internal Security ( Amendment ) Bill is not challenged . " 
 The test for judicial review on matters not relating to the ISA remains the objective test . In Kamal Jit Singh v. Minister for Home Affairs ( 1992 ) , the High Court held that validity of detention under the Criminal Law ( Temporary Provisions ) Act is not dependent on the Minister 's subjective satisfaction . Rather , the Minister must be objectively satisfied that the person was associated with criminal activities . 
 = = = = Academic views = = = = 
 = = = = = Mala fides situations = = = = = 
 While the current law in Singapore holds that the Home Affairs Minister 's decision is subjective and not judicially reviewable , there is uncertainty whether there are exceptional situations in which the courts may still step in to practice judicial review even though the ISA deals with national security matters . A possible exception is when the Minister 's decision was made mala fides , that is , in bad faith . Such decisions would involve the clear abuse of power , such as being " detained solely for having red hair or for failing a professional examination or for having acted as a lawyer against the Government " . 
 However , the law on this issue is presently unclear . In Lee Mau Seng , the High Court said that mala fides was not a justiciable issue in relation to the ISA . A similar stance was taken in Malaysia in Karam Singh . However , in Teo Soh Lung the Court of Appeal said that it did not need to decide whether Lee Mau Seng has precluded judicial review in mala fides situations until a case with a mala fides factual situation arises . Furthermore , there is an increasing number of Malaysian cases reflecting " a gradual recognition that ... indicate a retreat from the purely subjective approach " . 
 In response to the harshness of the rule in Lee Mau Seng , academics have offered several suggestions for circumventing it . One is that the definition of mala fides used by the courts in Lee Mau Seng is actually unreasonableness and not mala fides in the narrow sense of dishonesty or bad faith . In Cannock Chase District Council v. Kelly ( 1977 ) , Lord Justice Megaw asserted that bad faith is " dishonesty " and " always involves a grave charge " . This contrasts with the meaning of mala fides in Lee Mau Seng which includes situations of carelessness or vagueness . Thus , an allegation of bad faith in the narrow sense could permit review by the courts . 
 = = = = = Freezing of the common law = = = = = 
 After the 1989 amendments to the Constitution and the ISA , there was academic discourse on the effect of section 8B ( 1 ) on the future development of the common law . The amendments merely caused a time warp in the common law , taking it back to 1971 . As they did not amount to a codifying or declaratory Act seeking to replace the common law of judicial review , there is uncertainty whether the courts may continue to develop the common law and move away from the legal position laid down in Lee Mau Seng . Michael Rutter has asserted that the common law can indeed continue to change . While the Parliament has the power to turn the clock back , " the Parliament is powerless to stop the clock from running " and " as soon as the clock is placed back in the hands of the judiciary , the hands might race forward again " . 
 Such a stance has wide implications : the High Court and Court of Appeal would not be bound by Lee Mau Seng . They could rule that situations involving mala fides are judicially reviewable , or completely re @-@ adopt the legal position stated in Chng Suan Tze . The justification is that " if Parliament intended to render judiciary law impossible , it has only to issue its laws in a more detailed shape , so that in the vast complexity of human affairs there may always be at hand a rule sufficiently precise and definite to meet each particular case " . 
 = = = = = Validity of ouster clause = = = = = 
 Another issue that has undergone academic scrutiny is the nature of section 8B ( 2 ) as an ouster clause . An ouster clause is an objectively worded provision which is drafted to exclude the jurisdiction of the courts . 
 In Teo Soh Lung , the Court of Appeal declined to address the constitutionality of section 8B and , in particular , how section 8B ( 2 ) should be interpreted . Michael Hor has described the judiciary 's reluctance to address these points as " an elegant piece of judicial ' kung fu ' " in which it chose to evade the problem . In a lecture to law students in 2010 , Chief Justice Chan Sek Keong commented that , in general , " ouster clauses may be inconsistent with Article 93 of the Constitution , which vests the judicial power of Singapore in the Supreme Court " , though he expressed no concluded opinion on the matter . However , it seems unlikely that Article 93 can be relied on to invalidate section 8B ( 2 ) since Parliament specifically enacted Article 149 ( 3 ) to protect the 1989 amendments to the ISA from inconsistency with Article 93 . 
 Tham Chee Ho has opined that where a jurisdictional error of law is involved , judicial review will be available despite the presence of an ouster clause . However , an ouster clause still precludes judicial review of non @-@ jurisdictional errors of law . If this distinction between jurisdictional and non @-@ jurisdictional errors of law exists , section 8B ( 2 ) will preclude judicial review of non @-@ jurisdictional errors of law but not jurisdictional errors . Notably , there is a difference between English and Singapore law as regards this issue . In R. v. Lord President of the Privy Council , ex parte Page ( 1992 ) , Lord Browne @-@ Wilkinson commented that the case of Anisminic Ltd. v. Foreign Compensation Commission ( 1968 ) had the effect of rendering the distinction between jurisdictional and non @-@ jurisdictional errors of law obsolete . This has limited the effect of ouster clauses in the United Kingdom since all errors of law are considered as jurisdictional . However , the Singapore courts have not yet adopted this legal position , and there are cases indicating that the distinction between jurisdictional and non @-@ jurisdictional errors of law still exists . 
 = = = = = Basic features doctrine = = = = = 
 The basic features doctrine developed in Kesavananda Bharati v. The State of Kerala ( 1973 ) and Minerva Mills Ltd. v. Union of India ( 1980 ) by the Supreme Court of India rests on the notion that there are certain elements of the nation 's constitutional structure which cannot be amended by Parliament . 
 In the High Court case of Teo Soh Lung v. Minister for Home Affairs ( 1989 ) , the plaintiff argued that the 1989 amendments to the Constitution had violated the basic features of the Constitution by breaching the principle of separation of powers by usurping judicial power , and contravening the rule of law . The Court rejected the application of the basic features doctrine owing to the differences in the making of the Singapore Constitution and the Indian Constitution , and the fact that the framers of the Singapore Constitution had not expressly provided for limitations to be placed on Parliament 's power of amendment . The Court also held that , in any case , there had been no violation of the Constitution 's basic features on the facts of the case . On appeal , the Court of Appeal determined the case on other grounds , and thus found it unnecessary to decide conclusively if the basic features doctrine applies in Singapore . 
 = = = = = Role of the judiciary in national security matters = = = = = 
 There are competing views over the appropriate role of the judiciary in matters concerning preventive detention under the ISA . A related concern is whether the judicial process is suitable for such matters . The legislative and constitutional amendments relating to judicial review under the ISA were intended to limit the role of the courts in national security matters . In 1989 , Law Minister S. Jayakumar argued in Parliament that the amendments were needed because the courts would effectively be responsible for national security matters if judicial review was permitted . The subjective test was deemed necessary to reserve to the executive the responsibility for national security matters , and to enable the Government to deal effectively with security threats . 
 Tham Chee Ho contends that , based on the objective test set out in Chng Suan Tze , the fear that the courts will take over responsibility for national security matters is misplaced . This is because the courts do not review the actions taken by the executive for national security purposes , but merely determine whether the situation in fact involves national security issues . The Court of Appeal in Chng Suan Tze reflected this by holding that what was required to preserve national security was a matter solely for executive judgment . 
 Another reason that was put forward by Jayakumar to justify a limited role by the judiciary was that the judicial process is unsuitable for deciding preventive detention issues . Persons who are potential threats to national security may act covertly , hindering the collection of evidence to secure a conviction in a court trial . By its nature , however , preventive detention is a precautionary measure and involves making decisions on limited information to prevent threats to national security from materializing . Jayakumar said that the court is ill @-@ equipped to determine whether there are suspicious circumstances which justify pre @-@ emptive action . Tham agrees with this view , but argues that it applies only where the courts review the exercise of executive power . He distinguishes the objective test applied in Chng Suan Tze from the situation mentioned by Jayakumar , since the court is only interested in whether there is a national security issue involved . 
 Thio Li @-@ ann has opined that the 1989 measures taken to limit judicial checks on executive power demonstrate a preference for non @-@ legal institutional checks . One example of a non @-@ legal institutional check is the requirement under the Constitution and the ISA for an advisory board to hear detainees ' representations and recommend to the President whether a detention order should be terminated . Thio argues that such checks are weak and cannot replace judicial review . She contends that since Article 149 of the Constitution permits the enactment of repressive laws which contravene constitutional liberties , meaningful restraints should be placed on the wide discretionary powers under the ISA . Similarly , in Chng Suan Tze , the Court of Appeal rejected the view that the executive 's accountability to Parliament is a sufficient safeguard against the arbitrary exercise of power . 
 Eunice Chua argues against adopting the subjective test and limiting judicial review to breaches of the procedures stated in the ISA . Her argument is based on the premise that courts should consider notions of substantive democracy in performing their judicial role . Chua argues that in Teo Soh Lung the Court of Appeal should have considered whether there were sufficient safeguards for the protection of detainees after the curtailment of judicial review through constitutional and legislative amendments . She suggests that Article 151 , which provides for restrictions on preventive detention , should be read liberally in favour of detainees , bearing in mind the exclusion of fundamental liberties by Article 149 . In her view , the curtailment of judicial review should therefore be rejected , as it does not accord with the " spirit " of Article 151 of the Constitution which ensures safeguards for detainees . 
 Conversely , Jayakumar argued in 1989 that judicial review is an inappropriate safeguard in preventing abuse of the detention powers under the ISA in the situation where a dishonest government is in power . He argued that judicial safeguards are illusory because such a dishonest government would " pack the courts " and appoint judges which would rule in their favour . He regarded the best safeguard to be for voters to elect honest and incorruptible men into the Government . 
 = = = = Criticisms of preventive detention = = = = 
 In 2006 , the United States Department of State noted that although the ISA had not been used against the Singapore Government 's political opponents for some years , " political opposition and criticism remained restricted by the government 's authority to define these powers broadly . In the past , occasional government references to speech that it considered ' out @-@ of @-@ bounds ' were understood to be implicit threats to invoke the ISA . " The Singapore Government itself has regularly raised the need to prevent national security threats from materializing as a justification for preventive detention . However , there have been suggestions that the criminal law is apt for dealing with this matter as well . Crimes of accessory liability such as abetment , conspiracy and unlawful assembly in the Penal Code may apply even if harm has not actualized . Furthermore , restrictions imposed by the Societies Act , as well as the offences in the Sedition Act , may be viable alternatives to preventive detention . 
 Preventive detention has been preferred over open court trials , as it has been suggested that the criminal trial could be used as a platform for radicals to publicize their views , and that it might confer the honour of martyrdom on accused persons . However , it has been suggested that an open trial which details the evils of terrorism and the indiscriminate destruction that it causes could educate the public and potentially unite the various communities in the country . 
 Under the framework of the ISA , detainees are theoretically accorded due process . For instance , detainees have a right to make representations against their detention to an advisory board . However , Article 151 ( 3 ) of the Constitution prevents any government authority from disclosing any information which would , " in its own opinion , be against national interest " . Therefore , there is no means to compel the authorities to disclose information which may be pertinent for the detainee to make a proper representation to an advisory board , thus compromising due process . Moreover , the secrecy of advisory board hearings has been criticized as it may lead to the public questioning the legitimacy of the hearings , and to an impression that justice has not manifestly been done . 
 Due to the limited form of judicial review available under the ISA , whether a person remains under detention depends largely on the Ministry of Home Affairs . This raises the question quis <unk> <unk> <unk> ? – who guards the guardians ? If preventive detention is applied illegitimately in a manner that cripples lawful democratic opposition , the absence of judicial review would preclude the exposure of such abuse . It has been submitted that the voice of public opinion is most suited for this purpose . 
 = = = = Instances of the application of the PPSO and ISA = = = = 
 According to The Sunday Times of 28 October 1956 , 234 people , including trade union leaders Lim Chin Siong , James <unk> and C. V. Devan Nair , were detained under the PPSO as suspected Communist subversives . On 2 February 1963 Operation <unk> , a joint Malaysian – Singaporean anti @-@ Communist operation , led to the arrest of 133 people . As of 5 April 1963 , 17 were being detained in the Federation of Malaya and 107 in Singapore , while the remaining nine had been released . On 30 October 1966 , Chia Thye Poh , leader of the leftist Barisan Sosialis political party , was detained . He was subsequently held for 32 years pursuant to the ISA , the last nine of which under forms of house arrest and civil rights restrictions , including confinement on the island of Sentosa . All such restrictions were finally lifted on 27 November 1998 . As of that date , the South China Morning Post referred to him as " the world 's second longest serving prisoner @-@ of @-@ conscience after South Africa 's Nelson Mandela " . 
 The Straits Times of 28 May 1976 reported that 50 people allegedly involved in a Communist plot had been arrested . Among them were the playwright and theatre director Kuo Pao Kun , then a secretary for the Chinese Chamber of Commerce , and his wife Goh Lay Kuan . Kuo was detained under the ISA for four years and seven months , and his citizenship was revoked . Following his release he was placed under residence and travel restrictions until 1983 . His citizenship was reinstated in 1992 . 
 In 1987 , in a security operation known as Operation Spectrum , 22 Roman Catholic church and social activists and professionals were detained under the ISA . They were accused of being members of a dangerous Marxist conspiracy bent on subverting the government by force and replacing it with a Marxist state . The detentions led to , among others , the Chng Suan Tze and Teo Soh Lung cases . 
 Two people were arrested in 1997 and four in 1998 for espionage activities . Of those arrested in 1997 , one was a male permanent resident who was a deep @-@ cover operative of a foreign intelligence service who had used the other person , a female Singaporean , as a collaborator . Three of the people arrested in 1998 were agents for a foreign intelligence agency . One of them had recruited the fourth person to collect intelligence on and to subvert a local community organization . All the detainees were subsequently released . 
 From 2001 , the ISA was mainly used against al @-@ Qaeda @-@ inspired terrorists in Singapore . In December that year , 15 members of the Jemaah Islamiyah ( JI ) militant group were arrested for involvement in the Singapore embassies attack plot . JI member Mohamed <unk> bin Jaffar was detained in January 2002 ( and later released in September 2011 ) , and another 21 members were arrested and detained in August 2002 . 
 In February 2006 , alleged JI head Mas Selamat bin <unk> was extradited from Indonesia and detained under the ISA . He escaped from custody on 27 February 2008 and was only rearrested by the Malaysian authorities on 1 April 2009 . He was transferred back to Singapore for detention under the ISA on 24 September 2010 . 
 Between November 2006 and April 2007 , four Singaporean JI members were detained under the ISA while one had a restriction order issued against him . In addition , lawyer and lecturer Abdul Basheer s / o Abdul Kader , who radicalized himself by reading extremist propaganda on the Internet , was detained in February 2007 for preparing to engage in militant activities in Afghanistan . He was released on 21 February 2010 , but rearrested in September 2012 and detained under the ISA the following month for planning to resume jihadist terrorism against foreign military operations abroad , including leaving Singapore – illegally , if necessary – to do so . 
 Full @-@ time National Serviceman Muhammad Fadil Abdul Hamid was detained on 4 April 2010 . He was described by the media as self @-@ radicalized , having been deeply influenced by the lectures of Feiz Mohammad and Anwar al @-@ <unk> which he had accessed online . Around this time , two other people influenced by al @-@ <unk> were placed under restriction orders . Between January and July 2011 , three Muslim radicals were deported to Singapore from other countries and detained . JI members <unk> bin <unk> and Samad bin <unk> were arrested in Malaysia and Indonesia respectively ; while Abdul Majid s / o <unk> Mohammad , a member of the Moro Islamic Liberation Front ( MILF ) , was arrested in Malaysia . As of 13 September 2011 , there were 17 people on orders of detention , one whose detention had been suspended , and 49 people on restriction orders . On 7 March 2013 , it was mentioned in Parliament that 64 people had been detained under the ISA for activities related to terrorism since 2002 . 
 In September 2013 , the Singapore media reported that <unk> Hussaini had been detained in March that year and was the fifth Singaporean to have been influenced by radical ideology he had read online . <unk> had entered Thailand illegally to take part in the armed insurgency in Southern Thailand , but was arrested and deported to Singapore . Another Singaporean , Mustafa Kamal Mohammad , was placed on a two @-@ year restriction order from September 2013 for being a member of the MILF in the Philippines . Three Singaporean former JI members had their restriction orders lifted ; they were <unk> Osman and Samad <unk> , and Abdul Majid <unk> Mohamad who had trained with the MILF . 
 = = = Subversive documents = = = 
 Under Chapter III of Part II of the ISA , the minister responsible for printing presses and publications – currently the Minister for Communications and Information – is authorized to ban documents and publications that are subversive or otherwise undesirable . For instance , the Minister may prohibit ( absolutely or conditionally ) the printing , publication , sale , issue , circulation or possession of a document or publication that : 
 ( a ) contains any incitement to violence ; 
 ( b ) counsels disobedience to the law or to any lawful order ; 
 ( c ) is calculated or likely to lead to a breach of the peace , or to promote feelings of hostility between different races or classes of the population ; or 
 ( d ) is prejudicial to the national interest , public order or security of Singapore ... 
 Such a prohibition order can extend to any past or future issue of a periodical publication , and to other publications which have been issued or appear to have been issued by the publishing house , agency or other source which issued the prohibited publication . The proprietor of a prohibited publication can lodge an objection to a prohibition order within a month of the date when the order is published in the Government Gazette to the President , whose decision on the matter is " final and shall not be called in question in any court " . When exercising this discretion , the President is required to follow the advice of the Cabinet . It is a criminal offence to print , publish , sell , issue , circulate , reproduce or possess a prohibited publication or an extract from it ; and to import , abet the importation of , or have in one 's possession any imported prohibited publication . There is a rebuttable presumption a person knows the contents of a publication and their nature immediately after the publication comes into his or her possession . However , it is a defence for a person to demonstrate that the publication was " printed , published , sold , issued , circulated or reproduced , as the case may be , without his authority , consent and knowledge , and without any want of due care or caution on his part , and that he did not know and had no reason to suspect the nature of the document or publication " . 
 Among the publications that have been interdicted under the Act are works by Vladimir Lenin and Mao Zedong , and the Russian political newspaper Pravda . 
 A crime is committed if any person posts or distributes a placard , circular or other document which contains an incitement to violence , counsels disobedience to the law or a lawful order , or is likely to lead to a breach of the peace . Spreading false reports or making false statements likely to cause public alarm orally , in writing , or in any newspaper , periodical , book , circular or other printed publication is also an offence . 
 Finally , it is an offence to carry or have in one 's possession or under one 's control a subversive document . A document is deemed to be subversive if , in whole or in part , it has a tendency : 
 ( a ) to excite organised violence against persons or property in Singapore ; 
 ( b ) to support , propagate or advocate any act prejudicial to the security of Singapore or the maintenance or restoration of public order therein or inciting to violence therein or counselling disobedience to the law thereof or to any lawful order therein ; or 
 ( c ) to invite , request or demand support for or on account of any collection , subscription , contribution or donation , whether in money or in kind , for the direct or indirect benefit or use of persons who intend to act or are about to act , or have acted , in a manner prejudicial to the security of Singapore or to the maintenance of public order therein , or who incite to violence therein or counsel disobedience to the law thereof or any lawful order therein . 
 A document that purports to be a subversive document is presumed to be one until the contrary has been proved , and if it is proved that a person was carrying or had in his or her possession or under his or her control a subversive document , he or she is deemed to have known the contents of the document and their nature . Nevertheless , a person may defend himself or herself by proving that he or she was unaware of the contents and the nature of the contents of the document , and that he or she did not have reasonable cause to believe or suspect that the document was subversive . The ISA places a duty on any person , any office @-@ bearer of an association , or any responsible member or agent of an organization who receives a subversive document to deliver it to a police officer without delay . Failure to do so without police authorization , or communicating the contents of such a document to others or publishing them is an offence . 
 = = = Control of entertainments and exhibitions = = = 
 The Home Affairs Minister may , under Chapter IV of Part II of the ISA , order that any entertainment or exhibition be closed if satisfied if it " is or is likely to be in any way detrimental to the national interest " . Entertainment is defined by the Act as " any game , sport , diversion , concert or amusement of any kind to which the public has or is intended to have access and in which members of the public may or may not take part , whether on payment or otherwise " , while exhibition " includes every display of goods , books , pictures , films or articles to which the public has or is intended to have access , whether on payment or otherwise " . It is an offence to be the promoter of or a person concerned in the promotion of an entertainment or exhibition held or continued in contravention of an order requiring it to be closed , or the proprietor of the premises on which such an event is held . However , it is a defence to show that the event was " promoted or continued without his authority , consent and knowledge and without any want of due care or caution on his part " . 
 Alternatively , to ensure that an entertainment or exhibition is not detrimental to the public interest , the Minister can impose conditions relating to the holding of the event on its promoter , every person involved in its promotion , and the proprietor of the premises on which the event is to be held . Failure to comply with any of such conditions is an offence , unless the person involved is able to show he or she was not responsible for the breach and exercised due care and caution . The authorities are empowered to close an entertainment or exhibition operated in breach of any condition , or kept open in contravention of an order by the Minister . 
 To enable the Minister to determine whether an entertainment or exhibition should be banned or allowed to be held subject to conditions , the Minister can require that its promoter , any person involved in its promotion , or the proprietor of the premises on which it is to be held to provide information on the following matters : 
 ( a ) particulars of persons concerned in the promotion of the entertainment or exhibition and the interests represented by those persons ; 
 ( b ) particulars of the persons who have agreed to participate or participated in the entertainment or exhibition or have been invited to do so and the interests represented by those persons ; 
 ( c ) the purposes to which any profits from the entertainment or exhibition are intended to be or have been applied ; and 
 ( d ) such other matters as the Minister may direct . 
 <unk> false or incomplete information is an offence , and also entitles the Minister to prohibit an event from being held or direct it to be closed . The person providing the information also commits a crime if the event is held in a manner contrary to the information provided . 
 = = = Other powers = = = 
 Chapter VI of Part II of the ISA confers additional powers on the Minister for Home Affairs to prevent subversion . If a written law confers power on a person , body or authority to appoint people to positions , the Minister can order that he or she be provided with a list of the people from which the appointment will be made , and other information . The Minister can then direct that people whose appointment would be prejudicial to the interests of Singapore shall not be appointed or recruited . Furthermore , no person is permitted to disclose any communication received from the Minister except in the course of official duty . 
 The Minister , if satisfied that a school or educational institution is being used for a purpose detrimental to the interests of Singapore or the public , for instruction that is detrimental to the interests of the public or pupils , or as a meeting @-@ place of an unlawful society , can order that it be closed for a period not exceeding six months at a time . The board of managers or governors of an affected school or educational institution can lodge an objection against an order with the President , whose decision on the matter is final and may not be questioned in any court . The Minister 's power does not extend to places where the teaching " is of a purely religious character , or for a purely religious purpose " . 
 A person who requires a certificate of suitability for admission to an institution of higher education must apply to the Director of Education , who must not issue a certificate if " there appear to him to be reasonable grounds for believing that the applicant , if admitted to the institution in question , would be likely to promote , or otherwise participate in , action prejudicial to the interests or security of Singapore or any part thereof " . A person who does not hold a certificate of suitability may not be admitted to an institution of higher learning as a student . A person who has been refused a certificate may appeal to the Home Affairs Minister , whose decision on the matter is final and cannot be called into question in any court . 
 The Minister can forbid pupils , students , teachers or members ; any class of pupils , students , teachers or members ; or any named pupil , student , teacher or member of any school , college , educational institution or students ' union or association situated or established outside Singapore to enter into or travel within Singapore as a group unless they first obtain permission from the police to do so . An individual pupil , student , teacher or member can also be barred from Singapore if he or she intends to carry out within the country some common object of the group to which he or she belongs . The police can grant permission for such travel subject to conditions . If there is a reason for the Commissioner of Police to believe that any person : 
 ( i ) is a pupil , student , teacher or member affected by an order made under subsection ( 1 ) [ that is , an order by the Minister that the person must obtain police permission to travel to Singapore ] ; 
 ( ii ) has entered Singapore from a place outside and has not since the date of such entry continuously remained in Singapore for a period exceeding 3 months ; 
 ( iii ) is not the holder of a valid identity card issued to him in Singapore in accordance with the provisions of any written law for the time being in force relating to identity cards and which bears an address within Singapore ; and 
 ( iv ) has contravened or intends to contravene the provisions of any such order ; ... 
 or any person has breached any conditions imposed , the Commissioner can require that the person leave Singapore within a certain time and remain abroad for six months or a lesser period ; or take the person into custody and remove him or her from Singapore , whereupon the person must remain out of Singapore for six months . Failure to comply with any order by the Minister or a breach of the conditions of any permission to travel to Singapore is an offence . The above provisions do not authorize the removal from Singapore of any citizen of Singapore ordinarily resident in the country . 
 = = Provisions relating to security areas = = 
 Part III of the ISA deals with security areas . Section 48 , which is the only provision in Chapter I of Part III , empowers the President , acting on the Cabinet 's advice , to proclaim any area in Singapore a security area if in his opinion public security in the area " is seriously disturbed or threatened by reason of any action taken or threatened by any substantial body of persons , whether inside or outside Singapore , to cause or to cause a substantial number of citizens to fear organised violence against persons or property " and " he considers it to be necessary for the purpose of suppressing such organised violence " . A proclamation of a security area must be published by the Home Affairs Minister in any way that the Minister thinks necessary for bringing it to the notice of all persons who , in the Minister 's view , should have notice of it . It comes into effect once notice has been given , even if it has not yet been published in the Government Gazette . A proclamation remains in force until the President revokes it or Parliament <unk> it by passing a resolution . 
 = = = Preservation of public security = = = 
 Chapter II of Part III of the ISA empowers the Minister to take various steps to preserve public security . Within a security area , the Minister may declare areas to be danger areas , controlled areas or protected places . No person is allowed to enter or remain in a danger area unless escorted by a member of a security force , and to enforce this prohibition security forces can take all necessary measures , including those that are " dangerous or fatal to human life " . A person who is injured while in a danger area unlawfully cannot make any legal claim for it , though compensation may be awarded if a compensation board thinks it is equitable to do so . The declaration of an area as a controlled area enables the Minister to order that people within the area may only reside within that portion of the area declared to be the " residential part " , and that they may not venture beyond the residential part during certain hours . Failure to comply with such orders is a criminal offence . 
 If the Commissioner of Police is of the view that it is " necessary or expedient in the interests of public security or order , for the maintenance of supplies or services essential to the life of the community , that special precautions should be taken to prevent the entry of unauthorised persons " , he may declare a place or premises within a security area to be a protected place . While such a declaration is in force , no person is permitted to enter or remain in the place without the permission of the authority or person stated in the declaration . Persons wishing to enter a protected place must submit to being searched by police officers and other authorized persons , and must comply with directions concerning their conduct . A failure to do so can result in their removal from the protected place . It is an offence to be present in a protected place without permission , and to wilfully fail to stop after being challenged by a police officer or unlawfully refuse to submit to a search . The Commissioner of Police can take steps that he considers necessary to secure a protected place , including those that endanger the life of anyone entering the place . If the Commissioner employs such steps , he must take precautions ( including displaying prominent warning notices ) that he considers reasonably necessary to prevent accidental entry into the place . Once such precautions have been put in place , if any person enters the protected place without permission and is injured or killed , he or she is not entitled to receive any compensation or damages . 
 The Minister can declare any fence or barrier surrounding a part of a security area to be a perimeter fence . The Commissioner of Police is permitted to take steps to prevent people from crossing the fence or passing articles over , through or under the fence , including defensive measures that involve or may involve danger to life . If the measures are taken in a place other than on , under or within the perimeter fence , the Commissioner must take precautions – including displaying prominent warning signs – to ensure that people do not accidentally enter the area . If anyone is injured or dies as a result of a defensive measure , no compensation is payable unless the Minister certifies that it is just and equitable for such compensation to be paid . It is an offence to cross or attempt to cross , or pass or attempt to pass any article over , though or under a perimeter fence except at an authorized entry point ; and to damage , attempt to damage or tamper with any fence or any gate or movable barrier at an entry point . 
 In the interests of public safety , the Minister can make a " clearance order " concerning land that is within 46 metres ( 151 ft ) of any railway , public road or perimeter fence within a security area , or land in a security area that is " used for or in connection with the cultivation of rubber , oil palm , gutta @-@ percha , coconut , bananas or any other fruit growing on trees , or any other agricultural or food crops " . Such an order directs the owner or occupier of the land , their agent , or any person living in the area surrounded by a perimeter fence to clear away " all herbage , bush and undergrowth and any other object mentioned in the order , other than permanent buildings " , prevent the undergrowth from growing higher than 30 centimetres ( 12 in ) , and maintain the cleanliness of the land . Failure to comply with a clearance order is a criminal offence . 
 The officer in charge of a police division that forms part of a security area can do the following : 
 Exclusion of persons . Give a written order excluding any person or persons from the police division . 
 Curfew . <unk> a curfew on specified persons , designating that they stay indoors or within a particular area between certain hours , unless they obtain a permit to the contrary issued by a police officer of or above the rank of sergeant . 
 Control of roads . Regulate , restrict , control or prohibit the use of a road or waterway by any person or class of persons ; or any vehicle or vessel , or type or description of vehicle or vessel . In addition , can issue permits to regulate , restrict , control or prohibit persons or classes of persons from travelling in any bus , car , train or other vehicle , or in a vessel . 
 A police officer or member of the security forces who is of or above the rating of leading rate or rank of non @-@ commissioned officer and on duty , or a person authorized by the officer in charge of a police division , is empowered to seize any rice or other food if , because of its quantity or situation , it " is likely to or may become available to any persons who intend or are about to act or have recently acted in a manner prejudicial to public security or to the maintenance of public order " . In support of this power , people , premises , vehicles and vessels can be searched without a warrant . 
 If it appears to the Minister to be " necessary or expedient ... in the interests of public security , or for the accommodation of any security forces " , he or she may take possession of any land or building ( or part of a building ) in a security area . Police officers are permitted to use reasonable force when effecting the taking of possession , and the Minister can require the owner or occupier of the land or building to provide information relating to it . Once the land or building is in the Minister 's possession , he or she has wide power to determine how to use it . The Minister is entitled to disregard any legal restrictions on how it may be utilized , authorize other persons to do with the property anything which the owner or occupier is entitled to do , and ban or limit anyone from exercising rights of way over , and other rights relating to , the land or building . Anyone who feels aggrieved by the Minister taking possession of land or a building can lodge an objection with an advisory committee . The committee is required to consider the objections and any grounds against the objections put forward by the person given possession of the property , and make recommendations to the Minister . The Minister can give " such directions [ on the recommendations ] as he may think fit " , and award compensation . 
 If a building or structure in a security area is left unoccupied due to an order relating to the security area , and the officer in charge of the police division in which the building or structure is situated takes the view that it may be used by " any person or persons who intend , or are about , to act or have recently acted in a manner prejudicial to public security or by any other person who is likely to harbour any such persons " , and it is not practical to prevent such use , the officer can authorize the destruction of the building or structure . Compensation is payable for such destruction to a person if he or she can demonstrate to the Minister that the building or structure was constructed with the consent of the person lawfully entitled to the land on which it stood , and it was not liable to be forfeited . Even if the building or structure was subject to forfeiture , the Minister can still pay compensation to the owner or occupier if the latter person can prove that it was used by persons acting in a manner prejudicial to public security or for harbouring such persons without his or her knowledge or consent , and that he or she exercised due diligence to ensure that the building would not be used in this manner . 
 = = = Offences = = = 
 Chapter III of Part III of the ISA creates a number of criminal offences relating to security areas . 
 = = = = Firearms , ammunition and explosives = = = = 
 It is an offence to carry , or have in one 's possession or under one 's control in a security area without lawful excuse , any firearm , ammunition or explosive without lawful authority . The penalty for the offence is death . The onus is on the person charged to prove that he or she has a lawful excuse for having the item , and this can only be done by demonstrating that he or she acquired the item in a lawful manner for a lawful purpose , and did not act " in a manner prejudicial to public security or the maintenance of public order " while in possession of or having control of it . Furthermore , the person charged has lawful authority to have the item only if he or she : 
 is a police officer , member of the security forces , or person employed in the Prisons Department , and has the item in connection with the performance of his or her duty ; 
 is licensed , or authorized without a licence , to have the item ; or 
 has been granted an exemption by an officer in charge of a police division , or is a member of a class of persons exempted by the Commissioner of Police . 
 However , even if any of the above situations applies to a person , he or she will not be regarded as having lawful authority if he or she has the item for the purpose of using it in a manner prejudicial to public security or the maintenance of public order . 
 In Liew Sai Wah v. Public Prosecutor ( 1968 ) , the appellant was arrested at the Singapore train station for having six grenade bodies in his bag . He was charged and found guilty of possession of ammunition by the High Court , and sentenced to death . The conviction was upheld by the Federal Court of Malaysia ( then part of Singapore 's court hierarchy ) . However , on further appeal to the Privy Council , their Lordships held that grenade bodies did not come within the term ammunition , which was defined as " ammunition for any fire @-@ arm as hereafter defined and includes grenades , bombs and other like missiles whether capable of use with such a fire @-@ arm or not and any ammunition containing or designed or adapted to contain any noxious liquid , gas or other thing " . Counsel for the Public Prosecutor suggested that grenade bodies might fall within the definition of explosive , which includes " any material for making an explosive and any apparatus , machine , implement or material used or intended to be used or adapted for causing or aiding in causing any explosion in or with any explosive , and any part of any such apparatus , machine or implement " . However , the Privy Council declined to allow this submission as it involved the presentation of a case completely different to the one that the appellant was required to meet during his trial and the appeal before the Federal Court . The appellant was therefore acquitted . 
 It is a crime , while in a security area , to consort with or to be found in the company of a person carrying or having possession of or having under his or her control a firearm , ammunition or explosive in contravention of the offence mentioned above , if the circumstances raise a reasonable presumption that the person consorting intends or is about to act or has recently acted with the person having the item in a manner prejudicial to public security or the maintenance of public order . The penalty is either death or life imprisonment . It is a slightly less serious offence to be in a security area and consort with or be in the company of another person if it is reasonable for the person consorting to know that the other person had one of the above items . The penalty for this offence is imprisonment not exceeding ten years . If a person is carrying or has in his or her possession or under his or her control a firearm , ammunition or explosive , there is a rebuttable presumption that the person was acting in contravention of the offence mentioned above . 
 = = = = Supplies = = = = 
 It is an offence for a person , whether inside or outside a security area , to demand , collect or receive supplies from another person under circumstances which raise a reasonable presumption that : 
 the first person intends or is about to act , or has recently acted , in a manner prejudicial to public security or the maintenance of public order ; or 
 the supplies are intended for someone who intends or is about to act , or has recently acted in such a manner , or are for a terrorist to use . 
 It is also an offence , inside or outside a security area , to be found in possession of supplies which cannot be satisfactorily accounted for , or to directly or indirectly provide supplies to another person , in circumstances which raise the reasonable presumption referred to above . The penalty for all these offences is life imprisonment . However , in the latter situation , a person will not be convicted if he or she voluntarily provides full information of the offence to a police officer before being accused of or charged with the offence . 
 = = = = Other offences = = = = 
 A person inside or outside a security area who knows or has reasonable cause to believe that another person has committed an offence under Part III of the ISA , or has information about the present or intended movements or whereabouts of another person whom he or she knows or has reasonable cause to believe to be a terrorist , but who fails to report the matter to a police officer , commits an offence punishable by imprisonment for up to ten years . However , if the person voluntarily gives full information to a police officer before being accused of or charged with an offence , he or she will not be convicted . 
 It is also an offence to attempt to commit an offence under Part III ; to assist someone that one knows or has reasonable cause to believe has committed an offence to prevent , hinder or interfere with that person 's arrest , trial or punishment ; or generally to contravene or fail to comply with any provision of Part III or any order made , direction given or requirement imposed under Part III , or to abet any contravention or failure by another person . 
 = = Miscellaneous provisions = = 
 The final part of the ISA , Part IV , contains various miscellaneous provisions . Some notable provisions are described in this section . 
 A police officer is entitled to use such force as is reasonably necessary in the circumstances , including lethal weapons : 
 to arrest a person subject to a detention order ; 
 to arrest a person in respect of whom the officer has reason to believe that there are grounds justifying his or her preventive detention , or that he or she has acted or is about to act or is likely to act in a manner prejudicial to national security ; 
 to arrest a person suspected of having committed an offence under the ISA , the <unk> and Explosive Substances and Offensive Weapons Act , or sections 435 or 436 of the Penal Code which criminalize the commission of mischief by fire or an explosive substance to damage property or destroy a building ; 
 to overcome forcible resistance by a person to such an arrest ; or 
 to prevent an arrested person from escaping or being rescued from arrest . 
 A person who has been arrested for any of the offences mentioned above must , as soon as possible after arrest , be " clearly warned of his liability to be shot at if he endeavours to escape from custody " . In addition to a police officer , the power to use force can be exercised by a member of the security forces , any guard or watchman in a protected place , and any person authorized by the Commissioner of Police . 
 Provisions exist in the ISA to make it easier to admit statements made by people charged with offences under the Act or certain offences under other laws specified in the Second Schedule to the Act . A statement is admissible in evidence in a trial and , if the person who made the statement chooses to testify during a trial , it may be used in cross @-@ examination and to impeach his or her credit , " whether the statement amounts to a confession or not or is oral or in writing , made at any time , whether before or after that person is charged and whether in the course of a police investigation or not and whether or not wholly or partly in answer to questions , by that person to or in the hearing of any police officer of or above the rank of sergeant and whether or not interpreted to him by any other police officer or any other person concerned , or not , in the arrest " . This is subject to two limitations : 
 A statement is not admissible " if the making of the statement appears to the court to have been caused by any inducement , threat or promise having reference to the charge against that person , proceeding from a person in authority and sufficient in the opinion of the court to give that person grounds which would appear to him reasonable for supposing that by making it he would gain any advantage or avoid any evil of a temporal nature in reference to the proceedings against him " . 
 If a statement has been made by a person after being arrested , it is only admissible if the court is satisfied that a caution along the following lines was administered : " It is my duty to warn you that you are not obliged to say anything or to answer any question , but anything you say , whether in answer to a question or not , may be given in evidence . " However , if a person makes a statement before there is time to administer a caution , the statement remains admissible if the caution is then administered as soon as possible . 
 Once a person has been cautioned , he or she has a right to remain silent and is not required to answer any questions . 
 = = = Cases = = = 
 Lee Mau Seng v. Minister for Home Affairs [ 1971 ] SGHC 10 , [ 1971 – 1973 ] S.L.R. ( R. ) 135 , High Court ( Singapore ) , archived from the original on 5 January 2012 . 
 Chng Suan Tze v. Minister for Home Affairs [ 1988 ] SGCA 16 , [ 1988 ] 2 S.L.R. ( R. ) [ Singapore Law Reports ( Reissue ) ] 525 , Court of Appeal ( Singapore ) , archived from the original on 24 December 2011 . 
 Teo Soh Lung v. Ministry for Home Affairs [ 1989 ] 1 S.L.R. ( R. ) 461 , H.C. ( Singapore ) ( " Teo Soh Lung ( H.C. ) " ) . 
 Teo Soh Lung v. Minister for Home Affairs [ 1990 ] 1 S.L.R. ( R. ) 347 , C.A. ( Singapore ) ( " Teo Soh Lung ( C.A. ) " ) . 
 = = = Legislation = = = 
 Constitution of the Republic of Singapore ( 1985 Rev. Ed . , 1999 Reprint ) . 
 Essential ( Detained Non @-@ Citizens ) Regulations ( Cap . 90 , Rg 12 , 1990 Rev. Ed . ) . 
 Internal Security Act ( Cap . 143 , 1985 Rev. Ed . ) ( " ISA " ) . 
 Internal Security ( General ) Regulations ( Cap . 143 , Rg 2 , 1990 Rev. Ed . ) ( " <unk> " ) . 
 = = = Other works = = = 
 Hor , Michael ( 2002 ) , " Terrorism and the Criminal law : Singapore 's Solution " , Singapore Journal of Legal Studies : 30 – 55 , SSRN <unk> . 
 Teo Chee Hean ( Deputy Prime Minister , Coordinating Minister for National Security and Minister for Home Affairs ) , " Debate on President 's Address ( Third Allotted Day ) " , Singapore Parliamentary Debates , Official Report ( 19 October 2011 ) , vol . 88 , cols . 61 – 73 . 
 Tham , Chee Ho ( 1992 ) , " Judiciary Under Siege ? " , Singapore Law Review 13 : 60 – 84 . 
 Yee , Chee Wai ; Ho , Tze Wei Monica ; Seng , Kiat Boon Daniel ( 1989 ) , " Judicial Review of Preventive Detention under the Internal Security Act – A Summary of Developments " , Singapore Law Review 10 : 66 – 103 . 
 = = = Articles = = = 
 Lee , Jack Tsen @-@ Ta ( 2012 ) , The Past , Present and Future of the Internal Security Act [ Singapore Management University School of Law Opinion Series No . <unk> / 2012 ] , <unk> ; first published as Lee , Jack Tsen @-@ Ta ( June 2012 ) , " The Past , Present and Future of the Internal Security Act " , Dignity Defined , pp. 6 – 9 , archived from the original ( PDF ) on 4 June 2012 . 
 Sin , Boon Ann ( 1989 ) , " Judges and Administrative Action – A Look at Chng Suan Tze v Minister of Home Affairs & Ors " , Malayan Law Journal 2 : ci – <unk> . 
 Yeong , Sien Seu ( 1992 ) , " Clarity or Controversy – The Meaning of Judicial Independence in Singapore and Malaysia " , Singapore Law Review 13 : 85 – 108 . 
 Zee , Josiah ( 2011 ) , " Defending Singapore 's Internal Security Act : Balancing the Need for National Security with the Rule of Law " , Murdoch University Electronic Journal of Law 18 ( 1 ) : 28 – 46 , archived from the original on 14 February 2013 . 
 = = = Books and other works = = = 
 Prof. S. Jayakumar ( Minister for Law ) , speech during the Second Reading of the Constitution of the Republic of Singapore ( Amendment ) Bill , Singapore Parliamentary Debates , Official Report ( 25 January 1989 ) , vol . 52 , cols . 463 – 528 . 
 Prof. S. Jayakumar ( Minister for Law ) , speech during the Second Reading of the Internal Security ( Amendment ) Bill , Singapore Parliamentary Debates , Official Report ( 25 January 1989 ) , vol . 52 , cols . 531 – 556 . 
 Tan , Jing Quee ; Teo , Soh Lung ; Koh , Kay Yew ( 2009 ) , Our Thoughts are Free : Poems and Prose on Imprisonment and Exile , Singapore : Ethos Books , ISBN 978 @-@ 981 @-@ 08 @-@ 2511 @-@ 9 . 
 Tan , Kevin Y [ ew ] L [ ee ] ; Thio , Li @-@ ann ( 2010 ) , " Special Powers against Subversion and Emergency Powers " , Constitutional Law in Malaysia and Singapore ( 3rd ed . ) , Singapore : LexisNexis , pp. 180 – 261 , ISBN 978 @-@ 981 @-@ 236 @-@ 795 @-@ 2 . 
 Teo , Soh Lung ( 2010 ) , Beyond the Blue Gate : Recollections of a Political Prisoner , Petaling Jaya , Selangor , Malaysia : Strategic Information and Research Development Centre , ISBN 978 @-@ 967 @-@ 5 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 Teo Soh Lung : Singapore [ Lawyer to Lawyer Network , Human Rights Documents , General , 1582 , doc . 123 ] , New York , N.Y. : Lawyers Committee for Human Rights , December 1988 , OCLC <unk> . 
 Thio , Li @-@ ann ( 2012 ) , " Constitutional Supremacy " , A Treatise on Singapore Constitutional Law , Singapore : Academy Publishing , pp. 223 – 271 at 260 – 271 , paras . 04 @.@ 084 – 04 @.@ 104 , ISBN 978 @-@ 981 @-@ 07 @-@ 1515 @-@ 1 . 
 Update [ Lawyer to Lawyer Network , Human Rights Documents , General , 1582 , doc . 175 ] , New York , N.Y. : Lawyers Committee for Human Rights , June 1990 , OCLC <unk> . 
 = Stranger in a Strange Land ( Lost ) = 
 " Stranger in a Strange Land " is the ninth episode of the third season of the American drama television series Lost , and the show 's 58th episode overall . The episode was written by Elizabeth Sarnoff and Christina M. Kim , and directed by Paris Barclay . It first aired in the United States on February 21 , 2007 , on ABC . 
 In the episode , Kate Austen ( Evangeline Lilly ) , Karl ( Blake Bashoff ) , and James " Sawyer " Ford ( Josh Holloway ) continue to journey back to the beach camp , while Jack Shephard ( Matthew Fox ) and Alex ( Tania Raymonde ) must save Juliet Burke ( Elizabeth Mitchell ) from execution . Flashbacks reveal the origin of Jack 's tattoos . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In flashbacks , Jack is in Phuket , Thailand , where he meets a local woman named Achara ( Bai Ling ) ; the two soon enter into a relationship . After finding out that she works in a tattoo parlor and claims to be able to see who people really are , Jack demands that she give him a tattoo . Achara is hesitant to give him a tattoo , but she does so anyway and tells him there will be consequences . The next morning , he is beaten up by her brother and other locals and told to leave . 
 Sawyer and Kate begin the episode on Alex 's canoe with an unconscious Karl , paddling away from the Hydra island . Kate suggests returning for Jack ; however , Sawyer refuses . Kate and Sawyer land on the main island and question Karl about the Others . Karl reveals that the Others work on the Hydra island , but live on the main island . The next morning , Sawyer finds Karl crying in the jungle . Karl says that he is crying because he misses Alex . Sawyer asks Karl if he is in love , which Karl affirms to be true . Sawyer tells him that love is worth the risks of getting caught by the Others and lets Karl go into the jungle to find Alex . 
 Jack is put into the bear cage , and notices a handcuffed Juliet being led to his old prison . She visits him later and asks Jack to treat Ben 's back , which has become infected following the surgery , but Jack refuses . She also explains that she is in trouble with the Others for killing Pickett . Later , Isabel ( Diana Scarwid ) , the Others ' " sheriff , " arrives at the cage and discusses Jack 's tattoo with him , as she can read the Chinese . Isabel brings him to a room where Juliet is being held and asks him whether Juliet told him to kill Ben or not . Jack lies and says she did not and is brought back to his cage . Once back , he is visited by Cindy Chandler ( Kimberley Joseph ) and the previously kidnapped members of the tail @-@ section . Cindy starts to ask Jack questions , saying they are here to " watch " , but he angrily sends her away . Alex visits Jack later and tells him that the Others are planning to execute Juliet . Alex helps him escape from his cage , and they go to Ben Linus ( Michael Emerson ) , who writes a note , sparing Juliet , in return for Jack 's continuing to be Ben 's doctor . The two then go to a trial the Others are holding for Juliet , and Alex gives Isabel Ben 's note , which says Juliet is not to be executed , but is to be marked instead ( with a branded symbol at the base of her spine ) . When Juliet later asks Jack why he helped her , he replies that it is because Ben said he would let both of them off the island and he wants to make that happen by working together . At the end of the episode , Jack and the Others travel back to the main island on a boat . Just before leaving , Isabel translates Jack 's tattoo , " He walks amongst us , but he is not one of us " . Jack replies , " That 's what they say , that 's not what they mean . " 
 = = Production = = 
 " Stranger in a Strange Land " was the first episode of the series directed by Paris Barclay . Barclay had previously won two Emmy Awards for directing episodes of NYPD Blue . The episode was written by Elizabeth Sarnoff and Christina M. Kim , the pair had previously worked together on the second season episodes " The Hunting Party " , " The Whole Truth " , and " Two for the Road " . 
 Although Jack had tattoos on his arm the entire series , their origin had never been explained . Matthew Fox received the tattoos before Lost was even created . The producers considered putting make @-@ up over them , but instead , decided just to keep them and fit it in with the plot . According to Assistant Professor <unk> Zhu of Northeastern University , the tattoo is made up of four Chinese characters from a poem written by Mao Zedong in 1925 . Fox 's tattoo translates to " Eagles high up , cleaving the space " . ( In this episode however , one of " the Others " tells Jack that his tattoo translates as : " He walks among us , but he is not one of us . " Jack replies , " That 's what they say , that 's not what they mean . " ) The number 5 can also be seen on Fox 's forearm ; he got that tattoo while working on Party of Five , along with another cast member . In an interview , Fox said that for him , getting a tattoo was a " pretty intense experience " , and something he would not do in the " spur of the moment " . He thought Jack having tattoos was a " really cool idea " . Since Fox used tattoos to represent memories or meaningful events in his life , the writers took a similar approach when dealing with Jack 's tattoos . 
 " Stranger in a Strange Land " was shot in various places on the island of Oahu . The scenes with Kate , Sawyer , and Karl on the canoe were shot in Kāne <unk> Bay , while the flashback beach scenes were filmed on <unk> Beach . The shots of Jack in a cage were done in Oahu 's Paradise Park . The Other 's tank and operating room are located in a film studio on the island . Bai Ling , who played Achara , recalled that when shooting the sex scene between her character and Jack , she was " kind of nervous " because she did not know Fox very well . Ling recalls that " we ( she and Fox ) both had a mutual understanding to just go for it . Sometimes I 'm on top of him , sometimes he 's on top of me . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Stranger in a Strange Land " was watched by 12 @.@ 95 million Americans , ranking Lost as the 21st most watched program of the week . This was an increase in viewers from the previous episode , making Lost the number one scripted television series in the adults 18 @-@ 49 category for the third consecutive week . The episode garnered more viewers than other television series ' showing at the same time on other networks , including Criminal Minds and CSI : NY . The ratings , however , were a decrease compared to the same time the previous year , when the episode " One of Them " garnered 18 @.@ 20 million Americans . 
 " Stranger in a Strange Land " garnered many negative reviews from critics . Chris Carabott , a writer for IGN , wrote that " the episode was " nothing more than a transition episode " . Carabott felt that although it was " a necessary evil in episodic television like Lost " , it did not " excuse the poor execution and uninteresting story " . IGN later chose it as the worst episode of the series , describing it as " pointless and boring " . Cinemablend.com 's Josh Spiegel claimed that the episode " was the first rough patch of an otherwise very good third season . " Spiegel went on to write that although previews for " Stranger in a Strange Land " promised that three questions would be answered , they were not the mysteries he had been worried about . Mac Slocum of Filmfodder.com was upset about the " overblown marketing " which failed to deliver the answers that he wanted . 
 " Stranger in a Strange Land " is widely considered amongst Lost fans as the worst episode of the series , and was even recognized as such by show runner Damon Lindelof in an interview . It was part of the inspiration to set an end date for the series . 
 = Big Painting No. 6 = 
 Big Painting No. 6 ( sometimes Big Painting or Big Painting VI ) is a 1965 oil and Magna on canvas painting by Roy Lichtenstein . Measuring 235 cm × 330 cm ( 92 @.@ 5 in × 129 in ) , it is part of the Brushstrokes series of artworks that includes several paintings and sculptures whose subject is the actions made with a house @-@ painter 's brush . It set a record auction price for a painting by a living American artist when it sold for $ 60 @,@ 000 in 1970 . The painting is in the <unk> Nordrhein @-@ Westfalen collection . 
 As with all of his Brushstrokes works , it is in part a satirical response to the gestural painting of Abstract Expressionism . Like most of Lichtenstein 's Ben @-@ Day dots works it is a depiction of mechanical reproduction via painterly technique . In this case , the satire comes from the depiction of the graphical depiction of the spontaneous painting motion in painstaking painterly detail . 
 = = History = = 
 In early 1970 , Andy Warhol established the record auction price for a painting by a living American artist with a $ 60 @,@ 000 ( US $ 365 @,@ 604 in 2016 dollars ) sale of Big Campbell 's Soup Can with Torn Label ( Vegetable Beef ) ( 1962 ) , which is part of the Campbell 's Soup Cans series , in a sale at Parke @-@ Bernet , the preeminent American auction house of the day ( later acquired by Sotheby 's ) . This record was broken in November 1970 by Lichtenstein 's Big Painting No. 6 with an auction sale for $ 75 @,@ 000 ( US $ 457 @,@ 005 in 2016 dollars ) to German art dealer Rudolf <unk> . 
 The source for the entire Brushstrokes series was Charlton Comics ' Strange Suspense Stories 72 ( October 1964 ) by Dick Giordano . Big Painting No. 6 is in the <unk> Nordrhein @-@ Westfalen collection in Düsseldorf . 
 = = Description = = 
 This painting has a Ben @-@ Day dots background with four layered vigorous brushstrokes atop them in white , yellow , green , and red . The focal point is the topmost central red brushstroke that depicts dripping paint . The black contours contribute a dynamic effect to the two @-@ dimensional work . The subject of the painting is the process of Abstract Expressionist painting via sweeping brushstrokes and drips , but the result of Lichtenstein 's simplification that uses a Ben @-@ Day dots background is a representation of the mechanical / industrial color printing reproduction . Big Painting No. 6 is depicts imitations of what could be typical Abstract Expressionist brushstrokes on an extremely large scale . Since it is depicted as a reproduction of an imitation the painting is two steps removed from an original . While each Abstract Expressionist brushstroke is an instantaneous effort , the satire includes the fact that Lichtenstein took a great deal of time to achieve the complicated reproduction . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Big Painting No. 6 @.@ is a prime example of his works that both turned a mundane household task into a planned artistic operation and made a time @-@ consuming task appear as if it was produced mechanically in an instant . The painting is regarded as an example of his subtle humor expressed as " gestural swathes rendered in commercial harshness as a parody of action painting . " 
 According to Robert Rosenblum , by confronting the state of the art world , Lichtenstein reinforces its vitality : " ... the vocabulary of Abstract Expressionism , attacked implicitly in Lichtenstein 's earlier work , now becomes the explicit subject . With disarming paradox , the impulsive , athletic smears and <unk> of the 1950s are here impersonally hardened and industrialized by being seen through Lichtenstein 's lens of commercial imagery . The results are not only witty in their use of art to comment about art , but even revive , most ironically , the pictorial energy and boldness of the style being parodied . " 
 He uses overlapping forms rather than a single form or distinct adjacent forms , which seems to create a more dynamic feel to the shallow space . However , since Lichtenstein does not uses shading or contrast , the monochromatic strokes with just bold black outlines are void of certain elements of depth . Big Painting No. 6 and Yellow and Green Brushstrokes go one step further in terms of canvas size and dynamic activity that was presented earlier in Little Big Painting . 
 Big Painting No. 6 is the result of producing " ... whiplash , abstract <unk> works with his quasi @-@ mechanical means ... " Lichtenstein 's form of Abstract Expressionism uses a " quasi @-@ mechanical " method to conform " the spontaneous , loaded brushstroke to his own comic @-@ strip and Ben Day formula " . One critic considers that Lichtenstein has converted the wide dripping brush strokes into a tidy work representing mass production . 
 = <unk> of Puerto Rico = 
 The currencies of Puerto Rico closely follow the historic development of Puerto Rico . As a colony of Spain and the United States , Puerto Rico was granted the use of both foreign and provincial currencies . Following the Spanish colonization in 1502 , Puerto Rico became an important port , with its own supply of gold . However , as the mineral reserves ran empty within the century , the archipelago 's economy suffered . The Spanish Crown issued the <unk> Mexicano , which meant that a semi @-@ regular shipment of gold from the Viceroyalty of New Spain would be sent to the island , as a way to provide economic support . Between 1636 and 1637 , Philip IV of Spain imposed a tax which had to be paid using a revenue stamp . Inspired by this , Puerto Rico began producing banknotes in 1766 , becoming the first colony to print 8 @-@ real banknotes in the Spanish Empire and which in the Spanish government 's approval of subsequent issues . 
 The situado was discontinued during the 19th century , creating an economic crisis , as a result of Mexico gaining its independence from Spain . Salvador Meléndez Bruna , the colonial governor in office , ordered the issue of provincial banknotes , creating the Puerto Rican peso . However , printing of these banknotes ceased after 1815 . During the following decades , foreign coins became the widespread currency . In the 1860s and 1870s , banknotes reemerged . On February 1 , 1890 , the Banco Español de Puerto Rico was inaugurated and began issuing banknotes . The bank designed four series and placed three in circulation under Spanish rule . In 1895 , a Royal Decree ordered the production of provincial peso coins . 
 On August 13 , 1898 , the Spanish – American War ended with Spain ceding Puerto Rico to the United States . The Banco Español de Puerto Rico was renamed Bank of Porto Rico and issued bills equivalent to the United States dollar , creating the Puerto Rican dollar . In 1902 , the First National Bank of Porto Rico issued banknotes in a parallel manner . Two more series were issued until 1913 . After Puerto Rico 's economy and monetary system was fully integrated into the United States ' economic and monetary system , the Puerto Rican dollars were redeemed for those issued by the United States Treasury . The peso and dollar have been followed by other contemporary issues , including commemorative banknotes , private currency , and a quarter coin designed with Fort San Felipe del Morro in the face . 
 = = Early licenses issued by the Spanish Crown = = 
 After Juan Ponce de León began the colonization process of Puerto Rico , the archipelago became a strategic military location , used by Spain to protect its colonies and possessions in America . Vessels used it as a main point for resupplying before attempting long voyages and trading became a key part of economy . However , when the mines and rivers in the main island of Puerto Rico , then known as San Juan Bautista , were depleted Puerto Rico began suffering from shortage of gold and its income was reduced drastically , precipitating a recession . Beginning in the 16th century , the Spanish Crown was forced to issue a monetary support decree to the archipelago known as situado , which was supplied by the Royal banks in Central America , particularly Mexico . However , this aid failed to arrive often , contributing to the economical instability . This was exacerbated by other factors , including the costs of running an efficient military and a lack of commercial prosperity . Natural conditions and disasters also contributed , multiplying the costs of maintaining fortresses while hurricanes damaged haciendas , destroying crops and shortening the amount of laborers . 
 Municipalities suffered most , being forced to implement taxes , including the <unk> del viento ( lit . " wind tax " ) , which was imposed on foreign suppliers . However , these taxes barely helped , this was because each one had to receive a Royal certification , a bureaucratic procedure which usually lasted several years . Once they reached an established deadline , the process would have to be repeated , taking an extended amount of time . From January 1 , 1636 , to December 15 , 1637 , Philip IV of Spain imposed an obligatory payment to the treasuries in Puerto Rico . The debt was to be paid with currency symbolized by legalized papers bearing a Royal seal . Researchers believe that the use of these documents had an impact in the production of banknotes in Puerto Rico . In due time , these documents would be short in supply upon their arrival , in such cases the government officials would stamp the current date into old papers . Pedro Tomás de Cordova and Humberto <unk> claim in their research that Puerto Rico was the first place in America to print 8 @-@ real , establishing 1766 as the date for this achievement . Thus , putting Puerto Rico ahead by two decades before Cuba ( 1781 ) , Hispaniola ( 1782 ) and even Spain ( 1783 ) . Both researchers divided the first two types of banknotes issued , the two varieties were classified as " issued " and " printed " . Although both were manufactured using the same method , those referred to as " printed " bore stamps listing numbers and letters . In 1767 , the Spanish Crown approved subsequent issues , conditioning that they should be collected once situado shipped . When this was lacking , paper money was used in a widespread manner throughout the main island . These requirements were met when possible , an example of this was in 1769 , when 88 @,@ 000 banknotes were reclaimed by the authorities . 
 = = Birth of the Puerto Rican peso = = 
 In the 19th century , the issuing of situado concluded , with two last deliveries of 500 @,@ 000 and 100 @,@ 000 between 1809 and 1810 . This brought forth a critical economical crisis to Puerto Rico . At the moment , Salvador Meléndez Bruna , the colonial governor in office , ordered the production of provincial paper money . The decree was officially enacted on August 31 , 1812 . These banknotes used the peso being used as equivalent to Spanish reales . Produced by hand , these banknotes featured quantities in the thousands , with 1 peso being worth 8 reales . Mechanical printing had arrived to Puerto Rico years earlier , but up until 1813 , part of the issued notes were being produced by hand and stamped . Between 1812 and 1813 , the tradition of collecting paper money continued , which reduced the amount of surviving banknotes drastically . The other notes printed between 1813 and 1814 , featured a combination of printed types and stamps , the printing was done by Puerto Rico 's National Printing Office and featured patterns to prevent the production of counterfeits . Those featuring denominations in reales , were adorned by Spain 's Royal Seal , with the color varying depending on the date of issue , the 1813 8 @-@ real banknotes featured a lamb on the obverse . However , these security measures were ineffective against counterfeiting , eventually copies of several denominations were circulating in a widespread manner , forcing cities outside of San Juan , Arecibo and Loiza to discontinue their use . Meléndez Bruna decided that the only way to prevent forgery was by asking Spain to produce sealed paper for the printing of the banknotes . The first issue bore the signatures of treasurers or accountants , but this was dropped the subsequent year . 
 = = = End of the Cádiz Constitution = = = 
 On February 11 , 1813 , Alejandro Ramírez arrived to Puerto Rico and almost immediately was named to the office of Intendant , eventually establishing a Consulate of Commerce to control trade in Puerto Rico . Originally from Guatemala , where he had served in various political positions , Ramírez was also a member of the Philadelphia Philosophical Society . The Diario <unk> de Puerto Rico , a newspaper specialized in the archipelago 's economy , noted that during the time banknotes of all denominations were still being forged in large quantities . The publication claimed that the counterfeits were most likely produced in other locations of the Caribbean , this was based on the fact that only one royal press existed in Puerto Rico . However , modern researchers maintain that the copies could have been produced locally in a clandestine manner . This is based on a report that emphasizes that the designs of false 8 @-@ real notes were crude and that the ink used spread when touched , something that wouldn 't be possible if produced elsewhere , particularly because the ink would dry in the voyage between countries . During this time , paper notes began disappearing and the stated recurred to renewing old pieces . 
 In 1814 , Ferdinand VII refused to renew the Spanish Constitution of 1812 , returning the Empire to an absolutist method of government . Consequently , Ramírez contacted some of his allies in Philadelphia and commissioned the production of banknotes in denominations of 3 and 5 reales . The issues were printed by Murray , Draper , <unk> & Company and featured the signatures of treasurer José <unk> and Ramírez . The designs featured the Spanish Crown and Ferdinand VII 's profile in the two varieties and were numbered manually . No official documentation , letter or decree from the Spanish Crown related to the creation of these notes have surfaced . These issues were collected and destroyed with extreme efficacy in 1866 , leaving only a few dozen intact . 
 = = Reemergence of paper money = = 
 The negative perception created by the issue of paper money between 1813 and 1815 , brought the production of banknotes to a halt , while only coins circulated in the archipelago . In 1865 , the Spanish Civil Code was imposed in Puerto Rico . Meanwhile , the Caja de Ahorros was founded in San Juan , a small bank , which provided an annual interest of up to 6 % to its subscribers . The institution was bankrupted in 1879 , but its business model was followed by other banks founded in the southern region of Puerto Rico . The Caja de Ahorros de Ponce ( lit . " Ponce Savings Bank " ) was founded in 1873 and continued in business until 1879 . The institution issued notes in denominations of 1 , 3 , 5 and 50 pesos which were printed by the P.W. <unk> firm . These bills were only printed in one side and were signed by members of the bank 's board of directors , which was composed by eminent Puerto Rican citizens . These were redeemed mostly in Ponce and co @-@ existed along tokens issued by local business entities . 
 In 1868 , the Central Republican Board of Cuba and Puerto Rico was founded . The group organized expeditions to Cuba , offering supplies to movements that supported the independence of Puerto Rico and Cuba . Founded by José Francisco Basora , a Puerto Rican revolutionary and friend of Ramón Emeterio Betances , the group had connections within the wealthy sugar industry in the larger <unk> . Bonds for quantities of 100 , 500 and 1 @,@ 000 pesos were printed between June 1 and November 1 , 1869 , in order to cover the expenses of the two planned revolutions . On August 17 , 1869 , the board issued notes in denominations of 1 , 5 , 10 and 20 pesos , these were produced to establish an affordable alternative to the bonds . All of these issues circulated throughout North and South America as well as the Caribbean . Although they were widespread in the Spanish processions , their use was kept clandestine to avoid imprisonment by the royal authorities . However , none of them was redeemed due to the failure of the Ten Years ' War and Little War in Cuba . On December 17 , 1866 , Maria Christina of Austria signed a decree which authorized the auctioning of a railroad in Puerto Rico . In 1888 , Ivo Bosch y Puig , an engineer from Catalonia , received the concession to put the project in march . In Madrid , Bosch y Puig established the Compañía de los Ferrocarriles de Puerto Rico ( lit . " Puerto Rico Railroad Company " ) . During this decade , Charles Skipper and East produced 5 @-@ peso banknotes in England , which were circulated after receiving the signatures of Bosch y Puig and an unidentified associate . 
 = = = The provincial coin = = = 
 Due to its strategic location , currencies from several countries began circulating in Puerto Rico and used as trade . The government often ordered the collection of these coins in exchange for exchange notes . The first of these took place in 1857 , when a royal decree ordered the gathering of <unk> coins . These arrived to Puerto Rico in 1813 , originally produced by Spain in Venezuela . Due to Spanish manufacture , the exchange notes issued for the <unk> featured a 12 @.@ 5 % discount , which left a significant deficit in the government 's budget . A decade later , coins were brought from the Dominican Republic to Puerto Rico . Consequently , the distribution of foreign coins received authorization . In 1879 , the circulation of Mexican silver was approved in government and official entities , eventually allowing public distribution in 1881 . However , some saw an opportunity for profit in this and bought Mexican pesos outside of Puerto Rico before importing them , in the process gaining a profit of up to 40 centavos per peso . In 1884 , a number of different coins were <unk> with a fleur @-@ de @-@ lis for circulation on Puerto Rico . Spanish 2 , 4 and 8 reales , and 5 and 10 <unk> , United States ' 20 cents , quarters , halves and dollars were all <unk> and used until they were redeemed in 1894 . By 1895 , the coins circulating in Puerto Rico were mostly Mexican silver , creating a shortage of currency . To resolve this , Spain issued a Royal Decree stating that the Mexican coins were to be replaced by ones minted in Madrid , with special coins created exclusively for Puerto Rico . To execute this move , exchange notes in one @-@ peso denomination were created . Once the exchange concluded in 1896 , the provincial coin was already in circulation . Silver 20 centavos and 1 peso coins were introduced in 1895 , followed in 1896 by silver 5 , 10 and 40 centavos . The 1 peso coins bore the denomination as " 1 <unk> = 5 <unk> " . These exchanges heavily affected the government 's economy . Some years later , <unk> Millán a commercial firm in San Juan obtained some of the now @-@ obsolete Exchange Notes , which were converted into souvenirs and offered as gifts to their clients . 
 = = Banco Español de Puerto Rico = = 
 On May 23 , 1887 , Maria Christina of Austria and Victor Balaguer , Spain 's Overseas Minister , signed a royal decree proposing the creation of a royal bank in Puerto Rico . A waiting period of three months was imposed to those interested in pursuing the project , who had to present a business proposal as dictated by the order . Two proposals were formally presented and taken under consideration . One of these , was presented by the Sociedad Anónima de Crédito Mercantil de Puerto Rico ( lit . " Puerto Rico Mercantile Credit Company " ) , which was represented by Manuel Vicente Rodríguez , Enrique <unk> , Guillermo <unk> , Pablo <unk> <unk> and José Caldas , with all of them serving as the group 's directors . The other one was presented by a coalition of French and Spanish bankers . The proposal which bore the signature of Francisco <unk> and Eulogio Despujols , who acted as their representatives , was ultimately accepted . 
 On May 5 , 1888 , a second royal decree was issue , <unk> the creation of the Banco Español de Puerto Rico , which received a charter validity of 25 years . This grant of authority was awarded to Enrique <unk> y <unk> , José Caldas y Caldas and Pablo <unk> , the members composing this partnership . The bank wasn 't established immediately , this was because the currency being used in Puerto Rico was Mexican silver , which created problems and delayed the establishment date until early 1890 . Until this point , the Sociedad Anónima de Crédito Mercantil de Puerto Rico continued in service , before disappearing in April . 
 During this timeframe , they produced 100 @-@ peso banknotes featuring the lamb , Puerto Rico 's official emblem . The bank was inaugurated on February 1 , 1890 , with Juan <unk> y Navarro and José Manuel López Sainz as governor and vice governor respectively . The Royal Decree permitted the issuing of paper money in denominations of 5 , 10 , 20 , 50 , 100 and 200 pesos . These banknotes were manufactured by the American Bank Note Company . The original bank was located in San Juan , with a second one being established in Mayagüez in 1894 . Until 1898 , the institution issued four series A , B , C and D , though apparently C was put into production after D and didn 't circulate under Spanish control . Series D began distribution on December 1 , 1894 ; this became the first time that the lamb , which had continued being used since the days of the Sociedad Anónima de Crédito Mercantil de Puerto Rico , was replaced by the profile of Maria Christina of Austria . The Ministerio de Ultramar issued 1 peso notes in 1895 . 
 = = = American invasion and decline = = = 
 On August 13 , 1898 , Spain ceded Puerto Rico to the United States as part of the Treaty of Paris , bringing the Puerto Rican Campaign to an end . The Banco Español de Puerto Rico was then transferred to invading investors . However , the terms signed in the armistice , stated that the United States would have to respect all the charters that were previously granted by Spain to its former colonies . This was certified by the United States Congress on June 6 , 1900 . Thus , the bank continued issuing provincial currency in Puerto Rico , but was renamed El Banco de Puerto Rico or Bank of Puerto Rico . The capital used by the currency was changed from peso to dollars , giving birth to the Puerto Rican dollar . A proposal to print 1 @-@ dollar banknotes was suggested , but refused citing that it could " bring dangerous results " . Series C bills were issued with a release date of " May 1 , 1900 " and were <unk> with " Moneda Americana " in bold red letters . They bore the signatures of the new bank governor Carlos María Soler and cashier Manuel Vicente . This marked the first and only time that currency valorized in dollars was issued outside the United States . 
 Series E was introduced subsequently . The banknotes for this issue were bilingual , featuring the bank 's name both in Spanish and English . Early specimens for Series F were produced in 1907 , but they never reached circulation . The bills for this issue featured the profiles of Christopher Columbus and Juan Ponce de León . The colonial government intended to eliminate all Spanish captions from these notes , intending to accelerate a failed " Americanization " process in Puerto Rico . Series F ultimately entered circulation on July 1 , 1909 , still featuring bilingual captions and exhibiting a higher degree of technical quality . In 1913 , the charter granted by Spain expired and the bank was closed and its assets were liquidated . After this date , Puerto Rico 's economy was fully integrated into the United States ' currency system , while Puerto Rican dollars were redeemed for United States dollars . <unk> valorized in millions continued in circulation , thus a collect was ordered and held between January 16 – 24 , 1916 . The remaining bills , with an estimated value of $ 14 @,@ 872 were taken out of circulation nine years later by the Puerto Rico Commercial Bank . 
 Parallel to the Bank of Puerto Rico , American investors saw an opportunity to establish banks in Puerto Rico . The first of these was the American Colonial Bank , which opened in 1899 . The establishment of national banks was proposed to the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency , with charters being eventually established in June 1900 . The requirements for establishing a bank under this grant of authority , demanded that at least three @-@ fourths of the board of directors lived in Puerto Rico at least for a year . It took the group two years to meet these regulations , but in 1902 the First National Bank of Porto Rico was inaugurated , with Andrés <unk> from San Juan serving as its president . The bank began issuing notes in denominations of 10 , 20 , 50 and 100 dollars which were manufactured by October 27 , 1902 , even before all of the requirements were met . 
 = = Collection value and numismatic study = = 
 The remaining exemplars of Puerto Rican currency have gathered significant value with the years , particularly in the United States . The value of them within the collectors of that country is due to the special nature of the post @-@ 1898 issues . Since they were issued under the same Spanish provincial charter , the Bureau of Engraving and Printing classifies them as " territorial " currency , this being the only unit of exchange of this kind that is recognized by the United States Department of the Treasury . 
 Objects from Puerto Rico are constantly featured in specialized magazines , in both national and international distribution . The Puerto Rican dollars that were collected by the government , were burned between January 16 – 24 , 1925 , drastically reducing the amount of surviving notes from the Bank of Puerto Rico . The Great Depression reduced their numbers further , since necessity prevented the collection of pesos in large denominations . Thus less than five exemplars are known to exist of the 100 and 200 peso banknotes issued by El Banco Español de Puerto Rico and the 5 and 10 dollars Series F bills published by the Bank of Puerto Rico . 
 Similarly , the other notes issued by this banks range from scarce to rare . The banknotes from the First National Bank of Porto Rico are particularly scarce , this is because the institution 's issues didn 't even reach quantities of 20 . Only two bills from the $ 100 denomination have been known to survive , similarly two from the $ 20 issue are left , with one of them being acquired by Amon G. Carter before his death . Carter was known to exhibit the piece , but didn 't make it available for sale . More than a dozen $ 10 banknotes survived , seldom appearing at auctions . Other extremely rare banknotes include the 2 and 4 real notes of 1813 and all of the denominations issued by the Caja de Ahorros de Ponce . In contrast , the paper money used by the Puerto Rico Railroad Company is still known to appear occasionally in the market . Outside of these , the clandestine bills issued by the Central Republican Board of Cuba and Puerto Rico , range from scarce ( 5 @-@ peso bill ) to extremely rare ( 20 @-@ peso notes ) . 
 In Puerto Rico , the Sociedad <unk> de Puerto Rico ( lit . " Numismatic Society of Puerto Rico " ) was founded in 1949 . The society is usually composed of 25 to 50 members and it focuses in collecting and distributing both coins and banknotes from Puerto Rico to interested collectors . An annual exhibition along the Sociedad <unk> de Puerto Rico ( lit . " Philatelic Society of Puerto Rico " ) has been held in Plaza Las Américas since the commercial center 's inauguration . Outside of this activity , Puerto Rican currency can be found locally in philatelic and numismatic as well as flea markets . At auctions , banknotes have been known to surpass bid that are up to 70 @,@ 000 dollars . The collection of cardboard samples given by banks to numismatic merchants , has also been noted among enthusiasts . 
 = = Other issued currency = = 
 In 2005 , the Puerto Rican Nationalist Party issued a limited amount of banknotes commemorating the Jayuya Uprising . The series included pesos of six denominations , including $ 1 , $ 5 , $ 10 , $ 20 , $ 50 and $ 100 bills . The designs of all banknotes feature Pedro Albizu Campos in the front side while the reverses are adorned with the flags of Puerto Rico , Jayuya and the Nationalist Party . Microprint with the names of Pedro Albizu Campos and Filiberto Ojeda Ríos are found throughout the pesos . On July 10 , 2005 , Liberty Dollar of Puerto Rico was created by Alfredo Pacheco Martínez . Silver ounces began circulating on October 8 , 2005 , marking the first time that a silver coin was distributed in more than a century . After an intervention with parent company Liberty Services concluded with its assets being confiscated , leading to a process that resulted in the indictment and conviction of founder Bernard von NotHaus , Pacheco Martínez continued to circulate the coins under the name of <unk> Boricua . In August 2010 , he was also indicted on the same charges faced by Von NotHaus . Pacheco Martínez was found guilty on June 29 , 2012 , being subsequently sentenced to 19 years in prison . 
 In December 2007 , the United States Congress approved a measure that included the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico , Washington D.C. and several non @-@ autonomous territories including American Samoa , Guam and the United States Virgin Islands in the 50 State Quarters program . Both <unk> and territories were excluded from the original program approved in 1998 , which was followed by almost ten years of lobbying before they were included . The design on these coins was expected to feature the same George Washington image found in the obverse of the original issues , while the reverse would depict illustrations of something characteristic to that location . The Secretary of Treasury approved the design on July 31 , 2008 . The coins were issued , as well as " proof coins " and 90 % silver special issues . The Puerto Rico coin was the second release in 2009 . In 2012 , as part of the National Park Quarters Program initiative , the United States Mint will release a quarter commemorating the inclusion of El Yunque National Forest as part of the National Forest System in 1903 . 
 = Anne Dallas Dudley = 
 Anne Dallas Dudley ( née Annie Willis Dallas ; November 13 , 1876 – September 13 , 1955 ) was a prominent activist in the women 's suffrage movement in the United States . After founding the Nashville Equal Suffrage League and serving as its president , she moved up through the ranks of the movement , serving as President of the Tennessee Equal Suffrage Association and then as Third Vice President of the National American Woman Suffrage Association , where she helped lead efforts to get the Nineteenth Amendment to the US Constitution ratified . She is especially noted for her successful efforts to get the Nineteenth Amendment ratified in her home state of Tennessee , the final state necessary to bring the amendment into force . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 Anne Dallas Dudley was born Annie Willis Dallas in Nashville , Tennessee , in 1876 to a distinguished upper @-@ class family . Her father , <unk> B. Dallas , had moved to Nashville in 1869 and established himself as an entrepreneur in the textile industry . Her grandfather , Alexander J. Dallas , had been a commodore in the U.S. Navy , while his brother , George M. Dallas , served as Vice President of the United States under James K. Polk . 
 Annie Dallas was educated at Ward 's Seminary and Price 's College for Young Ladies , both in Nashville . In 1902 , she married Guilford Dudley ( 1854 – 1945 ) , a banker and insurance broker . Together they had three children , Ida Dallas Dudley ( 1903 – 1904 ) , who died in infancy , <unk> Dallas Dudley ( 1905 – 1924 ) , and Guilford Dudley , Jr . ( 1907 – 2002 ) . 
 = = Women 's suffrage movement = = 
 A few years after being married , Anne Dallas Dudley became involved in the temperance movement as a supporter of alcohol prohibition . Through her work in the temperance movement and her association with friends such as Maria Daviess and Ida Clyde Clark , Dudley became convinced that women 's place in society could only be improved if women were allowed to vote . At the time , however , almost all men and a majority of women opposed the idea of women participating in the political process . 
 In September 1911 , Dudley , Daviess , Clark , and several other women met in the back parlor of the Tulane Hotel and founded the Nashville Equal Suffrage League , an organization dedicated to building local support for women 's suffrage while " quietly and earnestly avoiding militant methods " . Dudley was selected as the organization 's first president . During her presidency , the league organized giant May Day suffrage parades , usually led by Dudley and her children . Dudley also helped bring the National Suffrage Convention to Nashville in 1914 . At the time , it was one of the largest conventions ever held in the city . 
 After serving as president of the local league for four years , Dudley was elected to head the Tennessee Equal Suffrage Association in 1915 . During this time she helped to introduce and lobby for a suffrage amendment to the state constitution . Although the amendment was defeated , a later measure to give women the right to vote in presidential and municipal elections was eventually passed by the state legislature in 1919 . 
 In 1917 , Dudley became the Third Vice President of the National American Woman Suffrage Association , where she contributed significantly to advancing legislation on the issue of women 's suffrage . In 1920 , Dudley , along with Catherine <unk> Kenny and Abby Crawford Milton , led the campaign in Tennessee to approve ratification of the Nineteenth Amendment to the US Constitution . On August 18 , Tennessee became the 36th and deciding state to ratify the amendment , thereby giving women the right to vote throughout the country . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Following the success of the suffrage campaign , Dudley became the first woman associate chairman of the Tennessee Democratic Committee . She was also selected as the first female delegate @-@ at @-@ large to the Democratic National Convention in 1920 . Dudley 's involvement in politics declined significantly in subsequent years , with her efforts being focused on civic and charitable causes during the remainder of her life . She was an active worker for the American Red Cross during World War II and later served as board chairman of the Association for the Preservation of Tennessee Antiquities . 
 Dudley died unexpectedly on September 13 , 1955 , of a coronary occlusion at her home in Belle Meade , Tennessee . She was 78 years old . She is buried with her family at Mount Olivet Cemetery in Nashville . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Dudley 's legacy has been honored in numerous ways . She is one of three women featured in the Tennessee Woman Suffrage Memorial in Knoxville , Tennessee , along with Lizzie Crozier French of Knoxville and Elizabeth Avery Meriwether of Memphis . She is featured along with ten other prominent Tennesseans in The Pride of Tennessee , the official Tennessee State Bicentennial Portrait which hangs in the Tennessee State Capitol . There is also a historical marker in Nashville 's Centennial Park dedicated to her . Dudley was inducted into the National Women 's Hall of Fame in 1995 . 
 An apartment building completed in 2015 on Elliston Place in Nashville is named " The Dallas " in honor of her . 
 = The Masked Avengers ' prank on Sarah Palin = 
 On November 1 , 2008 , American vice @-@ presidential candidate Sarah Palin fell victim to a prank call by the Masked Avengers , a Quebecer radio comedy duo , who tricked Palin into believing she was talking to French President Nicolas Sarkozy . During the conversation , the fake Sarkozy , speaking in English ( the real Sarkozy does not speak English ) , talked to Palin about foreign policy , hunting , and the 2008 U.S. presidential election . After it was revealed to Palin that the call was a prank , she handed the phone to one of her assistants who told the comedy duo " I have to let you go " and hung up . 
 Both the McCain and Obama campaigns released light @-@ hearted statements about the prank . However , a McCain campaign advisor said that behind the scenes , aides and advisors to the campaign were not happy that the pranksters were able to lie their way up to Palin , or with the publicity Palin received because of the call . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Masked Avengers , a Canadian radio duo from Montreal , Quebec radio station <unk> @-@ FM , had become notorious for making prank calls to celebrities . Disc jockeys and comedians Sébastien Trudel and Marc @-@ Antoine Audette had previously pranked celebrities like business mogul Bill Gates , golfer Tiger Woods , singer Britney Spears , and French president Nicolas Sarkozy . 
 Sarah Palin was the Republican governor of Alaska . On August 29 , 2008 , John McCain announced that she would be his running mate in the 2008 presidential election against Democrats Barack Obama and Joe Biden . Critics of Palin voiced their concern what they saw as her lack of foreign policy experience , especially after an interview with Katie Couric of the CBS Evening News where Palin was criticized by many for her answer to a question about her " foreign policy credentials " . 
 = = Preparation = = 
 Marc @-@ Antoine Audette said that it took the duo about four or five days of calls to Palin 's staff to finally be able to talk to her . They claimed that they started by talking to low @-@ level people in Alaska and made their way up through Palin 's campaign staff . Audette said that at first they didn 't think their prank would work , calling it a " mission impossible " . He claimed that " after about a dozen calls " , the duo " started to realize it [ the prank call ] might work , because her [ Sarah Palin 's ] staff didn 't know the name of the French President . They asked us to spell it . " Audette and Trudel credited their ability to make their way up through Palin 's staff to sounding convincing during the first few calls , always arranging to place the call at a set time , and not leaving a contact number . The four days of calls needed to talk to Palin was quicker compared to some of their other pranks . Audette and Trudel said that it took them two months to talk to Paul McCartney and one to talk to Bill Gates , but only two days to prank Britney Spears . 
 = = Conversation = = 
 Finally , on November 1 , the Masked Avengers were able to talk to Palin . The call began with Trudel , who claimed to be an aide to Sarkozy named " Frank l ’ <unk> " , talking to an assistant to Palin who identifies herself as " Lexi " . Lexi puts Palin on the line , who says " hello " only to realize that Trudel is still on the other line . Trudel tells Palin to hold on for a moment while he gives the phone to Sarkozy , who is really Audette . Palin can be heard talking to someone in the room about when to hand Palin the phone . Audette then begins to speak and a somewhat extended conversation ensues . 
 After Audette reveals that the call was a prank by <unk> in Montreal , Palin leaves the phone and can be heard in the background telling her aides that the call was " just a radio station prank " . Audette is still on the line and jokes that " if one voice can change the world for Obama , one Viagra can change the world for McCain . " One of Palin 's assistants picks up the phone and says " I ’ m sorry , I have to let you go . Thank you . " 
 = = Reaction = = 
 In an e @-@ mail , Palin spokeswoman Tracey Schmitt wrote that " Governor Palin was mildly amused to learn that she had joined the ranks of heads of state , including President Sarkozy , and other celebrities in being targeted by these pranksters . C 'est la vie . " When asked by reporters about the conversation , Palin said that she would " keep a sense of humor through all of this , just as we [ the McCain campaign ] did with SNL [ parodies of her ] , too . " She added that " you 've got to have some levity in all this . " 
 Barack Obama senior advisor Robert Gibbs jokingly said in an interview that " I 'm glad we [ the Obama campaign ] check out our calls before we hand the phone to Barack Obama . " 
 The Masked Avengers received a sudden burst of fame from the prank . They gave more than 300 interviews about the conversation , and were even flown to New York City by CBS to appear on The Early Show . In an interview , Marc @-@ Antoine Audette and Sébastien Trudel said that they found it " pretty disturbing to see that idiots like us can go through to a vice @-@ presidential candidate " , and claimed that they were just " two stupid comedians with a bad French accent . " The Masked Avengers also admitted that the call was " probably the biggest [ prank ] we 've ever done . " 
 When recalling the experience , Audette said that " once we [ Audette and Trudel ] started making jokes , she didn 't seem to mind , and she didn 't seem to be aware of the fact we were making jokes " , which according to Audette was when " we were like ' Oh my God this [ call ] is gonna be long ' " . The duo also said that they weren 't trying to make any political statements with the call , they just like to take high @-@ profile people to task . 
 = = Impact = = 
 After McCain and Palin were defeated in the general election , a Republican campaign advisor told The New York Times that the McCain Campaign was not happy about the prank , which caused friction between McCain and Palin . McCain and his advisors were allegedly upset that Palin did not tell them beforehand that she planned to speak with who she thought was Nicolas Sarkozy . McCain strategist Steve Schmidt called a meeting and demanded to know who let Palin talk to the fake Sarkozy without checking with senior advisors first . Steve <unk> , one of Palin 's aides admitting to vetting the call without speaking to campaign advisors or the U.S. State Department , told the Los Angeles Times that " No one 's going to beat me up more than I beat myself up for setting up the governor like that . " 
 = Shikasta = 
 For Persian <unk> style see Shikasta <unk> . 
 Re : <unk> Planet 5 , Shikasta ( often shortened to Shikasta ) is a 1979 science fiction novel by Doris Lessing , and is the first book in her five @-@ book Canopus in Argos series . It was first published in the United States in October 1979 by Alfred A. Knopf , and in the United Kingdom in November 1979 by Jonathan Cape . Shikasta is also the name of the fictional planet featured in the novel . 
 Subtitled " Personal , psychological , historical documents relating to visit by Johor ( George Sherban ) Emissary ( Grade 9 ) 87th of the Period of the Last Days " , Shikasta is the history of the planet Shikasta ( Earth ) under the influence of three galactic empires , Canopus , Sirius , and their mutual enemy , Puttiora . The book is presented in the form of a series of reports by Canopean emissaries to Shikasta who document the planet 's prehistory , its degeneration leading to the " Century of Destruction " ( the 20th century ) , and the Apocalypse ( World War III ) . 
 Shikasta draws on the Old Testament and is influenced by spiritual and mystical themes in Sufism , an Islamic belief system in which Lessing had taken an interest in the mid @-@ 1960s . The book represented a major shift of focus in Lessing 's writing , from realism to science fiction , and this disappointed many of her readers . It received mixed reviews from critics . Some were impressed by the scope and vision of the book , with one reviewer calling it " an audacious and disturbing work from one of the world 's great living writers " . Others were critical of the novel 's bleakness , that humanity has no free will and that their fate lies in the hands of galactic empires . 
 The story of Shikasta is retold in the third book of the Canopus series , The Sirian Experiments ( 1980 ) , this time from the point of view of Sirius . Shikasta reappears in the fourth book in the series , The Making of the Representative for Planet 8 ( 1982 ) , and the Zones , briefly mentioned in Shikasta , are the subject of the second book in the series , The Marriages Between Zones Three , Four and Five ( 1980 ) . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Canopus , a benevolent galactic empire centred at Canopus in the constellation Argo Navis , colonises a young and promising planet they name Rohanda ( the fruitful ) . They nurture its <unk> humanoids and accelerate their evolution . When the Natives are ready , Canopus imposes a " Lock " on Rohanda that links it via " astral currents " to the harmony and strength of the Canopean Empire . In addition to Canopus , two other empires also establish a presence on the planet : their ally , Sirius from the star of the same name , and their mutual enemy , Puttiora . The <unk> confine their activities largely to genetic experiments on the southern continents during Rohanda 's prehistory ( described in Lessing 's third book in the Canopus series , The Sirian Experiments ) , while the Shammat of Puttiora remain dormant , waiting for opportunities to strike . 
 For many millennia the Natives of Rohanda prosper in a Canopean induced climate of peaceful coexistence and accelerated development . Then an unforeseen " cosmic re @-@ alignment " puts Rohanda out of phase with Canopus which causes the Lock to break . Deprived of Canopus 's resources and a steady stream of a substance called SOWF ( substance @-@ of @-@ we @-@ feeling ) , the Natives develop a " Degenerative Disease " that puts the goals of the individual ahead of those of the community . The Shammat exploit this disturbance and begin undermining Canopus 's influence by infecting the Natives with their evil ways . As Rohanda degenerates into greed and conflict , the Canopeans reluctantly change its name to Shikasta ( the stricken ) . Later in the book , Shikasta is identified as Earth , or an allegorical Earth . 
 In an attempt to salvage Canopus 's plans for Shikasta and correct the Natives ' decline , Canopean emissaries are sent to the planet . Johor is one such emissary , who takes on the form of a Native and begins identifying those individuals who have not degenerated too far and are amenable to his corrective instructions . Johor then sends those he has successfully " converted " to spread the word among other Natives , and soon isolated communities begin to return to the pre @-@ Shikastan days . But without the SOWF and Shammat 's influence over the Natives , Canopus is fighting a losing battle and the planet declines further . By the Shikastan 's 20th century , the planet has degenerated into war and self @-@ destruction . Johor returns , but this time through Zone 6 from which he is born on the planet ( incarnated ) as a Shikastan , George Sherban . As Sherban grows up , he establishes contact with other Canopeans in disguise and then resumes his work trying to help the Shikastans . But famine and unemployment grow , and anarchy spreads . 
 On the eve of World War III , Sherban and other emissaries relocate a small number of promising Shikastans to remote locations to escape the coming nuclear holocaust . The war reduces Shikasta 's population by 99 % and sweeps the planet clean of the " barbarians " . The Shammat , who set the Shikastans on a course of self @-@ destruction , self @-@ destruct themselves and withdraw from the planet . The Canopeans help the survivors rebuild their lives and re @-@ align themselves with Canopus . With a strengthened Lock and the SOWF flowing freely again , harmony and prosperity return to Shikasta . 
 = = Background and genre = = 
 Doris Lessing was born to British parents in Persia ( now Iran ) in 1919 . Her family moved to Southern Rhodesia ( now Zimbabwe ) in 1925 where she later dropped out of school at the age of 14 . Over the next decade she pursued various careers , including journalism , and published several short stories . In the early 1940s Lessing was attracted to a group of " quasi @-@ Communist [ s ] " and joined their Left Book Club in Salisbury ( now Harare ) . Her interest in " the race issue " , prominent in Rhodesia at the time , prompted her to join the Southern Rhodesian Labour Party . Lessing moved to London in 1949 where she began her writing career . She also joined the British Communist Party and became an active campaigner against the use of nuclear weapons . 
 In 1950 Lessing 's first novel , The Grass Is Singing , was published , a story of racial conflict based on her experiences in Rhodesia . It was followed by several others , including her semi @-@ autobiographical Children of Violence series , and her 1962 " breakthrough " novel , The Golden Notebook in which she broached the subject of feminism . In 1964 , disillusioned with Communism , Lessing turned her attention to Sufism , an Islamic belief system , after reading The Sufis by Idries Shah . She described The Sufis as " the most surprising book [ she ] had read " , and said it " changed [ her ] life " . Lessing later met Shah , who became " a good friend [ and ] teacher " . In the early 1970s Lessing began writing " inner space " fiction , which included the novels Briefing for a Descent into Hell ( 1971 ) and Memoirs of a Survivor ( 1974 ) . In the late 1970s she wrote Shikasta in which she used many Sufi concepts . 
 Shikasta was intended to be a " single self @-@ contained book " , but as Lessing 's fictional universe developed , she found she had ideas for more than just one book , and ended up writing a series of five . Shikasta , and the Canopus in Argos series as a whole , fall into the category of soft science fiction ( " space fiction " in Lessing 's own words ) due to their focus on characterization and social and cultural issues , and the de @-@ emphasis of science and technology . Robert Alter of The New York Times suggested that this kind of writing belongs to a genre literary critic Northrop Frye called the " anatomy " , which is " a combination of fantasy and morality " . Gore Vidal placed Lessing 's " science fiction " " somewhere between John Milton and L. Ron Hubbard " . 
 Shikasta represented a major shift of focus for Lessing , influenced by spiritual and mystical themes in Sufism . This switch to " science fiction " was not well received by all . By the late 1970s , Lessing was considered " one of the most honest , intelligent and engaged writers of the day " , and Western readers unfamiliar with Sufism were dismayed that Lessing had abandoned her " rational worldview " . George Stade of The New York Times complained that " our Grand Mistress of lumpen realism has gone religious on us " . The reaction of reviewers and readers to the first two books in the series , Shikasta and The Marriages Between Zones Three , Four and Five ( 1980 ) , prompted Lessing to write in the Preface to the third book in the series , The Sirian Experiments ( 1980 ) : 
 I would so like it if reviewers and readers could see this series , Canopus in Argos : Archive , as a framework that enables me to tell ( I hope ) a beguiling tale or two ; to put questions , both to myself and to others ; to explore ideas and sociological possibilities . 
 Further criticism of the Canopus series followed , which included this comment by New York Times critic John Leonard : " One of the many sins for which the 20th century will be held accountable is that it has discouraged Mrs. Lessing . [ ... ] She now <unk> on behalf of our insignificance in the cosmic <unk> . " Lessing replied by saying : " What they didn 't realize was that in science fiction is some of the best social fiction of our time . I also admire the classic sort of science fiction , like Blood Music , by Greg Bear . He 's a great writer . " Lessing said in 1983 that she would like to write stories about red and white dwarves , space rockets powered by anti @-@ gravity , and charmed and coloured quarks , " [ b ] ut we can 't all be physicists " . 
 Lessing later wrote several essays on Sufism which were published in her essay collection , Time Bites ( 2004 ) . She was awarded the 2007 Nobel Prize in Literature , and was described by the Swedish Academy as " that <unk> of the female experience , who with scepticism , fire and visionary power has subjected a divided civilisation to scrutiny " . 
 Lessing dedicated Shikasta to her father . While she was still a child in Southern Rhodesia he often used to gaze up at the night sky and say , " Makes you think – there are so many worlds up there , wouldn 't really matter if we did blow ourselves up – plenty more where we came from . " Shikasta gave rise to a religious cult in America . Lessing said in an interview that its followers had written to her and asked , " When are we going to be visited by the gods ? " , and she told them that the book is " not a cosmology . It 's an invention " , and they replied , " Ah , you 're just testing us " . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 The name " Shikasta " comes from the Persian word <unk> ( <unk> ) meaning " broken " , and is often seen used as the name of the Iranian national style of Persian calligraphy , <unk> <unk> . In the book , Lessing does not state explicitly that the planet Shikasta is Earth , but many critics believe that its similarities to Earth 's history make it clear that Shikasta is Earth as seen by the Canopeans . Some of the documents in the book written by Shikastans refer to geographical locations and countries on Earth . Other critics , however , interpret Shikasta as an allegorical Earth with parallel histories that deviate from time to time . 
 Shikasta has been called an " anti @-@ novel " , and an " architectonic novel " . It is the story of the planet Shikasta from the perspective of Canopus and is presented as a case study for " first @-@ year students of Canopean Colonial Rule " . It contains a series of reports by Canopean emissaries to the planet , extracts from the Canopean reference , History of Shikasta , and copies of letters and journals written by selected Shikastans . The history of Shikasta is monitored by the virtually immortal Canopeans , from Rohanda 's prehistory , through to Shikasta 's " Century of Destruction " ( Earth 's 20th century ) , and into Earth 's future when the Chinese occupy Europe and World War III breaks out . The book purports to be the " true " history of our planet . 
 Shikasta alludes to the Old Testament , Gnosticism and Sufism , and draws on several Judeo @-@ Christian themes . Lessing wrote in the book 's preface that it has its roots in the Old Testament . Her SOWF ( Substance @-@ Of @-@ We @-@ Feeling ) , the " spiritual nourishment " that flows from Canopus to Shikasta , is also a word she invented with a pronunciation similar to " Sufi " . A reviewer of the book in the Los Angeles Times said that Shikasta is a " reworking of the Bible " , and the Infinity Plus website draws parallels between the Canopeans and their emissaries , and God and his angels from the Old Testament . A New York Times reviewer wrote that the " outer space " where the Canopeans come from is a metaphor for " religious or inner space " . Thelma J. Shinn , in her book Worlds Within Women : Myth and <unk> in Fantastic Literature by Women , described the struggle between Canopus and Shammat , played out on Shikasta , as the " eternal struggle between good and evil " , and the " Degenerative Disease " that strikes Shikasta as a metaphor for the original sin . Lessing said in an interview that the final war ( World War III ) at the end of the novel is the Apocalypse . Phyllis Sternberg <unk> wrote in The Journal of Bahá ’ í Studies that Shikasta is the " symbolic rendering of the coming of a new prophet to an <unk> planet " , and relates it to Bahá ’ í principles . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Paul Gray wrote in a review in Time that the documents that make up Shikasta allow Lessing to stretch the novel out over vast periods of time and shift perspective " dramatically from the near infinite to the minute " . He said that the book 's cohesiveness is its variety , and noted how Lessing <unk> her " grand designs " and " configurations of enormous powers " with " passages of aching poignancy " . Gray said that Shikasta is closer to Gulliver 's Travels and the Old Testament than it is to Buck Rogers , and may disappoint readers interpreting her " space fiction " as " science fiction " . He found Lessing 's bleak vision of Earth 's history in which she suggests that humans " could not [ ... ] help making the messes they have , that their blunders were all ordained by a small tic in the cosmos " , a little " unsatisfying " , but added that even if you do not subscribe to her theories , the book can still be enjoyable , " even furiously engaging on every page " . Gray called Shikasta " an audacious and disturbing work from one of the world 's great living writers " . 
 Author Gore Vidal wrote in The New York Review of Books that Shikasta is a " work of a formidable imagination " . He said that Lessing is " a master " of eschatological writing , but added that while her depictions of a terminal London are " very real " , as a whole the book is " never quite real enough " . Vidal also felt that Zone 6 , Lessing 's alternate plane for the dead , is not as convincing as The Dry Lands in Ursula K. Le Guin ’ s Earthsea trilogy . He compared the Canopeans and Shammat to Milton 's God and Satan in Paradise Lost , but said that while Lucifer 's " overthrow [ ... ] of his writerly creator is an awesome thing " , in Shikasta Lessing 's human race with no free will is too passive and of no interest . Vidal attributed this to Lessing 's " surrender " to the Sufis and the SOWF ( Substance @-@ Of @-@ We @-@ Feeling ) , and not her inability to create good characters . 
 New York Times reviewer George Stade said that Shikasta " forces us to think about [ ... ] what we are , how we got that way and where we are going " , but complained that the book is filled with " false hopes " , and that the fate of humankind relies on " theosophical emanations , cosmic influences , occult powers , spiritual visitations and stellar vibrations " . When the SOWF is cut off and the Shikastans degenerate , Lessing " both indicts and <unk> " them , implying that humanity is bad , but it is not their fault . While Stade complemented Lessing on the book 's satire , and her depictions of Zone 6 , which he said " have the eerie beauty of ancient Gnostic texts " , he " disapprove [ d ] " of the novel as a whole , but added , " that doesn 't mean I didn 't enjoy reading it " . 
 The Los Angeles Times called Shikasta an " epic " and suspected that it may have influenced the Nobel committee when they referred to Lessing as an " <unk> of the female experience " . Thelma J. Shinn wrote in her book , Worlds Within Women : Myth and <unk> in Fantastic Literature by Women , that Lessing 's history of humanity in Shikasta is " pessimistic " but " convincing " . Infinity Plus described Shikasta as a " mainstream novel that uses SF ideas " , and said that while Lessing was not able to predict the fall of the Soviet Union and the impact of computers , the novel " barely seems dated " because of her " cunningly non @-@ specific " approach . 
 James Schellenberg writing in Challenging Destiny , a Canadian science fiction and fantasy magazine , was impressed by Shikasta 's " grand sense of perspective " and the context of humanity set in a " vaster scale of civilization and right @-@ thinking " . He liked the concept of SOWF as a " metaphor of community connectedness " , but felt it was an unusual way to build a utopia . The book 's fractured storytelling leads to Lessing breaking the " famous dictum of writing – show , don 't tell " , and while that may work in certain circumstances , Schellenberg felt that that approach does not work very well in Shikasta . The online magazine Journey to the Sea found Lessing 's inclusion of stories from the Hebrew Bible " entertaining and intriguing " , and said she challenges the logical thinker 's rejection of these sacred texts , suggesting that it is " imaginatively possible " that they could be true . 
 Following Lessing 's death in 2013 , The Guardian put Shikasta in their list of the top five Lessing books . 
 = Indian Camp = 
 " Indian Camp " is a short story written by Ernest Hemingway . The story was first published in 1924 in Ford Madox Ford 's literary magazine Transatlantic Review in Paris and republished by Boni & Liveright in Hemingway 's first American volume of short stories In Our Time in 1925 . Hemingway 's semi @-@ autobiographical character Nick Adams — a child in this story — makes his first appearance in Indian Camp , told from his point of view . 
 In the story Nick Adams ' father , a country doctor , has been summoned to a Native American or " Indian " camp to deliver a pregnant woman of her baby . At the camp , the father is forced to perform an emergency caesarean section using a jack @-@ knife , with Nick as his assistant . Afterward , the woman 's husband is discovered dead , having slit his throat during the operation . The story shows the emergence of Hemingway 's understated style and his use of counterpoint . An initiation story , " Indian Camp " includes themes such as childbirth and fear of death which permeate much of Hemingway 's subsequent work . When the story was published , the quality of writing was noted and praised , and scholars consider " Indian Camp " an important story in the Hemingway canon . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 The story begins in the pre @-@ dawn hours as the young Nick Adams , his father , his uncle and their Indian guides row across a lake to a nearby Indian camp . Nick 's father , a doctor , has been called out to deliver a baby for a woman who has been in labor for days . At the camp , they find the woman in a cabin lying on a bottom <unk> ; her husband lies above her with an injured foot . Nick 's father is forced to perform a caesarian operation on the woman with a jack @-@ knife because the baby is in the breech position ; he asks Nick to assist by holding a basin . The woman screams throughout the operation , and when Nick 's uncle tries to hold her down , she bites him . After the baby is delivered , Nick 's father turns to the woman 's husband on the top bunk and finds that he fatally slit his throat with a straight razor during the operation . Nick is sent out of the cabin , and his uncle leaves with two Natives , not to return . The story ends with only Nick and his father on the lake , rowing away from the camp . Nick asks a series of questions about birth and death . Nick thinks to himself that he will never die while we silently watches his father row . 
 = = Background and publication history = = 
 In the early 1920s , Hemingway and his wife Hadley lived in Paris where he was foreign correspondent for the Toronto Star . When Hadley became pregnant they returned to Toronto . Hemingway biographer Kenneth Lynn suggests that Hadley 's childbirth became the inspiration for the story . She went into labor while Hemingway was on a train , returning from New York . Lynn believes Hemingway likely was terrified Hadley would not survive the birth , and he became " beside himself with fear ... about the extent of her suffering and swamped by a sense of helplessness at the realization that he would probably arrive too late to be of assistance to her " . Hemingway wrote " Indian Camp " a few months after John Hemingway was born in Toronto on October 10 , 1923 . 
 While they were in Toronto , Hemingway 's first book , Three Stories and Ten Poems , was published in Paris , followed months later by a second volume , in our time ( without capitals ) , which included 18 short vignettes presented as untitled chapters . Hemingway , Hadley , and their son ( nicknamed Bumby ) returned to Paris in January 1924 , moving into a new apartment on the Rue Notre Dame des Champs . With Ezra Pound , Hemingway helped Ford Madox Ford edit his newly launched literary magazine , Transatlantic Review , which published pieces by modernists such as Pound , John Dos Passos , James Joyce , Gertrude Stein , as well as Hemingway . 
 " Indian Camp " began as a 29 @-@ page untitled manuscript that Hemingway cut to seven pages ; at first he called the story " One Night Last Summer " . In 1924 , the seven @-@ page story titled " Indian Camp " was published by the Transatlantic Review in the " Works in Progress " section , along with a piece from James Joyce 's manuscript Finnegans Wake . A year later on October 5 , 1925 , " Indian Camp " was republished by Boni & Liveright in New York , in an expanded American edition of Hemingway 's first collection of short stories titled In Our Time , ( with capitals ) with a print @-@ run of 1335 copies . 
 " Indian Camp " was later included in Hemingway 's collection The Fifth Column and the First Forty @-@ Nine Stories published in October 1938 . Two collections of short stories published after Hemingway 's death included " Indian Camp " : The Nick Adams Stories ( 1972 ) and The Complete Short Stories of Ernest Hemingway : The Finca Vigía Edition ( 1987 ) . The Nick Adams Stories ( 1972 ) , edited by Philip Young , included the story fragment titled " Three Shots " that Hemingway originally cut from " Indian Camp " . 
 = = Themes and genre = = 
 = = = Initiation and fear of death = = = 
 " Indian Camp " is an initiation story . Nick 's father ( Dr. Adams ) exposes his young son to childbirth and , unintentionally , to violent death — an experience that causes Nick to equate childbirth with death . Hemingway critic <unk> Tetlow maintains that in " Indian Camp " , sexuality culminates in " butchery @-@ style " birth and bloody death , and that Nick 's anxiety is obvious when he turns away from the butchery . The story reaches a climax when Nick 's " heightened awareness " of evil causes him to turn away from the experience . Although Nick may not want to watch the caesarian , his father insists he watch - he does not want his son to be initiated into an adult world without toughness , writes Thomas Strychacz . 
 Hemingway biographer Philip Young writes that Hemingway 's emphasis in " Indian Camp " was not primarily on the woman who gives birth or the father who commits suicide , but on young Nick Adams , who witnesses these events and becomes a " badly scarred and nervous young man " . In " Indian Camp " , Hemingway begins the events that shape the Adams persona . Young considers this single Hemingway story to hold the " master key " to " what its author was up to for some thirty @-@ five years of his writing career " . Critic Howard Hannum agrees . He believes the trauma of birth and suicide Hemingway paints in " Indian Camp " rendered a leitmotif that gave Hemingway a unified framework for the Nick Adams stories . 
 " Indian Camp " is also about the fear of death . The section cut from the story highlights Nick 's fear ; the published version underscores it in a less obvious manner . In the cut section , later published as " Three Shots " , the night before being taken to the Indian camp Nick is left alone in the forest , where he is " overwhelmed by thoughts of death " . Critic Paul Strong speculates that Hemingway may have intended the narrative to be structured so that Nick 's father chose to take his fearful son to the Indian camp where Nick faced the grisly reality of death , which can have done " little to assuage Nick 's fears . " Hannum believes Hemingway is intentionally vague about the details of the birth but not the death ; he speculates that Nick would have likely " blocked out much of the caesarian but he had clearly seen the father 's head tilted back " . 
 Critics have questioned why the woman 's husband kills himself . Strong finds the arguments that the husband is driven to suicide by the wife 's screaming to be problematic because the suicide occurs at the moment the screams are silenced . He points to Hemingway 's statement in Death in the Afternoon , " if two people love each other there can be no happy end to it " , as evidence that the husband may have killed himself because he is " driven frantic by his wife 's pain , and perhaps his own " . 
 The story also shows the innocence of childhood ; Nick Adams believes he will live forever and be a child forever ; he is a character who sees his life " stretching ahead . " At the end of the story , in the boat with his father , Nick denies death when he says he will never die . " Indian Camp " shows Hemingway 's early fascination with suicide and with the conflict between fathers and sons . Young thinks there is an unavoidable focus on the fact that the two people the principal characters are based on — the father , Clarence Hemingway , and the boy , Ernest Hemingway — end up committing suicide . Kenneth Lynn writes that the irony to modern readers is that both characters in " that boat on the lake would one day do away with themselves " . Hemingway shot himself on July 2 , 1961 ; his father shot himself on December 6 , 1928 . 
 = = = Primitivism , race , and autobiography = = = 
 In his essay " Hemingway 's Primitivism and ' Indian camp ' " Jeffrey Meyers writes that Hemingway was very clear about the husband 's role , because in this story he was writing about a familiar subject — the experiences of his boyhood in Michigan . The young father 's role is to " deflate the doctor " , who finds victory in slicing open the woman 's belly to deliver the infant , and to provide a counterpoint to the mother 's strength and resilience . The father 's suicide serves as a symbolic rejection of the white doctor whose skill is necessary , but who brings with him destruction . In her paper " Screaming Through Silence : The Violence of Race in ' Indian Camp ' " , Amy Strong writes " Indian Camp " is about domination ; the husband kills himself at the moment his wife is cut open by a white doctor . She thinks the theme of domination exists on more than one level : Nick is dominated by his father ; the white outsiders dominate in the Indian camp ; and the white doctor " has cut into the woman , like the early settlers leaving a gash in the tree . " 
 According to Hemingway scholar Thomas Strychacz , in the story Hemingway presents a re @-@ enactment of the arrival of Europeans in the New World and the subsequent doctrine of manifest destiny . The white men in the story arrive on the water and are met at a beach by natives . The native husband and father of the baby loses everything , causing him to kill himself : his home is overtaken , and his wife ripped apart . The white doctor tells his son to ignore the woman 's screams : " her screams are not important . I don 't hear them because they are not important . " The doctor 's victory is to control nature by delivering a baby , diminished by the father 's suicide who through his death symbolically takes back control from the white doctor . 
 Meyers claims the story is not autobiographical though it is an early example of Hemingway 's ability to tell stories " true to life . " In the story , Nick Adams ' father , who is portrayed as " professionally cool " , is based on Hemingway 's own father , Clarence Hemingway . Hemingway 's paternal uncle , George , appears in the story , and is treated unsympathetically . Hannum suggests George may have been the child 's father , writing that in the story remains the " never @-@ resolved implication of the paternity of the Indian child " . During the surgery the mother bites Uncle George , the Indians laugh at him , and he leaves when the father is found dead . 
 Jackson Benson writes in " Ernest Hemingway : The Life as Fiction and the Fiction as Life " that critics should refrain from finding connections between Hemingway 's life and fiction and instead focus on how he uses biographical events to transform life into art . He believes the events in a writer 's life have only a vague relationship to the fiction , like a dream from which a drama emerges . Of Hemingway 's earliest stories , Benson claims " his early fiction , his best , has often been compared to a compulsive nightmare " . In his essay " On Writing " , Hemingway wrote that " Indian Camp " was a story in which imaginary events were made to seem real : " Everything good he 'd ever written he 'd made up .... Of course he 'd never seen an Indian woman having a baby . That was what made it good . " 
 = = Writing style = = 
 Hemingway biographer Carlos Baker writes that Hemingway learned from his short stories how to " get the most from the least , how to prune language , how to multiply intensities , and how to tell nothing but the truth in a way that allowed for telling more than the truth " . The style has become known as the iceberg theory , because , as Baker describes it , in Hemingway 's writing the hard facts float above water while the supporting structure , including the symbolism , operates out of sight . Benson believes Hemingway used autobiographical details as framing devices to write about life in general — not only his life . The concept of the iceberg theory is sometimes referred to as the " theory of omission " . Hemingway believed the writer could describe one thing though an entirely different thing occurs below the surface . 
 Hemingway learned from Ezra Pound how to achieve a stripped @-@ down style and how to incorporate the concepts of imagism in his prose . He said Pound " had taught him more ' about how to write and how not to write ' than any son of a bitch alive " ; and his friend James Joyce told him " to pare down his work to the essentials " . The prose is spare and lacks a clear symbolism . Instead of more conventional literary allusions , Hemingway relied on repetitive metaphors or metonymy to build images . The caesarian is repeatedly associated with words such as " the blanket " and " the bunk " in a series of objective correlatives , a technique Hemingway learned from T.S. Eliot . Tetlow believes in this early story Hemingway ignored character development ; he simply places a character in a setting , and adds descriptive detail such as a screaming woman , men smoking tobacco , and an infected wound , which give a sense of truth . 
 " Indian Camp " is constructed in three parts : the first places Nick and his father on a dark lake ; the second takes place in the squalid and cramped cabin amid terrifying action ; and the third shows Nick and his father back on the lake — bathed in sunlight . Hemingway 's use of counterpoint is evident when , for example , at the end , Nick trails his hand in lake water that " felt warm in the sharp chill of the morning " . Paul Strong believes the deleted section may have provided context and additional counterpoint to the plot , with Nick 's aloneness in the " stillness of the night " juxtaposed against the middle scene , crowded with people . Paul Smith writes that by cutting the piece , Hemingway focuses on the story 's central point : the life and death initiation rituals , familiar to the residents of the Indian camp but alien to young Nick . Unable to express his feelings fully , in the end , Nick trails his hand in the water and " felt quite sure that he would never die " . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Hemingway 's writing style attracted attention when in our time ( without capitals ) was published in Paris in 1924 — in a small @-@ print run from Ezra Pound 's modernist series through Three Mountains Press . Edmund Wilson described the writing as " of the first distinction " , enough to bring attention to Hemingway . When " Indian Camp " was published , it received considerable praise . Ford Madox Ford regarded " Indian Camp " as an important early story by a young writer . Critics in the United States claimed Hemingway reinvigorated the short story by his use of declarative sentences and his crisp style . Hemingway admits In Our Time is a collection of stories with " pretty good unity " and generally critics agree . 
 In the 1970s Carlos Baker wrote of the stories from In Our Time , and specifically " Indian Camp " , that they were a remarkable achievement . Hemingway scholars , such as Benson , rank " Indian Camp " as one of Hemingway 's " greatest short stories , " a story that is described as " best known " , " violent " and " dramatic " . In 1992 , Frederick Busch wrote in The New York Times that Hemingway had gone out of fashion . While his antisemitism , racism , violence , and attitudes toward women and homosexuals made him a politically incorrect writer , he turned violence into art unlike any other American writer of his time by showing that " the making of art is a matter of life or death , no less " . Busch believes Hemingway 's characters either faced life or chose death , a choice shown most starkly in " Indian Camp " . The saving of a life in " Indian Camp " is at the center of much of Hemingway 's fiction , Busch writes , and adds power to his fiction . 
 = <unk> shark = 
 The winghead shark ( Eusphyra blochii ) is a species of hammerhead shark , and part of the family Sphyrnidae . Reaching a length of 1 @.@ 9 m ( 6 @.@ 2 ft ) , this small brown to gray shark has a slender body with a tall , sickle @-@ shaped first dorsal fin . Its name comes from its exceptionally large " hammer " , or cephalofoil , which can be as wide as half of the shark 's total length . The function of this structure is unclear but may relate to the shark 's senses . The wide spacing of its eyes grants superb binocular vision , while the extremely long nostrils on the leading margin of the cephalofoil may allow for better detection and tracking of odor trails in the water . The cephalofoil also provides a large surface area for its ampullae of Lorenzini and lateral line , with potential benefits for electroreception and <unk> respectively . 
 Inhabiting the shallow coastal waters of the western Indo @-@ Pacific , the winghead shark feeds on small bony fishes , crustaceans , and cephalopods . It gives birth to live young , with the developing embryos receiving nourishment through a placental connection . Females produce annual litters of 6 – 25 pups ; depending on region , birthing may occur from February to June after a gestation period of 8 – 11 months . This harmless species is widely fished for meat , fins , liver oil , and fishmeal . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has assessed it as Endangered in 2016 , as it is thought to have declined in some parts of its range due to over @-@ exploitation . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 In 1785 , German naturalist Marcus Elieser Bloch described a shark that he referred to Squalus zygaena ( a synonym of Sphyrna zygaena , the smooth hammerhead ) . French zoologist Georges Cuvier , as a brief footnote to the account of S. zygaena in his 1817 Le Règne animal distribué d 'après son organisation , pour servir de base à l 'histoire naturelle des animaux et d 'introduction à l 'anatomie comparée , observed that Bloch 's specimen ( which he labeled " z. nob . <unk> " ) was not a smooth hammerhead but rather a different species . Although Cuvier did not propose a proper binomial name , his colleague Achille Valenciennes interpreted it as such in 1822 when he described another specimen of the same species in detail , calling it Zygaena <unk> nobis and attributing the name to Cuvier . 
 In 1862 , Theodore Gill placed the winghead shark in its own genus Eusphyra , derived from the Greek eu ( " good " ) and <unk> ( " hammer " ) . However , subsequent authors did not accept Eusphyra and preferred to keep this species with the other hammerheads in the genus Sphyrna . Eusphyra was resurrected by Henry Bigelow and William Schroeder in 1948 , and came into wider usage after additional taxonomic research was published by Leonard Compagno in 1979 and 1988 . Nevertheless , some sources still refer to this species as Sphyrna blochii . Other common names for the winghead shark include arrowhead , arrow headed hammerhead shark , and slender hammerhead . 
 = = Phylogeny = = 
 The traditional view of hammerhead shark evolution is that species with smaller cephalofoils evolved first from a requiem shark ancestor , and later gave rise to species with larger cephalofoils . Under this interpretation , the winghead shark is the most derived hammerhead as it has the most extreme cephalofoil morphology . However , molecular phylogenetic research based on isozymes , mitochondrial DNA , and nuclear DNA have found the opposite pattern , with the winghead shark as the most basal member of the hammerhead family . This result supports the counterintuitive idea that the first hammerhead shark to evolve had a large cephalofoil . It also supports the separation of Eusphyra from Sphyrna by keeping the latter monophyletic ( including all descendants of a single ancestor ) . The winghead shark lineage is estimated to have diverged from the rest of the hammerheads some 15 – 20 million years ago during the Miocene . 
 = = Description = = 
 True to its name , the winghead shark 's cephalofoil consists of a pair of long , narrow , and gently swept @-@ back blades . The width of the cephalofoil is equal to 40 – 50 % of the shark 's total length . The front of the cephalofoil has a slight indentation in the middle and a gentle bump on each side in front of the nostrils . Each nostril is roughly twice as long as the width of the mouth and extends along almost the entire leading margin of each blade . The circular eyes , located at the forward outer corners of the cephalofoil , are equipped with protective nictitating membranes . The relatively small , arched mouth contains 15 – 16 upper and 14 lower tooth rows on each side , and sometimes also a single row of tiny teeth at the upper and / or lower symphyses ( jaw midpoints ) . The teeth are small and smooth @-@ edged , with angled triangular cusps . There are five pairs of gill slits , with the fifth pair over the pectoral fin origins . 
 The body is slim and streamlined , with a very tall , narrow , and falcate ( sickle @-@ shaped ) first dorsal fin that originates over the bases of the rather small pectoral fins . The second dorsal fin is much smaller and originates over the aft third of the anal fin base . The anal fin is about half again as long as the second dorsal fin . There is a lengthwise groove on the caudal peduncle at the dorsal origin of the caudal fin . The upper caudal fin lobe is longer than the lower lobe , and bears a notch in the trailing margin near the tip . The skin is covered by overlapping dermal denticles , each with three horizontal ridges leading to marginal teeth . This species is brownish gray to gray above and off @-@ white below , and lacks fin markings . It grows up to 1 @.@ 9 m ( 6 @.@ 2 ft ) long . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The winghead shark is found in the tropical western Indo @-@ Pacific , from the Persian Gulf eastward across South and Southeast Asia to New Guinea and northern Queensland . Its range extends as far north as Taiwan and as far south as the Montebello Islands off Western Australia . This species inhabits shallow waters close to shore and has been known to enter estuaries . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 Several non @-@ exclusive hypotheses have been proposed to explain the extreme size of the winghead shark 's cephalofoil . The placement of the eyes at the ends of the cephalofoil provides a binocular field of view of 48 ° , the most of any hammerhead and four times that of a requiem shark ; this species thus has excellent depth perception , which may aid in hunting . This species also has proportionately the longest nostrils among the hammerheads ; longer nostrils contain more <unk> receptors and can sample more water at a time , increasing the chances of detecting an odor molecule . A winghead shark 1 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) long is theoretically capable of sampling over 2 @,@ 300 cm3 ( 140 in3 ) of water per second . Another potential olfactory benefit of the cephalofoil is increased separation between the midpoints of the left and right nostrils , which enhances the shark 's ability to resolve the direction of a scent trail . Finally , the cephalofoil may increase the shark 's ability to detect the electric fields and movements of its prey , by providing a larger surface area for its electroreceptive ampullae of Lorenzini and <unk> lateral line . The lateral blades seem too large to function in maneuvering , which has been suggested for other hammerheads . 
 The winghead shark usually hunts close to the sea floor . Its diet consists mainly of small bony fishes , followed by crustaceans and cephalopods . Known parasites of this species include the tapeworms Callitetrarhynchus blochii , Heteronybelinia <unk> , Otobothrium <unk> , O. <unk> , Phoreiobothrium <unk> , and Phyllobothrium blochii , the nematodes Hysterothylacium <unk> , <unk> sp . , <unk> blochii , and <unk> sp . , the copepod <unk> <unk> , and the protozoan Eimeria <unk> . 
 = = = Life history = = = 
 The winghead shark is viviparous like the rest of its family , with the developing young sustained to term by a placental connection to the mother . Adult females have a single functional ovary , on the right , and two functional uteruses . <unk> form inside the uteruses during pregnancy , one for each embryo . In the waters around Mumbai , the mating season is in July and August during the monsoon . The males bite at the sides of the females as a prelude to copulation . Females can reproduce every year ; the litter size ranges from 6 to 25 pups , and increases with the size of the female . The gestation period lasts 8 – 9 months off western India , and 10 – 11 months off northern Australia . Pregnant females have been reported to quarrel with each other . 
 Initially , the embryo is nourished by yolk and develops in a similar fashion to other sharks . At a length of 4 @.@ 0 – 4 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 1 @.@ 8 in ) , the cephalofoil and the fins begin to form . When the embryo is 12 – 16 cm ( 4 @.@ 7 – 6 @.@ 3 in ) long , the yolk supply begins to run low and folds appear on the yolk sac and uterine wall , which will later interlock to form the placenta . At this stage , the embryo has most of the features of an adult , albeit rudimentary and colorless . The blades of the cephalofoil are folded back along the body , and there are long external gill filaments protruding from the gill slits . At a length of 20 – 29 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 – 11 @.@ 4 in ) , the placenta has formed ; the first teeth , dermal denticles , and skin pigmentation appear on the embryo , and the external gills are much reduced in size . By the time the embryo is 30 cm ( 12 in ) long , it resembles a miniature version of the adult . 
 Birthing takes place in May and June off Mumbai and <unk> , in March and April in the Gulf of Mannar , and in February and March off northern Australia . The pups emerge tail @-@ first , and their cephalofoils remain folded until after birth to facilitate passage through the cloaca . The newborns measure 32 – 47 cm ( 13 – 19 in ) in length . Sexual maturity is reached at around 1 @.@ 0 – 1 @.@ 1 m ( 3 @.@ 3 – 3 @.@ 6 ft ) long for males and 1 @.@ 1 – 1 @.@ 2 m ( 3 @.@ 6 – 3 @.@ 9 ft ) long for females . The maximum lifespan is at least 21 years . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 Harmless to humans , the winghead shark is caught throughout its range using gillnets , seines , stake nets , longlines , and hook @-@ and @-@ line . The meat is sold fresh , the fins are exported to Asia for shark fin soup , the liver is a source of vitamin oil , and the offal is processed into fishmeal . This species is taken in large numbers in some areas , such as in the Gulf of Thailand and off India and Indonesia , and there is anecdotal evidence that its population has suffered as a result . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has listed the winghead shark as Endangered . This species is only infrequently caught in Australian waters , where it has been assessed regionally as Least Concern by the IUCN . 
 = All Saints ' Church , Southampton = 
 All Saints ' Church was a church building in Southampton City Centre , located on the corner of the High Street and East Street , a short distance south of the Bargate . 
 The original church on the site was named All Hallows , and was constructed in medieval times on land granted by the monarch at the time , Henry II , to the monks of St. Denys Priory . This building fell into disrepair and in the 1790s a new church building was constructed and the church renamed to All Saints . The old church was demolished in 1791 and the new building was completed in 1795 , following two acts of Parliament allowing trustees of the church to raise funds from rates on property and rents in the parish . The All Hallows catacombs were incorporated into the All Saints building , and a separate graveyard was established . The church was regularly attended by author Jane Austen while she lived in Southampton and painter Sir John Everett Millais was baptised there . A new organ was installed in the church in 1861 and a substantial refurbishment programme took place in 1872 . All Saints was heavily damaged in the Southampton Blitz and was subsequently demolished . 
 The All Saints building was designed by architect Willey Reveley and featured an arched ceiling that spanned the whole sanctuary , some 90 feet ( 27 m ) long and 60 feet ( 18 m ) wide , without the use of any supporting pillars . The neoclassical frontage of the church was dominated by four columns supporting Grecian pilasters and a triangular pediment . 
 The catacombs were the resting place of a chancellor of the Exchequer and two notable Royal Navy officers among others . In August 1944 the remains of all 403 people buried in the catacombs were transferred to a communal grave elsewhere in Southampton . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 12th to 17th century = = = 
 Henry II , king of England from 1154 to 1189 , granted land for the construction of All Hallows ' Church to the monks of St. Denys Priory during his reign . The original church , located on the corner of the High Street and East Street , a short distance south of the <unk> a chancel and nave with north aisle , and a tower in three stages at its western end . The parish registers date from 1653 . The Great Ejection of 1662 led to a number of people being ejected from All Hallows , and these went on to form what would become Above Bar Church and Avenue St Andrew 's United Reformed Church . Among their number was the rector of the church at the time , Nathaniel Robinson . The church had five bells , but three of them were stolen one night in September 1682 and never found , despite an award being offered by the Mayor of Southampton , John Speed , in the London Gazette . 
 = = = 18th century = = = 
 By 1791 the medieval church of All Hallows had fallen into disrepair , and an act of Parliament ( the All Saints Church , Southampton Act of 1791 ) was passed with provision to demolish the existing structure and rebuild the parish church , and to purchase land for a church yard . The old building , which the Act described as " very ancient , and in a very decayed and ruinous condition " , was demolished that year . Work begun on the replacement church , All Saints , in the spring of 1792 , with the foundation stone being laid on 3 August that year . In addition to replacing the previous building , a number of neighbouring houses were demolished to make way for the new church . 
 The building was designed by John Reveley , better known as Willey Reveley , an architect who had been a pupil of Sir William Chambers . Reveley complained in 1795 regarding the late payment of his bills , stating that the committee overseeing the construction of the church owed him £ 1000 . Writing about Reveley 's design for All Saints ' , Dr Frank Salmon of Cambridge University said " the church in Southampton was probably his most important building " and John Nichols , who authored Reveley 's obituary in The Gentleman 's Magazine , described it as " his principal work " . However , in a 1861 history of Hampshire , the building is described as " wholly without interest " . Nichols related that the finished building was substantially different to Reveley 's original intentions , stating : 
 The foundation stone was laid by the Provincial Grand Master of the Freemasons , Thomas <unk> , and the ceremony was also attended by the poet laureate , Henry Pye , who wrote an ode for the ceremony . The Mayor of Southampton and other dignitaries were also in attendance . The powers awarded to the church 's trustees in the 1791 act for fundraising proved insufficient and another act ( the All Saints Church , Southampton Act of 1793 ) was passed two years later to remedy this . The 1793 legislation 's introduction reported that the demolition had been completed and construction of the new building was under way . The 1791 act allowed the trustees to borrow up to £ 5000 , and to collect rates on property and rents in the parish of up to one shilling in each pound . The 1793 act allowed them to raise an additional £ 4000 among other provisions . The building was completed in 1795 . The catacombs of the original church remained intact and were incorporated into the new building . This underground cemetery reached slightly beyond the footprint of the actual building , extending under a portion of the High Street itself . In addition to the catacombs , a separate graveyard was established , located south of East Street on Back of the Walls ( another Southampton street ) . This location was technically outside of the All Saints ' parish boundary . 
 The first rector of the new church was Richard Mant , who preached a sermon when the building was consecrated in that year . In the sermon , Mant made comments which were seen as an abusive attack on the " dissenters " – that is , those Christians who did not exclusively use the Church of England 's prescribed forms of prayer – and this prompted a detailed written response from William Kingsbury , the minister of an independent church in Southampton . Kingsbury 's letter sparked a response from Brian <unk> of Oxford , which in turn led to much further debate and publications on the matter including a " pastoral charge " by the Bishop of Salisbury . Mant 's son , also called Richard , had been born in Southampton in 1776 and went on to become a bishop . A further act of Parliament was passed in 1797 , after the new building had been constructed and furnished , allowing the trustees to raise up to £ 4000 more and increasing the percentage they could collect from properties in the parish to one shilling and sixpence in the pound . 
 = = = 19th century = = = 
 In the early 19th century , novelist Jane Austen lived in the parish and regularly attended the church , mentioning it occasionally in her correspondence . In her letters she noted in January 1809 that she and her family had been unable to attend for two consecutive Sundays but despite the third Sunday being " very blowing " they did manage to attend that week . Painter Sir John Everett Millais , born in 1829 , was baptised in the church . The Law Commission estimate that the last debt relating to the construction of the building would have been paid by 1840 . By 1843 the graveyard was full , and it was closed around 1885 . 
 The church 's single bell dated from 1828 and was manufactured by Warner of London . The rectory , which had been located in East Street since the fifteenth century , was sold in 1858 and a new one purchased , in Anglesea Place . A new organ was installed in the church three years later . The organ was manufactured by Bevington and Son and consisted of three tiers : a great with 11 stops , a swell with ten stops , and a choir organ with five stops . July 1872 saw a substantial refurbishment programme take place , with the original ceiling of the main sanctuary being completely replaced . The original plaster ceiling was removed with the new one constructed from wood , resulting in a weight reduction of 25 tons . The scheme cost £ 1 @,@ 900 . 
 = = = 20th and 21st centuries = = = 
 In 1914 the graveyard was formally deconsecrated and the headstones were removed from the site , which became a children 's playground in the 1930s and subsequently a multi @-@ storey car park . 
 The church was damaged beyond repair in a German bombing raid in December 1940 . In August 1944 , the human remains housed in the catacombs were transferred to <unk> Cemetery in Southampton where they were reburied in a single communal grave . In all , the remains of 403 people were transferred , some fairly well preserved in their oak coffins with leaden shells , but others had disintegrated completely . The ruins of the church building were subsequently demolished – sources do not indicate exactly when – and replaced by shops and a multi @-@ storey car park . The parish registers were successfully retrieved from the ruin and , despite being charred and damaged by candle wax and molten tar ( the results of a fire that followed the bombing ) , they have been restored . 
 Despite the debts related to the costs for the construction of the building having been settled in the early @-@ mid 19th century , and the church ceasing to exist 100 years later , the three acts of Parliament allowing trustees of the church to levy rates on properties in the parish for the purpose of settling those debts remained in force and untouched until the Law Commission proposed their repeal in July 2014 , with a view to presenting recommendations to Parliament in 2015 . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 = = = Exterior = = = 
 The frontage measured 60 feet 6 inches ( 18 @.@ 44 m ) wide and had four columns which measured 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) in diameter by 36 feet ( 11 m ) high . The columns were topped with Grecian pilasters and supported a pediment . The lower part of the three spaces between the four pillars were filled with wide arches , with the entrance doors topped with fanlights below them . The building had staircases on each side , lit by semi @-@ circular headed windows between the outer columns and the pilaster . 
 There was an entablature around the building supported by similar pilasters to those atop the columns . The south side of the building , which faced East Street , had two rows of eight windows ; each window was 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) wide , with the upper windows 13 feet ( 4 @.@ 0 m ) high and the bottom row 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) high . The north side had no windows because it adjoined the neighbouring buildings . 
 On the east end of the roof , the church had a cupola which was topped with a large concrete pineapple . <unk> were a feature of several buildings in Southampton as a symbol of welcome , an idea that originated in the Caribbean and which possibly reached the city as a result of the slave trade in the 16th century . The pineapple survived the bombing and has been used as an exhibited on special occasions , such as Black History Month . 
 = = = Interior = = = 
 Inside the church , the arched ceiling of the main sanctuary was unsupported by internal pillars and spanned the whole length and width of the church , measuring 90 feet ( 27 m ) by 60 feet ( 18 m ) . 
 = = Notable burials = = 
 The local newspaper , the Southern Daily Echo , claims one of the Chancellors of the Exchequer that served under Charles II was buried in the catacombs , but does not specify which chancellor this was . Rear @-@ Admiral Philip De Carteret , a renowned Royal Navy officer and explorer who participated in two circumnavigation expeditions in 1764 – 66 and 1766 – 69 was also buried in the catacombs . Another naval officer , Captain Sir Thomas Carew , was interred in the catacombs on 2 May 1840 . 
 = Meråker Line = 
 The Meråker Line ( Norwegian : <unk> ) is a 72 kilometers ( 45 mi ) railway line which runs through the district and valley of Stjørdalen in Nord @-@ Trøndelag , Norway . The line branches off from the Nordland Line at Hell Station and runs eastwards to the Norway – Sweden border , with Storlien Station acting as the border station . There the line continues as the Central Line . Traditionally the Meråker Line was regarded as the whole line from Trondheim Central Station to the border , a distance of 102 kilometers ( 63 mi ) . There are two daily passenger train services operated by the Norwegian State Railways and a limited number of freight trains hauling lumber and wood chippings . 
 Proposals for a railway were first made in 1870 . Routes via Verdal and Røros were soon discarded and the Meråker Line was approved on 5 June 1873 . The first revenue services ran in 1879 and the line was officially opened on 22 July 1882 . The line gave a boom to the local economy , allowing for same @-@ day transport of produce to Trondheim . The line has been upgraded several times to increase the axle load . During World War II , the line was the scene of both the Hommelvik train disaster and the Meråker train disaster . Steam trains were in use until 1971 , following the introduction of diesel locomotives in 1961 . From 1900 to 2005 <unk> Smelteverk was a major customer , using the line to haul carbide , and later <unk> , from their mill at Kopperå to the port at Muruvik . The Norwegian National Rail Administration plans to have electrified and installed centralized traffic control by 2023 . 
 = = Route = = 
 The Meråker Line is currently defined as the section between Hell and the Norway – Sweden border at Storlien . Until 2008 it was regarded as the entire section from Trondheim Central Station to Storlien . The line was initially 102 @.@ 23 kilometers ( 63 @.@ 52 mi ) to the border , or 105 @.@ 97 kilometers ( 65 @.@ 85 mi ) to Storlien Station . With the new definition , the line is 70 @.@ 69 kilometers ( 43 @.@ 92 mi ) . The national border is 655 @.@ 10 kilometers ( 407 @.@ 06 mi ) from Oslo Central Station and 751 @.@ 67 kilometers ( 467 @.@ 07 mi ) from Stockholm Central Station . At Leangen Station the Stavne – Leangen Line branches off and provides a bypass through Trondheim . At Hell the Nordland Line continues northwards . From Storlien the line continues as the Centre Line via Östersund to Sundsvall . 
 The line largely follows the coast of the Trondheimsfjord from Trondheim until reaching Hell . From there the line heads inland through the valley of Stjørdalen . Initially it follows the river of Stjørdalselva . The line runs predominantly due east from Trondheim , passing through the current municipalities of Trondheim , Malvik , Stjørdal and Meråker . With the new definition , it only passes through the latter two , and is entirely located within Nord @-@ Trøndelag . From Trondheim to Hell the line runs just above sea level , except past Leangen Station where the line hits 34 @-@ meter ( 112 ft ) <unk> mean sea level . From Hegra Station there is again a slight rise . The 72 kilometers ( 45 mi ) from Trondheim to Gudå Station remain fairly flat . From there the line enters a steep climb , passing Meråker Station at an elevation of 220 meters ( 720 ft ) AMSL and Kopperå Station at 329 meters ( 1 @,@ 079 ft ) . Storlien is located at 593 meters ( 1 @,@ 946 ft ) AMSL . The Meråker Line is not electrified and lacks centralized traffic control , but as GSM @-@ R. The standard gauge railway is owned and operated by the Norwegian National Rail Administration . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Since the Middle Ages , both the Stjørdalen and Verdal valleys were important trade routes connecting Trøndelag and Jämtland . In particular , Levanger grew into an important trading town for Jämtland farmers , who would travel across the Verdal Mountains . The first public discussion of a railway was launched in Levanger in 1858 ; the initiative was pushed by Jämtland 's governor Thome , who proposed a line via Verdal to Levanger . At the time , the Trondhjem – Støren Line was about to be built , and the commercial interests in Trondheim were more concerned with a southward connection along what would become the Røros Line to Oslo . A 1869 meeting in Sundsvall , Sweden , had proposed three routes for the line : via Verdal , via Meråker or as a branch from Røros . 
 A road up Stjørdalen was built during the 1850s , connecting at Stjørdalshalsen to a steam ship service to Trondheim . A concern in Sweden was that <unk> could freeze up and that the Trondheimsfjord offered an ice @-@ free alternative for export of timber . Trade from Norway to Sweden was limited , mostly due to the limited infrastructure . Norwegian trades argued that a railway would allow for the export of Norwegian fish to Sweden . 
 A committee was appointed in 1870 to consider the railway , and was followed by on @-@ site investigations to determine the railway 's route . Similar investigations were carried out in Sweden . For the Norwegian side , costs were estimated to be at 4 @.@ 7 million Norwegian <unk> for the Meråker route . Surveys along the Verdal route deemed the route unsuitable . This presumed a narrow gauge ( 1 @,@ 067 millimetres or 42 @.@ 0 inches ) railway , common in Norway at the time . Operating profits were estimated to give a 4 @.@ 5 percent return on capital . Shares in the railway company were offered for sale in 1871 ; the largest purchaser was Trondheim Municipality , who bought shares for 1 @.@ 2 million kroner . In Trondheim alone , private investors bought an additional 3 @.@ 6 million kroner in shares . 
 In the spring of 1871 , the line was considered by the Standing Committee for Railways in the Parliament of Norway . The proposition was voted down at 64 votes to 42 . After a local railway committee was established , Parliament passed legislation to build the line on 2 May 1872 . The state would receive shares in the company equal to their monetary contribution . A suggestion from Johan Sverdrup that required the company to also borrow 1 @.@ 4 million kroner was voted down 58 votes to 52 . In Sweden , the work was meeting resistance , and many Trondheim businessmen chose to purchase shares in the Swedish part of the line to secure the financing of the Swedish part . In 1873 , the Parliament of Sweden voted to build a narrow gauge railway from <unk> to the Norwegian border ; there was already a railway line from <unk> to Sundsvall , the Sundsvall – <unk> Railway . 
 The Norwegian Parliament gave 400 @,@ 000 kroner in support in 1873 , and doubled it the following year . By then , the Swedish authorities had decided that all railways should be built in standard gauge , and the Norwegian Parliament chose to change their configuration to the same gauge in 1874 , increasing estimated costs from 4 @.@ 7 to 8 @.@ 9 million kroner . This was a similar arrangement to what would happen with the two international lines in Eastern Norway , where the Kongsvinger and Østfold Lines were also built with standard gauge . Despite intense lobbying from representatives from Innherred , the Verdal alternative was finally discarded when parliament gave 3 million kroner to the Meråker Line . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 The choice of route through Stjørdal remained a controversy . The river Stjørdalselva created a barrier just north of Hell , making it cheaper to build the line on the south shore of the river until Hegra . This would make the line bypass Stjørdalshalsen on the north shore , the largest town between Trondheim and Östersund . Despite massive local protests , Parliament ultimately chose the southern alternative . The added distance reduced Stjørdalshalsen 's trade role while reducing railway revenue as the steam ships continued to run on the route , thus reducing the profitability of the line . Stjørdalselva Bridge was opened in 1902 when the Hell – Sunnan Line opened to Stjørdal . 
 Blasting commenced during a ceremony in 1875 , although regular construction work on the line did not commence until the following year . The immediate line into Trondheim was the last to start , in 1878 , following disagreements about the plans . By then 54 kilometers ( 34 mi ) of track were laid from Leangen Station to the border between Nedre Stjørdal and Øvre Stjørdal . The first train ran from Rotvoll Station , just outside Trondheim , to the international border on 27 August 1879 . From 11 February 1880 a weekly train service was operated and regular revenue services began on 17 October 1881 , although the line was not yet completed to Östersund . 
 In Trondheim , the existing railway station for the Trondhjem – Støren Line was built as a cul @-@ de @-@ sac station at Kalvskinnet . This could not serve the Meråker Line and the station was thus moved to Brattøra , an artificial peninsula immediately north of the city center . Thus the station became located next to the new port facility . With the construction of the Røros Line , it was decided to connect both lines to the same station . The cost of the new station was 1 @.@ 4 million kroner . Trondheim Station did not open until 1882 . 
 The work paid well , and attracted many navvies to the area . Initial wages were 3 @.@ 20 kroner per day , though this later was reduced . Two and a half thousand men were employed , with fewer jobs being offered than there were applicants . Land owners were compensated 50 – 200 kroner per hectare ( NOK 20 – 80 per acre ) for cultivated land , and 10 kroner per hectare ( NOK 4 per acre ) for forest . Many local farmers made good money offering transport of cargo for the construction , as well as renting out annexes for navvies ; others made money as traders . As with all such construction areas , many legal and illegal pubs and brothels were established . After construction was completed , some moved on , while others settled in the area ; many of these received jobs with the railway company . 
 The official opening took place on 22 July 1882 by King Oscar II of Sweden and Norway . This was at the height of the debate on parliamentarianism and the king 's right to veto the Parliament of Norway , and the king used the opening ceremonies and speeches at each station to encourage people to support the union between Sweden and Norway , and pointed out how the railway would better connect the " brother nations " . In contrast , in Hegra no @-@ one from the municipal council chose to attend the opening ceremony , and no @-@ one from Nedre Stjørdal attended the opening at Hell either . 
 = = = The first years = = = 
 By 1880 the railway had six locomotives at its disposal . No. 1 – 2 were Class 14 that were intended as helping power to get trains up the steep climb from Gudå to Storlien . No. 3 – 6 were Class 9 locomotives that would do the main haulage from Gudå into Trondheim . In 1883 , NSB 's other two Class 14 locomotives were transferred from the <unk> Line . The initial fleet consisted of 24 passenger and nine breaking cars , all from Skabo . The line featured the first bogie cars in the country , with a single entrance at the end of each car , instead of individual doors for each compartment . There were also 37 closed freight cars , 40 lumber cars , 20 boxcars , 100 flatcars and three milk cars . At first all trains were mixed freight and passenger . 
 In addition to the trains heading for Sweden , there was also a commuter train that ran , first from Hommelvik Station , then from Hegra Station , into Trondheim in the morning , and returning after work in the evening . Since there was no depot at Hegra , the locomotive had to return without cars to Hommelvik for the nightly overhaul . The 854 kilometers ( 531 mi ) route from Trondheim to Stockholm initially took 57 hours . By 1904 , this was reduced to 26 hours , mostly due to reducing the layover between trains . 
 The Røros Line was connected to the station at Brattøra at 24 June 1884 , allowing Marienborg to be us as a common maintenance depot for both lines . The Meråker Line 's locomotives were then renumbered , starting at 51 , to keep them distinguished from the Røros Line 's . From the same year , the Meråker Line was assigned two Class 8 locomotives . From 1896 , Class 15 locomotives were used , and two years later supplemented by the Class 17 . 
 The revenue of the line was at 533 @,@ 306 kroner per year in 1900 , most of which was from the freight traffic . This gave a return of capital of 1 – 2 % . Freight traffic increased about twice as fast as passenger traffic , and in 1904 a new daily train was put into service to Storlien . The first Hell – Sunnan Line opened in stages between 1902 and 1905 . At first the trains along the Hell – Sunnan Line were decoupled at Hell Station , but from 1909 on direct trains to Trondheim started operating . 
 = = = Impact = = = 
 The Meråker Line was of great economic and social importance for the villages it passed through . It allowed much quicker transport into Trondheim , and the station buildings became centers of community life . For the first time these places had telegraph stations and daily post deliveries . The expedient transport meant that many more people chose to travel into Trondheim , which gained an advantage over other towns , such as Levanger and Stjørdalshalsen , in becoming the regional center for trade . Especially Stjørdalshalsen lost much of its importance for the villages up the valley Stjørdalen . For farmers , the railway made it possible to sell fresh dairy products to Trondheim , and even to Sundsvall . New markets , combined with good income during construction that allowed for investments in machinery , increased the revenue and profits for agriculture along the line . By 1900 , 68 people were employed by the railway in Meråker alone . 
 Storlien , just on the Swedish side of the national border , grew up as a resort , with the first hotel established just after the railway arrived . Trade between the two countries increased , as Jämtland had easy access to the Trøndelag market . However , the freight rates were so high that it was cheaper to send some products to Trøndelag from the Swedish east coast by ship around Scania . 
 Meråker saw in industrial boom due to the railway . There was already a copper mine and smelters at Kopperå , and they saw the railway as a possibility to change from locally produced charcoal to imported coke . A pulp mill opened in 1887 , but burned down in 1912 . The most important industry was the carbide factory that opened in Kopperå in 1900 — <unk> Smelteverk . Though located close to the hydroelectricity sources in Meråker , the import and export of raw and finished materials would not have been possible without the railway . A port for the plant was built at Muruvik in 1918 . 
 Lumber export was one of the main driving forces for building railways at the time , and the Meråker Line was no exception . In both Stjørdalen and the vast areas of Jämtland and Northern Sweden are huge amounts of woodlands . The Meråker Line ran straight through this area , and was seen as a new possibility to export lumber to the continent , where there was high demand for it . Before the railway was built , there was a small sawmill in Hommelvik . In 1881 , the Scotsman Lewis Miller bought huge areas of woods in Jämtland , as well as nine sawmills in Sweden . All the produce from these were then sent to Hommelvik for processing and shipment . At the most he employed 100 men , and exported up to 183 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m3 ( 6 @.@ 5 × 109 cu ft ) of lumber each year . Also located at Hommelvik were two wharfs owned by NSB , and one of the major imports was coal for the Swedish State Railways . 
 = = = World War I and beyond = = = 
 World War I proved to be a boom for the Meråker Line . The line suddenly became a transit corridor for shipments from Russia , as well as from Sweden , to the ports in Trondheim and Hommelvik . To cope with the increased traffic , NSB had to both rent equipment from Sweden and acquire ten new Class 21 and Class 35 locomotives between 1913 and 1918 . Four of these were transferred from other lines , while six were new . With the new locomotives , the dimensioned axle weight needed to be upgraded to 14 t ( 14 long tons ; 15 short tons ) , which mostly involved improving the bridges . The bridge at <unk> was dismounted and sold to be used on the Gråkallen Line of the Trondheim Tramway . Class 35 was used on the Gudå – Storlien section , and replaced the aging Class 14 . They remained in service until 1929 , when they were transferred to the Ofoten Line . 
 From 1927 , the first pure through @-@ passenger trains started operating in the summer , towards Sweden in the morning and back during the evening . From 1933 it operated all year . Through the 1920s and 1930s , many shorter distances received extra trains , and passenger and freight trains were gradually separated into separate trains . The traffic through Trondheim – Hell increased ; commuter trains terminated at several different stations . From 1930 , multiple units were also put into use on the line . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 During the German occupation of Norway from 9 April 1940 , traffic continued in ordinary fashion until 14 April , when a telephone message was misunderstood , and Norwegian military forces shot at a train they thought had Germans on board . After this , traffic on the line was halted . On the Swedish side of the border , 1 to 2 kilometers ( 0 @.@ 62 to 1 @.@ 24 mi ) of track was broken to hinder the Germans from using the line to access Sweden . Local traffic to Kopperå started again on 25 April . On 17 May , a multiple unit ran to Storlien with a general to discuss reopening the line . The answer was negative , but on 24 May , an agreement was struck . At the same time , military trains were put into use , from Snåsa and Steinkjer to Storlien , and onward to Narvik . After transport on the Ofoten Line to Narvik ( via Sweden ) was officially reopened on 2 August , there were regular trains from Trondheim via the Meråker Line to Narvik , with up to three trains a day . 
 On 19 November 1940 , a train with workers from Trondheim to the airport collided with the local train from Kopperå just east of Hommelvik Station . The Hommelvik train disaster killed 22 people . The trains were supposed to have passed at <unk> Station , but the engineer thought he had seen the other train , and had left the station . The accident occurred at 08 : 03 , and was caused by there being virtually no light to see with , since all outdoor sources of light were covered . On 23 January 1941 , a coke and coal train from Sweden lost its braking between the border and Kopperå . The six back cars plus the caboose derailed just west of Kopperå Station , while the locomotive and 17 other trains continued their wild flight . The train derailed at Meråker Station , and the Meråker train disaster killed both the engineer and the stoker . 
 The railway and its personnel were an active part of the Norwegian resistance movement during the war . In particular , Swedish newspapers and literature were smuggled into the country , primarily by stokers , who hid the material in the coal . Also , people who were not able to flee to Sweden via the mountains , or needed to get out in a hurry , were sometimes smuggled on board the trains , primarily on German trains . Illegal documents and microfilms were also smuggled out . For German transport trains , track @-@ side employees tried to create " delays " . 
 = = = Post @-@ war = = = 
 After the war there was limited resources for new rolling stocks and upgrades to the line . Multiple units gradually took over passenger trains , and by 1957 , no passenger trains to Storlien were hauled by locomotives . That year Stavne – Leangen Line opened , allowing trains to bypass Trondheim Central Station . The new Di 3 diesel locomotives were put into service in 1961 . The last steam engine was taken out of service in 1971 . The introduction of the Di 3 forced an upgrade to the line to allow for an axle load of 18 tonnes . The opening of European Road E14 in the 1950s caused a reduction in shorter @-@ haul passenger and freight . NSB subsequently cut passenger services to a single daily train , with a Di 3 hauling Swedish carriages through Meråker . Trains continuing along the Nordland Line continued to increase . 
 Maintenance remained mostly manual until the 1960s , after which a major rationalization plan shifted this work to machines . This allowed the line 's standard to increase , allowing for heavier and faster trains . Hegra , Sona and <unk> Stations were made unmanned in 1970 . 
 Freight volumes remained high throughout the following decades . In the late 1950s , the Swedish Air Force built a 32 million kroner storage area for aviation fuel at Muruvik . The terminal would be a reserve in case of an attack on Sweden , and the Meråker Line was to be used to transport the fuel into Sweden . The depot was sold in 1988 to Petrofina , following the Royal Norwegian Air Force 's quest to build a pipeline to the NATO @-@ base at Trondheim Airport , Værnes . 
 from the 1960s through the 1990s . ] ] 
 As previous , the Swedish authorities continued to subsidize freight operations on their side , making it profitable for Swedish exports to go via the Baltic Sea . Hopes in Trondheim to act as a major transit port for Swedish cargo never materialized . The 1966 opening of Norske Skog Skogn paper mill saw an increase in transport of lumber from Sweden . The petroleum transport lasted until the 1980s , when the Muruvik terminal was sold to Norwegian interests . A major customer was still Meråker Smelteverk , who used designated trains to haul ore from Muruvik to Kopperå and <unk> in return . By 1980 , cargo volumes were up to the level seen during World War I. 
 The line had 400 @,@ 000 tonnes of cargo in 2005 . Half of this was for Norske Skog , and 130 @,@ 000 tonnes for <unk> Meråker , the smelter . The latter was shut down the following year , with the subsequent drop in <unk> year the line received a 60 @-@ million @-@ kroner upgrade , increasing maximum axle load to 22 @.@ 5 tonnes , the same as on the Central Line . Speeds increased from 50 to 80 km / h ( 31 to 50 mph ) for freight trains and from 100 to 130 km / h ( 62 to 81 mph ) for passenger trains . The Norwegian National Rail Administration , who took the line in 1996 , opened the Gevingåsen Tunnel between Hell and Hommelvik 15 August 2011 , making the section from Hell to Muruvik a branch . The Rail Administration reclassified the lines in 2008 , so that the section from Trondheim to Hell is now part of the Nordland Line and only the section from Hell to Storlien is regarded as part of the Meråker Line . 
 The Trøndelag Commuter Rail was established in 1993 , increasing the frequency on the western part of the line . With the retirement of the Di 3 in 2000 , the Class 92 multiple units were introduced also on the Meråker Line . The concept , originally named Mittnabotåget , saw two daily services , originally running all the way to Östersund Central Station . From 2007 a train change was introduced at Storlien . Through traffic was closed from November 2013 to March 2015 with a bridge closed on the Swedish side . 
 = = Operations = = 
 The Norwegian State Railways operate two daily round trips between Heimdal Station via Trondheim Central Station to Storlien Station . There passengers change to a regional train operated on the Central Line by <unk> . This served was marketed as <unk> ( " the neighbor train " ) in Norway and Mittnabotåget in Sweden until 2012 . Travel time from Trondheim to Storlien is 1 hour and 44 minutes . Most freight trains are lumber trains , hauling timber from Jämtland to the Norske Skog Skogn paper mill . There is also a train hauling limestone from Verdal to Örnsköldsvik . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Peter Andreas Blix was chosen to be the line 's main architect . Hell was the largest station along the line , at 148 square meters ( 1 @,@ 590 sq ft ) . Slightly smaller 110 square meters ( 1 @,@ 200 sq ft ) buildings were built at Ranheim , Malvik , Hommelvik and Gudå . Smaller 90 square meters ( 970 sq ft ) station buildings were erected at Leangen , Hegra , <unk> and Meråker . These were all built in wood . Stylistically Blix drew inspiration from the freer composition of British railway stations of the 1870s , often resulting in non @-@ symmetrical stations . <unk> they drew Gothic inspiration . Blix designed the stations along the Røros Line and the Jæren Line in similar styles . 
 Balthazar Lange designed Trondheim Central Station . The originally two @-@ story station was designed in Renaissance Revival architecture . With the opening of the Hell – Sunnan Line in 1902 , there was a need for a larger station at Hell . The Blix ' station building was therefore moved to Sunnan Station , while a new and larger building , designed by Paul Due , was built at Hell . It received an intermediate style between <unk> and Jugendstil . 
 = = Future = = 
 Lack of electrification has been described as the " missing green link " in using the Meråker Line for intermodal transport for shipping out of Trondheim . The line could also act <unk> for fish exports from Northern Norway to the continent . The steep gradient between Gudå and Storlien is prohibitive for a single diesel locomotive , but would be more economical for electric traction . These issues limit cargo hauling on the line to lumber trains . 
 Proposals for electrification of the Meråker Line have been made since the 1940s . By then the Swedish side had been electrified . This was initially desired also by NSB in an effort to cut the high operating costs of steam trains . However , lines with higher traffic received priority . By 1971 the last steam trains were retired and issue of electrification for marginal lines were shelved . The issue was pressed by regional bodies from 1978 and 1992 , and then again from the 2000s . This time the issue was successful and in 2013 the Parliament of Norway approved the electrification of the Meråker Line and the section from Trondheim to Steinkjer . The plan is to start the physical construction in 2017 and finish by 2022 . 
 Installation of centralized traffic control is scheduled to take place as part of nationwide implementation of European Train Control System , which is scheduled to be completed within 2023 . Capacity and efficiency on the line require more passing capacity , especially for longer freight trains . Thus the passing loop at Gudå Station has been proposed lengthened . To allow trains to run from the Meråker Line directly northward on the Nordland Line , a triangular line has been proposed at Hell Station . All regular freight trains on the line come from the north . 
 = Devil 's Halo = 
 Devil 's Halo is the eighth studio album by American singer @-@ songwriter and bassist Me 'Shell Ndegéocello . After writing songs for over a year , Ndegéocello recorded the album in seven days with audio engineer S. Husky Höskulds . She was accompanied by a band featuring drummer Deantoni Parks , guitarist Chris Bruce , and keyboardist <unk> Ciancia ; Bruce and Ciancia produced the record with Ndegéocello . 
 The songs on Devil 's Halo featured an eclectic fusion of styles , including alternative rock , soul , and jazz @-@ rock . Ndegéocello 's spiritually complex and ambiguous lyrics spoke of romantic love and loneliness , among other themes . Released by Downtown Records on October 6 , 2009 , Devil 's Halo charted modestly but was well received by most critics . 
 = = Background = = 
 Ndegéocello spent over a year writing the songs from Devil 's Halo , being inspired in part by her trip to Ireland . " I went to a couple of pubs and there were much older gentlemen playing the guitar and just singing these amazing , simple songs " , Ndegéocello recalled . " I really admired that . I wanted to get to that kind of place where the song could just exist with a guitar and a vocal . " With Icelandic audio engineer S. Husky Höskulds , Ndegéocello proceeded to record the album in seven days , backed by a band that featured guitarist Chris Bruce , keyboardist <unk> Ciancia , and drummer Deantoni Parks . She later credited them with providing her inspiration and critique while keeping her " clear about what is the real focus — in life and in music " . Their instruments were recorded live without digital post @-@ production , which New York Times critic Ben Ratliff said contributed to the music 's raw and organic sound . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 According to The Boston Globe 's Sarah Rodman , Devil 's Halo featured a " <unk> of sounds " . Ndegéocello performed in what Nick Coleman of The Independent described as " the alt @-@ rock idiom " , while Slant Magazine 's Matthew Cole called Devil 's Halo an R & B record that utilized textures from experimental rock and electronica . Jacqueline Smith from The New Zealand Herald said its fusion of styles was based in soul music : " Though it channelled everyone from Sade to Santana , it 's an album of mostly soul - of the soul @-@ baring kind " . AllMusic 's Thom Jurek found the record 's " <unk> , near @-@ pop , rock tunes " starker than her previous three albums . 
 For the song " Slaughter " , Ndegéocello tried to weave together sonic influences from the producers Trevor Horn and RZA , as well as the bands Yes , Sade , and The Human League : " That 's what I tried to achieve in this particular recording : some sonic tapestries that people , even if they 're not listening to the lyrics , could just feel or hear , or just have a deep , inner dialogue with . " She covered Ready for the World 's 1986 song " Love You Down " , deconstructing it into what Village Voice critic Eugene Holley Jr. described as " a stripper 's classic " . Songs such as " Mass Transit " and " White Girl " featured Ndegéocello 's characteristic ska and reggae influenced basslines ; Holley argued that Caribbean riddims and country @-@ rock guitar grooves underpinned the music , serving as a backdrop for Ndegéocello 's contralto singing throughout Devil 's Halo . In the opinion of Ed Potton from The Times , her voice " resided somewhere between Sade and PJ Harvey " . 
 The main theme of Devil 's Halo , City Pages critic Rick Mason said , was the treachery of love and its bitter effects , with songs Holley described as brimming with " spiritual complexity and ambiguity " . In Jurek 's opinion , " romance , substance abuse , and one woman speaking candidly to another are themes in this musical meditation on bliss , lust , loneliness , and emotional wreckage " . musicOMH journalist Andrew Burgess described the record 's content as " achingly sensual and brutally violent " , while Seattle Weekly 's Saby Reyes @-@ <unk> wrote " isolation — even more than the sexual charge the songs exude — serves as the linchpin that pushes her narrators to strive for connection in the first place . " According to The Huffington Post 's Mike Ragogna , while the music covered styles ranging from pop and quiet storm to " light " avant @-@ garde , the subject matter had a " low key / high concept " quality expressed through terse lyrics , sonic experiments , and character studies such as " Lola " and " White Girl " . 
 " Lola " was written as a critique of mainstream societal treatment of romantic love and heartbreak society . " A wife ’ s just a whore with a diamond ring " , Ndegéocello 's sang . She drew inspiration from matchmaking reality television shows that presented love as a " really clear exchange " . " I hear young women going ' well if he can buy me something ' " , Ndegéocello explained . " That song — ' Put It in the Bag ' — which is based on ' can you buy me some things ? ' And then the male counterpart , all he can really talk about is sex and if the woman can cook . And it ’ s funny to me . That you 're no more than a whore , you just have a wedding ring . " " Bright Shiny Morning " was titled after the book of the same name by James Frey . Ndegéocello wrote the song after reflecting on her past lies and misrepresentations , particularly those she made in an attempt to be accepted in the music industry . " People change themselves " , she said . " Almost in the sense of creating mental anguish in order to make other people happy and to obtain celebrity and fame . That 's why the lyric is ' you do anything . ' Some people do anything for their big dreams of sunshine . " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Devil 's Halo was released by Downtown Records on October 6 , 2009 , to generally positive reviews from critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream publications , the album received an average score of 78 , based on seven reviews . In Billboard , Gary Graff wrote that the record " neatly straddles a line between challenging and accessible " , featuring some of Ndegéocello 's strongest compositions yet . Jurek claimed she " hasn 't been so nakedly vulnerable and brazenly honest on record as she is here " . Tyler Lewis of PopMatters hailed it as her most consistent and " emotionally potent work " since 1999 's Bitter while adding that Devil 's Halo featured " a greater sense of perspective of life 's realities " . According to Q , the songs expressing frantic feelings were balanced by " unpredictable but always <unk> moments of beauty " . Salon journalist Heather Havrilesky said " like a world @-@ weary muse , Ndegéocello taps into something rich and melancholy at the sludgy bottom of our hearts " while possessing a " mellow depth " in her singing . Washington Post critic Mark Jenkins believed the music 's " stripped @-@ down approach accentuated her musical brawn " . Noel Murray from The A.V. Club found the album " bracingly unpredictable and persistently enjoyable ; it 's an art @-@ soul record for those who like to be challenged while they ’ re tapping their toes . Or vice versa " . 
 In a less enthusiastic review , Andy Gill of The Independent believed the eclectic style on Devil 's Halo sounded muddled : " The songs seem to bleed into one another , with too much pointlessly flashy playing leading to polite jazz @-@ rock hell . One 's left yearning for a hummable melody that might imprint one of these songs upon one 's memory " . Mojo wrote that while the lyrics to " her songs are as politically charged as ever , musically they 're laboured experiments in style " . Robert Christgau from MSN Music was even less receptive , rating the album a " dud " , which indicated " a bad record whose details rarely merit further thought " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 Oren <unk> – vocal arrangements and vocals on " Slaughter " 
 Chris Bruce – banjo , bass , guitar , production 
