 For the week ending April 7 , 2011 , " Big Fat Bass " debuted at number 31 on the South Korean International Singles Chart , selling 8 @,@ 874 digital downloads . It also charted on Billboard 's Hot Dance / Electronic Digital Songs on April 16 , 2011 at number 18 . 
 = Gladiator ( 2000 film ) = 
 Gladiator is a 2000 British @-@ American epic historical drama film directed by Ridley Scott , and starring Russell Crowe , Joaquin Phoenix , Connie Nielsen , Ralf Möller , Oliver Reed ( in his final film role before his death ) , Djimon Hounsou , Derek Jacobi , John Shrapnel , and Richard Harris . Crowe portrays the fictional character , loyal Roman general Maximus Decimus Meridius , who is betrayed when Commodus , the ambitious son of Emperor Marcus Aurelius , murders his father and seizes the throne . Reduced to slavery , Maximus rises through the ranks of the gladiatorial arena to avenge the murders of his family and his emperor . 
 The film was released in the United States on May 5 , 2000 , and was a box office success , receiving generally positive reviews and being credited with rekindling interest in the historical epic . The film won multiple awards , including Best Picture , Best Actor for Crowe , and three other Oscars at the 73rd Academy Awards . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In AD 180 , Hispano @-@ Roman General Maximus Decimus Meridius leads the Roman army to a decisive victory against the Germanic tribes near <unk> , ending a long war on the Roman frontier and winning the favor of the Emperor Marcus Aurelius . Maximus , weary of battle , desires to retire to his Spanish farm estate , but the Emperor tells him that his own son and heir to the throne , Commodus , is unfit to rule and so appoints Maximus as regent to help save Rome from corruption . Marcus Aurelius tells Commodus that he will not be emperor ; Commodus murders him in a fit of rage and becomes the Emperor of Rome . 
 Commodus asks Maximus for his loyalty , but the general suspects foul play and refuses . Soon after , Maximus is arrested and is scheduled to be executed at dawn . Maximus manages to escape and makes the long journey to his farm on horseback , but arrives to find it burnt and his family dead , under orders of Commodus . He buries them and collapses in despair . He is then captured by slavers who take him to <unk> , a North African province . He is sold to a man named Proximo , who trains him as a gladiator . There he befriends two of Proximo 's gladiators , a Numidian named Juba and a German named Hagen . 
 Reluctant at first , Maximus is forced to fight in local tournaments . He wins every match because of his superior military skills and traumatized indifference to death . His newfound fame and recognition is brought to Proximo 's attention . Proximo reveals to Maximus that he himself was once a gladiator , and had fought well enough to have gained his freedom . He encourages Maximus to go to Rome and fight in the Colosseum , where the Emperor has organized 150 days of games to commemorate his late father . Proximo advises him to " win the crowd " to earn their respect and eventually his freedom . He could then use this leverage to possibly overthrow or kill the Emperor as part of his plan for revenge . 
 Maximus ' first taste of gladiatorial combat in the Colosseum is depicted as a re @-@ enactment of the Battle of Zama . With his team portrayed as Carthaginian infantry , they defy all expectations and are able ( solely due to Maximus ' commands ) to defeat " Scipio 's legionaries " who were supposed to obliterate them . A surprised and delighted Commodus comes into the arena to personally congratulate them . Maximus braces himself to kill the Emperor , but at the last moment decides against it because of the presence of Commodus ' young nephew Lucius Verus . He then reveals himself to the startled Commodus and vows to have his vengeance . As the Praetorian Guard prepares to kill him , the crowd chants " Live ! " repeatedly , earning their favor and showing their support . Commodus relents and leaves angrily . 
 Next , Maximus is pitted against the formidable Tigris of Gaul , an undefeated gladiator . After a fierce and lengthy duel which Commodus attempted to fix , Maximus is able to gain the upper hand , but spares his opponent 's life despite the crowd 's urging that he kill him . Angered by this action , Commodus berates him , even taunting him with harrowing details of his family 's death . Undaunted , Maximus turns around and walks away . This act of defiance , along with his victory over Tigris , makes him more popular than the Emperor himself . 
 As Maximus is being escorted back to the gladiators ' quarters , his former orderly Cicero approaches him and says that he still has the loyalty of the legions , encamped near Rome . Commodus ' sister Lucilla and the chief senator Gracchus secure a meeting with Maximus , and he obtains their promise to help him escape Rome , rejoin his soldiers , topple Commodus by force , and hand power over back to the Senate . Suspicious , Commodus learns of this plot from Lucilla by threatening young Lucius , then dispatches his men to arrest and / or kill the conspirators . Gracchus is quickly apprehended , while a contingent of Praetorians is sent to Maximus ' quarters . Proximo lets Maximus escape and sacrifices himself and his men ( including Hagen ) to gain him more time . Maximus reaches the rendezvous point but falls into a trap ; Cicero is killed and Maximus is captured . 
 Commodus , desperate and jealous of Maximus ' growing popularity , challenges him to a duel in the Colosseum . Before the fight , and unknown to the crowd , he stabs him in the side to put him at a disadvantage . During the fight , Maximus manages to evade Commodus ' blows and disarm him . Commodus asks the Praetorians to give him a sword , but his request is denied . He produces a hidden stiletto , but Maximus instinctively turns the blade back into his throat , killing him . 
 However , Maximus succumbs to the stab wound , asking with his last words that reforms be made , his gladiator allies freed , and that Senator Gracchus be reinstated . He is then carried away for an honorable funeral as a " soldier of Rome " , while Commodus ' corpse is left unceremoniously on the ground . Later , Juba revisits the Colosseum at night , now free to go back to his own family , and he buries Maximus ' figurines of his wife and son at the spot where he died . He promises that he will see Maximus again , " but not yet " . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Russell Crowe as Maximus Decimus Meridius : a Hispano @-@ Roman legatus forced into becoming a slave who seeks revenge against Commodus . He has earned the favor of Marcus Aurelius , and the love and admiration of Lucilla prior to the events of the film . His home is near Trujillo in today 's Province of Cáceres , Spain . After the murder of his family he vows vengeance . Maximus is a fictional character partly inspired by Marcus Nonius Macrinus , Narcissus , Cincinnatus , and Maximus of Hispania . Mel Gibson was first offered the role , but declined as he felt he was too old to play the character . Antonio Banderas and Hugh Jackman were also considered . 
 Joaquin Phoenix as Commodus : The corrupted , twisted and immoral son of Marcus Aurelius , he murders his father when he learns that Maximus will hold the emperor 's powers in trust until a new republic can be formed . 
 Connie Nielsen as Lucilla : Maximus 's former lover and the older child of Marcus Aurelius . Lucilla has been recently widowed . She resists her brother 's incestuous advances for she hates him , while also having to be careful to protect her son , Lucius , from her brother 's corruption and wrath . 
 Oliver Reed as Antonius Proximo : An old , gruff gladiator trainer who buys Maximus in North Africa . A former gladiator himself , he was freed by Marcus Aurelius , and gives Maximus his own armor and eventually a chance at freedom , and becomes somewhat of a mentor to Maximus . This was Reed 's final film appearance , before he died during the filming . In the original film script , Proximo was supposed to live . 
 Derek Jacobi as Senator Gracchus : A member of the Roman Senate who opposes Commodus 's rule and an ally of Lucilla and Maximus . 
 Djimon Hounsou as Juba : A Numidian tribesman who was taken from his home and family by slave traders . He becomes Maximus 's closest ally and friend . 
 David Schofield as Senator Falco : A Patrician , a senator opposed to Gracchus . He helps Commodus to consolidate his power . 
 John Shrapnel as Senator Gaius : Another Roman senator allied with Gracchus , Lucilla , and Maximus against Commodus . 
 Tomas Arana as General Quintus : another Roman legatus , who served under and was a friend to Maximus . Made commander of the Praetorian Guard by Commodus , after betraying Maximus . In the extended version , Quintus sees the mad side of the Emperor when he is forced to execute two innocent men . Quintus later redeems himself by refusing to allow Commodus a sword during his duel with Maximus . 
 Ralf Möller as Hagen : A Germanic warrior and Proximo 's chief gladiator who later befriends Maximus and Juba during their battles in Rome . 
 Spencer Treat Clark as Lucius Verus : The young son of Lucilla . He is named after his father Lucius Verus . He is also the grandson of Marcus Aurelius . 
 David Hemmings as Cassius : the master of ceremonies for the gladiatorial games in the Colosseum . 
 Tommy Flanagan as Cicero : Maximus 's loyal servant who provides liaison between the enslaved Maximus , his former legion based at Ostia , and Lucilla . He is used as bait for the escaping Maximus and eventually killed by the Praetorian Guard . 
 Sven @-@ Ole Thorsen as Tigris of Gaul : An undefeated champion gladiator who is called out of retirement by Commodus to kill Maximus but is defeated by Maximus . Commodus then ordered Maximus to kill Tigris , but he spared him , which caused Commodus to hate Maximus even more . 
 Richard Harris as Marcus Aurelius : The old and wise emperor of Rome who appoints Maximus , whom he loves as a son , with the ultimate aim of returning Rome to a republican form of government . He is murdered by his son Commodus before his wish can be fulfilled . 
 Omid Djalili as a slave trader . 
 Giannina <unk> as Maximus 's wife . 
 Giorgio <unk> as Maximus 's son who is the same age as Lucilla 's son Lucius . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Screenplay = = = 
 Gladiator was based on an original pitch by David Franzoni , who wrote the first draft . Franzoni was given a three @-@ picture deal with DreamWorks as writer and co @-@ producer on the strength of his previous work , Steven Spielberg 's Amistad , which helped establish the reputation of DreamWorks . Not a classical scholar , Franzoni was inspired by Daniel P. Mannix 's 1958 novel Those About to Die , and he chose to base his story on Commodus after reading the Augustan History . In Franzoni 's first draft , dated April 4 , 1998 , he named his protagonist Narcissus , a wrestler who , according to the ancient sources Herodian and Cassius Dio , strangled Emperor Commodus to death . 
 Ridley Scott was approached by producers Walter F. Parkes and Douglas Wick . They showed him a copy of Jean @-@ Léon Gérôme 's 1872 painting entitled <unk> Verso ( Thumbs Down ) . Scott was enticed by filming the world of Ancient Rome . However , Scott felt Franzoni 's dialogue was too " on the nose " ( lacking subtlety ) and hired John Logan to rewrite the script to his liking . Logan rewrote much of the first act , and made the decision to kill off Maximus 's family to increase the character 's motivation . 
 Russell Crowe describes being eager for the role as pitched by Walter F. Parkes , in his interview for Inside the Actors Studio : " They said , ' It 's a 100 @-@ million @-@ dollar film . You 're being directed by Ridley Scott . You play a Roman General . ' I 've always been a big fan of Ridley 's . " 
 With two weeks to go before filming , the actors complained of problems with the script . William Nicholson was brought to Shepperton Studios to make Maximus a more sensitive character , reworking his friendship with Juba and developed the afterlife thread in the film , saying " he did not want to see a film about a man who wanted to kill somebody . " 
 The screenplay faced many rewrites and revisions . Crowe allegedly questioned every aspect of the evolving script and strode off the set when he did not get answers . According to a DreamWorks executive , " ( Russell Crowe ) tried to rewrite the entire script on the spot . You know the big line in the trailer , ' In this life or the next , I will have my vengeance ' ? At first he absolutely refused to say it . " Nicholson , the third and final screenwriter , says Crowe told him , " Your lines are garbage but I 'm the greatest actor in the world , and I can make even garbage sound good . " Nicholson goes on to say that " probably my lines were garbage , so he was just talking straight . " 
 Russell Crowe described the script situation : " I read the script and it was substantially <unk> . Even the character didn 't exist on the pages . And that set about a long process , that 's probably the first time that I 've been in a situation where the script wasn 't a complete done deal . We actually started shooting with about 32 pages and went through them in the first couple of weeks . " 
 Of the writing / filming process , Crowe added , " Possibly , a lot of the stuff that I have to deal with now in terms of my quote unquote volatility has to do with that experience . Here was a situation where we got to Morocco with a crew of 200 and a cast of a 100 or whatever , and I didn 't have anything to learn . I actually didn 't know what the scenes were gonna be . We had , I think , one American writer working on it , one English writer working on it , and of course a group of producers who were also adding their ideas , and then Ridley himself ; and then , on the occasion where Ridley would say , ' Look , this is the structure for it -- what are you gonna say in that ? ' So then I 'd be doing my own stuff , as well . And this is how things like , ' Strength and honor , ' came up . This is how things like , ' At my signal , unleash hell , ' came up . The name Maximus Decimus Meridius , it just flowed well . " 
 = = = Pre @-@ production = = = 
 In preparation for filming , Scott spent several months developing storyboards to develop the framework of the plot . Over six weeks , production members scouted various locations within the extent of the Roman Empire before its collapse , including Italy , France , North Africa , and England . All of the film 's props , sets , and costumes were manufactured by crew members due to high costs and unavailability of the items . One hundred suits of steel armour and 550 suits in polyurethane were made by Rod Vass and his company <unk> . The unique sprayed @-@ polyurethane system was developed by <unk> and pioneered for this production . Over a three @-@ month period , 27 @,@ 500 component pieces of armor were made . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The film was shot in three main locations between January and May 1999 . The opening battle scenes in the forests of Germania were shot in three weeks in the Bourne Woods , near Farnham , Surrey in England . When Scott learned that the Forestry Commission planned to remove a section of the forest , he convinced them to allow the battle scene to be shot there and burn it down . Scott and cinematographer John Mathieson used multiple cameras filming at various frame rates and a 45 @-@ degree shutter , creating stop motion effects in the action sequences , similar to techniques used for the battle sequences of Saving Private Ryan ( 1998 ) . Subsequently , the scenes of slavery , desert travel , and gladiatorial training school were shot in Ouarzazate , Morocco just south of the Atlas Mountains over a further three weeks . To construct the arena where Maximus has his first fights , the crew used basic materials and local building techniques to manufacture the 30 @,@ 000 @-@ seat mud brick arena . Finally , the scenes of Ancient Rome were shot over a period of nineteen weeks in Fort Ricasoli , Malta . 
 In Malta , a replica of about one @-@ third of Rome 's Colosseum was built , to a height of 52 feet ( 15 @.@ 8 meters ) , mostly from plaster and plywood ( the other two @-@ thirds and remaining height were added digitally ) . The replica took several months to build and cost an estimated $ 1 million . The reverse side of the complex supplied a rich assortment of Ancient Roman street furniture , colonnades , gates , statuary , and marketplaces for other filming requirements . The complex was serviced by tented " costume villages " that had changing rooms , storage , armorers , and other facilities . The rest of the Colosseum was created in computer @-@ generated imagery using set @-@ design blueprints and textures referenced from live action , and rendered in three layers to provide lighting flexibility for compositing in Flame and Inferno software . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 British post @-@ production company The Mill was responsible for much of the computer @-@ generated imagery effects that were added after filming . The company was responsible for such tricks as compositing real tigers filmed on bluescreen into the fight sequences , and adding smoke trails and extending the flight paths of the opening scene 's salvo of flaming arrows to get around regulations on how far they could be shot during filming . They also used 2 @,@ 000 live actors to create a computer @-@ generated crowd of 35 @,@ 000 virtual actors that had to look believable and react to fight scenes . The Mill accomplished this by shooting live actors at different angles giving various performances , and then mapping them onto cards , with motion @-@ capture tools used to track their movements for three @-@ dimensional compositing . The Mill created over 90 visual effects shots , comprising approximately nine minutes of the film 's running time . 
 An unexpected post @-@ production job was caused by the death of Oliver Reed of a heart attack during the filming in Malta , before all his scenes had been shot . The Mill created a digital body double for the remaining scenes involving his character Proximo by photographing a live action body @-@ double in the shadows and by mapping a three @-@ dimensional computer @-@ generated imagery mask of Reed 's face to the remaining scenes during production at an estimated cost of $ 3 @.@ 2 million for two minutes of additional footage . Visual effects supervisor John Nelson reflected on the decision to include the additional footage : " What we did was small compared to our other tasks on the film . What Oliver did was much greater . He gave an inspiring , moving performance . All we did was help him finish it . " The film is dedicated to Reed 's memory . 
 = = Historical authenticity = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The film is loosely based on real events that occurred within the Roman Empire in the latter half of the 2nd Century AD . As Ridley Scott wanted to portray Roman culture more accurately than in any previous film , he hired several historians as advisors . Nevertheless , some deviations from historical fact were made to increase interest , maintain narrative continuity , and for practical or safety reasons . Scott also stated that due to the influence of previous films affecting the public perception of what ancient Rome was like , some historical facts were " too unbelievable " to include . For instance in an early version of the script , gladiators would have been carrying out product endorsements in the arena ; while this would have been historically accurate , it was not filmed for fear that audiences would think it anachronistic . 
 At least one historical advisor resigned due to these changes . Another asked not to be mentioned in the credits ( though it was stated in the director 's commentary that he constantly asked , " where is the proof that certain things were exactly like they say ? " ) . Historian Allen Ward of the University of Connecticut believed that historical accuracy would not have made Gladiator less interesting or exciting because " creative artists need to be granted some poetic license , but that should not be a permit for the wholesale disregard of facts in historical fiction " . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Marcus Aurelius died at <unk> ( a Roman camp on the site of modern @-@ day Vienna in Austria ) in 180 AD ; he was not murdered by his son Commodus following the final battle of the Marcomannic Wars . In reality Marcus Aurelius gave succession to his immoral son . In doing so the great philosopher emperor ended the beneficent tradition of previous Adoptive Emperors . 
 The character of Maximus is fictional , although in some respects he resembles the historical figures Narcissus ( Commodus 's real @-@ life murderer and the character 's name in the first draft of the screenplay ) , Spartacus ( who led a significant slave revolt ) , Cincinnatus ( a farmer who became dictator , saved Rome from invasion , then resigned his six @-@ month appointment after 15 days ) , and Marcus Nonius Macrinus ( a trusted general , Consul in 154 AD , and friend of Marcus Aurelius ) . Although Commodus engaged in show combat in the Colosseum , he was not killed in the arena ; he was strangled in his bath by the wrestler Narcissus . Commodus reigned for over twelve years , unlike the shorter period portrayed in the film . 
 The character of Maximus had a similar career ( and personality traits as documented by Herodian ) to Claudius Pompeianus ( a Syrian ) who married Marcus Aurelius ' daughter Lucilla following the death of Lucius Verus . It is believed Aurelius may have wanted Pompeianus to succeed him as Caesar in preference to Commodus but was turned down . Pompeianus had no part in any of the many plots against Commodus . He was not depicted in the film . 
 In the film the character Antonius Proximo claims " the wise " Marcus Aurelius banned gladiatorial games in Rome forcing him to move to Mauretania . The real Marcus did ban the games but only in Antioch as punishment for the city 's support of the usurper Avidius Cassius . No games were ever banned in Rome . However , when the Emperor started conscripting gladiators into the legions , the resulting shortage in fighters allowed <unk> such as Proximo to make " windfall " profits through increased charges for their services . 
 In real life , the death of Commodus did not result in a peace for Rome , nor a return to the Roman Republic . Rather , it ushered in a chaotic and bloody power struggle that culminated in the Year of the Five Emperors of AD 193 . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Costumes within the film are almost never completely historically correct . Some of the soldiers wear fantasy helmets . The bands wrapped around their lower arms were rarely ever worn . Their appearance is the product of historical movies always depicting peoples of antiquity wearing such bands . Although the film is set within the 2nd century AD , the Imperial Gallic armor and the helmets worn by the legionaries are from AD 75 , a century earlier . This was superseded by new designs in AD 100 . Likewise the Legions ' standard bearers ( <unk> ) , centurions , mounted forces , and auxiliaries would have worn scale armour : Lorica squamata . The Germanic tribes are dressed in clothes from the stone @-@ age period . 
 The Roman cavalry are shown attacking using stirrups . This is anachronistic in that the horse @-@ mounted forces of the Roman army used a two @-@ horned saddle . Stirrups were only employed for safety reasons because of the additional training and skill required to ride with a Roman saddle . Catapults and ballistae would not have been used in a forest . They were reserved primarily for sieges and were rarely used in open battles . 
 The Praetorian Guards seen in the film are all wearing black uniforms . No historical evidence supports that . On Campaign they usually wore standard legionary equipment albeit with some unique decorative elements . 
 In the bird 's eye view of Rome when the city is introduced for the first time there are several buildings that did not exist at the time of Gladiator . For example , the Basilica of Maxentius and Constantine is quite prominent ; however , it was not completed until AD 312 . 
 = = Influences = = 
 The film 's plot was influenced by two 1960s Hollywood films of the sword @-@ and @-@ sandal genre , The Fall of the Roman Empire and Spartacus , and shares several plot points with The Fall of the Roman Empire , which tells the story of Livius , who , like Maximus in Gladiator , is Marcus Aurelius 's intended successor . Livius is in love with Lucilla and seeks to marry her while Maximus , who is happily married , was formerly in love with her . Both films portray the death of Marcus Aurelius as an assassination . In Fall of the Roman Empire a group of conspirators independent of Commodus , hoping to profit from Commodus 's accession , arrange for Marcus Aurelius to be poisoned ; in Gladiator Commodus himself murders his father by smothering him . In the course of Fall of the Roman Empire Commodus unsuccessfully seeks to win Livius over to his vision of empire in contrast to that of his father , but continues to employ him notwithstanding ; in Gladiator , when Commodus fails to secure Maximus 's allegiance , he executes Maximus 's wife and son and tries unsuccessfully to execute him . Livius in Fall of the Roman Empire and Maximus in Gladiator kill Commodus in single combat , Livius to save Lucilla and Maximus to avenge the murder of his wife and son , and both do it for the greater good of Rome . 
 Scott cited Spartacus and Ben @-@ Hur as influences on the film : " These movies were part of my cinema @-@ going youth . But at the dawn of the new millennium , I thought this might be the ideal time to revisit what may have been the most important period of the last two thousand years – if not all recorded history – the apex and beginning of the decline of the greatest military and political power the world has ever known . " 
 Spartacus provides the film 's gladiatorial motif , as well as the character of Senator Gracchus , a fictitious senator ( bearing the name of a pair of revolutionary Tribunes from the 2nd century BC ) who in both films is an elder statesman of ancient Rome attempting to preserve the ancient rights of the Roman Senate in the face of an ambitious autocrat – Marcus Licinius Crassus in Spartacus and Commodus in Gladiator . Both actors who played Gracchus ( in Spartacus and Gladiator ) , played Claudius in previous films – Charles Laughton of Spartacus played Claudius in the unfinished 1937 film I , Claudius and Sir Derek Jacobi of Gladiator , played Claudius in the 1976 BBC adaptation . Both films also share a specific set piece , wherein a gladiator ( Maximus here , Woody Strode 's Draba in Spartacus ) throws his weapon into a spectator box at the end of a match , as well as at least one line of dialogue : " Rome is the mob " , said here by Gracchus and by Julius Caesar ( John Gavin ) in Spartacus . 
 The film 's depiction of Commodus 's entry into Rome borrows imagery from Leni Riefenstahl 's Nazi propaganda film Triumph of the Will ( 1935 ) , although Scott has pointed out that the iconography of Nazi rallies was itself inspired by the Roman Empire . Gladiator reflects back on the film by duplicating similar events that occurred in Adolf Hitler 's procession . The Nazi film opens with an aerial view of Hitler arriving in a plane , while Scott shows an aerial view of Rome , quickly followed by a shot of the large crowd of people watching Commodus pass them in a procession with his chariot . The first thing to appear in Triumph of the Will is a Nazi eagle , which is alluded to when a statue of an eagle sits atop one of the arches ( and then is shortly followed by several more decorative eagles throughout the rest of the scene ) leading up to the procession of Commodus . At one point in the Nazi film , a little girl gives flowers to Hitler , while Commodus is met by several girls who all give him bundles of flowers . 
 = = Music = = 
 The Oscar @-@ nominated score was composed by Hans Zimmer and Lisa Gerrard , and conducted by Gavin Greenaway . Zimmer was originally planning to use Israeli vocalist Ofra Haza for the score , after his work with her in The Prince of Egypt . However , Ofra died in her early 40s in late February 2000 , before she was able to record , and so Gerrard was chosen instead . Lisa Gerrard 's vocals are similar to her own work on The Insider score . The music for many of the battle scenes has been noted as similar to Gustav Holst 's " Mars : The Bringer of War " , and in June 2006 , the Holst Foundation sued Hans Zimmer for allegedly copying the late Holst 's work . Another close musical resemblance occurs in the scene of Commodus 's triumphal entry into Rome , accompanied by music clearly evocative of two sections – the Prelude to Das Rheingold and Siegfried 's Funeral March from Götterdämmerung – from Richard Wagner 's Ring of the Nibelung . On February 27 , 2001 , nearly a year after the first soundtrack 's release , Decca produced Gladiator : More Music From the Motion Picture . Then , on September 5 , 2005 , Decca produced Gladiator : Special Anniversary Edition , a two @-@ CD pack containing both the above @-@ mentioned releases . Some of the music from the film was featured in the NFL playoffs in January 2003 before commercial breaks and before and after half @-@ time . In 2003 , Luciano Pavarotti released a recording of himself singing a song from the film and said he regretted turning down an offer to perform on the soundtrack . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Gladiator received generally positive reviews , with 76 % of the critics polled by Rotten Tomatoes giving it favorable reviews , with an averaged score of 7 @.@ 2 out of 10 . At the website Metacritic , which employs a normalized rating system , the film earned a favorable rating of 64 / 100 based on 37 reviews by mainstream critics . The Battle of Germania was cited by CNN as one of their " favorite on @-@ screen battle scenes " , while Entertainment Weekly named Maximus as their sixth favorite action hero , because of " Crowe 's steely , soulful performance " , and named it as their third favorite revenge film . In December 2000 , Gladiator was named the best film of the year by viewers of Film 2000 , taking 40 % of the votes . In 2002 , a Channel 4 ( UK TV ) poll named it as the sixth greatest film of all time . Entertainment Weekly put it on its end @-@ of @-@ the @-@ decade , " best @-@ of " list , saying , " Are you not entertained ? " . 
 It was not without its <unk> . Roger Ebert gave the film 2 out of 4 stars , and criticized the look of the film as " muddy , fuzzy , and indistinct . " He also derided the writing , claiming it " employs depression as a substitute for personality , and believes that if characters are bitter and morose enough , we won 't notice how dull they are . " Camille Paglia called the film " boring , badly shot and suffused with sentimental <unk> rubbish . " 
 The film earned US $ 34 @.@ 83 million on its opening weekend at 2 @,@ 938 U.S. theaters . Within two weeks , the film 's box office gross surpassed its US $ 103 million budget . The film continued on to become one of the highest earning films of 2000 and made a worldwide box office gross of US $ 457 @,@ 640 @,@ 427 , with over US $ 187 million in American theaters and more than the equivalent of US $ 269 million in non @-@ US markets . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Gladiator was nominated in 36 individual ceremonies , including the 73rd Academy Awards , the BAFTA Awards , and the Golden Globe Awards . Of 119 award nominations , the film won 48 prizes . 
 The film won five Academy Awards and was nominated for an additional seven , including Best Original Screenplay , Best Supporting Actor for Joaquin Phoenix and Best Director for Ridley Scott . It was the first movie to win Best Picture without winning either a directing or screenwriting award since All the King 's Men at the 22nd Academy Awards in 1950 . In 2003 , Chicago became another Best Picture winner which didn 't win an Academy Award in either of these two major categories . Due to Academy rules , only Hans Zimmer was officially nominated for Best Music , Original Score , and not to Lisa Gerrard at the time . However , the pair did win the Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score as co @-@ composers . 
 73rd Academy AwardsBest Picture 
 Best Actor in a Leading Role ( Russell Crowe ) 
 Best Visual Effects 
 Best Costume Design 
 Best Sound Mixing ( Bob <unk> , Scott Millan and Ken Weston ) 
 BAFTA Awards 
 Best Cinematography 
 Best Editing 
 Best Film 
 Best Production Design 
 58th Golden Globe Awards 
 Best Motion Picture – Drama 
 Best Original Score – Motion Picture 
 American Film Institute Lists 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Heroes and Villains : 
 General Maximus Decimus Meridius – # 50 Hero 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movie Quotes : 
 " Father to a murdered son . Husband to a murdered wife . And I will have my vengeance , in this life or the next . " – Nominated 
 AFI 's 100 Years of Film Scores – Nominated 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Cheers – Nominated 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movies ( 10th Anniversary Edition ) – Nominated 
 AFI 's 10 Top 10 – Nominated Epic Film 
 = = Impact = = 
 The film 's mainstream success is responsible for an increased interest in Roman and classical history in the United States . According to The New York Times , this has been dubbed the " Gladiator Effect " . 
 It 's called the ' Gladiator ' effect by writers and publishers . The snob in us likes to believe that it is always books that spin off movies . Yet in this case , it 's the movies – most recently Gladiator two years ago – that have created the interest in the ancients . And not for more Roman screen <unk> , but for writing that is serious or fun or both . " 
 The Cicero biography Cicero : The Life and Times of Rome 's Greatest Politician and Gregory Hays 's translation of Marcus Aurelius 's Meditations received large spikes in sales after the release of the film . The film also began a revival of the historical epic genre with films such as Troy , The Alamo , King Arthur , Alexander , 300 , Kingdom of Heaven and Robin Hood ( the last two were also directed by Scott ) . The character of Maximus was placed 12th in the Total Film list of 50 best movie heroes and villains and 35th in the Empire 's 100 Greatest Movie Characters . Maximus is also featured on <unk> " Australian Legends " postage stamp series . Russell Crowe attended a ceremony to mark the creation of the stamps . 
 = = Home media = = 
 The film was first released on DVD on November 21 , 2000 , and has since been released in several different extended and special edition versions . Special features for the Blu @-@ ray Disc and DVDs include deleted scenes , trailers , documentaries , commentaries , storyboards , image galleries , Easter eggs , and cast auditions . The film was released on Blu @-@ ray in September 2009 , in a 2 @-@ disc edition containing both the theatrical and extended cuts of the film , as part of Paramount 's " Sapphire Series " ( Paramount bought the DreamWorks library in 2006 ) . Initial reviews of the Blu @-@ ray Disc release criticized poor image quality , leading many to call for it to be remastered , as Sony did with The Fifth Element in 2007 . A remastered version was later released in 2010 . 
 The DVD editions that have been released since the original two @-@ disc version , include a film only single @-@ disc edition as well as a three @-@ disc " extended edition " DVD which was released in August 2005 . The extended edition DVD features approximately fifteen minutes of additional scenes , most of which appear in the previous release as deleted scenes . The original cut , which Scott still calls his director 's cut , is also select @-@ able via seamless branching ( which is not included on the UK edition ) . The DVD is also notable for having a new commentary track featuring director Scott and star Crowe . The film is on the first disc , the second one has a three @-@ hour documentary into the making of the film by DVD producer Charles de <unk> , and the third disc contains supplements . Discs one and two of the three @-@ disc extended edition were also repackaged and sold as a two @-@ disc " special edition " in the EU in 2005 . 
 = = Cancelled sequel = = 
 In June 2001 , Douglas Wick said a Gladiator prequel was in development . The following year , Wick , Walter Parkes , David Franzoni , and John Logan switched direction to a sequel set fifteen years later ; the Praetorian Guards rule Rome and an older Lucius is trying to learn who his real father was . However , Russell Crowe was interested in resurrecting Maximus , and further researched Roman beliefs about the afterlife to accomplish this . Ridley Scott expressed interest , although he admitted the project would have to be retitled as it had little to do with gladiators . An easter egg contained on disc 2 of the extended edition / special edition DVD releases includes a discussion of possible scenarios for a follow @-@ up . This includes a suggestion by Walter F. Parkes that , in order to enable Russell Crowe to return to play Maximus , who dies at the end of the original movie , a sequel could involve a " multi @-@ generational drama about Maximus and the <unk> and this chapter of Rome " , similar in concept to The Godfather Part II . 
 In 2006 , Scott stated he and Crowe approached Nick Cave to rewrite the film , but their ideas conflicted with DreamWorks 's idea of a spin @-@ off involving Lucius , whom Scott revealed would turn out to be Maximus 's son with Lucilla . Scott noted that a tale of corruption in Rome was too complex , whereas Gladiator worked due to its simple drive . In 2009 , details of Cave 's ultimately @-@ rejected script surfaced on the internet : the script having Maximus being reincarnated by the Roman gods and returned to Rome to defend Christians against persecution ; then transported to other important periods in history , including World War II , the Vietnam War , and finally being a general in the modern @-@ day Pentagon . This script for a sequel , however , was rejected as being too far @-@ fetched , and not in keeping with the spirit and theme of the original film . 
 = Spirit of the American Range = 
 Spirit of the American Range is a classical music album by the Oregon Symphony under the artistic direction of Carlos Kalmar , released by Dutch record label Pentatone on February 10 , 2015 . The album was recorded at the Arlene Schnitzer Concert Hall in Portland , Oregon in April 2013 and January 2014 . It contains works by three American 20th @-@ century composers : Walter Piston 's ballet suite from The Incredible Flutist , George Antheil 's " A Jazz Symphony " , and Aaron Copland 's Symphony No. 3 . The recording was the third by the orchestra under Kalmar 's leadership , following the highly successful Music for a Time of War ( 2011 ) and This England ( 2012 ) . Spirit of the American Range received a Grammy Award nomination for Best Orchestral Performance , and its producer , Blanton Alspaugh , was nominated for Producer of the Year , Classical . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 Spirit of the American Range was released by the Dutch record label Pentatone in February 2015 , following a pre @-@ release by the Oregon Symphony on January 8 . The album contains compositions by three 20th @-@ century American composers : the ballet suite from The Incredible Flutist by Walter Piston , " A Jazz Symphony " by George Antheil , and Symphony No. 3 by Aaron Copland . These works were recorded live at the Arlene Schnitzer Concert Hall in Portland , Oregon . The Piston suite was recorded on April 13 – 15 , 2013 , " A Jazz Symphony " was recorded on April 20 – 22 , 2013 , and Copland 's symphony was recorded on January 5 , 2014 . The album was the third recording by the orchestra during Carlos Kalmar 's tenure , following the highly successful Music for a Time of War ( 2011 ) and This England ( 2012 ) . Like these albums , Spirit of the American Range was recorded in hybrid multichannel ( surround sound ) Super Audio CD format by Soundmirror recording engineers John Newton and Blanton Alspaugh . Mark Donahue served as the mixing and mastering engineer . The album 's liner notes are credited to Elizabeth Schwartz with German translations by Franz Steiger ; its cover photography was taken by Martha Warrington , and it features designs by <unk> . Angelina <unk> served as product manager . 
 Job <unk> , artistic director of Pentatone , said of the album 's origins : 
 From day one the co @-@ operation between Pentatone and the Oregon Symphony and its Music Director Carlos Kalmar has been something magical . The quality of the orchestra and the program ideas of Carlos Kalmar attracted the attention of a large group of music lovers in and outside the U.S. During a pleasant meeting at the Chicago airport almost two years ago the idea for this new album was discussed . I believe all at the table liked it and now everybody can hear how these three pieces , although by composers with different styles , fit perfectly in one program . And of course the Copland symphony is one of the best pieces ever written by an American composer . 
 Kalmar said of the recording , " It is a great pleasure to share these important American works for which I have the greatest fondness and appreciation . They aren 't widely performed and certainly deserve to be enjoyed by a wider public . " Spirit of the American Range was funded in part by the James DePreist Fund for Broadcast and Recording . 
 = = = Works = = = 
 The Incredible Flutist ( 1938 ) , Piston 's only composition for the stage , received its premiere at Symphony Hall on May 30 , 1938 by the Boston Pops under Arthur Fiedler . The performance featured work by dancer @-@ choreographer Hans Wiener and his ballet company . The ballet is about residents of a small village becoming enchanted by a flutist affiliated with a traveling circus . Antheil 's " A Jazz Symphony " was composed in 1925 and premiered at Carnegie Hall on April 10 , 1927 . It is written for two oboes , two clarinets , one soprano saxophone , one alto saxophone , one tenor saxophone , three trumpets , three trombones , tuba , percussion , drum set , two pianos , two banjos ( one doubling guitar ) , strings , and solo piano . According to Antheil , the work is : " one of the very first symphonic expressions which attempted to synthesize American jazz as a legitimate symphonic expression " . 
 Copland 's third symphony was composed between 1944 and September 1946 , and was premiered by Serge Koussevitzky conducting the Boston Symphony Orchestra on October 18 , 1946 . It is written for three flutes , two piccolos , three oboes and English horn , two clarinets , E @-@ flat clarinet , bass clarinet , two bassoons and contrabassoon , four horns , four trumpets , three trombones and tuba , timpani , two harps , celesta , piano , strings , and a variety of percussion instruments , including bass drum , tam @-@ tam , cymbals , xylophone , glockenspiel , tenor drum , wood block , snare drum , triangle , slapstick , ratchet , anvil , claves , and tubular bells . Copland said the work would " reflect the euphoric spirit of the country at the time " . 
 = = Broadcasts and reception = = 
 KQAC ( 89 @.@ 9 FM , " All Classical Portland " ) broadcast the album on January 8 , 2015 and made it available to stream on its website . The station offered the album as a thank you gift to donors during a fundraising campaign . 
 Classical Voice North America 's Paul E. Robinson said the album 's contents were unrelated to its title , and had " nothing whatever to do with the early days of the American West " , but complimented the orchestra 's performances . He praised the " excellent " flute soloist in The Incredible Flutist , called the performance of Copland 's symphony " more careful than inspired " , and noted the " vast dynamic range " created by the label 's sound technology . Peter Dickinson of Gramophone compared Kalmar 's interpretation of Symphony No. 3 to other available recordings : " Kalmar and the Oregon Symphony are impressive and create a challenge to the established choices . Kalmar is a minute shorter than Bernstein in both the opening movement and fanfare finale . Overall his interpretation is similar to Bernstein 's , and the orchestra 's expert handling of the work suggests that they should record more . " Furthermore , he wrote , " Engineering is excellent but individual tracks for the Piston would have been a help . " Anthony Tommasini , music critic for The New York Times , called the recording " exciting " and said the Piston piece received a " supple , colorful performance " . He complimented " A Jazz Symphony " , which he said " emerges here as a savvy , audacious score " , and ended his review with : " Best of all is an urgent , superbly played account of Copland 's Third Symphony . " The Oregonian 's David Stabler praised the Oregon Symphony for recording the lesser @-@ known works by Piston and Antheil . 
 The album received a Grammy Award nomination for Best Orchestral Performance at the 58th Annual Grammy Awards , marking the third for Kalmar and the orchestra . In addition , Alspaugh was nominated for Producer of the Year , Classical . <unk> said of the recognition , " I think this is a confirmation of the excellent quality that the orchestra is offering . In my mind , it 's very important that we get nominated . Whether we get the Grammy or not has so many other components . " Christine Whiteside , executive director of the Oregon Symphony Association in Salem , said , " It validates the quality of the Oregon Symphony , and what a great honor it is to have a Grammy @-@ nominated orchestra play in Salem . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 " Suite from The Incredible Flutist " 1 ( Walter Piston ) – 17 : 12 
 " A Jazz Symphony " ( George Antheil ) – 7 : 07 
 Symphony No. 3 ( Aaron Copland ) 
 " Molto Moderato , with simple expression ' " – 9 : 55 
 " Allegro molto " – 7 : 55 
 " Andantino quasi allegretto " – 10 : 13 
 " Motto <unk> ( Fanfare ) – Allegro <unk> " – 12 : 55 
 Track listing adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 ^ Note 1 Includes : Introduction ; Siesta Hours in the Marketplace and Entrance of the Vendors ; Dance of the Vendors ; Entrance of the Customers , Tango of the Four Daughters , Arrival of Circus and Circus March ; Solo of the Flutist ; Minuet : Dance of the Widow and Merchant ; Spanish Waltz ; Eight O 'Clock Strikes ; Siciliano : Dance of the Flutist and the Merchant 's Daughter ; Polka ; Finale . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = = Orchestra roster = = = 
 Credits adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 " * " denotes acting musicians ; " * * " denotes principals on Copland ; " ^ " denotes guest musicians . 
 = Victor Henry Anderson = 
 Victor Henry Anderson ( May 21 , 1917 – September 20 , 2001 ) was an American Wiccan priest and poet . He was a founding member of the Feri Tradition , a form of the modern Pagan new religious movement of Wicca which was established in California during the 1960s . Much of his poetry was religious in nature , being devoted to Feri deities . 
 Born in Clayton , New Mexico , to a working @-@ class family , Anderson was left visually impaired during childhood . His family regularly moved around within the United States during his early years , with Anderson claiming that encounters with Mexican , Hawaiian , and Haitian migrants led to him gaining an early understanding of these various cultures ' magical practices . The family eventually settled in Oregon , and Anderson later claimed that it was here that he was initiated into a tradition of witchcraft by an African woman . He later claimed that , in 1932 , he joined a magico @-@ religious group known as the Harpy Coven which was based in Ashland and which dissolved in the 1940s . According to his description , the group was devoted to a god and goddess , Setan and Lilith , and were influenced by both American folk magic and Huna . 
 In 1944 , he married Cora <unk> in Bend , Oregon , and , inspired by the writings of English Wiccan Gerald Gardner , they founded the Mahaelani Coven , gaining followers of what became known as the Feri tradition . One of their first initiates was Gwydion Pendderwen , who was a significant influence on the development of the tradition , and who introduced elements from Alexandrian Wicca in to it . Anderson was a professional accordion player and wrote poetry for various American Pagan magazines . In 1970 , he published his first book of poetry , Thorns of the Blood Rose , which contained devotional religious poetry dedicated to the Goddess ; it won the Clover International Poetry Competition Award in 1975 . Anderson continued to promote the Feri tradition until his death , at which point April Niino was appointed as the new Grandmaster of the tradition . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Childhood : 1917 – 1931 = = = 
 Anderson was born on May 21 , 1917 at the Buffalo Horn Ranch in Clayton , New Mexico . His parents were Hilbart Alexander Anderson ( 1883 – 1952 ) and Mary Frances Anderson ( née Smith , 1886 – 1973 ) . Regarding his ethnic ancestry , he later stated that " I am mostly Irish and Spanish with some Native American , including Polynesian " . He also claimed that his maternal great @-@ grandmother had been one of the Blue <unk> , a community living in Appalachia whose skin had a blueish coloration due to methemoglobinemia . Anderson became almost completely blind when he was two years old , either because of an accident or untreated diabetes . By 1920 , the family were living in Burkburnett , Wichita County , Texas , where a sister , Elsie <unk> Anderson , was born in February . Here , Hilbart worked as a floor worker on some of the many oil rigs in the town . From there they moved to Albuquerque , New Mexico , where they were recorded as living in the 1923 – 24 directory , and where Anderson later claimed that he had made many friends among Mexican migrant children . Anderson 's later wife claimed that he was also instructed in how to use his etheric vision by " Mexican Witches " during childhood . The family next moved to <unk> , Oklahoma , where Hilbart 's brother resided . 
 After several months in Oklahoma they proceeded to the area around Ashland , Oregon , where Anderson claimed to have befriended Hawaiian and Haitian migrant families who were working as fruit pickers . Anderson often claimed that he had been instructed in the magical practices of Hawaiian Kahuna and Haitian Vodou , with his later wife referring to him as both " one of the last Kahuna " and " a priest of <unk> " . He claimed to have been instructed in Vodou by Haitians who were working in southern Oregon . While living in that state he attended a school for the blind , although despite this was largely self @-@ educated . The family moved around the state in the coming years ; in August 1928 they were living in Pinehurst , where Hilbert was recorded as working as an engineer at a lumber mill in the 1930 census . By the 1940 census , the family were recorded as living in East Phoenix , Jackson county , Oregon , with <unk> adding that he had also been living there in 1935 . At this point , Hilbert was working as a millwright and Mary as a trained nurse . In 1942 they were recorded as living in Ashland , and it was here that they attended the First Baptist Church , before relocating to Bend prior to 1944 . 
 Anderson claimed to be initiated into a tradition of witchcraft in 1926 by a woman " of the Fairy race " , whom he elsewhere referred to as " a priestess from Africa " . Anderson informed the journalist Margot Adler that when he was nine years old he encountered a small old woman sitting in the centre of a circle containing brass bowls of herbs . He alleged that he instinctively stripped naked and that she then sexually initiated him into a witchcraft tradition , during which he had a vision of a goddess and a horned god . After the vision , he claimed that they sat in the circle and she instructed him in the magical use of the various herbs , after which he was washed in butter , oil , and salt , before putting his clothes on and returning home . The Pagan studies scholar Ethan Doyle White described this as being " difficult to accept as a literal account " , but suggested that Anderson may have undergone a significant spiritual experience with an older woman in 1926 , which was subsequently " embellished into the later tale " that he told Adler . A woman who knew Anderson , Cornelia Benavidez , later stated that " He says that he became friends with a woman in the circus who was a fire dancer and when she got older worked the stands . She somehow joined the circus in South Africa and made her way to the US . When he first met her she was 60 years old and he was a nine @-@ year @-@ old boy . He knew her for 15 years " . Researcher <unk> <unk> provided potential supporting evidence for this claim when he noted that a number of the circuses that performed in Oregon during the 1920s and 1930s had Africans in their travelling retinues . 
 = = = The Harpy Coven : 1932 – 1943 = = = 
 Anderson claimed that in 1932 he was initiated into a witchcraft group in Ashland that he called the Harpy Coven , although remains the only source testifying to the group 's existence . Research into the coven was later conducted by Valerie Voigt , the coordinator of the Pagan , Occult , and Witchcraft Special Interest Group of the United States branch of Mensa , who was also one of Anderson 's students and who asked him about the group . According to her claims , the group were led by two figures , known as Maybelle " <unk> " Warren and Jerome Warren , with other members being Jim Murdoch , Patricia Fern , Tom C. ( " <unk> " ) , and Ruth D. , the latter of whom was a preacher 's wife . As related by Voigt , most of them had been immigrants from the Southern states , mainly from Alabama . 
 According to Voigt , the coven placed an emphasis on practical magic rather than worship , theology , ethics , or ritual , and were eclectic in their practices , mixing Huna with forms of American folk magic . She noted that they did not worship a goddess but held to a belief in a god who was opposed to the God of Christianity . Moreover she claimed that they met together for both outdoor and indoor meetings , according to the phases of the moon . According to Voigt 's account , Anderson also claimed that on occasion , the coven used a naked woman as their altar , and that the group disbanded after World War II broke out . 
 After the Pagan studies scholar Aidan A. Kelly published a summary of Voigt 's research , Anderson released an open letter dated to August 21 , 1991 , refuting many of Kelly 's claims and referring to it as " the stupid drivel of those who have only a shallow grasp of their alleged research . " He stated that contrary to Kelly 's assertions , the Harpy Coven had worshiped a goddess , who was known as Lilith , and that " we did not think of her as merely the Goddess , but as God Herself " . He added that the coven also venerated a consort of the Goddess , who was known as Setan , but " although the Goddess tells us that away from the sweet influence of her love , he is the most terrible of all spirits , he is not the fallen angel or ' Satan ' of Christianity or Islam " . Kelly later stated that the Harpy Coven might " have been self @-@ trained or may have descended from an earlier person or group " . 
 = = Later life : 1944 – 2001 = = 
 Anderson met Cora Ann <unk> in Bend , Oregon , in 1944 ; they married three days later , on 3 May , claiming that they had encountered each other before in the astral realm . Born in Nyota , Alabama , in January 1915 , Cora had been exposed to folk magical practices from childhood ; reputedly , her Irish grandfather was a " root doctor " who was known among locals as the " druid " . The Andersons claimed that one of their first acts after their marriage was the erection of an altar . The following year , a son was born , and they named him Victor Elon , with the latter being the Hebrew word for oak ; Cora claimed that she had received the name in a dream . After the birth , a ritual was held to dedicate the infant to the Goddess . In 1948 , the family moved to Niles , California , later that year purchasing a home in San Leandro . There , Anderson became a member of the Alameda Lodge of the Fraternal Order of Eagles , and he subsequently remained so for forty years . Victor earned his living as a musician , playing the accordion at events , while Cora worked as a hospital cook . It has been claimed that Anderson could speak Hawaiian , Spanish , Creole , Greek , Italian , and Gothic . 
 In the mid @-@ 1950s Victor and Cora read Witchcraft Today , a 1954 book by English Wiccan Gerald Gardner , with Cora claiming that Victor corresponded with Gardner for a time . The Pagan studies scholar Chas S. Clifton has suggested that the Andersons used Gardner 's work as a " style guide " for the development of their own tradition of modern Pagan witchcraft . Similarly , Kelly stated that the Andersons ' tradition " began to more and more resemble that of the Gardnerians " as the couple learned more about the latter , adopting elements from it . Anderson was in correspondence with the Italian @-@ American Wiccan Leo Martello , who encouraged Anderson to found his own coven . Circa 1960 , the Andersons founded a coven , naming it Mahaelani , after the Hawaiian word for the full moon . Throughout the late 1950s and early 1960s , the Andersons initiated a number of individuals into the coven . One of these was Gwydion Pendderwen , a friend of their son who shared their interest in the esoteric . Pendderwen contributed to the development of what came to be known as the Feri tradition , with some members of the lineage viewing him as its co @-@ founder . Pendderwen noted that he had first met the family when , aged thirteen , he got into a fight with Victor Elon , although the two later became friends . Pendderwen was particularly influenced by Welsh mythology , and on a visit to Britain he spent time with the Alexandrian Wiccans Alex Sanders and Stewart Farrar , subsequently introducing various Alexandrian elements into Feri Wicca . In the early 1970s , the Andersons established a new coven with Pendderwen and his initiate , Alison Harlow . After Pendderwen married , his wife also joined this coven , although it disbanded in 1974 . 
 = = = Anderson 's teaching = = = 
 Over the next four decades , the Andersons would initiate between twenty @-@ five and thirty people into their tradition . Anderson has been described as one of the " founding teachers " and the " seminal voice " of the Feri tradition , although – according to Feri initiate Storm <unk> – he preferred to refer to himself as " Grand Master and a fairy chief " . The original word that the Andersons used for their tradition was Vicia , which Cora claimed was Italian . She added that " the name Fairy became accidentally attached to our tradition because Victor so often mentioned that word in speaking of nature spirits and Celtic magic " . Early initiates alternately spelled the name of the tradition as Fairy , Faery , or Faerie , although Anderson began using the spelling Feri during the 1990s to differentiate it from other witchcraft traditions of the same name ; not all practitioners followed his example . Cora claimed that Feri was the word 's original spelling , adding that it meant " the things of magic " . Anderson also referred to his form of Wicca as the Pictish tradition . In their writing , the Andersons mixed terminology adopted from Huna , Gardnerian Wicca , and Voodoo , believing that all reflected the same underlying magico @-@ religious tradition . It drew heavily upon the <unk> system developed by Max Freedom Long . According to one Feri initiate , <unk> Blackthorn : 
 " The Andersons ' teaching method was very informal . There were no classes in an academic sense , only conversations and the occasional ritual , usually followed by a home @-@ cooked meal . Discussions with Victor were non @-@ linear and overflowing with information . Someone once aptly remarked that talking to Victor was like to trying to drink from a fire hose . Often the connecting threads and underlying patterns in the information didn 't become apparent until later on . There was also a non @-@ verbal component to Victor 's teaching . He was a true shaman , and had the ability to shift the consciousness of his students on a level well below the surface of conversation . " 
 According to Kelly : 
 " Studying with Victor presented some unusual problems . He demanded as much respect as any working @-@ class grandfather might . One could ask for clarification , but to even hint that one disagreed with him , or worse yet , to contradict him , would result in an immediate and permanent order to leave . One was tempted to ask such forbidden questions because Victor lived in mythic time and was totally uninterested in other people 's concepts of logic or consistency ... Another student told me that when Victor read a new book and believed it was true , then he considered it to have always been true and would rethink his history accordingly . " 
 According to one initiate , Jim Schuette , Anderson was " a taskmaster . He took pride in testing his students . " One of those initiated into the Anderson 's Feri tradition was Starhawk , who incorporated ideas from the Feri tradition when creating Reclaiming . She also included aspects from it in her 1979 book , The Spiral Dance , including mention of the Iron and Pearl Pentagram and the three souls , all of which originated within Feri Wicca . Another prominent initiate was Gabriel Carillo ( Caradoc ap <unk> ) , who in the late 1970s developed a written body of Feri teachings , and began offering paid classes in the tradition in the 1980s , generating the <unk> lineage ; doing so generated controversy among Feri initiates , with critics believing that it was morally wrong to charge for teaching . 
 = = = Poetry and final years = = = 
 In 1970 Anderson privately published Thorns of the Blood Rose , which contained poems that he had authored over the previous 25 years . He stated that " every poem is a love letter to the Goddess " . Money to publish the book had come from Cora 's savings , with sales barely covering the costs of publication , so a second printing was not possible at that time . In 1975 , this book received the Clover International Poetry Competition Award , and in 1980 it was republished by Pendderwen , who also put some of Anderson 's poems to music for his own 1975 album , Songs for the Old Religion . Anderson also contributed work to Pagan magazines like Witch Eye , Green Egg , and <unk> . Anderson had assembled a group of poems to be published as a second book , released posthumously as Lilith 's Garden in 2005 . 
 To honor her fiftieth wedding anniversary , in 1994 Cora authored a book titled Fifty Years in the Feri Tradition , deeming it a tribute to her husband . It has been termed " the definitive written work on Feri <unk> and thought " . In 1998 , Cora suffered a stroke and was left largely bedridden by its effects . 
 At the time of his death , he was still running a coven , which was known as <unk> or Blue Circle . He died at his home on September 20 , 2001 . He was survived by his wife , son , and various grandchildren and great @-@ grandchildren . Cora then appointed a woman named <unk> , or April Niino , to be the new Grandmaster of the Feri tradition in summer 2003 . The tradition itself survived , with various publications appearing that discussed the practice of magic from a Feri perspective . 
 = = Teachings = = 
 Anderson 's Feri Wicca tradition <unk> revolved around a Goddess , who was named Mari after the Basque folkloric character . In Feri theology , Mari was accompanied by a male consort , a Horned God named Krom . Krom was also viewed as a union of two separate entities , the Divine Twins . Cora claimed that the Goddess had created these Twins , " not because she had to have male help , but because in her divine lust she desired them " . According to Anderson , the name Mari meant " mother of water " , and he described both Mari and Krom as having been the deity names of " the tiny dark aborigines of Scotland , Ireland , and the ancient British Isles " . The God was also referred to as <unk> Taus . He stressed the view that these deities were real entities , rather than Jungian archetypes , the latter being a view that had been espoused by other Pagans . 
 Systems of morality in Feri revolved largely around the idea of kala ; Cora stated that this term was borrowed from the Hawaiian language and that it meant " keep [ ing ] oneself clean and bright and free from complexes within and without " . Cora stated that the Feri tradition had " a code of honor and sexual morality which is as tough and demanding as the Bushido of Japan and of Shinto " . She added that while Christian missionaries would understand Feri as a " sex cult " , " we do not behave like a bunch of <unk> mad dogs in heat " . Initiation into Feri was a sexual act , and according to Cora " in initiation you literally marry the Goddess , her dual consort and the Gods , whether you are male or female " . It involved a male priest giving the female initiate the names of the God and Goddess upon orgasm . If the female initiate was already betrothed to another , or did otherwise not wish to have intercourse with the priest , then a ritual known as the Intentions of the Heart took place . In this , her next sexual act with another person would be considered her initiation . When a female initiated a male , there was a similarly sexual component although according to Cora , " there are some important differences " . 
 The Andersons taught that there were three parts of the soul , with Doyle White believing that they had adopted this belief from those of Hawaii . Cora stated that the first part of the soul inhabited " the etheric body or double " , surrounding and penetrating the physical body , extending about 2 cm from human flesh and colored either " a misty blue @-@ gray " or " a lovely electric pink " . According to her , the second part of the soul inhabited the aura and extended 8 to 9 inches from the physical body . She believed that the third part of the soul was " the <unk> " and lived in the top of the aura , appearing as a blue , white or gold ball of light . The Andersons also expressed a belief in reincarnation , believing that the allocation of one 's future births were organized by karma . They taught that between incarnations , a soul could travel to one of nine etheric globes surrounding the Earth , in which existed " well @-@ defined classes of nature spirits " which included gnomes , <unk> , <unk> , and salamanders . 
 Cora described Feri as the " direct survival of old Stone Age religion " , reflecting a trend within the Wiccan community for retaining faith in the witch @-@ cult hypothesis long after it was academically discredited by historians . The Andersons believed that the Witchcraft religion had emerged in Africa and been spread throughout the world , believing that Feri Wicca was essentially the same as Sami indigenous religion , <unk> , and Santeria . She believed that the ritual tools of " the Craft " were " very much alike throughout the world in both time and place " . She listed the ritual tools as an <unk> " to raise or focus power " , a binding cord for use in " ritual liberation and unbinding " , as well as a scourge " to raise power " , although the latter was never used to whip human beings . A chalice is used in rituals , symbolizing " the yoni female receptacle of the life force " , with an accompanying stone or wax phallus which is sometimes dipped into the chalice during rituals . A stone or wooden egg " honors the cosmic egg which God held in her womb " . Cora stated that in their rituals " power is raised and used in magic operations for the good of our human race , our ecology , or for necessary martial purposes " . 
 According to Adler , Anderson had " a very poetic way of looking at the world " . Alison Harlow had informed her that Anderson 's claims about his origins often changed , with Doyle White commenting that " Anderson believed that the telling of spiritual ' truths ' through stories was more important than factual accounts of the past " . Anderson described Feri witchcraft as " a devotional science " , and his wife called him " an Einstein of the occult " . Cora claimed that the couple were " scientists in the truest sense " . Adler noted that some of the " hallmarks " of the Feri tradition were its " shamanic practices and sexual mysticism " . It only involved one initiation . There is no set book of liturgy in the tradition , with teachings being passed down orally . Practitioner Storm <unk> noted that " the Feri tradition is less about specific practices and more about energetic experience " . 
 = Final Fantasy Tactics Advance = 
 Final Fantasy Tactics Advance ( <unk> , Fainaru Fantajī Takutikusu Adobansu ) is a tactical role @-@ playing game developed and published by Square ( now Square Enix ) for the Nintendo Game Boy Advance . A spin @-@ off of the popular Final Fantasy series , the game shares several traits with 1997 's Final Fantasy Tactics , although it is not a direct sequel . The player assembles a clan of characters , and controls their actions over grid @-@ like battlefields . Players are mostly free to decide the classes , abilities , and statistics of their characters . 
 The game 's story centers on four children ; Marche , Mewt , Ritz , and Doned , who live in a small town named St. Ivalice . The children are transported to a realm of the same name as their town , " Ivalice " , after discovering an ancient magical book . The story then focuses on the exploits of Marche as he attempts to return to the real world while facing opposition from those around him . 
 Tactics Advance is one of the initial products from the cooperation of Square and Nintendo made for the Game Boy Advance console ; it was developed by the team brought over from the game company Quest Corporation . Following its release , Tactics Advance @-@ themed merchandise was introduced . The game was positively received . It has a sequel , Final Fantasy Tactics A2 : Grimoire of the Rift for the Nintendo DS . 
 Tactics Advance was re @-@ released for the Nintendo Wii U Virtual Console on January 28 , 2016 for Europe / Australia & North America with Japan on March 30 , 2016 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 In Tactics Advance , turn @-@ based tactical battles take place on a three @-@ dimensional isometric field . The player takes the role of Marche , a clan leader ; he must organize the clan 's members and advance their status through missions that are offered in pubs . The player competes against the computer 's team in turn @-@ based play , although unlike Final Fantasy Tactics characters execute their actions instantly . 
 Missions are tasks undertaken by a clan . There are four types of missions : regular , encounter , dispatch , and area . In regular missions , Marche 's entire party ventures to a particular location to do battle . Many of these missions are used to advance the story . In encounter missions , Marche 's group battles a rival mercenary clan by purchasing a mission or meeting them on the map . In dispatch missions , which do not involve battle , Marche temporarily sends away one member from his party . Area missions are usually a dispatch mission where Marche 's clan can liberate certain regions to obtain bonuses and discounts at shops . 
 Some missions , typically dispatch missions , require a special item to be in possession in order to accept the mission . Others require a dispatch character to have a specific job class . In regards to items , this may mean another mission must be done to get an item that would allow you to perform the later mission . 
 The world map is initially empty except for the starting location ; it is customized as the player wins location " tokens " after certain missions . These tokens represent different terrains and settlements , such as plains , mountains , deserts , forests , and towns , that can be placed in slots on the world map . Items are rewarded to the player depending on the placement of the tokens . Ivalice also introduces areas called <unk> , lawless slums that Judges avoid . Jagd is a German word which means the hunt . Jagds are the only places in the game in which a character can die ; everywhere else , they are protected from death by the Judges and are simply knocked out . 
 Tactics Advance also offers multiplayer capability for two players . Players may cooperate or compete using a link @-@ cable peripheral , and also trade items and party members . Additional missions and items are also offered when players link . 
 = = = Job system = = = 
 There are 34 " jobs " in Tactics Advance that govern a character 's stats , equipment , and abilities . Most items that can be equipped have various abilities assigned to them , each available for use by characters of a certain job while the item is equipped . When a battle is completed , characters will receive Ability Points ( AP ) distributed over their currently equipped weapons or items ( such as armor ) . Once a target amount of AP has been accumulated for a given ability , the character will master that ability , allowing the character to use them at any time , regardless of items equipped and job chosen . Mastery of abilities in different jobs will eventually allow the character access to more jobs . For example , if a human unit wishes to change jobs to Paladin , it needs to master at least two " action " abilities from the Soldier job . 
 Units have a primary job which determines the stat boosts they receive when they level up and the attributes associated with that class . A unit may also have a secondary job set of abilities , where it can use any abilities of the selected job , but with the stat profile of the primary job . For example , an Assassin with a Sniper secondary job could use abilities from both jobs , but has the stat profile and appearance of an Assassin , its primary job . This may deny the use of some abilities depending on their equipped weapon . In the previous example , any abilities that require the possession of a great bow , will not be allowed for use if the character has a Katana equipped . 
 Tactics Advance also introduces five playable races : Humans , the small <unk> Moogles , the strong lizard @-@ like Bangaa , the agile rabbit @-@ like Viera , and the magically @-@ skilled Nu Mou . Certain jobs are only available to certain races . Along with the abilities obtained with experience , each race has a guardian beast called a " Totema " to represent whom and which can be summoned to whose aid when a member of that race has 10 Judge Points , that is after your clan has defeated that Totema as part of the main story line . 
 = = = Laws = = = 
 One arbitrary game mechanic of Tactics Advance is the Laws system . Laws are set by Judges , invincible arbiters present at each battle , with some exceptions . Laws may forbid the use of certain weapons , items , elemental spells , or status changes . Breaking a law results in punishment by <unk> , the receipt of a red or yellow card . Imprisonment happens if a character infringes a law twice or knocks out another unit with a forbidden ability or weapon . However , Jagds have no Judges or laws ; units knocked out in the Jagds will die and permanently leave the clan if they are not revived by the end of the battle . 
 To offset the difficulty of having things forbidden for use , there are certain things that are recommended by the Judges , and therefore grant Judge Points if used . Judge Points ( JP ) are used to carry out combos with nearby allies or to summon a Totema . JP are also received upon knocking out an opponent . Later in the game , the player gains the ability to use law cards , which can add laws , and anti @-@ law cards , which can nullify laws that are already in effect . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The story of Tactics Advance revolves around three primary characters : Marche Radiuju , the main character who battles the dream worlds of his friends ; Ritz Malheur , a stubborn girl who speaks her mind and changes sides in her struggle for self @-@ acceptance ; and Mewt Randell , a boy whose mother died that discovers a magical entity that changes the world into the world of Ivalice . There are also secondary characters , such as Doned Radiuju , Marche 's little brother who does not desire to return to the real world , since he is sick in the real world and healthy in the dream one ; and Cid Randell , Mewt 's father who becomes the <unk> of Ivalice . 
 Within Ivalice , there are other characters that help advance the plot . Some characters befriended Marche , such as the moogles Montblanc and Nono ; <unk> <unk> , a Nu Mou troublemaker and self @-@ proclaimed genius ; and Shara , a Viera archer who befriends Ritz . There are other characters who antagonize Marche , including <unk> Swain , a Nu Mou Royal mage in Mewt 's service ; <unk> <unk> , a mysterious enforcer who replaces the Judges when they become independent of the Palace ; and Queen <unk> , who is the ruler of Ivalice and was in the Gran Grimoire itself in a form modeled after Mewt 's deceased mother . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 Ivalice is a world created by four ordinary children : Marche Radiuju , a new student and resident of St. Ivalice and its school ; Mewt Randell , a shy boy still attached to the memory of his late mother ; Ritz Malheur , an assertive and outspoken classmate of Marche and Mewt ; and Doned Radiuju , Marche 's younger , handicapped brother and a big fan of fantasy novels and video games . Mewt comes across a dusty old tome in a local used bookstore and eagerly wishes to show it to his friends . Unaware that the book is the legendary Gran Grimoire , Mewt brings the book over to Marche 's house along with Ritz . The old book is written in a language none of them have ever seen before , and a single inscription reads : " Alta <unk> , <unk> <unk> " . The next morning , Marche wakes up in the world of Ivalice . The fantasy Ivalice is supposedly a reincarnation of Mewt 's memories from a Final Fantasy game . 
 Marche is separated from the others , and immediately begins a quest to return home . Even after realizing how much better his life is in the new Ivalice , he believes that none of it is real and is even more determined to return to his home when he realizes that everyone in town has been dragged into the dream as well , many of whom are now suffering under Mewt 's rule or are being slaughtered by the adventuring Clans that populate the world . The other children , and Mewt 's father Cid , slowly realize through Marche 's efforts that the world has been shaped according to their wishes . Mewt is no longer being teased , is reunited with his deceased mother , and is now the Prince of Ivalice ; Ritz no longer has her white <unk> hair , instead having the silky red hair which she always wanted ; Doned can now walk and is no longer sickly ; Marche is suddenly athletic and popular ; Cid is the highest @-@ ranking official in the nation ; and all of them now live in Final Fantasy , the video game the children all love . 
 Eventually Marche succeeds in his quest to return Ivalice to normal . He achieves this by destroying the crystals , or world threads , of Ivalice , defeating <unk> <unk> ( the manifestation of Mewt 's negative emotions ) , and killing the Li @-@ Grim , the physical manifestation of the book 's wish @-@ based magic that had been masquerading as Mewt 's mother , Queen <unk> . He teaches the other children in the process that they cannot live in fantasy but must learn to live with their misfortunes in reality . The other children are wiser from the experience , as the ending reveals them all to have become happy with themselves . 
 In addition to the main plot , there are two side plots : the Redwing Arc and the Judge Arc . The Redwing Arc centers around the Redwings clan , a foreign crime ring , their subordinate clan Borzoi , and their smuggled foreign monsters . The other is the Judge Arc , unlockable after beating the main three hundred missions . This serves as an alternative ending where Marche never goes on his quest and stays in Ivalice , overthrows several corrupt judges , and becomes next in line for Cid 's judge sword . 
 = = Development = = 
 Rumors of the game 's development began when Square announced its publishing agreement with Nintendo , and it was later confirmed by the producer Matsuno . The development team of Tactics Advance , Square 's Product Development Division 4 , was constructed from employees of Quest Corporation , and work began in February 2002 . This comes after Quest announced the handover of its software development team to Square , of which the former is famed for its Tactics Ogre series . Initially thought of as a port of Final Fantasy Tactics , Final Fantasy Tactics Advance is developed with an entirely new storyline and setting , and received significant changes to make it more user @-@ friendly for the GBA handheld console ; e.g. a quick @-@ save function . 
 Final Fantasy Tactics Advance uses the gameplay of Final Fantasy Tactics , but introduced certain changes such as a customizable map for the world of Ivalice . While built for the Game Boy Advance , Final Fantasy Tactics Advance 's graphics are vibrantly colored and extensively detailed , and though environments and characters are wholly sprite @-@ based , facial expressions are easily identifiable and many motion frames have been given to create a smooth animation . The game also introduced an option to switch between three display modes . Two of the modes are optimized for gameplay on Game Boy Advance and the new Game Boy Advance SP respectively , and there 's also a TV mode for better color display while playing this game into a television screen by using a Game Boy Player which , must be attached to a Game Cube for this to work . 
 In Japan , Final Fantasy Tactics Advance 's story was expanded and broadcast in Japanese radio stations . The radio drama entitled Final Fantasy Tactics Advance Radio Edition was broadcast in four radio stations within Japan from early January 2003 to late March 2003 . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The music in Final Fantasy Tactics Advance was primarily composed by Hitoshi Sakimoto , with additional music contributed by Kaori Ohkoshi and Ayako Saso ; Nobuo Uematsu provided the main theme . The Final Fantasy Tactics Advance Original Soundtrack album was released by DigiCube on February 19 , 2003 . It spans 74 tracks and has a duration of 2 : 05 : 27 . The first disk includes every song from the game , as it sounds through the Game Boy Advance hardware . The second disk contains fully orchestrated versions of 32 of the same 42 tracks . A new age arrangement album entitled White : Melodies of Final Fantasy Tactics Advance , a selection of musical tracks from the game arranged by Yo Yamazaki , Akira Sasaki , and Satoshi Henmi , was released by SME Visual Works on February 26 , 2003 . White spans 11 tracks and has a duration of 46 : 10 . Within the game , the classical @-@ themed soundtrack is compressed into MIDI file format . Simple sound effects are used during battles , and there are no voices or speech within the game . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Final Fantasy Tactics Advance sold over 440 @,@ 000 copies during its year of release in Japan , with nearly 225 @,@ 000 units being sold in its first week alone . By August 6 , 2004 , more than 1 million units of the game were sold in North America and Europe together . 
 The game was well received among the gaming community , widely regarded to feature an outstanding combination of music , graphics , gameplay , and storyline . Final Fantasy Tactics Advance won Best Handheld Game at the 7th Annual Interactive Achievement Awards in 2004 . It was also rated as outstanding by IGN ( 9 @.@ 0 out of 10 ) and given 5 out of 5 by GameSpy . In 2007 , Final Fantasy Tactics Advance was named 14th best Game Boy Advance game of all time in IGN 's feature reflecting on the Game Boy Advance 's long lifespan . It was also rated the 67th best game made on a Nintendo System in Nintendo Power 's Top 200 Games list . 
 Reviewers were pleased with graphics and visuals of Final Fantasy Tactics Advance ; GameSpot adding that the battles are " clear and colorful " , and character jobs are easily identified , though gameplay becomes slow when too many character sprites are in one screen . The gameplay is also lauded for retaining the elements of Tactics Ogre yet offers freedom to players to develop characters as they wish . GameNOW said that the game " lives up to its legacy — and then some " , and called it " easily one of the best GBA games around " . Criticism was thrown to the game 's menu , which was cluttered with complicated options in organizing the clan members , and did not detail out statistics for characters and equipment . Some reviewers thought there are too many character jobs since some jobs overlap one another and certain abilities are redundant . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In 2007 , a sequel to Final Fantasy Tactics Advance was released for the Nintendo DS as part of the Ivalice Alliance series , Final Fantasy Tactics A2 : Grimoire of the Rift . While the story focuses on different characters than Advance , several characters from the game appear in cameo roles , such as Montblanc and Mewt . Montblanc also appears in Final Fantasy XII as the leader of Clan <unk> . 
 To commemorate the release of Final Fantasy Tactics Advance in Japan , several pieces of merchandise were introduced exclusive for the region : web money cards , posters , character card collections and a set of twenty pin badges . Square and Nintendo also announced a limited @-@ edition Final Fantasy Tactics Advance @-@ themed Game Boy Advance SP package to commemorate the game and the console 's launching in February 2003 . A Japanese @-@ exclusive adaptation of the game 's story in radio drama form was also released . It was aired in January to March 2003 . The series was released by DigiCube on CD in four separate parts , with some changes to plot details . 
 = Getty Conservation Institute = 
 The Getty Conservation Institute ( GCI ) , located in Los Angeles , California , is a program of the J. Paul Getty Trust . It is headquartered at the Getty Center but also has facilities at the Getty Villa , and commenced operation in 1985 . The GCI is a private international research institution dedicated to advancing conservation practice through the creation and delivery of knowledge . It " serves the conservation community through scientific research , education and training , model field projects , and the dissemination of the results of both its own work and the work of others in the field " and " adheres to the principles that guide the work of the Getty Trust : service , philanthropy , teaching , and access . " GCI has activities in both art conservation and architectural conservation . 
 GCI conducts scientific research related to art conservation . It offers formal education and training programs , and it published a number of scholarly books . GCI has supported field projects around the world to preserve cultural heritage . 
 = = Scientific projects = = 
 GCI scientists study the deterioration of objects and buildings , and how to prevent or stop such deterioration . One of many projects in this area involved the effect of outdoor and indoor air pollutants on museum collections . Another project analyzed the cause of deterioration of the sandstone in the original National Capitol Columns now at the United States National Arboretum . 
 In addition , GCI " conducts scientific research on materials ' composition . " For example , a project on the conservation of photographs has as one of its objectives the creation of an " Atlas of Analytical <unk> of Photographic Processes " which will provide " a precise chemical fingerprint of all the 150 or so ways pictures have been developed . " As a part of that project , Getty scientists once examined the world 's first photograph from nature by <unk> <unk> . Using X @-@ ray fluorescence spectroscopy , reflectance Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy , and other techniques during the 2002 @-@ 2003 project , they found ( for example ) that bitumen of Judea was present in the image . 
 Scientists at GCI viewed the CheMin instrument aboard the Curiosity rover , currently exploring the Gale crater on Mars , as a potentially valuable means to examine ancient works of art without damaging them . Until recently , only a few instruments were available to determine the composition without cutting out physical samples large enough to potentially damage the artifacts . The CheMin on Curiosity directs a beam of X @-@ rays at particles as small as 400 µm and reads the radiation scattered back to determine the composition of an object in minutes . Engineers created a smaller , portable version , named the X @-@ <unk> . Fitting into a few briefcase @-@ sized boxes , it can examine objects on site , while preserving their physical integrity . It is now being used by Getty scientists to analyze a large collection of museum antiques and the Roman ruins of Herculaneum , Italy . 
 = = Education and training = = 
 Training of interested parties around the world is important for the sustainability of GCI 's work . For example , GCI collaborated with other organizations to create a course " to assist museum personnel in safeguarding their collections from the effects of natural and human @-@ made emergencies . " Also , GCI developed a course on the " Fundamentals of the Conservation of Photographs " which is now taught in eastern Europe by the Academy of Fine Arts and Design in Bratislava and the Slovak National Library . Besides courses and workshops , GCI has also been involved with long @-@ term education programs , such as establishing a Master 's degree program in Archaeological and Ethnographic Conservation in collaboration with the University of California , Los Angeles . 
 = = Field projects = = 
 GCI 's field projects are " selected based on how they fit the institute 's goals of raising public awareness , contributing new , broadly applicable information to the field , and supporting cultural heritage " and " must be executed in collaboration with partners … who must be serious about their efforts … so that projects are assured of continuing after the Getty 's involvement ceases . " Among other completed GCI field projects were efforts to preserve the Mogao Caves and <unk> Grottoes in China ( announced in 1989 ) ; to restore prehistoric rock paintings of Sierra de San Francisco in Baja California Sur ( 1994 ) ; and to protect ancient buildings and archaeological sites in Iraq following the start of the Iraq war ( 2004 ) . 
 = = Dissemination of information = = 
 It has been stated that " perhaps the institute 's most profound contribution to conservation is the dissemination of information and methods learned in the field . " Methods of information dissemination include conferences ; lectures ; books ; and online publications , newsletters , video , and audio . 
 The following are selected books published by GCI : 
 Ward , Philip R. The nature of conservation : a race against time . Marina del Rey , CA : Getty Conservation Institute , 1986 . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 00 @-@ 5 
 The conservation of tapestries and embroideries : proceedings of meetings at the Institut royal du patrimoine <unk> , Brussels , Belgium , September 21 – 24 , 1987 . Los Angeles : Getty Conservation Institute , 1989 . ISBN 0 @-@ 89236 @-@ 154 @-@ 9 
 Cather , Sharon . The conservation of wall paintings : proceedings of a symposium organized by the Courtauld Institute of Art and the Getty Conservation Institute , London , July 13 – 16 , 1987 . Marina del Rey , CA : Getty Conservation Institute , 1991 . ISBN 0 @-@ 89236 @-@ 162 @-@ X 
 <unk> , Ennis , and Jeffrey Levin . Picture LA : landmarks of a new generation . Marina del Rey , CA : Getty Conservation Institute , 1994 . ISBN 0 @-@ 89236 @-@ 305 @-@ 3 
 Klein , Kathryn . The unbroken thread : conserving the textile traditions of Oaxaca . Los Angeles : Getty Conservation Institute , 1997 . ISBN 0 @-@ 89236 @-@ 380 @-@ 0 
 Corzo , Miguel Angel . Mortality immortality ? : the legacy of 20th @-@ century art . Los Angeles : Getty Conservation Institute , 1999 . ISBN 0 @-@ 89236 @-@ 528 @-@ 5 
 <unk> , Valerie , and Sharon L. Jones . Building an emergency plan : a guide for museums and other cultural institutions . Los Angeles : Getty Conservation Institute , 1999 . ISBN <unk> 
 <unk> , Bertrand , Jean @-@ Paul Gandolfo , and Sibylle Monod . A guide to the preventive conservation of photograph collections . Los Angeles : Getty Conservation Institute , 2003 . ISBN 0 @-@ 89236 @-@ 701 @-@ 6 
 <unk> , Max , and Roy L Perkinson . The restoration of engravings , drawings , books , and other works on paper . Los Angeles : Getty Conservation Institute , 2006 . ISBN 0 @-@ 89236 @-@ 835 @-@ 7 
 Rainer , Leslie and <unk> Bass Rivera editors . The Conservation of Decorated Surfaces on <unk> Architecture . Los Angeles : Getty Conservation Institute , 2006 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 89236 @-@ 850 @-@ 1 
 <unk> , Giulia , Maria Pia <unk> , and Ornella Salvadori . Plant Biology for Cultural Heritage : <unk> and Conservation . Los Angeles : Getty Conservation Institute , 2009 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 89236 @-@ 939 @-@ 3 
 Here is a selection of courses by GCI : 
 <unk> ( International Course on Architectural Records , Inventories and Information Systems for Conservation ) 
 = = Senior staff = = 
 Since GCI was established , it has had three directors . Besides the director , the GCI senior staff includes : 
 Associate Director , Programs : Jeanne Marie <unk> 
 Associate Director , Administration : Kathleen Gaines 
 Chief Scientist : Giacomo Chiari 
 Head of Education : Kathleen <unk> 
 Head of Field Projects : Susan Macdonald 
 In 2009 , GCI had a $ 33 million budget , down from $ 41 million in 2008 . 
 = = Getty conservation activities outside GCI = = 
 In addition to the work of the GCI , the J. Paul Getty Trust contributes to the conservation field through the J. Paul Getty Museum conservation departments , the conservation collection located in the library at the Getty Research Institute , and conservation grants provided by the Getty Foundation . 
 = Original Song = 
 " Original Song " is the sixteenth episode of the second season of the American television series Glee , and the thirty @-@ eighth episode overall . It was written by Ryan Murphy , directed by Bradley Buecker , and premiered on Fox in the United States on March 15 , 2011 . McKinley High 's glee club , New Directions , decides to prepare original songs for the Regionals competition against the Dalton Academy Warblers , and <unk> High 's Aural Intensity coached by Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) . Blaine ( Darren Criss ) finally shows his affection for Kurt ( Chris Colfer ) . Rachel ( Lea Michele ) tries to repair her relationship with Finn ( Cory Monteith ) and faces off with Quinn ( Dianna Agron ) . New Directions wins the Midwest Regional Show Choir competition , advancing to the upcoming Nationals competition in New York City . 
 " Original Song " garnered mostly positive reception . Critics praised the interaction between Kurt and Blaine , as well as most of the original songs in the episode . Mark Perigard of the Boston Herald called it a " great " episode " filled with so many good moments " . Cover versions of six songs were featured , including " Raise Your Glass " by Pink and " Blackbird " by The Beatles . The episode also featured an extensive selection of original songs , more so than any previous episode of Glee . The musical performances , cover versions , and original songs in the episode were met with generally positive reviews from critics . With the exception of " Jesus Is My Friend " and " Only Child " , all songs were released as singles available for digital download . 
 Upon its initial airing , this episode was viewed by 11 @.@ 15 million American viewers and garnered a 4 @.@ 2 / 13 rating / share in the 18 @-@ 49 demographic , according to the Nielsen ratings . The total viewership and ratings for this episode declined slightly from the previous episode , " Sexy " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After the Warblers rehearse " Misery " in preparation for Regionals , Kurt Hummel ( Chris Colfer ) confesses his envy over how the Warblers always give Blaine ( Darren Criss ) the solo performance . Later , Kurt honors the sudden death of the Warblers ' canary mascot , Pavarotti , with a performance of " Blackbird " . Blaine is visibly moved by Kurt 's emotional tribute and realizes that he has feelings for Kurt . He later argues that the Warblers shouldn 't rely on him alone for Regionals , and proposes that instead of " Misery " , the group should feature a duet . Blaine is adamant that Kurt be his partner for it , and the vote in favor of it is nearly unanimous . As the two are about to practice their duet of " Candles " , Blaine confesses that he wanted to spend more time with him , and they share their first kiss . 
 Rachel 's ( Lea Michele ) second attempt at an original song , " Only Child " , proves to be only a small improvement over " My Headband " . Finn ( Cory Monteith ) encourages her to dig deeper into her pain to find her song . Quinn 's ( Dianna Agron ) desire to become prom queen prompts her to get close to Rachel in order to run interference between her and Finn . In doing this , she supports Rachel 's idea of writing original songs for Regionals ; the members of New Directions eventually agree , due to the fact they received a cease and desist letter from My Chemical Romance saying they can 't perform " Sing " for Regionals . Sue later admits to forging the letter in yet another attempt to sabotage the glee club . Rachel confronts Quinn about her relationship with Finn , trusting her to be honest . Quinn admits they have been together for a couple of weeks and tells Rachel that she doesn 't belong in Lima . Quinn says she will remain behind with Finn and Rachel can 't hate her for helping to send her on her way . Hurt , Rachel goes home and uses Quinn 's words as a springboard for writing a new song . 
 Brittany ( Heather Morris ) confronts Santana ( Naya Rivera ) , saying that she misses their friendship . However , Santana is hostile and angrily says that Brittany " blew her off " , while Brittany shows that she is upset that Santana is still dating Sam ( Chord Overstreet ) even after confessing her love to Brittany . The two are interrupted by Sue , finding that she has filled their lockers with dirt , an event later brought up during the Glee club 's song writing session . 
 In rehearsal , director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) passes out rhyming dictionaries to help the glee club with songwriting . Showcasing their original songs , Santana sings " Trouty Mouth " as a tribute to Sam 's large mouth and Puck ( Mark Salling ) sings " Big Ass Heart " to Lauren ( Ashley Fink ) . Mercedes ( Amber Riley ) later sings " Hell to the No " . While Will agrees that it 's a great song , he says that it 's not appropriate for Regionals , also noting that the best songs " come from a place of pain " . After the club members share recent hurtful anecdotes , he writes " Loser Like Me " on the board , deciding that could be the title for the yet @-@ unwritten song . 
 The judges for this year 's Regionals competition are local broadcasting legend Rod Remington ( Bill A. Jones ) , Tea Party candidate and home schooler Tammy Jean Albertson ( Kathy Griffin ) , and former exotic dancer Sister Mary Constance ( Loretta Devine ) . Aural Intensity opens the competition with " Jesus Is My Friend " , a song that Sue selected to cater specifically to the judges . The Warblers open with Kurt and Blaine 's duet of " Candles " , followed by " Raise Your Glass " . Rachel conveys feelings to Finn through the performance of her original song , " Get It Right " , reflecting on the past failures in their rocky relationship and expressing her deep desire to reconcile with Finn . The New Directions respond to Sue 's bullying with their second original song , " Loser Like Me " , an anthem dedicated to the underdogs of high school . New Directions wins the Regionals competition . Rachel is honored with New Directions ' first MVP award . 
 = = Production = = 
 The casting notice for Tammy Jean described her as " a middle @-@ aged recent Tea Party candidate and home schooler — a Sarah Palin type " , while Sister Mary Constance is a former stripper . Kathy Griffin and Loretta Devine were cast to guest @-@ star as Regionals judges Tammy Jean Albertson and Sister Mary Constance respectively . Recurring characters who appear include New Directions members Mike Chang ( Harry Shum , Jr . ) , Sam Evans ( Chord Overstreet ) , Lauren Zizes ( Ashley Fink ) , and Blaine Anderson ( Darren Criss ) , the lead singer of the Dalton Academy Warblers . 
 Series producer Ryan Murphy first planned an episode entitled " Original Song " to air in early 2010 , during the series ' first season . Prior to this episode , most of Glee 's musical performances were cover versions , and by October 2009 he had received offers from multiple songwriters willing to devise original tracks . At the time , he stated that Diane Warren would write two ballads for the show , and if successful , Glee may continue to use original music in the future , but not all the time . These plans did not come to fruition , nor did a December 2009 claim by OneRepublic frontman Ryan Tedder that he had been recruited by Glee 's music supervisor , Adam Anders , to write an original song for the series . Murphy later stated that he planned to showcase original music during the second season , aiming to find a way for this to occur organically , as : " It wouldn ’ t work [ before ] if they just broke out and started singing their own songs . You wouldn 't get it . I think it has to be an assignment . " 
 Six original tracks were composed for " Original Song " , entitled " Get It Right " , " Loser Like Me " , " Hell to the No " , " Trouty Mouth " , " Only Child " and " Big Ass Heart " . The first two songs are featured on the series ' sixth soundtrack album , Glee : The Music , Volume 5 . In the episode , " Loser Like Me " was performed by New Directions , with club co @-@ captains Rachel Berry ( Lea Michele ) and Finn Hudson ( Cory Monteith ) on lead vocals . Described by Glee music supervisor Adam Anders as " a very uptempo , kind @-@ of @-@ summery hit " , the song was co @-@ written with Swedish music songwriter and producer Max Martin , known for his work with many pop artists . Having covered many of Martin 's co @-@ written songs on the series , including songs by Britney Spears and Kelly Clarkson , Anders felt it was appropriate to have his involvement . According to the American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers database , co @-@ writers on the song include Anders , Peer Åström , Savan Kotecha , and Johan Schuster . " Get It Right " is a ballad composed specifically for Michele by Anders , his writing partner , and his wife . " Hell to the No " was sung solo by Mercedes . It was titled for the character 's signature catchphrase and was co @-@ written by Anders , Astrom , and executive producer Ian Brennan . The episode also features cover versions of Pink 's " Raise Your Glass " , Maroon 5 's " Misery " , The Beatles 's " Blackbird " , Hey Monday 's " Candles " , and <unk> 's " Jesus Is My Friend " . All of the songs except " Jesus Is My Friend " and " Only Child " were released as singles available for digital download . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Original Song " was first broadcast on March 15 , 2011 in the United States on Fox . It garnered a 4 @.@ 2 / 13 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic , and received over 11 @.@ 15 million American viewers during its initial airing , despite airing simultaneously with NCIS on CBS , The Biggest Loser on NBC , No Ordinary Family on ABC , and One Tree Hill on The CW . The total viewership and ratings for this episode were slightly down from those of the previous episode , " Sexy " , which was watched by 11 @.@ 96 million American viewers and received a 4 @.@ 6 / 14 rating / share in the 18 @-@ 49 demographic upon first airing on television . 
 In Canada , this episode also aired on March 15 , 2011 on Global Television Network . The episode was watched by 1 @.@ 8 million viewers , making it the ninth most @-@ watched television program of the week . In Australia , the episode drew 972 @,@ 000 viewers , making Glee the tenth most @-@ watched show of the night . In the UK , the episode was watched by 2 @.@ 41 million viewers ( 1 @.@ 97 million on E4 , and 440 @,@ 000 on E4 + 1 ) , becoming the most @-@ watched show on cable for the week . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " Original Song " was met with mostly positive reception from critics upon its initial airing . James Poniewozik of Time called it a " solid " episode and wrote that " it did well by a couple of ongoing relationship stories . " Amy Reiter of the Los Angeles Times opined that it delivered several " long @-@ anticipated moments [ ... ] and several more we only wish we 'd thought to anticipate . " Mark Perigard of the Boston Herald deemed it a " great " episode , " filled with many great moments . " Robert Canning of IGN rated it 8 / 10 , signifying a " great " episode . Sandra Gonzalez of Entertainment Weekly praised the development of " Original Song " , and wrote : " One great thing about the episode was that after last week 's plot @-@ bomb @-@ filled episode , the show didn 't completely abandon what we 'd learned that week . " Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club graded it " B − " ; he noted that he enjoyed the scenes , but criticized the show for its inconsistency . Brett Berk of Vanity Fair praised the episode for " not only [ ... ] retreating into the series ’ s standard , flailing , everybody @-@ in @-@ the @-@ pool narrative template , or filling this metaphorical slough with more leaden tropes than Richard Serra circa 1968 , but by having the results be precisely the <unk> we all knew would occur . " Akash Nikolas at Zap2It praised the new song and its performance as a metaphor for the show : " New Directions flashed Glee ’ s trademark “ L ” sign , which the show has renamed as something cool . And instead of cups full of slush that 's usually thrown at the Glee Club , the cups were filled with red confetti and thrown at the audience . This neat moment captured the show ’ s conceit : taking something ugly and oppressive and turning it into something beautiful and celebratory . " 
 The guest performances made by Kathy Griffin and Loretta Devine were met with mixed reception from several critics . Amy Reiter was more critical on Griffin 's performance as Tammy Jean Albertson , and noted " while Kathy Griffin was sight @-@ gag funny as local tea party candidate Tammy Jean Albertson [ ... ] her lines fell a bit flat . " She went on to praise Devine 's performance as Sister Mary Constance , saying that her lines " totally hit the bull 's @-@ eye . " Robert Canning praised both performances , saying that it was the best part of the episode . He continued , " I love how the guest judge segments of these contest episodes are beginning to become mini @-@ series unto themselves . I hope that tradition continues . " James Poniewozik had mixed feelings regarding Griffin 's performance . He went on to write , " Glee can be sharp and topical enough that I thought it could actually do something clever with the much @-@ publicized cameo . Instead , the performance hinged on expected gags [ ... ] and Griffin delivered it all with a stiffness that felt more like a recitation than a performance . " Todd VanDerWerff reacted negatively to both performances . In his review of the episode , he opined , " That judges ’ scene [ ... ] was a pale retread of the original , only this time , it had Kathy Griffin and Loretta Devine , as well as a bunch of tired Tea Party gags that were tired when this episode was written . " 
 The Kurt – Blaine storyline was met with general acclaim from critics . In her review for the episode , Katie Morgan of Billboard reacted positively to the interaction between Kurt and Blaine . She wrote , " It sure took them long enough , but we 're so glad to finally see Kurt happy . " In his review , Mark Perigard opined , " It was utterly , sweetly romantic , and Criss sold the hell out of the moment . It ’ s long overdue and it will silence the growing legion of critics out there who were unhappy with the pace of this story and why Kurt always seemed to be stuck in pure misery . " Robert Canning was more critical on the storyline . He highly criticized Darren Criss ' performance as Blaine . In a detailed review regarding the storyline , Canning wrote , " Kurt finally got the first kiss he deserved . Too bad it came from the wooden , glass @-@ eyed Blaine . Chris Colfer has been in the running for performance awards for good reason . Darren Criss will not be . Colfer and his character deserve better than the cardboard , unemotional declaration of love that Criss delivered . Yay for Kurt and his first boyfriend , but that was a bland work up to their kiss . " Sandra Gonzalez called the whole development " simply perfect " . Kevin Fallon of The Atlantic thought the kiss was " sweet " , and stated that he was pleased that it attracted no controversy whatsoever . James Poniewozik reacted positively to the storyline . In his review , Poniewozik wrote , " As for the at @-@ long @-@ last kiss , it 's to Glee 's credit that it made me think , ‘ Finally , Blaine and Kurt are locking lips already ! ’ before it made me think , ‘ Look , an honest @-@ to @-@ God gay kiss , between two men , on my primetime TV show ! ’ " Aly Semigran of MTV praised the interaction between Kurt and Blaine , saying that the kiss scene was a " sweet , real and , shockingly , un @-@ hyped moment " . Semigran went on to praise the acting in the scene , saying that both actors " handled it with dignity and honesty " . Brett Berk deemed the interaction to be " appropriately fervid " . 
 = = = = Music and performances = = = = 
 The musical performances and selection in the episode were met with mixed response from critics . The original track " Loser Like Me " received general acclaim from critics . Berk praised the performance , and gave it four stars . He opined , " All four stars are for the lyrics [ ... ] in which the lovable dorks sing about being the lovable dorks we fell in love with [ ... ] " . In her review for the episode , Erica Futterman of Rolling Stone praised the song , and called it a " true anthem " that " ends triumphantly " . Raymond Flandez of The Wall Street Journal gave a positive review of the song : " The song grew out of a collaborative brainstorming session that went beyond rhyming dictionaries or first attempts at ditties such as ' Trouty Mouth ' , ' Big Ass Heart ' , and ' Hell to the No ' . " Jarrett Wieselman of the New York Post commended the show for the use of original songs , and wrote " Glee entered uncharted territory last night [ ... ] no , not Kurt 's first kiss . I 'm talking about New Directions dabbling in , and debuting , their very first original songs . It was as risky for the show as it was for the group since opting to perform wholly new creations would either give them a leg up on the competition or put them six feet under . " Bobby Hankinson of the Houston Chronicle praised the song , and deemed it " fun and summery " . 
 Sandra Gonzalez of Entertainment Weekly was generally positive on most of the songs featured in the episode . She gave the performance of " Loser Like Me " a " B " , and explained that " This one took a little time to grow on me . I liked it better on the show than when I heard it by itself , which is weird because it 's exactly the same thing . Goes to show how much of a difference a good performance [ ... ] makes . " Gonzalez gave the highest grade to the cover versions of " Misery " and " Raise Your Glass " , both performed by the Dalton Academy Warblers . In her review for " Misery " , she praised the performance , and gave it an " A " . She opined , " I 'm a sucker for a Warbler @-@ ized pop song , especially when it makes Blaine dance and make his weird , animated faces . They 're simply adorable , and these Warblers are simply amazing . " Gonzalez gave the performance of " Raise Your Glass " an " A " . The lowest grade given by Gonzalez was a " D " for Santana 's performance of " Trouty Mouth " . She explained " If we 're taking this song as a joke , it gets a ' B − ' because Santana sounded great . But [ ... ] I think about how bad I felt for Sam watching his utter mortification . " " Candles " was generally well received by Gonzalez . She gave the performance a " B " and went on to write " It ’ s really hard for this pair to live up to the awesomeness of ' Baby , It 's Cold Outside ' . I 'm sure they could one day , but this one fell a bit short for me musically . [ ... ] In the context of the show , however , it was a great moment . " 
 Amy Reiter of the Los Angeles Times reacted positively to all of the songs . In her review for " Original Song " , Reiter opined that " The original songs [ ... ] weren 't half bad : From Santana 's ode to poor , horrified Sam , ' Trouty Mouth , ' to Puck 's tribute to Lauren , ' Big Ass Heart , ' to Mercedes ' self @-@ celebrating ' Hell to the No , ' the original songs on this episode were funny and revealing . And rousing Regionals @-@ winning anthem ' Loser Like Me ' landed like an exuberant slushy in the face [ ... ] . " Katie Morgan of Billboard praised the performance of " Candles " , and called it " beautifully intimate " , and commended The Warblers ' " solid performance " . Todd <unk> of The A.V. Club responded negatively to " Trouty Mouth " , but was generally pleased with the other songs . VanDerWerff went on to praise the voice of Lea Michele : " The first song Rachel sang at regionals [ ... ] was a nicely done little ballad , the sort of song you could both see someone like Rachel writing and later belting . " James Poniewozik also praised the voice of Michele , as well as her character development . He opined , " That said , I like the arc of Rachel @-@ as @-@ songwriter , which has played to some of Lea Michele 's greatest strengths both as a comic and dramatic actress . " Robert Canning of IGN found the original songs to be " hilarious " . He opined , " Getting to run through a series of comical and catchy false starts was entertaining . Santana 's ' Trouty Mouth ' was sultry and hilarious . Puckerman 's rocking ode to Lauren , ' Big Ass Heart , ' was also a ridiculous treat . And then both were outdone by Mercedes ' stomping , Amy Winehouse @-@ aping ' Hell to the No ' . " 
 = = = Chart history = = = 
 Seven of the eleven songs featured on the episode charted on several popular musical charts . In the United States , " Loser Like Me " debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 at number six , and in Canada , the song debuted at number nine on the Canadian Hot 100 . The single was the second highest charting single for Glee after " Don 't Stop Believin ' " , and sold 210 @,@ 000 downloads its first week in the US , second only to the cast 's cover of Katy Perry 's " Teenage Dream " , which sold 214 @,@ 000 downloads in its first week . It was certified gold in the US before the end of 2011 . " Get It Right " debuted at number sixteen on the Billboard Hot 100 and number twenty @-@ three on the Canadian Hot 100 . These two original songs were featured in the soundtrack album Glee : The Music , Volume 5 . It was released on March 15 , 2011 , and debuted at number three on the Billboard 200 , selling over 90 @,@ 000 copies in its first week in the United States . A third original song , " Hell to the No " , was released only as a single , and debuted at number fifty @-@ three on the Billboard Hot 100 and number sixty @-@ five on the Canadian Hot 100 . Four covers from the episode were featured on the album Glee : The Music Presents the Warblers , which was released on April 19 , 2011 , and all four charted in the top 100 in the US , Australia , and Canada : " Misery " , " Blackbird " , " Candles " , and " Raise Your Glass " . 
 = Francisco Rafael Arellano Félix = 
 Francisco Rafael Arellano Félix ( 24 October 1949 – 18 October 2013 ) was a Mexican drug lord and former leader of the Tijuana Cartel , a drug trafficking organization . He was the oldest of seven brothers and headed the criminal organization early in the 1990s alongside them . Through his brother Benjamín , Francisco Rafael joined the Tijuana Cartel in 1989 following the arrest of Miguel Ángel Félix Gallardo , one of the most prominent drug czars in Mexico during the 1980s . When the Arellano Félix took control of the organization in the early 1990s , tensions with the rival Sinaloa Cartel prompted violent attacks and slayings from both fronts . 
 The drug lord was arrested in 1993 in Tijuana , Baja California , and imprisoned at Federal Social Readaptation Center No. 1 , a maximum security prison . In 2006 , he was extradited to the United States pending charges on drug trafficking in a California federal district court . He was released from prison two years later and deported back to Mexico . Back in his home country , Francisco Rafael had no other pending criminal charges . While celebrating his birthday in Los Cabos , Baja California Sur , on 18 October 2013 , a gunman disguised as a clown shot him dead . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Francisco Rafael Arellano Félix was born in Culiacán , Sinaloa , on 24 October 1949 , to Benjamín Francisco Arellano Sánchez ( father ) and Norma Alicia Félix <unk> ( mother ) . His father was from the state of Durango but emigrated to Sinaloa , where he met his wife , in the 1940s . The couple had eleven children , Francisco Rafael being the eldest of his seven brothers ( Benjamín , Carlos Alberto , Eduardo , Ramón Eduardo , Luis Fernando , Francisco Javier ) and four sisters ( Alicia María , <unk> , Norma Isabel and Leticia ) . He also had two half @-@ brothers , Jesús and Manuel Arellano , but their second surnames remain confidential . Francisco Rafael grew up in a modest house in Miguel Hidalgo St. # 566 in Culiacán , blocks away from the Autonomous University of Sinaloa , and lived there for about 20 years . Neighbors recall that the Arellano Félix brothers were " cheerful boys " without addictions and inclined to selling clothes , <unk> , and candy that they brought illegally from the United States . Francisco Rafael went to " Álvaro Obregón " elementary school a couple of streets away from their house . He later attended " Emilio <unk> " middle school in the same neighborhood . At a young age , Francisco Rafael dropped out of middle school to help out his father , a mechanic . Alongside his brothers Benjamín and Ramón , however , he also smuggled contraband from Tijuana . His affinity towards music led him and his two brothers to form a musical group known as " Sonido Escorpión " and later renamed as " Los Escorpiones " . By the 1970s , his family moved to Guadalajara , Jalisco , but Francisco Rafael stayed in Culiacán , where he owned an event center known as " El <unk> " . He then moved years later to Mazatlán and created the discothèque Frankie Oh . Francisco Rafael 's discothèque was a major nightlife attraction in Mazatlán during the mid @-@ 1980s . With an estimated US $ 5 million investment to build it , Frankie Oh had the capacity to host 2 @,@ 500 people ; it had an internal waterfall and a large dance floor surrounded by a fish tank . The nightclub 's theme also mirrored a zoo because it had several exotic animals , including two lions , in the entrances and in the surroundings . The only non @-@ living animal inside Frankie Oh was a scorpion , which was found as a giant metal statue at a water fountain and as the logo of the nightclub . Francisco Rafael usually carried a diamond @-@ encrusted scorpion necklace in reference to his astrological sign , the Scorpio . 
 His discothèque invited several famous Mexican and international artists , including but not limited to Luis Miguel , Emmanuel , Mijares , Nelson Ned , Ricardo Montaner , among others . It also hosted car and motorcycle shows where Francisco Rafael performed with his Harley @-@ Davidson . With his popularity rising in Mazatlán , he was named " Businessman of the Year " by a local radio station . Aside from managing the Frankie Oh , Francisco Rafael organized beauty contests , sports tournaments , and made frequent appearances in social magazines . He was a close friend of former World Champion Mexican boxer Julio César Chávez , whom he considered as close as a brother of his . Francisco Rafael lived most of his early life as a businessman and playboy while his brothers , Benjamín and Ramón , became involved in the drug trade after moving to Tijuana in the 1980s . Francisco Rafael was first married to Victoria Barrionuevo and had three children ( Francisco , Benjamín Arellano Barrionuevo , and an unnamed daughter ) ; after separating , he married Rocío del Carmen Lizárraga Lizárraga , whom he kidnapped a few months after she was declared queen of a carnival in Mazatlán and just after her 18th birthday in May 1990 . 
 = = Criminal career = = 
 The sister of Francisco Rafael 's mother , Agustina Félix <unk> , married Jesús <unk> Avilés ( alias " El Chuy " ) , a drug trafficker under the tutelage of Miguel Ángel Félix Gallardo , the former leader of the Guadalajara Cartel and a high profile drug lord in Mexico . Other sources say that the Arellano Félix brothers were nephews of the drug lord Félix Gallardo , who allegedly introduced them to the drug trade in Baja California . Benjamín worked with the drug trafficker Javier Caro <unk> ( cousin of Rafael Caro Quintero ) , who later fled to Canada after Félix Gallardo was arrested in 1989 and after he feared a coup from the Arellano Félix . With the leadership void open , Benjamín started to work full @-@ time with his uncle <unk> Avilés ; Francisco Rafael , Ramón , and Javier later join them in Tijuana . The arrest of Félix Gallardo led to the disintegration of the Guadalajara Cartel into several drug trafficking organizations : in the western coast , a faction formed the Sinaloa Cartel ; in the Ciudad Juárez border area , another group formed the Juárez Cartel ; and in the Baja California border region , others formed the so @-@ called Tijuana Cartel , which was formed by the Arellano Félix and lieutenants previously loyal to Félix Gallardo in the area . In December 1989 , the Arellano Félix ordered their gunmen to decimate the Machi Ramírez , a once @-@ prominent crime family that controlled the drug trade in Tijuana prior to their arrival . Once established in Tijuana , the Arellano Félix forged important relations with some of the most prominent families in the region . 
 The flight , eventual arrest , and murder of Caro <unk> angered his associates that headed the Sinaloa and Sonora <unk> . Two leaders of the Sinaloa Cartel , Joaquín " El Chapo " Guzmán , now Mexico 's most @-@ wanted , and his business partner Héctor " El <unk> " Palma , attempted to take control of Tijuana from the hands of the Arellano Félix in the early 1990s . The antagonism lasted for several years and was accompanied by violent acts in the states of Baja California , Sonora , Sinaloa , Durango , Jalisco , Guerrero , Michoacán and Oaxaca . In 1989 , " El Chapo " Guzmán sent Armando López ( alias " El Rayo " ) , one of his most @-@ trusted men , to speak with the Arellano Félix in Tijuana . Before he had a chance to speak face @-@ to @-@ face with them , López was killed by Ramón . The corpse was disposed in the outskirts of the city and the Tijuana Cartel ordered a hit on the remaining family members of the López family to prevent future reprisals . Two years later , Ramón killed another Sinaloa Cartel associate , Rigoberto Campos <unk> ( alias " El Rigo " ) , prompting bigger conflicts with the rival cartel . In September 1992 , the Tijuana Cartel ordered another hit against their rivals ; in Iguala , Guerrero , lawyers of Félix Gallardo and several of his family members were kidnapped and killed by gunmen . " El <unk> " Palma responded to the attacks by ordering several of his men to kill eight members of the Arellano Félix organization at the Christine discothèque in Puerto Vallarta , Jalisco . Ramón and Francisco Javier were the prime targets but they escaped uninjured . 
 Their deep @-@ seated rivalry reached its peak on 24 May 1993 when gunmen affiliated with the Tijuana Cartel attempted to kill " El Chapo " Guzmán in the Guadalajara International Airport . In the raging fire , gunmen shot a luxurious vehicle thought to hold Guzmán ; however , among those aboard was Catholic Cardinal Juan Jesús Posadas Ocampo , who was killed at the scene , along with six other civilians . Guzmán successfully escaped the assassination attempt by leaving in a taxi . On 4 December 1993 , Francisco Rafael was arrested by the Federal Judicial Police ( <unk> ) in Tijuana for charges on drug trafficking , illegal use of weaponry under Mexican law , and complicity in the murder of Posadas Ocampo . He was sentenced to 10 years and three months and imprisoned at the Federal Social Readaptation Center No. 1 , a maximum security prison in Almoloya de Juárez , State of Mexico . Unlike the rest of his brothers who eventually led the Tijuana Cartel and made it one of the leading and most violent drug trafficking organizations in Mexico during the 1990s , Francisco Rafael was not a key player in the cartel 's hegemony . His arrest in 1993 was earlier than the eventual downfall of his other brothers , who were later arrested and / or killed . In the Tijuana Cartel , his task was to coordinate the buying and selling of narcotics to the United States . 
 = = = Extradition to the U.S. = = = 
 A 1980 US indictment said that Francisco Rafael was under investigation by the DEA for alleged cocaine and heroin distribution in the San Diego area . The DEA had identified him as one of the cocaine suppliers and set up an undercover operation to arrest him and his associates by purchasing multi @-@ ton shipments of cocaine . He admitted to have worked with drug distributor Ramón <unk> @-@ <unk> , and that he used him as a mediator for a drug transaction with an undercover federal agent . In court , Francisco Rafael admitted having sent <unk> @-@ <unk> and four other individuals to sell nine ounces of cocaine to the agent . He was arrested in California on 7 August 1980 and remained under custody until or around 8 September 1980 after paying a US $ 150 @,@ 000 bond and promising to appear at every court session . Nonetheless , he fled to Mexico shortly afterwards and did not appear in court on 8 October 1980 . 
 On 2 June 2003 U.S. authorities requested the Mexican government to extradite Francisco Rafael . A Mexican federal judge approved the request the following year , but the drug lord was extradited to the United States on 16 September 2006 . He was flown from Matamoros , Tamaulipas , via helicopter and handed over to U.S. authorities in a prison in Brownsville , Texas , after a 10 @-@ year sentence in Mexico . He was then transferred to the state of California pending federal charges on drug trafficking . On 18 June 2007 , he pleaded guilty to the possession and distribution of cocaine before U.S. District Judge Irma E. Gonzalez in a San Diego federal court . In his testimony , he admitted to selling about 250 grams of cocaine to a supplier who negotiated with an undercover Drug Enforcement Administration ( DEA ) agent in an unnamed motel in San Diego in 1980 . In October 2007 , Francisco Rafael was sentenced to six years in prison and with possibility to parole in four months given the time he had already served in prison . 
 = = = Release and deportation = = = 
 Though sentenced to six years in prison , Francisco Rafael was released on 4 March 2008 after a year and five months behind bars . His lawyer confirmed that he was released for the time he had previously served in Mexico . Once released , he was deported to Mexico through the Paso del Norte International Bridge ( " Santa Fe " ) international bridge in Ciudad Juárez , Chihuahua , and El Paso , Texas . He had no pending charges in his home country . Mexican authorities watched Francisco Rafael from a distance as he merged through the multitude of people close to the border . It was unknown if his family was notified of his deportation but the authorities allege that shortly after his arrival he took a flight to Tijuana to see his wife and children . Upon his arrival , Francisco Rafael moved to Mazatlán before deciding to move to Los Cabos , a resort town in the Baja California peninsula . The former drug lord lived there with his wife in <unk> del <unk> , an upper @-@ middle @-@ class neighborhood on a hill and with view towards the Arco de Cabo San Lucas . Instead of his actual name , Francisco Rafael went by his pseudonym Mauro Vázquez , and posed as a businessman , avid motorcyclist , and music producer . 
 = = Death = = 
 Francisco Rafael was celebrating his 64th birthday along with his wife , children , and friends at Ocean House , a beachfront banquet hall owned by Hotel Marbella in Los Cabos , Baja California Sur on 18 October 2013 . There were about 80 to 100 attendees at the party , including prominent businessmen , politicians , celebrities , and sport figures like former Mexican footballer Jared <unk> and boxing champion Omar Chávez . The party also hosted a number of musical groups , including banda La <unk> , El Mariachi de Los Cabos , and the former leading vocalist of Banda El Recodo . At around 8 : 00 p.m. that day , a black @-@ colored SUV entered the private property and parked near the entrance of the ballroom . In the front seats of the car , according to eye @-@ witness reports , were two men ; in the back seat was a man dressed as a clown , who descended from the vehicle and headed towards the door that led to the kitchen . Once inside the ballroom , the clown identified Francisco Rafael at the center of the room and began to walk towards him . When the clown was about 1 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) close , he pulled out a pistol from his costume and shot him point @-@ blank in his head and then several times more as he fell to the ground , killing him on the scene . As the former drug lord lay dead near the entrance , the assassin ran through a rear exit while the attendees yelled , fell to the ground , and hid under the tables . Four more shots were heard outside the ballroom shortly after the attack ; according to eyewitnesses , the clown had done this to scare off one of Francisco Rafael 's sons , who was chasing him . The suspect then fled the crime scene in the black @-@ colored SUV and headed towards the highway . 
 The first to arrive at the crime scene were the municipal authorities of Los Cabos , followed by the Mexican Armed Forces and the federal and state police forces . Upon the arrival of the authorities , Francisco Rafael 's wife — in between tears — informed them of the former drug lord 's identity . The autopsy revealed that Francisco Rafael died of severe traumatic brain injury from shots in the thorax and head with a FN Five @-@ seven pistol . The murder of Francisco Rafael initially fell under state jurisdiction because he was not wanted by the federal government when he was killed . Therefore , the murder investigation was started by the Baja California Sur authorities and not by the Office of the General Prosecutor ( PGR ) . However , the PGR joined the case after it was requested by the state authorities . 
 = = = Funeral = = = 
 On 19 October 2013 , the Baja California Sur state police escorted the corpse of Francisco Rafael and his family members to the port of <unk> . The body was then shipped by boat to his home state of Sinaloa . It was initially reported by the media that his corpse was to be cremated in Mazatlán ; however , his remains were taken to the city of Los Mochis in the municipality of Ahome for cremation on 20 October 2013 . 
 = = = Aftermath and investigation = = = 
 Roughly twenty @-@ four hours after the death of Francisco Rafael , the Mexican federal police arrested Manuel Aguirre Galindo ( alias " El Caballo " – " The Horse " ) , a founder of the Tijuana Cartel and a high @-@ ranking leader and money launderer who had been a fugitive for more than 20 years , in Mexico City . It is unknown who notified the authorities of his whereabouts but they allege that they were either notified by a rival gang or by members of the Arellano Félix clan . Among the hypotheses presented by Zeta , a Tijuana @-@ based magazine known for its investigative reports on the Tijuana Cartel , are as followed : ( 1 ) shortly after the murder of Francisco Rafael , the police interrogated his family and several of the party invitees , who may have <unk> information that led to Aguirre Galindo 's arrest , given that the drug lord was allegedly responsible for providing security to Francisco Rafael ; ( 2 ) the other hypothesis is that Aguirre Galindo 's location was tipped by members of the Tijuana Cartel who were mad at him for failing to protect Francisco Rafael . 
 The motives behind the murder case are officially unknown but Mexican authorities believe that given the circumstances and the players involved , the suspected source of fire was organized crime and that the motives possibly stemmed from " unpaid old debts , and old retributions " . The authorities are working with two separate lines of investigation : ( 1 ) the first line alleges that Francisco Rafael was killed by members of the Beltrán Leyva Cartel , a drug trafficking organization that fights for the control of the smuggling routes in the Baja California peninsula against the Sinaloa Cartel ; ( 2 ) the second line alleges that Francisco Rafael was killed by members of the Sinaloa Cartel , specifically on orders of " El Chapo " Guzmán , the cartel 's leader . " El Chapo " was nearly captured by the Mexican federal police in Los Cabos in March 2012 , after an anonymous call informed the DEA that the drug lord was possibility hiding in three properties . Investigators allege that Francisco Rafael , although he was no longer involved in organized crime , might have tipped the authorities to his whereabouts and incurred " El Chapo 's " wrath . They also believe that the attack might have been carried out by a local drug @-@ dealing group in Los Cabos ; the main suspect of this allegation is a man named Javier López Rivera or Javier Acosta López ( alias " El Javier " and / or " El Javi " ) , the supposed leader of this crime cell . In this line of investigation , the authorities believe that the drug dealer sent two of his men to pick up the assassin who had arrived from Sinaloa at the Los Cabos International Airport . Two of the three men involved in the murder case , they allege , go by the aliases " <unk> " and " El <unk> " . 
 According to the Mexican authorities , the murder plot was possibly carried out with the collaboration of the Tijuana Cartel because no security measures were taken during the party and because the entrances were open to the public ( when they are usually closed for private events ) . The investigation was further complicated by the fact that many of the invitees — fearing for their lives — fled from the scene when Francisco Rafael was killed by the clown . Out of the 80 to 100 attendees , only 20 of them stayed , many of them family members and employees of the banquet hall . When the authorities interrogated those who stayed and asked them whether they had recognized the assassin or any other physical features , none of them were able to give any details . Some stated that they did not even pay attention to the clown when he entered the crime scene , while others stated that they did not even recall exactly what the clown was wearing , remembering only that the assassin was wearing a blue @-@ stripped or purple shirt , a multicolored wig , and a red clown nose . 
 On 7 November 2013 , a person who was at the murder scene uploaded a 1 : 04 minute video on YouTube showing the scene before Francisco Rafael was killed . The video starts with the former vocalist of Banda El Recodo singing " El Señor de las <unk> " , a song by Vicente Fernández , alongside a mariachi group . As the film progresses , the camera turns to the sides and shows former footballer Jared <unk> siting at a table with Rocío del Carmen Lizárraga , wife of Francisco Rafael . Towards the last seconds of the video , a bald @-@ looking man passes through the back of the tables in front of the camera and apparently gives a hand signal to the assassin before walking away . Then , a man dressed as a clown ( the presumed assassin ) passes through the front and heads towards the place where Francisco Rafael was at . Seconds later , one shot was heard ; most of the invitees were not aware of what had happened , and the music continued . Shortly afterwards , four more shots were heard from the rear . Following the second round of shots , the music stopped and the invitees started screaming . The video only captured a few seconds after the last four shots before concluding . The Baja California Sur authorities believe that the bald @-@ looking man that appeared on the video shortly before the clown and apparently gave him a hand signal is involved in the murder plot . Eyewitnesses who sat at a table with the suspect stated that they did not know who he was but that they saw him greet Francisco Rafael during the party . The suspect reportedly made three phone calls during the party and sent several text messages . Investigators believe that the man was possibly communicating with the assassin ; the authorities are investigating the text messages and phone calls made that day in the area through the <unk> database . With the surface of the video , the authorities were able to also gather more information about the assassin and the murder . They were able to identify other invitees , including former Cruz Azul footballer Héctor López . The video allowed the authorities to identify the physical characteristics of the assassin , including his skin color , approximate height , and the color of his clothing . The authorities are investigating whether any purchases made in custom or fabric stores in the area might lead them to the murderers . 
 In January 2014 , the PGR stated that the alleged mastermind of the murder was possibly José Rodrigo Aréchiga Gamboa ( alias " El Chino Ántrax " ) , the leader of Los Ántrax , an armed squadron of the Sinaloa Cartel . The agency revealed through several photographs that Francisco Rafael and Aréchiga Gamboa met at the fight promotion event of boxers Omar Chávez and Joachim Alcine in Los Cabos two days prior to the murder . The PGR hypothesized that the murder was possibly stemmed from Francisco Rafael 's involvement in money laundering activities and as a message from the Los Ántrax to show that they were in charge of organized crime in Los Cabos . They also believe that Ismael " El Mayo " Zambada , a top leader of the Sinaloa Cartel , might have ordered the attack . The state authorities identified two other possible murderers : Noé Castro ( alias " R1 " ) , Aréchiga Gamboa 's right @-@ hand man in Los Cabos ; and a man known by his alias " R13 " . They also conducted anthropometry studies to conclude if Aréchiga Gamboa fit the physical descriptions of the man featured in the video . 
 = The Show ( Girls Aloud song ) = 
 " The Show " is a song recorded by British girl group Girls Aloud for their second studio album , What Will the Neighbours Say ? ( 2004 ) . It was released by Polydor Records on 13 September 2004 , as the lead single from the album . The song was written by Miranda Cooper , Brian Higgins , Lisa Cowling , Jon Shave , and Tim Powell . The synth rhythm , composed by Shave , represents a change in musical direction from the band 's previous releases . " The Show " is an uptempo dance @-@ pop and electropop song with elements of the 1990 rave records . It garnered a positive response from music critics , who deemed it as another unique track produced by Xenomania , and was considered one of the best songs of 2004 by The Times . 
 " The Show " debuted and peaked at number 2 on the UK Singles Chart , continuing the band 's string of hits by becoming their fifth consecutive single to chart within the top three . The song also peaked inside the top ten in Ireland and certain European territories . In 2006 , it charted at number 67 on Australia 's singles chart . The accompanying music video was directed by Trudy Bellinger , and portrays the five members as characters working in a salon . To promote the song , Girls Aloud performed " The Show " at the 2004 Royal Variety Performance and at London gay nightclub G @-@ A @-@ Y. It was also performed on five of the group 's concert tours . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 Following a brief hiatus , Polydor Records enlisted Brian Higgins and Xenomania to produce Girls Aloud 's second album in its entirety , following the success of their debut album . Higgins explained that Polydor were not going to continue with the group 's contract unless he produced songs for the album . He continued , saying that his initial reaction was that he thought he would only be required to produce a couple of songs , however Polydor insisted that he produce the album in its entirety and that they thought only he understood what they wanted . The album was recorded from April to September 2004 . For the lead single from What Will the Neighbours Say ? , Polydor presented the band four singles choices , including " The Show " , " Wake Me Up " , " Graffiti My Soul " , and " Androgynous Girls " . Although " Wake Me Up " was the preferred choice , it was deemed too hard sounding and the record company didn 't want to take the risk , and they also added " Androgynous Girls " as a b @-@ side to the album 's second single three months later . " The pressure to come up with singles was , as always , immense . But [ ... ] we were able to have a lot of fun working on ideas that were maybe a little too odd to be on the radio , " Higgins said . They decided to release " The Show " , which was debuted on 28 June 2004 , less than six months after the release of " Jump " . It was released on two different CD single formats , but did not feature any new b @-@ sides . A remix of " Jump " appears on the first disc , while the Gravitas Club Mix of " The Show " and an exclusive interview both appeared on the second disc . " The Show " was also released in Australia two years later , on 3 June 2006 , as the second single from the Australian version of Chemistry . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The song was written by Miranda Cooper , Brian Higgins , Lisa Cowling , Jon Shave , and Tim Powell . Contrary to the verse @-@ chorus form that is typically used in modern pop music , " The Show " opts for a less conventional song structure . It was noted for its intricacy . The song 's lyrics , which contain an anti @-@ promiscuity message , " set in motion a writing style that would come to epitomise Girls Aloud 's music . " In the group 's 2008 autobiography Dreams That Glitter - Our Story , Cheryl Cole described Girls Aloud 's cover of the Pointer Sisters ' " Jump " as " the point when we realized everything we 'd been doing was quite down and moody [ ... ] and that 's not what people wanted . " As their first single following the cover , " The Show " served as an introduction to Girls Aloud 's new sound , being " their most risqué cut at the time . " Rather than the guitar that dominated the band 's first three singles , " The Show " mostly utilises synthesisers . The synth rhythm was composed by a Xenomania musician named Jon Shave . MusicOMH contributor John Murphy deemed the track 's composition similar to " Love Machine " , which he considered inspired by " ' 80s synth pop . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " The Show " was described by BBC Music as " a feisty , thumping track with a positively rude bassline , " while a reviewer for Virgin Media described the song as a " rush of thrilling synth stabs and <unk> vocal hooks . " Paul Scott of Stylus Magazine referred to " The Show " as one of Girls Aloud 's best songs , deeming it " audacious to say the least . With its clipped delivery and gnarled synth riffs barely sweetened , it ’ s SAW doing SST ; tungsten and gristle polished to an FM sheen . " Alexis Petridis of The Guardian considered " The Show " and " Love Machine " as the perfect examples of Xenomania 's unique production , and added that the lead single " is based around a frantically exciting electronic noise that seems to have escaped from an early @-@ 1990s rave record . " In their best @-@ of @-@ year countdown , The Times noted that the song helped Xenomania to establish themselves as the best pop music production team . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 On the week ending 17 July 2004 , " The Show " debuted at number 2 on the UK Singles Chart , being held of the top spot by Usher 's " Burn " . It fell to number 5 the following week . " The Show " is Girls Aloud 17th best @-@ selling single in the United Kingdom . The single also debuted and peaked at number 9 on the European Hot 100 Singles , falling to number 18 the following week . In Ireland , it debuted at number ten , and peaked at number 5 three weeks later . After its release in Australia in 2006 , " The Show " failed to make impact and missed the top forty of the ARIA Charts , debuting and peaking at number 67 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The accompanying music video for " The Show " was directed by Trudy Bellinger . After the video shoot , Girls Aloud decided it was time to change their choreographer , hiring Beth Honan , who continued to work with the band for several years . Walsh also said that the music video for " The Show " was her least favourite from the band . The story takes place in a salon called " <unk> Allowed . " Each member of the band plays a character working in the salon , pampering and making @-@ up a variety of men . Nicola Roberts is " Chelsea Tanner , " who sprays insulting messages with fake <unk> onto her male customers ; Nadine Coyle is " <unk> " , who ineptly tries to give her male customers facials ; Sarah Harding is " Supa <unk> " , a hair stylist who fails to satisfy any of her customers ; Cheryl Cole is " Maxi Wax " , who makes the waxing process as painful as possible ; and Kimberley Walsh is " The Boss " , who looks on <unk> as her employees take their revenge on the salon 's male customers . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Girls Aloud performed " The Show " at 2004 's Royal Variety Performance . During the performance , they changed from little black uniforms to sultry red dresses during the course of their routine . They also performed the song at London gay nightclub G @-@ A @-@ Y , to promote the release of the single , on 26 June 2004 . Girls Aloud have included " The Show " in five of their concert tours . For their first tour , 2005 's What Will the Neighbours Say ? Live , " The Show " served as the opening number . For 2006 's Chemistry Tour , each member have individual " stations " modeled after beauty salons , referencing the song 's music video . The stations are surrounded by frames , which are illuminated through the song . The group then uses the framework for their dance routine . The following year , on their first greatest hits tour , the band performed the song with a half @-@ naked male dance partner , using a bed for a prop . " The Show " was also performed on 2009 's Out of Control Tour , where the song was included in a greatest hits medley which closed the concerts . In 2013 , the song was performed in full during the Ten : The Hits Tour in the style of a Victoria 's Secret show . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 These are the formats and track listings of major single releases of " The Show " . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Nadine Coyle – co @-@ lead vocals 
 Cheryl Fernandez @-@ Versini – co @-@ lead vocals 
 Sarah Harding – co @-@ lead vocals 
 Nicola Roberts – co @-@ lead vocals 
 Kimberley Walsh – co @-@ lead vocals 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Henry Adams Thompson = 
 Henry Adams Thompson ( March 23 , 1837 – July 8 , 1920 ) was an American prohibitionist and professor who was the vice @-@ presidential nominee of the Prohibition Party in 1880 . 
 Thompson was a native of Pennsylvania , but spent much of his career in Ohio . He became a member of the United Brethren church and taught mathematics at several United Brethren colleges in the Midwest . Thompson served as president of Otterbein University from 1872 to 1886 . Much of his time as college president was devoted to improving the financial standing of the school during the economic depression that followed the Panic of 1873 . 
 Initially a Republican , he became an early member of the Prohibition Party . His attempt at election to the vice presidency in 1880 , running on a ticket with Neal Dow of Maine , was the party 's best showing to date , but they still placed a distant fourth to the eventual winners , James A. Garfield and Chester A. Arthur . He ran for office under the Prohibition banner several other times before and after 1880 , all without success . 
 = = Early life and educational career = = 
 Henry Thompson was born in <unk> , Centre County , Pennsylvania on March 23 , 1837 , the son of John Thompson and Lydia Blake Thompson . John Thompson was the manager of an ironworks in Centre County , and later owned a general mercantile business in <unk> . Lydia Blake was a Quaker from Kennett Square , Pennsylvania , who was disinherited when she married Thompson , a Presbyterian . John Thompson was politically active and served two terms as county sheriff . He was active in anti @-@ slavery and temperance causes , in both of which his son Henry followed him . 
 Thompson graduated from Jefferson College ( now Washington & Jefferson College ) in 1858 with a bachelor 's degree , and studied for two years at the Western Theological seminary ( now Pittsburgh Theological Seminary ) . In 1861 , he was appointed professor of mathematics at Western College ( now Leander Clark College ) , a United Brethren @-@ affiliated college in <unk> , Iowa , and taught there for one year . The United Brethren , a pietist church that arose first among Pennsylvania Germans during the Great Awakening , was one of the earliest churches in the United States to embrace abolitionism . By Thompson 's time , they had also joined the fight for the prohibition of alcohol , though most did so from within the Republican Party and did not join the small single @-@ issue Prohibition Party . 
 The next year , 1862 , Thompson began teaching mathematics and natural science at another United Brethren school , Otterbein University in Westerville , Ohio . That same year , he married Harriet Copeland , an artist who also taught at Otterbein . They had three children : Jessie , Clara , and Louis ; two of the three became medical doctors . In 1867 , Thompson left Otterbein to become superintendent of schools in Troy , Ohio . After four years in that position , he returned to teaching , serving again as a mathematics professor in Westfield College , a United Brethren school in Westfield , Illinois . 
 In 1872 , Thompson was elected president of Otterbein University , and remained in that position until 1886 . He received a doctorate in divinity from Otterbein the following year . As president , Thompson continued to teach and delivered speeches around the country on school or church business . Thompson took office shortly before the financial Panic of 1873 , with the result that his primary concern as president was keeping the college funded . In this he was successful , although the college had to borrow money to stay afloat until the economy recovered . After the initial debt was incurred , Thompson worked to raise donations to pay it off more quickly . He also worked to attract new professors to teach at Otterbein , improving both the quality of education and the school 's reputation among scholars . Thompson was involved in organizing the General Board of Education of the United Brethren Church , which served as a coordinating body for the schools affiliated with the church . 
 = = Political career = = 
 Thompson had identified with the Republican Party since its founding in the 1850s , but in 1874 he left it to join the new Prohibition Party . The Prohibitionists , more of a movement than a party , focused their efforts on banning alcohol . Like Thompson , most party members came from pietist churches , and most were former Republicans . He was the party 's nominee for the federal House of Representatives from Ohio 's 12th district at a special election held that year because of the resignation of Democrat Hugh J. Jewett , as well as for the full term that would follow . Thompson lost both , receiving only a few hundred votes and losing to Democratic candidate William E. Finck . He served as chairman of the Prohibition National Convention in 1876 in Cleveland , but the young party 's nominees fared poorly , winning fewer than 7000 votes nationwide . 
 In 1880 , the party nominated Thompson for vice president , joining a ticket headed by Neal Dow of Portland , Maine , the author of one of the nation 's first municipal prohibition laws . Only twelve states sent delegates to the convention , and the platform they agreed on was silent on most issues of the day , focusing instead on the evils of alcohol . The Prohibitionists increased their vote total in the election that year , but still received just over 10 @,@ 000 votes out of more than nine million cast . Thompson made another bid for elected office in 1887 , when the Prohibition Party nominated him for Governor of Ohio . He was again unsuccessful , netting less than one percent of the vote and finishing in a distant fifth place behind the winner , Democrat Richard M. Bishop . Thompson 's vote total was also surpassed by the Republican candidate , William H. West , and the candidates of two other minor parties , the Workingman Party and the Greenback Party . 
 Thompson ran for Congress several more times . In 1900 , he ran in Ohio 's 3rd congressional district as the nominee of the Union Reform Party , which was made up of Prohibition Party members who split from the main party . He received just 0 @.@ 32 % of the vote , and Republican Robert M. Nevin won the election . In 1908 , he ran for the same seat for the re @-@ united Prohibition Party , but won just 0 @.@ 4 % of the vote , losing the election to Democrat James M. Cox . In 1910 , Thompson ran for governor of Ohio . Despite the growing popularity of the idea of prohibition , the Prohibition Party candidate got just 0 @.@ 77 % of the vote as Democrat Judson Harmon carried the state . His final attempt at election came in Indiana 's 4th congressional district , just over the Ohio border . With 2 @.@ 24 % of the vote , it was Thompson 's best performance , but he still fell far short of victory . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After retiring as college president in 1886 , Thompson remained active in school , party , and church affairs . He became a director of the Ohio State Archaeological and Historical Society in 1885 and prepared their exhibit at the World 's Columbian Exposition in Chicago in 1893 . He wrote several books on church topics , including Our Bishops : A Sketch of the Origin and Growth of the Church of the United Brethren in Christ , published in 1889 . In 1901 , he was elected editor of the United Brethren Review . He died in Dayton , Ohio on July 8 , 1920 , and was buried at Westerville , Ohio 's Otterbein Cemetery . 
 = ECW One Night Stand ( 2006 ) = 
 ECW One Night Stand ( 2006 ) was a professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view event produced by World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) . It was held on June 11 , 2006 , at the Hammerstein Ballroom in New York , New York . 
 The main event was John Cena versus Rob Van Dam for the WWE Championship , which Van Dam won by pinfall after performing a Five Star Frog Splash following interference from Edge . The predominant match on the undercard was Rey Mysterio versus Sabu for the World Heavyweight Championship , which ended in a no contest after Sabu hit Mysterio with a Triple Jump DDT through a table on to the floor rendering both men kayfabe unable to wrestle , as a result , Mysterio retained the title . Another match on the undercard was Edge , Mick Foley , and Lita versus Terry Funk , Tommy Dreamer and Beulah McGillicutty in a Hardcore Intergender match . 
 = = Background = = 
 The build @-@ up for One Night Stand occurred on both Raw and SmackDown heading into the pay @-@ per @-@ view , but build @-@ up behind the scenes began several months earlier , as WWE was bringing back ECW full @-@ time . The news that WWE was planning to bring back ECW was leaked in the middle of April as Vince McMahon decided to revive ECW as a full @-@ time brand . Reports beforehand stated that WWE was prepared to bring back ECW immediately after WrestleMania 22 . WWE opted to cancel its webcast Velocity and replace it with the new ECW program . The new brand was officially confirmed by WWE on May 25 , 2006 , with its debut show airing on June 13 , 2006 on the Sci Fi Channel . 
 The main feud heading into One Night Stand was between John Cena and Rob Van Dam over the WWE Championship . At WrestleMania , Van Dam competed in a six @-@ man Money in the Bank ladder match , in which Van Dam won and earned the right to face the champion of his choice anytime he wanted to in 12 months . On the May 22 episode of Raw , Cena defeated Chris Masters . After the match , Van Dam came out to the ring and announced that he was cashing in his opportunity for the WWE Championship at One Night Stand . The two exchanged lefts and rights , with Masters getting involved . The distraction allowed Van Dam to toss his briefcase into Cena 's face and then hit him with the Van Daminator . The two had a contract signing for their match on the June 5 , 2006 episode of Raw . Before signing the contract , Van Dam told Cena that he would win the WWE Championship at One Night Stand and rename it the ECW World Heavyweight Championship . ECW representative Paul Heyman told Cena that the ECW fans can ’ t wait to boo him out of the Hammerstein Ballroom . Cena signed the contract and wished Van Dam luck . Heyman , however , told Cena that he had brought some people from ECW and at that point , Balls Mahoney , Terry Funk , Tommy Dreamer and the Sandman came to the ring . Cena attempted to fight them off , but Sandman hit Cena with his Singapore cane . ECW 's Sabu then came out and sent Cena through the table with his Atomic Arabian Facebuster move . Several Raw superstars ran out to attempt to fight off the ECW Originals . Because of this , a match was booked for the WWE vs. ECW Head to Head special that aired on the USA Network on June 7 , 2006 between Cena and Sabu . The match ended in a no contest after ECW 's newest wrestler , The Big Show attacked Cena , sparking a brawl between WWE and ECW superstars . 
 The other main match on the card was a Hardcore Intergender match , as Edge and Mick Foley faced Terry Funk and Tommy Dreamer . The rivalry started between Edge and Foley , when the two faced in a Hardcore match at WrestleMania 22 . Edge won the match after a spear off the apron and through a flaming table on the outside . Foley was a guest on the Cutting Edge on the May 1 , 2006 episode of Raw , and the two agreed to a WrestleMania Hardcore rematch the following week . Before the match began on the May 8 , 2006 edition of Raw , Foley announced that the match was now a triple threat match , with Tommy Dreamer added as the third person . During the match , however , Foley turned heel for the first time in over eight years and attacked Dreamer with a barbed wire baseball bat . Foley handed Edge the bat and Edge hit Dreamer with it , busting him open . Foley hit the Mandible claw on Dreamer and Edge simultaneously speared Dreamer , with Foley getting the pinfall . The two , along with Lita celebrated up the entrance ramp . On the May 15 , 2006 episode of Raw , Foley wanted to apologize to Dreamer for what happened the previous week ; however , Dreamer was not in the arena , so Foley brought out Terry Funk . Funk asked Foley to apologize for what happened to Dreamer . Instead , Foley started bashing ECW . In an attempt to get into a fight with Foley , Funk made comments about Foley 's family , calling his wife a whore and his kids bastards . When the two exchanged punches , Edge and Lita came out , with Lita low @-@ blowing Funk . Edge and Foley double @-@ teamed Funk , with Edge hitting Funk with a barbed wire baseball bat . A week later , on the May 22 , 2006 edition of Raw , Edge and Foley announced themselves as co @-@ holders of the WWE Hardcore Championship . Paul Heyman came out and made a challenge to Edge and Foley to face Funk and Dreamer at One Night Stand , which Edge accepted . The two , along with Lita , went after Heyman up the ramp , before Dreamer and Funk attacked them with several weapons , sending the trio out of the arena . On the WWE vs. ECW Head to Head special that aired on June 7 , 2006 , Edge faced Dreamer in an Extreme Rules match . Dreamer hit Edge with a Dreamer Driver through the table . Lita interfered , and hit Dreamer repeatedly with a cane . Dreamer was not hurt by the shots , and he got Lita up for a powerbomb , before Edge speared Dreamer . Edge got the pinfall and won the match . During the match , Foley and Funk were fighting outside the ring , with Funk busting Foley open . After the match , Foley sat in the middle of the ring and stated his kayfabe thoughts on ECW . 
 Where the hell do any of you get off , telling me I sold out ? Where do you get off ? Where do you find the nerve , to call me a whore ? You think I hate ECW ? I love that place . I love that place ! But ECW simply didn 't love me back . She was like the girl I can 't let go off , but the one who makes me sick , upon seeing her . She wanted too much blood , too much of my heart , too much of my life ! So I left , and I found fame and fortune in WWE . And Paul Heyman was right . There 's only one real difference between me and Tommy Dreamer . I 'm a whore , and he 's not . You see , seven years ago , I pulled the sock out of my pants , and made Vince McMahon laugh , and the doors of opportunity open wide for Mick Foley , but not for Tommy Dreamer . All he 's got is his heart , his pride and the initials ECW . And I wanted to tell Edge that I went back and I watched our WrestleMania match , the greatest hardcore match of all time , I said . Well the truth is , maybe it wasn 't quite as good as I thought . Maybe Edge , you and I are gonna have to be tougher than ever , hungrier than ever , sicker than ever , to walk into that steaming cesspool that is the Hammerstein Ballroom . 2 @,@ 500 sickening , twisted fans , screaming for our blood , because Tommy Dreamer can do everything I can , and maybe with more passion . He 's gonna beat us up , all over New York City . He 's gonna bludgeon us . Terry Funk , the greatest wrestler I ever saw . You look at Terry Funk and you see an old man , you 're not seeing the real Terry Funk . His slaps are worse than most men 's punches . His punches dole out concussions , and when he picks up a weapon , he can use it like no man ever has . He has an excruciating pain waking up every single day , looking for one more chance to have one great last match . I blew the son of a bitch up in Japan , and he came back and hugged me . I set him up on fire in Philadelphia , and he put his arm around me . He doesn 't put his arm around me anymore . I don 't want your arm around me , Terry Funk . Tommy Dreamer , the only difference between me and you , is I have the guts to go to WWE . ( At this point , a fan was audibly heard on the telecast telling Foley to shut up . ) No , you shut your mouth ! ( pointing out to said fan ) Because when I go to Hammerstein Ballroom , Edge and I are prepared to take the beatings of our lives , and I will do that to exorcise the sick , twisted whore that is ECW . I want her out of my life . You ’ ve seen me thrown off cells , you 've seen me slammed in tacks , you 've seen me go through a burning table at WrestleMania ; it is nothing compared to the horrors I will unleash on Dreamer and Funk at ( goddamn you ) ECW . ' Cause I 'm gonna stake the hearts of your heroes , and I 'm gonna shove them down their throats for making me fall in love with you to begin with . You stepped on my heart , you stepped on my soul , you took everything I 've had faith in , and you just throw it away . And then when I walk to that ring at the Hammerstein Ballroom as a WWE Legend , you Terry Funk and you Tommy Dreamer will learn about loss ... Have a nice day . 
 One of the main undercard matches on the card was between Rey Mysterio and Sabu for the World Heavyweight Championship . ECW representative Paul Heyman announced that Mysterio had accepted the challenge for One Night Stand on the June 2 , 2006 edition of SmackDown . Before the June 9 , 2006 edition of SmackDown , Heyman kayfabe revealed to WWE 's official website that he was trying to get Mysterio to join the new ECW brand . Mysterio turned down Heyman 's offer on the June 9 , 2006 edition of SmackDown . In the main event on that edition of SmackDown , Mysterio faced Finlay . Mysterio was about to 619 Finlay , when Sabu , who was holding a steel chair , climbed onto the ring apron . Mysterio dropkicked the chair into Sabu , which distracted the referee . This allowed Finlay to hit Mysterio with his shillelagh , and the Celtic Cross for the victory . After the contest , Sabu set up a table on the outside of the ring , and hit Mysterio with a springboard legdrop that sent Mysterio through the table . 
 = = Event = = 
 Paul Heyman began the event as it aired on pay @-@ per @-@ view , coming to the ring to " ECW " chants . Heyman stated that " this [ ECW 's resurrection ] didn 't happen because of me and it didn 't happen because of Vince McMahon . This happened because of you [ the fans ] . And on behalf of every single one of us , from the bottom of my heart , thank you , thank you , thank you ! " 
 The first match on the card was a match between ECW Original Tazz and WWE Raw commentator Jerry Lawler . In what was a squash match , Lawler slapped ECW commentator Joey Styles in the face en route to the ring . Tazz won after 35 seconds by making Lawler pass out to the <unk> . After the match , Tazz joined Joey Styles on commentary for the rest of the show . 
 ECW 's Kurt Angle versus Raw 's Randy Orton was next . Despite Angle 's participation as an anti @-@ ECW crusader from last year 's One Night Stand he was met with raucous cheers from the ECW faithful . Randy Orton , by contrast , received an overwhelmingly negative reaction from the fans in attendance , and was subjected throughout the match to several derogatory chants including " Go Fuck Cena " and " Orton 's a Homo " . Orton gained the main advantage in the match after Angle missed a Running Shoulder Tackle , which sent him into the ringpost . The crowd inside the Hammerstein Ballroom chanted " Boring ! " as Orton applied a rear choke on Angle . Angle hit a series of German <unk> , before hitting an Angle Slam . Orton attempted an RKO , but Angle countered , locking on the Ankle lock . Orton tapped out , giving Angle the victory . 
 The Full Blooded Italians ( Little Guido Maritato and Tony Mamaluke ) versus Super Crazy and Tajiri was next . After Guido propelled Crazy into the crowd , Guido and Mamaluke hit Tajiri with the Muscle Buster for the victory . After the contest , The Big Show entered the ring hitting Mamaluke with the cobra clutch backbreaker and kicked F.B.I. ' s enforcer Big Guido in the head . After the match , Big Show came to low blow Big Guido . 
 John " Bradshaw " Layfield made a surprise appearance , cutting a promo . Just over a week earlier , he announced on his radio show that he was not going to return to professional wrestling . JBL recalled his ( legitimate ) assault on The Blue Meanie from One Night Stand 2005 and referred to himself as " The King of Hardcore " . He announced that he was replacing Tazz as the color commentator of SmackDown ! . 
 Rey Mysterio versus Sabu was next in an Extreme Rules match with the World Heavyweight Championship on the line . The match started with several chair shots from both competitors . Sabu had the upper part for most of the match , hitting an Arabian Facebuster and a Triple Jump Moonsault , but Mysterio kicked out of both moves . Mysterio regained the upper hand , as he hit a Seated Senton that sent both men through a table at ringside . Sabu countered a second Seated Senton attempt , and put Mysterio on a second table at ringside . Sabu proceeded to hit a Triple @-@ Jump Somersault Splash , but Mysterio made it to his feet while on the table . This turned the move into a DDT , sending both men through the table at ringside . Although neither men were legitimately hurt , Dr. Ferdinand Rios came out and kayfabe declared that the match could not continue . This meant that Mysterio retained the World Heavyweight Championship . 
 Edge and Mick Foley versus Tommy Dreamer and Terry Funk was next in what was a Hardcore Tag Team match . Before the match began Edge and Foley entered the ring , accompanied by Lita and Dreamer and Funk entered the ring , accompanied by Beulah McGillicutty , which turned the match into a Hardcore six @-@ person tag @-@ team match . Despite McGillicutty and Lita being added to the match , they stayed out of the action for most of the contest . Funk was taken backstage halfway through the match as Foley wrapped barbed wire around his fist and raked it across the forehead and eyes of Funk . Funk later returned to the match , hitting Edge and Foley with a Barbed Wire Bat . Funk then set the bat on fire and left it at ringside . Funk hit Foley , and Foley fell onto a Barbed Wire Board . Foley 's shirt was on fire , but was put out by a ringside attendant . Dreamer and Funk got the upper @-@ hand after Dreamer DDT 'd Edge . Dreamer then locked a Modified Crossface onto Edge , using Barbed wire against Edge 's face . Lita broke the hold up only to have Dreamer give her the Spicolli Driver . Edge blindsided Dreamer wrapping Barbed Wire around his head , before dropping him with the Inverted DDT . McGillicutty entered the ring to check on Dreamer , but Edge speared McGillicutty and pinned her with a cover that resembled the " legs up " version of the missionary position . 
 Balls Mahoney faced Masato Tanaka in the second Extreme Rules match of the night . Mahoney got the early advantage after throwing a beer can in the face of Tanaka . Tanaka gained the advantage after hitting a superplex off the top rope . Mahoney won the match after hitting Tanaka with a steel chair . Before the WWE Championship match , Eugene came to the ring to cut a promo . He reminded the fans that he was Eric Bischoff 's nephew , before being interrupted by The Sandman . Sandman hit Eugene repeatedly with his Singapore cane , leaving Eugene to run to the back , with The Sandman chasing after him . 
 The main event was reigning champion John Cena defending his WWE Championship against Rob Van Dam . It was evident that the crowd was decidedly anti @-@ Cena even before the match began ; in keeping with his traditional entrance , Cena threw the T @-@ shirt he wore to the ring out into the crowd , only to have it thrown back at him a number of times . Loud , insulting chants were directed at Cena throughout the match , such as " Fuck You , Cena ! " , " Same Old Shit " , " Overrated " and " You Can 't Wrestle ! " The action quickly went to ringside , and Van Dam got the advantage on Cena , with a Moonsault Press off the steel steps . Van Dam continued his offense when the action went back inside the ring as he placed a chair on Cena 's stomach before hitting the Rolling Thunder . Cena later managed to get the advantage , hitting a DDT on a steel chair . Cena went for his finishing move , the FU , but Van Dam blocked the attempt . Van Dam would then set up a table in the corner , but Cena got Van Dam in the STFU . When John Cena refused to break the hold after Van Dam got to the ropes , Cena clotheslined the referee , after they had a push and shove . Cena proceeded to deliver Van Dam with a <unk> off the top rope and then hitting Van Dam with steel steps . Replacement referee Nick Patrick officiated the remainder of the match , with Van Dam kicking out of two . As Cena got up he went to deliver Van Dam an FU , Van Dam grabbed onto the rope , which leads Cena to deliver Van Dam an FU out of the ring . As Cena turned around , someone in a motorcycle helmet interfered and speared Cena through a table . The person was revealed as Edge , who won a number one contender 's match to challenge for the WWE Championship at Vengeance on June 25 , 2006 . Edge also knocked out Nick Patrick . The Hammerstein Ballroom crowd chanted " Thank You Edge ! " . Van Dam then hit the Five @-@ Star Frog Splash on Cena , but there was no referee as Patrick was knocked out . Paul Heyman ran to the ring , and counted the pinfall to three , giving Van Dam the victory . The ECW locker room came to the ring to celebrate with Van Dam , but it was unclear at the time whether Van Dam was " officially " WWE Champion . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 On Raw the next day Paul Heyman addressed the controversy of Rob Van Dam 's WWE Championship win . He announced that Vince McMahon ruled Van Dam 's WWE Championship win as official and that the WWE Championship would be rechristened as the ECW World Heavyweight Championship on the premiere of ECW on Sci Fi . On the debut episode of ECW on June 13 , 2006 , Heyman presented Van Dam with the ECW World Heavyweight Championship . Van Dam said that he had opted to keep the spinner belt ( sarcastically remarking that " this one spins ! " ) , making him both WWE Champion and ECW World Heavyweight Champion . Edge , who was the number one contender for Van Dam 's WWE Championship at Vengeance appeared , and speared Van Dam . Soon after , John Cena came through the crowd and attacked Edge , followed by a punch to Heyman , before being chased out by ECW Originals . At Vengeance Van Dam defeated Edge to retain the WWE Championship . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The overall reaction to the pay @-@ per @-@ view was very good , with 280 @,@ 000 people ordering the event , down from the 325 @,@ 000 orders the previous year . 
 = = Results = = 
 = Aether ( video game ) = 
 Aether is a video game designed by Edmund McMillen and Tyler Glaiel and published by Armor Games , released on September 3 , 2008 . Players control a lonely boy and an octopus @-@ like monster that the boy encounters , solving puzzles on different planets to restore them from monochrome to color . The pair travel through space by swinging on clouds and asteroids with the monster 's elongated tongue , searching other planets for life to which the boy can relate . It is also a part of The Basement Collection . 
 McMillen and Glaiel created the game and developed it in 14 days . Both developers expressed interest in seeing a version being released on the Wii game console through the WiiWare online service . Aether received a positive response from video game blogs for its unusual visual style and atmosphere . The single looped piece of background music received a mixed response and the controls were highlighted as an area of the game that could have been improved before release . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Aether is a space adventure game with washed @-@ out pastel colors and a varying soundtrack consisting of a piano , synthesizer , guitar , and percussion piece . There are four monochrome planets to explore , which have subdued hues . Players control a lonely boy from Earth and an octopus @-@ like monster he befriends . The monster 's tongue is used to propel itself and the boy through space and onto other planets . Each planet has a unique soundtrack that gets louder as you approach it . Each moon or planet exerts gravity over the player character , requiring momentum to escape from the planet 's orbit . To escape a planet , the tongue must first be latched onto a cloud floating above the planet 's surface , which can then be used to swing the player around . By propelling themselves from the initial cloud using swinging momentum , players can latch onto the next and repeat the process to leave the planet 's orbit . After reaching space the process is repeated with stars and asteroids . In space the lack of gravity causes the player to drift until the direction is changed by swinging on another object . 
 When travelling through space , players are drawn to a planet 's orbit once they get close . Each planet 's location is labeled with a colored marker which disappears once that planet 's puzzle is solved . The player encounters characters who can be helped if a puzzle is solved . Each planet besides Earth has its own puzzle . The monster 's ability to swing around objects is used in some of the game 's puzzles . One puzzle involves swinging on the crystals which surround the core of a hollow planet called Gravida , without swinging on the same crystal twice or breaking the chain . Solving each planet 's puzzle produces a flash of light , after which monochrome planets change to color , subdued pastel colors brighten , and the planet 's unique soundtrack becomes permanent . 
 The game 's plot describes a journey through a child 's emotions and anxieties . After befriending the monster , the boy leaves Earth on the creature 's back to look for life elsewhere in the galaxy . He hopes to find someone to relate to . The hollow planet Gravida 's surface is patrolled by a creature that complains of stomach pains . This larger creature is followed by several tiny creatures , some of which ride on its back . One of these smaller inhabitants has fallen into the core of Gravida . Though it is isolated and lonely , the creature consoles itself that nobody can harm it . The planet <unk> is composed of water , with a monster identical to the player 's swimming around with a shoal of fish . The monster tells the player to leave . Planet <unk> has two faces on opposite sides , one angry and one happy . A two @-@ faced creature travels across the surface ; one is happy and the other morose . <unk> is orbited by four moons , each of which has differing opinions on an unnamed man or boy . When players find the planet <unk> , they discover that it is surrounded by a green fog . Gravity is very intense within the fog . Four orbiting satellites produce the fog , which has trapped two boys . Earth shrinks slightly after each planet has been completed . After restoring color to all the surrounding planets , the game is completed by returning to Earth . The Earth has shrunk until it is only slightly larger than the monster ; it is destroyed when the boy and his monster land . Both fly upwards and land on the moon , where the boy is free to craft a future of his choosing . 
 = = Development = = 
 Aether was created by Edmund McMillen and Tyler Glaiel , McMillen was a member of independent development studio Cryptic Sea and co @-@ creator of the award winning Gish . Glaiel runs his own independent studio , Glaiel Games , and develops Flash games for game and animation website Newgrounds . The game 's graphics and story were created by McMillen , while Glaiel wrote the game 's music and code . The game was developed in 14 days ; McMillen found he could " ride off " Glaiel 's inspiration and allowed the project to be completed quickly . " People being creative and taking risks with their work always is inspiring to me , honesty in art is also very inspiring , " he stated . 
 McMillen 's childhood experiences and fears were used for the game 's themes of loneliness , nervousness , and fear of abandonment or rejection . The boy 's journeys through space represent inward @-@ thinking and imagination , planets represent fears and the inhabitants personify McMillen 's childhood " inner demons " . He was initially unsure as to whether or not he wished to release Aether , since it was based on personal experiences and made him feel vulnerable . Glaiel created the game 's planets and gameplay , designing the layout of the planets to convey the emotions involved in the game , but he did not know which planets would ultimately be used to relate to each emotion . He felt that the game 's sense of emotion and mood was improved because development was not thoroughly planned from the outset . Both developers expressed a wish to port the game to the WiiWare service on the Wii video game console . Aether was released as part of McMillen 's game and comic compilation CD This is a Cry For Help in early November 2008 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game was positively received by gaming blogs , though reviewers held mixed opinions about the controls . The story was compared to The Little Prince , Antoine de Saint Exupéry 's 1943 novella . Aether 's graphics were praised by reviewers . Alec Meer of website Rock Paper Shotgun described them as " beautiful to look at " , Justin McElroy of Joystiq said the game has a " unique visual style " and described the pastel shades as attractive , and Peter Cohen of Macworld described them as a unique look composed of " cute characters with sometimes grotesque imagery " . " StaceyG " of Jay Is Games found the music relaxing and called the game " a truly compelling experience with excellent atmosphere " . Meer also enjoyed the game but found the looped piano music irritating . Nate Ralph of Wired found the game " hauntingly beautiful , if short " . 
 Reviewers noted that the solution to some of the puzzles were unclear , further hindered by the planets ' inhabitants , whose dialogue does not change when the planet 's puzzle is completed . The tongue propulsion physics were said to be clumsy by StaceyG , who stated that , in conjunction with the gravity exerted by planets , it is more difficult to leave planets ' surfaces than to navigate through space . Both Meer and StaceyG enjoyed the spacefaring aspect of the game , and Derek Yu of website <unk> stated the controls " sometimes felt brilliant , at other times felt unresponsive and awkward . " Patrick Dugan of Play This Thing saw potential in the tongue @-@ swinging gameplay , noting that Aether appeared to be the first of a series . He suggested that more spatial elements , such as nebulae and black holes , would have made space flight more interesting . McMillen described Aether as " just the prelude to a larger experience " , while Yu suggested that a larger game with improved controls " could be something better than great " . 
 Aether received an Honorable Mention at IndieCade in 2009 . 
 = John Robert Boyle = 
 John Robert Boyle , KC ( February 1 , 1870 or February 3 , 1871 – February 15 , 1936 ) was a Canadian politician and jurist who served as a Member of the Legislative Assembly of Alberta , a cabinet minister in the Government of Alberta , and a judge on the Supreme Court of Alberta . Born in Ontario , he came west and eventually settled in Edmonton , where he practiced law . After a brief stint on Edmonton 's first city council , he was elected in Alberta 's inaugural provincial election as a Liberal . During the Alberta and Great Waterways Railway scandal , he was a leader of the Liberal insurgency that forced Premier Alexander Cameron Rutherford from office . 
 Though initially left out of cabinet by Arthur Sifton , Rutherford 's successor , Boyle was named Minister of Education in 1912 . He served in this capacity until 1918 , during which time he alienated many non @-@ English speakers by insisting on a <unk> English school system . In 1918 he was made Attorney @-@ General . He retained his seat in the legislature after the Liberal defeat in the 1921 election and briefly served as leader of the Liberal opposition , but was appointed to the bench in 1924 . He was still a judge when he died in 1936 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Boyle was born in <unk> , Ontario on either February 1 , 1870 or February 3 , 1871 , of Scottish and Irish descent . His father died in 1884 , and Boyle had to leave school to support his family ; he eventually completed high school at Sarnia Collegiate Institute in 1888 and 1889 . Following graduation , he taught school for three years in Lambton County . In 1894 , he came west , though accounts vary as to exactly where he settled and for what purpose : he either studied law in Regina , taught school in Pilot Butte , or settled in Edmonton . 
 Sources agree that he was in the Edmonton area by 1896 , and that he taught school there before being called to the bar in 1899 . In either 1892 or 1902 he married Dora Shaw , with whom he had three children ( Helen , Frederick and Jean ) . He partnered with Hedley C. Taylor to form Taylor & Boyle , which was later known as Boyle , Parlee , Freeman , Abbott & Mustard ; the firm was a forerunner of the present day Parlee McLaws . Boyle was made King 's Counsel in 1913 . 
 He ran in the 1904 Edmonton municipal election to elect the first Edmonton City Council ( Edmonton had hitherto been a town ) . He finished second of seventeen candidates in the aldermanic race , and was elected to a two @-@ year term . He resigned in 1906 , before the completion of his term . 
 = = Provincial politics = = 
 = = = Early provincial career = = = 
 In 1905 , Boyle ran in Alberta 's inaugural provincial election as the Liberal candidate in Sturgeon , where he defeated Conservative Frank Knight by a wide margin . Boyle served as Deputy Speaker in the 1st Alberta Legislative Assembly . ( To focus on government affairs , Boyle resigned as Edmonton alderman on May 7 , 1906 and a by @-@ election was held to fill his empty seat . ) 
 During his first term , Boyle supported the selection of Edmonton ( over rival Calgary ) as the new province 's capital , and supported the Liberal government of Alexander Cameron Rutherford in its decision to borrow money to finance the creation of Alberta Government Telephones ( abandoning its usual " pay as you go " approach ) . Boyle predicted that " Alberta , the first to undertake [ a provincial government telephone system ] will become a model for every province in the Dominion . " He also sided with the government in its rejection of Conservative demands that it build and operate railways , as he felt that doing so would not be viable as long as the trunk lines were in private hands . He enthusiastically backed private construction of railways , however , and greeted the announcement of the Alberta and Great Waterways Railway — which was to run northward from Edmonton to Lac la Biche and later Fort McMurray — with what historian L. G. Thomas describes as " an extravagant eulogy ... [ speaking ] of Lac la Biche as another Lake Louise , of <unk> running from New Orleans to the Arctic circle , and of northern Alberta as a second Cobalt region . " 
 = = = Alberta and Great Waterways Railway scandal = = = 
 The Rutherford government was comfortably re @-@ elected in the 1909 election ; Boyle himself was acclaimed in Sturgeon . Shortly after the elections , rumours began to spread that all was not well with the Alberta and Great Waterways Railway ( A & GWR ) , to which the government had given loan guarantees and on whose behalf it had sold bonds in the London bond market . When the new legislature convened in February 1910 , Boyle tabled a list of eleven questions for the government about the A & GWR . Rutherford , Minister of Railways as well as Premier , duly answered them in writing . Boyle found these answers unsatisfactory , and on February 21 gave notice of a motion to expropriate the A & GWR 's bond money ; he held that the government had raised more money for the A & GWR than was needed for construction . He also alleged that S. B. Woods , deputy to Attorney @-@ General Charles Wilson Cross , had removed key components from the government 's files on the A & GWR , in advance of their having been inspected by Boyle and Conservative leader R. B. Bennett . 
 Boyle 's resolution rapidly divided the Liberal members between insurgents , led by Boyle and William Henry Cushing ( who resigned his position as Minister of Public Works over the A & GWR issue ) , and loyalists , led by Rutherford and his remaining cabinet ministers , especially Cross . In the ensuing debate , several charges were levelled against Boyle himself : Agriculture Minister Duncan Marshall accused him of being motivated by his rejection for the position of A & GWR solicitor . Boyle admitted applying for the position , but denied that it had anything to do with his attacks on the government . The Edmonton Bulletin accused him of approaching two Liberal members who were also hotel keepers , Lucien Boudreau and Robert L. Shaw , and offering them immunity from prosecution for liquor offenses if they helped bring down Rutherford 's government and replace it with one , led by Cushing , in which Boyle would be Attorney @-@ General . 
 Though Rutherford survived a motion of non @-@ confidence ( moved by Ezra Riley and seconded by Boyle ) by three votes , he was successfully pressured to resign by Lieutenant @-@ Governor of Alberta George Bulyea . It had been expected that Cushing would replace Rutherford if the latter was defeated , but Bulyea and other prominent Liberals did not have confidence in him , and instead selected Arthur Sifton , Alberta 's Chief Justice . 
 = = = Minister of the Crown = = = 
 Sifton left all major figures of the A & GWR affair , including Boyle , out of his first cabinet , and instead appointed fellow judge Charles R. Mitchell Attorney @-@ General . However , in 1912 he decided that enough time had passed for old wounds to heal , and re @-@ appointed Cross as Attorney @-@ General . At the same time , he brought Boyle into his cabinet as Minister of Education . The law required that members newly admitted to cabinet resign their seats in the legislature and immediately contest a by @-@ election ; Boyle was re @-@ elected in Sturgeon by a safe margin . 
 Boyle 's time as Education Minister was tumultuous : many teachers enlisted to fight in World War I , and many others left the profession for more lucrative opportunities elsewhere . In its members ' handbook , the Alberta Teachers ' Association describes Boyle 's efforts to remedy this situation as " heroic " , citing in particular his convincing the legislature to set a minimum teachers ' salary of $ 840 per year . Another of Boyle 's tactics to alleviate the teacher shortage was to make it easier for teachers qualified in Quebec to teach in Alberta . However , this liberalization was subject to applicants ' English proficiency : Boyle insisted that all instruction in Alberta schools be delivered in English . A Québécois teacher who passed an English language proficiency exam would be granted a temporary teaching license , which could be upgraded to a full Alberta Teaching Certificate with five months ' study at a normal school . Boyle 's insistence that Alberta was English offended not only the province 's French Canadian minority , but also its Ukrainian @-@ speaking population ; an editorial in a Ukrainian newspaper maintained angrily that " the minister of education lies when he says that Alberta is an English province . Alberta is a Canadian province , where everyone has equal rights , including the Ukrainians . " During a by @-@ election in Whitford Boyle accused the Conservatives of promising Ukrainian language schools to court the immigrant vote . 
 In 1918 , new premier Charles Stewart , who had succeeded Sifton when the latter entered federal politics in 1917 , fired Cross and appointed Boyle Attorney @-@ General . The following year Boyle introduced legislation formally making English Alberta 's only official language . At the time , he boasted that in the past election " my majority came from English electors " in contrast to a Conservative who supported " Russian schools for Russian people " . As Attorney @-@ General , he also supported unsuccessful legislation to allow Imperial Oil to construct a pipeline in Alberta ; in response to bipartisan opposition calling for pipelines to be common carriers , he said that to adopt such a course would be to tell oil companies that they " were free to spend vast sums in exploration work but if oil were found , they were not to pipe it out . " 
 One of Boyle 's chief responsibilities as Attorney @-@ General was to enforce Alberta 's recently enacted prohibition . This proved difficult , as the law was widely disparaged — not least by judges , who reputedly presided over liquor trials while hungover . In 1921 , Boyle estimated that bootleggers were profiting from prohibition to the tune of C $ 7 million . He was denounced by supporters of prohibition for his ineffectiveness at enforcing it , and by its opponents for " <unk> to himself the powers of a czar . " 
 In the 1921 election , Boyle both sought re @-@ election in Sturgeon and election in the new multi @-@ member constituency of Edmonton . He was defeated in the former but victorious in the latter , making him one of two members from the 1st Alberta Legislative Assembly to be elected to the 5th ; the other was Cross , Boyle 's predecessor as Attorney @-@ General and rival from the Alberta and Great Waterways Affair . Provincially , the Liberals were soundly defeated by the United Farmers of Alberta ( UFA ) , which , contesting their first election , won 39 seats to the Liberals ' 14 . 
 = = = Leader of the Alberta Liberals = = = 
 Late in Stewart 's term as premier , there had been speculation that he would resign due to ill @-@ health , and Boyle was among the candidates mentioned as possible successors . When Stewart did resign , immediately following the 1921 election , Boyle was selected to replace him . In the assessment of Lakeland College historian Franklin Foster , Boyle " showed vigour " in the legislature , where he presented a strong opposition to the new UFA government of Herbert Greenfield . Even so , he showed some private courtesy : when John Edward Brownlee , Greenfield 's Attorney @-@ General and his strongman in the legislature , missed a session due to illness , Boyle assured him that the Liberals would not attack the government too vigorously in his absence . 
 As leader of the Alberta Liberals , Boyle corresponded extensively with Liberal Party of Canada leader ( and Prime Minister of Canada ) William Lyon Mackenzie King ; according to Foster , Boyle 's letters to King were " a mixture of useless information and pleas to be rescued by an appointment to the bench . " It is possible that one of his letters had some impact on history , however : in 1924 , while Greenfield was attempting to negotiate control of Alberta 's natural resources from King 's federal government , Boyle sent King a letter warning him that the UFA was doomed in the next election unless " something extraordinary happens . That extraordinary thing which Greenfield wants to happen now is obtaining from you the natural resources at once . " King drew out negotiations until Greenfield returned to Alberta empty @-@ handed ; soon after , Greenfield was forced from office by his own backbenchers , and replaced by Brownlee . 
 = = Judicial career and later life = = 
 In 1924 , Boyle was appointed to the Supreme Court of Alberta , and resigned from the legislature . He was succeeded as Liberal leader by another former Attorney @-@ General , Charles R. Mitchell . As judge , Boyle once refused to issue an injunction to end a coal miners ' strike that had turned violent , because he believed that the Alberta Provincial Police could contain the violence if properly instructed ( another judge later issued the injunction ) . It was also before Boyle that the statement of claim was filed in MacMillan v. Brownlee , the case that forced Brownlee to resign as premier . 
 Boyle was a member of the Presbyterian Church , the Masonic Order , and the Independent Order of Odd Fellows . He was still sitting as a judge when he died February 15 , 1936 , on his way to Jamaica . The Edmonton neighbourhood of Boyle Street and the village of Boyle are named in his honour ; perhaps ironically , the latter lies on what was once the Alberta and Great Waterways Railway line . 
 = = Electoral record = = 
 = St Eugrad 's Church , Llaneugrad = 
 St Eugrad 's Church , Llaneugrad is an isolated church near the village of Marian @-@ glas , in Anglesey , north Wales . A church was supposedly founded here by St Eugrad in about 605 , although the earliest parts of the present structure are the nave , chancel and chancel arch , which date from the 12th century . A side chapel was added to the north in the 16th century , and some moderate restoration work was carried out in the 19th century . It contains a 12th @-@ century font , a 13th @-@ century carved stone depicting the crucifixion , and a memorial to one of the officers killed when the Royal Charter sank off Anglesey in 1859 . 
 The church is still used for worship by the Church in Wales , one of four in a combined parish ; one of the others is St Gallgo 's Church , <unk> , founded by Eugrad 's brother . As of 2012 , the parish does not have an incumbent priest . St Eugrad 's is a Grade II * listed building , a national designation given to " particularly important buildings of more than special interest " , in particular because it is regarded as a " simple rural church " and " characteristic of the island " , and because of the medieval fabric including the chancel arch , described as " a rare survivor of an early building date for the region . " 
 = = History and location = = 
 St Eugrad 's Church is in the countryside in the north @-@ east of Anglesey , north Wales , in the community of Llaneugrad . It is about half a mile ( 800 m ) from the village of Marian @-@ glas and 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) from the county town of Llangefni . The isolated church , set within an oval churchyard , is located at the side of a lane leading to a house and farm . The community of Llaneugrad ( a local government sub @-@ division equivalent to a parish council in England ) takes its name from the church : the Welsh word llan originally meant " enclosure " and then " church " . 
 The 19th @-@ century writer Samuel Lewis said that the church was supposedly founded in about 605 by St Eugrad . Eugrad was one of the sons of St Caw ( a king from northern Britain ) and a brother of St Gildas . He was also brother of St Gallgo , who founded the nearby church now dedicated to him . St Gallgo 's and St Eugrad 's have been in the same parish since at least 1253 . 
 No part of any building from the early 7th century survives . The oldest parts of the church are the walls of the nave and the chancel , which are from the 12th century . The north and south doorways were added in the 14th and 15th centuries respectively . A chapel was added to the north side of the chancel in the 16th century . This was at a time when a second altar was added to many churches to allow expressions of devotion to St Mary , and side chapels from the late 15th and early 16th centuries can be found in many Anglesey churches . The 17th century saw the re @-@ roofing of the nave . A porch was added to the south @-@ west corner and a vestry to the north @-@ west in the middle of the 19th century ; Some restoration work ( described as " conservative " ) took place in the later part of the century . 
 St Eugrad 's is still used for worship by the Church in Wales . It is one of four churches in the combined benefice of Llaneugrad and <unk> with <unk> with Llanfihangel Tre 'r <unk> . It is within the deanery of Twrcelyn , the archdeaconry of Bangor and the Diocese of Bangor . As of 2012 , there is a vacancy for an incumbent priest . A service of Holy Communion or Morning Prayer ( in English ) is held at the church most Sunday mornings . 
 The poet Dafydd Trefor is recorded in a list of clergy for the Bangor diocese of 1504 as being rector of St Gallgo 's and St Eugrad 's , and signed himself as such in a deed of 1524 . The poet and historian John Williams ( better known by his bardic name " Glanmor " ) was rector of the two churches from 1883 until his death in 1891 . 
 = = Architecture and fittings = = 
 St Eugrad 's is built in Decorated style using rubble masonry with gritstone dressings . The roof is made of slate and has stone coping . It has a 17th @-@ century bellcote at the west end containing one bell , and stone crosses at the tops of the gables . All of the church 's external walls have been <unk> apart from the north and west wall of the chapel and the south porch . The vestry and the porch both have flat roofs and battlements . 
 The church is entered through the porch at the south @-@ west corner of the nave , which leads to a round @-@ arched 15th @-@ century doorway . Internally , the nave and chancel are separated by a 12th @-@ century arch , which is now covered in plaster . The nave is 18 feet 9 inches by 12 feet 6 inches ( 5 @.@ 7 by 3 @.@ 8 m ) . A doorway on the north side of the nave , from the 14th century , leads into the 19th @-@ century vestry . Alongside the doorway there is a water stoup which shows signs of weathering , and a carved stone depicting the crucifixion . It shows a " crudely carved " figure on a wheel cross , and is probably from the 13th century . It was previously set in a recess above the south door . The plain baptismal font , thought to be from the 12th century , is at the west end of the nave . 
 The chancel measures 12 feet 9 inches by 10 feet 6 inches ( 3 @.@ 9 by 3 @.@ 2 m ) . Its roof is from the 16th century and has its trusses closer together than the 17th @-@ century nave roof . The south wall of the chancel has a decorated wooden panel dated 1644 , which used to be part of a pulpit . The north wall was removed when the chapel was added , and a beam placed across the opening . The chapel measures 20 feet by 12 feet 9 inches ( 6 @.@ 1 by 3 @.@ 9 m ) . Its roof is also from the 16th century and is similar to the nave roof . There is a blocked 16th @-@ century doorway with a pointed arch on the chapel 's west side . 
 The windows mainly date from the 19th century . The south wall of the nave has a blocked @-@ up round @-@ headed window from the 12th century . The 19th @-@ century east window has three lights ( sections of window separated vertically by mullions ) topped by tracery in trefoil shapes ( decorative stonework in a three @-@ leaf circular pattern ) . The chapel 's north and west window are similar . The north window in the vestry has details similar to those of the blocked nave window , and reuses some medieval material in the window sill . There is no stained glass in the church ; all the windows have clear glass . 
 The church furniture ( pews , pulpit , reading desk and chancel rail ) is from the 19th century ; all the items are all decorated with trefoil holes . A survey of church plate within the Bangor diocese in 1906 recorded some plain silver @-@ plated items ( chalice , paten , flagon and alms dish ) without inscriptions or dates . 
 There are various 18th @-@ century memorials , and some from the 19th and 20th centuries honouring members of the Williams family upon whose land the church stands . John Groome , the Fourth Officer of the Royal Charter ( which sank off the east coast of Anglesey in 1859 with the loss of over 440 lives ) is remembered with a stone memorial in Art Nouveau style . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 The church has national recognition and statutory protection from alteration as it has been designated as a Grade II * listed building – the second @-@ highest of the three grades of listing , designating " particularly important buildings of more than special interest " . It was given this status on 12 May 1970 , and has been listed as " a simple rural church ( characteristic of the island ) " which is " substantially 12th @-@ century in character and fabric " . Cadw ( the Welsh Assembly Government body responsible for the built heritage of Wales and the inclusion of Welsh buildings on the statutory lists ) also notes the chancel arch , commenting that it " represents a rare survivor of an early building date for the region " , the 13th @-@ century <unk> stone and the 16th @-@ century chancel roof and chapel . 
 The 19th @-@ century Anglesey historian Angharad Llwyd described the church in 1833 as " a small but stately edifice , of lofty proportions and venerable appearance . " The clergyman and antiquarian Harry Longueville Jones visited in 1844 , and later wrote that " this little edifice is one of the simplest in the island " , although he added that " the plan of the building has been rendered very anomalous " because of the erection of the chapel , " as large as the nave " , on the north side of the chancel . He noted the " rudely sculptured <unk> figure " , suggesting that it may have come from the churchyard cross . At the time of his visit , he said that the church " was in a state of great neglect " but deserved to be " carefully preserved " because of its " architectural peculiarities " . 
 A 2006 guide to the churches of Anglesey comments that the nave and chancel both have " considerable headroom " , and notes the " very large beam " between the chancel and chapel . It describes the porch as " unusual " because of its flat roof and <unk> . A 2009 guide to the buildings of the region describes St Eugrad 's as " very small " , adding that it is " small enough to have preserved its plan from the Early Christian Church " . It comments that the north and south doorways are " obscured " by the " clumsily battlemented " porch and vestry . 
 = Toy Story 3 = 
 Toy Story 3 is a 2010 American 3D computer @-@ animated comedy @-@ drama film , and the third installment in the Toy Story series . It was produced by Pixar Animation Studios and released by Walt Disney Pictures . Directed by Lee Unkrich , the screenplay was written by Michael Arndt , while Unkrich wrote the story along with John Lasseter and Andrew Stanton , respectively director and co @-@ writer of the first two films . The film was released in theaters June 18 , 2010 , and played worldwide from June through October in the Disney Digital 3 @-@ D , RealD , and IMAX 3D formats . Toy Story 3 was the first film to be released theatrically with Dolby Surround 7 @.@ 1 sound . 
 The plot focuses on the toys Woody , Buzz Lightyear , and their friends dealing with an uncertain future as their owner , Andy , prepares to leave for college . The film features an ensemble voice cast with Tom Hanks , Tim Allen , Joan Cusack , Don Rickles , Wallace Shawn , John Ratzenberger , Estelle Harris , Jodi Benson , and John Morris reprising their roles from the previous films , and Ned Beatty , Michael Keaton , Whoopi Goldberg , Blake Clark ( replacing Jim Varney ) , Timothy Dalton , Kristen Schaal , Bonnie Hunt , and Jeff Garlin joining the returning cast . 
 Toy Story 3 became the second Pixar film ( after Up ) and third animated film overall ( after Beauty and the Beast and Up ) to receive an Academy Award nomination for Best Picture . It received four more Academy Award nominations for Best Adapted Screenplay , Best Sound Editing , Best Animated Feature and Best Original Song , winning the latter two . Toy Story 3 grossed over $ 1 billion worldwide , becoming the highest @-@ grossing film of 2010 — both in North America and worldwide — and the fifth @-@ highest @-@ grossing film at the time of its release , as well as the third highest grossing animated film of all time and the first animated film to generate $ 1 billion in ticket sales . A sequel , Toy Story 4 , directed by Lasseter is scheduled to be released on June 15 , 2018 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 17 @-@ year @-@ old Andy is about to leave for college , and his toys have not been played with for years . He intends to take only Woody with him , and puts Buzz Lightyear , Jessie and the other toys in a bag to be stored in the attic . Andy 's mother mistakenly takes the bag to the curb for garbage pickup . The toys escape and , believing Andy intended to throw them away , decide to climb into a donation box with Barbie bound for Sunnyside Daycare . Woody follows them but is unable to convince them of the mistake . 
 Andy 's toys are welcomed by the other toys at Sunnyside , and are given a tour of the seemingly idyllic play @-@ setting by Lots @-@ O ' -Huggin ' Bear ( " Lotso " ) , Big Baby , and Ken , with whom Barbie falls in love . The toys choose to stay , except Woody , who attempts to return to Andy , but is instead found by Bonnie , one of the Sunnyside students . She takes Woody home and plays with him along with her other toys , which are well @-@ treated . Meanwhile , at Sunnyside , a group of toddlers play roughly with Andy 's toys , unlike the gentler older children . 
 Buzz seeks out Lotso to request to have them moved to the older children 's room , but Lotso , who controls Sunnyside in a concentration camp @-@ like style , refuses , explaining that the newer toys need to be sacrificed to the younger children to protect the older ones , who want to avoid enduring such damage and suffering . Seeing promise in Buzz , he resets him to his original space ranger persona , which also resets his memory . At the same time , Mrs. Potato Head , through an eye she accidentally left in Andy 's room , sees Andy searching for the toys and realizes Woody was telling the truth . However , before they can leave , Andy 's toys are imprisoned by Lotso 's gang , guarded by Buzz . 
 At Bonnie 's house , a toy clown named Chuckles explains to Woody that he , Lotso and Big Baby once had a beloved owner named Daisy . When the toys were accidentally left behind by Daisy 's family during a trip , they made their way back to her house , only to find that Lotso had been replaced , causing Lotso to become resentful . 
 Woody returns to Sunnyside and learns from a <unk> Telephone toy that there is only one way out of the daycare : the trash . He reconciles with Andy 's other toys and begins planning a way out of Sunnyside . That night , the toys execute their escape , but accidentally reset Buzz to Spanish mode instead of his old persona . Buzz promptly allies himself with Woody and falls in love with Jessie . The toys reach a dumpster , but are caught by Lotso and his gang . As a garbage truck approaches , Woody reveals what he learned about Lotso and tosses Daisy 's ownership tag , which Chuckles had kept , to Big Baby . Lotso smashes the tag and says that toys are meant to be discarded , but this leads an enraged Big Baby to throw Lotso into the dumpster . As the toys try to run away , Lotso pulls Woody into the dumpster just as the truck collects the trash . The rest of Andy 's toys fall into the back of the truck while trying to rescue him , and a falling television lands on Buzz , restoring his memory and normal personality . 
 The truck deposits the toys at a landfill , where they find themselves on a conveyor belt leading to a shredder , and then an incinerator . Woody and Buzz help Lotso reach an emergency stop button , only for Lotso to abandon them and escape . The toys resign themselves to their fate , but are soon rescued by the Aliens operating an industrial claw . Lotso is found by a garbage truck driver who straps him to his truck 's radiator grill and drives away . Woody and his friends board another garbage truck back to Andy 's house . 
 In Andy 's room , Woody climbs into the box with Andy 's college supplies , while the other toys ready themselves for the attic . Woody leaves a note for Andy , who , thinking the note is from his mother , takes the toys to Bonnie 's house and introduces her to them . Bonnie recognizes Woody , who , to Andy 's surprise , is at the bottom of the box . Though hesitant at first , Andy passes Woody on to Bonnie , and then plays with her before leaving . Woody and the other toys watch Andy 's departure as they begin their new lives with Bonnie . Meanwhile , Barbie , Ken and Big Baby have made vast improvements to Sunnyside , and maintain contact with Woody and his friends through letters . 
 = = Voice cast = = 
 This is the list of the voice cast for the film : 
 Several other characters ( such as Bo Peep , RC , Etch , and Wheezy ) are only seen in flashbacks or briefly mentioned . The character of Slinky Dog appeared to be in limbo after the death of his original voice actor Jim Varney on February 10 , 2000 , three months after Toy Story 2 was released . Varney was replaced by Blake Clark . After Clark was cast to play Slinky Dog , the producers realized that Clark and Varney had coincidentally been close friends since they appeared in the 1989 film Fast Food , making the transition a lot easier . 
 = = Production = = 
 According to the terms of Pixar 's initial seven @-@ film deal with Disney , all characters created by Pixar for their films were owned by Disney . Furthermore , Disney retained the rights to make sequels to any Pixar film , though Pixar retained the right of first refusal to work on these sequels . In 2004 , when the contentious negotiations between the two companies made a split appear likely , Michael Eisner , Disney chairman at the time , put plans in motion to produce Toy Story 3 at a new Disney studio , Circle 7 Animation . Tim Allen , the voice of Buzz Lightyear , indicated a willingness to return , even if Pixar was not on board . 
 Screenwriter Jim Herzfeld wrote a script for Circle 7 's version of the film . It focused on the other toys shipping a malfunctioning Buzz to Taiwan , where he was built , believing that he will be fixed there . While searching on the Internet , they find out that many more Buzz Lightyear toys are malfunctioning around the world and the company has issued a massive recall . Fearing Buzz 's destruction , a group of Andy 's toys ( Woody , Rex , Slinky , Mr. Potato Head , Hamm , Jessie , and Bullseye ) venture out to rescue Buzz . At the same time , Buzz meets other toys from around the world that were once loved , but have now been recalled . 
 In January 2006 , Disney bought Pixar in a deal that put Pixar chiefs Edwin Catmull and John Lasseter in charge of all Disney Animation . Shortly thereafter , Circle 7 Animation was shut down and its version of Toy Story 3 was cancelled . The following month , Disney CEO Robert Iger confirmed that Disney was in the process of transferring the production to Pixar . John Lasseter , Andrew Stanton , Pete Docter , and Lee Unkrich visited the house where they first pitched Toy Story and came up with the story for the film over a weekend . Stanton then wrote a treatment . 
 This story had no traces of the Circle 7 's version of the film , since the filmmakers did not read its script : " Not out of spite , but we wanted to start fresh , and not be influenced by what they ’ d done , " said Unkrich . " We didn 't look at any of the work they 'd done . We really didn 't want to know anything about it . " In February 2007 , Lasseter announced Toy Story 2 's co @-@ director , Unkrich , as the sole director of the film instead of himself ( Lasseter had directed the first two films and was busy directing Cars 2 ) , and Michael Arndt as screenwriter . 2010 was also announced as the tentative release date . 
 Unkrich , who had been working with Arndt and story development artists on the film since the middle of 2006 , said that he felt pressure to avoid creating " the first dud " for Pixar , since ( as of 2010 ) all of Pixar 's films had been critical and commercial successes . In February 2008 , the film 's plotline was reported : " Woody the cowboy and his toy box friends are dumped in a daycare centre after their owner , Andy , leaves for college . " 
 During the initial development stages of the film , Pixar revisited their work from the original Toy Story and found that , although they could open the old computer files for the animated 3D models , error messages prevented them from editing the files . This necessitated recreating the models from scratch . To create the chaotic and complex junkyard scene near the film 's end , more than a year and a half was invested on research and development to create the simulation systems required for the sequence . 
 Instead of sending Tom Hanks , Tim Allen and John Ratzenberger scripts for their consideration in reprising their roles , a complete story reel of the film was shown to the actors in a theater . The reel was made up of moving storyboards with pre @-@ recorded voices , sound effects , and music . At the conclusion of the preview , the actors signed on to the film . 
 Dolby Laboratories announced that Toy Story 3 would be the first film that will feature theatrical 7 @.@ 1 surround sound . Thus , even the Blu @-@ ray version will feature original 7 @.@ 1 audio , unlike other films which were remixed into 7 @.@ 1 for Blu @-@ ray . 
 = = Release = = 
 Toy Story 3 had its worldwide premiere on June 12 , 2010 , opening at Taormina Film Fest in Italy . In the United States , it premiered on June 13 , 2010 , at El Capitan Theatre in Hollywood , California . El Capitan also hosted on June 17 , 2010 , a Toy Story marathon , showing for the first time all three Toy Story films together . The film went into its wide release on June 18 , 2010 , along with a release to IMAX 3D theaters . 
 The film was theatrically accompanied with the Pixar short film Day & Night , which focuses on what happens when an animated personification of Day meets his opposite , Night , and the resulting growth for both . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 The film 's first teaser trailer was released with Up in Disney Digital 3 @-@ D on May 29 , 2009 . On October 2 , 2009 , Toy Story and Toy Story 2 were re @-@ released as a double feature in Disney Digital 3 @-@ D. The first full @-@ length trailer was attached as an exclusive sneak peek and a first footage to the Toy Story double feature on October 12 , 2009 . A second teaser was released on February 10 , 2010 , followed by a second full @-@ length trailer on February 11 , and appeared in 3D showings of Alice in Wonderland and How to Train Your Dragon . On March 23 , 2010 , Toy Story and Toy Story 2 were released separately on Blu @-@ ray / DVD combo packs ; Toy Story included a small feature of " The Story of Toy Story 3 " and Toy Story 2 included one on the " Characters of Toy Story 3 " . 
 Mattel , Thinkway Toys , and Lego are among companies that produced toys to promote the film . Fisher Price , a Mattel Company , has released Toy Story 3 with 21 3D images for viewing with the View @-@ Master viewer . Disney Interactive Studios also produced a video game based on the film Toy Story 3 : The Video Game , which was released for Microsoft Windows , Xbox 360 , Wii , PlayStation 3 , Nintendo DS , and PSP on June 15 , 2010 . A PlayStation 2 version was released on October 30 , 2010 as part of a PS2 bundle and separately on November 2 , 2010 ( the same day Toy Story 3 was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray ) . It was also the last Disney / Pixar game to be released on PlayStation 2 . 
 Toy Story 3 was featured in Apple 's iPhone OS 4 Event on April 8 , 2010 , with Steve Jobs demonstrating a Toy Story 3 @-@ themed <unk> written in HTML5 . Pixar designed a commercial for the toy Lots @-@ O ' -Huggin ' Bear and formatted it to appear as if it came from an old VCR recording . The recording was altered with distorted sound , noise along the bottom of the screen , and flickering video , all designed to make it look like a converted recording from around 1983 . A Japanese version of the commercial was also released online , with the name " Lots @-@ O ' -Huggin Bear " replaced with " Little Hug @-@ Hug Bear " ( Japanese : <unk> / <unk> <unk> <unk> @-@ Chan ) . 
 On Dancing with the Stars ' May 11 , 2010 episode , the Gipsy Kings performed a Spanish @-@ language version of the song " You 've Got a Friend in Me " , which featured a <unk> <unk> dance choreographed by Cheryl Burke and Tony Dovolani . Both the song and dance are featured in the film . Toy Story 3 was promoted with airings of the first and second film on several channels in the weeks preceding the film 's release , including Disney Channel , Disney XD , and ABC Family . Sneak peeks of Toy Story 3 were also revealed , primarily on Disney Channel . 
 = = = = Oscar campaign = = = = 
 Toy Story 3 's " Not since ... " Oscar campaign drew a lot of attention , emphasizing the film 's uniqueness and critical acclaim . The campaign consisted of posters featuring characters from the film , comparing Toy Story 3 to previous winners such as The Lord of the Rings , Shakespeare in Love , Titanic and more . Walt Disney Studios Chairman Rich Ross explained they were going for the Best Picture win , not just Best Animated film . The Hollywood Reporter gave the campaign a bronze award in Key Art Awards Winners 2011 . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Toy Story 3 was released by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment in North America on November 2 , 2010 , in a standard DVD edition , a two @-@ disc Blu @-@ ray Disc , and in a four @-@ disc DVD / Blu @-@ ray / Digital Copy combo pack . Features include behind the scenes , including a sneak peek teaser for the upcoming Cars 2 , the sequel to the 2006 film Cars . A 10 @-@ disc Toy Story trilogy Blu @-@ ray box set arrived on store shelves that same day . A 3D version of the Blu @-@ ray was released in North America on November 1 , 2011 . 
 On its first week of release ( November 2 – 7 , 2010 ) , it sold 3 @,@ 859 @,@ 736 units ( equal to $ 73 @,@ 096 @,@ 452 ) , ranking No.1 for the week and immediately becoming the best @-@ selling animated film of 2010 in units sold ( surpassing How to Train Your Dragon ) . As of July 18 , 2012 , it has sold 10 @,@ 911 @,@ 701 units ( $ 185 @,@ 924 @,@ 247 ) . It has become the best @-@ selling DVD of 2010 in units sold , but it lacks in sales revenue and , therefore , ranks second behind Avatar on that list . It also sold about 4 @.@ 0 million Blu @-@ ray units , ranking as the fourth best @-@ selling film of 2010 . 
 In the United Kingdom , it broke the record for the largest first day ever for animated feature in sales revenue , on both DVD and Blu @-@ ray . Additionally , on the first day of its iTunes release , it immediately became the most downloaded Disney film ever . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 = = = = Worldwide = = = = 
 Toy Story 3 earned $ 415 @,@ 004 @,@ 880 in North America and $ 648 @,@ 167 @,@ 031 in other countries for a worldwide total of $ 1 @,@ 063 @,@ 171 @,@ 911 , earning more revenue than the previous two films of the series combined . It became the highest @-@ grossing animated film , surpassing the six @-@ year record held by 2004 's Shrek 2 ( $ 919 million ) , until Walt Disney Animation Studios ' Frozen surpassed it in 2014 followed by Minions in 2015 . It is the 19th highest @-@ grossing film , the highest @-@ grossing film of 2010 , the third highest @-@ grossing animated film ( behind Frozen and Minions ) , the highest @-@ grossing film in the Toy Story series , the highest @-@ grossing Pixar film , and the seventh highest @-@ grossing film distributed by Disney . In estimated attendance , though , it still ranks fourth on the list of modern animated films , behind Shrek 2 , Finding Nemo , and The Lion King . On its first weekend , Toy Story 3 topped the worldwide box office with $ 145 @.@ 3 million ( $ 153 @.@ 7 million with weekday previews ) , the third @-@ largest opening weekend worldwide for an animated feature . On August 27 , 2010 — its 73rd day of release , it surpassed the $ 1 billion mark , becoming the third Disney film , the second Disney @-@ distributed film in 2010 ( after Alice in Wonderland ) , the first animated film , and the seventh film in cinematic history to do so . 
 = = = = North America = = = = 
 In North America , Toy Story 3 is the 17th highest @-@ grossing film , unadjusted for inflation . Adjusted for ticket price inflation , though , it ranks 94th on the all @-@ time chart . It is also the highest @-@ grossing film of 2010 , the 2nd highest @-@ grossing Pixar film ( behind Finding Dory ) , the second highest @-@ grossing G @-@ rated film , the fourth highest @-@ grossing animated film , and the seventh highest @-@ grossing film distributed by Disney . Box Office Mojo estimates that the film sold over 52 million tickets in the US . The film earned $ 41 @,@ 148 @,@ 961 on its opening day ( June 18 , 2010 ) from 4 @,@ 028 theaters , including $ 4 million at midnight shows from about 1 @,@ 500 theaters , setting an opening @-@ day record for an animated film . 
 During its opening weekend , the film topped the box office with $ 110 @,@ 307 @,@ 189 , setting an opening @-@ weekend record among Pixar films , films released in June , ( surpassed by Man of Steel ) and G @-@ rated films . The film also achieved the second @-@ largest opening weekend for an animated film , and the fourth @-@ largest opening weekend for a film from 2010 . Its average of $ 27 @,@ 385 per venue is the second highest for a G @-@ rated film and the second highest for an animated feature . Its opening @-@ week gross ( Friday @-@ through @-@ Thursday ) of $ 167 @.@ 6 million is the largest among animated films , the largest among 2010 films , and the 23rd largest of all time . It also achieved the largest 10 @-@ day gross among 2010 films . It topped the box office for two consecutive weekends . 
 = = = = Outside North America = = = = 
 Outside of North America , Toy Story 3 is the 19th highest @-@ grossing film , the fourth highest @-@ grossing animated film , the third highest @-@ grossing film of 2010 , the highest @-@ grossing Pixar film , and the seventh highest @-@ grossing Disney film . It topped the box office outside North America three times , on its first ( $ 35 @.@ 0 million ) , second , and sixth weekend ( which was its largest ) . 
 Its highest @-@ grossing market after North America is Japan ( $ 126 @.@ 7 million ) , where it is the second highest @-@ grossing U.S. animated feature ( behind Finding Nemo ) , followed by the UK and Ireland , and Malta ( £ 73 @.@ 8 million - $ 116 @.@ 6 million ) , where it is the fourth highest @-@ grossing film , and Mexico ( $ 59 @.@ 4 million ) , where it is the second highest @-@ grossing film . It set opening weekend records for animated films in Ecuador , Colombia , Mexico , China , Argentina , Hong Kong , Spain , and the UK . It is the highest @-@ grossing animated film of all time in the UK , Ireland and Malta , Mexico , Hong Kong , and Egypt . It is the highest @-@ grossing 2010 film in Argentina , Bolivia , Chile , Colombia , Hong Kong , Mexico , Spain , the UK , Ireland , and Malta . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Toy Story 3 received critical acclaim . The film has a 99 % approval rating on the review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes based on reviews from 290 critics , with an average score of 8 @.@ 9 / 10 . The site 's consensus was " <unk> blending comedy , adventure , and honest emotion , Toy Story 3 is a rare second sequel that really works . " Toy Story 3 was the best @-@ reviewed film of 2010 on Rotten Tomatoes . Another review aggregator , Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 top reviews from mainstream critics , calculated a score of 92 based on 39 reviews , signifying " universal acclaim " . TIME named Toy Story 3 the " best film of 2010 " , as did Quentin Tarantino . In 2011 , TIME named it one of " The 25 All @-@ TIME Best Animated Films " . Audiences surveyed by Cinemascore gave the film a grade " A " rating . 
 A. O. Scott of The New York Times stated " This film — this whole three @-@ part , 15 @-@ year epic — about the adventures of a bunch of silly plastic junk turns out also to be a long , melancholy meditation on loss , impermanence and that noble , stubborn , foolish thing called love . " Owen Gleiberman from Entertainment Weekly gave the film an " A " saying " Even with the bar raised high , Toy Story 3 enchanted and moved me so deeply I was flabbergasted that a digitally animated comedy about plastic playthings could have this effect . " Gleiberman also wrote in the next issue that he , along with many other grown men , cried at the end of the film . Michael Rechtshaffen of The Hollywood Reporter also gave the film a positive review , saying " Woody , Buzz and playmates make a thoroughly engaging , emotionally satisfying return . " 
 Mark Kermode of the BBC gave the film , and the series , a glowing review , calling it " the best movie trilogy of all time " . In USA Today , Claudia Puig gave the film a complete 4 star rating , writing " This installment , the best of the three , is everything a movie should be : hilarious , touching , exciting , and clever . " Lou Lumenick of the New York Post wrote " Toy Story 3 ( which is pointlessly being shown in 3 @-@ D at most locations ) may not be a masterpiece , but it still had me in tears at the end . " Michael Phillips of the Chicago Tribune gave the film 3 out of 4 stars , writing that " Compared with the riches of all kinds in recent Pixar masterworks such as Ratatouille , WALL @-@ E , and Up , Toy Story 3 looks and plays like an exceptionally slick and confident product , as opposed to a magical blend of commerce and popular art . " Roger Moore of the Orlando Sentinel , who gave the film 3 ½ out of 4 stars , wrote " Dazzling , scary , and sentimental , Toy Story 3 is a dark and emotional conclusion to the film series that made Pixar famous . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 On January 25 , 2011 , the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences announced that Toy Story 3 was not only nominated for Best Animated Feature , but also for Best Picture . This makes Toy Story 3 not only the first animated sequel in history to be nominated for Best Picture , but also just the third animated film to ever be so nominated ( following Beauty and the Beast and Up ) , with Toy Story 3 becoming the second Pixar film to be nominated for both awards . Toy Story 3 also became the first @-@ ever Pixar film — and the first animated feature film since Shrek — to be nominated for the Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay , though six of Pixar 's previous films were nominated for the Best Original Screenplay : Toy Story , Finding Nemo , The Incredibles , Ratatouille , WALL @-@ E , and Up . In 2011 , it was nominated for a Kids ' Choice Award for Favorite Animated Movie , but lost to Despicable Me . 
 = = Music = = 
 The film score for Toy Story 3 was composed and conducted by Randy Newman , his sixth for Pixar after Toy Story , A Bug 's Life , Toy Story 2 , Monsters , Inc . , and Cars . Initially , Disney released the soundtrack only as digital download . This was the second instance where Disney did not release the award @-@ winning soundtrack of a Pixar film on CD , the first being Up . In January 2012 , Intrada released the Toy Story 3 soundtrack on Compact Disc . 
 All songs written and composed by Randy Newman . 
 In addition to the tracks included in the soundtrack album , the film also uses several other tracks such as " Dream Weaver " by Gary Wright , " Le Freak " by Chic , and Randy Newman 's original version of " You 've Got a Friend in Me " . Furthermore , tracks " Cowboy ! " and " Come to Papa " included material from Newman 's rejected score to Air Force One . The song " Losing You " from Newman 's own album Harps and Angels was also used in the first trailer for the film . The Judas Priest song " Electric Eye " was also used in the film in the temp score for the opening scene of Toy Story 3 . The aliens are playing the tune in their sports car . The song was ultimately replaced by another piece of music . 
 Chart positions 
 Music awards 
 = = Sequel = = 
 A sequel , titled Toy Story 4 , will be released on June 15 , 2018 . The film will be directed by John Lasseter and co @-@ directed by Josh Cooley . The film will focus on the relationship between Woody and Bo Peep , whose role was reduced to a cameo in the third film . 
 = Do What U Want = 
 " Do What U Want " is a song by American singer Lady Gaga , featuring guest vocals from singer R. Kelly . The song was released to digital outlets on October 21 , 2013 as the second single from Gaga 's third studio album Artpop ( 2013 ) . The singers wrote the song with DJ White Shadow , Martin Bresso , and William Grigahcine . DJ White Shadow first presented Gaga with the song 's initial concept two years prior to its release . The song 's production was completed in 2013 , with Kelly 's vocals added soon after . A snippet of " Do What U Want " premiered in a Best Buy / Beats by Dr. Dre commercial on October 17 . Warm reception from fans and music critics led to its release as the album 's second single . 
 It is a synthpop and R & B song featuring 1980s @-@ style synthesizers and an electronic instrumental track . The song 's lyrics represent themes of sexual submission , with Gaga telling detractors that her thoughts , dreams , and feelings are her own , no matter what one does with her body . Critics praised the song 's simplicity , production , and commercial appeal . The single cover for " Do What U Want " , a close @-@ up of Gaga 's buttocks in a floral thong , was photographed by Terry Richardson who had also directed the song 's music video , which was planned to be released through BitTorrent in December 2013 ; the release was cancelled due to unknown circumstances . 
 " Do What U Want " achieved top @-@ ten peaks on the record charts in Canada , South Korea , and several European countries , and peaked at number 13 on the US Billboard Hot 100 . Live performances of the song were televised on the 2013 American Music Awards , Alan Carr : Chatty Man , Saturday Night Live , America 's The Voice , and Britain 's The X Factor . Several remixes of the song were released , including ones with vocals from Christina Aguilera and Rick Ross . 
 = = Writing and development = = 
 " Do What U Want " was co @-@ written by Lady Gaga , Blair , R. Kelly , Martin Bresso , and William Grigahcine . It was produced by Blair and Gaga and features vocals by Kelly . Gaga had been living in Chicago and completing the songs for Artpop , which was being influenced by the R & B and hip hop music predominant there . One day , the singer came to know about an article discussing her weight and she was angered with such news . She decided that it was through her music that she could take a stance against " shallow journalism " . After the release of the first single from the album , titled " Applause " , the singer was also determined to create something different and unfamiliar to her past hit singles , and " Do What U Want " stemmed from these thoughts . 
 Blair recalled how in 2011 his friend Martin was playing him a particular beat from his own remix project . Blair liked the music and presented it to Gaga who had begun writing the song 's lyrics while on the Born This Way Ball tour . Blair described its beat as " some space age George Jetson R & B sound " . After the lyrics were completed in September 2013 , Blair suggested bringing Kelly on board as a collaborator . Kelly was in the process of completing his album , Black Panties , and agreed to participate following a telephone conversation with Gaga . Kelly told Billboard that working with the singer was " natural jelling " . Gaga told MTV News about the song : 
 " I 've been living in Chicago and spending a lot of time there , and that 's where R. Kelly hails from . I was working on Artpop and I wrote [ ' Do What U Want ' ] on tour . It was about my obsession with the way people view me . I have always been an R. Kelly fan and actually it is like an epic pastime in the Haus of Gaga that we just get fucked up and play R. Kelly . This is a real R & B song and I [ said ' I ] have to call the king of R & B and I need his blessing . ' It was a mutual love . " 
 = = Recording and composition = = 
 " Do What U Want " is a mid @-@ tempo synthpop and R & B track , drawing influence from 1980s @-@ inspired throbbing synths and an electronic beat . Eric R. Danton of Rolling Stone described it as a " muscular club beat " . James Montgomery from MTV News said that a " lurching , lascivious beat " was the main backbone of the song , interspersed with Gaga 's loud @-@ voiced vocals , a " corky " chorus and Kelly 's " cool , coital " singing . The song 's chorus is built around arpeggios . Complex described its " Do what you want , what you want with my body " hook as " catchy and somewhat raunchy " . The song 's lyrics represent themes of sexual submissiveness , with Gaga telling off detractors that her thoughts , dreams , and feelings are her own , no matter what one does with her body . Jim Farber of New York Daily News suggested " Do What U Want " to be a response to " everyone who ever made a tart comment about her — which , by now , involves half the planet " . Gaga and Kelly alternate singing the lines " Do what u want / What u want with my body / Do what u want / What u want with my body / Write what you want , say what you want about me / If you want you know that I 'm not sorry " . 
 According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com , " Do What U Want " is set in the time signature of common time , with a moderate tempo of 96 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of A major with Gaga 's vocals spanning the tonal nodes of E3 to F ♯ 5 . The song follows a basic sequence of D – E – F ♯ m – E – D – E as its chord progression . " Do What U Want " was recorded at Record Plant Studios in Hollywood , California and at PatchWerk Recording Studios , in Atlanta , Georgia . Gaga 's vocals were recorded by Dave Russell and Bill Malina , while Kelly 's by Abel Garibaldi and Ian <unk> . Russell held primary mixing of the track at Record Plant , with additional support from Benjamin Rice , Ghazi Hourani , Zane <unk> , and Dino " <unk> " Zisis . The song 's instrumentals include guitars by Tim Stewart , programming by Rick Pearl , and audio mastering done by Gene Grimaldi at Oasis Mastering Studios in Burbank , California . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 On September 3 , 2013 , Gaga asked her fans through Twitter to help her choose the second single : options given were " Manicure " , " Sexxx Dreams " , " Aura " , and " Swine " . On September 20 , 2013 , Gaga announced that " Venus " had been chosen as the second single , and that it would be released before the album . A snippet of " Do What U Want " debuted in a US commercial for Best Buy / Beats on October 17 , 2013 . It was also used in promotion for British mobile company , O2 , as part of their " Be More Dog " campaign . Subsequently , Gaga and her label decided to release " Do What U Want " as the second official single from Artpop , instead of " Venus " . " Do What U Want " officially impacted Italian radio stations on October 25 , 2013 , and five days later in the UK . The song impacted Mainstream Top 40 and Rhythmic radio stations in the United States on November 5 , 2013 . Lipshutz compared the song 's last @-@ minute release to that of " Judas " from Born This Way in April 2011 . After quick commercial success , the label soon decided to rush a single release . 
 The first promotional artwork features Gaga naked with moss covering her genitals . The single 's official cover art was released on October 21 , showing Gaga 's backside , wearing a floral thong . The cover art was shot by photographer Terry Richardson . In an interview with German television station ProSieben , Gaga explained that the explicit imagery for the cover art was due to the constant criticism and discussion surrounding her , adding that " When I look at how society has changed , I feel like this is a good time to show you my ass , because it 's all I choose to give you . " 
 According to Digital Spy 's Catherine Earp , the shoot resembles a polaroid . Leigh Silver from Complex magazine compared it to Andy Warhol 's polaroid series , where the artist shot pictures of <unk> and their rear . Hilary Hughes from Esquire called the cover art " awful " but felt that the image paved way for much imagination in lieu of the suggestive theme of the song . The night before the song 's release , Gaga tweeted lyrics of " Do What U Want " in reference to critics and rumors that had surfaced throughout her career , including those claiming the singer to be a hermaphrodite , gaining weight in 2012 , and her drug addiction . She also addressed media fabrications on her alleged negative relationships with Madonna and Katy Perry . Alex Camp from Slant Magazine felt Gaga 's stunt cheapened the song 's intent , pointing out how it highlighted the singer 's preoccupation with social media and her public image . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Upon release , " Do What U Want " received generally positive response from reviewers . Critics complimented the simplicity of the song , with some comparing Gaga 's vocals to those of Tina Turner and Aguilera . Alexa Camp , writing for Slant Magazine , describes the track as " a measured electro banger that smartly doubles as a love song . " Lars Brandle of Billboard complimented the song as " radio @-@ friendly " and concluded that " Gaga is in good form . " Lipshutz from the same publication wrote that the song and its lyrics were a " thrilling listen , intoxicatingly defiant " . Writing for The Daily Beast , Kevin Fallon was highly enthusiastic toward the song , calling it " pure pop heaven " and giving his praise to its " chorus that will make it a radio hit ..... and driving , danceable beat throughout . " Carl Williot of Idolator website summarized the song as " a pretty flawless piece of R & B. " Dharmic X from Complex praised " Do What U Want " as " catchy " . Latifah Muhammad from Black Entertainment Television felt that " Between the two , Kelly seems the furthest of his sonic comfort zone but nestles into a groove over the dance beat " and described the track as " musical genius " . 
 Jim Farber of New York Daily News gave the song four out of five stars , saying that the " music provides its own quirk . To match the R & B @-@ style beat — and the guest appearance by R. Kelly — Gaga finds a new soul edge to her voice . She belts , scoring a hit in every sense . " Slate magazine 's Aisha Harris felt that Gaga and Kelly 's efforts worked " surprisingly well " . <unk> Tewari of International Business Times said that Gaga sounded her " rebellious best " on the upbeat song . Lewis Corner from Digital Spy gave the song four out of five stars , stating that its " ear @-@ snagging melody revives some of her earlier pop perfection . " Hilary Hughes from Esquire felt that Kelly 's guest appearance on the song , improved its quality much more than the preceding single " Applause " . Hughes added that Gaga 's Whitney Houston @-@ esque vocals are elevated further by Kelly 's " standard , soaring tenor " . " Do What U Want " was listed as one of the 100 Best Songs Of 2013 by Rolling Stone , ranked at number 17 . 
 A mixed review came from Kyle Anderson from Entertainment Weekly , who felt that Gaga and Kelly 's vocals track did not " come together " since Gaga 's singing style interfered with the composition of the song as well as Kelly 's R & B vocals . Anderson also felt that the lyrics sung by Kelly were rehash and subpar . He concluded saying that the song is " an intriguing mind @-@ meld nonetheless " . March Hogan from Spin magazine said that the song was " as usual " about fame but felt that the cover art complemented the theme the song portrayed . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 In the United States , " Do What U Want " was predicted by industry prognosticators to sell between 150 @,@ 000 and 160 @,@ 000 digital downloads in the week ending November 11 , 2013 . Nielsen SoundScan reported that the song had sold 156 @,@ 000 digital downloads , entering the Hot Digital Songs chart at number three and becoming Gaga 's 14th top ten on that chart . Consequently it debuted at number 13 on the Billboard Hot 100 . The song is Kelly 's 52nd Hot 100 entry and highest rank since " I 'm a Flirt " peaked at number 12 in 2007 . The song plummeted down to number 58 the following week . In its third week , " Do What U Want " climbed to number 48 on the chart , aided by its move upwards on the Radio Songs chart , from number 64 to 51 , with an audience impression of 23 million , up by about 22 % from the second week . Following the release of Artpop , the song returned to the top twenty of Hot 100 , moving in to number 18 . The song has sold 1 @,@ 220 @,@ 000 copies in the US as of April 2015 , and was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . On the Pop Songs chart , " Do What U Want " debuted at number 39 for the issue of November 11 , 2013 , and moved up to number 29 the next week with a spin increase of 991 on the US radio stations . Next week , the song acquired a further 1 @,@ 096 spins and moved to number 23 on the chart . It has reached a peak of number seven on Pop Songs , with 9 @,@ 237 spins . The song also peaked at number eight on the Rhythmic chart with 2 @,@ 662 spins . " Do What U Want " became the second single by Gaga — the first being her debut single " Just Dance " — not to reach the top of the Hot Dance Club Songs chart , where it stalled inside the top @-@ ten at number seven . 
 In Australia , " Do What U Want " entered the Australian Singles Chart at number 21 ; also debuting on the New Zealand Singles Chart at number twelve . The song entered the Irish Singles Chart at number nine and in The Netherlands ' Mega Single Top 100 at number 27 . It also entered the Finnish Download Chart at number two . In South Korea , the song sold 10 @,@ 576 digital downloads , reaching number eight in the Gaon Digital Chart . It fell to number 13 the next week , selling a further 7 @,@ 184 copies . Following the album release , the song sold 20 @,@ 309 copies and reached a new peak of number two . " Do What U Want " reached the top of the charts in Greece , and also reached the top @-@ ten in Finland , France , Italy , and Spain . The song had debuted at number 50 on the Japan Hot 100 , but rose to position 26 , after two weeks . " Do What U Want " also debuted at number seven on the Canadian Hot 100 and in its eleventh week on the chart , the song reached a new peak of number three . It was certified gold by Music Canada , for selling over 40 @,@ 000 digital downloads . 
 In the United Kingdom " Do What U Want " was deemed ineligible to enter the UK Singles Chart . The Official Charts Company released a statement explaining that the song would be allowed to chart only after the associated album 's pre @-@ order offer ended . The rules of the Official Chart Company " allow one ' instant grat ' promotion per album , i.e a single track download given away as an album pre @-@ order incentive . ' Do What U Want ' is the second track [ following ' Applause ' ] to be delivered to fans who pre @-@ order Artpop " . Thus the song was not eligible to enter the chart until the promotion finished and the album was released . According to Alan Jones from Music Week , in the week following its release the single sold 22 @,@ 915 copies in the UK ; had it been eligible to chart , Jones predicted it would have entered at number ten . After the release of Artpop , " Do What U Want " debuted at number nine on the UK charts with sales of 29 @,@ 657 copies becoming her 11th top @-@ ten single there . It also entered the Scottish Singles Chart at the same position . " Do What U Want " became Gaga 's 13th best selling single in the United Kingdom , and was certified gold by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) for selling over 400 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Gaga performed the song live along with " Venus " on the tenth series of The X Factor ( UK ) on October 27 , 2013 , at Fountain Studio in Wembley . Jason Lipshutz from Billboard denoted it as " intoxicatingly weird " . ITV , which aired the performance , and Ofcom , the British media regulator , received around 260 complaints regarding the performance , due to Gaga 's costume and the suggestive lyrics of the track , which was broadcast before the 9pm watershed . A spokesperson from the channel released a statement that they did not believe the performance to be inappropriate . During her ArtRave party for the release of Artpop , Gaga performed eight songs from the album , closing the set with " Do What U Want " . The performance ended with the singer mirroring the pose of the album cover art — a Jeff Koons sculpture — on the stage , by sitting down and spreading her legs apart , while cupping her breasts . On November 16 , 2013 , Gaga performed " Do What U Want " at episode 751 of the 39th season of comedy show Saturday Night Live . Kelly appeared as the guest vocalist , doing the similar routine with Gaga , and picking her up from the stage on his shoulder . There was also sex simulations , dry humping and they ended the performance in an embrace . According to Zach Johnson from E ! , the performance drew mixed reaction from the media . 
 Gaga had revealed during ArtRave that she and Kelly would perform " Do What U Want " at the American Music Awards of 2013 on November 24 . During the performance , Gaga enacted the role of a secretary for the President of the United States , which was played by Kelly . The stage was set up to be reminiscent of the Oval Office . Gaga belted out the final chorus of the song alone , as the backdrops displayed a video of the singer playing a piano as a child . The epilogue featured self @-@ depreciating newspaper headlines in the backdrops , proclaiming " Lady Gaga is Over " and " Lady Gaga is Fat " . Jason Lipshutz of Billboard called it " the most elaborate performance " of the ceremony and found parallels with Kelly 's own rap opera Trapped in the Closet in its storytelling . 
 At the British chat show , Alan Carr : Chatty Man , Gaga performed another acoustic version of the track . Wearing a Kansai Yamamoto bodice with an iPad attached to it , Gaga belted out the song while playing the piano . Another performance took place at the 2013 Jingle Bell Ball on December 8 , 2013 , where she sang " Do What U Want " along with other songs from her discography . It was first announced that Gaga would perform on the fifth season finale of The Voice on December 12 , 2013 , with the assumption that R. Kelly would accompany her during a performance of " Do What U Want " . However , a television commercial aired on December 17 , the evening of the finale , teased that " Christina joins Lady Gaga for one epic performance " ; they sung " Do What U Want " as the final performance of the evening . Both appeared in " matching clothes " with few differences , Gaga wore a " jumpsuit all sharp , off @-@ kilter angles " , while Aguilera was dressed in a " slinky @-@ sexy gown emphasizing her smooth curves " . A writer from Rap @-@ Up praised it as an " over @-@ the @-@ top " performance . Los Angeles Times writer Amy Reiter commended the pair 's vocal ability as " triumphant " . On the 2014 ArtRave : The Artpop Ball tour , the song was performed after " Paparazzi " . Gaga perched atop a silver chair shaped like a hand , and sang the song . Kelly 's verses were removed from the live rendition . Eric <unk> from The Gazette praised the song saying that it had " earned [ its ] place alongside crowd pleasers ' Paparazzi ' and ' Bad Romance ' " from Gaga 's catalogue of hits . 
 = = Music video = = 
 Gaga confirmed the director during her ArtRave party , along with Kelly 's presence in the video and spoke about their " chemistry " . Richardson and Gaga had previously shot the " Cake Like Lady Gaga " snippet video , featuring the singer playing with cake . He had been wanting to do music videos for some time , and started his work in the medium with the video for Miley Cyrus ' single " Wrecking Ball " and Beyoncé 's " XO " . After her provocative performance of the song on Saturday Night Live , many interviewers had questioned Gaga regarding her chemistry with Kelly , leading the singer to tweet the following message : " Many interviewers <unk> today about my ' <unk> ' performance w / R Kelly on SNL I 'm beginning to think y 'all aren 't ready for the video . " 
 On November 26 , 2013 , Interscope announced that the video would be released through file sharing service BitTorrent and Vice , sometime in December 2013 . This is BitTorrent 's second initiative , following a similar release for singer Madonna and her secretprojectrevolution video . The bundle would consist of the music video , pictures , a separate clip in 4K resolution documenting the making of the release , and interviews with Gaga and director Richardson . Interscope described the bundle as a means of " explor [ ing ] the link between open expression and open technology ; providing an inside look at the creative process , with original film , music , archival content and behind @-@ the @-@ scenes footage direct from artists . " 
 On December 4 , 2013 , Gaga tweeted that she was intent on making the video " perfect " since it was unlike her previous endeavors , adding that it was " very personal " . Two days later , Richardson posted a black @-@ and @-@ white photo from the set of the video , which showed Gaga being held by Kelly ; with her legs wrapped around his waist . She wore nothing but a black bikini , while Kelly gestured his middle finger towards the camera in a leather pant / kilt dress . One week later , a colored behind @-@ the @-@ scenes photo was released , showing the singers in the same garments as the previous image , while Kelly stood with his legs spread apart as Gaga crawled in between them . 
 However the bundle as well as the video was not released in December ; Gaga later released a statement in her social networking website Little Monsters that the video was delayed since the singer was given just one week to plan and complete it , like the video for " Applause " . She added that it was unlike her since she preferred planning her videos over a period of time to honor her creativity . The video remained unreleased despite Gaga releasing the official video for follow @-@ up single , " G.U.Y. " On June 19 , 2014 , celebrity news website TMZ published previously unseen footage from the video showing sexually suggestive scenes . In one of them , Kelly , playing a doctor , reaches under a sheet covering a naked Gaga , causing her to moan . In another scene , Richardson appeared to be photographing Gaga as she writhes on newspapers . According to the TMZ report , the video was cancelled possibly due to weariness and fear of backlash for Kelly 's past trial on child pornography , as well as sexual harassment claims by several models who had previously worked with Richardson . 
 = = Remixes = = 
 = = = DJWS Remix = = = 
 The DJWS Remix of " Do What U Want " featuring R. Kelly and rapper Rick Ross was released on December 20 , 2013 . Ross told in an interview with MTV that he was not prepared for collaborating with Gaga . The remix starts with Kelly 's vocals with a new introduction , followed by Ross rapping on a verse , adding new lines like " Photos of the <unk> just to post ' em on a blog / Get <unk> views cause they know we be the top / Jean <unk> in the hall , she my work of art so I pin her to the wall . " During Gaga 's vocals , the " groove " of the song is updated which was described by Fuse as " nostalgic , banging , sex @-@ freaky and new all at the same time . It 's a 2013 ode to another era of synth R & B. " Molly <unk> from the channel was however dismissive of Ross ' verse , calling it unnecessary . Spin magazine 's Chris Martin noted that Ross ' contribution to " Do What U Want " sounded " awkward " and found similarity with Jay @-@ Z 's rap verse in singer Beyoncé 's song , " Drunk in Love " . Mike Wass from Idolator commented that the remix felt unnecessary , following controversy in the media surrounding Ross ' lyrics in the song " <unk> " about date rape , and recapitulation of Kelly 's child @-@ sex abuse case . 
 = = = Remix featuring Christina Aguilera = = = 
 An alternate studio version of " Do What U Want " featuring Christina Aguilera was released on January 1 , 2014 ; it marks their first collaboration . The song was released in the US , Canada and Mexico on January 1 , 2014 and then released a day later worldwide . On December 24 , Aguilera tweeted that she was " working on something special " and attached an image of her singing in a recording studio . The session took place in the living room of singer Carly Simon 's home at Martha 's Vineyard , with assistance from Oak Bluffs @-@ based producer Jimmy Parr . The following week , it was announced that a revised studio version of " Do What U Want " would be released , where the original vocals by Kelly are substituted for a verse performed by Aguilera . 
 The final product was digitally released shortly after midnight on January 1 , 2014 . On February 11 , 2014 , Gaga uploaded four other remixes of the version with Aguilera , all commissioned by Interscope and mixed by Steven Redant . The Aguilera remix received generally favorable reviews from music critics ; Melissa Locker from Time felt that the re @-@ recorded version of the track " will allow more sales of the track without the moral dilemma that comes with supporting Kelly " , who had previously been charged and acquitted for child pornography in the 2000s , and also complimented Gaga as a " savvy marketer " for releasing " two versions of a hit song with two different <unk> " . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 Digital download 
 " Do What U Want " feat . R. Kelly – 3 : 48 
 Digital download – remix single 
 " Do What U Want " feat . R. Kelly and Rick Ross ( DJWS Remix ) – 4 : 19 
 Digital download – remix single 
 " Do What U Want " feat . Christina Aguilera – 3 : 36 
 Digital remixes EP 
 " Do What U Want " feat . R. Kelly ( DJ White Shadow Remix ) – 4 : 03 
 " Do What U Want " feat . R. Kelly ( Samantha Ronson Remix ) – 4 : 27 
 " Do What U Want " feat . R. Kelly ( <unk> Remix ) – 5 : 12 
 " Do What U Want " feat . Christina Aguilera ( Steven Redant Madrid Radio Remix ) – 4 : 00 
 " Do What U Want " feat . Christina Aguilera ( Steven Redant Madrid Club Remix ) – 7 : 31 
 " Do What U Want " feat . Christina Aguilera ( Steven Redant Barcelona Remix ) – 6 : 28 
 " Do What U Want " feat . Christina Aguilera ( Red Ant & Amp <unk> Deep House Remix ) – 6 : 50 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Management 
 Recorded at Record Plant Studios , Hollywood , California and PatchWerk Recording Studios , West Midtown , Atlanta , Georgia 
 R. Kelly appears courtesy of RCA Records , a division of Sony Music Entertainment 
 Stefani Germanotta P / K / A Lady Gaga ( BMI ) Sony ATV Songs LLC / Haus of Gaga Publishing , LLC / GloJoe Music Inc . ( BMI ) , Maxwell and Carter Publishing , LLC ( ASCAP ) , Administered by Universal Music Publishing Group , Etrange Fruit ( SACEM ) , Fuzion ( SACEM ) , Administered by Get Familiar Music ( ASCAP ) , R. Kelly Publishing Inc . / Universal Music – Z Music LLC ( BMI ) 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Artpop . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Alan McNicoll = 
 Vice Admiral Sir Alan Wedel Ramsay McNicoll , KBE , CB , GM ( 3 April 1908 – 11 October 1987 ) was a senior officer in the Royal Australian Navy ( RAN ) and a diplomat . Born in Melbourne , he entered the Royal Australian Naval College at the age of thirteen and graduated in 1926 . Following training and staff appointments in Australia and the United Kingdom , he was attached to the Royal Navy at the outbreak of the Second World War . As torpedo officer of the 1st Submarine Flotilla in the Mediterranean theatre , McNicoll was decorated with the George Medal in 1941 for disarming enemy ordnance . He served aboard HMS King George V from 1942 , sailing in support of several Arctic convoys and taking part in the Allied invasion of Sicily . McNicoll was posted for staff duties with the Admiralty from September 1943 and was involved in the planning of the Normandy landings . He returned to Australia in October 1944 . 
 McNicoll was made executive officer of HMAS Hobart in September 1945 . Advanced to captain in 1949 , he successively commanded HMAS Shoalhaven and HMAS Warramunga before being transferred to the Navy Office in July 1950 . In 1952 , McNicoll chaired the planning committee for the British nuclear tests on the Montebello Islands , and was appointed commanding officer of HMAS Australia . He commanded the ship for two years before it was sold off for scrap , at which point he returned to London to attend the Imperial Defence College in 1955 . He occupied staff positions in London and Canberra before being posted to the Naval Board as Chief of Personnel in 1960 . This was followed by a term as Flag Officer Commanding HM Australian Fleet . 
 McNicoll 's career culminated with his promotion to vice admiral and appointment as First Naval Member and Chief of Naval Staff ( CNS ) in February 1965 . As CNS , McNicoll had to cope with significant morale and recruitment issues occasioned by the February 1964 collision between HMAS Melbourne and Voyager and , furthermore , oversaw an extensive modernisation of the Australian fleet . In 1966 , he presided over the RAN contribution to the Vietnam War , and it was during his tenure that the Australian White Ensign was created . McNicoll retired from the RAN in 1968 and was appointed as the inaugural Australian Ambassador to Turkey . He served in the diplomatic post for five years , then retired to Canberra . McNicoll died in 1987 at the age of 79 . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Alan McNicoll was born in the Melbourne suburb of Hawthorn , Victoria , on 3 April 1908 . He was the second of four sons of Walter McNicoll , a school teacher and Militia officer , and <unk> ( née Wedel Jarlsberg ) . The young McNicoll was of noble Norwegian descent through his mother . He was initially educated at Scotch College , Melbourne , before the family moved to Goulburn , from where he was sent to attend The Scots College in Sydney . On 1 January 1922 , at the age of thirteen , McNicoll entered the Royal Australian Naval College at Jervis Bay . Described as " urbane and studious " , he performed well both academically and in sport , ultimately placing first in seamanship , history and English . On graduation in 1926 , McNicoll was posted to Britain for service and further training with the Royal Navy . 
 Advanced to acting sub @-@ lieutenant in September 1928 , McNicoll 's appointment to the United Kingdom concluded the following year , at which point he returned to Australia and was initially posted to the land base HMAS Cerberus . He was attached to HMAS Penguin soon after , before being assigned for duties with HMAS Australia . In his Lieutenants ' Examinations in 1929 , McNicoll achieved 1st Class Certificates in all of his subjects and was awarded a prize of ₤ 10 as a result . He was promoted to lieutenant in July 1930 , with seniority from 1 April that year . Completing a twelve @-@ month posting aboard HMAS Canberra between 1932 and 1933 , McNicoll decided to specialise as a torpedo officer and returned to the United Kingdom in order to undertake the long course at the Royal Naval College in Dartmouth . While in the UK , McNicoll wrote and published Sea Voices , a book of poems centred on naval life . 
 McNicoll 's detachment to the Royal Navy was terminated in 1935 on his graduation from Dartmouth , and he returned to Australia . Over the next three years , he saw service in HMAS Canberra , HMAS Sydney and Cerberus , advancing to lieutenant commander on 1 April 1938 . On 18 May 1937 , McNicoll wed Ruth Timmins at St Stephen 's Church of England at Brighton . From March 1939 , McNicoll was once again seconded to the Royal Navy , receiving a posting to the torpedo school HMS Vernon ; he was serving in Vernon on the outbreak of the Second World War . While residing at Portsmouth , McNicoll and his wife had their first child , a son named Ian , in June that year . Ian died when one week old . The couple later had two more sons , Guy and Anthony , and a daughter , Deborah . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 On 14 September 1939 , eleven days after the outbreak of the Second World War , McNicoll was posted to HMS Victory , the flagship of Admiral Sir William James , the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , Portsmouth . In April 1940 , McNicoll was transferred to the light cruiser HMS Fiji as a member of the ship 's commissioning crew . During McNicoll 's time aboard the ship , it was severely damaged by a torpedo in operations on 1 September and barely made it back to harbour . McNicoll ultimately served on Fiji for six months before being attached to HMS Medway , a submarine depot ship stationed at Alexandria , Egypt , in October 1940 . In this post he was made torpedo officer of the 1st Submarine Flotilla operating in the Mediterranean theatre . In addition to his standard duties , McNicoll was regularly involved in rendering safe captured enemy ordnance . On one such occasion , he was tasked with disarming the captured Italian submarine Galileo Galilei , which entailed removing the inertia pistols from eight torpedoes that had badly corroded . As a consequence of his " gallant and undaunted devotion to duty " in this action , McNicoll was awarded the George Medal and presented a Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief 's Commendation . His decoration was promulgated in a supplement to the London Gazette on 8 July 1941 . 
 In April 1942 , McNicoll transferred to the battleship HMS King George V and served as Squadron Torpedo Officer . As part of the Home Fleet , King George V provided support to several Arctic convoys throughout the conflict . From April to May 1942 , King George V formed up as a support component to Convoy PQ 15 , the first for McNicoll . While sailing in thick fog on 1 May , King George V collided with the destroyer HMS Punjabi after the latter crossed under the bow of the battleship . Punjabi was sliced in two during the collision , and sank with heavy loss of life . Several depth charges were also ignited on the damaged stern of King George V during the accident . King George V was patched up at Seidisfjord , before sailing to Gladstone Dock , Liverpool , to receive repairs . 
 In December 1942 , HMS King George V deployed in support of Convoy JW 51A , the first Russian convoy to sail direct from the United Kingdom without stopping at Iceland . The journey was completed without incident . On receiving word of the German naval attack on Convoy JW 51B in what became known as the Battle of the Barents Sea , King George V was dispatched along with nine other ships from Scapa Flow on 31 December to provide cover for the returning Convoy RA 51 and to attempt to catch the German ships engaged in the previous assault . The German ships were ultimately not encountered , and RA 51 was returned safely . King George V later provided a covering force for two further convoys during early 1943 , before being transferred to the Mediterranean during May in preparation for Operation Husky , the Allied invasion of Sicily . Promoted to commander on 30 June 1943 , McNicoll took part in the Sicilian invasion the following month , with King George V serving as part of the covering force . Prior to the invasion , King George V , along with HMS Howe , had executed a bombardment of Trapani and the islands of Favignana and Levanzo on the night of 11 / 12 July , as part of a deception suggesting landings on the west coast of Sicily . 
 McNicoll was briefly reposted to HMS Victory on 1 September 1943 , before being transferred for staff duties with the Admiralty in London the following month . He completed a year @-@ long attachment with the Admiralty , and was involved in the planning for the Normandy landings . On 15 February 1944 , he attended an investiture ceremony at Buckingham Palace , where he was formally presented his George Medal by King George VI . McNicoll returned to Australia and was attached to the staff of HMAS Cerberus in October 1944 ; he spent the remainder of the war in this post . Up to this period , McNicoll had completed all but five of his years of military service attached to the Royal Navy . McNicoll 's three brothers also served in the Second World War : Ronald Ramsay , who ultimately retired with the rank of major general and served in the Korean War , as a colonel with the Royal Australian Engineers ; Frederick Oscar Ramsay as a lieutenant in the Royal Australian Navy ( RAN ) ; and David Ramsay — who would become an accomplished journalist — as a lieutenant in the 7th Division up to 1944 , before spending the remainder of the conflict as a war correspondent for Consolidated Press , in which capacity he covered the Normandy landings . 
 = = Senior command = = 
 = = = Ships ' captain = = = 
 McNicoll was appointed executive officer of the light cruiser HMAS Hobart on 16 September 1945 , a fortnight after the cessation of hostilities in the Pacific theatre . From November 1945 until July 1947 , Hobart spent nine months operating in Japanese waters over three distinct periods as part of the British Commonwealth Occupation Force . The ship was placed in reserve from December 1947 , and McNicoll briefly transferred to HMAS Penguin before assuming the post of Director of Plans and Operations at the Navy Office in Melbourne on 6 January 1948 . Advanced to captain in June 1949 , he was posted two months later to HMAS Shoalhaven , a River @-@ class frigate , as the ship 's commanding officer , and was simultaneously placed in charge of the 1st Frigate Squadron . He was appointed an honorary aide @-@ de @-@ camp to the Governor @-@ General of Australia in December for a period of three years . In January 1950 , McNicoll transferred to command the destroyer HMAS Warramunga and was subsequently made Captain ( D ) in control of the 10th Destroyer Squadron . 
 During McNicoll 's tenure as commanding officer of Warramunga , the ship operated in Australian waters as part of the Australia Station , sailing to New Zealand for a visit during March 1950 . On the outbreak of the Korean War in June that year , Warramunga was selected as part of the Australian contribution to the conflict . Moreover , the ship was to be attached to a force of five Royal Navy destroyers led by a captain , making it expedient to have the Australian ship commanded by an officer of lower rank ; McNicoll was consequently replaced by Commander Otto Becher on 28 July . McNicoll was then posted to the Navy Office to assist in the introduction and co @-@ ordination of National Service in the Australian military in response to the National Service Act 1951 . He moved to the land base HMAS Lonsdale in October 1951 , on being made Deputy Chief of Naval Staff . 
 In 1952 , McNicoll was appointed chairman of the planning committee for the British nuclear tests on the Montebello Islands , off the coast of Western Australia . Later that year , he was made commanding officer of the heavy cruiser HMAS Australia , a post he held for the next two years . As commander of Australia , McNicoll also served as Chief Staff Officer to the Flag Officer Commanding HM Australian Fleet . HMAS Australia was near the end of its naval service and had been relegated to training duties from 1950 . As such , the cruiser was primarily consigned to Australian waters , though a brief trip to New Zealand did occur in October 1953 . McNicoll was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire in the 1954 New Year Honours List for his involvement in the British atomic program ; he was presented with the decoration three months later by Queen Elizabeth II in a ceremony at Government House , Melbourne . 
 The year of 1954 was to be HMAS Australia 's last in service , with the ship conducting Royal and Vice Regal tasks as some of its final duties . In February and March , HMAS Australia served as part of the escort for the Royal Yacht Gothic during the Australian leg of Queen Elizabeth II 's coronation tour . The cruiser was presented with the Gloucester Cup on 25 March as the ship " considered to be foremost in general efficiency , cleanliness , seamanship and technical training " during the year of 1953 . As one of the ship 's final duties with the Navy , Australia was tasked with transporting Field Marshal Sir William Slim , the Governor @-@ General of Australia , along with his wife and their staff on a cruise around the Coral Sea , the Great Barrier Reef and the Whitsunday Passage . The voyage embarked on 4 May , and two days later Australia fired its 8 @-@ inch guns for the final time . While in the Coral Sea , a Dutch naval ship was discovered to be incapacitated off the coast of Hollandia , Netherlands New Guinea , and was consequently towed by Australia to Cairns . McNicoll was later appointed a Commander of the Order of Orange @-@ Nassau by the Dutch government for his rescue of the ship . 
 = = = Rise to Chief of Naval Staff = = = 
 McNicoll relinquished command of HMAS Australia in July 1954 before the cruiser was paid off and marked for disposal the following month , and he briefly returned to duties at the Navy Office . In November , he embarked for London to attend the Imperial Defence College as part of the 1955 course intake , which signified that he had been marked for senior command . McNicoll and his wife , Ruth , had separated in 1950 and their divorce , which cited adultery as the cause , was finalised in October 1956 , while the former was still in London . On 17 May the following year , McNicoll wed Frances Mary Chadwick , a journalist , in the Hampstead register office . Made acting rear admiral in January 1957 , McNicoll was appointed as Head of the Australian Joint Service Staff in London . He returned to Australia in February 1958 and was selected to serve as Deputy Secretary ( Military ) at the Department of Defence ; McNicoll 's rank was made substantive in July that year . 
 On 8 January 1960 , McNicoll was posted to the Naval Board in Canberra as Second Naval Member and Chief of Personnel . As noted by historian Ian <unk> , McNicoll held this position at a time in which recruitment and retention in the Navy particularly lagged behind targets . McNicoll was additionally appointed as a trustee of the RAN Relief Trust Fund during this period . Completing his term on the Naval Board , McNicoll was posted as Flag Officer Commanding HM Australian Fleet on 8 January 1962 and hoisted his standard aboard HMAS Melbourne , the flagship of the RAN . The Australian government had designated the role of the RAN to be primarily one of anti @-@ submarine warfare , a posture which McNicoll thought unwise . McNicoll argued that surface and air weapons posed a threat equal to that of submarines toward vessels in modern naval warfare . As such , he campaigned for a contemporary aircraft carrier to replace that of HMAS Melbourne . The Army and Air Force opposed McNicoll 's stance , and the government ultimately concluded that there was no strategic requirement for a new carrier in light of agreements contained in the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization . In any event , McNicoll experienced a particularly demanding tenure as Fleet Commander since the RAN was in the process of a complete overhaul of its order of battle and , as a consequence , he had to manage the introduction and deployment into service of six Ton @-@ class minesweepers acquired from the Royal Navy , along with the first batch of Westland Wessex helicopters and modernised afloat support capabilities . Furthermore , McNicoll was charged with the responsibility of ensuring Australian naval commitments to the Far East Strategic Reserve were met . 
 McNicoll 's two @-@ year term as Fleet Commander concluded on 6 January 1964 , at which point he returned to the Naval Board as Fourth Naval Member and Chief of Supply . However , this post proved short @-@ lived with his appointment as Flag Officer @-@ in @-@ Charge East Australia Area , headquartered at the land base HMAS Kuttabul in Sydney , from June that year . In the 1965 New Year Honours , McNicoll was appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath . 
 = = = Chief of Naval Staff = = = 
 On 24 February 1965 , McNicoll was promoted vice admiral and made Chief of Naval Staff ( CNS ) in succession to Vice Admiral Sir Hastings Harrington . By virtue of this position , McNicoll was head of the Naval Board and the functional commander of the RAN . McNicoll 's term as CNS was characterised by a period of heightened activity for the RAN in light of the Australian commitments to the Indonesia – Malaysia Konfrontasi and the Vietnam War . He furthermore had to oversee an extensive modernisation of the fleet , with the introduction into service of the Perth @-@ class destroyers , Attack @-@ class patrol boats , and the initial batch of Oberon @-@ class submarines . The Fleet Air Arm was also re @-@ equipped with American fixed wing aircraft . Despite these acquisitions , the RAN possessed a rather thin and limited fleet during this period , which McNicoll blamed on past naval planning . He criticised the lack of foresight in earlier decisions that had led to " inconsistencies and inadequate estimating " in the future needs of the RAN , which had consequently left the fleet outdated and minimal . In addition to the RAN 's materiel issues , McNicoll faced significant problems with morale and recruitment . A series of mishaps and accidents over the previous decade led to what naval historian Tom Frame termed as " an appreciable erosion of public confidence in the navy 's professional standards " . The situation intensified following the February 1964 collision between HMAS Melbourne and Voyager . The two subsequent Royal Commissions into the incident subjected the RAN to unprecedented scrutiny and damaged the public perception of its senior leadership . McNicoll had to cope with the turmoil occasioned by these events and concerned himself with the restoration of morale in the Navy . 
 The tenure of Air Chief Marshal Sir Frederick Scherger as Chairman , Chiefs of Staff Committee was set to expire in May 1966 , and a replacement had to be selected from the service chiefs . The Chief of the General Staff , Lieutenant General Sir John Wilton , had among defence and military circles been assumed to be the natural successor . However , mounting speculation arose from late 1965 over who was to be selected for the position as it became known Prime Minister Sir Robert Menzies preferred McNicoll for the post , as did Secretary of the Department of Defence Sir Ted Hicks , who thought McNicoll more intelligent and objective than his Army counterpart . McNicoll lobbied ardently for the position , and was supported by his wife , Frances , who actively campaigned on her husband 's behalf . By December 1965 , Scherger 's replacement had still not been decided upon and Menzies chose to delay the decision until the new year . However , Menzies retired in January 1966 and was succeeded by his deputy , Harold Holt . Holt and the newly appointed Minister for Defence , Allen Fairhall , preferred Wilton and ultimately selected him to succeed Scherger . In any event , McNicoll was created a Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire in the 1966 New Year Honours for his service as CNS . 
 McNicoll was eager for a RAN contribution to the Vietnam War and , in July 1966 , proposed that the four Australian minesweepers operating out of Singapore be deployed to Vietnamese waters since Konfrontasi was at an end and the vessels were no longer necessary in that area . The notion was rejected by Fairhall , however , who was conscious of an upcoming election and was adamant that nothing be decided until afterward . The possibility of a naval contribution to Vietnam was raised again in December , and it was decided that the guided missile destroyer HMAS Hobart and a clearance diving team of six personnel be deployed as the Royal Australian Navy Force Vietnam . Per an agreement between McNicoll and Admiral Roy L. Johnson , Commander of the United States Pacific Fleet , HMAS Hobart was to be attached to the United States Seventh Fleet and conduct shore bombardment operations . The deployment of an Australian destroyer to Vietnam became permanent , with the ships operating on a six @-@ month rotation . To McNicoll 's satisfaction , the RAN contribution to the theatre was further bolstered in 1967 with the formation of the RAN Helicopter Flight Vietnam and the dispatch of naval aviators to serve in an Army support role with No. 9 Squadron RAAF . 
 The visible legacy of McNicoll 's service as CNS is the Australian White Ensign . The British White Ensign had been flown by Australian vessels since the formation of the RAN in 1911 , but the Australian contribution to Vietnam — a conflict in which the United Kingdom was not involved — served to complicate the situation . Federal politician Sam Benson questioned the Australian use of the British ensign before parliament in October 1965 , and McNicoll later raised the issue with the Naval Board . The Naval Board ultimately decided to recommend to the government that the RAN create its own unique white ensign . A design accompanied the recommendation , which described the ensign as a " white flag with the Union Flag in the upper canton at the hoist with six blue stars positioned as in the Australian flag " . The government approved the proposal , and the Australian White Ensign was formally introduced throughout the RAN on 1 March 1967 . 
 After 46 years of service , McNicoll retired from the RAN on 2 April 1968 and was succeeded as CNS by Vice Admiral Victor Smith . In the lead @-@ up to his retirement , McNicoll completed a farewell tour by visiting several ships and naval establishments throughout Australia . The trip culminated with a two @-@ week visit to Vietnam , and McNicoll was present in Saigon when the city was attacked by Viet Cong forces as part of the Tet Offensive . As a man who " liked action " , McNicoll later stated that he received a " great thrill " during the assault as he awaited transportation back to Australia . 
 = = Ambassador and later life = = 
 On his retirement from the Navy , McNicoll was appointed by the Australian government as its inaugural ambassador to Turkey . He was able to form amiable relations between the governments of Australia and Turkey , despite the physical and logistic issues associated with the establishment of a new embassy and the lack of knowledge both nations had of one another . McNicoll held his diplomatic post in Ankara for five years , before he returned to Australia in 1973 and retired to Canberra . A man of " culture and refined literary tastes " , McNicoll engaged his passion for the arts during retirement and in 1979 published his translation of The Odes of Horace . He was also a music lover and a keen fly @-@ fisherman . 
 Sir Alan McNicoll died on 11 October 1987 at the age of 79 . Remembered as a " well @-@ informed , hard working and skilled administrator " , he was cremated with full naval honours . McNicoll was survived by his wife , and by the children from his first marriage . 
 = Siege of Savage 's Old Fields = 
 The Siege of Savage 's Old Fields ( also known as the First Siege of Ninety Six , November 19 – 21 , 1775 ) was an encounter between Patriot and Loyalist forces in the back country town of Ninety Six , South Carolina , early in the American Revolutionary War . It was the first major conflict in South Carolina in the war , having been preceded by bloodless seizures of several military fortifications in the province . Patriot forces under the command of Major Andrew Williamson had been dispatched to the area to recover a shipment of gunpowder and ammunition intended for the Cherokees that had been seized by Loyalists . Williamson 's force , numbering over 500 , established a stockaded fort near Ninety Six , where it was surrounded by some 1 @,@ 900 Loyalists . 
 Because the war was in its early days and the partisan war in the southern back country had not become as brutal as it would be later in the war , the siege was conducted desultorily , and was effectively a stalemate . After two days the Loyalists withdrew , having lost four killed and 20 wounded to one Patriot killed and 12 wounded . The Patriots also withdrew toward the coast , but a major Patriot expedition not long after resulted in the arrest or flight of most of the Loyalist leadership . 
 = = Background = = 
 When the American Revolutionary War began in Massachusetts in April 1775 , the free population of the Province of South Carolina was divided in its reaction . Many English coastal residents were either neutral or favored the rebellion , while significant numbers of back country residents , many of whom were German and Scottish immigrants , were opposed . Loyalist sentiment in the back country was dominated by Thomas <unk> , a vocal and active opponent of Patriot attempts to resist King and Parliament . By August 1775 tensions between Patriot and Loyalist in the province had escalated to the point where both sides had raised sizable militia forces . 
 Events were largely nonviolent for some time , although there were isolated instances of tarring and feathering , but tensions were high as the sides struggled for control of munitions . The Council of Safety in early August sent William Henry Drayton and Reverend William Tennent to Ninety Six to rally Patriot support and suppress growing Loyalist support in the back country . Drayton was able to negotiate a tenuous truce with <unk> in September . 
 On September 15 , Patriot militia seized Fort Johnson , the principal fortification overlooking the Charleston harbor . Governor William Campbell dissolved the provincial assembly , and fearing for his personal safety , fled to the Royal Navy sloop of war HMS Tamar . This left the Patriot Council of Safety in control of the provincial capital . The council began improving and expanding Charleston 's coastal defenses ; eventually this culminated in a bloodless exchange of cannon fire between Patriot positions and Royal Navy ships in the harbor on November 11 and 12 . 
 Matters also escalated after the seizure by Loyalists in October of a shipment of gunpowder and ammunition sent by the Council of Safety and intended for the Cherokee . The council responded by organizing a large @-@ scale expedition to recover the munitions . On November 8 it voted to send Colonel Richard Richardson , the commander of the Camden militia , to recover the shipment and arrest Loyalist leaders . 
 = = Siege = = 
 While Richardson gathered his forces , Major Andrew Williamson , who had already been recruiting in the back country , learned of the gunpowder seizure . He arrived at Ninety Six early on November 19 with 560 men . Finding the small town to be not very defensible , he established a camp on John Savage 's plantation , provided a field of fire for the force 's three swivel guns . He began fortifying the camp , ordering the construction of an improvised stockade . Loyalist recruiting had been more successful : Williamson had learned that Captain Patrick Cuningham and Major Joseph Robinson were leading a large Loyalist force ( estimated to number about 1 @,@ 900 ) toward Ninety Six . In a war council that day , the Patriot leaders decided against marching out to face the Loyalists . The Loyalists arrived the next day , and surrounded the Patriot camp . 
 The leaders of the two factions were in the midst of negotiating an end to the standoff when two Patriot militiamen were seized by Loyalists outside the stockade . This set off a gunfight that lasted for about two hours . The next morning the two sides resumed firing at each other at long range . The Loyalists attempted to set fires , creating a smokescreen they could use to approach the stockade . This attempt was frustrated by the wet ground . The Loyalists next constructed a large wooden shield behind which they sought to bring incendiaries closer to the fort , but they only succeeded in " [ setting ] Fire to their own Engine themselves " , according to one account , and it was not proof against the Patriot 's guns . 
 On the afternoon of November 21 the Patriots held a war council , in which they decided to sortie that night . They were preparing for this action at sunset when a Loyalist approached with a parley flag . Nothing was decided in the discussion beyond an agreement to meet the next morning . In that meeting , the Loyalists agreed to withdraw across the Saluda River and the Patriots agreed to destroy the fort . Both sides were to return prisoners taken since November 2 and not interfere with each other 's communications with their respective political leaders . The Patriot leaders were also required to surrender their swivel guns , although they were returned three days later . The truce also included reinforcements for both sides , terms that the Council of Safety claimed did not apply to Colonel Richardson 's force . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The reasons why the Loyalists chose to negotiate the truce are unknown . Governor Campbell described the Loyalists as lacking in effective leadership , and historian Martin Cann speculates that it may have been caused by Colonel Richardson 's preparations or approach . Richardson mobilized 2 @,@ 500 men , which grew by the end of November to more than 4 @,@ 000 . This force scoured the back country , arresting or driving away most of the Loyalist leadership . The campaign effectively ended on December 22 , when 15 inches ( 38 cm ) of snow fell on the area . Richardson 's men , unprepared for the snow , made a difficult trek back to the lowlands . 
 Some of the Loyalist leaders who escaped Richardson 's expedition , including most notably Thomas Brown , fled to West Florida where they joined regular and irregular forces serving with the British . These events resulted in the end of large @-@ scale Loyalist activity in the southern Appalachians , although what was in many ways a civil war became progressively more brutal in the following years . Ninety Six became a British outpost after the 1780 Siege of Charleston , and was besieged in 1781 by forces under the command of Nathanael Greene . Although Greene was forced to lift that siege by the approach of a relief force , the British abandoned Ninety Six not long afterward . 
 = Assata Shakur = 
 Assata <unk> Shakur ( born JoAnne Deborah Byron ; July 16 , 1947 ) , whose married name was Chesimard , is an African @-@ American activist and member of the former Black Panther Party ( BPP ) and Black Liberation Army ( BLA ) . Between 1971 and 1973 , Shakur was convicted of several crimes and was the subject of a <unk> manhunt . 
 In May 1973 , Shakur was involved in a shootout on the New Jersey Turnpike , in which she was accused of killing New Jersey State Trooper Werner Foerster and grievously assaulting Trooper James Harper . BLA member Zayd Malik Shakur was also killed in the incident , and Shakur was wounded . Between 1973 and 1977 , Shakur was indicted in relation to six other incidents — charged with murder , attempted murder , armed robbery , bank robbery , and kidnapping — resulting in three acquittals and three dismissals . In 1977 , she was convicted of the first @-@ degree murder of Foerster and of seven other felonies related to the shootout . 
 Shakur was incarcerated in several prisons in the 1970s . She escaped from prison in 1979 and fled to Cuba in 1984 after living as a fugitive for a few years , and received political asylum . She has been living in Cuba ever since . Since May 2 , 2005 , the FBI has classified her as a domestic terrorist and offered a $ 1 million reward for assistance in her capture . On May 2 , 2013 , the FBI added her to the Most Wanted Terrorist List ; the first woman to be listed . On the same day , the New Jersey Attorney General offered to match the FBI reward , increasing the total reward for her capture to $ 2 million . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Shakur was born in Jamaica , Queens , New York City , on July 16 , 1947 , where she lived for three years with her parents and grandparents , Lula and Frank Hill . After her parents divorced in 1950 , Shakur spent most of her childhood in Wilmington , North Carolina with her grandmother , until her family relocated to Queens when she was a teenager . Assata describes her Aunt Evelyn as the heroine of her childhood , as she was constantly exposing Assata to new things . In her autobiography , Assata writes about how her Aunt encouraged her to read , visited museums and saw plays with her and describes her aunt as " very sophisticated and knew all kinds of things . She was right up my alley because I was forever asking all kinds of questions . I wanted to know everything . " ( Pg . 40 ) For a time , she ran away from home and lived with strangers until she was taken in by her aunt , Evelyn Williams , who later became her lawyer . Shakur dropped out of high school , but later earned a General Educational Development ( GED ) with her aunt 's help . Before dropping out of high school , Shakur attended a segregated school in New York which she writes about within her autobiography . Constantly being either the only black student or one of few , Shakur describes how the integrated school system was poorly set up . She talks about how teachers would act surprised whenever she would answer a question in class , as if they were surprised that black people can be intelligent . Shakur talks about how history was often taught sugar coated , and that students were taught a history that erases the oppression that people of color have experienced . She references a play about George Washington 's birthday in which she participated in , and how her role within the play was to sing “ George Washington never told a lie ” over and over again ; Her reaction to participating in the play is shared in her autobiography as “ I didn ’ t know what a fool they had made out of me until i grew up and started to read real history ” ( Pg 33 ) . Shakur attended Borough of Manhattan Community College ( BMCC ) and then the City College of New York ( CCNY ) in the mid @-@ 1960s , where she was involved in many political activities , protests , and sit @-@ ins . 
 Shakur was arrested for the first time in 1967 with 100 other BMCC students , on charges of trespassing . The students had chained and locked the entrance to a college building to protest a curriculum deficient in black studies and a lack of black faculty . She married Louis Chesimard , a fellow student @-@ activist at CCNY , in April 1967 , and divorced him in December 1970 . Shakur devotes only one paragraph of her autobiography to her marriage , attributing its termination to disagreements related to gender roles . 
 After graduation from CCNY at 23 , Shakur became involved in the Black Panther Party ( BPP ) , and eventually became a leading member of the Harlem branch . Before joining the BPP , Shakur had met several of its members on a 1970 trip to Oakland , California . One of Shakur 's main activities with the BPP was coordinating a school breakfast program . However , she soon left the Party , charging macho behavior of males in these organizations , but did not go as far as other female Panthers like Regina Jennings , who left the organization over sexual harassment . Instead , Shakur 's main criticism of the BPP was its alleged lack of focus on black history : 
 " The basic problem stemmed from the fact that the BPP had no systematic approach to political education . They were reading the Red Book but didn 't know who Harriet Tubman , Marcus Garvey , and Nat Turner were . They talked about <unk> but still really believed that the Civil War was fought to free the slaves . A whole lot of them barely understood any kind of history , Black , African or otherwise . [ ... ] That was the main reason many Party members , in my opinion , underestimated the need to unite with other Black organizations and to struggle around various community issues . " 
 That same year Chesimard changed her name to Assata Shakur and joined the Black Liberation Army ( BLA ) , “ a radical and violent organization of black activists ” " whose primary objective ( was ) to fight for the independence and self @-@ determination of Afrikan people in the United States . " In 1971 , Shakur joined the Republic of New Afrika , an organization formed to create an independent black @-@ majority nation composed of Alabama , Georgia , Louisiana , Mississippi , and South Carolina . 
 = = Allegations and manhunt = = 
 On April 6 , 1971 , Shakur was shot in the stomach during a struggle with a guest at the Statler Hilton Hotel in Midtown Manhattan and was arrested on a string of charges . According to police , Shakur knocked on the door of a room occupied by an out @-@ of @-@ town guest and asked " Is there a party going on here ? " to which the occupant responded in the negative . Shakur then allegedly displayed a revolver and a struggle ensued , during which she was shot . She was booked on charges of attempted robbery , felonious assault , reckless endangerment , and possession of a deadly weapon , then released on bail . Shakur is alleged to have said that she was glad that she had been shot since , having experienced what it was like , she was no longer afraid to be shot again . 
 Following an August 23 , 1971 bank robbery in Queens , Shakur was sought for questioning , and a photograph of a woman ( who was later alleged to be Shakur ) with thick @-@ rimmed black glasses , a high hairdo pulled tightly over her head , and a steadily pointed gun became ubiquitous in banks and full page print ads paid for by the New York Clearing House Association . On December 21 , 1971 , Shakur was named as one of four suspects by New York City police in a hand grenade attack that destroyed a police car and slightly injured two patrolmen in Maspeth , Queens ; a 13 @-@ state alarm was issued three days after the attack when a witness identified Shakur and Andrew Jackson from FBI photographs . Atlanta law enforcement officials said that Shakur and Jackson had lived together for several months in Atlanta , Georgia , in the summer of 1971 . 
 Shakur was one of those wanted for questioning for wounding a police officer attempting to serve a traffic summons in Brooklyn on January 26 , 1972 . After a March 1 , 1972 $ 89 @,@ 000 Brooklyn bank robbery , a Daily News headline asked : " Was that JoAnne ? " ; Shakur was also wanted for questioning after a further September 1 , 1972 Bronx bank robbery . Msgr. John Powis alleged that Shakur was involved in an armed robbery at his Our Lady of the Presentation church in Brownsville , Brooklyn , on September 14 , 1972 , based on FBI photographs . 
 In 1972 , Shakur was the subject of a nationwide manhunt after the FBI alleged that she was the " revolutionary mother hen " of a Black Liberation Army cell that had conducted a " series of cold @-@ blooded murders of New York City police officers , " including the " execution style murders " of New York Police Officers Joseph <unk> and Waverly Jones on May 21 , 1971 and Gregory Foster and Rocco Laurie on January 28 , 1972 . Shakur was alleged to have been directly involved with the Foster and Laurie murders , and involved with the <unk> and Jones murders . Some sources go further , identifying Shakur as the de facto leader and the " soul of the Black Liberation Army " after the arrest of co @-@ founder <unk> Moore . Robert Daley , Deputy Commissioner of the New York City Police , for example , described Shakur as " the final wanted fugitive , the soul of the gang , the mother hen who kept them together , kept them moving , kept them shooting . " 
 As of February 17 , 1972 , when Shakur was identified as one of four BLA members on a short trip to Chattanooga , Tennessee , Shakur was wanted for questioning ( along with Robert Vickers , Twyman Meyers , Samuel Cooper , and Paul Stewart ) in relation to police killings , a Queens bank robbery , and the grenade attack . Shakur was announced as one of six suspects ( pictured left ) in the ambushing of four policemen — two in Jamaica , Queens , and two in Brooklyn — on January 28 , 1973 , despite the fact that the assailants were identified as male . 
 By June 1973 , an apparatus that would become the FBI 's Joint Terrorism Task Force ( JTTF ) was issuing near daily briefings on Shakur 's status and the allegations against her . According to Cleaver and <unk> , the FBI and local police " initiated a national search @-@ and @-@ destroy mission for suspected BLA members , collaborating in <unk> that were the products of intensive political repression and counterintelligence campaigns like <unk> " and " attempted to tie Assata to every suspected action of the BLA involving a woman . " The JTTF would later serve as the " coordinating body in the search for Assata and the renewed campaign to smash the BLA , " after her escape from prison . After her capture , however , Shakur was not charged with any of the crimes that had made her the subject of the manhunt . 
 Shakur and others claim that she was targeted by the FBI 's COINTELPRO as a result of her involvement with these organizations . Specifically , documentary evidence suggests that Shakur was targeted by an investigation named <unk> , which " attempted to hook former New York Panther Joanne Chesimard ( Assata Shakur ) to virtually every bank robbery or violent crime involving a black woman on the East Coast . " Although named after Shakur , <unk> ( like its predecessor , <unk> ) was not limited to Shakur . 
 = = New Jersey Turnpike shootout = = 
 On May 2 , 1973 , at about 12 : 45 a.m. , Assata Shakur , along with Zayd Malik Shakur ( born James F. <unk> ) and <unk> Acoli ( born Clark Squire ) , were stopped on the New Jersey Turnpike in East Brunswick by State Trooper James Harper , backed up by Trooper Werner Foerster in a second patrol vehicle ( Car 820 ) , for driving with a broken tail light . According to Col. David B. Kelly , the vehicle was also " slightly " exceeding the speed limit . Recordings of Trooper Harper calling the dispatcher were played at the trials of both Acoli and Assata Shakur . After reporting his plans to stop the vehicle he had been following , Harper can later be heard to say : " Hold on — two black males , one female . " The stop occurred 200 yards ( 183 m ) south of what was then the Turnpike Authority administration building at exit 9 , the headquarters of Troop D. Zayd Shakur was driving the two @-@ door vehicle , Assata Shakur was seated in the right front seat , and Acoli was in the right rear seat . Trooper Harper asked the driver for identification , noticed a discrepancy , asked him to get out of the car , and questioned him at the rear of the vehicle . 
 It is at this point , with the questioning of Zayd Shakur , that the accounts of the confrontation begin to differ ( see the witnesses section below ) . However , in the ensuing shootout , Trooper Foerster was shot twice in the head with his own gun and killed , Zayd Shakur was killed , and Assata Shakur and Trooper Harper were wounded . 
 According to initial police statements , at this point one or more of the suspects began firing with semiautomatic handguns and Trooper Foerster fired four times before falling mortally wounded . At Acoli 's trial , Harper testified that the gunfight started " seconds " after Foerster arrived at the scene . At this trial , Harper said that Foerster reached into the vehicle , pulled out and held up a semiautomatic pistol and ammunition magazine , and said " Jim , look what I found , " while facing Harper at the rear of the vehicle . At this point , Assata Shakur and Acoli were ordered to put their hands on their laps and not to move ; Harper said that Assata Shakur then reached down to the right of her right leg , pulled out a pistol , and shot him in the shoulder , after which he retreated to behind his vehicle . Harper later retracted this version of events . Questioned by prosecutor C. Judson Hamlin , Harper said he saw Foerster shot just as Assata Shakur was felled by bullets from Harper 's gun . Harper testified that Acoli shot Foerster with a .38 caliber semiautomatic pistol and then used Foerster 's own gun to " execute him . " According to the testimony of State Police investigators , two jammed semiautomatic pistols were discovered near Foerster 's body . 
 Acoli then drove the car ( a white Pontiac LeMans with Vermont license plates ) — which contained Assata Shakur , who was wounded , and Zayd Shakur , who was dead or dying — 5 miles ( 8 km ) down the road at milepost 78 across from Service Area 8 @-@ N ( the Joyce Kilmer Service Area ) , where Assata Shakur was apprehended . The vehicle was chased by three patrol cars and the booths down the turnpike were alerted . Acoli then exited the car and — after being ordered to halt by Trooper Robert Palentchar ( Car 817 ) , the first on the scene — fled into the woods as Palentchar emptied his gun . According to Palentchar , Assata Shakur then walked towards him from 50 feet ( 15 m ) away with her bloody arms raised in surrender . Acoli was captured after a 36 @-@ hour manhunt — involving 400 people , state police helicopters , and bloodhounds from the Ocean County Sheriff 's Department — the following day . Zayd Shakur 's body was found in a nearby gully along the road . 
 At the time of the shootout , Assata Shakur was a member of the Black Liberation Army ( BLA ) and no longer a member of the Black Panther Party . According to a New Jersey Police spokesperson , Assata Shakur was on her way to a " new hideout in Philadelphia " and " heading ultimately for Washington " and a book in the vehicle contained a list of potential BLA targets . Assata Shakur testified that she was on her way to Baltimore for a job as a bar waitress . 
 Assata Shakur , with gunshot wounds in both arms and a shoulder was moved to Middlesex General Hospital , under " heavy guard , " and was reported to be in " serious condition " ; Trooper Harper was wounded in the left shoulder , in " good " condition , and given a protective guard at the hospital . Assata Shakur was interrogated and arraigned from her hospital bed , and her medical care during this period is often alleged to have been " substandard . " She was transferred from Middlesex General Hospital in New Brunswick to Roosevelt Hospital in Edison after her lawyers obtained a court order from Judge John Bachman , and then transferred to Middlesex County Workhouse a few weeks later . 
 The Pontiac LeMans and Trooper Harper 's patrol car were taken to a state police garage in East Brunswick . Following the incident , on May 11 , the State Police instituted two @-@ man night patrols on the turnpike and Garden State Parkway , although the change was not made public until June . 
 = = Criminal charges and dispositions = = 
 Between 1973 and 1977 , in New York and New Jersey , Shakur was indicted ten times , resulting in seven different criminal trials . Shakur was charged with two bank robberies , the kidnapping of a Brooklyn heroin dealer , attempted murder of two Queens police officers stemming from a January 23 , 1973 failed ambush , and eight other felonies related to the Turnpike shootout . Of these trials , three resulted in acquittals , one in a hung jury , one in a change of venue , one in a mistrial due to pregnancy , and one in a conviction ; three indictments were dismissed without trial . 
 = = = Turnpike shootout change of venue = = = 
 On the charges related to the New Jersey Turnpike shootout , New Jersey Superior Court Judge Leon <unk> ordered a change of venue in 1973 from Middlesex to Morris County , New Jersey , saying " it was almost impossible to obtain a jury here comprised of people willing to accept the responsibility of impartiality so that defendants will be protected from transitory passion and prejudice . " Polls of residents in Middlesex County , where Acoli had been convicted less than three years earlier , showed that 83 % knew her identity and 70 % said she was guilty . 
 = = = Bronx bank robbery mistrial = = = 
 In December 1973 , Shakur was tried for a September 29 , 1972 , $ 3 @,@ 700 robbery of the Manufacturer 's Hanover Trust Company in the Bronx , along with co @-@ defendant Kamau Sadiki ( born Fred Hilton ) . In light of the pending murder prosecution against Shakur in New Jersey state court , her lawyers requested that the trial be postponed for six months to permit further preparation . Judge Lee P. Gagliardi denied a postponement , and the Second Circuit denied Shakur 's petition for mandamus . In protest , the lawyers stayed mute , and Shakur and Sadiki conducted their own defense . Seven other BLA members were indicted by District Attorney Eugene Gold in connection with the series of holdups and shootings on the same day , who — according to Gold — represented the " top echelon " of the BLA as determined by a year @-@ long investigation . 
 The prosecution 's case rested largely on the testimony of two men who had pleaded guilty to participating in the holdup . The prosecution called four witnesses : Avon White and John Rivers ( both of whom had already been convicted of the robbery ) and the manager and teller of the bank . White and Rivers , although convicted , had not yet been sentenced for the robbery and were promised that the charges would be dropped in exchange for their testimony . White and Rivers testified that Shakur had guarded one of the doors with a .357 magnum pistol and that Sadiki had served as a lookout and drove the getaway truck during the robbery ; neither White nor Rivers was cross @-@ examined due to the defense attorney 's refusal to participate in the trial . Shakur 's aunt and lawyer , Evelyn Williams , was also cited for contempt after walking out of the courtroom after many of her attempted motions were denied . The trial was delayed for a few days after Shakur was diagnosed with pleurisy . 
 During the trial , the defendants were escorted to a " holding pen " outside the courtroom several times after shouting complaints and epithets at Judge Gagliardi . While in the holding pen , they listened to the proceedings over loudspeakers . Both defendants were repeatedly cited for contempt of court and eventually barred from the courtroom , where the trial continued in their absence . A contemporary New York Times editorial criticized Williams for failing to maintain courtroom " decorum , " comparing her actions to William Kunstler 's recent contempt conviction for his actions during the " Chicago Seven " trial . 
 Sadiki 's lawyer , Robert Bloom , attempted to have the trial dismissed and then postponed due to new " revelations " regarding the credibility of White , a former co @-@ defendant working for the prosecution . Bloom had been assigned to defend Hilton over the summer , but White was not disclosed as a government witness until right before the trial . Judge Gagliardi instructed both the prosecution and the defense not to bring up Shakur or Sadiki 's connections to the BLA , saying they were " not relevant . " Gagliardi denied requests by the jurors to pose questions to the witnesses — either directly or through him — and declined to provide the jury with information they requested about how long the defense had been given to prepare , saying it was " none of their concern . " This trial resulted in a hung jury and then a mistrial when the jury reported to Gagliardi that they were hopelessly deadlocked for the fourth time . 
 = = = Bronx bank robbery retrial = = = 
 The retrial was delayed for one day to give the defendants more time to prepare . The new jury selection was marked by attempts by Williams to be relieved of her duties due to disagreements with Shakur as well as Hilton 's attorney . Judge Arnold Bauman denied the application , but directed another lawyer , Howard Jacobs , to defend Shakur while Williams remained the attorney of record . Shakur was ejected following an argument with Williams , and Hilton left with her as jury selection continued . After the selection of twelve jurors ( 60 were excused ) , Williams was allowed to retire from the case , with Shakur officially representing herself , assisted by lawyer Florynce Kennedy . In the retrial , White testified that the six alleged robbers had saved their hair clippings to create disguises , and identified a partially obscured head and shoulder in a photo taken from a surveillance camera as Shakur 's . Kennedy objected to this identification on the grounds that the prosecutor , assistant United States attorney Peter <unk> , had offered to stipulate that Shakur was not depicted in any of the photographs . Although both White and Rivers testified that Shakur was wearing overalls during the robbery , the person identified as Shakur in the photograph was wearing a jacket . The defense attempted to discredit White on the grounds that he had spent eight months in Matteawan Hospital for the Criminally Insane in 1968 , and White countered that he had faked insanity ( by claiming to be Allah in front of three psychiatrists ) to get transferred out of prison . 
 Shakur personally cross @-@ examined the witnesses , getting White to admit that he had once been in love with her ; the same day , one juror ( who had been frequently napping during the trial ) was replaced with an alternate . Like the first trial , the retrial was marked by the defendants leaving and / or being thrown out of the court room for periods of varying lengths . Both defendants were acquitted in the retrial ; six jurors interviewed after the trial stated that they did not believe the two key prosecution witnesses . Shakur was immediately returned to Morristown , New Jersey , under a heavy guard following the trial . Louis Chesimard ( Shakur 's ex @-@ husband ) and Paul Stewart , the other two alleged robbers , had been acquitted in June . 
 = = = Turnpike shootout mistrial = = = 
 The Turnpike shootout proceedings continued with Judge John E. Bachman in Middlesex County . The jury was chosen from Morris County , which had a far smaller black population than Middlesex County . On this basis , Shakur unsuccessfully attempted to remove the trial to federal court . 
 Shakur was originally slated to be tried with Acoli , but the trials were separated ( before jury selection was complete ) due to Shakur 's pregnancy , and hers resulted in a mistrial in 1974 because of the possibility of miscarriage ; Shakur was then hospitalized on February 1 . 
 = = = Attempted murder dismissal = = = 
 Shakur and four others ( including Fred Hilton , Avon White , and Andrew Jackson ) were indicted in the State Supreme Court in Bronx on December 31 , 1973 on charges of attempting to shoot and kill two policemen — Michael O 'Reilly and Roy <unk> , who were wounded but had since returned to duty — in a January 28 , 1973 , ambush in St. Albans , Queens . On March 5 , 1974 , two new defendants ( Jeannette Jefferson and Robert Hayes ) were named in an indictment involving the same charges . On April 26 , while Shakur was pregnant , New Jersey Governor Brendan Byrne signed an extradition order to move Shakur to New York to face two counts of attempted murder , attempted assault , and possession of dangerous weapons related to the alleged ambush ; however , Shakur declined to waive her right to an extradition hearing , and asked for a full hearing before Middlesex County Court Judge John E. Bachman . 
 Shakur was extradited to New York City on May 6 , arraigned on May 11 ( pleading innocent ) , and remanded to jail by Justice Albert S. <unk> of the State Supreme Court , pending a pretrial hearing on July 2 . In November 1974 , New York State Supreme Court Justice Peter Farrell dismissed the attempted murder indictment because of insufficient evidence , declaring " The court can only note with disapproval that virtually a year has passed before counsel made an application for the most basic relief permitted by law , namely an attack on the sufficiency of the evidence submitted by the grand jury . " 
 = = = Kidnapping trial = = = 
 Shakur was indicted on May 30 , 1974 , on the charge of having robbed a Brooklyn bar and kidnapping bartender James E. Freeman for ransom . Shakur and co @-@ defendant Ronald Myers were accused of entering the bar with pistols and shotguns , taking $ 50 from the register , kidnapping the bartender , leaving a note demanding a $ 20 @,@ 000 ransom from the bar owner , and fleeing in a rented truck . Freeman was said to have later escaped unhurt . The text of Shakur 's opening statement in the trial is reproduced in her autobiography . Shakur and co @-@ defendant Ronald Myers were acquitted on December 19 , 1975 after seven hours of jury deliberation , ending a three @-@ month trial in front of Judge William Thompson . 
 = = = Queens bank robbery trial = = = 
 In July 1973 , after being indicted by a grand jury , Shakur pleaded not guilty in Federal Court in Brooklyn to an indictment related to an August 31 , 1971 $ 7 @,@ 700 robbery of the Bankers Trust Company bank in Queens . Judge Jacob <unk> set a tentative trial date of November 5 that year . The trial was delayed until 1976 , when Shakur was represented by Stanley Cohen and Evelyn Williams . In this trial , Shakur acted as her own co @-@ counsel and told the jury in her opening testimony : 
 " I have decided to act as co @-@ counsel , and to make this opening statement , not because I have any illusions about my legal abilities , but , rather , because there are things that I must say to you . I have spent many days and nights behind bars thinking about this trial , this outrage . And in my own mind , only someone who has been so intimately a victim of this madness as I have can do justice to what I have to say . " 
 One bank employee testified that Shakur was one of the bank robbers , but three other bank employees ( including two tellers ) testified that they were uncertain . The prosecution showed surveillance photos of four of the six alleged robbers , contending that one of them was Shakur wearing a wig . Shakur was forcibly subdued and photographed by the FBI on the judge 's order , after having refused to cooperate , believing that the FBI would use photo manipulation ; a subsequent judge determined that the manners in which the photos were obtained violated Shakur 's rights and ruled the new photos inadmissible . In her autobiography , Shakur recounts being beaten , choked , and kicked on the courtroom floor by five marshals , as Williams narrated the events to ensure they would appear on the court record . Shortly after deliberation began , the jury asked to see all the photographic exhibits taken from the surveillance footage . The jury determined that a widely circulated FBI photo allegedly showing Shakur participating in the robbery was not her . 
 Shakur was acquitted after seven hours of jury deliberation on January 16 , 1976 , and was immediately remanded back to New Jersey for the Turnpike trial . The actual transfer took place on January 29 . She was the only one of the six suspects in the robbery to be brought to trial . Andrew Jackson and two others indicted for the same robbery pleaded guilty ; Jackson was sentenced to five years in prison and five years ' probation ; another was shot and killed in a gun fight in Florida on December 31 , 1971 , and the last remained at large at the time of Shakur 's acquittal . 
 = = = Turnpike shootout retrial = = = 
 By the time Shakur was retried in 1977 , Acoli had already been convicted of the murder of Foerster ( on the theory that he fired the bullets ) , and a total of 289 articles had been published in the local press relating to the various crimes with which Shakur had been accused . Shakur 's trial , along with Acoli 's , would end up costing Middlesex County an estimated $ 1 million . 
 Shakur again attempted to remove the trial to federal court . The United States District Court for the District of New Jersey denied the petition and also denied Shakur an injunction against the holding of trial proceedings on Fridays ( the Muslim Sabbath ) . An en banc panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit affirmed . 
 The nine @-@ week trial was widely publicized , and was even reported on by the Telegraph Agency of the Soviet Union ( TASS ) . On March 25 , 1977 , back in Middlesex County , Shakur was convicted as an accomplice in the murders of New Jersey State Trooper Werner Foerster and Zayd Shakur and possession of weapons , as well as of assault and attempted murder of Harper . During the trial , hundreds of civil rights campaigners demonstrated outside of the Middlesex County courthouse each day . 
