 Following the 13 @-@ minute opening statement by Edward J. Barone , the first assistant Middlesex County prosecutor ( directing the case for the state ) , William Kunstler ( the chief of Shakur 's defense staff ) moved immediately for a mistrial , calling the eight @-@ count grand jury indictment " adversary proceeding solely and exclusively under the control of the prosecutor , " whom Kunstler accused of " improper prejudicial remarks " ; Judge Theodore Appleby , noting the frequent defense interruptions that had characterized the previous days ' jury selection , denied the motion . The prosecution contended that Shakur shot and killed her companion , Zayd Shakur , and " executed " Trooper Foerster with his own weapon . 
 The next day , the jury listened to State Police radio tapes while being provided with a printed transcript , an arrangement that resulted from " hours of haggling " between the defense and prosecution . The " climax " of the tape came when Trooper Ronald Foster , the State Police radio operator , shouted into his microphone " They just shot Harper ! Be on the lookout for this car ! " and " It is a Pontiac . It 's got one tail light " after the wounded Harper entered into the administration building near the site of the shootout . As the tapes were played , Shakur was seated " calmly and without apparent concern " wearing a yellow turban and brightly colored floor @-@ length dress over a white turtleneck sweater . 
 On February 23 , Shakur 's attorneys filed papers asking Judge Appleby to subpoena FBI Director Clarence Kelley , Senator Frank Church and other federal and New York law enforcement officials to testify about the Counter Intelligence Program , which they alleged was designed to harass and disrupt black activist organizations . Kunstler had previously been successful in <unk> Kelley and Church for the trials of American Indian Movement ( AIM ) members charged with murdering FBI agents . The motion ( argued March 2 ) — which also asked the court to require the production of memos , tapes , documents , and photographs of alleged COINTELPRO involvement from 1970 to 1973 — was denied . 
 Shakur herself was called as a witness on March 15 , the first witness called by the defense ; she denied shooting either Harper or Foerster , and also denied handling a weapon during the incident . She was questioned by her own attorney , Stuart Ball , for under 40 minutes , and then cross @-@ examined by Barone for less than two hours ( see the Witnesses section below ) . Ball 's questioning ended with the following exchange : 
 " On that night of May 2 [ n ] d , did you shoot , kill , execute or have anything to do with the death of Trooper Werner Foerster ? " 
 " No . " 
 " Did you shoot or assault Trooper James Harper ? " 
 " No . " 
 Under cross @-@ examination , Shakur was unable to explain how three magazines of ammunition and 16 live shells had gotten into her shoulder bag ; she also admitted to knowing that Zayd Shakur carried a gun at times , and specifically to seeing a gun sticking out of Acoli 's pocket while stopping for supper at a Howard Johnson 's restaurant shortly before the shooting . Shakur admitted to carrying an identification card with the name " Justine Henderson " in her <unk> the night of the shootout , but denied using any of the aliases on the long list that Barone proceeded to read . 
 = = = = Defense attorneys = = = = 
 Shakur 's defense attorneys were William Kunstler ( the chief of Shakur 's defense staff ) , Stuart Ball , Robert Bloom , Raymond A. Brown , Stanley Cohen ( who died of unknown causes early on in the Turnpike trial ) , Lennox Hinds , Florynce Kennedy , Louis Myers , Laurence Stern , and Evelyn Williams , Shakur 's aunt . Of these attorneys , Kunstler , Ball , Cohen , Myers , Stern and Williams appeared in court for the turnpike trial . Kunstler became involved in Shakur 's trials in 1975 , when contacted by Williams , and commuted from New York City to New Brunswick every day with Stern . 
 Her attorneys , in particular Lennox Hinds , were often held in contempt of court , which the National Conference of Black Lawyers cited as an example of systemic bias in the judicial system . The New Jersey Legal Ethics Committee also investigated complaints against Hinds for comparing Shakur 's murder trial to " legalized lynching " undertaken by a " kangaroo court . " Hinds ' disciplinary proceeding reached the U.S. Supreme Court in Middlesex County Ethics Committee v. Garden State Bar Ass 'n ( 1982 ) . According to Kunstler 's autobiography , the sizable contingent of New Jersey State Troopers guarding the courthouse were under strict orders from their commander , Col. Clinton <unk> , to completely shun Shakur 's defense attorneys . 
 Judge Appleby also threatened Kunstler with dismissal and contempt of court after he delivered an October 21 , 1976 speech at nearby Rutgers University that in part discussed the upcoming trial , but later ruled that Kunstler could represent Shakur . Until obtaining a court order , Williams was forced to strip naked and undergo a body search before each of her visits with Shakur — during which Shakur was shackled to a bed by both ankles . Judge Appleby also refused to investigate a burglary of her defense counsel 's office that resulted in the disappearance of trial documents , amounting to half of the legal papers related to her case . Her lawyers also claimed that their offices were bugged . 
 Tensions and dissension existed among the members of the defense team . Evelyn Williams felt that she was a victim of male prejudice stating that " for the second time in ( her ) legal career ( she ) became aware of the disdain with which men perceive women . " She expressed " amazement and contempt " for the actions of her fellow lawyers as she watched their " infighting for center stage " during the trial . Other members of the team were concerned that Williams was overly aggressive during her sole cross @-@ examination to the point of passing her notes that read , in part , " You 're antagonizing the jury " and " Shut up and sit down . " 
 = = = = Witnesses = = = = 
 <unk> Acoli , Assata Shakur , Trooper Harper , and a New Jersey Turnpike driver who saw part of the incident were the only surviving witnesses . Acoli did not testify or make any pre @-@ trial statements , nor did he testify in his own trial or give a statement to the police . The driver traveling north on the turnpike testified that he had seen a State Trooper struggling with a Black man between a white vehicle and a State Trooper car , whose revolving lights illuminated the area . 
 Shakur testified that Trooper Harper shot her after she raised her arms to comply with his demand . She said that the second shot hit her in the back as she turned to avoid it , and that she fell onto the road for the duration of the gunfight before crawling back into the backseat of the Pontiac — which Acoli drove 5 miles ( 8 km ) down the road and parked . She testified that she remained there until State Troopers dragged her onto the road . 
 Trooper Harper 's official reports state that after he stopped the Pontiac , he ordered Acoli to the back of the vehicle for Trooper Foerster — who had arrived on the scene — to examine his driver 's license . The reports then state that after Acoli complied , and as Harper was looking inside the vehicle to examine the registration , Trooper Foerster yelled and held up an ammunition magazine as Shakur simultaneously reached into her red pocketbook , pulled out a nine @-@ millimeter weapon and fired at him . Trooper Harper 's reports then state that he ran to the rear of his car and shot at Shakur who had exited the vehicle and was firing from a crouched position next to the vehicle . 
 Under cross @-@ examination at both Acoli and Shakur 's trials , Trooper Harper admitted to having lied in these reports and in his Grand Jury testimony about Trooper Foerster yelling and showing him an ammunition magazine , about seeing Shakur holding a pocketbook or a gun inside the vehicle , and about Shakur shooting at him from the car . Trooper Harper retracted his previous statements and said that he had never seen Shakur with a gun and that she did not shoot him . 
 = = = = Jury = = = = 
 A total of 408 potential jurors were questioned during the voir dire , which concluded on February 14 . All of the 15 jurors — ten women and five men — were white , and most were under thirty years old . Five jurors had personal ties to State Troopers ( one girlfriend , two nephews , and two friends ) . A sixteenth female juror was removed before the trial formally opened when it was determined that Sheriff Joseph DeMarino of Middlesex County , while a private detective several years earlier , had worked for a lawyer who represented the juror 's husband . Judge Appleby repeatedly denied Kunstler 's requests for DeMarino to be removed from his responsibilities for the duration of the trial " because he did not divulge his association with the juror . " 
 One prospective juror was dismissed for reading Target Blue , a book by Robert Daley , a former New York City Deputy Police Commander , which dealt in part with Shakur and had been left in the jury assembly room . Before the jury entered the courtroom , Judge Appleby ordered Shakur 's lawyers to remove a copy of Roots : The Saga of an American Family by Alex Haley from a position on the defense counsel table easily visible to jurors . The Roots TV miniseries adapted from the book and shown shortly before the trial was believed to have evoked feelings of " guilt and sympathy " with many white viewers . 
 Shakur 's attorneys sought a new trial on the grounds that one jury member , John McGovern , had violated the jury 's sequestration order . Judge Appleby rejected Kunstler 's claim that the juror had violated the order . McGovern later sued Kunstler for defamation ; Kunstler eventually publicly apologized to McGovern and paid him a small settlement . Additionally , in his autobiography , Kunstler alleged that he later learned from a law enforcement agent that a New Jersey State Assembly member had addressed the jury at the hotel where they were sequestered , urging them to convict Shakur . 
 Due to the high security of the trial and the sequestration , Shakur 's trial , along with Acoli 's , cost Middlesex County an estimated $ 1 million combined . In September 1977 , New Jersey Governor Brendan Byrne vetoed a bill to give the Morris County sheriff $ 7 @,@ 491 for overtime expenses incurred in guarding Shakur 's jury . 
 = = = = Medical evidence = = = = 
 A key element of Shakur 's defense was medical testimony meant to demonstrate that she was shot with her hands up and that she would have been subsequently unable to fire a weapon . A neurologist testified that the median nerve in Shakur 's right arm was severed by the second bullet , making her unable to pull a trigger . Neurosurgeon Dr. Arthur Turner Davidson , Associate Professor of Surgery at Albert Einstein College of Medicine , testified that the wounds in her upper arms , armpit and chest , and severed median nerve that instantly paralyzed her right arm , would only have been caused if both arms were raised , and that to sustain such injuries while crouching and firing a weapon ( as described in Trooper Harper 's testimony ) " would be anatomically impossible . " 
 Davidson based his testimony on an August 4 , 1976 examination of Shakur and on X @-@ rays taken immediately after the shootout at Middlesex General Hospital . Prosecutor Barone questioned whether Davidson was qualified to make such a judgment 39 months after the injury ; Barone proceeded to suggest ( while a female Sheriff 's attendant acted out his suggestion ) that Shakur was struck in the right arm and collar bone and " then spun around by the impact of the bullet so an immediate second shot entered the fleshy part of her upper left arm " to which Davidson replied " Impossible . " 
 Dr. David Spain , a pathologist from Brookdale Community College , testified that her bullet scars as well as X @-@ rays supported her claim that her arms were raised , and that there was " no conceivable way " the first bullet could have hit Shakur 's clavicle if her arm was down . 
 Judge Appleby eventually cut off funds for any further expert defense testimony . Shakur , in her autobiography , and Williams , in <unk> Evidence , both claim that it was difficult to find expert witnesses for the trial . Not only because of the financial expense , but also because most forensic and ballistic specialists declined on the grounds of a conflict of interest when approached because they routinely performed such work for law enforcement officials . 
 = = = = Other evidence = = = = 
 Neutron activation analysis administered after the shootout showed no gunpowder residue on Shakur 's fingers ; her fingerprints were not found on any weapon at the scene , according to forensic analysis performed at the Trenton , New Jersey crime lab and the FBI crime labs in Washington , D.C. According to tape recordings and police reports made several hours after the shoot @-@ out , when Harper returned on foot to the administration building 200 yards ( 183 m ) away , he did not report Foerster 's presence at the scene ; no one at headquarters knew of Foerster 's involvement in the shoot @-@ out until his body was discovered beside his patrol car , more than an hour later . 
 = = = = Conviction and sentencing = = = = 
 On March 24 , the jurors listened for 45 minutes to a rereading of testimony of the State Police chemist regarding the blood found at the scene , on the LeMans , and Shakur 's clothing . That night , the second night of jury deliberation , the jury asked Judge Appleby to repeat his instructions regarding the four assault charges 30 minutes before retiring for the night , which led to speculation that the jury had decided in Shakur 's favor on the remaining charges , especially the two counts of murder . Appleby reiterated that the jury must consider separately the four assault charges ( atrocious assault and battery , assault on a police officer acting in the line of duty , assault with a deadly weapon , and assault with intent to kill ) , each of which carried a total maximum penalty of 33 years in prison . The other charges were : first @-@ degree murder ( of Foerster ) , second @-@ degree murder ( of Zayd Shakur ) , illegal possession of a weapon , and armed robbery ( related to Foerster 's service revolver ) . The jury also asked Appleby to repeat the definitions of " intent " and " reasonable doubt . " 
 Shakur was convicted on all eight counts : two murder charges , and six assault charges . The prosecution did not need to prove that Shakur fired the shots that killed either Trooper Foerster or Zayd Shakur : being an accomplice to murder carries an equivalent life sentence under New Jersey law . Upon hearing the verdict , Shakur said — in a " barely audible voice " — that she was " ashamed that I have even taken part in this trial " and that the jury was " racist " and had " convicted a woman with her hands up . " Judge Appleby told the court attendants to " remove the prisoner " and Shakur replied : " the prisoner will walk away on her own feet . " After Joseph W. Lewis , the jury foreman , read the verdict , Kunstler asked that the jury be removed before alleging that one juror had violated the sequestration order ( see above ) . 
 At the post trial press conference Kunstler blamed the verdict on racism stating that " the white element was there to destroy her . " When asked by a reporter that if that were the case why did it take the jury 24 hours to reach a verdict Kunstler replied , " That was just a pretense . " A few minutes later the prosecutor Barone disagreed with Kunstler 's assessment saying the trial 's outcome was decided " completely on the facts . " 
 At Shakur 's sentencing hearing on April 25 , Appleby sentenced her to 26 to 33 years in state prison ( 10 to 12 for the four counts of assault , 12 to 15 for robbery , 2 to 3 for armed robbery , plus 2 to 3 for aiding and abetting the murder of Foerster ) , to be served consecutively with her mandatory life sentence . However , Appleby dismissed the second @-@ degree murder of Zayd Shakur , as the New Jersey Supreme Court had recently narrowed the application of the law . Appleby finally sentenced Shakur to 30 days in the Middlesex County Workhouse for contempt of court , concurrent with the other sentences , for refusing to rise when he entered the courtroom . To become eligible for parole , Shakur would have had to serve a minimum of 25 years , which would have included her four years in custody during the trials . 
 = = = Nelson murder dismissal = = = 
 In October 1977 , New York State Superior Court Justice John Starkey dismissed murder and robbery charges against Shakur related to the death of Richard Nelson during a December 28 , 1972 , hold @-@ up of a Brooklyn social club , ruling that the state had delayed too long in bringing her to trial , saying " People have constitutional rights , and you can 't shuffle them around . " The case was delayed in being brought to trial as a result of an agreement between the Governors of New York and New Jersey as to the priority of the various charges against Shakur . Three other defendants were indicted in relation to the same holdup : Melvin Kearney , who died in 1976 from an eight @-@ floor fall while trying to escape from the Brooklyn House of Detention , <unk> Myers , who was killed by police while a fugitive , and Andrew Jackson , the charges against whom were dismissed when two prosecution witnesses could not identify him in a lineup . 
 = = = Attempted robbery dismissal = = = 
 On November 22 , 1977 , Shakur pleaded not guilty to an attempted armed robbery indictment stemming from the 1971 incident at the Statler Hilton Hotel . Shakur was accused of attempting to rob a Michigan man staying at the hotel of $ 250 of cash and personal property . During the incident Shakur was shot in the stomach and subsequently arrested , booked , and released on bail . The prosecutor was C. Richard Gibbons . The charges were dismissed without trial . 
 = = Imprisonment = = 
 After the Turnpike shootings , Shakur was imprisoned in New Jersey State Reception and Correction center in Yardville , Burlington County , New Jersey and later moved to Rikers Island Correctional Institution for Women in New York City where she was kept in solitary confinement for 21 months . Shakur 's only daughter , <unk> Shakur , was conceived during her trial and born on September 11 , 1974 in the " fortified psychiatric ward " at Elmhurst General Hospital in Queens , where Shakur stayed for a few days before being returned to Rikers Island . In her autobiography , Shakur claims that she was beaten and restrained by several large female officers after refusing a medical exam from a prison doctor shortly after giving birth . While imprisoned on Rikers Island , Shakur filed a § 1983 suit related to the conditions of her confinement ; she was unsuccessful in persuading the federal courts to order that the legal aid <unk> assisting in her claim be granted attorney @-@ like visitation rights . 
 After a bomb threat was made against Judge Appleby , Sheriff Joseph DeMarino lied to the press about the exact date of her transfer to Clinton Correctional Facility for Women for security reasons . She was also transferred from the Clinton Correctional Facility for Women to a special area staffed by women guards at the Yardville Youth Correction and Reception Center in New Jersey , where she was the only female inmate , for " security reasons . " When Kunstler first took on Shakur 's case ( before meeting her ) , he described her basement cell as " adequate , " which nearly resulted in his dismissal as her attorney . On May 6 , 1977 , Judge Clarkson Fisher , of the United States District Court for the District of New Jersey , denied Shakur 's request for an injunction requiring her transfer from the all @-@ male facility to Clinton Correctional Facility for Women ; the Third Circuit affirmed . 
 On April 8 , 1978 , Shakur was transferred to Alderson Federal Prison Camp in Alderson , West Virginia where she met Puerto Rican nationalist Lolita Lebrón and Mary Alice , a Catholic nun , who introduced Shakur to the concept of liberation theology . At Alderson , Shakur was housed in the Maximum Security Unit , which also contained several members of the Aryan Sisterhood as well as Sandra Good and Lynette " Squeaky " Fromme , followers of Charles Manson . 
 On March 31 , 1978 , after the Maximum Security Unit at Alderson was closed , Shakur was transferred to the Clinton Correctional Facility for Women in New Jersey . According to her attorney Lennox Hinds , Shakur " <unk> the awfulness of the condition in which she was incarcerated , " which included vaginal and anal searches . Hinds argues that " in the history of New Jersey , no woman pretrial detainee or prisoner has ever been treated as she was , continuously confined in a men 's prison , under twenty @-@ four @-@ hour surveillance of her most intimate functions , without intellectual sustenance , adequate medical attention , and exercise , and without the company of other women for all the years she was in custody . " 
 Shakur was identified as a political prisoner as early as October 8 , 1973 by Angela Davis , and in an April 3 , 1977 , New York Times advertisement purchased by the Easter Coalition for Human Rights . An international panel of seven jurists representing the United Nations Commission on Human Rights concluded in 1979 that her treatment was " totally <unk> any prisoner . " Their investigation , which focused on alleged human rights abuses of political prisoners , cited Shakur as " one of the worst cases " of such abuses and including her in " a class of victims of FBI misconduct through the COINTELPRO strategy and other forms of illegal government conduct who as political activists have been selectively targeted for provocation , false arrests , entrapment , fabrication of evidence , and spurious criminal prosecutions . " Amnesty International , however , did not regard Shakur as a former political prisoner . 
 = = Escape = = 
 On November 2 , 1979 she escaped the Clinton Correctional Facility for Women in New Jersey , when three members of the Black Liberation Army visiting her drew concealed .45 @-@ caliber pistols , seized two guards as hostages and commandeered a prison van . The van escaped through an unfenced section of the prison into the parking lot of a state school for the handicapped , 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 km ) away , where a blue @-@ and @-@ white Lincoln and a blue Mercury Comet were waiting . No one was injured during the prison break , including the guards held as hostages who were left in the parking lot . Her brother , Mutulu Shakur , Silvia <unk> , former Panther <unk> Odinga , and Marilyn Buck were charged with assisting in her escape ; Ronald Boyd Hill was also held on charges related to the escape . In part for his role in the event , Mutulu was named on July 23 , 1982 as the 380th addition to the FBI 's Ten Most Wanted Fugitives list , where he remained for the next four years until his capture in 1986 . State correction officials disclosed in November 1979 that they had not run identity checks on Shakur 's visitors and that the three men and one woman who assisted in her escape had presented false identification to enter the prison 's visitor room , before which they were not searched . Mutulu Shakur and Marilyn Buck were convicted in 1988 of several robberies as well as the prison escape . 
 At the time of the escape , Kunstler had just started to prepare her appeal . After her escape , Shakur lived as a fugitive for several years . The FBI circulated wanted posters throughout the New York – New Jersey area ; her supporters hung " Assata Shakur is Welcome Here " posters in response . In New York , three days after her escape , more than 5 @,@ 000 demonstrators organized by the National Black Human Rights Coalition carried signs with the same slogan . The image of Shakur on the wanted posters featured a wig and blurred black @-@ and @-@ white features ( pictured right ) . 
 For years after Shakur 's escape , the movements , activities , and phone calls of her friends and relatives — including her daughter walking to school in upper Manhattan — were monitored by investigators in an attempt to ascertain her whereabouts . In July 1980 , FBI director William Webster said that the search for Shakur had been frustrated by residents ' refusal to cooperate , and a New York Times editorial opined that the department 's commitment to " enforce the law with vigor — but also with sensitivity for civil rights and civil liberties " had been " clouded " by an " apparently crude sweep " through a Harlem building in search of Shakur . In particular , one pre @-@ dawn April 20 , 1980 raid on 92 Morningside Avenue , during which FBI agents armed with shotguns and machine guns broke down doors , and searched through the building for several hours , while preventing residents from leaving , was seen by residents as having " racist overtones . " In October 1980 , New Jersey and New York City Police denied published reports that they had declined to raid a Bedford @-@ Stuyvesant , Brooklyn building where Shakur was suspected to be hiding for fear of provoking a racial incident . 
 = = Political asylum in Cuba = = 
 Shakur fled to Cuba by 1984 ; in that year she was granted political asylum in that country . The Cuban government paid approximately $ 13 a day toward her living expenses . In 1985 she was reunited with her daughter , <unk> , who had been raised by Shakur 's mother in New York . 
 In an open letter , Shakur has called Cuba " One of the Largest , Most Resistant and Most Courageous <unk> ( Maroon Camps ) that has ever existed on the Face of this Planet . " She also referred to herself as a " 20th century escaped slave . " Shakur is also known to have worked as an English @-@ language editor for Radio Havana Cuba . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 In 1987 , she published Assata : An Autobiography , which was written in Cuba . Her autobiography has been cited in relation to critical legal studies and critical race theory . The book does not give a detailed account of the events on the New Jersey Turnpike , except saying that the jury " Convicted a woman with her hands up ! " It gives an account of her life beginning with her youth in the South and New York . Shakur challenges traditional styles of literary autobiography and offers the public a perspective on her life that is not easily accessible to the public . The book was published by Lawrence Hill & Company in the United States and Canada but the copyright is held by Zed Books Ltd. of London due to " Son of Sam " laws , which restrict who can receive profits from a book . In the six months preceding the publications of the book , Evelyn Williams , Shakur 's aunt and attorney , made several trips to Cuba and served as a go @-@ between with Hill . 
 In 1993 , she published a second book , Still Black , Still Strong , with <unk> bin Wahad and Mumia Abu @-@ Jamal . 
 = = = Extradition attempts = = = 
 In 1997 , Carl Williams , the superintendent of the New Jersey State Police , wrote a letter to Pope John Paul II asking him to raise the issue of Shakur 's extradition during his talks with President Fidel Castro . During the pope 's visit to Cuba in 1998 , Shakur agreed to an interview with NBC journalist Ralph Penza . Shakur later published an extensive criticism of the NBC segment , which inter @-@ spliced footage of Trooper Foerster 's grieving widow with an FBI photo connected to a bank robbery of which Shakur had been acquitted . On March 10 , 1998 New Jersey Governor Christine Todd Whitman asked Attorney General Janet Reno to do whatever it would take to return Shakur from Cuba . Later in 1998 , U.S. media widely reported claims that the United States State Department had offered to lift the Cuban embargo in exchange for the return of 90 U.S. fugitives , including Shakur . 
 In September 1998 , the United States Congress passed a non @-@ binding resolution asking Cuba for the return of Shakur as well as 90 fugitives believed by Congress to be residing in Cuba ; House Concurrent Resolution 254 passed 371 – 0 in the House and by unanimous consent in the Senate . The Resolution was due in no small part to the lobbying efforts of Governor Whitman and New Jersey Representative Bob Franks . Before the passage of the Resolution , Franks stated : " This escaped murderer now lives a comfortable life in Cuba and has launched a public relations campaign in which she attempts to portray herself as an innocent victim rather than a cold @-@ blooded murderer . " 
 In an open letter to Castro , chair of the Congressional Black Caucus Representative Maxine Waters of California later explained that many members of the Caucus ( including herself ) were against Shakur 's extradition but had mistakenly voted for the bill , which was placed on the accelerated suspension calendar , generally reserved for non @-@ controversial legislation . In the letter , Waters explained her opposition , calling COINTELPRO " illegal , clandestine political persecution . " 
 On May 2 , 2005 , the 32nd anniversary of the Turnpike shootings , the FBI classified her as a domestic terrorist , increasing the reward for assistance in her capture to $ 1 million , the largest reward placed on an individual in the history of New Jersey . New Jersey State Police superintendent Rick Fuentes said " she is now 120 pounds of money . " The bounty announcement reportedly caused Shakur to " drop out of sight " after having previously lived relatively openly ( including having her home telephone number listed in her local telephone directory ) . 
 New York City Councilman Charles Barron , a former Black Panther , has called for the bounty to be rescinded . The New Jersey State Police and Federal Bureau of Investigation each still have an agent officially assigned to her case . Calls for Shakur 's extradition increased following Fidel Castro 's transfer of presidential duties ; in a May 2005 television address , Castro had called Shakur a victim of racial persecution , saying " they wanted to portray her as a terrorist , something that was an injustice , a brutality , an infamous lie . " In 2013 the FBI announced it had made Shakur the first woman on its list of most wanted terrorists . The reward for her capture and return was also doubled to $ 2 million that year . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 A documentary film about Shakur , Eyes of the Rainbow , written and directed by Cuban filmmaker Gloria Rolando , appeared in 1997 . The official premiere of the film in Havana in 2004 was promoted by Casa de las Américas , the main cultural forum of the Cuban government . The National Conference of Black Lawyers and Mos Def are among the professional organizations and entertainers to support Assata Shakur ; The " Hands Off Assata " campaign is organized by Dream Hampton . Hip @-@ hop artist Common recorded a tribute to Shakur , " A Song for Assata , " on his album Like Water for Chocolate , 2000 , after traveling to Havana to meet with Shakur personally . Paris ( " Assata 's Song " , in Sleeping with the Enemy , 1992 ) , Public Enemy ( " Rebel Without A Pause " in It Takes a Nation of Millions to Hold Us Back , 1988 ) , 2Pac ( " Words of Wisdom " in <unk> Now , 1991 ) , Digital Underground ( " Heartbeat Props " in Sons of the P , 1991 ) , The Roots ( " The Adventures in Wonderland " in <unk> <unk> , 1996 ) , Asian Dub Foundation ( " Committed to Life " in Community Music , 2000 ) , Saul Williams ( " Black Stacey " in Saul Williams , 2004 ) , Rebel Diaz ( " Which Side Are You On ? " in Otro Guerrillero Mixtape Vol . 2 , 2008 ) , <unk> ( " Something Wonderful " in Soundtrack to the Struggle , 2011 ) , Murs ( " Tale of Two Cities " in The Final Adventure , 2012 ) , Jay Z ( " Open Letter Part II " in 2013 ) , Digable Planets , The <unk> and X @-@ Clan have recorded similar songs about Shakur . Shakur has been alternately termed a " rap music legend " or a " minor cause <unk> . " 
 On December 12 , 2006 , the Chancellor of the City University of New York , Matthew Goldstein , directed City College 's president , Gregory H. Williams , to remove the " unauthorized and inappropriate " designation of the " Guillermo Morales / Assata Shakur Community and Student Center , " which was named by students in 1989 , when a student group won the right to use the lounge after a campus shutdown over proposed tuition increases . The decision resulted in a lawsuit from student and alumni groups . As of April 7 , 2010 , the presiding judge has ruled that the issues of students ' free speech and administrators ' immunity from suit " deserve a trial . " 
 In 1995 Borough of Manhattan Community College renamed a scholarship that had previously been named for Shakur , following controversy . In 2008 , Shakur was featured in a course on " African @-@ American heroes " — along with figures such as Harriet Tubman , Sojourner Truth , John Henry , Malcolm X , and Angela Davis — at Bucknell University . Her autobiography is studied together with those of Angela Davis and Elaine Brown , the only women activists of the Black Power movement who have published book @-@ length autobiographies . Rutgers University professor H. Bruce Franklin , who excerpts Shakur 's book in a class on Crime and Punishment in American Literature , calls her a " revolutionary fighter against imperialism . " 
 Shakur is still a notorious figure among New Jersey law enforcement officials . For example , black ( now <unk> ) Trooper Anthony Reed sued the force , among other things , over posters of Shakur , altered to include Reed 's badge number , being hung in Newark barracks , an incident that Reed considered " racist in nature . " In contrast , according to Dylan Rodriguez , to many " U.S. radicals and revolutionaries " Shakur represents a " venerated ( if sometimes fetishized ) signification of liberatory desire and possibility . " 
 The largely Internet @-@ based " Hands Off Assata ! " campaign is coordinated by Chicago @-@ area Black Radical Congress activists . 
 In 2015 , hip @-@ hop artist Common was pulled from a commencement speech at New Jersey 's Kean University because of police complaints . The university rescinded the offer to have Common speak at the event after members of the State Troopers Fraternal Association of New Jersey voiced their anger over Common 's " A Song For Assata . " 
 In 2015 , Black Lives Matter co @-@ founder Alicia Garza writes : “ When I use Assata ’ s powerful demand in my organizing work , I always begin by sharing where it comes from , sharing about Assata ’ s significance to the Black Liberation Movement , what its political purpose and message is , and why it ’ s important in our context . " 
 The Chicago Black activist group Assata 's Daughters is named in her honor . 
 = = Terrorist list = = 
 Assata Shakur was moved to the FBI 's Most Wanted Terrorists List on May 2 , 2013 , the 40th anniversary of New Jersey State Trooper Werner Foerster 's murder . 
 = The Walking Dead ( TV series ) = 
 The Walking Dead is an American horror drama television series developed by Frank Darabont , based on the comic book series of the same name by Robert Kirkman , Tony Moore , and Charlie Adlard . Andrew Lincoln plays the show 's lead character , sheriff 's deputy Rick Grimes , who awakens from a coma discovering a world overrun by zombies , commonly referred to as " walkers " . Grimes reunites with his family and becomes the leader of a group he forms with other survivors . Together they struggle to survive and adapt in a post @-@ apocalyptic world filled with walkers and opposing groups of survivors , who are often more dangerous than the walkers themselves . 
 Much of the series takes place within the Atlanta metro area and surrounding countryside . Later , the setting transitions to other parts of the country including Alexandria , Virginia . 
 The Walking Dead premiered in the United States on October 31 , 2010 , exclusively shown on cable television channel AMC and internationally on Fox International Channels . As a result of very favorable Nielsen ratings that rank the show unprecedentedly high for a cable series , AMC has renewed the series each year . Beginning with its third season , The Walking Dead attracts the most 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ old viewers of any cable or broadcast television series . The series has been renewed for a 16 @-@ episode seventh season which will debut on October 23 , 2016 . 
 The series has been well received by critics and nominated for several awards , including the Writers Guild of America Award for Television : New Series and the Golden Globe Award for Best Television Series – Drama . An AMC companion series , Fear the Walking Dead , debuted on August 23 , 2015 . 
 = = Series overview = = 
 = = = Season 1 ( 2010 ) = = = 
 Sheriff 's deputy Rick Grimes awakens from a coma discovering a world overrun by zombies , colloquially referred to as " walkers " . He meets survivor Morgan Jones who reveals that an unknown pathogen , spread through bites , is causing people to degenerate and feed on living animals . Rick travels to Atlanta , Georgia , in search of his family only to find that the city has been overrun by walkers . Rescued by Glenn Rhee , Rick is eventually introduced to the rest of Glenn 's group who are camping a few miles outside of the city . There , he discovers that his wife Lori and son Carl have been hiding with Shane Walsh , Rick 's friend and former police partner . The two employ different approaches to keep the peace as Rick returns to Atlanta for supplies and a man left behind , while Shane exerts his authority over the camp . When the camp is overrun by walkers , Rick and Shane convince the surviving group to head for the Centers for Disease Control ( CDC ) in Atlanta . They briefly shelter with the only remaining CDC staff member , who has been unable to develop a cure , before a protocol incinerates the facility . 
 = = = Season 2 ( 2011 – 12 ) = = = 
 While scavenging supplies along a highway , Carol Peletier 's daughter is separated and Carl is accidentally shot , forcing the survivors to stay on the nearby farm of veterinarian Hershel Greene . Hershel saves his life , and in the group 's attempt to co @-@ exist with Hershel 's family , secrets and disagreements lead to rising tensions . In addition , Rick learns of Lori 's former affair with Shane and her newfound pregnancy , creating a rift between Rick and Shane . 
 A hidden collection of walkers – mainly friends and family of Hershel but also Carol 's missing daughter – is discovered in a barn and eventually released by an agitated Shane , who compels the group to eliminate the threat . Shortly thereafter , an encounter with a hostile group of survivors results in a shootout and the torture of a prisoner as they react to the new threat . Shane unilaterally decides to kill the prisoner without the group 's knowledge . In an attempt to take over leadership , an unhinged Shane lures Rick away to murder him but is himself killed . The scuffle attracts a horde of walkers who overrun the farm , forcing the group to scatter and regroup . Rick 's leadership is questioned but solidified , and he reveals what he learned at the CDC : everyone is infected and will reanimate after death even if they aren 't bitten by a walker . 
 = = = Season 3 ( 2012 – 13 ) = = = 
 After spending several months fleeing remnants of the herd , the survivors make a new home in a prison infested with walkers but find greater danger from the treachery of two rescued convicts . In the process of clearing it , Maggie Greene is forced to perform a fatal Caesarean section on Lori to save her baby , and Rick becomes withdrawn and hallucinates of Lori and others who died . Meanwhile , Andrea and Michonne – who rescued Andrea near Hershel 's farm – are discovered by Merle Dixon and taken to the town of Woodbury which is led by a man known as The Governor . Michonne is distrustful and escapes to the prison , where she meets Rick 's group and guides them on a rescue mission following Glenn and Maggie 's capture . There are casualties on both sides and The Governor , disfigured by Michonne , declares the prison group terrorists and Merle a traitor . 
 Reunited with his brother , Daryl Dixon briefly leaves the group with Merle before deciding his place is at the prison . Rick returns to his hometown to gather weapons and ammunition , and reconsiders his morality when confronted by an unhinged Morgan . A romantically @-@ involved Andrea convinces The Governor to negotiate a truce with Rick ; secretly , The Governor plans an ambush , and Merle thwarts it at the cost of his life . Andrea flees Woodbury but is captured by The Governor who locks her in a room with a walker and launches a full @-@ scale attack on a seemingly @-@ abandoned prison . They are ambushed by Rick 's group , and The Governor massacres his own people for refusing to fight . The Governor escapes , and Rick 's group returns to Woodbury to take in the survivors but are too late to save Andrea . 
 = = = Season 4 ( 2013 – 14 ) = = = 
 Several months have passed and the prison community has grown when a deadly flu @-@ like infection spreads among the population , killing residents who reanimate as walkers . Carol is banished for murdering two sick residents . <unk> walkers breach the prison fence and are barely contained when a scavenging detail returns with medicine . Elsewhere , The Governor encounters the Chambler family , and they join another group of survivors led by The Governor 's former right @-@ hand man from Woodbury , Martinez . The Governor murders Martinez and takes charge of the group , honing them into a fighting force he turns on the plague @-@ weakened prison . Rick offers to share the prison , but The Governor ignites hostilities by executing Hershel . The Governor is ultimately killed , but the prison is overrun by walkers and Rick 's group is scattered . 
 Separated into small groups , the survivors discover signs along railway lines advertising sanctuary at Terminus . Glenn and Tara Chambler join with a group of survivors escorting Eugene Porter – who claims to know how to stop the walkers – to Washington , D.C. They reunite with Maggie and are the first to reach Terminus . Carol aids a pair of troubled sisters she secretly taught to use weapons , and after one commits fratricide , she is forced to execute the remaining sister . Beth Greene is kidnapped away from Daryl , and he falls in with a gang that later reveal a vendetta against Rick ; Daryl sides with Rick , Carl and Michonne to defeat them , then push on to reach Terminus . Those who arrive are initially welcomed by the residents of Terminus , but ultimately forced to disarm and locked inside a railway boxcar . 
 = = = Season 5 ( 2014 – 15 ) = = = 
 Rick 's group learn the residents of Terminus engage in cannibalism , luring victims to them under the guise of protection . Carol uses walkers to attack Terminus , enabling the others to escape . Reunited , they soon encounter Gareth and a small band of Terminus survivors who attempt to terrorize and prey upon Rick 's group but are outmatched and killed . Abraham Ford and Rosita Espinosa continue their mission to get Eugene to Washington , D.C. , joined by Glenn , Maggie and Tara . After facing a number of setbacks , Eugene admits that he fabricated the story about a cure in order to receive protection . Meanwhile , Daryl and Carol follow a marked car to Atlanta , where Beth has been held in a nearby hospital ruled by morally @-@ compromised police officers . Carol is taken , and Daryl recruits the rest of his group to help . They capture several police officers to make a trade but a brief standoff ends in Beth 's death . 
 The reunited group continue toward Washington , D.C. and are approached by Aaron who offers them shelter at the Alexandria Safe Zone , a fortified suburban community led by Deanna Monroe . Feeling the sheltered residents wouldn 't be able to survive against walkers or hardened survivors , Rick and Carol consider forcefully taking over the community while others begin assuming leadership roles . A series of confrontations frighten residents , and during a meeting deciding Rick 's fate he executes a prominent resident who accidentally killed Deanna 's husband . Rick 's friend Morgan arrives to witness the execution . 
 = = = Season 6 ( 2015 – 16 ) = = = 
 Trusting Rick for their survival , Alexandrian volunteers help to lure a nearby horde of walkers away from the community . Others repel an invasion by the deranged Wolves which results in a large herd of walkers breaking off to surround Alexandria . The walls hold for a day before walkers overrun the community , trapping residents indoors . An attempt to escape ends with Carl losing an eye and several deaths , including Deanna 's . Rick and Michonne inspire the community to make a stand and are nearly overwhelmed when the walkers are diverted by burning fuel brought by Daryl . Rick , who had been treating the Alexandrians as expendable , admits he was wrong and sees they can go beyond survival to build a stronger community . 
 Two months later , the community faces a food shortage when they meet Jesus , who invites them to trade with the Hilltop . Offering mercenary services in exchange for food and medicine , Rick leads a team to wipe out a nearby compound of the extortionist Saviors and executes a man claiming to be their leader , Negan . However , the Saviors remain a threat and seek to take prisoners as leverage against Alexandria . Extremist Carol is saved by pacifist Morgan when she flees to resolve her troubled conscience in death . Maggie suffers pregnancy complications and Rick 's group try to get her to the Hilltop but find Saviors waiting for them and eventually walk into the middle of the gang psychologically defeated . Forced to their knees , Rick 's group listen to Negan who chooses one among them to be punished for their actions . 
 = = = Future seasons = = = 
 Executive producer David Alpert said in 2014 , that the original comics have given them enough ideas for Rick Grimes and company over the next seven years . " I happen to love working from source material , specifically because we have a pretty good idea of what Season 10 is gonna be " , Alpert said . " We know where seasons 11 and 12 [ will be ] ... we have benchmarks and milestones for those seasons if we 're lucky enough to get there . " 
 = = Cast and characters = = 
 = = = Main = = = 
 Andrew Lincoln as Rick Grimes : The series ' protagonist and a former sheriff 's deputy who is the leader of the main group of survivors . He becomes a more cold and calculating leader over the course of the series . ( seasons 1 – present ) 
 Jon Bernthal as Shane Walsh : Rick 's former police partner and close friend . He becomes unhinged in season two , becoming a threat to the group . ( seasons 1 – 2 ; guest season 3 ) 
 Sarah Wayne Callies as Lori Grimes : Rick 's wife who has an affair with Shane when she believes Rick is dead . She later becomes pregnant and gives birth to a new child . ( seasons 1 – 3 ) 
 Laurie Holden as Andrea : A former civil rights attorney and member of the original Atlanta group of survivors . ( seasons 1 – 3 ) 
 Jeffrey DeMunn as Dale Horvath : An older member of the group who owns the RV with which the group travels . He is often the voice of reason within the group . ( seasons 1 – 2 ) 
 Steven Yeun as Glenn Rhee : A former pizza delivery boy who saves Rick 's life in the first episode . In season two , he begins a relationship with Maggie Greene , and over the course of the series , becomes an integral member of the group . ( seasons 1 – present ) 
 Chandler Riggs as Carl Grimes : Rick and Lori 's young son who is forced to mature and learn to survive in the deadly new world . ( seasons 1 – present ) 
 Norman Reedus as Daryl Dixon : The group 's primary hunter who becomes Rick 's right @-@ hand man and a key member of the group . ( seasons 2 – present , recurring season 1 ) 
 Melissa McBride as Carol Peletier : Originally a meek housewife , she overcomes domestic abuse to become a strong and empowered woman capable of making difficult decisions . ( seasons 2 – present , recurring season 1 ) 
 Michael Rooker as Merle Dixon : Daryl 's racist and volatile older brother . In season three , he is the right @-@ hand man to the Governor . ( season 3 , recurring season 1 , guest season 2 ) 
 Lennie James as Morgan Jones : The first survivor Rick encounters in season one . After suffering a psychological break , he comes to peace with the world around him . ( seasons 6 @-@ present ; recurring season 5 ; guest seasons 1 , 3 ) 
 Lauren Cohan as Maggie Greene : The eldest daughter of the Greene family and Glenn 's girlfriend . ( seasons 3 – present , recurring season 2 ) 
 Scott Wilson as Hershel Greene : A veterinarian and farmer , who maintains his faith and acts as the group 's primary moral compass . ( seasons 3 – 4 , recurring season 2 ) 
 Emily Kinney as Beth Greene : A soft @-@ spoken teenage girl , Hershel 's younger daughter , and Maggie 's younger half @-@ sister . ( seasons 4 – 5 , recurring seasons 2 – 3 ) 
 <unk> Gurira as Michonne : A katana @-@ wielding , quiet , but fierce woman who joins Rick 's group . ( seasons 3 – present ) 
 David Morrissey as The Governor / Philip Blake : The leader of the town of Woodbury . Serving as an antagonist , he is ruthless , paranoid , and dangerous . ( seasons 3 – 4 ; guest season 5 ) 
 Chad L. Coleman as <unk> Williams : Tough and compassionate , he places an emphasis on moral reasoning . He struggles to cope with the immoral nature of some of the group 's survival tactics and finds it difficult to kill in defense of the group . ( seasons 4 – 5 , recurring season 3 ) 
 <unk> Martin @-@ Green as Sasha Williams : <unk> 's fiery younger sister and a former firefighter who is the group 's sharpshooter . After several personal losses , she suffers from PTSD . ( seasons 4 – present , recurring season 3 ) 
 Lawrence Gilliard , Jr. as Bob Stookey : A former army medic and recovering alcoholic who develops a close relationship with Sasha . ( seasons 4 – 5 ) 
 Michael <unk> as Abraham Ford : A former military sergeant who is on a mission to bring a survivor to Washington , D.C. , to find a cure for the walker virus . ( seasons 5 – present , recurring season 4 ) 
 Josh <unk> as Eugene Porter : A man who claims to know a cure for the walker virus . He is weak and inefficient when dealing with walkers , but is very smart . ( seasons 5 – present , recurring season 4 ) 
 Christian Serratos as Rosita Espinosa : A tough , focused , and a very capable survivor and also Abraham 's girlfriend . ( seasons 5 – present , recurring season 4 ) 
 Alanna Masterson as Tara Chambler : A former police academy student and ally of the Governor 's before joining Rick 's group . She serves as a primary supply runner . ( seasons 5 – present , recurring season 4 ) 
 Andrew J. West as Gareth : The cannibalistic leader of Terminus , who captures and coerces Rick 's group into submission . ( season 5 , guest season 4 ) 
 Seth Gilliam as Fr . Gabriel Stokes : A priest who joins Rick 's group . He has a lack of experience around walkers and struggles with his faith in the new world . ( seasons 5 – present ) 
 Ross Marquand as Aaron : An Alexandrian recruiter who brings Rick 's group to Alexandria . ( seasons 6 – present , recurring season 5 ) 
 Tovah Feldshuh as Deanna Monroe : A former Congresswoman and leader of Alexandria . ( season 6 , recurring season 5 ) 
 Alexandra Breckenridge as Jessie Anderson : An Alexandria resident who develops a relationship with Rick . ( season 6 , recurring season 5 ) 
 Austin Nichols as Spencer Monroe : Deanna 's son and a guard of Alexandria . ( seasons 6 – present , recurring season 5 ) 
 Austin <unk> as Dwight : A former member of the Saviors . ( seasons 7 – present , recurring season 6 ) 
 Tom Payne as Paul " Jesus " <unk> : A member and scout for the Hilltop Colony . ( seasons 7 – present , recurring season 6 ) 
 Xander Berkeley as Gregory : The leader of the Hilltop Colony . ( seasons 7 – present , guest season 6 ) 
 Jeffrey Dean Morgan as Negan : The psychopathic leader of the Saviors that he rules in tyranny . ( seasons 7 – present , guest season 6 ) 
 = = = Recurring = = = 
 IronE Singleton as Theodore " T @-@ Dog " Douglas : A member of the Atlanta survivors . ( seasons 1 – 3 ) 
 Emma Bell as Amy : Andrea 's younger sister and a member of the Atlanta survivors . ( season 1 , guest season 3 ) 
 Andrew Rothenberg as Jim : A member of the Atlanta survivors . ( season 1 , guest season 3 ) 
 Jeryl Prescott Sales as Jacqui ( season 1 , guest season 3 ) 
 Juan Pareja as Morales : A member of the Atlanta survivors . ( season 1 ) 
 Madison Lintz as Sophia Peletier : Carol 's young daughter . ( seasons 1 – 2 ) 
 Adam Minarovich as Ed Peletier : Carol 's abusive husband . ( season 1 , guest season 2 ) 
 Jane McNeill as Patricia : Hershel 's wife . ( season 2 ) 
 James Allen McCune as Jimmy : Beth 's boyfriend . ( season 2 ) 
 Michael Zegen as Randall Culver : A member of another group of survivors . ( season 2 ) 
 Lew Temple as Axel : A convict discovered living in the prison . ( season 3 ) 
 Dallas Roberts as Milton Mamet : A scientist in Woodbury studying the walker virus . ( season 3 ) 
 Jose Pablo Cantillo as Caesar Martinez : The Governor 's right @-@ hand man in Woodbury . ( seasons 3 – 4 ) 
 Melissa <unk> as Karen : A citizen of Woodbury who later joins the prison community . ( seasons 3 – 4 ) 
 Brighton <unk> as Lizzie Samuels : A young girl who has joined the prison community and suffers from psychological problems . ( season 4 ) 
 Kyla Kenedy as Mika Samuels : Lizzie 's younger sister who has also joined the prison community . ( season 4 ) 
 Denise Crosby as Mary : A cannibalistic survivor of Terminus and Gareth 's mother . ( season 4 , guest season 5 ) 
 Chris Coy as Martin : A cannibalistic survivor who becomes part of Gareth 's group . ( season 5 ) 
 Tyler James Williams as Noah : A survivor in Grady Memorial Hospital who later escapes . ( season 5 ) 
 Major Dodson as Sam Anderson : Jessie 's younger son who is frightful of the walkers . ( seasons 5 – 6 ) 
 Austin Abrams as Ron Anderson : Jessie 's older son . ( seasons 5 – 6 ) 
 Michael Traynor as Nicholas : A supply runner for Alexandria who has a cowardly nature . ( seasons 5 – 6 ) 
 Benedict Samuel as the unnamed leader of the Wolves . ( season 6 , guest season 5 ) 
 Jason Douglas as Tobin : The foreman of Alexandria 's construction crew . ( seasons 5 – present ) 
 Katelyn <unk> as Enid : A teenager in Alexandria who forms a bond with Carl . ( seasons 5 – present ) 
 Corey Hawkins as Heath : A supply runner in Alexandria . ( seasons 5 – present ) 
 Merritt Wever as Dr. Denise Cloyd : A doctor stationed in Alexandria . ( season 6 ) 
 = = = Darabont connections = = = 
 The series features several actors whom Walking Dead developer Frank Darabont has worked with previously , including Laurie Holden ( Andrea ) , Jeffrey DeMunn ( Dale Horvath ) , Melissa McBride ( Carol Peletier ) , Sam Witwer ( the dead soldier in the tank where Rick hides in " Days Gone Bye " ) , and Juan Gabriel Pareja ( Morales ) . All five appeared in his 2007 film The Mist , along with Thomas Jane , who originally was set to star in the series when it was pitched to HBO . Jane was later in talks with Darabont to possibly guest star on the series as of fall 2010 , but with Darabont 's departure , it is unknown whether the guest spot will happen or not . Laurie Holden also appeared in the 2001 film The Majestic ( as Adele Stanton , Jim Carrey 's character 's love interest ) , which Darabont directed . DeMunn has also appeared in several of Darabont 's films ; in addition to The Mist and The Majestic , he appeared in The Shawshank Redemption ( 1994 ) and The Green Mile ( 1999 ) . It was planned that Witwer ( Private Jessup in Darabont 's The Mist ) would reprise his " Days Gone Bye " role in the original conception of The Walking Dead 's season two premiere and in a webisode , but both plans were discarded . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 On January 20 , 2010 , AMC officially announced that it had ordered a pilot for a possible series adapted from The Walking Dead comic book series , with Frank Darabont and Gale Anne Hurd acting as executive producers and Darabont writing and directing . The entire series was pre @-@ ordered based just on the strength of the source material , the television scripts , and Darabont 's involvement . In January 2010 a review of the pilot episode 's script attracted further attention . The pilot began filming in Atlanta , Georgia on May 15 , 2010 after AMC had officially ordered a six episode first season . The series ' remaining episodes began filming on June 2 , 2010 with Darabont serving as showrunner . On August 31 , 2010 , Darabont reported that The Walking Dead had been picked up for a second season , with production to begin in February 2011 . On November 8 , 2010 , AMC confirmed that there would be a second season consisting of 13 episodes . He would also like to include some of the " environmental elements " that take place during Volume 2 of Kirkman 's book . 
 = = = Crew = = = 
 The first season writing staff consisted of series developer and executive producer Frank Darabont ( who wrote / co @-@ wrote four of the six episodes ) , executive producer Charles H. Eglee , executive producer and creator of the comic book Robert Kirkman , co @-@ executive producer Jack <unk> , consulting producer Adam Fierro and Glen Mazzara , all of whom contributed to one episode each . Along with Darabont , who directed the pilot episode , the remaining five were directed by Michelle MacLaren , Gwyneth Horder @-@ Payton , Johan Renck , Ernest Dickerson and Guy Ferland . 
 On December 1 , 2010 , Deadline.com reported that Darabont had fired his writing staff , including executive producer Charles " Chic " Eglee , and planned to use freelance writers for the second season . Kirkman called the announcement " premature " and clarified that Eglee left to pursue other projects when Darabont decided to stay on as showrunner , and no definitive plans had been made regarding the writing staff for season two . 
 [ Chic Eglee ] was brought onto The Walking Dead with the idea that Frank was going to work on the first season and then go off and do movies [ ... ] Chic didn 't want to be second @-@ in @-@ command on a show when he 's used to being a top dog , and so he decided to go off and do something else , which is something that happens and is not a big deal . 
 On December 3 , 2010 , in an interview with Entertainment Weekly , executive producer Gale Anne Hurd commented : " It 's completely inaccurate . [ In ] the writers ' room , there are people that have set up other projects that will be their first priority if their own series is picked up as a pilot or if it 's a series . I think [ Eglee ] just decided that he wants to run his own show . " She revealed that it would be likely for the show to return in October 2011 , as Darabont and Kirkman planned on mapping out the next season early in 2011 . She also confirmed that , " every one of the principal cast is signed up for multiple seasons . " In July 2011 , series developer and showrunner Frank Darabont stepped down from his position as showrunner for the series . It was speculated that he was unable to adjust to the schedule of running a television series . However , The Hollywood Reporter reported he had been fired over disputes over planned budget cuts and executive meddling . Executive producer Glen Mazzara was then appointed the new showrunner . New writers joined the writing staff in the second season , including co @-@ executive producer Evan Reilly , producer Scott M. Gimple , story editor Angela Kang , and David Leslie Johnson . New writers in the third season included producers Nichole Beattie and Sang Kyu Kim , with Frank Renzulli contributing a freelance script . 
 After the conclusion of the third season , Glen Mazzara stepped down from his position as showrunner and executive producer for the series , per a mutual agreement between Mazzara and AMC . The press release read , " Both parties acknowledge that there is a difference of opinion about where the show should go moving forward , and conclude that it is best to part ways . " Scott M. Gimple succeeded Mazzara as showrunner for season four , with new writers joining the writing staff , such as Curtis Gwinn , Channing Powell , and Matt Negrete . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Bear McCreary was hired to compose the score for the series . McCreary stated that the main theme was based on his viewing of production designs for the opening title sequence . Instead of doing a full theme song as with his earlier works , McCreary chose to use a simple , repeating motif from the strings section . 
 It repeats over and over , and in fact in the pilot episode , you start hearing it before the main title begins , and this is something that continues episode to episode . You hear the main title music before the main title begins , so you know it 's coming . That , to me , was the little hook – that little thing that , whenever you hear it , it takes you to the series . 
 = = = = Soundtracks = = = = 
 Four soundtracks for The Walking Dead have been released to date . The Walking Dead : AMC Original Soundtrack , Vol . 1 was released on March 17 , 2013 . The second volume was released on March 25 , 2014 . Songs of Survival is a soundtrack for the third season and it was released on August 27 , 2013 , by Republic Records as a Walmart exclusive for the special edition release of the third season . Songs of Survival , Vol . 2 is a soundtrack for the fourth season and it was released on August 26 , 2014 , by Republic Records as a Walmart exclusive of the fourth season release . 
 = = = Makeup = = = 
 Gregory Nicotero is an executive producer and the key special effects makeup artist on the series . Each walker is put through " zombie school " and is taught how to move like zombies . There are three levels of zombie makeup : Hero , <unk> , and Deep Background . Hero zombies are featured walkers and are completely made over from head to toe . <unk> zombies get highlights and shadows on the face , but do not get close enough to the camera to require full makeup . Deep background zombies often wear masks and are only meant to be used as a backdrop . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The Walking Dead is mostly filmed in Georgia . The series is completely shot on 16 mm film . David Tattersall was the director of photography for the pilot episode with David Boyd as the director of photography on the remainder of the episodes . Production design is done by Greg Melton and Alex Hajdu . The effects team includes veteran special effects makeup designer Gregory Nicotero , special effects coordinator Darrell Pritchett , and visual effects supervisors Sam Nicholson and Jason Sperling . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 The Walking Dead debuted during the same week in 120 countries . As part of an expansive campaign to advertise and heighten anticipation for the premiere , AMC and Fox International Channels coordinated a worldwide zombie invasion event on October 26 , 2010 . The stunt involved invading 26 major cities within a 24 @-@ hour period , starting with Taipei and Hong Kong , and ending in Los Angeles for the U.S. premiere . 
 The show 's official website released , just prior to the 2010 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International , a motion comic based on Issue No. 1 of the original comic and voiced by Phil LaMarr . The site also posted a making @-@ of documentary primarily about the first episode , as well as a number of other behind @-@ the @-@ scenes videos and interviews . In the documentary , comic series creator and show executive producer Robert Kirkman as well as artist Charlie Adlard say they are pleased with how faithful the show is to the comic and remark on the similarities between the actors and the comic 's original character drawings . 
 Action figures of characters from the series were created for release in November 2011 and have continued throughout the years with eight line @-@ ups . The figures , which are manufactured by McFarlane Toys , are designed to resemble the actors on the series . Figures created to resemble the characters as drawn in the comic book were released in September 2011 . 
 = = = Green initiatives = = = 
 With a primary objective of reducing the environmental impacts of film and television productions , including The Walking Dead , producer Gale Anne Hurd has directed the cast , crew , production team , suppliers , and bloggers about her shows to adopt the <unk> app to make the production almost paper @-@ free ; this works by digitally transmitting interactive call sheets and other intra @-@ team and team @-@ supplier communications ( such as directions , images , menus , and updates ) to people 's cell phones and tablets . Hurd said of using <unk> : in addition to conserving paper , " It 's also easier , and it 's better for security . People are less likely to leave their smartphone or tablet lying around for someone else to pick up . " 
 Hurd describes additional steps taken to increase efficiency and cut production costs : " If you use vehicles that get better gas mileage , that are electric or hybrids , you 're going to pay a lot less in fuel . If you use compact fluorescent bulbs , you 're going to save a lot of money in utilities . If you recycle even your own sets , and use them again , that 's going to save money . You don 't have to buy new lumber . So there are cost savings , absolutely . " Additionally , the production team aims to reduce vehicle idling , which decreases carbon dioxide emissions . 
 Hurd also cuts down on plastic waste by personally using a refillable , stainless steel <unk> water bottle and promoting its use among her colleagues . She shared : " on a lot of my projects I give them as crew gifts before we start production , and have water stations available , but you can 't force people to use them . " 
 = = = Franchise and spin @-@ offs = = = 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 To date , three web series based on The Walking Dead have been released via AMC 's website – Torn Apart ( 2011 ) , Cold Storage ( 2012 ) , and The Oath ( 2013 ) . 
 = = = = Motion comic = = = = 
 In 2011 , AMC debuted an animated comic book version of The Walking Dead novel 's beginning , featuring the voice of actor Phil LaMarr . 
 = = = = Talking Dead = = = = 
 A live after @-@ show titled Talking Dead premiered on AMC on October 16 , 2011 , following the encore presentation of The Walking Dead 's season two premiere . Talking Dead features host Chris Hardwick discussing the latest episode with fans , actors , and producers of The Walking Dead . 
 = = = Fear the Walking Dead = = = 
 In September 2013 , AMC announced they were developing a companion series to The Walking Dead which follows a different set of characters created by Robert Kirkman . On March 9 , 2015 , AMC announced it had ordered the show to series , with a two @-@ season commitment . The show 's title , Fear the Walking Dead , was revealed on March 27 , 2015 . The first season , consisting of six episodes , premiered on August 23 , 2015 . 
 = = = Parodies and spoofs = = = 
 Due to its popularity , The Walking Dead has inspired dozens of parodies and spoofs featured on YouTube channels like Bad Lip Reading and TV shows such as Saturday Night Live . Bad Lip Reading made a widely viewed parody involving Rick and the Governor , entitled " La @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ Dum " . The series ' cast was shown the parody at the 2013 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International , and David Morrissey — who portrays the Governor — reacted by saying he now understood why so many people would walk up to him on the street and blurt , " Hey , La @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ Dum ! " . Until seeing the video , he had wondered , " what 's wrong with these people ? " 
 = = Release = = 
 Scenes from the pilot were screened July 23 , 2010 , as part of the 2010 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International . It premiered on AMC on October 31 , 2010 , and premiered internationally on Fox International Channels during the first week of November . Almost two weeks before the official premiere on AMC , the pilot episode leaked online . 
 International broadcast rights for the show were sold and announced on June 14 , 2010 . The show airs on Fox International Channels in 126 countries in 33 languages . The fifth season debuted its first part on October 13 , 2014 . The second part premiered on February 9 , 2015 . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The season 1 DVD and Blu @-@ ray was released on March 8 , 2011 . A three @-@ disc special edition of the first season — featuring new featurettes and audio commentaries — was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray on October 4 , 2011 . The European versions of the first season DVD and Blu @-@ ray are edited for gore , with cuts to episode two ( " Guts " ) , episode three ( " Tell It to the Frogs " ) , episode four ( " Vatos " ) and episode five ( " Wildfire " ) . Until eOne / <unk> re @-@ released the first season in D @-@ A @-@ CH in a Special Uncut Version on DVD and Blu @-@ ray on May 31 , 2013 . 
 The season 2 DVD and Blu @-@ ray was released on August 28 , 2012 . It was also released as a limited edition Blu @-@ ray , packaged as a miniature zombie head designed by McFarlane Toys . Special features include audio commentaries , deleted scenes , webisodes , and several featurettes . 
 The season 3 DVD and Blu @-@ ray was released on August 27 , 2013 . It was also released as a limited edition Blu @-@ ray , packaged as a miniature version of the Governor 's zombie head aquarium tank designed by Greg Nicotero and sculpted by McFarlane Toys . Special features include audio commentaries , deleted scenes , and several featurettes . 
 The season 4 DVD and Blu @-@ ray was released on August 26 , 2014 . It was also released as a limited edition Blu @-@ ray , packaged with a tree @-@ walker designed by McFarlane Toys . Special features include audio commentaries , deleted scenes , and several featurettes , as well as extended episodes which are exclusive to the Blu @-@ ray . 
 The season 5 DVD and Blu @-@ ray was released on August 25 , 2015 . 
 = = = Syndication = = = 
 MyNetworkTV acquired the broadcast syndication rights to the series , premiering on October 1 , 2014 . The version that airs on MyNetworkTV is edited to meet broadcast television standards . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 All seasons of The Walking Dead have been well reviewed by recognized critics , with a 86 % approval rating for the series to date on Rotten Tomatoes . For the first season , 89 % of 24 Rotten Tomatoes critics gave it a positive review , with an average score of 7 @.@ 5 / 10 . That site 's consensus states , " Blood @-@ spattered , emotionally resonant , and white @-@ knuckle intense , The Walking Dead puts an intelligent spin on the overcrowded zombie subgenre . " Metacritic scored the first season 82 / 100 based on 25 critic reviews , 23 of which were positive , two mixed , and none negative . Heather Havrilesky of Salon.com included the show on their list of 9 new TV shows not to miss , giving it a grade of " A " , with the author saying , " A film @-@ quality drama series about zombies ? Somebody pinch me ! " 
 For the second season , 83 % of 22 critic reviews on Rotten Tomatoes were positive , with an average score of 8 @.@ 1 / 10 . The site 's consensus states , " The second season of The Walking Dead fleshes out the characters while maintaining the grueling tension and gore that made the show a hit . " Of 22 Metacritic critic reviews , 18 were positive , four were mixed , and none were negative ; their average score was 80 / 100 . Early criticism of the show focused on the slow pace of the second season , particularly the first half . Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly , described the series as " a nighttime soap " , comparing it to " a parody of a Samuel Beckett play " that had very little sense of direction and few appearances of walkers . Nate Rawlings of Time 's online entertainment section noted that " the pace during the first half of this season has been brutally slow . [ ... ] They 've tried to develop individual characters , but each subplot meant to add a layer to a character has been quickly resolved . " Later reviews from other critics , such as Scott Wampler of Collider.com , recognized the increased quality of the second half , stating it " seemed far more intense , more interesting , better written " . Recognizing the overall season , Kevin Yeoman of Screen Rant offered praise saying " the writers succeeded in <unk> themselves from the intermittent monotony brought about by the serial nature of the show " . 
 The third season had 88 % of Rotten Tomatoes ' 30 critics giving it a positive review , with an average score of 8 @.@ 1 / 10 . The site 's consensus states , " The palpable terror and visceral thrills continue in the third season of The Walking Dead , along with a deeper sense of the people who inhabit its apocalyptic landscape . " Metacritic 's 19 critics rated the season 82 / 100 , all of whom gave a positive review . Verne Gay of Newsday claimed that the season 3 premiere " doesn 't disappoint " going on to say that there are " spots where you will yell out at the screen , ' Oh , my God , that just didn 't happen . ' Yes , the new season is that good " , concluding his review by giving the season an A + rating . 
 For season four , 87 % of Rotten Tomatoes ' 35 critic reviews were positive , with an average score of 7 @.@ 8 / 10 . The site 's consensus states , " Consistently thrilling , with solid character development and enough gore to please grindhouse fans , this season of The Walking Dead continues to demonstrate why it 's one of the best horror shows on television " . Metacritic scored the season 75 / 100 based on 16 critic reviews , 13 of which were positive , three mixed , and none negative . 
 The fifth season had 90 % of Rotten Tomatoes ' 31 critic reviews rating it positively , with an average score of 7 @.@ 9 / 10 . The site 's consensus states , " Thanks to a liberal dose of propulsive , bloody action and enough compelling character moments to reward longtime fans , The Walking Dead 's fifth season continues to deliver top @-@ notch entertainment . " Metacritic scored the fifth season 80 / 100 based on 11 critic reviews , all of which were positive . 
 For season six , 80 % of Rotten Tomatoes ' 21 critic reviews were positive , with an average score of 7 @.@ 4 / 10 . The site 's consensus states , " Six seasons in , The Walking Dead is still finding ways to top itself , despite slow patches that do little to advance the plot . " Metacritic scored the sixth season 79 / 100 based on 10 critic reviews , nine of which were positive , one mixed , and none negative . 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The Walking Dead has the highest total viewership of any series in cable television history , including its third through ( current ) sixth seasons , during which it averaged the most 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ old viewers of all cable or broadcast television shows . Total viewership for its season five premiere was 17 @.@ 3 million , the most @-@ watched series episode in cable history . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 The Walking Dead was nominated for Best New Series by the Writers Guild of America Awards 2011 and Best Television Series Drama by the 68th Golden Globe Awards . The show was named one of the top 10 television programs of 2010 by the American Film Institute Awards 2010 . For the 37th Saturn Awards , the series received six nominations — for Best Television Presentation , Andrew Lincoln for Best Actor in Television , Sarah Wayne Callies for Best Actress on Television , Steven Yeun for Best Supporting Actor in Television , Laurie Holden for Best Supporting Actress in Television , and Noah Emmerich for Best Guest Starring Role in Television . The series was nominated for Best Drama Series by the inaugural 1st Critics ' Choice Television Awards . The pilot episode " Days Gone Bye " received three nominations from the 63rd Primetime Emmy Awards — for Outstanding Sound Editing for a Series and Outstanding Special Visual Effects for a Series and won for Outstanding Prosthetic Makeup for a Series , Miniseries , Movie , or Special . For the 41st Saturn Awards , the series received its highest number of nominations , with a total of seven , including for the show itself , Andrew Lincoln for Best Actor on Television , Norman Reedus for Best Supporting Actor on Television , Emily Kinney and Melissa McBride for Best Supporting Actress on Television , Andrew J. West for Best Guest Star on Television , and Chandler Riggs for Best Young Performer on Television . 
 = Amanda Clement = 
 Amanda E. Clement ( March 20 , 1888 – July 20 , 1971 ) was the first woman paid to umpire a baseball game , and may have also been the first woman to referee a high school basketball game . Clement served as an umpire on a regular basis for six years , and served occasionally for several decades afterwards . An accomplished athlete in multiple disciplines , Clement competed in baseball , basketball , track , gymnastics , and tennis , and has been attributed world records in shot put , sprinting , hurdling , and baseball . 
 = = Early life and umpiring career = = 
 Amanda Clement was born in Hudson , South Dakota , then part of the Dakota Territory , on March 20 , 1888 to Harriet Clement , one of the original settlers of Eden , South Dakota , and her husband , who died when Amanda was very young . In 1904 Clement traveled to Hawarden , Iowa to watch her brother Hank pitch in a semi @-@ professional game . The umpire for the amateur game taking place before Hank 's did not show , and Hank suggested that Amanda , who had played baseball with her brothers and was knowledgeable about the game , serve as the umpire . In so doing , Clement became the first woman paid to umpire a baseball game . Her performance was so well received that she was hired to umpire further semi @-@ professional games . 
 Clement 's umpiring career lasted six years , during which she officiated games in North Dakota , South Dakota , Minnesota , Iowa , and Nebraska . Unlike in modern games , during Clement 's time games only had one umpire , who stood behind the pitcher and was responsible for calling strikes and balls , whether balls were fair or foul , and whether runners reached bases safely . Despite the danger umpires faced during this era Clement was treated respectfully by both players and fans , and became respected for her serious style and because she was <unk> to bribery . Her popularity was so high that baseball marketers emphasized her officiating of games to bring in crowds . In 1906 Clement wrote an editorial for the Cincinnati Enquirer arguing that women made better umpires than men because men would not speak abusively towards female umpires . She would repeat this idea in interviews with other newspapers . Clement , a Congregationalist , refused to umpire on Sundays and stayed in the homes of clergymen while umpiring on the road . 
 Clement earned between $ 15 to $ 25 per game , which she used to fund her college education , attending Yankton College for two years followed by two years at University of Nebraska . While at Yankton , she refereed high school basketball games , possibly the first woman to do so , captained the college 's women 's basketball team , ran track , was a gymnast , and was by her own approximation the state 's best tennis player . 
 A number of additional accomplishments in sports have been attributed to Clement , but cannot be confirmed because of poor record keeping at the time . These claims include winning tennis championships in Iowa and South Dakota and setting world records in shot put , sprinting , hurdling , and baseball , where it is claimed that Clement threw a baseball 275 feet . 
 = = After umpiring = = 
 Although Clement spent only six years serving as an umpire on a regular basis , she continued to serve intermittently until her forties . Following her time as a regularly serving umpire , Amanda Clement spent several years teaching physical education at the University of Wyoming , the Jamestown , North Dakota high school , and other schools in North Dakota and South Dakota . Clement also managed several <unk> , including one in <unk> , Wisconsin . Clement also served as the coach of Hudson Independent basketball team , organized tennis tournaments , and served as a newspaper reporter , police matron , typesetter , justice of the peace , and as the city assessor for the town of Hudson . In 1929 Clement moved back to South Dakota to care for her mother , who was ill . Following her mother 's death in 1934 , Clement moved to Sioux Falls , South Dakota where she spent twenty @-@ five years as a social worker before retiring in 1966 . Clement died in Sioux Falls on July 20 , 1971 . 
 = Audioslave = 
 Audioslave was an American rock supergroup formed in Los Angeles , California , in 2001 and disbanded in 2007 . The four @-@ piece band consisted of then @-@ former Soundgarden lead singer / rhythm guitarist Chris Cornell , and then @-@ former Rage Against the Machine members Tom Morello ( lead guitar ) , Tim Commerford ( bass / backing vocals ) , and Brad Wilk ( drums ) . Critics first described Audioslave as a combination of Soundgarden and Rage Against the Machine , but by the band 's second album , Out of Exile , it was noted that they had established a separate identity . 
 Audioslave 's trademark sound was created by blending 1970s hard rock with 1990s alternative rock . Moreover , Morello incorporated his well @-@ known , unconventional guitar solos into the mix . As with Rage Against the Machine , the band prided themselves on the fact that all sounds on their albums were produced using only guitar , bass , drums , and vocals . 
 In its six years of existence , Audioslave released three albums , received three Grammy nominations , and became the first American rock band to perform an open @-@ air concert in Cuba . Audioslave disbanded in February 2007 when Cornell issued a statement announcing that he was permanently leaving the band " due to irresolvable personality conflicts as well as musical differences . " The 2007 Rage Against the Machine reunion and tour involving the rest of the band as well as solo albums released that same year by Morello and Cornell cemented the supergroup 's permanent demise . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation ( 2000 – 2001 ) = = = 
 Audioslave 's history dates back to October 18 , 2000 , when Rage Against the Machine 's lead vocalist Zack de la Rocha announced he was leaving the band , citing a breakdown in its " decision @-@ making process " . Rage Against the Machine broke up as a result of de la Rocha 's departure , but the remaining three members of the band — Tim Commerford , Tom Morello , and Brad Wilk — decided to stay together and announced plans to continue with a new vocalist . Several vocalists jammed with the three , including B @-@ Real of Cypress Hill , but they did not want another rapper or anybody who sounded like de la Rocha . Music producer and friend Rick Rubin later suggested that they play with Chris Cornell , the ex @-@ frontman of Soundgarden . Rubin also persuaded the three of them to go into group therapy with performance coach Phil Towle after the breakup . Rubin was confident that with the right new voice Rage Against the Machine had the potential to become a better band ; he believed " it could turn into a Yardbirds @-@ into @-@ Led Zeppelin scenario . " Commerford later credited Rubin for being the catalyst that brought Audioslave together . He called him " the angel at the crossroads " because " if it wasn 't for him , I wouldn 't be here today . " 
 The chemistry between Cornell and the other three was immediately apparent ; as Morello described : " He stepped to the microphone and sang the song and I couldn 't believe it . It didn 't just sound good . It didn 't sound great . It sounded transcendent . And ... when there is an irreplaceable chemistry from the first moment , you can 't deny it . " The quartet wrote 21 songs during 19 days of rehearsal , and began working in the studio in late May 2001 with Rubin as producer , while sorting out the label and management issues . 
 = = = Audioslave ( 2002 – 2003 ) = = = 
 On March 19 , 2002 , Audioslave was confirmed for the seventh annual Ozzfest , even though at that time the band had no official name or release date for their debut album . A few days later , reports surfaced that the band had broken up before they had played for a public audience . Cornell 's manager confirmed that the frontman had left the band , with no explanation given . Under the name " Civilian " ( or " The Civilian Project " ) , 13 rough mixes of the songs the band had been working on were leaked onto peer @-@ to @-@ peer <unk> networks in May 2002 . According to Morello , the band was frustrated because the songs were not in their finished form and in some cases , " weren 't even the same lyrics , guitar solos , performances of any kind . " 
 Initial rumors suggested that Cornell took issue with having two managers actively involved in the project ( Jim <unk> of Rebel Waltz represented Cornell , and Peter Mensch of Q Prime handled Rage Against the Machine ) . According to the band , however , the split was not triggered by personal conflicts , but by their quarreling managers . After the mixing of the album was finished , roughly six weeks later , the group reformed and simultaneously fired their former management companies and hired another , The Firm . Their previous labels , Epic and Interscope , settled their differences by agreeing to alternate who released the band 's albums . 
 The band divulged their official name and launched their website in early September . The first single , " Cochise " , was posted online in late September , and was on the radio in early October . Critics praised Cornell 's vocal style , a distinct departure from the rapping of de la Rocha , and found that " the former members of <unk> have gone and done a Paul Weller , retreating from the ground they broke back [ to ] the sounds that inspired them . " Music video director Mark Romanek shot a video for " Cochise , " which shows the band playing atop a tower under construction in the midst of a giant fireworks display providing all the lighting . The firework explosions during filming prompted fears of a terrorist attack among residents living near Los Angeles ' Sepulveda Dam , the shooting location . 
 The self @-@ titled debut album , Audioslave , was released on November 19 , 2002 , and entered the Billboard 200 chart at No. 7 after selling 162 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . It was certified gold by the RIAA within a month of release , and by 2006 achieved triple platinum status . It is the most successful Audioslave album to date , having sold more than three million copies in the United States alone . Despite its commercial success , Audioslave received mixed reviews . Some critics lambasted the group 's effort as uninspired , and predictable . Pitchfork Media praised Cornell 's voice , but criticized virtually every other aspect of the album , deeming the lyrics " complete gibberish " and Rubin 's production " a synthesized rock @-@ like product that emits no heat . " Other critics , however , praised the supergroup 's style reminiscent of 1970s rock and compared it to Led Zeppelin and Black Sabbath , saying they added much @-@ needed sound and style to contemporary mainstream rock . 
 Audioslave made their live debut on November 25 , 2002 , performing a brief concert on the roof of the Ed Sullivan Theater on Broadway in New York City for the Late Show with David Letterman . This was the first time any band had appeared on Letterman 's marquee . That year 's KROQ Almost Acoustic Christmas was their first official paying concert , in which the band played on the first night , December 7 , 2002 , after giving a secret club show the night before . Towards the end of the band 's six @-@ song set , Cornell told the audience , " These guys saved my life this year , " and the show ended with his bandmates hugging him . Afterwards , asked to expand on his comments , he would say only that he had dragged the trio " through a trail of shit " in the past months . 
 During this time , there was a rumor that Cornell had checked himself into drug rehabilitation . He later confirmed it in an interview with Metal Hammer that was conducted from a clinic payphone . In a San Diego <unk> article , Cornell explained that he went through " a horrible personal crisis " during the making of the first record , staying in rehab for two months and separating from his wife . He credited Morello , Commerford and Wilk with helping him rebound from the difficult period . He dismissed the rumors about being in rehab for <unk> or heroin , but when asked , offered only , " Various things . I 'm not picky . Mainly for drinking . " 
 " Like a Stone " , the second single from Audioslave , was released in early 2003 . It was the highest @-@ charting single from the album , peaking at number one on Billboard 's Mainstream Rock Tracks and Modern Rock Tracks charts . It was certified gold by the RIAA , making it Audioslave 's most successful single ever . The music video for " Like a Stone " was written and directed by Meiert Avis . It was shot in the Los Angeles house where Jimi Hendrix wrote Purple Haze . The video uses negative space to invoke the memory of musicians past . The music video for the third single , " Show Me How to Live " , was banned from MTV , reportedly because it shows the band in a high @-@ speed car chase running police cars and motorcycles off the road . The band 's first DVD , Audioslave , was released on July 29 , 2003 . 
 The band toured extensively worldwide in 2003 , gaining positive reviews for their live performances , including at the revived Lollapalooza . Their performance on the Lollapalooza tour was so well received by readers of Metal Edge that they won the magazine 's 2003 Readers ' Choice Award for " Favorite Lollapalooza Band " by a landslide . 
 = = = Out of Exile ( 2004 – 2005 ) = = = 
 In 2004 , Audioslave was among the nominees for the 46th Grammy Awards : " Like a Stone " was nominated for " Best Hard Rock Performance " and Audioslave for " Best Rock Album . " They spent the rest of 2004 on break from touring and working on the second album . This gave Morello time to concentrate on his solo project , The Nightwatchman , and also to take an active part in political activities . Cornell had time to focus on his personal life ; after his divorce from his first wife was finalized , he married Vicky <unk> , a Paris @-@ based publicist he met during Audioslave 's first European tour . 
 Work on a new album had started in 2003 during the Lollapalooza tour , and continued at the end of the year when band members entered the studio . Aside from writing new material , the band also had some leftover songs from the Audioslave sessions ; according to Morello , they had " almost another album 's worth of stuff [ already done ] . " " Be Yourself " , the first single from the still @-@ untitled album , was panned by some critics , who felt it was " limp , and the lyrics are bland and directionless . " Nevertheless , it reached number one on the Mainstream and Modern Rock charts . 
 In April 2005 , the band launched a club tour , which lasted until late May . Although on previous tours Audioslave occasionally played cover songs , they deliberately avoided playing their former bands ' songs to avoid using those songs as a " crutch " to " help sell and break Audioslave " as their aim was to establish the band as an " independent entity . " After achieving that goal , they thought it was " time to own those histories , " and began performing a selection of the two bands ' most popular songs ( such as " Black Hole Sun " and " Bulls on Parade " ) on the tour . 
 The second single , " Your Time Has Come " was released through a unique promotion , lasting one week , which involved radio listeners around the world . Radio stations were asked to post a link on their websites to a special timed @-@ out download of the song . Once one million people clicked on the link , the song was unlocked and became downloadable by all one million . 
 On May 6 , 2005 , Audioslave played a free show in Havana , Cuba , in front of an estimated 50 @,@ 000 people at the La Tribuna <unk> José Martí ( José Martí Anti @-@ Imperialist Stand ) venue , which was purpose @-@ built in 2000 for mass protests against the U.S. government . Audioslave became the first American rock group to perform an open @-@ air concert in the socialist republic of Cuba . The band traveled to Havana — bringing along their camera crew — on May 4 to spend two days visiting historic sites and interacting with Cuban musicians and youngsters . Morello and the rest of the band insisted that the trip was not to make a political statement , but to take part in a musical cultural exchange . Cornell commented : " Hopefully , this concert will help to open the musical borders between our two countries . " The trip was organized with the joint authorization of the United States Department of the Treasury and the Instituto Cubano de la Musica ( Cuban Institute of Music ) , as travel by U.S. citizens to Cuba is restricted , but the authorization arrived so late that the band had to cancel and postpone several confirmed dates of their U.S. tour . The 26 @-@ song @-@ set concert — which included several Soundgarden and Rage Against the Machine songs — was the longest the band had ever played . 
 Out of Exile was released internationally on May 23 , 2005 , then a day later in the U.S. It debuted at the top of the Billboard 200 chart , the only Audioslave album to reach this position . The following week , however , it dropped to number three , with a 62 @-@ percent sales decrease — consequently reaching platinum . Cornell admitted to writing his most personal songs ever on this album , influenced by the positive changes in his life since 2002 . He also described the album as more varied than the debut and relying less on heavy guitar riffs . 
 The album was received more favorably than Audioslave 's debut ; critics noted Cornell 's stronger vocals , likely the result of quitting smoking and drinking , and pointed out that Out of Exile is " the sound of a band coming into its own . " AllMusic , which gave Audioslave a lukewarm review , praised the album as " lean , hard , strong , and memorable . " The lyrics , however , were still a common complaint . MusicOMH.com wrote that Cornell 's lyrics " continue to border on the ridiculous " ; the album 's softer , slower approach was frequently criticized as well . 
 Following the album 's release , the band embarked on a European tour , performed at the Live 8 benefit concert in Berlin on July 2 , 2005 , and played their first North American headlining arena tour from late September to November 2005 . The music video for " Doesn 't Remind Me " , the third single from Out of Exile , was posted online in September 2005 . Audioslave 's second DVD , Live in Cuba , featuring the concert in Havana , was released on October 11 , 2005 . It was certified platinum in less than two months . 
 = = = Revelations and breakup ( 2006 – 2007 ) = = = 
 In December 2005 , Audioslave received its third Grammy nomination at the 48th Grammy Awards in the " Best Hard Rock Performance " category for " Doesn 't Remind Me . " Audioslave began recording their next album ; Cornell had already expressed his desire to make " an album every year or year @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half " even before Out of Exile was released . In early July 2005 , after the conclusion of the European tour , the band returned to the studio to write new songs ; Morello said their aim was to " blur the lines between rehearsing , recording and touring . " The actual recording began in January 2006 , with plans to release the album , Revelations in June . This time , the band chose Out of Exile 's mixer , Brendan O 'Brien as producer . 
 Audioslave had 20 songs written and recorded 16 of those in only three weeks . However , the album 's release date was postponed to early September , and the band cancelled their previously announced European tour , to have a new album to support , when they embarked on touring . The first single off the album , " Original Fire " , was made available online on Audioslave 's official website for free streaming in early July . 
 News about Cornell 's departure emerged in July 2006 , when insiders stated that after the third album was released , he would depart the band and restart his solo career . Cornell immediately denied the rumors , stating " We hear rumors that Audioslave is breaking up all the time . ... I always just ignore [ them ] . " In the same interview , he also discussed his intentions to record a new solo album , the second in seven years , before the end of August . 
 A special marketing campaign preceded the new album 's release in August , when the art concept was featured on Google Earth as a fictional utopian island , Audioslave Nation , created in the South Pacific . Several songs from the upcoming album appeared on movie and video game soundtracks ; " Wide Awake " and " Shape of Things to Come " were featured in Miami Vice , while " Revelations " was on the soundtrack of Madden NFL 07 . Revelations was released on September 5 , 2006 . The album entered the Billboard 200 at No. 2 and sold 142 @,@ 000 copies during its first week of release . It became the band 's least commercially successful album ; dropping even faster than Out of Exile , its sales were down 65 percent the following week , achieving gold certification a month later . The album showed funk , soul and R & B influences that were non @-@ existent for the band before ; Morello referred to the new sound as " Led Zeppelin meets Earth , Wind & Fire . " Additionally , several songs took a more overtly liberal political stance than previous Audioslave releases . 
 The album received a similar critical response to Out of Exile with the majority of reviewers praising the band 's integrity on the record . The new funk and soul influences were also welcomed favorably , Allmusic called the album Audioslave 's " most colorful , diverse , and consistent record yet . " Many others , however , saw it as " just another rock record , " and musically not much different from the previous album . 
 Cornell decided to delay the Revelations tour until 2007 , because he wanted to " let the album come out for awhile [ sic ] " and also concentrate on his second solo album . The rest of the band went along ; Morello also revealed his plans to release his debut solo album in early 2007 . The second , and final single from the album , " Revelations " was released in October 2006 with an accompanying music video a month later . 
 On January 22 , 2007 , Rage Against the Machine was announced to reunite for one show only , at the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival , on April 29 , 2007 . Less than a month later , on February 15 , 2007 , Cornell officially announced his departure from Audioslave , issuing this statement : 
 Due to irresolvable personality conflicts as well as musical differences , I am permanently leaving the band Audioslave . I wish the other three members nothing but the best in all of their future endeavors . 
 He stated that , as far as he was concerned , Audioslave had disbanded , and that a greatest hits collection would be issued in the future , because of label commitments . The New York Post reported that according to sources the split was not about " irresolvable personality conflicts " but about the money ; a friend of Cornell said , " Chris was unhappy with the financial arrangement within the group — he wrote all the music , yet the other three bandmates took an equal share in the multimillion @-@ dollar publishing rights . " 
 = = = Post @-@ breakup ( 2008 – present ) = = = 
 Morello has since said that he never officially heard and still has not heard from Cornell that he was leaving the group . Cornell countered : " Tom and I did have communications about the fact that I was gonna go make a record , and that I was tired of what ended up seeming like political negotiations toward how we were gonna do Audioslave business and getting nowhere with it . " He also added that this process of " doing Audioslave business " led him to go solo . Cornell admits that he has not spoken to the other members of Audioslave since the breakup . He has said that the breakup was not about money , but that he was just not getting along with the other members during their later years . Said Cornell , " Getting along as people is one thing . Getting along as a group of people that can work together in a band situation ... We weren 't particularly getting along well , no . Bands work in a way where everyone at some point has to have a similar idea of how you do things ... Three albums into it , it started to seem like our interests weren 't as conjoined anymore . " 
 In 2011 , Cornell revealed further information about the band 's breakup ; " Personally a lot of it was me trying to land on my feet again . I went through a lot of personal turmoil right around the time Audioslave formed and unfortunately I think that affected the band a little bit in terms of me not really being grounded .... I think there was stuff that could have been resolved , and there was drama that was probably unnecessary , typical rock band stuff . I certainly played a role in it . I definitely feel like I was part of a lot of unnecessary stuff . It didn 't need to become what it became . You learn with experience . " 
 In 2012 , Tom Morello said that unreleased material that was not on the three albums could be released in the future at an unspecified point . Chris Cornell and Tom Morello shared the stage together for the first time in seven years , among many musicians , at the 2013 Rock and Roll Hall of Fame . Cornell also joined Morello on stage on September 26 , 2014 , guesting on his solo Seattle show . They played together several Nightwatchman songs , Cornell 's usual acoustic covers , and for the first time in eight years , some Audioslave songs . 
 Both Rage Against the Machine and Soundgarden have reformed since Audioslave 's breakup . Rage Against the Machine has performed at several live venues and other festivals since its initial performance at the Coachella Music Festival in April 2007 , although the band currently has no plans to make a new album . Soundgarden announced a reunion in 2010 and recorded a new album , King Animal , which was released in November 2012 . 
 In August 2015 , Chris Cornell openly said in interview with Total Guitar , that he is quite eager to reunite with Audioslave : " I think it would be great . We did a lot of songs , and with the benefit of not having done anything with those guys for so long , I can 't imagine what it would be . It would be a really amazing experience just to get back and work with the same guys again . " Soon after , guitarist Tom Morello said that he 's interested in working with Cornell again , remembering their 2014 Seattle performance with great fondness : " I love Chris and consider him a great friend . The Hall of Fame jam was nice , but a little chaotic . Playing with him in Seattle , that was just fantastic . I love that guy . He 's one of the most talented vocalists in the history of vocalists . And to be able to play the songs that we wrote together , it was awesome and so much fun . I hope we do something like that again . " 
 = = Name = = 
 The original idea for the band 's name was " Civilian , " but it was dropped when members found out that it was already taken . Morello later discredited the story , contradicting Commerford and Cornell , and commented that " Civilian " was merely a rumor circulating at the time . He stated : " The band has only ever had one name , and that is Audioslave . " Morello described the origin of the " Audioslave " name to LAUNCHcast as follows : 
 That was Chris 's suggestion that sort of came to him in a vision . We 're all on the two @-@ way pagers , and Chris one night said , " I got it . It 's Audioslave . " We were all , like , " All right , fantastic . " ... To paraphrase Elvis Costello , talking about band names is like dancing about architecture — there 's just no point in it because the band name becomes the music and the people . 
 After the name was announced , it emerged that it was already being used by an unsigned band from Liverpool . The two bands worked out a settlement , with the American Audioslave paying $ 30 @,@ 000 in a deal that allowed each band to use the name . To avoid confusion , the Liverpool band would rename themselves " The Most Terrifying Thing . " 
 The name was mocked by critics due to its uninspired nature , and was regarded as one of the worst in contemporary rock music , or even of all time . Pitchfork Media called it the " most asinine <unk> of the year , " and Chuck Klosterman of Spin magazine chided it as " one of the dumbest band names in recent rock history . " 
 = = Musical style and influences = = 
 By combining ' 70s style hard rock riffing with alternative rock , Audioslave created a distinctive sound . This mix was driven by Cornell 's wide vocal range , Morello 's innovative guitar solos and the rhythm section of Wilk and Commerford . Morello , although stating he " never felt musically limited " in Rage Against the Machine , did say that he had " a lot more scope to explore with Audioslave " and a " wider musical territory . " This meant that the instrumentalists had the opportunity to write slow and melodic songs , something they had not done before . 
 As opposed to de la Rocha 's lyrics , Cornell 's were mostly apolitical ; Morello referred to them as " haunted , existential poetry . " They were characterised by his cryptic approach , often dealing with themes of existentialism , love , hedonism , spirituality and Christianity . Audioslave 's first two albums drew influences from 1970s hard rock such as Led Zeppelin and Black Sabbath and from the members ' previous bands ( the grunge sound of Soundgarden and the funk metal sound of Rage Against the Machine ) . For Revelations , which was influenced by 1960s and ' 70s funk , soul and R & B music , Morello used vintage guitars and amplifiers and Cornell adopted his " seventies funk and R & B @-@ flavor vocals . " The guitarist also cited Sly & the Family Stone , James Brown and Funkadelic as a reason for the funk overtones on the album . 
 Just as Rage Against the Machine did , Audioslave also included the statement " All sounds made by guitar , bass , drums and vocals " in their albums ' booklets as Morello 's guitar work often caused listeners to believe that the band used samples , synthesiser effects or different turntable techniques to produce certain sounds . 
 = = = Songwriting and recording process = = = 
 All of Audioslave 's lyrics were written by Cornell , while all four members — as a band — were credited with writing the music . Their songwriting process was described by Wilk as " more collaborative " and " satisfying " than Rage Against the Machine 's , which was " a battle creatively . " Cornell also felt the same way ; he saw Soundgarden 's songwriting method inferior to Audioslave 's . Rick Rubin , producer of the band 's first two albums , was also lauded as " a great collaborative partner " and was likened to " the fifth Beatle " by Tom Morello . 
 The time spent on songwriting by the band was always short . They wrote 21 songs in 19 days for the first album and exceeded that rate for the second album by having a song or sometimes two written every day . This method was adopted for the third album as well . 
 Cornell 's battle with drug addiction and alcoholism was a defining factor in the writing and recording process of the debut album . The singer admitted that he was " never able to write effectively " while drinking , and attended rehab after recording Audioslave . Although Morello stated that Revelations was " the first record [ Cornell ] didn 't smoke , drink or take drugs through the recording , " he later clarified his statement by saying : " Chris was stone sober during the making of our Out of Exile album . Chris was also sober during the making of Revelations and prior to recording he gave up smoking as well . " 
 = = Politics = = 
 While Rage Against the Machine 's music was politically influenced , Audioslave 's music was mostly not . Cornell stated he did not want to become the new singer of Rage Against the Machine or any political band , but he would play benefits the other band members wanted to play . Despite his reluctance to write political lyrics , he himself never discounted the possibility ; he already touched upon political issues in Audioslave 's " Set It Off " — a song inspired by 1999 's WTO riots ( the " Battle of Seattle " ) — then later wrote an anti @-@ war song , " Sound of a Gun , " and what Morello called " the most political song Audioslave 's ever written , " " Wide Awake " for Revelations . " Wide Awake " was an attack on the Bush administration 's failure to act over the consequences of Hurricane Katrina . 
 The band was openly anti @-@ Bush and against the Iraq War from the beginning ; on March 17 , 2003 , only hours after President Bush announced plans to invade Iraq , the band performed live in Hollywood with messages reading " How many Iraqis per gallon ? " and " Somewhere in Texas , a Village is Missing an Idiot , " scrolled across the stage . The music video for " Doesn 't Remind Me " was also critical of the Iraq war . Wilk called Bush " a fucking scam " in an interview , criticizing the Bush administration 's rationale for war in Iraq . 
 During the time of the second album 's release several politically charged Rage Against the Machine songs resurfaced in Audioslave 's live set . Although the members committed to not making political statements during their Cuba tour , Commerford stated in an interview that the concert made Audioslave more politically active than Rage Against the Machine ever was . While in Cuba , Cornell said that he takes " every aspect of human life " into consideration , when it comes to writing lyrics , and that he would write about the experience in a song , or more songs . This culminated in the political influences on Revelations , although he did not write about Cuba specifically . He asserted that he felt Audioslave can be a band like U2 , which is " not overtly political , but Bono gets a lot done . " That year , the band played at two more concerts organized to raise political awareness : Live 8 , which aimed to end global poverty , and the Hurricane Katrina benefit concert , <unk> Now : Music & Relief . 
 Audioslave was prominently involved in the Axis of Justice , a non @-@ profit organization formed by Tom Morello and System of a Down 's Serj Tankian to " bring together musicians , fans of music , and grassroots political organizations to fight for social justice . " Axis of Justice tents were set up at almost every Audioslave show , and with the exception of Commerford all band members appeared on the Concert Series Volume 1 CD / DVD charity album released in 2004 . 
 = = Band members = = 
 Chris Cornell – lead vocals , acoustic guitar ( 2001 – 2007 ) 
 Tom Morello – electric guitar ( 2001 – 2007 ) 
 Tim Commerford – bass guitar , backing vocals ( 2001 – 2007 ) 
 Brad Wilk – drums , percussion ( 2001 – 2007 ) 
 = = Discography = = 
 Audioslave ( 2002 ) 
 Out of Exile ( 2005 ) 
 Revelations ( 2006 ) 
 = Guitar Hero Live = 
 Guitar Hero Live is a music video game developed by FreeStyleGames and published by Activision . It was released for PlayStation 3 , PlayStation 4 , Wii U , Xbox 360 , and Xbox One in October 2015 and to iOS devices including Apple TV in November 2015 . As with previous games in the series , the goal is to use a special guitar controller to match fret patterns displayed on a scrolling note pattern on screen in time with the music . 
 The game serves as a reboot of the Guitar Hero franchise , being the first new entry in the series since Warriors of Rock in 2010 and the seventh installment overall . Activision wanted to bring back Guitar Hero for the next generation of video game consoles but wanted the new game to be innovative . FreeStyleGames was given a free rein to revitalize the series by Activision , which led to the development of a new guitar controller featuring a 6 button , 3 @-@ fret layout in contrast to the 5 button controller of previous games . FreeStyleGames also wanted to bring a more immersive experience to the player , and developed the main career mode GH Live to have the note pattern displayed atop full motion video taken from the perspective of a lead guitarist during a concert , with the crowd and other band members dynamically reacting to the player 's performance . FreeStyleGames also wanted to forgo the traditional downloadable content model to provide new songs for the game , and created the GHTV mode which encompasses curated playlists in the style of music television channels that are streamed around the clock , allowing them to easily acquire and add new songs . Within GHTV , songs are presented with the note track overlaid atop their music video or from live concert footage . GHTV allows players to pick up and play currently @-@ streamed songs at any time or use money and in @-@ game credits to play any song within the library , forgoing traditional downloadable content . The game was shipped with forty @-@ two songs on disc and 200 songs within the GHTV library ; New content has been added to GHTV on a weekly basis , provided through premium shows that earn players unique rewards . 
 Guitar Hero Live was released to generally positive reception , with critics praising the new controller design for providing trickier and more realistic gameplay in comparison to previous Guitar Hero games , as well as the wider variety of content available via the GHTV mode . The main Live portion of the game received mixed reviews , with critics panning its weak soundtrack , lack of multiplayer , and describing the live action footage as being self @-@ aware , exaggerated , and " campy " . The GHTV mode also received mixed reception for its reliance on microtransactions , and the inability to permanently purchase songs to own . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Guitar Hero Live follows similar gameplay to previous installments in the series , requiring players to use a guitar @-@ shaped controller with buttons and a strum bar to match notes on a scrolling " highway " corresponding to notes played in a song . In contrast to the previous five @-@ button design , the Guitar Hero Live controller features six buttons arranged into two rows of three . The frets are represented by a " note highway " , three scrolling lanes on @-@ screen , containing either black or white notes representing the two rows . Lower difficulty levels use one row of buttons , while higher difficulties may include " chords " that use a combination of buttons from both rows . The game typically maps out power chords to use the top row of buttons , while modifications of those chords include others from the <unk> row . Notes may be held and sustained , indicated by trailing lines after the note markers , during which the player can use the guitar 's whammy bar to alter the held note 's pitch for effect . Fast @-@ moving sections of songs may employ the use of hammer @-@ on and pull @-@ off notes , marked with a special outline , which can be played without using the strum bar . The game also retains the concept of open strumming introduced in previous Guitar Hero titles , represented as a horizontal bar across the lanes and requiring the player to hit the strum bar without pressing any fret keys . The player is able to select one of four difficulty levels which affect the number and complexity of the note patterns they have to hit , and the speed at which the on @-@ screen display scrolls . Guitar Hero Live can also be played by two players , both playing on separate guitar controllers with split @-@ screen separate note highways , competing for the best score . Songs in GH Live mode ( below ) also includes vocals , allowing players to sing along in tone with the song 's lyrics using a connected microphone . 
 The game is playable via an app on iOS mobile devices , including the fourth @-@ generation Apple TV . This version supports both " touch " mode and support for an optional Bluetooth @-@ enabled guitar controller that provides " [ the ] full game in an uncompromised way " according to Activision . When in touch mode , the note display geared towards the 6 @-@ button controller is replaced with four touch @-@ screen buttons but otherwise retains the same gameplay ; with the controller , the game otherwise plays the same . Due to the size of the game relative to storage space on most mobile devices , Guitar Hero Live on iOS units requires a persistent Internet connection as all songs , including those that are normally part of the console on @-@ disc soundtrack , are streamed from Activision 's servers when played . 
 = = = GH Live = = = 
 In the game 's primary single @-@ player mode , titled GH Live within the game , the player completes songs while experiencing full @-@ motion video taken from the first @-@ person perspective of a band 's lead guitarist . The video includes shots of the audience and the band members . As the player performs the songs , the audience responds positively to good performances when few mistakes are made . If the player makes several mistakes in a row , the audience will become critical and start to jeer at the performer . To win back the crowd , the player can either match more notes correctly , or can use collected Hero Power to rapidly regain their interest . Hero Power , replacing Star Power from previous Guitar Hero games , is collected by correctly playing marked series of notes on the track ; Hero Power can be accumulated , marked as on @-@ screen guitar picks next to the track , to be used at later times . The player can release Hero Power for a limited time by either tilting the guitar controller upward or hitting a special button on the controller . 
 The career mode is broken up into a dozen @-@ some show sets , each set consisting of about 3 @-@ 5 songs . The video for each set includes the band 's introduction , banter between the band and crowd between songs , and final ovations on conclusion of the show . The player must unlock each set in order as to move forward . Once a set is complete , the player is shown the game 's ranking of their performance and for each song , based on factors such as percentage of notes hit correctly , the longest streak of properly played consecutive notes , and how long they kept the virtual crowd excited about their performance . The player then unlocks the ability to play the individual songs outside of sets . 
 = = = GHTV = = = 
 In addition to songs that were shipped on disc , additional songs are introduced to the game through Guitar Hero TV ( GHTV ) . On starting GHTV mode , the player is given a choice of a number of themed channels , which broadcast playable songs curated programs on a rotating schedule similar to a radio broadcast . One such channel always present new songs that have been added to GHTV . Songs in GHTV are played over the music video for the song or live concert footage of the band playing the song , instead of the custom visuals for the main single player game . The player can pick up and play on any song that is being shown , but they also are able to use earned Plays to replay a specific song outside of the channel 's rotation . 
 While playing in GHTV , the player is scored to track their performance , and their scores are compared to other players - both those playing at the same time as well as asynchronous scores from other players . To help boost their score , players can accumulate Hero Power in the same fashion as in the GH Live mode . Prior to a song , the player can choose to use Coins , the in @-@ game currency , to purchase one of several Hero Powers which they can deploy during the song , improving their score and performance . Hero Powers include temporary boosts in scoring multipliers , ability to clear all notes for a short distance on the track , or to increase or decrease the density of notes . When a song is complete , the player is ranked based on their performance with the other tracked players , and awarded experience points , Coins , and other bonuses . Experience points are used to raise the player 's rank in the GHTV metagame , allowing them to unlock player card skins and other features of GHTV , including Play tokens . Alternatively , players can use the paid , microtransaction currency Hero Cash to purchase access to content . In an update in December 2015 , players on GHTV have an opportunity to be randomly pitted in a head @-@ to @-@ head challenge against another player of similar skill level , about twice every half @-@ hour . Winning this head @-@ to @-@ head challenge can give the player an experience point boost . 
 New songs to GHTV are typically introduced via limited @-@ time " Premium Shows " , which run for a week or more ; these songs are then moved into the on @-@ demand catalog and later into the normal GHTV rotation . Access to Premium Shows can be purchased with Hero Cash , or by completing several specific songs in either on @-@ demand or on rotation play . Within the Premium Shows , players complete in the same manner as with normal GHTV songs and can earn unique in @-@ game rewards , such as coins or alternate skins for the on @-@ screen note " highway " . 
 Players can purchase a " Party Pass " that allows full access to all of GHTV 's on @-@ demand songs and paid features for 24 hours , a mode that FreeStyleGames envisioned to be used when players are hosting large parties or similar events . As first held on the weekend of 6 November 2015 , Activision may hold promotional periods that similarly offer full access . 
 In addition to regular content , GHTV has been used to provide specialty programming . GHTV can offer uniquely curated music video shows with host segments wrapped around playable songs ; the first such show features songs selected by the band Avenged Sevenfold and will include commentary by the band on these selections . Def Leppard used GHTV to premiere their new music video for their single " Dangerous " in January 2016 . Activision offered a contest for players to win prizes by participating in a special " <unk> @-@ a @-@ Thon " premium show , highlighting the addition of Dragonforce 's " Through the Fire and Flames " - one of the most notoriously difficult songs that has appeared in other Guitar Hero titles - to the GHTV setlist . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The on @-@ disc soundtrack of Guitar Hero Live includes 42 songs and spans across a diverse selection of genres , the developers recognizing that challenging guitar tracks are not strictly limited to rock music . The game 's soundtrack include songs by The Black Keys , Blitz Kids , Ed Sheeran , Fall Out Boy , Gary Clark , Jr . , Green Day , The Killers , The Lumineers , My Chemical Romance , Pierce the Veil , The Rolling Stones , Skrillex , and The War on Drugs . 
 Pre @-@ orders of the game offered access to a time @-@ limited premium show featuring three live recordings by Avenged Sevenfold , including " Shepherd of Fire " , " Buried Alive " and " Nightmare " , filmed from their performances at the Download Festival in England and Mexico City . 
 Additional songs are provided through GHTV . Two hundred songs were playable on GHTV at launch , and the developers plan on adding new songs to GHTV on a regular basis . There is no backwards compatibility with songs or controllers from previous editions of the franchise ; FreeStyleGames ' developer Jamie Jackson justified the decision , explaining that Guitar Hero Live was a " completely new game " that existing content would not work with due to the change in core gameplay . There is not any traditional downloadable content for the game in the form of additional songs , instead using the streaming nature of GHTV to provide new songs . FreeStyleGames does not expect to make GHTV content available for offline play . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Background and aborted reboot = = = 
 Rhythm games like Guitar Hero and Rock Band had been widely popular between 2005 and 2008 , but due to oversaturation of the market and the onset of the recession in 2009 , the rhythm genre suffered major setbacks , and the genre 's popularity had quickly waned . Sales of the previous installment Guitar Hero : Warriors of Rock were below estimates and lower than previous games in the series . Weak sales of Warriors of Rock , in part , led to Activision cancelling a planned 2011 sequel , and shuttering the Guitar Hero franchise . 
 In a July 2011 interview with <unk> , Activision CEO Bobby Kotick stated that they were going to try to " reinvent " the series , but a former <unk> of Vicarious Visions has stated that as of 2012 , all development of Guitar Hero has come to an end within Activision . Another source close to Vicarious Visions had reported to Kotaku that while Guitar Hero 7 was in development under an Activision studio , the game was considered a " disaster " . The cancelled game omitted the additional instruments and used only a guitar peripheral , redesigning the unit to include a 6 @-@ button mechanism replacing the strum bar ; the resulting unit was considered too expensive to manufacture and purchase . The developers had started from scratch to try to create new characters and venues that would be more reactive to the actual songs being played , to give the feel of a music video , but ultimately this proved too much of a challenge and had to be scrapped . Further , with a limited budget , the song selection was limited to " low @-@ budget " hits of the 1990s , or at times reusing songs that had previously been included in Guitar Hero games . Though the team had a two @-@ year development cycle , it was closed down after Activision president Eric Hirshberg had seen the current state of the project at the one @-@ year point . Daniel <unk> , a developer for Vicarious Visions at the time of cancellation , stated that he had come up with an idea of revitalizing the series using a first @-@ person perspective approach , and had developed a prototype that he had called Guitar Hero Live at the time , though neither Activision nor FreeStyleGames have confirmed if this prototype was used as inspiration for the revived series . 
 = = = As Guitar Hero Live = = = 
 In February 2015 , rumors surfaced that new entries in both the Guitar Hero and Rock Band franchises for eighth generation consoles were in development ; Harmonix announced Rock Band 4 on 5 March 2015 . On 14 April 2015 , Activision officially announced a reboot of the Guitar Hero franchise , Guitar Hero Live , with development by FreeStyleGames . 
 In an interview with Fortune magazine , Activision 's CEO of Publishing Eric Hirshberg found that even after five years without a game , the Guitar Hero brand still enjoyed high social media attention , with over 10 million followers on the Guitar Hero 's Facebook page . However , Hirshberg stated that Activision realized they needed to reinvent the series so that consumers would not consider it much the same as previous games and to help sway those that were turned off by the earlier saturation of music games . 
 The task of developing the new game was given to FreeStyleGames around 2012 . FreeStyleGames had developed both DJ Hero and DJ Hero 2 , and while both games were critically praised , the latter was released on the downward trend of the music game genre . FreeStyleGames had suffered some layoffs as a result of the hiatus of the Guitar Hero series , though remained an Activision studio and financially viable due to their work for the Wii U Sing Party . As the development of Sing Party wrapped up , the studio created an internal research and development department to begin brainstorming what their next game would , with input from Activision . Hirshberg had encouraged the team to reconsider Guitar Hero , noting the fan dedication to the series , but noted that the game needed innovation to be successful . Activision gave the team freedom to develop the game without relying on the previous titles in the series . The core gameplay of Guitar Hero Live was rebuilt from scratch ; developer Jamie Jackson explained that the goal of the game was to bring " big innovation " to the franchise rather than continue with the same format used by previous games . He explained to his staff to only " think of [ Guitar Hero ] as a name . Think of it as a music game with a guitar peripheral , but pretend that nothing else has ever been done . " The team brainstormed on what had made the Guitar Hero series fun , and recounted the earlier titles of the series which were designed to enable the player to envision themselves as a superstar guitarist , subsequent design choices were made around recreating that experience . The team also cited fellow <unk> franchise Call of Duty as an influence towards the goal of providing an immersive , first @-@ person experience . 
 Though FreeStyleGames experimented with other options including a controller @-@ less game , camera and motion detection , and social @-@ based games , but recognized quickly that the guitar controller was a key part of the series ' success . The developers recognized they wanted to have a guitar controller so that players would not be embarrassed to have in their living rooms and spent time getting the look of the controller accurate to a real guitar . The design of the game 's guitar controller was overhauled , using rapid prototyping to test potential guitar designs . The final design of the controller for Live utilizes a new design with six buttons arranged into two rows of three frets , designated by black and white @-@ colored notes in @-@ game , instead of using the traditional row of five colored frets used by previous Guitar Hero games . Jackson explained that the new layout was meant to make the game easier for new players , as the three @-@ button layout avoids the need to use one 's pinkie finger , a difficulty they recognized new players had on the traditional five @-@ button controller . The layout was also designed to provide a new challenge to experienced players , including more realistic simulations of chords . The choice to use only three buttons also came from statistical analysis of past games , where about 80 % of the players would never play harder than the Medium difficulty level which typically only required the use of three fingers with the previous five @-@ button controllers . The initial controller iterations , presented both in @-@ studio and to Activision , were met with skepticism but they found that players quickly adapted to the new scheme as an improvement over the older controllers . The " note highways " for the songs were created by both programmers and musicians using MIDI software as to map to each of the six controller buttons and the open strum bar . Note highways were developed first for the Expert difficulty level , essentially recreating the guitar part of the song note for note , while highways for lower difficulty levels were then constructed by removing notes while assuring the core rhythm of the song remained . 
 The game itself is presented in a more realistic and immersive style ; the rendered stages and characters of previous games are replaced by full motion video , shot from the first @-@ person perspective of the lead guitarist , simulating real @-@ world concert settings . The video footage is dynamic , and can transition between versions featuring positive or negative reactions by the crowd and band members based upon the player 's performance . The first @-@ person footage utilizes session musicians as actors playing the remaining members of the band , and is filmed using a Bolt robotic camera system , programmed to simulate the motions of a guitarist on stage . The Bolt ran along a 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) track , and was able to move and turn quickly , mimicking the speed of a musician 's movements . Prior to filming with the Bolt , an actor outfitted with motion and position detectors acted out the song with the other band actors ; these movements were recorded and then used to direct the Bolt as it replaced the actor in subsequent takes . To avoid injury to the other actors from the motions of the camera , the routines were all choreographed based on the camera 's motions and used as cues for the other actors . To enable smoother transitions between positive and negative versions of the band footage , multiple takes were performed for each song using the same camera motions . Groups of 200 to 400 actors were filmed using a green screen to construct crowds ; using varying takes and other editing techniques , the groups of actors could be made to cover much larger areas . To simulate larger crowds , these shots were superimposed on a combination of live footage from actual rock concerts and 3D models constructed by FreeStyleGames . The effects studio Framestore helped with editing and assembling the digital live @-@ action footage . Positional audio effects are also used as part of the footage , varying the volume of certain instruments depending on how close the player is to them on @-@ screen in the footage . 
 Ten different bands represent the songs in the " Guitar Hero Live " mode , playing in two different music festivals . Members of these fictional bands were selected through auditions prior to filming , making sure that they could recreate the actual performance of a song , as well as mixing and matching members of ensemble groups to get the right look and feel . Bands were filmed in a warehouse in Oxford . England To help with creating appropriate stage presence for the fictional bands and their fans , FreeStyleGames created material that each band would have had in the band 's career , such as album covers and clothing , using various musical genres to help inspire their designs . 
 GHTV was designed by FreeStyleGames to allow them to provide new music without having to secure more stringent music licensing rights . FreeStyleGames found that this mode attracted the attention of bands who were eager to offer their music for it ; the bands saw GHTV as comparable to the marketing that music television channels had done in the 1980s and 1990s , putting the imagery of the band at the player as they played along . FreeStyleGames also compared GHTV to music services like Spotify and Pandora . This approach makes it easier to secure licensing rights , and fits in better with the current " throwaway culture " nature of society today according to Jackson . Jackson explained that the feature and its curated playlists were " about discovering music as much as it is about going and finding music you know you already like " . Activision 's Hirshberg stated that GHTV was developed as a better means to provide new songs to players through a round @-@ the @-@ clock content platform , rather than relying on scheduled downloadable content , allowing the company to provide a much larger quantity of songs , with plans for " hundreds at launch on day one " of the game 's release . 
 Guitar Hero Live was considered to be a game that can be expanded upon in the future through content patches , as opposed to released new titles each year which had previously led to the music genre decline in 2009 . Though FreeStyleGames added vocals prior to the game 's launch , there are no present plans to include other instruments such as bass guitar or drums in the title , with Jackson stating that the game is " all about guitars " . 
 = = = Marketing and promotion = = = 
 On 14 April 2015 , Hirshberg and Jackson invited Pete Wentz of Fall Out Boy and Gerard Way of My Chemical Romance to promote the game . Wentz performed his band 's song " My Songs Know What You Did in the Dark " in the Guitar Hero Live mode , while Way and Jackson dueled each other on My Chemical Romance 's song " Na Na Na " . A commercial for the game was revealed in October 2015 , starring Lenny Kravitz and James Franco . In conjunction with Activision , The CW ran special promotional ads for Guitar Hero Live , featuring the actors David Ramsey and Candice Patton playing the game in the week prior to the game 's release . Activision arranged to have rapper Macklemore play Guitar Hero Live with FreeStyleGames ' Jamie Jackson during the halftime show of the Seattle Seahawks home game on the Sunday prior to the release of the game . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Guitar Hero Live received positive reviews . Aggregating review websites GameRankings and Metacritic gave the Wii U version 83 @.@ 75 % based on 4 reviews and 84 / 100 based on 4 reviews , the PlayStation 4 version 81 @.@ 91 % based on 43 reviews and 80 / 100 based on 69 reviews and the Xbox One version 80 @.@ 93 % based on 20 reviews and 81 / 100 based on 21 reviews . 
 Most reviewers praised the risk of changing up the gameplay of Guitar Hero with the new controller design , contrasting to Rock Band 4 's reliance on its established gameplay mechanics . Chris Carter of Destructoid considered the change a reinvention of the series , and though he had to relearn how to play the controller , enjoyed the experience and " the increased emphasis on chords and fancy finger @-@ work " . Griffin McElroy of Polygon also praised the new controller , finding that the higher difficulties in the game present " the most challenging fake guitar @-@ playing " that he 's seen , and having to relearn the new playing style through the game 's difficulties levels was a " delight " . Matt Miller of Game Informer found the six @-@ button layout was not any better than the traditional five @-@ button one , but " nails a different dynamic " as it feel like one was playing more realistic guitar chords . Though Game Revolution 's Nick Tan was impressed with the challenge of the new controller , he felt the buttons themselves were too small and tight on the neck of the controller , and the new challenge may cause more casual players to forgo attempt to learn the new system and go back to Rock Band and the traditional layout . 
 The full @-@ motion video aspect of GH Live was not as well @-@ taken as the core gameplay . GameSpot 's Scott Buttersworth found that he often ignored the motion video as he was too focused on the gameplay , and when he did notice it , felt it appeared " so campy [ that ] it borders on parody " as it " absolutely trips over itself to sell you on the idea that you 're a totally super cool rockstar " . Tristan Ogilvie of IGN also felt that the live action footage was " overly cheesy vamping " , and further felt no connection to the band and bandmates he was to be playing along with as there was very little context given between sets . Ben Griffin of GamesRadar found that the crowd and bandmates only seemed to have two states , " fawning and furious " , making the transition disconcerting when the game switched between the two states simply based on his performance . Brandon Jones of GameTrailers believed it was difficult to " take the actors seriously " in part due to the duality of the crowd reaction as well as that the song was still based on studio recordings , sounding off in the concert setting . Jones further commented that the fictional bands were well @-@ matched to the songs they played , and that the pacing of the presentation , moving quickly between songs , made the experience feel more like a real concert . McElroy acknowledged the presentation can potentially be " cringe @-@ worthy " , but felt that the video was put together with self @-@ awareness of this factor to make it more charming , noting some of the extra details that FreeStyleGames and the actors used to fully take on their roles . 
 The soundtrack for the GH Live portion was also considered weak . McElroy found most of the songs were from 2000 or later , forgoing classic rock songs , and considered the soundtrack to be the " biggest disappointment " of GH Live . Buttersworth stated that many of the on @-@ disc selections are pop songs that " just aren 't cut out for Guitar Hero gameplay " , as they feature the same repeating guitar riff over and over . Griffin was more favorable of the on @-@ disc set list , finding that the tracks represented " the music landscape as it is rather than as it was " . Carter also appreciated the soundtrack , calling it a " good spread " of songs that can appeal to everyone . 
 The GHTV mode has mixed opinions , with most reviewers praising the concept , with the presentation of the channels were highlighted as hearkening to the heyday of MTV , and giving the player the ability to explore new music . However , reviewers were critical of the emphasis on microtransactions , and though the game was " generous " with providing free Plays and other in @-@ game currency rewards , this approach could still disappoint some players . Carter found that he could ignore the microtransactions and instead enjoy the freely @-@ playable curated music channels , helping him to play music that he had not yet heard or was outside of his normal play style , giving him a " a really cool feeling " about exploring new music , as well as seeing music videos from his youth again . Ogilvie similarly found that he could spend his time in GHTV within the free channels exploring new music , but believed the mode was " somewhat inflexible for the time poor " as players may not find the type of music they want to play when they are ready the play and that there was a lack of a programming guide for these channels . Griffin said that the pricing structure was weak compared to established DLC models , believing that the pricing for options like the Party Pack would have been better used to unlock the ability to play songs that he would enjoy . Miller stated that the microtransaction " structure is exploitative " , preventing him from easily accessing his favorite songs to play and making him frustrated with the game in the long run . Buttersworth was displeased with the need to grind through songs in the free channels as to earn Play tokens to access a song he wanted to play , and the ability to permanently unlock a song , stating " that lack of freedom undermined a lot of the fun " . Premium shows were particularly noted as problematic , in addition to the lack of a practice mode for the GHTV songs , which may impact how those players that seek to perfect every song would enjoy the game mode . Tan noted that in addition to either the time to complete the challenges or in @-@ game currency to unlock the show , the player would have to complete the show in one of the ranked positions to earn the offered prize , and if they failed , they would have to repeat that process again . 
 In an earnings report shortly following the game 's release , Activision stated that Guitar Hero Live was outselling their previous two Guitar Hero games , Guitar Hero : Warriors of Rock and Guitar Hero 5 , though did not report exact sales numbers . In their quarterly earnings results presented in February 2016 , Activision reported that sales for Guitar Hero Live missed their expectations , and in March 2016 , announced that they had to let go of about 50 of <unk> ' employees , though the studio still remains open to continue additional work for Activision . Prior to the Electronic Entertainment Expo 2016 , Activision stated they will continue to produce content for Guitar Hero Live but have no present plans for another game . 
 Guitar Hero Live was nominated for " Game of the Year " for the 2016 NME Awards , and for " Family Game of the Year " at the 19th Annual Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences DICE Awards . It was also nominated for " Excellence in Convergence " for the 2016 SXSW Gaming Awards , and for the " Family " award at the 2016 British Academy Games Awards . 
 = Band of Gypsys = 
 Band of Gypsys is a live album by Jimi Hendrix and the first without his original group , the Jimi Hendrix Experience . It was recorded on January 1 , 1970 , at the Fillmore East in New York City with Billy Cox on bass and Buddy Miles on drums , frequently referred to as the Band of Gypsys . The album mixes funk and rhythm and blues elements with hard rock and jamming , an approach which later became the basis of funk rock . It contains previously unreleased songs and was the last full @-@ length Hendrix album released before his death . 
 After his appearance at Woodstock with an interim group that included Cox , Hendrix began developing new songs and recording demos . When Miles became involved , he and Cox agreed to record a live album with Hendrix to be used to settle a contract dispute with a former manager . The new material , influenced by Cox 's and Miles ' musical approaches , signal a new direction for Hendrix . Songs such as " Power to Love " and " Message to Love " still maintain the dominant role of Hendrix 's guitar , but show funk and R & B influences . Lyrically , they also explore new , more humanistic themes for Hendrix . The two numbers written and sung by Miles bear the stylings of soul music . The anti @-@ riot / anti @-@ war " Machine Gun " , draws on Hendrix 's earlier blues aspirations , but incorporates new approaches to guitar improvisation and tonal effects . 
 As the album 's producer , Hendrix had a difficult time completing the task . Presented with the sometimes problematic recordings and resigned to turning it over to a different record company , Hendrix expressed his dissatisfaction with the final product . Shortly after its release , Band of Gypsys reached the top ten of the album charts in the US and UK as well as appearing in charts in several other countries . Although it was as popular as his albums with the Experience , it received mixed reviews . Some faulted the performances as tentative and underprepared ; additionally , Miles ' contributions on drums and vocals have been characterized as plodding and obtrusive . However , " Machine Gun " is generally regarded as the album 's highlight and one of Hendrix 's greatest achievements . The influence of Band of Gypsys is heard in the funk rock developments of the 1970s and has been cited as an inspiration by various later rock musicians . Reissues of the album on compact disc included three extra songs recorded during the Fillmore East shows and additional material has been released on later albums . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1969 , Jimi Hendrix was under pressure from his manager and record company to record a follow @-@ up to his hugely successful 1968 album Electric Ladyland . He was also required to produce an album 's worth of new material for Capitol Records in order to satisfy a contract dispute with former manager Ed Chalpin and PPX Enterprises . Capitol had released two misleading Chalpin @-@ produced Curtis Knight albums with Hendrix on guitar , which competed directly with his own Experience albums . Additionally , Hendrix was becoming increasingly dissatisfied with the limitations of bassist Noel Redding and the Experience format . During the recording of Electric Ladyland , he and producer Chas Chandler parted ways and Hendrix explored recording with new musicians and different musical styles . By the middle of the year , he had not completed any promising new material and Reprise Records resorted to issuing his April 1968 UK compilation album , Smash Hits , with some new tracks for the North American market . A concert film for which he had performed at the Royal Albert Hall in London in February 1969 was wrapped up in legal disputes and its release was uncertain . In May , while en route to a concert performance in Toronto , Hendrix was detained and charged with illegal possession of narcotics . If convicted of the felony , he faced as many as 20 years in prison . On June 28 , 1969 , Hendrix announced he planned to work with new musicians , including a new bass player . The next day , after a potentially life @-@ threatening riot following a concert in Denver , Colorado , Redding left the group to return to London and the Jimi Hendrix Experience came to an end . 
 Hendrix then began experimenting with an expanded lineup for a limited number of American engagements . In addition to original Experience drummer Mitch Mitchell , he worked with bassist Billy Cox and second guitarist Larry Lee , as well as percussionists Juma Sultan and Gerardo " Jerry " Velez . Cox and Lee were two musicians with whom he had played in R & B bands in Tennessee in 1962 , shortly after his stint in the US Army . The aggregation , often referred to as " Gypsy Sun and Rainbows " , performed as the final act at the Woodstock Festival on August 18 , 1969 ( while introducing the group at Woodstock , Hendrix added " It 's nothing but a band of gypsies " ) . After a couple more appearances , including a September 8 episode of the late night American television The Dick Cavett Show without Lee and Velez , the ensemble disbanded . Lee returned to Tennessee , Sultan and Velez left to pursue other opportunities , and Mitchell joined Jack Bruce 's touring group . 
 In October 1969 , Hendrix and Cox began jamming and recording demos with drummer Buddy Miles . Miles had played with various R & B and soul musicians , as a member of the Electric Flag and fronting the Buddy Miles Express , both blues rock @-@ R & B fusion groups . Miles was also a frequent jam partner of Hendrix and played the drums the year before on the two @-@ part song " Rainy Day , Dream Away " / " Still Raining , Still Dreaming " for Electric Ladyland . Cox and Miles expressed an interest in performing and recording a new album with Hendrix . Hendrix 's manager , Michael Jeffery , saw the opportunity to record a live album during a New Year 's performance at the Fillmore East and the trio began preparing for the upcoming concerts and new album . Between then and the end of December , the trio rehearsed at Juggy Sound Studios and recorded several demos at the Record Plant Studios in New York City , where Hendrix recorded much of Electric Ladyland . After Hendrix 's December 10 , 1969 , acquittal in his Canadian trial , the trio rehearsed their material at Baggy 's Studios up until their first concert appearance on December 31 . In an interview , Hendrix explained , " We spent 12 to 18 hours a day practicing this whole last week , straight ahead , and then we went into a funky little club and jammed down there to test it out " . Early versions of some of the songs which eventually appeared on Band of Gypsys from two of the rehearsal sessions were released as The Baggy 's Rehearsal Sessions by Dagger Records in 2002 . 
 = = Musical style , writing , composition = = 
 As a new group , the Band of Gypsys needed to develop a repertoire . Several songs that had begun as ideas , jams , and demos with the Experience and Gypsy Sun and Rainbows ( but unreleased ) were carried over to the Band of Gypsys . These included " Lover Man " , " Hear My Train A Comin ' " , " Izabella " , " Machine Gun " , " Bleeding Heart " , " Stepping Stone " , and " Message to Love " . Three new songs featuring vocals by Buddy Miles were added : " Changes " , " We Gotta Live Together " ( both Miles compositions ) and " Stop " , an R & B song written by Jerry Ragovoy and Mort Shuman , which had been recorded by Howard Tate in 1968 . Hendrix contributed new material as well , including " Power to Love " , " Ezy Ryder " , " Earth Blues " , " Burning Desire " , and the riff for the jam song " Who Knows " . The trio began rehearsing a set of songs for the four upcoming Fillmore shows . 
 Many of these songs represent a change in Hendrix 's music from his Experience repertoire . Biographer and later Hendrix producer John McDermott elaborates 
 Hendrix 's new songs made clear the emerging shifts in his musical direction . The titles alone — " Message to Love " , " Power of Soul " [ sic ] , " Earth Blues " , " Burning Desire " — suggest a change in theme . Jimi 's playful humor ... had been replaced with a strident sense of self @-@ examination . In addition , Cox and Miles spurred Jimi 's embrace of the R & B tradition they shared [ and ] merged rock and funk with unparalleled ease . 
 Most of the arrangements were developed through extensive jamming , with Cox 's and Miles ' playing influencing Hendrix 's ideas . According to biographer Keith Shadwick , Cox explained in later interviews , " the process was based on building up rhythm patterns and that each pattern dictated the shape and character of a portion of a song in which it appeared " . Record producer Alan Douglas witnessed the approach during a jam at the Record Plant and saw it as inefficient . On the other hand , Shadwick feels that it was necessary : " it seemed the only way available , especially as neither Cox nor Miles , in particular , were exactly swift on the musical uptake " . Music journalist Charles Shaar Murray noted , " Cox 's funky , uncluttered bass style would give Hendrix 's new music a more solid , less frenetic underpinning [ than Noel Redding 's style ] . In every way , Cox 's function would be to provide the steadiness Hendrix so urgently required " . Soft Machine drummer Robert Wyatt described Miles ' style as " pleasantly messy ... He wasn 't as tight as a Stax drummer [ such as Al Jackson , Jr . ] ... his rolls would clatter about a bit " . However , his often described " <unk> grooves " lay down a solid rhythmic foundation and the combination of Cox and Miles adds a " heavy , rolling fluidity which brings out a very different dimension in Hendrix 's playing " . 
 The mix of improvisation and R & B / funk elements is evident in " Who Knows " , which was the opening number for the second ( after the brief " Auld Lang Syne " ) and third shows . It is a loose jam rather than a structured song and during the performance for second show Hendrix teases the audience with " I hope you don 't mind us jamming a little bit , we 're just messing around ... seeing what we 're gonna play next " . Built on Hendrix 's guitar figure , " Who Knows " is framed by Cox 's economical funk @-@ blues bass line and Miles ' steady drum beat , which Murray describes as " a thick , lazy twitch " . Hendrix explores guitar phrases using different tones and effects between vocal sections . According to Cox , Hendrix used a new combination of effects for the first time . These included a Uni @-@ Vibe phase shifter , an Octavia harmonizer ( developed for him by Roger Mayer during the recording of his first album ) , a Fuzz Face distortion box , and a wah @-@ wah pedal . In the higher range , it has been described as producing a " whistling , shimmering , ring @-@ modulated tone so rich with upper harmonics " , while in the lower range " it almost sounds like ' Froggy Went a @-@ <unk> ' ' ... all these [ lower ] <unk> [ <unk> ] <unk> give it such a dramatic effect " . His use of the wah @-@ wah employs " rapid foot movement and wide sweeps [ which ] tend to make the melody fade in and out " . Also , by using a triplet rhythm with the pedal , a polyrhythm with the prevailing 4 
 4 beat is created . The lyrics , some which borrow from other R & B songs , are also improvised and show considerable differences between the two renditions . As it unfolds , there is an R & B @-@ style vocal call and response section between Hendrix and Miles , then separate vocal sections for each , which Miles follows with scat singing . During the middle section , most of the instrumentation drops out and returns with more Hendrix guitar tonal explorations before winding down at 8 : 23 ( second show ) and 9 : 32 ( third show ) . While McDermott feels that the jam is underdeveloped and biographer Harry Shapiro criticizes Miles ' vocals , Shadwick and writer David Henderson focus on the " easy groove " and " lilting flow " . Besides adding a fresh rhythmic element to his music , it also gives Hendrix more room to experiment with different approaches and sounds on guitar . 
 Similarly , the Buddy Miles song " We Gotta Live Together " is a jam number . It forms the second part of a medley with " Voodoo Child ( Slight Return ) " and had only been performed once before at the Baggy 's rehearsal room . The song features Miles attempting to engage the audience in a call and response " testifying " soul music @-@ style vocal section , which was mostly edited out for the album release . Hendrix and Cox back Miles ' vocal sections with parallel funk @-@ style lines , before a guitar solo using Hendrix 's new combination of effects . Shapiro comments 
 At that point , it picks up into double @-@ time and the sounds of electronic equipment not yet invented stream out of Jimi 's Stratocaster at breakneck speed . Coming after the kind of stuff Jimi could play in his sleep , the contrast is even more startling . The passage is quite short , but it has an eerie abstract quality . 
 " Changes " is another song written and sung by Miles and it benefits from more development and structure . Although it includes a prominent guitar line by Hendrix , it is Miles ' showcase piece . The song was performed during each show with little variation , except for Miles ' vocal improvisations . With these sections edited out , " Changes " is a relatively concise , soul music radio @-@ friendly number . When Miles re @-@ recorded it as " Them Changes " , it became a Billboard top 40 Best Selling Soul Singles as well as appearing in the magazine 's Hot 100 pop chart . 
 The two Hendrix compositions , " Power to Love " and " Message to Love " , are also more structured and rehearsed songs . They represent Hendrix 's new blending of funk , R & B , and rock together with a new lyrical approach . According to Shapiro , the lyrics reflect " a Jimi Hendrix who felt an increasing need to impart his compassionate vision of human potentiality [ and a ] move away from cynicism and bitterness " . Cox and Miles provide strong instrumental backing , where the rhythm is " locked @-@ in " or " deep in the pocket " , a common feature of funk and R & B. ( Nearly all of Hendrix 's music , and contemporary rock in general , uses common or 4 
 4 time ; " Manic Depression " ( 3 
 4 or 9 
 8 ) , " Dolly Dagger " ( 3 
 4 ) , " Stepping Stone " ( 8 
 8 ) , and the slow blues " " Red House " and " Belly Button Window " ( both 12 
 8 ) are among the exceptions . ) Jazz innovator Miles Davis felt that Cox and Miles were the best rhythm section for Hendrix and freed him from the constraints of the Experience . Guitarist Jean @-@ Paul <unk> , who played with Davis , commented in an interview : 
 Band of Gypsys was the ultimate in terms of what he [ Hendrix ] was doing . I thought the rhythm section was perfect for him . Billy Cox and Buddy Miles — those were two cats who could hit . I mean , it was so solid that when Hendrix went into his psychedelic stuff it was like a perfect contrast . You could see how far he was traveling because the ground was so clear ! 
 " Machine Gun " is another song that Hendrix had spent more time developing . By the Fillmore East concerts , it became an extended guitar improvisational piece , which " would completely change the perception of Hendrix 's capabilities as an improviser and musician " , according to Shadwick . Although based on a " minor drone @-@ blues " in the line of " Voodoo Child ( Slight Return ) " , Hendrix 's performance has been compared to jazz saxophonist John Coltrane 's approach to improvisation . Miles Davis , with whom Coltrane had recorded several albums in the 1950s , including the influential Kind of Blue , noted the connection : " Jimi liked what I had done with Kind of Blue and some other stuff and wanted to add more jazz elements to what he was doing . He liked the way Coltrane played with all those sheets of sound , and played his guitar in a similar way " . From Hendrix 's dedication of the song " to all the soldiers that are fighting in Chicago and Milwaukee and New York , oh yes , and all the soldiers fighting in Vietnam " , " Machine Gun " is as much about the late 1960s American race riots as the war in Vietnam . Guitarist Vernon Reid describes it as " like a movie about war without the visuals . It had everything — the lyrics , the humanism of it , the drama of it , the violence of it , the eeriness of it , [ and ] the unpredictability of it " . In many commentaries about Band of Gypsys , " Machine Gun " is singled out as the highlight of the album . Both McDermott and Shadwick call it one of Hendrix 's greatest achievements , which sets a standard that the rest of the album does not approach . 
 = = Recording = = 
 The material for Band of Gypsys was recorded over two consecutive nights at the Fillmore East . The group was scheduled for two shows on December 31 , 1969 , and another two on January 1 , 1970 ( because the shows went beyond midnight , the actual dates were December 31 – January 1 and January 1 – 2 ; for ease of reference , these are referred as the first show , second show , third show , and fourth show ) . The recording was supervised by Wally Heider , an experienced sound engineer who ran a recording studio and had made several live recordings . He had already recorded Hendrix live several times , including at the Monterey Pop Festival in 1967 and Woodstock in 1969 . Portable recording equipment was set up at the venue and the trio performed for a soundcheck in the afternoon . 
 Concert promoter Bill Graham billed the performances as " Jimi Hendrix : A Band of Gypsys " , but Hendrix 's new direction since the breakup of the Experience six months earlier had not been publicized . With a new lineup and material , Cox observed , " We didn 't know what to expect from the audience and the audience didn 't know what to expect from us " . A total of 47 songs were performed and recorded ; since most were played in more than one show , the number of different songs was 24 . The group did not prepare set lists or otherwise plan for their performances . McDermott notes , " Hendrix called out tunes to Miles and Cox and would often make time and tempo changes on the fly , alerting his partners with a simple head nod or raising of his guitar neck " . Miles also saw improvisation as a key element of their approach . According to Shadwick , the first show was essentially a warm @-@ up set and they performed eleven new songs ( it was the only show not to include any familiar Experience numbers ) . There were some microphone problems during the first two songs , which re @-@ appeared for the first two songs of the second show as well . Hendrix also experienced tuning problems with his guitar . His heavy use of the Stratocaster 's vibrato arm or " whammy bar " stressed the strings and led to pitch problems , which he was often forced to correct mid @-@ song . For the second show , in addition to new songs , Hendrix added " Stone Free " , " Foxy Lady " , " Voodoo Child ( Slight Return ) " , and " Purple Haze " to ring in the new decade . 
 On the second night , the group performed a mix of new and older material for the third and fourth shows . The contrast between the first and second nights has been noted by Hendrix biographers . Based on interviews with Cox and Miles , concert reviews , and film footage , McDermott and Shadwick conclude that Hendrix was less animated during the third and fourth shows , when he stood mostly in place until the final encores , seemingly concentrating on recording . In frequent interviews and in his autobiography , Bill Graham claimed that his criticism of Hendrix for playing to the audience ( although he seems to confuse which shows ) spurred him on . However , according to McDermott , Hendrix was already determined to deliver suitable performances to finally settle the bitter legal dispute with Ed Chalpin . All of the six songs that were chosen for Band of Gypsys were recorded during these two shows . When it was all done , Hendrix cut loose for his last encores with " Wild Thing " , " Hey Joe " , and " Purple Haze " . 
 = = Production = = 
 On January 12 , 1970 , Hendrix and recording engineer Eddie Kramer began the task of deciding which songs to include on the new album ( Cox and Miles did not participate in the process ) . The review and subsequent audio mixing was undertaken at Juggy Sound Studios in New York , where the trio started rehearsing in October . Excluding Experience and cover songs , there were multiple versions of thirteen new , previously unreleased songs from which to choose . Among those that received Kramer 's and Hendrix 's attention were " Machine Gun " , " Earth Blues " , " Burning Desire " , " Ezy Ryder " , " Who Knows " , and " Hear My Train A Comin ' " . Early on , Hendrix chose to include the Buddy Miles songs " Changes " and " We Gotta Live Together " . He also decided on " Power to Love " and " Message to Love " , studio versions of which had been considered for release as a single ( these studio recordings were later included on South Saturn Delta and West Coast Seattle Boy : The Jimi Hendrix Anthology ) . Songs with recording problems and those Hendrix wished to complete as studio recordings were withheld ( studio versions of " Izabella " and " Stepping Stone " were released as a single in March ; " Ezy Ryder " and " Earth Blues " were included on his first posthumous albums ) . 
 By January 21 , Hendrix and Kramer narrowed the list to " Message to Love " ( fourth show ) , " Hear My Train A Comin ' " ( first show ) , " Power to Love " ( third and fourth shows ) , and all four recordings of " Machine Gun " . Hendrix and Kramer began preparing mixes of the multitrack recordings . During the process , Kramer recalled 
 Mixing the Band of Gypsys album was a challenge . It was like Jimi was really almost pressured into doing it . Hearing Buddy 's [ vamping or musical improvisation ] seemed to bother him . We were sitting there and he was like . ' Oh man , I wish Buddy would shut the fuck up . ' He would listen to him and say , ' Can we cut some of those parts out ? ' I ended up editing a lot of Buddy 's quote unquote ' jamming ' , where he would go off and sing a lot . 
 One of Miles ' songs , " We Gotta Live Together " was pared down from fifteen to a little over five minutes and another , " Changes " , also benefited from trimming , because , as Murray puts it , " a little of [ Miles ' vamping ] goes an extremely long way " . This editing also provided some lighter moments . One of Jeffery 's assistants recalled , " Hendrix played me a tape and prefaced it by saying it represented the new direction in his music . He had made up this long loop of tape of the portions edited out of ' We Gotta Live Together ' . I flipped out and he started cracking up " . After several more editing and mixing sessions at Juggy Sound , the material for the album was readied on February 17 . The following day , Hendrix and Kramer met with Bob Ludwig , who supervised the final mastering . Hendrix chose to work with his own mastering engineer , because he had been dissatisfied with his record company 's results for Electric Ladyland . The task was completed on February 19 , 1970 , and the final track listing included two songs from the third show and four from the fourth and last show . 
 According to Shadwick , " The process of choosing and mixing the live album was not a pleasant one : Hendrix only <unk> his legal obligation to PPX / Capitol under duress and with the greatest reluctance " . McDermott questions why some superior tracks that recorded were not used instead . Kramer sees it as a compromise : 
 I don 't know that Jimi felt that these concerts were his best performances , but there were parts of them that he was really happy with . Certainly , ' Machine Gun ' and tracks like ' Message to Love ' sounded pretty good . At the time he didn 't want to include new songs that he wanted to finish in Electric Lady [ Hendrix 's new custom @-@ built recording studio ] . Jimi was kind of resigned to the fact that here we are , we have to mix this , we got to give it to Capitol , it wasn 't a Warner 's record [ his official record company ] , let 's do the best we can with it . 
 Early on , Billy Cox believed that the primary goal was to resolve the matter with Chalpin . Later , he commented , " Overall , the feeling was , ' What the heck , the album doesn 't belong to us anyway . Let 's just move on and forget it ' " . Already past the 1969 deadline , Hendrix summed it up : 
 I wasn 't too satisfied with the album . If it had been up to me , I never would have put it out . From a musician 's point of view , it was not a good recording and I was out of tune on a few things ... not enough preparation went into it and it came out a bit ' grizzly ' . The thing was , we owed the record company an album and they were pushing us , so here it is . 
 = = Release = = 
 On February 25 , 1970 , Michael Jeffery delivered the master tapes for Band of Gypsys to Capitol Records executives in Los Angeles . Capitol rush released the album one month later on March 25 , 1970 , and it entered Billboard magazine 's Top 200 albums chart at number eighteen . It reached number five during a stay of 61 weeks on the chart and , at the time of his death , was Hendrix 's best selling album in the US since Are You Experienced . Due to legal wrangling by Ed Chalpin and PPX , the album was not released in the UK for nearly two more months . When Track Records issued it on June 12 , 1970 , it quickly entered the British charts , where it remained for 30 weeks and reached number six . 
 For the album cover , Capitol Records used a grainy photograph of Hendrix taken during the Fillmore East shows illuminated by the multi @-@ colored liquid light show projected by the Joshua Light Show . However , Track used album cover art which proved controversial , as they had done with <unk> Ladyland . It depicted unflattering puppets or dolls that resembled Hendrix , Brian Jones , Bob Dylan , and John Peel huddled next to a drab , corrugated backdrop . The significance of posing the three with Hendrix was not evident as they had no known association with the Band of Gypsys nor the group 's material . Hendrix was an admirer of Dylan and recorded some of his songs ; Jones , who died the year before , had participated in a recording session for Hendrix 's " All Along the Watchtower " ( a Dylan composition ) ; and Peel hosted BBC 's Top Gear radio show when Hendrix performed there in 1967 . Jeffrey remarked , " If ever there is an award for the worst taste album cover it must go to this " . Responding to public pressure , Track later replaced it with a photograph of Hendrix performing at the August 1970 Isle of Wight Festival . 
 By the time of the album 's release , the trio had already broken up . Their first show after the Fillmore East engagement was at the Madison Square Garden on January 28 , 1970 . There they struggled through " Who Knows " and " Earth Blues " before leaving the stage . Jeffery , who reportedly was never happy with the lineup , fired Buddy Miles on the spot . Gerry Stickells , Hendrix 's tour manager , points to " Jimi 's own lack of commitment to the Band of Gypsys concept as its fatal flaw " . Two songs , " Stepping Stone " and " Izabella " , that the trio had recorded , were issued as a single by Reprise Records two weeks after Capitol released Band of Gypsys . Hendrix was dissatisfied with the mix and it was quickly withdrawn without ever appearing in the charts . Three other songs that were recorded with Cox and Miles were later used for early posthumous Hendrix albums , including The Cry of Love and Rainbow Bridge . Additional studio recordings by the trio in various stages of development were released on South Saturn Delta , The Jimi Hendrix Experience box set , Burning Desire , West Coast Seattle Boy , and People , Hell and Angels . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Band of Gypsys has often been viewed as the least important album that Hendrix released when he was alive . Critics have generally found it less powerful than his performance with the Experience , whom they felt Hendrix had a better rapport with live . In a contemporary review for Rolling Stone , music journalist Gary von <unk> said that the album is hampered by poorly recorded vocals and Miles ' unpleasant drumming , and instead viewed it as a showcase for Hendrix 's virtuosic guitar playing : " With just bass and drum support he is able to <unk> and transfix on the strength of his guitar @-@ work alone . " The magazine 's David Wild was more enthusiastic in a retrospective review and felt that songs such as " Message of Love " and " Machine Gun " still sound powerful in spite of the unclear recording quality . 
 According to Sean Westergaard of AllMusic , Band of Gypsys is one of the best live albums of all time and an important recording for Hendrix , who played with a remarkable degree of focus and precision on what were " perhaps his finest [ live ] performances . " Sputnikmusic 's Hernan M. Campbell believed that it departed from his more psychedelic recordings with the Jimi Hendrix Experience , but still retained their intensity , particular on " Machine Gun " , which Campbell called one of Hendrix 's most captivating performances . On the other hand , Robert Christgau felt that the " overrated " album is decent by live rock standards , but unexceptional in Hendrix 's discography . Christgau also believed that Hendrix is limited by the straighter , simpler rhythm section , but added that " Who Knows " and " Machine Gun " " are as powerful if not complex as anything he 's ever put on record " . He stated that Hendrix is more reliant on wah @-@ wah guitar lines for the second half of the album , except for the " rapid fire " " Message to Love " . 
 = = Influence = = 
 Writer Rickey Vincent describes Band of Gypsys as " a never @-@ heard @-@ before <unk> of punishing guitar riffs over crisp rhythm and blues grooves ... The funk @-@ rock sound would change the face of black music , setting a template for the spectacular glam @-@ funk of the 1970s " . Music writer Corey Washington adds , " the Band of Gypsys pioneered a unique style of funk that placed the guitar in the mix right along with the bass ... [ they ] took funk to the next level because of their rock background " . Murray sees their influence in the early 1970s radio hits " Freddie 's Dead " by Curtis Mayfield and " That Lady " by the Isley Brothers . ( Hendrix was influenced by Mayfield early in his career and was a member of the Isley Brothers ' touring band before the Experience ) . George Clinton and Parliament @-@ Funkadelic , who defined funk for the 1970s , were also influenced . P @-@ Funk 's " Maggot Brain " , a ten @-@ minute guitar opus by Eddie Hazel , draws on " Machine Gun " and bassist Bootsy Collins identified Hendrix as a chief innovator in the liner notes to his What 's Bootsy Doin ' ? album . Later funk @-@ influenced artists Larry Blackmon ( singer for Cameo ) and Nile Rodgers ( guitarist for Chic and record producer ) also cite the album 's importance and influence . 
 In addition to funk rock , Murray sees the Band of Gypsys as " tread [ ing ] an intriguing path along the common border between hard funk and heavy metal ; less psychedelic soul than black rock " . Vernon Reid ( guitarist for Living Colour ) and Ice @-@ T ( singer for Body Count ) have commented on the Band of Gypsys as an early influence . During interviews in the 1999 documentary Band of Gypsys : Live at the Fillmore East , Reid , <unk> Turner , Slash , and Lenny Kravitz discuss " the inspiration and continuing influence that Band of Gypsys has provided " . 
 During the Band of Gypsys rehearsals in November 1969 , Hendrix and Miles recorded the backing track for " <unk> Du Fontaine " , with Lightnin ' Rod ( later known as Jalal Mansur <unk> ) of the Last Poets . Although it was not released until 1984 , McDermott cited it as " a pristine example of Hendrix 's embrace of hip @-@ hop during that music form 's infancy " . Writer Gene Santoro describes it as " foreshadow [ ing ] the rap @-@ meets @-@ metal crossover of later artists like Run @-@ DMC " . In 1990 , the alternative hip hop group Digital Underground extensively sampled " Who Knows " , the opening song from Band of Gypsys , for " The Way We Swing " on the Sex Packets album . McDermott concludes that it would be difficult " to accurately measure the lasting impact Band of Gypsys has made on rock , funk , R & B , and Hip @-@ Hop " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Jimi Hendrix – electric guitar , vocals 
 Billy Cox – bass guitar , vocals 
 Buddy Miles – drums , vocals 
 Production personnel 
 Jimi Hendrix – producer , liner notes 
 Wally Heider – live recording engineer 
 Eddie Kramer – studio mixing engineer 
 Bob Ludwig – mastering engineer 
 Victor Kahn – album cover designer 
 Jan Blom – photographer 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 In the US , the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) first certified Band of Gypsys as a " Gold Record " , signifying sales in excess of 500 @,@ 000 copies , on June 3 , 1970 , less than two months after its release . On February 5 , 1991 , it achieved " Platinum Record " status ( more than one million copies sold ) . After Capitol Records re @-@ released the album on CD in 1997 , it was given a " Double Platinum " award on January 16 , 1998 , for sales over two million . Additionally , the 1999 Live at the Fillmore documentary DVD has received a platinum award . 
 = = Release history = = 
 Band of Gypsys was re @-@ released on compact disc in 1991 by Polydor Records in Europe and Japan . In addition to the original tracks , it included three extra songs recorded during the Fillmore East shows . These had been originally released in the US by Capitol Records in 1986 on the Band of Gypsys 2 album ( despite the title , only half of the album 's songs were recorded with Cox and Miles ) . In 1997 , when Band of Gypsys was re @-@ released on CD in the US , Capitol only included the original six tracks . 
 After Experience Hendrix , a family @-@ run company , assumed control of his recording legacy , more material from the Fillmore shows has been issued . " Hear My Train " and " Stop " are included on the 1999 double CD Live at the Fillmore East , along with several songs from each of the four shows . " Foxy Lady " was added to one version of the 2013 " Somewhere " single . An additional three songs from the second Fillmore show are included on West Coast Seattle Boy . The trio was filmed performing two of the songs that are included on the original album . Black and white footage for part of " Who Knows " was filmed by Woody <unk> from the hall , while Jan Blom shot " Machine Gun " from the balcony . It was later included on the 1999 DVD documentary Band of Gypsys : Live at the Fillmore East . 
 = Giraffe = 
 The giraffe ( Giraffa camelopardalis ) is an African even @-@ toed ungulate mammal , the tallest living terrestrial animal and the largest ruminant . Its species name refers to its camel @-@ like shape and its leopard @-@ like colouring . Its chief distinguishing characteristics are its extremely long neck and legs , its horn @-@ like ossicones , and its distinctive coat patterns . It is classified under the family Giraffidae , along with its closest extant relative , the okapi . The nine subspecies are distinguished by their coat patterns . 
 The giraffe 's scattered range extends from Chad in the north to South Africa in the south , and from Niger in the west to Somalia in the east . Giraffes usually inhabit savannahs , grasslands , and open woodlands . Their primary food source is acacia leaves , which they browse at heights most other herbivores cannot reach . Giraffes are preyed on by lions ; their young are also targeted by leopards , spotted hyenas , and African wild dogs . Giraffe are gregarious and may gather in large aggregations . Males establish social hierarchies through " necking " , which are combat bouts where the neck is used as a weapon . Dominant males gain mating access to females , which bear the sole responsibility for raising the young . 
 The giraffe has intrigued various cultures , both ancient and modern , for its peculiar appearance , and has often been featured in paintings , books , and cartoons . It is classified by the International Union for Conservation of Nature as Least Concern , but has been extirpated from many parts of its former range , and three subspecies are classified as Endangered . Nevertheless , giraffes are still found in numerous national parks and game reserves . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The name " giraffe " has its earliest known origins in the Arabic word <unk> ( <unk> ) , perhaps borrowed from an the animal 's Somali name <unk> . The Arab name is translated as " fast @-@ walker " . There were several Middle English spellings , such as <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . The Italian form <unk> arose in the 1590s . The modern English form developed around 1600 from the French <unk> . 
 The species name camelopardalis is from Latin . " <unk> " is an archaic English name for the giraffe deriving from the Ancient Greek for camel and leopard , animals which the giraffe was thought to resemble . 
 = = Taxonomy and evolution = = 
 The giraffe belongs to the suborder Ruminantia . Many ruminants have been described from the mid @-@ Eocene in Central Asia , Southeast Asia , and North America . The ecological conditions during this period may have facilitated their rapid dispersal . The giraffe is one of only two living species of the family Giraffidae , the other being the okapi . The family was once much more extensive , with over 10 fossil genera described . Their closest known relatives are the extinct deer @-@ like <unk> . They , together with the family <unk> ( whose only extant species is the pronghorn ) , belong to the superfamily <unk> . These animals may have evolved from the extinct family <unk> which might also have been the ancestor of deer . 
 The elongation of the neck appears to have started early in the giraffe lineage . Comparisons between giraffes and their ancient relatives suggest that vertebrae close to the skull lengthened earlier , followed by the elongation of vertebrae further down . One early giraffid ancestor was Canthumeryx which has been dated variously to have lived 25 – 20 million years ago ( mya ) , 17 – 15 mya or 18 – 14 @.@ 3 mya and whose deposits have been found in Libya . This animal was medium @-@ sized , slender and antelope @-@ like . Giraffokeryx appeared 15 mya in the Indian subcontinent and resembled either an okapi or a small giraffe , and had a more elongated neck and similar ossicones . Giraffokeryx may have shared a clade with more massively built giraffids like <unk> and <unk> . 
 <unk> like Palaeotragus , <unk> and Samotherium appeared 14 mya and lived throughout Africa and Eurasia . These animals had bare ossicones and small cranial sinuses and were more elongated with broader skulls . <unk> resembled the okapi and may been its ancestor . Others find that the okapi linage diverged earlier , before Giraffokeryx . Samotherium was a particularly important transitional fossil in the giraffe linage as its cervical vertebrae was intermediate in length and structure between a modern giraffe and an okapi , and was oriented more vertically than the latter . Bohlinia , which first appeared in southeastern Europe and lived 9 – 7 mya was likely a direct ancestor of the giraffe . Bohlinia closely resembled modern giraffes , having a long neck and legs and similar ossicones and dentition . 
 Bohlinia entered China and northern India in response to climate change . From here , the genus Giraffa evolved and , around 7 mya , entered Africa . Further climate changes caused the extinction of the Asian giraffes , while the African ones survived and radiated into several new species . G. camelopardalis arose around 1 mya in eastern Africa during the Pleistocene . Some biologists suggest the modern giraffe descended from G. <unk> ; others find G. gracilis a more likely candidate . The former was larger and more heavily built while the latter was smaller and more lightly built . The main driver for the evolution of the giraffes is believed to have been the changes from extensive forests to more open habitats , which began 8 mya . Some researchers have hypothesised that this new habitat coupled with a different diet , including acacia species , may have exposed giraffe ancestors to toxins that caused higher mutation rates and a higher rate of evolution . The coat patterns of modern giraffes may also have coincided with these habitat changes . Asian giraffes are hypothesised to have had more okapi @-@ like colourations . 
 The giraffe was one of the many species first described by Carl Linnaeus in 1758 . He gave it the binomial name Cervus camelopardalis . Morten Thrane Brünnich classified the genus Giraffa in 1772 . In the early 19th century , Jean @-@ Baptiste Lamarck believed the giraffe 's long neck was an " acquired characteristic " , developed as generations of ancestral giraffes strove to reach the leaves of tall trees . This theory was eventually rejected , and scientists now believe the giraffe 's neck arose through Darwinian natural selection — that ancestral giraffes with long necks thereby had a competitive advantage that better enabled them to reproduce and pass on their genes . 
 The giraffe genome is around 2 @.@ 9 billion base pairs in length compared to the 3 @.@ 3 billion base pairs of the okapi . 19 @.@ 4 % of proteins in giraffe and okapi genes are identical . The two species are equally distantly related to cattle , suggesting the giraffe 's unique characteristics are not because of a faster rate of evolution . The divergence of giraffe and okapi lineages dates to around 11 @.@ 5 mya . A small group of regulatory genes in the giraffe appear to be responsible for the animal 's stature and associated circulatory adaptations . 
 = = = Subspecies = = = 
 Up to nine subspecies of giraffe are recognised ( with population estimates as of 2010 ) : 
 A 2007 study on the genetics of six subspecies — the West African , Rothschild 's , reticulated , Masai , Angolan , and South African giraffe — suggests they may , in fact , be separate species . The study deduced from genetic drift in nuclear and mitochondrial DNA ( mtDNA ) that giraffes from these populations are reproductively isolated and rarely interbreed , though no natural obstacles block their mutual access . This includes adjacent populations of Rothschild 's , reticulated , and Masai giraffes . The Masai giraffe may also consist of a few species separated by the Rift Valley . 
 Reticulated and Masai giraffes have the highest mtDNA diversity , which is consistent with giraffes originating in eastern Africa . Populations further north are more closely related to the former , while those to the south are more related to the latter . Giraffes appear to select mates of the same coat type , which are imprinted on them as calves . The implications of these findings for the conservation of giraffes were summarised by David Brown , lead author of the study , who told BBC News : " <unk> all giraffes into one species obscures the reality that some kinds of giraffe are on the brink . Some of these populations number only a few hundred individuals and need immediate protection . " 
 The West African giraffe is more closely related to Rothschild 's and reticulated giraffes than to the Kordofan giraffe . Its ancestor may have migrated from eastern to northern Africa and then to its current range with the development of the Sahara Desert . At its largest , Lake Chad may have acted as a barrier between West African and Kordofan giraffes during the Holocene ( before 5000 BC ) . 
 = = Appearance and anatomy = = 
 Fully grown giraffes stand 4 @.@ 3 – 5 @.@ 7 m ( 14 @.@ 1 – 18 @.@ 7 ft ) tall , with males taller than females . The tallest recorded male was 5 @.@ 88 m ( 19 @.@ 3 ft ) and the tallest recorded female was 5 @.@ 17 m ( 17 @.@ 0 ft ) tall . The average weight is 1 @,@ 192 kg ( 2 @,@ 628 lb ) for an adult male and 828 kg ( 1 @,@ 825 lb ) for an adult female with maximum weights of 1 @,@ 930 kg ( 4 @,@ 250 lb ) and 1 @,@ 180 kg ( 2 @,@ 600 lb ) having been recorded for males and females , respectively . Despite its long neck and legs , the giraffe 's body is relatively short . Located at both sides of the head , the giraffe 's large , bulging eyes give it good all @-@ round vision from its great height . Giraffes see in colour and their senses of hearing and smell are also sharp . The animal can close its muscular nostrils to protect against sandstorms and ants . 
 The giraffe 's prehensile tongue is about 45 cm ( 18 in ) long . It is purplish @-@ black in colour , perhaps to protect against sunburn , and is useful for grasping foliage , as well as for grooming and cleaning the animal 's nose . The upper lip of the giraffe is also prehensile and useful when foraging . The lips , tongue , and inside of the mouth are covered in papillae to protect against thorns . 
 The coat has dark blotches or patches ( which can be orange , chestnut , brown , or nearly black in colour ) separated by light hair ( usually white or cream in colour ) . Male giraffes become darker as they age . The coat pattern serves as camouflage , allowing it to blend in the light and shade patterns of savannah woodlands . While adult giraffes standing among trees and bushes are hard to see at even a few metres ' distance , when moving about to gain the best view of an approaching predator , they rely on their size and ability to defend themselves rather than on camouflage , which appears to be more important for calves . The skin underneath the dark areas may serve as windows for thermoregulation , being sites for complex blood vessel systems and large sweat glands . Each individual giraffe has a unique coat pattern . 
 The skin of a giraffe is mostly gray . Its thickness allows the animal to run through thorn bush without being punctured . The fur may serve as a chemical defence , as its parasite repellents give the animal a characteristic scent . At least 11 main aromatic chemicals are in the fur , although indole and 3 @-@ <unk> are responsible for most of the smell . Because the males have a stronger odor than the females , the odor may also have sexual function . Along the animal 's neck is a mane made of short , erect hairs . The one @-@ metre ( 3 @.@ 3 @-@ ft ) tail ends in a long , dark tuft of hair and is used as a defense against insects . 
 = = = Skull and ossicones = = = 
 Both sexes have prominent horn @-@ like structures called ossicones , which are formed from ossified cartilage , covered in skin and fused to the skull at the parietal bones . Being vascularized , the ossicones may have a role in thermoregulation , and are also used in combat between males . Appearance is a reliable guide to the sex or age of a giraffe : the ossicones of females and young are thin and display tufts of hair on top , whereas those of adult males end in knobs and tend to be bald on top . Also , a median lump , which is more prominent in males , emerges at the front of the skull . Males develop calcium deposits that form bumps on their skulls as they age . A giraffe 's skull is lightened by multiple sinuses . However , as males age , their skulls become heavier and more club @-@ like , helping them become more dominant in combat . The upper jaw has a grooved palate and lacks front teeth . The giraffe 's molars have a rough surface . 
 = = = Legs , locomotion and posture = = = 
 The front and back legs of a giraffe are about the same length . The radius and ulna of the front legs are articulated by the carpus , which , while structurally equivalent to the human wrist , functions as a knee . It appears that a suspensory ligament allows the lanky legs to support the animal 's great weight . The foot of the giraffe reaches a diametre of 30 cm ( 12 in ) , and the hoof is 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) high in males and 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) in females . The rear of each hoof is low and the fetlock is close to the ground , allowing the foot to provide additional support to the animal 's weight . Giraffes lack dewclaws and interdigital glands . The giraffe 's pelvis , though relatively short , has an ilium that is outspread at the upper ends . 
 A giraffe has only two gaits : walking and galloping . Walking is done by moving the legs on one side of the body at the same time , then doing the same on the other side . When galloping , the hind legs move around the front legs before the latter move forward , and the tail will curl up . The animal relies on the forward and backward motions of its head and neck to maintain balance and the counter momentum while galloping . The giraffe can reach a sprint speed of up to 60 km / h ( 37 mph ) , and can sustain 50 km / h ( 31 mph ) for several kilometres . 
 A giraffe rests by lying with its body on top of its folded legs . To lie down , the animal kneels on its front legs and then lowers the rest of its body . To get back up , it first gets on its knees and spreads its hind legs to raise its hindquarters . It then straightens its front legs . With each step , the animal swings its head . In captivity , the giraffe sleeps intermittently around 4 @.@ 6 hours per day , mostly at night . It usually sleeps lying down , however , standing sleeps have been recorded , particularly in older individuals . Intermittent short " deep sleep " phases while lying are characterised by the giraffe bending its neck backwards and resting its head on the hip or thigh , a position believed to indicate paradoxical sleep . If the giraffe wants to bend down to drink , it either spreads its front legs or bends its knees . Giraffes would probably not be competent swimmers as their long legs would be highly cumbersome in the water , although they could possibly float . When swimming , the thorax would be weighed down by the front legs , making it difficult for the animal to move its neck and legs in harmony or keep its head above the surface . 
 = = = Neck = = = 
 The giraffe has an extremely elongated neck , which can be up to 2 – 2 @.@ 4 m ( 6 @.@ 6 – 7 @.@ 9 ft ) in length , accounting for much of the animal 's vertical height . The long neck results from a disproportionate lengthening of the cervical vertebrae , not from the addition of more vertebrae . Each cervical vertebra is over 28 cm ( 11 in ) long . They comprise 52 – 54 per cent of the length of the giraffe 's vertebral column , compared with the 27 – 33 percent typical of similar large ungulates , including the giraffe ’ s closest living relative , the okapi . This elongation largely takes place after birth , as giraffe mothers would have a difficult time giving birth to young with the same neck proportions as adults . The giraffe 's head and neck are held up by large muscles and a strengthened nuchal ligament , which are anchored by long dorsal spines on the anterior thoracic vertebrae , giving the animal a hump . 
 The giraffe 's neck vertebrae have ball and socket joints . In particular , the atlas – axis joint ( C1 and C2 ) allows the animal to tilt its head vertically and reach more branches with the tongue . The point of articulation between the cervical and thoracic vertebrae of giraffes is shifted to lie between the first and second thoracic vertebrae ( T1 and T2 ) , unlike most other ruminants where the articulation is between the seventh cervical vertebra ( C7 ) and T1 . This allows C7 to contribute directly to increased neck length and has given rise to the suggestion that T1 is actually C8 , and that giraffes have added an extra cervical vertebra . However , this proposition is not generally accepted , as T1 has other morphological features , such as an articulating rib , deemed diagnostic of thoracic vertebrae , and because exceptions to the mammalian limit of seven cervical vertebrae are generally characterised by increased neurological anomalies and maladies . 
 There are several hypotheses regarding the evolutionary origin and maintenance of elongation in giraffe necks . The " competing browsers hypothesis " was originally suggested by Charles Darwin and challenged only recently . It suggests that competitive pressure from smaller browsers , such as kudu , steenbok and impala , encouraged the elongation of the neck , as it enabled giraffes to reach food that competitors could not . This advantage is real , as giraffes can and do feed up to 4 @.@ 5 m ( 15 ft ) high , while even quite large competitors , such as kudu , can feed up to only about 2 m ( 6 ft 7 in ) high . There is also research suggesting that browsing competition is intense at lower levels , and giraffes feed more efficiently ( gaining more leaf biomass with each mouthful ) high in the canopy . However , scientists disagree about just how much time giraffes spend feeding at levels beyond the reach of other browsers , and a 2010 study found that adult giraffes with longer necks actually suffered higher mortality rates under drought conditions than their shorter @-@ necked counterparts . This study suggests that maintaining a longer neck requires more nutrients , which puts longer @-@ necked giraffes at risk during a food shortage . 
 Another theory , the sexual selection hypothesis , proposes that the long necks evolved as a secondary sexual characteristic , giving males an advantage in " necking " contests ( see below ) to establish dominance and obtain access to sexually receptive females . In support of this theory , necks are longer and heavier for males than females of the same age , and the former do not employ other forms of combat . However , one objection is that it fails to explain why female giraffes also have long necks . It has also been proposed that the neck serves to give the animal greater vigilance . 
 = = = Internal systems = = = 
 In mammals , the left recurrent laryngeal nerve is longer than the right ; in the giraffe it is over 30 cm ( 12 in ) longer . These nerves are longer in the giraffe than in any other living animal ; the left nerve is over 2 m ( 6 ft 7 in ) long . Each nerve cell in this path begins in the brainstem and passes down the neck along the vagus nerve , then branches off into the recurrent laryngeal nerve which passes back up the neck to the larynx . Thus , these nerve cells have a length of nearly 5 m ( 16 ft ) in the largest giraffes . The structure of a giraffe 's brain resembles that of domestic cattle . It is kept cool by evaporative heat loss in the nasal passages . The shape of the skeleton gives the giraffe a small lung volume relative to its mass . Its long neck gives it a large amount of dead space , in spite of its narrow windpipe . These factors increase the resistance to airflow . Nevertheless , the animal can still supply enough oxygen to its tissues and it can increase its respiratory rate and oxygen diffusion when running . 
 The circulatory system of the giraffe has several adaptations for its great height . Its heart , which can weigh more than 11 kg ( 25 lb ) and measures about 60 cm ( 2 ft ) long , must generate approximately double the blood pressure required for a human to maintain blood flow to the brain . As such , the wall of the heart can be as thick as 7 @.@ 5 cm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) . Giraffes have unusually high heart rates for their size , at 150 beats per minute . When the animal lowers its head the blood rushes down fairly unopposed and a rete mirabile in the upper neck prevents excess blood flow to the brain . When it raises again , the blood vessels constrict and direct the blood into the brain so the animal doesn 't faint . The jugular veins contain several ( most commonly seven ) valves to prevent blood flowing back into the head from the inferior vena cava and right atrium while the head is lowered . Conversely , the blood vessels in the lower legs are under great pressure because of the weight of fluid pressing down on them . To solve this problem , the skin of the lower legs is thick and tight ; preventing too much blood from pouring into them . 
 Giraffes have oesophageal muscles that are unusually strong to allow regurgitation of food from the stomach up the neck and into the mouth for rumination . They have four chambered stomachs , as in all ruminants , and the first chamber has adapted to their specialised diet . The intestines of an adult giraffe measure more than 70 m ( 230 ft ) in length and have a relatively small ratio of small to large intestine . The liver of the giraffe is small and compact . A gallbladder is generally present during fetal life , but it may disappear before birth . 
 = = Behaviour and ecology = = 
 = = = Habitat and feeding = = = 
 Giraffes usually inhabit savannahs , grasslands and open woodlands . They prefer <unk> , Commiphora , Combretum and open Terminalia woodlands over denser environments like Brachystegia woodlands . The Angolan giraffe can be found in desert environments . Giraffes browse on the twigs of trees , preferring trees of the subfamily <unk> and the genera Commiphora and Terminalia , which are important sources of calcium and protein to sustain the giraffe 's growth rate . They also feed on shrubs , grass and fruit . A giraffe eats around 34 kg ( 75 lb ) of foliage daily . When stressed , giraffes may chew the bark off branches . Although herbivorous , the giraffe has been known to visit carcasses and lick dried meat off bones . 
 During the wet season , food is abundant and giraffes are more spread out , while during the dry season , they gather around the remaining evergreen trees and bushes . Mothers tend to feed in open areas , presumably to make it easier to detect predators , although this may reduce their feeding efficiency . As a ruminant , the giraffe first chews its food , then swallows it for processing and then visibly passes the half @-@ digested cud up the neck and back into the mouth to chew again . It is common for a giraffe to salivate while feeding . The giraffe requires less food than many other herbivores because the foliage it eats has more concentrated nutrients and it has a more efficient digestive system . The animal 's faeces come in the form of small pellets . When it has access to water , a giraffe drinks at intervals no longer than three days . 
 Giraffes have a great effect on the trees that they feed on , delaying the growth of young trees for some years and giving " <unk> " to trees that are too tall . Feeding is at its highest during the first and last hours of daytime . Between these hours , giraffes mostly stand and ruminate . Rumination is the dominant activity during the night , when it is mostly done lying down . 
 = = = Social life = = = 
 Giraffes are usually found in groups . Traditionally , the composition of these groups has been described as open and ever @-@ changing . Giraffes were thought to have few social bonds and for research purposes , a " group " has been defined as " a collection of individuals that are less than a kilometre apart and moving in the same general direction . " More recent studies have found that giraffes do have long @-@ term social associations and may form groups or pairs based on kinship , sex or other factors . These groups may regularly associate with one another in larger communities or sub @-@ communities within a fission – fusion society . The number of giraffes in a group can range up to 44 individuals . 
 Giraffe groups tend to be sex @-@ segregated although mixed @-@ sex groups made of adult females and young males are known to occur . <unk> stable giraffe groups are those made of mothers and their young , which can last weeks or months . Social cohesion in these groups is maintained by the bonds formed between calves . Female association appears to be based on space @-@ use and individuals may be matrilineally related . Young males also form groups and will engage in <unk> . However , as they get older males become more solitary but may also associate in pairs or with female groups . Giraffes are not territorial , but they have home ranges . Male giraffes occasionally wander far from areas that they normally frequent . 
 Although generally quiet and non @-@ vocal , giraffes have been heard to communicate using various sounds . During courtship , males emit loud coughs . Females call their young by bellowing . Calves will emit snorts , bleats , <unk> and mewing sounds . Giraffes also snore , hiss , moan , grunt and make flute @-@ like sounds , and possibly communicate over long distances using infrasound — though this is disputed . During nighttime , giraffes appear to hum to each other above the infrasound range for purposes which are unclear . 
 = = = Reproduction and parental care = = = 
 Reproduction in giraffes is broadly polygamous : a few older males mate with the fertile females . Male giraffes assess female fertility by tasting the female 's urine to detect oestrus , in a multi @-@ step process known as the flehmen response . Males prefer young adult females over juveniles and older adults . Once an oestrous female is detected , the male will attempt to court her . When courting , dominant males will keep subordinate ones at bay . During copulation , the male stands on his hind legs with his head held up and his front legs resting on the female 's sides . 
 Giraffe gestation lasts 400 – 460 days , after which a single calf is normally born , although twins occur on rare occasions . The mother gives birth standing up . The calf emerges head and front legs first , having broken through the fetal membranes , and falls to the ground , severing the umbilical cord . The mother then grooms the newborn and helps it stand up . A newborn giraffe is 1 @.@ 7 – 2 m ( 5 @.@ 6 – 6 @.@ 6 ft ) tall . Within a few hours of birth , the calf can run around and is almost indistinguishable from a one @-@ week @-@ old . However , for the first 1 – 3 weeks , it spends most of its time hiding ; its coat pattern providing camouflage . The ossicones , which have lain flat while it was in the womb , become erect within a few days . 
 Mothers with calves will gather in nursery herds , moving or browsing together . Mothers in such a group may sometimes leave their calves with one female while they forage and drink elsewhere . This is known as a " calving pool " . Adult males play almost no role in raising the young , although they appear to have friendly interactions . Calves are at risk of predation , and a mother giraffe will stand over her calf and kick at an approaching predator . Females watching calving pools will only alert their own young if they detect a disturbance , although the others will take notice and follow . The bond a mother shares with her calf varies , though it can last until her next calving . Likewise , calves may suckle for only a month or as long as a year . Females become sexually mature when they are four years old , while males become mature at four or five years . However , males must wait until they are at least seven years old to gain the opportunity to mate . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Male giraffes use their necks as weapons in combat , a behaviour known as " necking " . <unk> is used to establish dominance and males that win necking bouts have greater reproductive success . This behaviour occurs at low or high intensity . In low intensity necking , the combatants rub and lean against each other . The male that can hold itself more erect wins the bout . In high intensity necking , the combatants will spread their front legs and swing their necks at each other , attempting to land blows with their ossicones . The contestants will try to dodge each other 's blows and then get ready to counter . The power of a blow depends on the weight of the skull and the arc of the swing . A necking duel can last more than half an hour , depending on how well matched the combatants are . Although most fights do not lead to serious injury , there have been records of broken jaws , broken necks , and even deaths . 
 After a duel , it is common for two male giraffes to caress and court each other . Such interactions between males have been found to be more frequent than heterosexual coupling . In one study , up to 94 percent of observed mounting incidents took place between males . The proportion of same @-@ sex activities varied from 30 – 75 percent . Only one percent of same @-@ sex mounting incidents occurred between females . 
 = = = Mortality and health = = = 
 Giraffes have an unusually long lifespan compared to other ruminants , up to 25 years in the wild . Because of their size , eyesight and powerful kicks , adult giraffes are usually not subject to predation . However , they can fall prey to lions and are regular prey for them in Kruger National Park . Nile crocodiles can also be a threat to giraffes when they bend down to drink . Calves are much more vulnerable than adults , and are additionally preyed on by leopards , spotted hyenas and wild dogs . A quarter to a half of giraffe calves reach adulthood . 
 Some parasites feed on giraffes . They are often hosts for ticks , especially in the area around the genitals , which has thinner skin than other areas . Tick species that commonly feed on giraffes are those of genera Hyalomma , Amblyomma and Rhipicephalus . Giraffes may rely on red @-@ billed and yellow @-@ billed oxpeckers to clean them of ticks and alert them to danger . Giraffes host numerous species of internal parasite and are susceptible to various diseases . They were victims of the ( now eradicated ) viral illness rinderpest . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 Humans have interacted with giraffes for millennia . The San people of southern Africa have medicine dances named after some animals ; the giraffe dance is performed to treat head ailments . How the giraffe got its height has been the subject of various African folktales , including one from eastern Africa which explains that the giraffe grew tall from eating too many magic herbs . Giraffes were depicted in art throughout the African continent , including that of the <unk> , Egyptians and Meroë Nubians . The <unk> were responsible for a life @-@ size rock engraving of two giraffes that has been called the " world 's largest rock art petroglyph " . The Egyptians gave the giraffe its own hieroglyph , named ' sr ' in Old Egyptian and ' <unk> ' in later periods . They also kept giraffes as pets and shipped them around the Mediterranean . 
 The giraffe was also known to the Greeks and Romans , who believed that it was an unnatural hybrid of a camel and a leopard and called it camelopardalis . The giraffe was among the many animals collected and displayed by the Romans . The first one in Rome was brought in by Julius Caesar in 46 BC and exhibited to the public . With the fall of the Western Roman Empire , the housing of giraffes in Europe declined . During the Middle Ages , giraffes were known to Europeans through contact with the Arabs , who revered the giraffe for its peculiar appearance . 
 Individual captive giraffes were given celebrity status throughout history . In 1414 , a giraffe was shipped from Malindi to Bengal . It was then taken to China by explorer Zheng He and placed in a Ming dynasty zoo . The animal was a source of fascination for the Chinese people , who associated it with the mythical <unk> . The Medici giraffe was a giraffe presented to Lorenzo de ' Medici in 1486 . It caused a great stir on its arrival in Florence . Another famous giraffe was brought from Egypt to Paris in the early 19th century as a gift from Muhammad Ali of Egypt to Charles X of France . A sensation , the giraffe was the subject of numerous memorabilia or " <unk> " . 
 Giraffes continue to have a presence in modern culture . Salvador Dalí depicted them with <unk> manes in some of his surrealist paintings . Dali considered the giraffe to be a symbol of masculinity , and a flaming giraffe was meant to be a " masculine cosmic apocalyptic monster " . Several children 's books feature the giraffe , including David A. Ufer 's The Giraffe Who Was Afraid of Heights , Giles Andreae 's Giraffes Can 't Dance and Roald Dahl 's The Giraffe and the Pelly and Me . Giraffes have appeared in animated films , as minor characters in Disney 's The Lion King and Dumbo , and in more prominent roles in The Wild and in the Madagascar films . Sophie the Giraffe has been a popular <unk> since 1961 . Another famous fictional giraffe is the Toys " R " Us mascot Geoffrey the Giraffe . 
 The giraffe has also been used for some scientific experiments and discoveries . Scientists have looked at the properties of giraffe skin when developing suits for astronauts and fighter pilots because the people in these professions are in danger of passing out if blood rushes to their legs . Computer scientists have modeled the coat patterns of several subspecies using reaction – diffusion mechanisms . 
 The constellation of Camelopardalis , introduced in the seventeenth century , depicts a giraffe . The Tswana people of Botswana saw the constellation Crux as two giraffes – Acrux and Mimosa forming a male , and Gacrux and Delta Crucis forming the female . 
 = = = Exploitation and conservation status = = = 
 Giraffes were probably common targets for hunters throughout Africa . Different parts of their bodies were used for different purposes . Their meat was used for food . The tail hairs served as <unk> , bracelets , necklaces and thread . Shields , sandals and drums were made using the skin , and the strings of musical instruments were from the tendons . The smoke from burning giraffe skins was used by the medicine men of Buganda to treat nose bleeds . The <unk> people of Sudan consume the drink Umm <unk> ; which is created from the liver and marrow of giraffes . Umm <unk> often contains DMT and other psychoactive substances from plants the giraffes eat such as Acacia ; and is known to cause hallucinations of giraffes , believed to be the giraffes ' ghosts by the <unk> . In the 19th century , European explorers began to hunt them for sport . Habitat destruction has hurt the giraffe , too : in the Sahel , the need for firewood and grazing room for livestock has led to deforestation . Normally , giraffes can coexist with livestock , since they do not directly compete with them . 
 The giraffe species as a whole is assessed as Least Concern from a conservation perspective by the IUCN , as it is still numerous . However , giraffes have been extirpated from much of their historic range including Eritrea , Guinea , Mauritania and Senegal . They may also have disappeared from Angola , Mali , and Nigeria , but have been introduced to Rwanda and Swaziland . Two subspecies , the West African giraffe and the Rothschild giraffe , have been classified as Endangered , as wild populations of each of them number in the hundreds . In 1997 , Jonathan Kingdon suggested that the Nubian giraffe was the most threatened of all giraffes ; as of 2010 , it may number fewer than 250 , although this estimate is uncertain . Private game reserves have contributed to the preservation of giraffe populations in southern Africa . Giraffe Manor is a popular hotel in Nairobi that also serves as sanctuary for Rothschild 's giraffes . The giraffe is a protected species in most of its range . It is the national animal of Tanzania , and is protected by law . Unauthorised killing can result in imprisonment . In 1999 , it was estimated that over 140 @,@ 000 giraffes existed in the wild , but estimates in 2010 indicate that fewer than 80 @,@ 000 remain . 
 = Entoloma sinuatum = 
 Entoloma sinuatum ( commonly known as the livid entoloma , livid agaric , livid pinkgill , leaden entoloma , and lead poisoner ) is a poisonous mushroom found across Europe and North America . Some guidebooks refer to it by its older scientific names of Entoloma lividum or Rhodophyllus sinuatus . The largest mushroom of the genus of pink @-@ spored fungi known as Entoloma , it is also the type species . Appearing in late summer and autumn , fruit bodies are found in deciduous woodlands on clay or chalky soils , or nearby parklands , sometimes in the form of fairy rings . Solid in shape , they resemble members of the genus Tricholoma . The ivory to light grey @-@ brown cap is up to 20 cm ( 8 in ) across with a margin that is rolled inward . The sinuate gills are pale and often yellowish , becoming pink as the spores develop . The thick whitish stem has no ring . 
 When young , it may be mistaken for the edible St George 's mushroom ( <unk> <unk> ) or the miller ( <unk> <unk> ) . It has been responsible for many cases of mushroom poisoning in Europe . E. sinuatum causes primarily gastrointestinal problems that , though not generally life @-@ threatening , have been described as highly unpleasant . Delirium and depression are uncommon sequelae . It is generally not considered to be lethal , although one source has reported deaths from the consumption of this mushroom . 
 = = Name and relationships = = 
 The saga of this species ' name begins in 1788 with the publication of part 8 of Jean Baptiste Bulliard 's Herbier de la France . In it was plate 382 , representing a mushroom which he called Agaricus lividus . In 1872 , Lucien Quélet took up a species which he called " Entoloma lividus Bull . " ; although all subsequent agree that this is a fairly clear reference to Bulliard 's name , Quélet gave a description that is generally considered to be that of a different species from Bulliard 's . In the meantime , 1801 had seen the description of Agaricus sinuatus by Christian Persoon in his Synopsis Methodica Fungorum . He based that name on another plate ( number 579 ) published in the last part of Bulliard 's work , and which the latter had labelled " agaric <unk> " . German mycologist Paul Kummer reclassified it as Entoloma sinuatum in 1871 . 
 For many years Quélet 's name and description were treated as valid because Bulliard 's name antedated Persoon 's . However , in 1950 , a change in the International Code of Botanical Nomenclature ( termed the Stockholm Code , after the city where the International Botanical Congress was being held ) caused only names on fungi published after 1801 or 1821 ( depending on their type ) to be valid . This meant that suddenly Bulliard 's name was no longer a valid name , and now it was Persoon 's name that had priority . Nonetheless it was a well @-@ known name , and the already chaotic situation caused by a change to a famous Latin name was further complicated by another of Quélet 's suggestions . He had in 1886 proposed a new , broader genus that included all pink @-@ gilled fungi with adnate or sinuate gills and angular spores : Rhodophyllus . These two approach to genus placement , using either Rhodophyllus or Entoloma , coexisted for many decades , with mycologists and guidebooks following either ; Henri Romagnesi , who studied the genus for over forty years , favoured Rhodophyllus , as initially did Rolf Singer . However , most other authorities have tended to favour Entoloma , and Singer conceded the name was far more widely used and adopted it for his Agaricales in Modern Taxonomy text in 1986 . 
 In the meantime , it had been widely accepted that the 1950 change to the Stockholm Code caused more problems than they solved , and in 1981 , the Sydney Code reinstated the validity of pre @-@ 1801 names , but created the status of sanctioned name for those used in the foundational works of Persoon and Elias Magnus Fries . Thus Entoloma sinuatum , which Fries had sanctioned , still had to be used for the species described by Quélet even though Bulliard 's name was the older one . At about the same time , Machiel Noordeloos re @-@ examined Bulliard 's name in more details , and discovered that not only was it illegitimate ( and thus not available for use ) because William Hudson had already used it ten years earlier for a different species , but Bulliard 's illustration was clearly not an Entoloma , but a species of Pluteus , a genus that is only distantly related to Entoloma . As this made Quélet 's name definitely unusable for the Entoloma , and because at the time he and Romagnesi believed there were ground to treat Quélet 's " E. lividum " and Persoon 's E. sinuatum as separate species , he had to coin a third name for Quélet 's species : Entoloma <unk> . He however later changed his mind on this issue , combining again his own Entoloma <unk> and E. sinuatum , so that Persoon 's name is now universally recognised . Because it was previously widely used and Quélet had provided a good description and illustration ( which , the proposer argued , was better considered as a new species rather than a mere placement of Bulliard 's name in another genus ) , a proposal was made in 1999 to conserve Entoloma lividum and thus restore its use . However , it failed because E. sinuatum had already been in use ( if not universally ) for many years and was thus a well @-@ known name for the species . 
 The specific epithet sinuatum is the Latin for " wavy " , referring to the shape of the cap , while the generic name is derived from the Ancient Greek words <unk> / <unk> " inner " and <unk> / <unk> " fringe " or " hem " from the inrolled margin . The specific epithet lividum was derived from the Latin word <unk> " lead @-@ coloured " . The various common names include livid entoloma , livid agaric , livid pinkgill , leaden entoloma , lead poisoner , and grey pinkgill . In the Dijon region of France it was known as le grand <unk> de la Côte @-@ d 'Or ( " the great poisoner of Côte d 'Or " ) . Quélet himself , who was poisoned by the fungus , called it the miller 's purge , akin to another common name of false miller . 
 Within the large genus Entoloma , which contains around 1500 species , E. sinuatum has been classically placed in the section Entoloma within the subgenus Entoloma , as it is the type species of the genus . A 2009 study analysing DNA sequences and spore morphology found it to lie in a <unk> clade with ( among other species ) E. <unk> , E. <unk> and E. <unk> , and most closely related to E. sp . 1 . This <unk> clade lay within a crown Entoloma clade . 
 = = Description = = 
 The largest member of its genus , Entoloma sinuatum has an imposing epigeous ( aboveground ) fruiting body ( basidiocarp ) , bearing a cap 6 – 15 cm ( 2 ½ – 6 in ) wide , though diameters of 25 cm ( 10 in ) have been recorded . It is convex to flat , often with a blunt umbo in its centre and wavy margins , ivory white to light grey @-@ brown in colour , and darkening with age . The distant gills are sinuate ( notched at their point of attachment to the stipe ) to almost free , generally ( but not always ) yellowish white before darkening to pink and then red . Interspersed between the gills are lamellulae ( short gills that do not extend completely from the cap margin to the stipe ) . When viewed from beneath , a characteristic groove colloquially known as a " moat " can be seen in the gill pattern circumnavigating the stalk . The form lacking yellow colour on the gills is rare but widespread , and has been recorded from Austria , France and the Netherlands . 
 The stout white stipe lacks a ring and is anywhere from 4 to 15 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 6 in ) high , and 0 @.@ 5 – 3 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 2 – 1 @.@ 6 in ) in diameter . It may be bulbous at the base . The taste is mild , although it may be unpleasant . The mushroom 's strong and unusual odour can be hard to describe ; it may smell of flour , though is often unpleasant and rancid . The spore print is reddish @-@ brown , with angular spores 8 – 11 × 7 – 9 @.@ 5 μm , roughly six @-@ sided and globular in shape . The basidia are four @-@ spored and clamped . The gill edge is fertile , and cystidia are absent . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Confusion with the highly regarded miller or sweetbread mushroom ( <unk> <unk> ) is a common cause of poisoning in France ; the latter fungus has a greyish @-@ white downy cap and whitish decurrent gills which turn pink with maturity . Young fruit bodies of Entoloma sinuatum can also be confused with St George 's mushroom ( <unk> <unk> ) , although the gills of the latter are crowded and cream in colour , and the clouded agaric ( Clitocybe nebularis ) , which has whitish decurrent gills and an unusual odour . To complicate matters , it often grows near these edible species . Its overall size and shape resemble members of the genus Tricholoma , although the spore colour ( white in Tricholoma , pinkish in Entoloma ) and shape ( angular in Entoloma ) help distinguish it . The rare and edible all @-@ white <unk> tricholoma ( T. <unk> ) has a satiny cap and stem and a faint , not mealy , odour . E. sinuatum may be confused with Clitocybe <unk> in the Pacific Northwest of North America , although the latter has white spores and generally grows in clumps . A casual observer may mistake it for an edible field mushroom ( Agaricus campestris ) , but this species has a ring on the stipe , pink gills that become chocolate @-@ brown in maturity , and a dark brown spore print . The poorly known North American species E. albidum resembles E. sinuatum but is likewise poisonous . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Entoloma sinuatum is fairly common and widespread across North America as far south as Arizona . It also occurs throughout Europe and the British Isles including Ireland , though it is more common in southern and central parts of Europe than the northwest . In Asia , it has been recorded in the Black Sea region , and <unk> Province in Turkey , Iran , and northern Yunnan in China . 
 The fruit bodies of E. sinuatum grow solitarily or in groups , and have been found forming fairy rings . Fruit bodies appear mainly in autumn , and also in summer in North America , while in Europe the season is reported as late summer and autumn . They are found in deciduous woodlands under oak , beech , and less commonly birch , often on clay or calcareous ( chalky ) soils , but they may spread to in parks , fields and grassy areas nearby . Most members of the genus are saprotrophic , although this species has been recorded as forming an ectomycorrhizal relationship with willow ( Salix ) . 
 = = Toxicity = = 
 This fungus has been cited as being responsible for 10 % of all mushroom poisonings in Europe . For example , 70 people required hospital treatment in Geneva alone in 1983 , and the fungus accounted for 33 of 145 cases of mushroom poisoning in a five @-@ year period at a single hospital in Parma . Poisoning is said to be mainly gastrointestinal in nature ; symptoms of diarrhoea , vomiting and headache occur 30 minutes to 2 hours after consumption and last for up to 48 hours . Acute liver toxicity and psychiatric symptoms like mood disturbance or delirium may occur . Rarely , symptoms of depression may last for months . At least one source reports there have been fatalities in adults and children . Hospital treatment of poisoning by this mushroom is usually supportive ; antispasmodic medicines may lessen colicky abdominal cramps and activated charcoal may be administered early on to bind residual toxin . Intravenous fluids may be required if dehydration has been extensive , especially with children and the elderly . Metoclopramide may be used in cases of recurrent vomiting once gastric contents are emptied . The identity of the toxin ( s ) is unknown , but chemical analysis has established that there are alkaloids present in the mushroom . 
 A study of trace elements in mushrooms in the eastern Black Sea Region of Turkey found E. sinuatum to have the highest levels of copper ( 64 @.@ 8 ± 5 @.@ 9 μg / g dried material — insufficient to be toxic ) and zinc ( 198 μg / g ) recorded . Caps and stalks tested in an area with high levels of mercury in southeastern Poland showed it to bioaccumulate much higher levels of mercury than other fungi . The element was also found in high levels in the humus @-@ rich substrate . Entoloma sinuatum also accumulates arsenic @-@ containing compounds . Of the roughly 40 μg of arsenic present per gram of fresh mushroom tissue , about 8 % was arsenite and the other 92 % was arsenate . 
 = Matsuo Bashō = 
 Matsuo Bashō ( 松尾 <unk> , 1644 – 1694 ) , born 松尾 <unk> , then Matsuo <unk> <unk> ( 松尾 <unk> 宗房 ) , was the most famous poet of the Edo period in Japan . During his lifetime , Bashō was recognized for his works in the collaborative haikai no renga form ; today , after centuries of commentary , he is recognized as the greatest master of haiku ( then called hokku ) . Matsuo Bashō 's poetry is internationally renowned ; and , in Japan , many of his poems are reproduced on monuments and traditional sites . Although Bashō is justifiably famous in the West for his hokku , he himself believed his best work lay in leading and participating in renku . He is quoted as saying , “ Many of my followers can write hokku as well as I can . Where I show who I really am is in linking haikai verses . ” 
 Bashō was introduced to poetry young , and after integrating himself into the intellectual scene of Edo ( modern Tokyo ) he quickly became well known throughout Japan . He made a living as a teacher ; but then renounced the social , urban life of the literary circles and was inclined to wander throughout the country , heading west , east , and far into the northern wilderness to gain inspiration for his writing . His poems were influenced by his firsthand experience of the world around him , often encapsulating the feeling of a scene in a few simple elements . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Bashō was born in 1644 , near Ueno , in Iga Province . His father may have been a low @-@ ranking samurai , which would have promised Bashō a career in the military , but not much chance of a notable life . His biographers traditionally claimed that he worked in the kitchens . However , as a child , Bashō became a servant to <unk> Yoshitada ( <unk> <unk> ) : together they shared a love for haikai no renga , a form of collaborative poetry composition . A sequence was opened with a verse in 5 @-@ 7 @-@ 5 mora format ; this verse was named a hokku , and would centuries later be renamed haiku when presented as a stand @-@ alone work . The hokku would be followed by a related 7 @-@ 7 mora verse by another poet . Both Bashō and Yoshitada gave themselves haigō ( <unk> ) , or haikai pen names ; Bashō 's was <unk> ( 宗房 ) , which was simply the on <unk> ( Sino @-@ Japanese reading ) of his adult name , " <unk> ( 宗房 ) " . In 1662 , the first extant poem by Bashō was published . In 1664 , two of Bashō 's hokku were printed in a compilation . 
 In 1665 , Bashō and Yoshitada together with some acquaintances composed a <unk> , or one @-@ hundred @-@ verse renku . In 1666 , Yoshitada 's sudden death brought Bashō 's peaceful life as a servant to an end . No records of this time remain , but it is believed that Bashō gave up any possibility of samurai status and left home . Biographers have proposed various reasons and destinations , including the possibility of an affair between Bashō and a Shinto <unk> named <unk> ( <unk> ) , which is unlikely to be true . Bashō 's own references to this time are vague ; he recalled that " at one time I coveted an official post with a tenure of land " , and that " there was a time when I was fascinated with the ways of homosexual love " : there is no indication whether he was referring to real obsessions or fictional ones . He was uncertain whether to become a full @-@ time poet ; by his own account , " the alternatives battled in my mind and made my life restless " . His indecision may have been influenced by the then still relatively low status of renga and haikai no renga as more social activities than serious artistic endeavors . In any case , his poems continued to be published in anthologies in 1667 , 1669 , and 1671 , and he published a compilation of work by himself and other authors of the <unk> school , The Seashell Game ( <unk> , Kai Ōi ) , in 1672 . In about the spring of that year he moved to Edo , to further his study of poetry . 
 = = Rise to fame = = 
 In the fashionable literary circles of Nihonbashi , Bashō 's poetry was quickly recognized for its simple and natural style . In 1674 he was inducted into the inner circle of the haikai profession , receiving secret teachings from Kitamura <unk> ( 1624 – 1705 ) . He wrote this hokku in mock tribute to the Shogun : 
 <unk> <unk> mo / <unk> / kimi ga <unk> 
 the Dutchmen , too , / kneel before His Lordship — / spring under His reign . [ 1678 ] 
 When Nishiyama <unk> , founder and leader of the <unk> school of haikai , came to Edo from Osaka in 1675 , Bashō was among the poets invited to compose with him . It was on this occasion that he gave himself the haigō of Tōsei , and by 1680 he had a full @-@ time job teaching twenty disciples , who published The Best Poems of Tōsei 's Twenty Disciples ( <unk> , Tōsei @-@ <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> ) , advertising their connection to Tōsei 's talent . That winter , he took the surprising step of moving across the river to Fukagawa , out of the public eye and towards a more reclusive life . His disciples built him a rustic hut and planted a banana tree ( <unk> , bashō ) in the yard , giving Bashō a new haigō and his first permanent home . He appreciated the plant very much , but was not happy to see Fukagawa 's native miscanthus grass growing alongside it : 
 <unk> bashō <unk> / <unk> <unk> <unk> no / <unk> kana 
 by my new banana plant / the first sign of something I loathe — / a miscanthus bud ! [ 1680 ] 
 Despite his success , Bashō grew dissatisfied and lonely . He began to practice Zen meditation , but it seems not to have calmed his mind . In the winter of 1682 his hut burned down , and shortly afterwards , in early 1683 , his mother died . He then traveled to <unk> , to stay with a friend . In the winter of 1683 his disciples gave him a second hut in Edo , but his spirits did not improve . In 1684 his disciple <unk> <unk> published a compilation of him and other poets , Shriveled Chestnuts ( <unk> , <unk> ) . Later that year he left Edo on the first of four major wanderings . 
 Bashō traveled alone , off the beaten path , that is , on the Edo Five Routes , which in medieval Japan were regarded as immensely dangerous ; and , at first Bashō expected to simply die in the middle of nowhere or be killed by bandits . However , as his trip progressed , his mood improved , and he became comfortable on the road . Bashō met many friends and grew to enjoy the changing scenery and the seasons . His poems took on a less introspective and more striking tone as he observed the world around him : 
 <unk> uma wo sae / <unk> yuki no / <unk> kana 
 even a horse / arrests my eyes — on this / snowy morrow [ 1684 ] 
 The trip took him from Edo to Mount Fuji , Ueno , and Kyoto . He met several poets who called themselves his disciples and wanted his advice ; he told them to disregard the contemporary Edo style and even his own Shriveled Chestnuts , saying it contained " many verses that are not worth discussing . " Bashō returned to Edo in the summer of 1685 , taking time along the way to write more hokku and comment on his own life : 
 <unk> toshi <unk> / <unk> kite <unk> / <unk> 
 another year is gone / a traveler 's shade on my head , / straw sandals at my feet [ 1685 ] 
 When Bashō returned to Edo he happily resumed his job as a teacher of poetry at his bashō hut , although privately he was already making plans for another journey . The poems from his journey were published as Account of Exposure to the Fields ( <unk> , <unk> kikō ) . In early 1686 he composed one of his best @-@ remembered haiku : 
 <unk> <unk> ike ya / <unk> <unk> / <unk> no <unk> 
 an ancient pond / a frog jumps in / the splash of water [ 1686 ] 
 Historians believe this poem became instantly famous : in April , the poets of Edo gathered at the bashō hut for a haikai no renga contest on the subject of frogs that seems to have been a tribute to Bashō 's hokku , which was placed at the top of the compilation . Bashō stayed in Edo , continuing to teach and hold contests , with an excursion in the autumn of 1687 when he traveled to the countryside for moon watching , and a longer trip in 1688 when he returned to Ueno to celebrate the Lunar New Year . At home in Edo , Bashō sometimes became reclusive : he alternated between rejecting visitors to his hut and appreciating their company . At the same time , he enjoyed his life and had a subtle sense of humor , as reflected in his hokku : 
 <unk> <unk> <unk> / <unk> ni <unk> / <unk> 
 now then , let 's go out / to enjoy the snow ... until / I slip and fall ! [ 1688 ] 
 = = Oku no Hosomichi = = 
 Bashō 's private planning for another long journey , to be described in his masterwork Oku no Hosomichi , or The Narrow Road to the Deep North , culminated on May 16 , 1689 ( Yayoi 27 , Genroku 2 ) , when he left Edo with his student and apprentice Kawai Sora ( <unk> <unk> ) on a journey to the Northern Provinces of Honshū . Bashō and Sora headed north to <unk> , which they reached on June 29 . They then walked to the western side of the island , touring <unk> on July 30 , and began hiking back at a leisurely pace along the coastline . During this 150 @-@ day journey Bashō traveled a total of 600 ri ( 2 @,@ 400 km ) through the northeastern areas of Honshū , returning to Edo in late 1691 . 
 By the time Bashō reached <unk> , Gifu Prefecture , he had completed the log of his journey . He edited and redacted it for three years , writing the final version in 1694 as The Narrow Road to the Interior ( <unk> , Oku no Hosomichi ) . The first edition was published posthumously in 1702 . It was an immediate commercial success and many other itinerant poets followed the path of his journey . It is often considered his finest achievement , featuring hokku such as : 
 <unk> <unk> ya / Sado ni <unk> / <unk> 
 the rough sea / stretching out towards Sado / the Milky Way [ 1689 ] 
 = = Last years = = 
 On his return to Edo in the winter of 1691 , Bashō lived in his third bashō hut , again provided by his disciples . This time , he was not alone : he took in a nephew and his female friend , <unk> , who were both recovering from illness . He had a great many visitors . 
 Bashō continued to be uneasy . He wrote to a friend that " disturbed by others , I have no peace of mind " . He made a living from teaching and appearances at haikai parties until late August 1693 , when he shut the gate to his bashō hut and refused to see anybody for a month . Finally , he relented after adopting the principle of <unk> or " lightness " , a semi @-@ Buddhist philosophy of greeting the mundane world rather than separating himself from it . Bashō left Edo for the last time in the summer of 1694 , spending time in Ueno and Kyoto before his arrival in Osaka . He became sick with a stomach illness and died peacefully , surrounded by his disciples . Although he did not compose any formal death poem on his deathbed the following , being the last poem recorded during his final illness , is generally accepted as his poem of farewell : 
 <unk> <unk> ni <unk> / <unk> wa <unk> wo / <unk> <unk> 
 falling sick on a journey / my dream goes wandering / over a field of dried grass [ 1694 ] 
 = = Influence and literary criticism = = 
 Rather than sticking to the formulas of kigo ( <unk> ) , which remain popular in Japan even today , Bashō aspired to reflect his real environment and emotions in his hokku . Even during his lifetime , the effort and style of his poetry was widely appreciated ; after his death , it only increased . Several of his students compiled quotations from him about his own poetry , most notably Mukai <unk> and Hattori <unk> . 
 During the 18th century , appreciation of Bashō 's poems grew more fervent , and commentators such as <unk> <unk> and Moro <unk> went to great length to find references in his hokku to historical events , medieval books , and other poems . These commentators were often lavish in their praise of Bashō 's obscure references , some of which were probably literary false cognates . In 1793 Bashō was deified by the Shinto bureaucracy , and for a time criticizing his poetry was literally blasphemous . 
 In the late 19th century , this period of unanimous passion for Bashō 's poems came to an end . Masaoka Shiki , arguably Bashō 's most famous critic , tore down the long @-@ standing orthodoxy with his bold and candid objections to Bashō 's style . However , Shiki was also instrumental in making Bashō 's poetry accessible in English , and to leading intellectuals and the Japanese public at large . He invented the term haiku ( replacing hokku ) to refer to the freestanding 5 @-@ 7 @-@ 5 form which he considered the most artistic and desirable part of the haikai no renga . 
 Critical interpretation of Bashō 's poems continued into the 20th century , with notable works by Yamamoto Kenkichi , Imoto <unk> , and Ogata Tsutomu . The 20th century also saw translations of Bashō 's poems into languages and editions around the world . The position of Bashō in Western eyes as the haiku poet par excellence gives great influence to his poetry : Western preference for haiku over more traditional forms such as tanka or renga have rendered archetypal status to Bashō as Japanese poet and haiku as Japanese poetry . Some western scholars even believe that Bashō invented haiku . The impressionistic and concise nature of Bashō 's verse greatly influenced Ezra Pound , the Imagists , and poets of the Beat Generation . 
 Two of Bashō 's poems were popularized in the short story " Teddy " written by J.D. Salinger and published in 1952 by The New Yorker magazine . 
 In 1979 , The International Astronomical Union named a crater found on Mercury after him . 
 = = List of works = = 
 Kai Ōi ( The Seashell Game ) ( 1672 ) 
 Edo Sangin ( <unk> ) ( 1678 ) 
 <unk> no <unk> ( <unk> ) ( 1680 ) 
 Tōsei <unk> <unk> <unk> Kasen ( <unk> ) ( 1680 ) 
 <unk> no <unk> ( <unk> ) ( 1680 ) 
 <unk> ( <unk> , " A Shriveled Chestnut " ) ( 1683 ) 
 <unk> Kikō ( Record of a Weather @-@ Exposed Skeleton ) ( 1684 ) 
 Fuyu no Hi ( Winter Days ) ( 1684 ) * 
 Haru no Hi ( Spring Days ) ( 1686 ) * 
 Kawazu <unk> ( Frog Contest ) ( 1686 ) 
 Kashima Kikō ( A Visit to Kashima Shrine ) ( 1687 ) 
 Oi no <unk> , or <unk> Kikō ( Record of a Travel @-@ Worn Satchel ) ( 1688 ) 
 Sarashina Kikō ( A Visit to Sarashina Village ) ( 1688 ) 
 Arano ( Wasteland ) ( 1689 ) * 
 <unk> ( The <unk> ) ( 1690 ) * 
 <unk> ( <unk> , " Monkey 's Raincoat " ) ( 1691 ) * 
 Saga Nikki ( Saga Diary ) ( 1691 ) 
 Bashō no <unk> Kotoba ( On <unk> the Banana Tree ) ( 1691 ) 
 <unk> no Setsu ( On Seclusion ) ( 1692 ) 
 Fukagawa Shū ( Fukagawa Anthology ) 
 <unk> ( A Sack of Charcoal ) ( 1694 ) * 
 <unk> ( The Detached Room ) ( 1694 ) 
 Oku no Hosomichi ( Narrow Road to the Interior ) ( 1694 ) 
 Zoku <unk> ( The Monkey 's Raincoat , Continued ) ( 1698 ) * 
 * Denotes the title is one of the Seven Major Anthologies of Bashō ( Bashō <unk> Shū ) 
 = = = English translations = = = 
 Matsuo , Bashō ( 2005 ) . Bashō ’ s Journey : Selected Literary Prose by Matsuo Bashō. trans . David Landis Barnhill . Albany , NY : State University of New York Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 7914 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 Matsuo , Bashō ( 1966 ) . The Narrow Road to the Deep North and Other Travel <unk> trans . Nobuyuki Yuasa . Harmondsworth : Penguin . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 14 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Matsuo , Bashō ( 2000 ) . Narrow Road to the Interior and Other <unk> trans . Sam Hamill . Boston : Shambhala . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 716 @-@ 3 . 
 Matsuo , Bashō ( 1999 ) . The Essential Bashō. trans . Sam Hamill . Boston : Shambhala . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 282 @-@ 3 . 
 Matsuo , Bashō ( 2004 ) . Bashō 's Haiku : Selected Poems of Matsuo Bashō. trans . David Landis Barnhill . Albany , NY : State University of New York Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 7914 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 Matsuo , Bashō ( 1997 ) . The Narrow Road to <unk> trans . Donald Keene , illustrated by Masayuki Miyata . Tokyo : Kodansha International . ISBN 978 @-@ 4 @-@ 7700 @-@ 2028 @-@ 4 . 
 Matsuo , Bashō ; et al . ( 1973 ) . Monkey 's <unk> trans . Maeda Cana . New York : Grossman Publishers . <unk> 670 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . ISBN <unk> . 
 Matsuo , Bashō ( 2008 ) . Basho : The Complete <unk> trans . Jane <unk> . Tokyo : Kodansha International . ISBN 978 @-@ 4 @-@ 7700 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 Matsuo , Bashō ; et al . ( 1981 ) . The Monkey ’ s Straw Raincoat and Other Poetry of the Basho <unk> trans . Earl Miner and Hiroko Odagiri . Princeton : Princeton University Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 691 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 Matsuo , Bashō ( 1985 ) . On Love and Barley : Haiku of <unk> trans . Lucien <unk> . Penguin Classics . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 14 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 = = In fiction = = 
 Bashō appeared in the Magic Treehouse book The Dragon of the Red Dawn . 
 = Sharabha = 
 Sharabha ( Sanskrit : <unk> , <unk> , Kannada : <unk> ) or Sarabha is a part @-@ lion and part @-@ bird beast in Hindu mythology , who , according to Sanskrit literature , is eight @-@ legged and more powerful than a lion or an elephant , possessing the ability to clear a valley in one jump . In later literature , Sharabha is described as an eight @-@ legged deer . 
 Shaiva scriptures narrate that god Shiva assumed the Avatar ( incarnation ) of Sharabha to pacify Narasimha - the fierce man @-@ lion avatar of Vishnu worshipped by Vaishnava sect . This form is popularly known as <unk> ( " Lord Sharabha " ) or Sharabeshwaramurti . The Vaishnavas refute the portrayal of Narasimha as being destroyed by Shiva @-@ Sharabha and regard Sharabha as a name of Vishnu . Another tale narrates that Vishnu assumed the form of the ferocious Gandaberunda bird @-@ animal to combat Sharabha . In Buddhism , Sharabha appears in Jataka Tales as a previous birth of the Buddha . 
 Sharabha also appears in the emblem of State government of the Indian state of Karnataka , University of Mysore and the Karnataka Soaps and Detergents Limited . 
 = = Development of character and iconography = = 
 In Sanskrit literature , Sharabha is initially described as an animal that roared and scared other animals in the hills and forest areas . <unk> compare warriors to Sharabha . In the later epic Mahabharata , this form of Sharabha was exaggerated as a lion @-@ slaying monster with eight legs , eyes on the top ; living in the forest and which ate raw flesh . It is also mentioned as residing on Mount Krauncha but not as a monster but as an ordinary beast along with lions and tigers on mount <unk> . The epic also includes Sharabha in the list of edible animals - the <unk> the animal group of antelope , deer , hare , bear , <unk> deer , sambar , <unk> , boar , and buffalo - which was offered as part of food at dinner to guests . Sharabha also appears as a name of a monkey @-@ king in the epic Ramayana , also as a proper name of heroes , apes , demons ( <unk> ) and serpent Nāgas and one of the names of god Vishnu as well as Buddha . In defining the ecological theme in Hindu medicine related to jungle and the aroma of meats , Sharabha has also been listed among the deer natives of Kashmir , Nepal , and Sikkim . However , the features explained are of an eight legged animal of the size of a camel with huge horns and conjectured as a large Himalayan goat . 
 = = = Shiva 's incarnation = = = 
 In Puranic literature , Sharabha is associated with god Shiva , who incarnates to subdue fierce manifestations of Vishnu . The legend of Sharabha fighting Narasimha - the man @-@ lion form of Vishnu - brings to fore the overt rivalry between the devotees of Vishnu ( Vaishnavite sect ) and those of Shiva ( Shaivite sect ) , which exposes the gory blood @-@ letting aspect . According to Roy , the Narasimha @-@ Sharabha encounter may be a <unk> version of Vedic tale of Vishnu piercing the boar . Shiva Purana describes Sharabha as thousand @-@ armed , lion @-@ faced and with matted hair , wings and eight feet . Sharabha Upanishad portrays Sharabha with two heads , two wings , eight legs of the lion with sharp claws and a long tail . Kalika Purana describes Sharabha as black in colour , with four feet downwards and four feet uplifted , with an enormous body . It also has a long face and nose , nails , eight legs , eight tusks , a cluster of manes , and a long tail . It jumps high repeatedly making a loud cry . 
 The iconography of Sharabeshwaramurti ( Shiva as Sharabha ) is specifically defined in texts such as <unk> and Sritattvanidhi . In <unk> , Sharabha is described in the form of a bird with golden colour , with two uplifted wings , two red eyes , four legs in the form of a lion touching the ground , four legs with claws upwards , and with an animal tail . The top part of the body is shown as human but with the face of a lion with an ornamented crown ; side tusks are also depicted giving an overall frightening sight . It also shows the Narasimha beneath Sharabha ’ s legs as a lion @-@ faced human with anjali ( hands folded prayer gesture ) . ( See Infobox image ) 
 In the Sritattvanidhi , the depiction prescribed for Sharabeshwaramurti is of thirty arms ; arms on the right are to hold thunderbolt , <unk> , abhaya , chakra ( discus ) , <unk> , staff , goad , sword , <unk> , axe , akshamala , a bone , bow , musala , and fire ; and the left hands to display noose , varada , mace , arrow , flag , and another type of sword , a snake , a lotus flower , skull @-@ cup , <unk> , plough , and <unk> with one hand encircling Durga in a hug . This form is extolled to usher good luck , cure all diseases and destroy all enemies . 
 The Chola dynasty in Tamil Nadu was particularly favourable to the beliefs of Shaiva sect . It is said that the sectarian aspect got highlighted during their reign . This is evident from the four Sharabha images , the earliest at the <unk> temple near Kumbakonam built by Vikrama Chola ( 1118 – 35 ) . The other images are at Darasuram and <unk> temple , <unk> built by a Chola ruler , <unk> Chola III where Sharabha 's image is housed in a separate shrine . 
 A sculpture of <unk> in the <unk> temple , a Shiva temple in Tanjore district , in Tamil Nadu is seen with three legs , with body and face of a lion and a tail . It has four human arms , the right upper hand holds axe , noose is held in the lower right hand , the deer in the upper left hand and fire in the lower left hand . Narasimha is shown with eight <unk> the Airavatesvara Temple at Darasuram , a rare image of the Chola period , in black basalt , depicts Shiva as Sharabha . It is deified in an exclusive small shrine , as part man , beast and bird , destroying the man @-@ lion incarnation of Vishnu , Narasimha . This highlights the hostility between the Shaivite and Vaishnavite sects . In the Chennakeshava temple of Belur ( 1113 ) , Karnataka , Gandaberunda ( 2 @-@ faced bird identified with Vishnu ) depiction is a carved scene of " chain of destruction " . Initially , a deer is prey to a large python , followed by being lifted by an elephant and a lion attacking the elephant , and the lion shown as devoured by Sharabha . 
 In iconographic representations of the myth of Shiva vis @-@ à @-@ vis Vishnu , Sharabha form has been built around Narasimha but substantially embellished with wings to represent Kali and Durga to denote the female powers ( shaktis ) of Shiva ; Sharabha is also shown with a bird head and a serpent in his beak head . 
 = = In Hindu scriptures = = 
 = = = In Mahabharata = = = 
 The Mahabharata , the great Hindu epic , narrates : a dog , with the help of a Rishi ( sage ) assumes various animal forms - starting from a dog to a tiger then to an elephant followed by a lion and a <unk> - terrorized every one in the hermitage of the Rishi . Eventually , Sharabha assumed a further fiercer form . In this fierce form he wanted to devour the Rishi . The Rishi then narrating the process of change in Sharabha ’ s development , as a result of his benevolence , cursed Sharabha to go back to his original form of a dog . The epic does not relate Shiva to Sharabha . 
 = = = Shaivite views = = = 
 The legend of Sharabha as an incarnation of Shiva is narrated in many Hindu scriptures and each presents a different version to suit one ’ s religious beliefs . But one common refrain in all these depictions is that Sharabha is a combination of a huge animal @-@ bird beast with enormous strength manifested with the purpose of pacifying similar ferocious avatars of Vishnu such as Narasimha ( man @-@ lion ) or Varaha ( the boar ) . 
 The Narasimha @-@ Sharabha legend is linked to gods assuming mythical animal forms to slay or subdue as the case may be . First , Vishnu assumed the form of Narasimha to slay Hiranyakashipu , an asura ( demon ) king , who was terrorizing the universe and devotee of Shiva . The Shiva Purana mentions : After slaying Hiranyakashipu , Narasimha ’ s wrath was not appeased . The world trembled , fearing what he might do . The Devas ( the gods ) requested Shiva to tackle Narasimha . Initially , Shiva brings forth Virabhadra , one of his terrifying forms , in order to calm Narasimha . When that failed , Shiva manifested as the human @-@ lion @-@ bird Sharabha . Shiva then assumed the Sharabha form . Sharabha then attacked Narasimha and seized him up until he was immobilized . He thus quelled Narasimha ’ s terrifying rage . Narasimha became a devotee of Shiva after being bound by Sharabha . Sharabha then decapitated and de @-@ skinned Narasimha so Shiva could wear the hide and lion @-@ head as a garment . The Linga Purana and Sharabha Upanishad also mention this mutilation and murder of Narasimha . After the mutilation , Vishnu assumed his normal form and retired to his abode , after duly praising Shiva . It was from here on that Shiva came to be known as " <unk> " or " <unk> " . 
 The Skanda Purana considers Narasimha as a mere irritation and not a threat to the world , contrary to what was brought out in the Shiva and Linga Puranas . The perception was that Vishnu may permanently adopt the fierce form of Narasimha , which would be detrimental to his role of doing good deeds . Hence , the purpose of Shiva assuming the form of Sharabha was to ensure that the lion body of Vishnu was discarded and he got united with his original divine form . Narasimha struck Sharabha with his body , it was Vishnu who groaned in pain and not Sharabha who was in an " adamantine body " . It was then that Vishnu realised that Sharabha was none other than Shiva and bowed and praised Sharabha . Shiva then blesses Vishnu and gives him a boon to kill demons . A Purana ends the story with gods fearing that Sharabha may not be able to control his rage and thus urging Shiva to give up his Sharabha form . Thereafter , Shiva dismembered Sharabha ’ s form ; his limbs were given away and his torso became a Kapalika . The Vamana Purana too discusses the tale , ending with Narasimha becoming the calm Vishnu again and Sharabha becoming a lingam , the symbol of Shiva . 
 In the Kalika Purana , Varaha - Vishnu ’ s boar avatar - had amorous dalliance with the earth goddess . He and his three boar sons then created mayhem in the world , which necessitated Shiva to take the form of Sharabha , to kill the Varaha form . Even , Vishnu requests Shiva to destroy Varaha , unable to control his own form . Here , Narasimha appears to aid Varaha . Sharabha kills Narasimha first and then kills Varaha , allowing Vishnu to reabsorb the energies of both his fierce forms . Finally , Vishnu defeats Sharabha . 
 = = = Vaishnava and Smartha views = = = 
 Vaishnava followers including Dvaita scholars , such as Vijayendra Tirtha ( 1539 – 95 ) refute the portrayal of Narasimha as being destroyed by Sharabha as they consider the Shaivite Puranas as tamasic - and thus not authoritative - based on their reading of <unk> Puranas and Shruti texts . The refutation of the Sharabha legend along with ten other Shaivite legends is discussed in a text by <unk> Tirtha called <unk> . 
 Some regional South @-@ Indian scriptures narrate that Narasimha took the form of Gandaberunda ( literally " the mighty two @-@ headed " ) , a more ferocious two @-@ headed bird @-@ animal , who combats and destroys Shiva @-@ Sharabha . 
 The Sharabha Upanishad mentions that <unk> means jiva ( " soul " ) and Hari ( Vishnu ) is gleaming in the form of Sharabha , and that Hari has manifested as Sharabha who is capable of granting moksha ( salvation ) . There is a reference to Sharabha in the Vishnu sahasranama , the 1000 names of Vishnu , and the literal meaning seems to suggest the praise of Sharabha ( the lion @-@ killing animal ) . 
 Narasimhan Krishnamachari , a scholar on Vishishtadvaita philosophy , states that the name " Sharabha " has been interpreted in two ways namely ; the first interpretation means " the Destroyer ( of those who transgress the bounds of ethics ) , " as given by the Sri Vaishnavite commentator , <unk> <unk> and the second interpretation as given by Adi Sankara , among others . The former is based on the Sanskrit verb SR , which means " to injure to destroy " . According to C. V. Radhakrishna Sastri , " Sara " also refers to an arrow , and the perishable body shines if it is aimed at <unk> , because He shines in that body . " 
 Adi Shankaracharya , as with the reference in the Sharabha Upanishad , refers to this 356th name of Vishnu sahasranama as not mentioning the lion @-@ killing animal at all and instead interprets the name to mean , " As the Lord shines in the body as the indwelling Self , He is called Sharabha , while the body is sara ( perishable ) . " As these commentaries on the Vishnu sahasranama suggest , none of them refer to the avatar of Shiva . 
 = = In Buddhist scriptures = = 
 In the Jataka tales of the Buddha 's previous lives , there is narration related to his birth as <unk> in a forest as a Sharabha , the eight @-@ legged deer . This story is of one compassion of the deer shown towards the King who wanted to hunt the deer . The King , while trying to hunt the deer , fell into a precipice with his horse . The deer instead of abandoning the king to his fate rescued him . The King was deeply touched by the compassion shown by the deer and thereafter promulgated a decry stating that hunting was an illegal activity in his country . 
 In Tibetan Buddhism , <unk> is represented as a beast with a goat 's head and horns , a lion 's mane and horse 's body and legs . It symbolizes determination , strength and speed . Sometimes , it is represented additionally with horns of an antelope and claws of an eagle . Sometimes , the goat head is replaced by a lion 's , horse 's feet by a lion 's and horns can be of a ram . A common feature of all representations is the horse 's body . It is often depicted as mounts of young Devas or dwarfs in a Torana – a six @-@ level archway behind an enlightenment throne of a Buddha or <unk> . Together with the devas , they symbolize the perfection of effort ( <unk> ) . 
 = = As emblem = = 
 The Government of Karnataka , the University of Mysore and the Karnataka Soaps and Detergents Limited ( <unk> @-@ an industrial unit owned by the Government of Karnataka ) have adopted Sharabha , with modifications and also appropriate justifications , as their emblem or logo . 
 In Karnataka Soaps and Detergents Limited logo , Sharabha is depicted in the form of a body of a lion with the head of an elephant to represent the virtues of wisdom , courage and strength . The Royal Emblem of Mysore has also been adopted by the University of Mysore as their logo too . This logo displays <unk> flanked on either side by the lion @-@ elephant Sharabha - stronger than the lion and the elephant and defender of uprightness , surmounted by a lion . 
 = Niandra Lades and Usually Just a T @-@ Shirt = 
 Niandra LaDes and Usually Just a T @-@ Shirt is the debut solo album by John Frusciante , released on November 22 , 1994 , on American Recordings . Frusciante released the album after encouragement from several friends , who told him that there was " no good music around anymore . " 
 Niandra LaDes and Usually Just a T @-@ Shirt combines avant @-@ garde and stream @-@ of @-@ consciousness styles , with guitar , piano and various effects on a four @-@ track recorder . The album 's first half , Niandra Lades , was recorded before Frusciante left the Red Hot Chili Peppers in 1992 ; during the recording of Blood Sugar Sex Magik . The second half , Usually Just a T @-@ Shirt , was recorded while the band was on tour in the months leading up to Frusciante 's departure . Niandra Lades and Usually Just a T @-@ Shirt sold poorly upon its release in 1994 , and was taken off the market , only to be re @-@ released in 1999 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Frusciante joined the Red Hot Chili Peppers in 1988 , at the age of 18 , and released his first album with the group , Mother 's Milk the following year . The follow @-@ up album , Blood Sugar Sex Magik , was recorded in an empty mansion that the band decided to live in for the duration of recording . Frusciante adapted well to the environment , and often spent his time alone painting , listening to music , and recording songs that would eventually make up the first half of the album , Niandra Lades . Blood Sugar Sex Magik was released on September 24 , 1991 and was an instant success . The album peaked at number three in the U.S. and went on to sell over 12 million copies worldwide . Soon after the album 's release , Frusciante developed a dislike of the band 's newfound popularity . He felt that the band was too famous , and wished they were still playing small nightclubs like they were before he joined the group . By his own admission , the band 's rise to popularity took Frusciante by surprise , and he could not cope with it . During Blood Sugar Sex Magik 's promotional tour , Frusciante began using heroin and cocaine heavily . He and vocalist Anthony Kiedis often argued before and after performances . According to Kiedis , Frusciante began purposely sabotaging shows by playing the wrong intro for a song , or playing out of key . His relationship with the band had become progressively more strained , and he abruptly quit during the Japanese leg of their world tour in 1992 . 
 = = Writing and recording = = 
 After leaving the Red Hot Chili Peppers , Frusciante continued to write and record solo material . He had been doing so since the age of nine , but had never considered releasing his material to the public . That was until several of his friends — including Johnny Depp , Perry Farrell , Gibby Haynes and former Red Hot Chili Peppers band mate Flea — encouraged him to release the material he wrote in his spare time during the Blood Sugar Sex Magik sessions . Frusciante began working on final cuts of the songs he had been writing , and producing them at his home in mid @-@ 1992 . The production process , however , became hampered by his increasingly severe addiction to heroin . Usually Just a T @-@ Shirt was recorded in the order it appears , with the final tracks being recorded shortly prior to Frusciante 's departure from the Chili Peppers . Frusciante 's use of heroin and cocaine became more extreme during the final stages of recording in late 1993 ; he began viewing drugs as the only way to " make sure you stay in touch with beauty instead of letting the ugliness of the world corrupt your soul . " 
 During a 1994 interview , a visibly intoxicated Frusciante noted that he wrote the album in order to create " interesting music " , which he felt no longer existed . He felt contemporary artists were not writing material he deemed worth listening to and the mainstream population were settling for mediocrity . Drugs were another significant topic Frusciante based Niandra Lades and Usually Just a T @-@ Shirt on . According to Frusciante , he " was stoned for every single note [ he ] played on the album . " He increased his drug use to cope with worsening depression that was caused by leaving the Red Hot Chili Peppers , and his subsequent isolation . Several songs on the album deal with his dislike for the Chili Peppers ' success , such as the album 's eleventh track , " Blood on My Neck From Success " . 
 All of the music on the record was written by Frusciante , save for the cover of hardcore punk band Bad Brains ' song " Big Takeover " . The track was intentionally slowed down and recorded melodically because of a pastime in which Frusciante sang punk songs in different time signatures : " It was just something I had been walking around thinking of in my head . Sometimes I 'll walk around singing punk rock songs to myself , but as if they were regular songs instead of punk rock songs , you know , slow it down and make a melody instead of just yelling them out . And then the idea occurred me to record it like a Led Zeppelin ballad with mandolins and stuff . " River Phoenix , a friend of Frusciante 's , had contributed guitar and backing vocals to two songs that were intended be included on the record , but they were ultimately left off due to protests from his family . These were later included under different names on the album Smile from the Streets You Hold in 1997 . 
 Niandra LaDes and Usually Just a T @-@ Shirt incorporated Frusciante 's avant @-@ garde style of song composition , with his stream @-@ of @-@ consciousness methodology . He recorded , mixed , produced and mastered the entire record by himself , and released it on Rick Rubin 's label , American Recordings . Warner Bros. , the Chili Peppers ' label , originally held the rights to the album because of the leaving @-@ artist clause in Frusciante 's Chili Peppers contract . Because he was living as a recluse , however , the label gladly handed the rights over to Rubin , who released the album under his label . 
 = = Release , reception , and aftermath = = 
 Niandra LaDes and Usually Just a T @-@ Shirt was initially previewed by Billboard magazine , who said that " Chili Peppers fans might be daunted by the album 's elusive experimentalism . " A representative of American Recordings did not foresee the album as being viable in any mainstream music stores , and some retailers went as far as to ban it from being sold . After the album was released , Frusciante played three small performances , and participated in a few magazine interviews to promote the album , explaining in one interview that people would only be able to understand his work if " their heads are capable of tripping out . " At one point shortly after release , Frusciante began searching for a string quartet to play the album with him on tour . The idea was eventually discarded when he could not find a band that " understands why Ringo Starr is such a great drummer , can play Stravinsky , and also smokes pot . " The concept of a tour was ultimately abandoned as well , due to Frusciante 's diminishing health . 
 Niandra LaDes and Usually Just a T @-@ Shirt was not widely reviewed , but yielded a generally positive response from critics . Steve Huey of AllMusic , who rated the album four out of five stars , said that " [ the album was ] an intriguing and unexpected departure from Frusciante 's work with the Chili Peppers " , and that " the sparse arrangements of the first half help set the stage for the gossamer guitar work later on . " He went on to say that Usually Just a T @-@ Shirt — the latter half of the album — contained " pleasant psychedelic instrumentals with plenty of backward @-@ guitar effects . " Ned Raggett , also of Allmusic , noted that " there 's nothing quite so stunning as [ Frusciante 's ] magnificent remake of Bad Brains ' ' The Big Takeover ' . " Adam Williams of PopMatters said the album " fall [ s ] somewhere between madness and brilliance " . He went on to compare Frusciante to Syd Barrett , and felt it was a " hint at a deeply cerebral artist looking within for inspiration and creativity . " High Times ' Tim <unk> saw the record as " a revelation , both disturbingly intimate and cryptically veiled . <unk> straight out of the guitarist 's stream of consciousness , it 's worlds away from the up @-@ front , balls @-@ out funk assault of his former band , " with " an ethereal , otherworldly quality . " The album received its share of negative criticism as well . Rolling Stone 's Christian Hoard felt " Frusciante 's eccentricities run seriously amok " , and that " [ the album ] sounds like a string of four @-@ track demos . The first part of the album is slightly more tuneful than the more ambient , experimental second section [ ... ] Mostly what you get are Frusciante 's acoustic @-@ guitar scratchings and stream @-@ of @-@ conscious ramblings . " The first Rolling Stone review of the record , however , was positive : " All in all , [ the album is ] a mess - but definitely a fascinating , often lovely mess . As one might expect of an album titled Niandra Lades and Usually Just a T @-@ shirt this is twisted , cool stuff . " The Boston Herald said that while the album was " a stark display of Frusciante 's acoustic guitar virtuosity " and " eerily beautiful " , the singing was " terrible ; his high notes will drive the neighborhood dogs into a frenzy . " 
 Frusciante 's drug addiction worsened as the years progressed . An article published by the New Times LA described him as " a skeleton covered in thin skin " . He participated in an interview with Dutch public broadcast station VPRO — the first media appearance he made since leaving the Chili Peppers . In the interview Frusciante speaks of the positive effects drugs have had on his mind and proudly admits to being a " junkie " . He went on to confess addictions to heroin and crack cocaine , but ultimately described himself as being in the best health of his life . In 1997 , Frusciante released his second solo album Smile From the Streets You Hold , primarily for drug money . Niandra Lades and Usually Just a T @-@ Shirt was estimated to have sold only 45 @,@ 000 copies when Frusciante ordered it out of print in 1998 — when Frusciante rehabilitated and rejoined the Chili Peppers . Smile From the Streets You Hold was withdrawn from the market a year later . In 1999 Niandra Lades and Usually Just a T @-@ Shirt was re @-@ released on American Recordings . In the early 2000s , Frusciante said he planned to re @-@ release Smile From the Streets You Hold sometime in the future , but did not give any indication as to when . It was eventually re @-@ released on American Records in Europe of 2006 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by John Frusciante , except where noted . 
 Niandra LaDes 
 " As Can Be " – 2 : 57 
 " My Smile Is a Rifle " – 3 : 48 
 " Head ( Beach Arab ) " – 2 : 05 
 " Big Takeover " ( cover of Bad Brains ) – 3 : 18 
 " Curtains " – 2 : 30 
 " Running Away into You " – 2 : 12 
 " Ants ( Cassette only bonus track ) " – 2 : 23 
 " Mascara " – 3 : 40 
 " Been Insane " – 1 : 41 
 " Skin Blues " – 1 : 46 
 " Your Pussy 's <unk> to a Building on Fire " – 3 : 17 
 " Blood on My Neck From Success " – 3 : 09 
 " Ten to Butter Blood Voodoo " – 1 : 59 
 Usually Just a T @-@ Shirt [ commonly referred to as ' Untitled # 1 @-@ 13 ' ] 
 Untitled # 0 ( Cassette only bonus track ) – 3 : 41 
 Untitled # 1 – 0 : 34 
 Untitled # 2 – 4 : 21 
 Untitled # 3 – 1 : 50 
 Untitled # 4 – 1 : 38 
 Untitled # 5 – 1 : 30 
 Untitled # 6 – 1 : 29 
 Untitled # 7 – 1 : 42 
 Untitled # 8 – 7 : 55 
 Untitled # 9 – 7 : 04 
 Untitled # 10 – 0 : 25 
 Untitled # 11 – 1 : 51 
 Untitled # 12 – 5 : 27 
 Untitled # 13 – 1 : 52 
 = = Personnel = = 
 John Frusciante - vocals , guitar , bass , piano , mandolin , banjo , clarinet , producer 
 Toni Oswald - vocals ( Untitled # 9 ) ( Uncredited ) 
 Martyn Atkins - art direction and design 
 Dirk Walter - design 
 = Horst Wessel = 
 Horst Ludwig Georg Erich Wessel ( 9 October 1907 – 23 February 1930 ) was a Nazi Party ( NSDAP ) activist known for writing the lyrics to the " Horst @-@ Wessel @-@ Lied " . His death in 1930 was used by the party for propaganda purposes . 
 Wessel first joined the German National People 's Party ( DNVP ) , but by 1926 was removed for being too extremist . He then joined the NSDAP , where he wrote songs for Nazi events . He rose to command several SA squads and districts . On 14 January 1930 , he was shot in the head by two members of the Communist Party of Germany ( KPD ) . Albrecht Höhler was arrested and charged with his murder . He was initially sentenced to six years in prison , but was executed after the Nazis came to power . Wessel 's funeral was given wide attention in Berlin , with many of the Nazi elite in attendance . After his death , he became a major Nazi propaganda symbol . His name was used for several civilian and military purposes during the time of the Third Reich . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Horst Ludwig Georg Erich Wessel was born on 9 October in 1907 in Bielefeld , Westphalia , as the son of Wilhelm Ludwig Georg Wessel ( born 15 July 1879 ) , a doctor and Lutheran minister at the Nikolai Church , one of Berlin 's oldest churches . Wessel 's mother , Bertha Luise Margarete Wessel ( neé Richter ) , also came from a family of Lutheran pastors . Wessel 's parents were married on 1 May 1906 . He grew up alongside his sister Ingeborg Paula Margarethe ( born 19 May 1909 ) and his brother Werner Georg Erich Ludwig ( born 22 August 1910 ) . The family lived in the Judenstraße ( " Street of the Jews " ) , which in medieval times had been the centre of Berlin 's Jewish community . Wessel 's refusal to follow his father into the ministry was the subject of many father and son conflicts . 
 The Wessel family , mainly influenced by the father , avidly supported the monarchist German National People 's Party ( DNVP ) , and when he was 15 , Wessel joined the DNVP 's youth group <unk> ( " Bismarck Youth " ) . He soon became a local leader , engaging in street battles with youth members of the Social Democratic Party ( SPD ) and Communist Party ( KPD ) . Later , Wessel joined groups with a more sinister reputation , including the Organisation Consul and finally the Black Reichswehr . 
 Wessel attended Volksschule ( primary school ) in Cölln from 1914 to 1922 , and thereafter attended high school at <unk> and <unk> Gymnasium , where he passed his Abitur examination . In 1926 Wessel enrolled in Friedrich Wilhelm University . 
 = = In the Nazi Party = = 
 = = = Joining the SA = = = 
 By 1926 , the German National People 's Party decided that Wessel had become " too radical " and he was removed . That December , he joined Adolf Hitler 's National Socialist German Workers ' Party ( Nazi Party ; NSDAP ) and its paramilitary organisation the Sturmabteilung ( " Storm Detachment " ; SA ) . Part of the attraction to Wessel was the socialist stance taken by the Nazi groups in northern Germany . He was also impressed by Joseph Goebbels , the Nazi Party 's Gauleiter ( regional leader ) of Berlin , about whom he said " There was nothing [ Goebbels ] couldn 't handle . The party comrades clung to him with great devotion . The SA would have let itself be cut to pieces for him . Goebbels – he was like Hitler himself . Goebbels – he was our Goebbels . " 
 In a group of fifty SA men , Wessel traveled to the Nazi Party rally in Nuremberg in August 1927 , joining other Berlin Nazis to make a group of 400 , led by Goebbels . At the time , the SA was banned in Berlin . When they returned , the 450 brownshirts were arrested . 
 Wessel soon impressed Goebbels in turn , and in January 1928 , a period in which the Berlin city authorities had banned the SA in an effort to curb political street violence , Wessel was sent to Vienna to study the National Socialist Youth Group , as well as the organisational and tactical methods of the Nazi Party there . He returned to Berlin in July 1928 to recruit local youths , and was involved in helping to implement a reorganisation of the NSDAP in the city into a cell @-@ structure similar to that used by the German Communist Party ( KPD ) . Wessel did this despite SA rules forbidding members from working for the party . 
 In 1929 , Wessel became the Street Cell Leader of the Alexanderplatz Storm Section of the SA . In May , he was appointed district leader of the SA for Friedrichshain where he lived . In October 1929 , Wessel dropped out of university to devote himself full @-@ time to the Nazi movement . 
 = = = Erna Jänicke = = = 
 At around the same time , the Alexanderplatz , the centre of Berlin 's nightlife , was part of the territory of Wessel 's SA troops . In September 1929 , he met Erna Jänicke , an 18 @-@ year @-@ old prostitute , in a bar . Soon he moved into her apartment in Große Frankfurter Straße ( today Karl @-@ Marx @-@ Allee ) . The landlady was Elisabeth Salm , whose late husband had been an active Communist . Some sources claim Wessel earned money as her procurer . After a few months , there was a dispute between Salm and Wessel over unpaid rent . 
 = = Death = = 
 = = = Assassination = = = 
 In the evening of 14 January 1930 , at around ten o 'clock , Wessel was shot in the face at point @-@ blank range by two members of the KPD in Friedrichshain . The attack occurred at Große Frankfurter Straße 62 , the building where Wessel and Jänicke lived . As he was lying seriously wounded in hospital , Goebbels was already releasing reports asserting that those who had carried out the attack were " degenerate communist subhumans " . He later died in hospital on 23 February from blood poisoning he contracted during his hospitalisation . 
 Following his death , the Nazis and Communists offered different accounts of the events . The police ( led by Chief Inspector Teichmann ) and several courts determined that both political and private reasons had led to Wessel 's assassination . By 17 January 1930 , the police announced their manhunt for their prime suspect : KPD member Albrecht Höhler . Jänicke identified Höhler as the gunman . It was then reported by a democratic @-@ minded newspaper that Jänicke knew about the existence of Höhler prior to the murder because Wessel had used her for espionage . Jänicke responded by saying she had never been a spy for Wessel , and that she only knew Höhler as an " acquaintance from the streets " . The police and courts believed Jänicke , and Höhler was quickly arrested . He was sentenced to six years imprisonment for the shooting ; the light sentence the result of the court finding that there were extenuating circumstances . Seven accomplices were also found guilty and sentenced to jail . 
 Three years later , after the Nazi accession to power in 1933 , Höhler was dragged out of prison and murdered by the SA . 
 = = = Funeral = = = 
 Goebbels ' plan was to turn Wessel 's funeral into a mass demonstration full of speeches and processions of SA men in uniform , but he could not get the necessary police permits to do so , even after Wessel 's sister requested Hindenburg to relent . 
 Wessel was buried in Berlin on 1 March 1930 . Contrary to Nazi claims , there were no attacks on the funeral procession . His funeral was filmed and turned into a major propaganda event by the NSDAP . Wessel was elevated by Goebbels ' propaganda apparatus to the status of leading martyr of the Nazi movement . Many of Goebbels 's most effective propaganda speeches were made at <unk> , but Wessel received unusual attention among the many unremembered storm troopers . In an editorial in the Völkischer Beobachter ( " People 's Observer " ) , Alfred Rosenberg wrote of how Wessel was not dead , but had joined a combat group that still struggled with them ; afterwards , Nazis spoke of how a man who died in conflict had joined " Horst Wessel 's combat group " or were " summoned to Horst Wessel 's standard . " The Prussian police had outlawed public gatherings and the display of swastikas at the funeral procession , with the exception of a few Nazi Party vehicles . Wessel 's coffin was paraded through large parts of the center of Berlin in a procession that took many hours . 
 As the coffin reached <unk> ( now Rosa @-@ Luxemburg @-@ Platz ) , KPD members began singing " The Internationale " in an attempt to disrupt the event . The police were unable to prevent abusive shouts and , at some points , flying rocks . No major clashes occurred , although someone had written " To Wessel the pimp , a last Heil Hitler " in white paint on the cemetery wall . 
 In attendance of Wessel 's funeral was Goebbels ( who delivered the eulogy ) , Franz Pfeffer von Salomon , Hermann Göring , and Prince August Wilhelm of Prussia , referred to as the " Nazi prince . " Prior to the event , Goebbels and Göring had discussed the possibility of Hitler attending . In his diary entry on the day of the funeral , Goebbels recalled : " Hitler isn 't coming . Had the situation explained to him over the telephone and he actually declined . Oh well " Goebbels blamed Rudolf Hess for preventing Hitler from coming . 
 Goebbels continue to use the " martyrdom " of Wessel as a propaganda device for years , including in January 1933 , when " an enormous procession ... led by Hitler , Goebbels , Röhm , and other top officials of the NSDAP , ... marched to the St. Nicholas Cemetery ... [ where ] Hitler spoke of Wessel 's death as a symbolic sacrifice , and dedicated a memorial to him . Wessel 's name was frequently invoked by the Nazis to bolster core tenets of National Socialist ideology during the remaining existence of the Third Reich . For example , a wartime article from the Nazi @-@ owned Völkischer Beobachter newspaper called Wessel " the hero of the Brown Revolution " and referred to his " sacrificial death " that " passionately inflamed millions who followed " . The paper further referred to Wessel as " the driving force behind the struggle for freedom of the armed services and the homeland of the Greater German Reich " . 
 After World War II , Wessel 's memorial was vandalized and his remains were destroyed . Such activity became common for buried Nazis in East Germany . The grave site was long marked only by part of the headstone of Wessel 's father , Ludwig , from which the surname " Wessel " had been removed . This , too , was destroyed around 2005 and the site was marked only by a raised mound of earth bounded by ivy , with two <unk> in the center . Later in 2011 , a group of anti @-@ Nazi activists attacked Wessel 's grave and sprayed the words Keine Ruhe für Nazis ! ( English : " No Rest For Nazis ! " ) on his headstone . In August 2013 , the grave of Wessel 's father was levelled as well , as the church wished to stop the site from being a rally point for Neo @-@ Nazis . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Horst Wessel Song = = = 
 Wessel played the <unk> ( shawm ) , a double @-@ reed woodwind instrument which was played in groups called <unk> ( " <unk> orchestras or bands " ) , and are still used in folk celebrations . Wessel founded an " SA <unk> " band , which provided music during SA events . In early 1929 , Wessel wrote the lyrics for a new Nazi fight song <unk> ( " fight song " ) , which was first published in Goebbels 's newspaper Der Angriff in September , under the title Der <unk> SA @-@ Mann ( " The Unknown SA @-@ Man " ) . The song later became known as Die Fahne Hoch ( " Raise the Flag " ) and finally the " Horst @-@ Wessel @-@ Lied " ( " Horst Wessel Song " ) . The Nazis made it a co @-@ national anthem of Nazi Germany , along with the first stanza of the Deutschlandlied . It was later claimed by the Nazis that Wessel also wrote the music , but it was considered more likely that the tune was in reality adapted from a World War I German Imperial Navy song , and was probably originally a folk song . The authorship of the melody was finally determined by a German court in 1937 as not by Wessel . 
 = = = Executions = = = 
 On April 10 , 1935 , five years after Wessel 's assassination , and two years after the SA murder of Wessel 's killer , Albrecht Höhler , two persons accused of being involved in Wessel 's killing were put on trial and subsequently beheaded in Berlin 's <unk> Prison : Solly Epstein , a Jewish painter , and Hans Ziegler , a barber . The two had been arrested in August 1933 , and were put on trial in May 1934 with a third defendant , Peter Stoll , a tailor . In 2009 the sentences against them were rescinded by the German government . 
