 = = = Posthumous notability = = = 
 = = = = Hans Westmar = = = = 
 Hans Westmar was one of the first films of the Nazi era to idealise a version of his life . Goebbels , however , disliked the film and temporarily banned it , eventually allowing its release with alterations and with the main character 's name changed to the fictional " Hans Westmar " . Part of the problem was the authentic depiction of storm trooper brutality , including violent clashes with Communists , did not fit the more reasonable tone the Nazis attempted to present initially , after coming to power ; unlike Wessel , Westmar preaches class reconciliation and does not alienate his family . It was among the first films to depict dying for Hitler as a glorious death for Germany , resulting in his spirit inspiring his comrades . 
 = = = = Memorial <unk> = = = = 
 Passau named a street Horst @-@ Wessel @-@ Straße . 
 The Berlin district of Friedrichshain , where Wessel died , was renamed " Horst Wessel Stadt " , and a square in the Mitte district was renamed " Horst @-@ Wessel @-@ Platz " . The U @-@ Bahn station nearby was also renamed . After the war , the name Friedrichshain was restored and Horst @-@ Wessel @-@ Platz ( which was in East Berlin ) became " <unk> " ( after Karl Liebknecht ) . In 1947 it was renamed " Luxemburg @-@ Platz " after Rosa Luxemburg ( it has been called Rosa @-@ Luxemburg @-@ Platz since 1969 ) . 
 In 1936 , Nazi Germany 's Kriegsmarine commissioned a three @-@ masted training ship and named her the Horst Wessel . The ship was taken as a war prize by the United States after World War II . After repairs and modifications , she was commissioned on 15 May 1946 into the United States Coast Guard as the USCGC Eagle ( <unk> @-@ 327 ) . She remains in service to this day . 
 Examples of German military units adopting the name of this Nazi @-@ era " martyr " in World War II include the 18th SS Volunteer Panzergrenadier Division , known as the " Horst Wessel " Division , and the Luftwaffe 's 26th Destroyer ( or heavy fighter ) Wing Zerstörergeschwader 26 , as well as its successor day fighter unit Jagdgeschwader 6 , which was similarly named the " Horst Wessel " wing . 
 = SR Q1 class = 
 The SR Q1 class is a type of austerity steam locomotive constructed during the Second World War . The class was designed by Oliver Bulleid for use on the intensive freight turns experienced during wartime on the Southern Railway network . A total of 40 locomotives were built . Bulleid incorporated many innovations and weight @-@ saving concepts to produce a highly functional design . The class lasted in service until July 1966 , and the first member of the class , number C1 , has been preserved by the National Railway Museum . 
 The highly unusual and controversial design represents the ultimate development of the British 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 freight engine , capable of hauling trains that were usually allocated to much larger locomotives on other railways . Nicknames for the class included " Ugly Ducklings " , " Coffee Pots " and " Charlies " . 
 = = Background = = 
 In late 1939 , the Southern Railway , until then primarily a high @-@ density commuter railway serving London and South @-@ East England , much of it electrified with third @-@ rail pick @-@ up , found itself on the British front line of the Second World War , with a severe lack of modern freight @-@ handling capability . The newest freight design was the Q Class 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 of 1938 , the last locomotive designed by Richard Maunsell . Built to essentially Victorian era principles , these had been designed as replacements for many of the older 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 0s inherited by the Southern Railway in 1923 , and entered service in January 1938 . Maunsell , having retired at the end of October 1937 , was replaced by Oliver Bulleid . 
 The Southern Railway , therefore , became an essential strategic war @-@ asset because of its proximity to continental Europe , and needed to equip itself with adequate freight @-@ handling capability to transport the vast quantities of supplies and troops required for the conflict . The brief stipulated high route availability and high tractive effort . 
 = = Construction history = = 
 The answer to this problem came from the drawing board of the Southern Railway 's innovative Chief Mechanical Engineer , Oliver Bulleid in the shape of the Q1 . Using the minimum amount of raw materials , and with all superfluous features stripped away , he produced in 1942 the most powerful 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 steam locomotive ever to run on Britain 's railways . The first twenty locomotives were constructed at Brighton works and the remaining twenty at Ashford . Powerful and light , the <unk> formed the backbone of the Southern 's heavy freight capability . The engine weighed less than 90 tons ( 90 @.@ 6 tonnes ) so could be used over more than 97 % of the Southern Railway 's route mileage . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 The class was one of several built under the wartime austerity regime , which stressed pure functionality above any considerations of style or decoration . This austere approach to the design explains its functional appearance . One aspect of their shape was that , like Bulleid 's SR Merchant Navy class and SR West Country and Battle of Britain classes , they could be simply driven through a coach @-@ washer for cleaning at a time when manpower for this time @-@ consuming chore could not be spared . 
 The unusual shape was also dictated by the use of materials ; the lagging was made of a glass fibre insulation material known as ' <unk> ' , which , although cheap and plentiful during the war years , could not support any weight , and therefore a separate casing was required which followed that seen in the Merchant Navy class locomotives , and the boiler rings were adapted to lend the lagging the support needed . A copper , rather than steel , firebox was utilised , unlike Bulleid 's Pacific designs . The wheels were smaller , 5 ft 1 in ( 1 @.@ 55 m ) adaptations of the Bulleid Firth Brown type utilised on the Pacifics . The locomotive had two cylinders with Stephenson link outside admission piston valves , having a travel in full gear of 6 1 ⁄ 8 in ( 155 @.@ 58 mm ) and a steam lap of 1 5 ⁄ 8 in ( 41 @.@ 28 mm ) . It was provided with a five @-@ nozzle blast @-@ pipe . 
 The boiler design was based upon that of the Lord Nelson class , and the firebox used the same <unk> and backplate . The boiler barrel measured 10 ft 6 in ( 3 @.@ 20 m ) in length , with diameters of 5 ft 0 in ( 1 @.@ 52 m ) at the front and 5 ft 9 in ( 1 @.@ 75 m ) at the back . The grate area was 27 sq ft ( 2 @.@ 51 m2 ) , the heating surface of the 209 tubes and 21 flues was 1 @,@ 302 sq ft ( 120 @.@ 96 m2 ) , that of the firebox was 170 sq ft ( 15 @.@ 79 m2 ) giving a total evaporative heating surface of 1 @,@ 472 sq ft ( 136 @.@ 75 m2 ) ; the superheater heating surface was 218 sq ft ( 20 @.@ 25 m2 ) . 
 = = Operational details = = 
 The Q1 represented the final development of the British 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 main line steam locomotive . Later designs of medium @-@ powered freight locomotives , such as the LMS Ivatt Class 2 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 and LMS Ivatt Class 4 Moguls all had a 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 wheel arrangement ; the 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 wheel arrangement was not used again in the BR Standard designs of locomotive . 
 BR classified the Q1 class in the power classification 5F . This represented a rarity , as few other 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 0s exceeded the classification of 4F , with notable exceptions being the LNER Class J20 ( 5F ) , LNER Class <unk> ( <unk> ) and LNER Class <unk> ( 6F ) . 
 The Q1 's route availability meant that although they were primarily freight locomotives , they also frequently deputised on secondary passenger services . However , the class gained a reputation for poor braking on unfitted freight trains due to the light construction of the tender braking system . 
 The <unk> thrived on their intended duties during World War II , where the class had proved that they were an indispensable addition to the Southern locomotive fleet . This was achieved to such an extent that they all remained in service until the 1960s , long after they were intended to cease operation as an " austerity " design . Withdrawals began in 1963 , during the implementation of the BR Modernisation Plan which saw the end of steam operations on Britain 's railways , the last example of the class being withdrawn in 1966 . 
 = = Livery and numbering = = 
 = = = Southern Railway and Bulleid numbering system = = = 
 Livery of the Q1 Class was plain freight black , with Sunshine Yellow numbering on the cabside , and " Southern " lettering on the tender , shaded in green . Bulleid advocated a continental style of locomotive nomenclature , based upon his experiences at the French branch of Westinghouse Electric before the First World War , and those of his tenure in the rail operating department during that conflict . The Southern Railway number followed an adaptation of the UIC classification system where " C " refers to the number of coupled driving axles – in this case three . All these locomotives therefore carried numbers which started " C " followed by the individual identifier from C1 to <unk> . 
 = = = Post @-@ 1948 ( nationalisation ) = = = 
 After nationalisation , the original Southern livery was in continued use , although with " British Railways " on the tender in Sunshine Yellow . From 1950 onwards , livery remained plain , although in the guise of British Railways Freight Black without lining of any description . The British Railways crest was located on the tender side . Given the British Railways power classification 5F , the locomotives were also renumbered to the British Railways ' standard numbering system as <unk> – <unk> . 
 = = Preservation = = 
 Only one locomotive of the class survived into preservation . First @-@ of @-@ class <unk> ( C1 ) has been preserved , and now resides at the National Railway Museum in York , where it carries its original SR livery and number . Before its return to York in 2004 , the locomotive worked on the Bluebell Railway in East Sussex . 
 = = In fiction = = 
 The locomotive Neville in the Thomas and Friends children 's television series is based on Q1 class No. <unk> . 
 = Hairography = 
 " Hairography " is the eleventh episode of the American television series Glee . The episode premiered on the Fox network on November 25 , 2009 . It was written by series creator Ian Brennan and directed by Bill D 'Elia . The episode introduces New Directions ' rival glee clubs , the Jane Addams Girls Choir for girls recently released from juvenile detention , and the Haverbrook Deaf Choir . Cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) sabotages New Directions by giving their set @-@ list for sectionals to the competing clubs . Quinn ( Dianna Agron ) reconsiders having her baby adopted , but ultimately <unk> to the idea , and Rachel ( Lea Michele ) tries unsuccessfully to attract Finn ( Cory Monteith ) . 
 Rapper Eve guest @-@ stars as Grace Hitchens , director of the Jane Addams Girls Choir , and So You Think You Can Dance contestants Katee Shean , <unk> Payne and Comfort <unk> appear as members of her group . The episode features covers of eight songs , including a mash @-@ up of " Hair " from the musical Hair and " Crazy in Love " by Beyoncé featuring Jay @-@ Z. Studio recordings of all but one of the songs performed in the episode were released as singles , available for digital download . 
 " Hairography " was watched by 6 @.@ 1 million US viewers and received mixed reviews from critics . Raymund Flandez of The Wall Street Journal deemed the mash @-@ up performance one of the worst of the season , with Zap2it 's Liz Pardue agreeing that it was " hideous " . Flandez , Pardue and Mike Hale of the New York Times all felt that it was inappropriate for New Directions to interrupt the deaf choir 's performance of " Imagine " , however Bobby Hankinson of the Houston Chronicle opined that reviewers needed to " realize that this show takes its jabs at everyone , but it always has a wink and a hug and lots and lots of love behind it " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 New Directions ' director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) suspects that cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) has been colluding with rival glee clubs , and visits the Jane Addams Academy for girls recently released from juvenile detention . When their club director Grace Hitchens ( Eve ) reveals the extent of the school 's under @-@ funding , Will invites her club to perform in the McKinley High auditorium . Will is intimidated by their opposition , but Rachel ( Lea Michele ) assures him that the girls are using the power of " hairography " — frequent , dramatic hair @-@ tossing — to distract from the fact their singing and dancing ability is limited . Will purchases wigs for New Directions and has them utilize hairography themselves , performing a mash @-@ up of " Hair " and " Crazy in Love " . Dalton Rumba ( Michael Hitchcock ) , glee club director at Haverbrook School for the Deaf , feels slighted by the invitation Will extended to the Jane Addams Academy , and arranges for his own club to also perform at McKinley High . His club duets with New Directions on John Lennon 's " Imagine " , and Will realizes that the new mash @-@ up and hairography routine is not working . He removes it from the club 's set @-@ list , replacing it with a performance of " True Colors " . Unbeknownst to Will , Sue reveals two songs from New Directions ' line @-@ up for sectionals to Grace and Dalton , suggesting they have their own clubs perform them to gain an edge in the competition . 
 Quinn ( Dianna Agron ) begins to doubt her decision to give her baby to Will 's wife Terri ( Jessalyn Gilsig ) , and re @-@ considers her stance on raising the baby with Puck ( Mark Salling ) instead of Finn ( Cory Monteith ) . She tells Terri she wants to keep the baby , but in an effort to change her mind , Terri 's sister Kendra ( Jennifer Aspen ) has Quinn babysit her three unruly sons . Quinn invites Puck to babysit with her and the two bond , however when Quinn discovers that Puck spent the evening sexting his ex @-@ girlfriend Santana ( Naya Rivera ) , she re @-@ commits to having the baby adopted , believing her daughter deserves a better father . 
 Kurt ( Chris Colfer ) gives Rachel a make @-@ over , ostensibly to help her attract Finn , but in reality attempting to sabotage her chances with him . Finn is unimpressed with Rachel 's new look before telling her he remembered having the conversation with Kurt about what he liked in girls . Rachel confronts Kurt , stating that even if he is in love with Finn , she will always have a better chance " because [ she 's ] a girl " . But Kurt tells her that they are both kidding themselves : Finn is in love with Quinn and nothing will change that . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Hairography " was written by series creator Ian Brennan , and directed by Bill D 'Elia . Recurring characters who appear in the episode are glee club members Brittany ( Heather Morris ) , Santana Lopez ( Rivera ) , Mike Chang ( Harry Shum , Jr . ) and Matt Rutherford ( Dijon Talton ) , Terri 's sister Kendra Giardi ( Aspen ) , Kendra 's husband Phil ( Michael <unk> ) , and their triplet sons ( Aidan , Ethan and Ben Freedman ) . Hitchcock guest @-@ stars as rival glee club director Dalton Rumba , and rapper Eve plays another club director , Grace Hitchens . So You Think You Can Dance contestants Katee Shean , <unk> Payne and Comfort <unk> appear as members of Grace 's club . 
 Eve was contracted to appear in two episodes of Glee , having been offered the role of Grace after Whitney Houston declined to appear . Discussing her casting , Eve stated : " I got asked and I 'd heard the buzz about the show . When the first pilot episode came out , I figured it was something different and something we haven 't seen on TV before . I didn 't want to turn it down ! " She commented that she would have loved to have seen Whitney Houston appear in the show , explaining : " I think it would 've been different in a sense because she 's an original diva . She would 've brought a whole other energy , which would 've been amazing . " Comparing her character Grace to McKinley High glee director Will , Eve explained : " For me especially , I come from a harder place . I 'm the teacher of a reform school . I 'm used to being very strict . " Asked if she would return to the show in the future , she replied : " If I 'm asked to do it , I definitely would . It 's just a really well @-@ made , smart show . " Though she does not sing in " Hairography " , Eve commented that she would like to do so if she returned to Glee in the future , naming " Sweet Dreams " by Eurythmics as her ideal song choice . 
 The episode features cover versions of " Bootylicious " by Destiny 's Child , " Don 't Make Me Over " by Dionne Warwick , " Papa Don 't Preach " by Madonna , a mash @-@ up of " Hair " from the musical Hair and " Crazy in Love " by Beyoncé featuring Jay @-@ Z , " Imagine " by John Lennon , " True Colors " by Cyndi Lauper and " You 're the One That I Want " from Grease . Yoko Ono was hesitant about allowing Glee the rights to " Imagine " . Series music supervisor P.J. Bloom explained : " It was very difficult to convince Yoko Ono that it was the right thing to do . She needed to truly understand how the music was going to be used . The added component of us wanting to have a deaf choir signing the song made for this incredibly poignant moment . ... It really took a lot of convincing to get her on board and realize that it was a great , great moment , and a tribute to John and his song . " Jenna Ushkowitz has commented that the performance of " Imagine " brought the cast and crew of Glee to tears , and that several cast members got " Imagine " tattoos afterwards as it was " such a nice checkpoint in our lives . " Studio recordings of all the songs performed in the episode except " You 're the One That I Want " were released as singles , available for digital download . " Imagine " charted at number 82 in Australia , 49 in Canada and 67 in America , while " True Colors " charted at number 47 in Australia , 38 in Canada and 66 in America . " Don 't Make Me Over " , " Imagine " and " True Colors " are also included on the album Glee : The Music , Volume 2 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Hairography " was watched by 6 @.@ 1 million U.S. viewers , and attained a 2 @.@ 5 / 7 rating / share in the 18 @-@ 49 demographic . Its viewership was a season low , however the episode aired the night before Thanksgiving , when all the major networks saw decreased ratings . In Canada , it was the twenty @-@ second most watched show for the week of broadcast , attaining 1 @.@ 37 million viewers . In the UK , the episode was watched by 2 @.@ 231 million viewers ( 1 @.@ 886 million on E4 , and 345 @,@ 000 on E4 + 1 ) , becoming the most @-@ watched show on E4 and E4 + 1 for the week , and the most @-@ watched show on cable for the week , as well as the most @-@ watched episode of the series at the time . Lynda K. Walker , Ann Marie <unk> , Michael Ward and Gina <unk> were nominated for the " Outstanding Hairstyling for a Single @-@ Camera Series " award at the 62nd Primetime Emmy Awards for their work on the episode . 
 The episode received mixed reviews from critics . Raymund Flandez of The Wall Street Journal was critical of New Directions ' mash @-@ up performance , deeming it one of the worst performances of the season . He enjoyed the deaf choir 's rendition of " Imagine " , but wished that New Directions had not interrupted and joined in with them . Mike Hale of the New York Times also disapproved of New Directions joining in with the deaf choir , writing that " Imagine " : " was shaping up to be the best thing in the episode " until New Directions " torpedoed the moment . " Liz Pardue of Zap2it felt that with " Hairography " Glee " wasn 't at its best " , deeming the writing less sharp than usual and observing that the pregnancy storyline dulled the episode for her . Pardue felt that New Directions were " butting in " to the Haverbrook performance of " Imagine " , which she found " a little insulting " , observing : " Good intentions , but cringe @-@ y outcome . " Pardue also criticized the mash @-@ up of " Hair " and " Crazy in Love " as " hideous " . 
 Gerrick D. Kennedy for the Los Angeles Times was generally more positive regarding the episode 's musical performances , however was critical of the ongoing pregnancy plot , noting that he cringed whenever Quinn appeared on screen . Conversely , Bobby Hankinson of the Houston Chronicle enjoyed Quinn in the episode , writing : " I love that she can keep her Mean Girls edge while being heartbreakingly sad or as joyful as she was singing " Papa Don 't Preach " . He countered criticism of the portrayal of New Directions ' rival choirs , suggesting : " at this point , everyone needs to realize that this show takes its jabs at everyone , but it always has a wink and a hug and lots and lots of love behind it . " Entertainment Weekly 's Dan Snierson reviewed the episode positively , calling the " Imagine " performance " a classic feel @-@ good Glee moment , teeming with sappy but undeniable heart " , while Aly Semigran of MTV deemed it her favorite musical moment from the show , feeling that it : " honored the classic song in such a respectful way . " 
 = Circle the Drain = 
 " Circle the Drain " is a song by American singer Katy Perry , from her third studio album , Teenage Dream ( 2010 ) . It was written by Perry , Christopher " Tricky " Stewart and Monte Neuble . Lyrically , " Circle the Drain " candidly focuses on a former lover 's drug @-@ addiction and the strains it put on both of them . Following its release , several media outlets reported it to have been inspired by her former relationship with Travie McCoy . Critics were divided on the track , with some finding Perry to be in a hypocritical position , given the album 's other material . Other reviewers found it nice to see a different side to the singer . 
 Capitol Records released the track as a promotional single two weeks before the album 's release on August 10 . The song achieved modest charting , with its highest peak position being number 30 on the Canadian Hot 100 . It charted similarly in New Zealand and managed to enter the US Billboard Hot 100 at number 58 . " Circle the Drain " has been performed by Perry on her 2011 world tour , California Dreams Tour . On the tour , she was dressed in a catsuit and the stage was decorated in cartoonish meat . Concert reviewers gave her performances mixed reviews . 
 = = Production and composition = = 
 Along with Christopher " Tricky " Stewart and Monte Neuble , Perry wrote the song entitled " Circle the Drain " for her third studio album , Teenage Dream . A total of 17 music engineers contributed to the track 's composition . Critics suggest the song is about her former relationship with Gym Class Heroes ' lead vocalist Travie McCoy . When finally asked about his opinion on the track , McCoy admitted to hearing about " Circle the Drain " , but has never actually listened to the song . Nonetheless , he commented : " I heard she put out a song that 's about me , or about some old habits or whatever . [ And ] I look at it like this : I 'm just stoked that she finally has a song with some substance on her record . Good job . " 
 " Circle the Drain " is a rant song where , lyrically , Perry is telling off a self @-@ destructive drug @-@ addicted ex @-@ boyfriend . Its candid lyrics also discuss the strains his addiction put on both of them . In the track 's chorus , she sings about how she wants to be his lover , not someone who has to take care of him , such as a maternal figure . She also sings about how he had ultimately lost large opportunities . Styled in the genres of electronic rock , disco @-@ rock , and gothic rock tones , it is an up @-@ tempo song that lasts for four minutes and 32 seconds , and also has influences of techno . The track is composed in the key of E ♭ minor and is set in time signature of common time , with a tempo of 135 beats per minute . Perry 's vocal range spans over an octave , from A ♭ 3 to D ♭ 5 . 
 Entertainment Weekly writer Leah Greenblatt stated that Perry 's lyrical talent is not her strength , adding : " neither , in fact , is rhyming ' forte ' with ' foreplay , ' as she does painfully on the druggie @-@ boyfriend takedown ' Circle the Drain ' . " Billboard journalist Monica Herrera found the song to have been inspired by Pat Benatar 's material , while Perry herself said : " It 's kind of like my ' You Oughta Know ' Alanis Morissette moment . " Al Fox of BBC News wrote that the song has " menacing undertones " which unveils a different side to Perry , unlike her current " unsolicited residency in many a showbiz column . " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Capitol Records released " Circle the Drain " as a promotional single from Teenage Dream two weeks before the album 's release on August 10 . The song charted modestly and only remained on music charts for its debut week . The track 's highest peak position was on the Canadian Hot 100 , where it debuted at number 30 ; " Circle the Drain " became the biggest jump on that chart ( 28 places , from number 58 ) for the week ending on August 28 . On the New Zealand Singles Chart , the song performed similarly , peaking at number 36 on August 23 . Additionally , " Circle the Drain " managed to enter the US Billboard Hot 100 at number 58 . 
 Critical reaction to " Circle the Drain " was mixed . Keri Mason from Billboard believed that tracks like " Circle the Drain " made the Teenage Dream album " get heavier sonically and lyrically , with a boom @-@ boom @-@ pow electro punch " . Slant Magazine 's Matthew Cole found the singer to be virtually less sympathetic than her former lover . This being because her " put @-@ downs are alternately pedantic " and hypocritical even , as she finds offense to his substance use before foreplay , but was singing about blacking out and hooking up on another of the album 's tracks – " Last Friday Night ( T.G.I.F. ) " . Chris Richards of The Washington Post had a similar reaction , finding it impossible to take any of the cautionary advice " Circle the Drain " offered , as Perry had just bragged about being very drunk on the very same record . 
 MTV News reporter James Montgomery , said when discussing several tracks on Teenage Dream , one of which included " Circle the Drain " , that " they are all really pretty great " and are " destined to be smash hits . " Yahoo ! Music journalist Chris Parkin found the song to be the only track on Teenage Dream to offer something deep and dark , citing the lyric " You fall asleep during foreplay because the pills you take are more your <unk> " . In his review of the record for PopMatters , Steve Leftridge stated that tracks such as " Circle the Drain " are not strong , edgy or clever enough " to lend any genuine credibility to Perry as a serious artist with anything to actually say . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Perry has included the song on the setlist for her 2011 world concert tour entitled California Dreams Tour . For performances of the track , the stage was decorated with cartoonish link sausages and rib @-@ eye steak that dangled from the rafters , while Perry was dressed in a catsuit . Along with Perry 's performances of " Teenage Dream " and " E.T. " , music blog Idolator staff writer Erika Brooks Adickman cited " Circle the Drain " as being a highlight of the tour . The Patriot Ledger 's Jay N. Miller found " Circle the Drain " to be " the most rocking " out of the setlist 's line @-@ up at TD Garden . 
 In contrast , The Hollywood Reporter quoted Rolling Stone 's Meredith Blake in her concert review saying she found it pointless to have those items onstage given the song 's theme . Writing for NME , Emily MacKay did a live review of the singer 's tour at the HMV Hammersmith Apollo in London during March 2011 . She said that the spiritless " Circle the Drain " , " Hummingbird Heartbeat " and " Who Am I Living For ? " were enough to make you feel somewhat like that of a " fractious toddler having a series of expensive toys waved in its mottled face by a fretful aunt to keep it from deciding it wants to cry . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital download 
 " Circle the Drain " – 4 : 32 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Fourth International = 
 The Fourth International ( FI ) is the Communist international organisation consisting of followers of Leon Trotsky , or Trotskyists , with the declared goal of helping the working class bring about socialism and work toward international communism . The Fourth International was established in France in 1938 : Trotsky and his supporters , having been expelled from the Soviet Union , considered the Comintern or Third International to have become " lost to " Stalinism and incapable of leading the international working class to political power . Thus , Trotskyists founded their own , competing " Fourth International " . 
 Today , there is no longer a single , cohesive Fourth International . Throughout the better part of its existence , the Fourth International was hounded by agents of the Soviet secret police , repressed by capitalist countries such as France and the United States and rejected by followers of the Soviet Union and later Maoism as illegitimate — a position these communists still hold today . It struggled to maintain contact under these conditions of simultaneous illegality and scorn around much of the world during World War II , because when workers ' uprisings did occur , they were usually under the influence of Soviet @-@ inspired , anarchist , social democratic , Maoist , or militant nationalist groups , leading to further defeats for the FI and its Trotskyists , who never gathered similar support . Even after the Soviet repudiation of Stalin and de @-@ <unk> , Trotskyism continued to be regarded as politically discredited and there was very little renewed support for Trotskyist ideas , particularly from those already committed to another form of communism . Ideologically , Maoists , left communists , and anarchists all consider Trotskyism , and thus also the Fourth International , to be ideologically bankrupt and impotent . Despite this , many parts of Latin America and Europe continue to have large Trotskyist groupings , with followings both young and old , who are attracted to its " anti @-@ Stalinist " positions and its rhetoric of workers ' internationalism . Quite a few of these groups carry the label " Fourth Internationalist " either in their organisation 's name , major political position documents , or both . 
 The Fourth International , in line with its Trotskyist underpinnings , tended to view the Comintern as worthy of conditional support even considering its corruption , and although it regarded its own ideas as more advanced and thus superior to those of the Third International , it did not actively seek the Comintern 's destruction . It has not succeeded in capitalizing on the renewed interest in socialism and does not operate as a cohesive entity in the manner of the prior internationals . The FI suffered a major split in 1940 and an even more significant split in 1953 . A partial reunification occurred in 1963 , but the international never recovered enough to re @-@ emerge as a single transnational grouping . Trotskyists ' response to that situation has been in the form of its broad array of Trotskyist Internationals , almost all of whom are bitterly divided over which organisation represents the " true " Fourth Internationalist political continuity . 
 = = Trotskyism = = 
 Trotskyists regard themselves as working in opposition to both capitalism and Stalinism . Trotsky advocated proletarian revolution as set out in his theory of " permanent revolution " , and believed that a workers ' state would not be able to hold out against the pressures of a hostile capitalist world unless socialist revolutions quickly took hold in other countries as well . This theory was advanced in opposition to the view held by the Stalinists that " socialism in one country " could be built in the Soviet Union alone . Furthermore , Trotsky and his supporters harshly criticised the increasingly totalitarian nature of Joseph Stalin 's rule . They argued that socialism without democracy is impossible . Thus , faced with the increasing lack of democracy in the Soviet Union , they concluded that it was no longer a socialist workers ' state , but a degenerated workers ' state . 
 Trotsky and his supporters had been organised since 1923 as the Left Opposition . They opposed the bureaucratisation of the Soviet Union , which they analysed as being partly caused by the poverty and isolation of the Soviet economy . Stalin 's theory of socialism in one country was developed in 1924 as an opposition to Trotsky 's Theory of Permanent Revolution , which argued that capitalism was a world system and required a world revolution in order to replace it with socialism . Prior to 1924 , the Bolsheviks ' international perspective had been guided by Trotsky 's position . Trotsky argued that Stalin 's theory represented the interests of bureaucratic elements in direct opposition to the working class . 
 Eventually Trotsky was sent into internal exile and his supporters were jailed . The Left Opposition , however , continued to work in secret within the Soviet Union . Trotsky was eventually exiled to Turkey . He moved from there to France , Norway , and finally to Mexico . He was assassinated on Stalin 's orders in Mexico , by Ramón <unk> , a Spanish @-@ born Soviet agent in August 1940 . 
 = = Political internationals = = 
 A political international is an organisation of political parties or activists with the aim of co @-@ ordinating their activity for a common purpose . There had been a long tradition of socialists organising on an international basis , and Karl Marx had led the International Workingmen 's Association , which later became known as the " first international " . 
 After the International Workingmen 's Association disbanded in 1876 , several attempts were made to revive the organisation , culminating in the formation of the Socialist International ( Second International ) in 1889 . This , in turn , was disbanded in 1916 following disagreements over World War I. Although the organisation reformed in 1923 as the Labour and Socialist International , supporters of the October Revolution and the Bolsheviks had already set up the Communist International ( Comintern ) , which they regarded as the Third International . This was organised on a democratic centralist basis , with component parties required to fight for policies adopted by the body as a whole . 
 By declaring themselves the Fourth International , the " World Party of Socialist Revolution " , the Trotskyists were publicly asserting their continuity with the Comintern , and with its predecessors . Their recognition of the importance of these earlier Internationals was coupled with a belief that they eventually degenerated . Although the Socialist International and Comintern were still in existence , the Trotskyists did not believe those organisations were capable of supporting revolutionary socialism and internationalism . 
 The foundation of the Fourth International was therefore spurred in part by a desire to form a stronger political current , rather than being seen as the communist opposition to the Comintern and the Soviet Union . Trotsky believed that its formation was all the more urgent for the role he saw it playing in the impending World War . 
 = = Decision to form the International = = 
 In the early 1930s , Trotsky and his supporters believed that Stalin 's influence over the Third International could still be fought from within and slowly rolled back . They organised themselves into the International Left Opposition in 1930 , which was intended to be a group of anti @-@ Stalinist dissenters within the Third International . Stalin 's supporters , who dominated the International , would no longer tolerate dissent . All Trotskyists , and those suspected of being influenced by Trotskyism , were expelled . 
 Trotsky claimed that the Third Period policies of the Comintern had contributed to the rise of Adolf Hitler in Germany , and that its turn to a popular front policy ( aiming to unite all ostensibly anti @-@ fascist forces ) sowed illusions in reformism and pacifism and " clear [ ed ] the road for a fascist overturn " . By 1935 he claimed that the Comintern had fallen irredeemably into the hands of the Stalinist bureaucracy . He and his supporters , expelled from the Third International , participated in a conference of the London Bureau of socialist parties outside both the Socialist International and the Comintern . Three of those parties joined the Left Opposition in signing a document written by Trotsky calling for a Fourth International , which became known as the " Declaration of Four " . Of those , two soon distanced themselves from the agreement , but the Dutch Revolutionary Socialist Party worked with the International Left Opposition to declare the International Communist League . 
 This position was contested by Andrés Nin and some other members of the League who did not support the call for a new International . This group prioritised regroupment with other communist oppositions , principally the International Communist Opposition ( ICO ) , linked to the Right Opposition in the Soviet Party , a regroupment which eventually led to the formation of the International Bureau for Revolutionary Socialist Unity . Trotsky considered those organisations to be centrist . Despite Trotsky , the Spanish section merged with the Spanish section of ICO , forming the Workers ' Party of Marxist Unification ( POUM ) . Trotsky claimed the merger was to be a capitulation to centrism . The Socialist Workers ' Party of Germany , a left split from the Social Democratic Party of Germany founded in 1931 , co @-@ operated with the International Left Opposition briefly in 1933 but soon abandoned the call for a new International . 
 In 1935 , Trotsky wrote an Open Letter for the Fourth International , reaffirming the Declaration of Four , while documenting the recent course of the Comintern and the Socialist International . In the letter , he called for the urgent formation of a Fourth International . The " First International Conference for the Fourth International " was held in Paris in June 1936 , reports giving its location as Geneva for security reasons . This meeting dissolved the International Communist League , founding in its place the Movement for the Fourth International on Trotsky 's perspectives . 
 The foundation of the Fourth International was seen as more than just the simple renaming of an international tendency that was already in existence . It was argued that the Third International had now degenerated completely and was therefore to be seen as a counter @-@ revolutionary organisation that would in time of crisis defend capitalism . Trotsky believed that the coming World War would produce a revolutionary wave of class and national struggles , rather as World War I had done . 
 Stalin reacted to the growing strength of Trotsky 's supporters with a major political massacre of people within the Soviet Union , and the assassination of Trotsky 's supporters and family abroad . He had agents go through historical documents and photos in order to attempt to erase Trotsky 's memory from the history books . According to the historian Mario Kessler , Stalin 's supporters turned to anti @-@ semitism to whip up sentiment against Trotsky ( as Trotsky was a Jew ) . Stalin 's daughter later claimed that his fight with Trotsky laid the foundations for his later anti @-@ semitic campaigns . 
 = = Founding Congress = = 
 The International 's rationale was to construct new mass revolutionary parties able to lead successful workers ' revolutions . It saw these arising from a revolutionary wave which would develop alongside and as a result of the coming World War . Thirty delegates attended a founding conference , held in September 1938 , in the home of Alfred <unk> just outside Paris . Present at the meeting were delegates from all the major countries of Europe , and from North America , although for reasons of cost and distance , few delegates attended from Asia or Latin America . An International Secretariat was established , with many of the day 's leading Trotskyists and most countries in which Trotskyists were active represented . Among the resolutions adopted by the conference was the Transitional Programme . 
 The Transitional Programme was the central programmatic statement of the congress , summarising its strategic and tactical conceptions for the revolutionary period that it saw opening up as a result of the war which Trotsky had been predicting for some years . It is not , however , the definitive programme of the Fourth International – as is often suggested – but instead contains a summation of the <unk> understanding of the movement at that date and a series of transitional policies designed to develop the struggle for workers ' power . 
 = = World War II = = 
 At the outbreak of World War II , in 1939 , the International Secretariat was moved to New York City . The resident International Executive Committee failed to meet , largely because of a struggle in the U.S. Socialist Workers Party ( SWP ) between Trotsky 's supporters and the tendency of Max Shachtman , Martin <unk> and James Burnham . The secretariat was composed of those committee members who happened to be in the city , most of whom were co @-@ thinkers of Shachtman . The disagreement centred on the <unk> ' disagreements with the SWP 's internal policy , and over the FI 's unconditional defence of the USSR . 
 Trotsky opened a public debate with Shachtman and Burnham and developed his positions in a series of polemics written in 1939 – 1940 and later collected in In Defense of Marxism . Shachtman and Burnham 's tendency resigned from the International in early 1940 , alongside almost 40 % of the SWP 's members , many of whom became founder members of the Workers Party . 
 = = = Emergency conference = = = 
 In May 1940 an emergency conference of the International met at a secret location " somewhere in the Western Hemisphere " . It adopted a manifesto drafted by Trotsky shortly before his murder and a range of policies on the work of the International , including one calling for the reunification of the then @-@ divided Fourth Internationalist groups in Britain . 
 Secretariat members who had supported Shachtman were expelled by the emergency conference , with the support of Trotsky himself . While leader of the SWP James P. Cannon later said that he did not believe the split to be definitive and final , the two groups did not reunite . A new International Executive Committee was appointed , which came under the increasing influence of the Socialist Workers Party . 
 The Fourth International was hit hard during World War II . Trotsky was assassinated , many of the FI 's European affiliates were destroyed by the Nazis and several of its Asian affiliates were destroyed by the Empire of Japan . The survivors , in Europe , Asia and elsewhere , were largely cut off from each other and from the International Secretariat . The new secretary , Jean Van <unk> ( also known as Gerland ) , was able to do little more than publish articles in the SWP 's theoretical journal Fourth International . Despite this dislocation , the various groups sought to maintain links and some connections were kept up throughout the early part of the war by sailors enlisted in the U.S. Navy who had cause to visit Marseilles . Contact was steady , if irregular , between the SWP and the British Trotskyists , with the result that the Americans exerted what influence they had to encourage the Workers ' International League into the International through a fusion with the Revolutionary Socialist League , a union that had been requested by the Emergency Conference . 
 In 1942 , a debate on the national question in Europe opened up between the majority of the SWP and a movement led by Van <unk> , Albert Goldman and Felix Morrow . This minority anticipated that the Nazi dictatorship would be replaced with capitalism rather than by a socialist revolution , leading to the revival of Stalinism and social democracy . In December 1943 , they criticised the SWP 's view as underestimating the rising prestige of Stalinism and the opportunities for the capitalists to use democratic concessions . The SWP 's central committee argued that democratic capitalism could not revive , resulting in either military dictatorship by the capitalists or a workers ' revolution . It held that this would reinforce the need for building the Fourth International , and adhered rigidly to their interpretation of Trotsky 's works . 
 = = = European Conference = = = 
 The wartime debate about post @-@ war perspectives was accelerated by the resolution of the February 1944 European Conference of the Fourth International . The conference appointed a new European Secretariat and elected Michel Raptis , a Greek resident in France also known as Michel Pablo , the organisational secretary of its European Bureau . Raptis and other bureau members re @-@ established contact between the Trotskyist parties . The European conference extended the lessons of a revolution then unfolding in Italy , and concluded that a revolutionary wave would cross Europe as the war ended . The SWP had a similar perspective . The British Revolutionary Communist Party ( RCP ) disagreed and held that capitalism was not about to plunge into massive crisis but rather that an upturn in the economy was already underway . A group of leaders of the French Internationalist Communist Party ( PCI ) around Yvan <unk> argued a similar position until they were expelled from the PCI in 1948 . 
 = = = International conference = = = 
 In April 1946 delegates from the principal European sections and a number of others attended a " Second International Congress " . This set about rebuilding the International Secretariat of the Fourth International with Michel Raptis appointed Secretary and Ernest Mandel , a Belgian , taking a leading role . 
 Pablo and Mandel aimed to counter the opposition of the majorities inside the British Revolutionary Communist Party and French Internationalist Communist Party . Initially , they encouraged party members to vote out their leaderships . They supported Gerry Healy 's opposition in the RCP . In France , they backed elements , including Pierre Frank and Marcel Bleibtreu , opposed to the new leadership of the PCI – albeit for differing reasons . 
 The Stalinist occupation of Eastern Europe was the issue of prime concern , and it raised many problems of interpretation . At first , the International held that , while the USSR was a degenerated workers ' state , the post @-@ World War II East European states were still bourgeois entities , because revolution from above was not possible , and capitalism persisted . 
 Another issue that needed to be dealt with was the possibility that the economy would revive . This was initially denied by Mandel ( who was quickly forced to revise his opinion , and later devoted his PhD dissertation to late capitalism , analysing the unexpected " third age " of capitalist development ) . Mandel 's perspective mirrored uncertainty at that time about the future viability and prospects of capitalism , not just among all Trotskyist groups , but also among leading economists . Paul Samuelson had envisaged in 1943 the probability of a " nightmarish combination of the worst features of inflation and deflation , " worrying that " there would be ushered in the greatest period of unemployment and industrial dislocation which any economy has ever faced . " Joseph Schumpeter for his part claimed that " The general opinion seems to be that capitalist methods will be unequal to the task of reconstruction . " He regarded it as " not open to doubt that the decay of capitalist society is very far advanced " . 
 = = Second World Congress = = 
 The Second World Congress in April 1948 was attended by delegates from 22 sections . It debated a range of resolutions on the Jewish Question , Stalinism , the colonial countries and the specific situations facing sections in certain countries . By this point the FI was united around the view that the Eastern European " buffer states " were still capitalist countries . 
 The Congress was especially notable for bringing the International into much closer contact with Trotskyist groups from across the globe . These included such significant groups as the Revolutionary Workers ' Party of Bolivia and the Lanka Sama Samaja Party in what was then Ceylon , but the previously large Vietnamese Trotskyist groups had mostly been eliminated or absorbed by the supporters of Ho Chi Minh . 
 After the Second World Congress in 1948 , the International Secretariat attempted to open communications with Josip Broz Tito 's regime in Yugoslavia . In their analysis , it differed from the rest of the Eastern Bloc because it was established by the partisans of World War II who had fought against Nazi occupation , as opposed to by Stalin 's invading armies . The British RCP , led by Jock Haston and supported by Ted Grant , were highly critical of this move . 
 = = Third World Congress = = 
 The Third World Congress in 1951 resolved that the economies of the East European states and their political regimes had come to resemble that of the USSR more and more . These states were then described as deformed workers states in an analogy with the degenerated workers state in Russia . The term deformed was used rather than degenerated , because no workers ' revolution had led to the foundation of these states . 
 The Third World Congress envisaged the real possibility of an " international civil war " in the near future . It argued that the mass Communist parties " may , under certain favourable conditions , go beyond the aims set for them by the Soviet bureaucracy and project a revolutionary orientation " . Given the supposed closeness of war , the FI thought that the Communist Parties and social democratic parties would be the only significant force that could defend the workers of the world against the imperialist camp in those countries where there were mass forces . 
 In line with this geopolitical perspective , Pablo argued that the only way the Trotskyists could avoid isolation was for various sections of the Fourth International to undertake long @-@ term <unk> in the mass Communist or Social Democratic parties . This tactic was known as entrism sui generis , to distinguish it from the short @-@ term entry tactic employed before World War II . For example , it meant that the project of building an open and independent Trotskyist party was shelved in France , because it was regarded as not politically feasible alongside entry into the French Communist Party . 
 This perspective was accepted within the Fourth International , yet sowed the seeds for the split in 1953 . At the Third World Congress , the sections agreed with the perspective of an international civil war . The French section disagreed with the associated tactic of <unk> sui generis , and held that Pablo was underestimating the independent role of the working class parties in the Fourth International . The leaders of the majority of the Trotskyist organisation in France , Marcel Bleibtreu and Pierre Lambert , refused to follow the line of the International . The International leadership had them replaced by a minority , leading to a permanent split in the French section . 
 In the wake of the World Congress , the line of the International Leadership was generally accepted by groups around the world , including the U.S. SWP whose leader , James P. Cannon , corresponded with the French majority to support the tactic of entrism sui generis . At the same time , however , Cannon , Healy and Mandel were deeply concerned by Pablo 's political evolution . Cannon and Healy were also alarmed by Pablo 's intervention into the French section , and by suggestions that Pablo might use the International 's authority in this way in other sections of the Fourth International that felt entrism " sui generis " was not a suitable tactic in their own countries . In particular , minority tendencies , exemplified in Britain by John Lawrence and in the U.S. by Bert Cochran , to support entrism " sui generis " hinted that Pablo 's support for their views indicated that the International might also demand Trotskyists in those countries adopt that tactic . 
 = = Formation of the International Committee of the Fourth International = = 
 In 1953 , the SWP 's national committee issued an Open Letter to Trotskyists Throughout the World and organised the International Committee of the Fourth International ( ICFI ) . This was a public faction which initially included , in addition to the SWP , Gerry Healy 's British section The Club , the Internationalist Communist Party in France ( then led by Lambert who had expelled Bleibtreu and his grouping ) , <unk> Moreno 's party in Argentina and the Austrian and Chinese sections of the FI . The sections of the ICFI withdrew from the International Secretariat , which suspended their voting rights . Both sides claimed they constituted a majority of the former International . 
 Sri Lanka 's Lanka Sama Samaja Party , then the country 's leading workers ' party , took a middle position during this dispute . It continued to participate in the <unk> but argued for a joint congress , for reunification with the ICFI . 
 An excerpt from the Open Letter explains the split as follows : 
 To sum up : The lines of cleavage between Pablo 's revisionism and orthodox Trotskyism are so deep that no compromise is possible either politically or organizationally . The Pablo faction has demonstrated that it will not permit democratic decisions truly reflecting majority opinion to be reached . They demand complete submission to their criminal policy . They are determined to drive all orthodox Trotskyists out of the Fourth International or to muzzle and handcuff them . Their scheme has been to inject their Stalinist <unk> piecemeal and likewise in piecemeal fashion , get rid of those who come to see what is happening and raise objections . 
 = = From the Fourth World Congress to reunification = = 
 Over the following decade , the IC referred to the rest of the International as the " International Secretariat of the Fourth International " , emphasising its view that the Secretariat did not speak for the International as a whole . The Secretariat continued to view itself as the leadership of the International . It held a Fourth World Congress in 1954 to regroup and to recognise reorganised sections in Britain , France and the U.S. 
 Parts of the International Committee were divided over whether the split with " <unk> " was permanent or temporary , and it was perhaps as a result of this that it did not declare itself to be the Fourth International . Those sections that considered the split permanent embarked on a discussion about the history of the split and its meanings . 
 The sections of the International that recognised the leadership of the International Secretariat remained optimistic about the possibilities for increasing the International 's political influence and extended the entrism into social democratic parties which was already underway in Britain , Austria and elsewhere . The 1954 congress emphasised entrism into communist parties and nationalist parties in the colonies , pressing for democratic reforms , ostensibly to encourage the left @-@ wing they perceived to exist in the communist parties to join with them in a revolution . Tensions developed between those who subscribed to the mainstream views of Pablo and a minority that argued unsuccessfully against open work . A number of these delegates walked out of the World Congress , and would eventually leave the International , including the leader of the new British section , John Lawrence , George Clarke , Michele Mestre ( a leader of the French section ) , and Murray Dowson ( a leader of the Canadian group ) . 
 The Secretariat organised a Fifth World Congress in October 1957 . Mandel and Pierre Frank appraised the Algerian revolution and surmised that it was essential to reorient in the colonial states and <unk> towards the emerging guerrilla @-@ led revolutions . According to Robert Alexander , Ernest Mandel has written that an organisation in Indonesia , the Partai <unk> , was affiliate to the FI from 1959 until the 1965 coup in that country . 
 The Sixth World Congress in 1961 marked a lessening of the political divisions between the majority of supporters of the International Secretariat and the leadership of the SWP in the United States . In particular , the congress stressed support for the Cuban revolution and a growing emphasis on building parties in the imperialist countries . The sixth congress also criticised the Lanka Sama Samaja Party , its Sri Lankan section , for seeming to support the Sri Lanka Freedom Party , which they saw as bourgeois nationalists ; the U.S. SWP made similar criticisms . 
 In 1962 the IC and IS formed a Parity Commission to organise a common World Congress . The supporters of Michel Pablo and Juan Posadas opposed the convergence . The supporters of Posadas left the International in 1962 . At the 1963 reunification congress , the sections of the IC and IS reunified ( with two exceptions : the British and French sections of the IC ) . This was largely a result of their mutual support for Ernest Mandel and Joseph Hansen 's resolution Dynamics of World Revolution Today and for the Cuban Revolution . This document distinguished between different revolutionary tasks in the imperialist countries , the " workers ' states " , and the colonial and semi @-@ colonial countries . In 1963 , the reunified Fourth International elected a United Secretariat of the Fourth International ( <unk> ) , by which name the organisation as a whole is often still referred . 
 = = Since reunification = = 
 Since the 1963 reunification , a number of approaches have developed within international Trotskyism towards the Fourth International . 
 The reunified Fourth International is the only current with direct organisational continuity to the original Fourth International at an international level . The International Committee and International Secretariat reunified at the 1963 congress , but without the Socialist Labour League and Internationalist Communist Organisation . It is sometimes known as the United Secretariat of the Fourth International ( <unk> ) after the name of its leading committee , although that committee was replaced in 2003 . It is also the only current to have continuously presented itself as " the " Fourth International . It is the largest current and leaders of some other Trotskyist Internationals occasionally refer to it as " the Fourth International " : ICFI secretary Gerry Healy , when proposing reunification discussions in the 1970s , described it as " the Fourth International " ; the International Socialist Tendency also usually refers to it in this way . 
 The International Committee of the Fourth International member groups customarily describe themselves as sections of the Fourth International , and the organisation as a whole describes itself as the " leadership of the Fourth International " . However , the ICFI presents itself as the political continuity of the Fourth International and Trotskyism , not as the FI itself . It clearly dates its creation as 1953 , rather than from 1938 . 
 Some tendencies argue that the Fourth International became dislocated politically during the years between Trotsky 's murder and the establishment of the ICFI in 1953 ; they consequently work to " reconstruct " , " reorganise " or " rebuild " it . This view originated with Lutte <unk> and the international Spartacist tendency and is shared by others who diverged from the ICFI . For example , the Committee for a Workers ' International , whose founders dropped out of the reunified FI after 1965 , call for a new " revolutionary Fourth International " . Indeed , the Fourth International ( ICR ) <unk> the Fourth International at a congress attended by ICR sections in June 1993 . 
 Other Trotskyist groups argue that the Fourth International is dead . They call for the establishment of a new " workers ' international " or a Fifth International . 
 = = Impact = = 
 In uniting the large majority of Trotskyists in one organisation , the Fourth International created a tradition which has since been claimed by many Trotskyist organisations . 
 Echoing Marx 's Communist Manifesto , the Transitional Programme ended with the declaration " Workers – men and women – of all countries , place yourselves under the banner of the Fourth International . It is the banner of your approaching victory ! " . It declared demands to be placed on capitalists , opposition to the bureaucracy in the Soviet Union , and support for workers ' action against fascism . Most of the demands on capitalists remain unfulfilled . The collapse of the Soviet Union occurred , but through a social revolution leading to the restoration of capitalism , rather than the political revolution proposed by the Trotskyists . Many Trotskyist groups have been active in anti @-@ fascist campaigns , but the Fourth International has never played a major role in the toppling of a regime . 
 Those groups which follow traditions that left the Fourth International in its early years argue that , despite initially correct positions , it had little impact . Lutte <unk> claims that it " did not survive the Second World War " . Workers Liberty , which follows in the third camp tradition established by the Workers Party , holds that " Trotsky and everything he represented was defeated and – as we have to recognise in retrospect – defeated for a whole historical period . " 
 Other groups point to a positive impact . The ICFI claim that " the [ early ] Fourth International consisted mainly of cadres who remained true to their aims " and describes much of the Fourth International 's early activity as " correct and principled " . The reunified FI claim that " the Fourth International refused to compromise with capitalism either in its fascist or democratic variants . " In its view , " many of the predictions made by Trotsky when he founded the Fourth International were proved wrong by history . But what was absolutely vindicated were his key political judgements . " 
 = The Principal and the Pauper = 
 " The Principal and the Pauper " is the second episode of The Simpsons ' ninth season . It first aired on the Fox network in the United States on September 28 , 1997 . In the episode , Seymour Skinner begins to celebrate his twentieth anniversary as principal of Springfield Elementary School , when a man arrives claiming that Skinner has assumed his identity . Principal Skinner admits that his real name is Armin Tamzarian , and that he had thought the true Seymour Skinner , a friend from the army , had died in the Vietnam War . Armin leaves Springfield , but is later persuaded to return as principal . 
 " The Principal and the Pauper " was written by Ken Keeler and directed by Steven Dean Moore . It guest starred Martin Sheen as the real Seymour Skinner . Although it aired during the show 's ninth season , it was a holdover from season eight . The episode is one of the most controversial episodes of The Simpsons . Many fans and critics reacted extremely negatively to the revelation that Principal Skinner , a recurring character since the first season , was an impostor . The episode has been criticized by series creator Matt Groening , and by Harry Shearer , who provides the voice of Principal Skinner . Despite this , Ken Keeler considers the episode the best work he has ever done for television . Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein have also defended the episode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 On the eve of his twentieth anniversary as school principal , Seymour Skinner is lured by his mother to Springfield Elementary School for a surprise party . The celebration goes well until a strange man arrives , claiming to be the real Seymour Skinner . Principal Skinner admits that he is an impostor , and that his real name is Armin Tamzarian . Armin then tells the story of the events that led him to steal Seymour Skinner 's identity . 
 Armin was once a troubled young man and finds himself in the Army . There , he met and befriended the real Sergeant Seymour Skinner , who became his mentor and helped him find meaning in his troubled life . Seymour told Armin that his dream was to become an elementary school principal after the war . Later , Seymour was declared missing and presumed dead . Armin took the news of the apparent death to Seymour 's mother , Agnes . Upon meeting him , however , Agnes mistook him for her son , and Armin could not bear to deliver the message . He instead allowed Agnes to call him Seymour , and took over Seymour 's life . Meanwhile , the real Seymour Skinner spent five years in a POW camp , then worked in a Chinese sweatshop for two decades until it was shut down by the United Nations . 
 After these revelations , the people of Springfield begin to distrust Armin . Armin decides that there is no longer any place for him in Springfield . The real Skinner is then offered the chance to realize his dream and take over as school principal . He takes the job , but the real Skinner finds himself isolated by the townspeople who realize they prefer Armin over him . Armin , however , has already left Springfield and gone to Capital City to resume his old persona as a no @-@ good street thug . 
 Marge heads to Capital City with Edna Krabappel , Agnes and the rest of the Simpson family . After Agnes orders Armin to return home , Homer persuades Mayor Quimby and all the other citizens to allow Armin to resume his assumed identity as Principal Skinner . The real Skinner is unhappy about this , and refuses to give up his job and his dignity just because the people of Springfield prefer Armin to him . In response , the townspeople banish the real Skinner from town by tying him to a chair on a flatcar of a freight train . Judge Snyder declares that Armin will again be referred to as Seymour Skinner , that he will return to his job as school principal , and that no one shall mention the name " Armin Tamzarian " again . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Principal and the Pauper " was the last episode of The Simpsons written by Ken Keeler , who also pitched the original idea for the episode . Many fans believe the episode is based on the story of Martin Guerre or the 1993 film <unk> . According to animation director Steve Moore , one of the working titles for the episode was " <unk> " . However , Keeler has said he was inspired by the Tichborne Case of nineteenth @-@ century England . The episode 's official title is a reference to the book The Prince and the Pauper by Mark Twain . 
 Producers Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein were excited about the episode because Principal Skinner was one of their favorite characters . The pair had already written the season five episode " Sweet Seymour Skinner 's Baadasssss Song " , which was an in @-@ depth study of the character . Oakley said he and Weinstein " spent a month immersed in the mind of Seymour Skinner " to prepare that episode , and from that point forward , took every opportunity to " tinker with [ Skinner 's ] personality and his backstory and his <unk> " . 
 Describing the real Seymour Skinner , Keeler remarked , " It would have been easy to make him a really horrible , nasty , dislikeable guy , but we didn 't do that . We made him just not quite right , not quite Skinner , and a little bit off . " Bill Oakley said the idea behind the character was that he " just lacked pizzazz " . The producers selected Martin Sheen to voice the character because they admired his performance in Apocalypse Now and felt his voice would be appropriate for a Vietnam veteran . 
 Keeler borrowed the name Armin Tamzarian from a claims adjuster who had assisted him after a car accident when he moved to Los Angeles . However , the real Tamzarian ( now a California Superior Court Judge ) was unaware his name was being used until after the episode aired . Keeler said he later received a " curtly phrased " letter from Tamzarian , who wanted to know why his name appeared in the episode . Keeler feared he would face legal troubles , but afterwards , Tamzarian explained that he was simply curious and did not intend to scare anyone . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " The Principal and the Pauper " finished 41st in the United States in the ratings for the week of September 22 – 28 , 1997 , with a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 2 . The episode was the second highest rated show on the Fox network that week , following King of the Hill . The Fox network 's ratings average for the week was 6 @.@ 4 . 
 The revelation that Principal Skinner was an impostor and the self @-@ referential deus ex machina ending were negatively received by many fans and critics . Skinner had been a recurring character since the first season and , after years of development , his backstory had suddenly been changed . Bill Oakley considers " The Principal and the Pauper " the most controversial episode from his tenure as executive producer . 
 In his 2004 book Planet Simpson , Chris Turner describes " The Principal and the Pauper " as the " broadcast that marked [ the ] abrupt plunge " from The Simpsons ' " Golden Age " , which he says began in the middle of the show 's third season . He calls the episode " [ one of ] the weakest episodes in Simpsons history " , and adds , " A blatant , continuity @-@ scrambling plot twist of this sort might 've been forgivable if the result had been as funny or sharply satirical as the classics of the Golden Age , but alas it 's emphatically not . " Turner notes that the episode " still sports a couple of virtuoso gags " , but says that such moments are limited . 
 In July 2007 , in an article in The Guardian , Ian Jones argues that the " show became stupid " in 1997 , pointing to " The Principal and the Pauper " as the bellwether . " Come again ? A major character in a long @-@ running series gets unmasked as a fraud ? It was cheap , idle storytelling " , he remarks . 
 In a February 2006 article in The Star @-@ Ledger , Alan Sepinwall and Matt Zoller Seitz cite the episode when asserting that the quality of The Simpsons " gets much <unk> " in season nine . Alan Sepinwall observes in another Star @-@ Ledger article , " [ The episode ] was so implausible that even the characters were disavowing it by the end of the episode . " Jon Hein , who coined the term " jumping the shark " to refer to negative changes in television series , writes in Jump the Shark : TV Edition , " We finally spotted a fin at the start of the ninth season when Principal Skinner 's true identity was revealed as Armin Tamzarian . " James Greene of Nerve.com put the episode fifth on his list " Ten Times The Simpsons Jumped the Shark " , calling it a " nonsensical meta @-@ comedy " and arguing that it " seemed to betray the reality of the show itself " . 
 In contrast , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , the authors of I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , praised the episode , calling it " one of the series ' all @-@ time best episodes , mainly because it shows us a human side , not just of Principal Skinner , but of his <unk> [ sic ] Mom as well . " They add that " Martin Sheen steals the show [ ... ] in a brief but important slice of Simpsons history . " Total Film 's Nathan Ditum named Martin Sheen 's performance in the episode the 20th best guest appearance on The Simpsons . 
 Ken Keeler , Bill Oakley , and Josh Weinstein all defend the episode in its DVD commentary . Keeler asserts , " I am very , very proud of the job I did on this episode . This is the best episode of television I feel I ever wrote . " He describes the episode as a commentary on " people who like things just the way they are " , and remarks , " It never seems to have occurred to anyone that this episode is about the people who hate it . " However , Keeler says that some of the dialogue was changed from his original draft , making this point less obvious . Oakley and Weinstein explain that they wanted to push the boundaries of the series while working as show @-@ runners , and advise viewers to treat " The Principal and the Pauper " as an " experiment " . They surmise that the negative reception was partly due to the fact that it was not immediately apparent to viewers that this was such an episode ( as opposed to , for example , " The Simpsons Spin @-@ Off Showcase " ) . They also describe the ending of the episode as an attempt to reset the continuity and allow fans to consider the episode as non @-@ canonical , divorced from the larger series . 
 Other figures associated with The Simpsons have publicly criticized the episode . In an April 2001 interview , Harry Shearer , the voice of Principal Skinner , recalled that after reading the script , he told the writers , " That 's so wrong . You 're taking something that an audience has built eight years or nine years of investment in and just tossed it in the trash can for no good reason , for a story we 've done before with other characters . It 's so arbitrary and gratuitous , and it 's disrespectful to the audience . " 
 In December 2006 , in an interview , Shearer added , " Now , [ the writers ] refuse to talk about it . They realize it was a horrible mistake . They never mention it . It 's like they 're punishing [ the audience ] for paying attention . " In the introduction to the ninth season DVD boxset , series creator Matt Groening describes " The Principal and the Pauper " as " one of [ his ] least favorite episodes " . He also called the episode " a mistake " in an interview with Rolling Stone . 
 Later episodes of The Simpsons contain references to " The Principal and the Pauper " . A clip from the episode was used in season eleven 's " Behind the Laughter " as an example of the show 's increasingly " gimmicky and nonsensical plots " . In the season fifteen episode " I , ( Annoyed Grunt ) -Bot " , Lisa addresses Principal Skinner as " Principal Tamzarian " when Skinner chides her for naming her new cat Snowball II , after a cat that had died earlier in the episode . Additionally , the continuity of the series appears to revert to the original story of Seymour Skinner in the season 21 episode " Boy Meets Curl " , as he is clearly shown to kick Agnes Skinner in utero , establishing him as Agnes ' biological son after all . 
 = John Thomas North = 
 John Thomas North ( 30 January 1842 – 5 May 1896 ) was an English investor and businessman . North was born in Leeds , Yorkshire , the son of a coal merchant and a churchwarden . At the age of fifteen he was apprenticed to millwrights and engineers before working for several years as a mechanic . He moved to Chile where his first occupation was as a boiler riveter in <unk> . He later moved to the Peruvian town of Iquique where he worked as a waterworks operator , importer and ship owner . The War of the Pacific ( 1879 – 1883 ) provided North with an opportunity to purchase large numbers of bonds in the Peruvian nitrate industry . When Chile annexed Iquique and the surrounding province of Tarapacá the Chilean government transferred ownership of the nitrate fields to the bondholders . North was thus able to take a monopoly share of the lucrative Chilean nitrate industry for a very small initial investment , becoming known as " The King of Nitrates " . 
 North built upon his nitrates business by expanding into further monopolies in waterworks and freight railways , but also owned several iron and coal fields . North maintained his monopolies by employing lawyers to block competing entrepreneurs both in court and the Chilean National Congress . This was allowed by Chilean president Domingo Santa María , but María 's successor , José Manuel Balmaceda , became concerned that Tarapacá was starting to resemble a " state within a state " and resolved to break North 's monopoly . Balmaceda had to force competition reforms through against opposition in congress , amongst a series of disputes which would eventually escalate into the 1891 Chilean Civil War between the president and the congress . 
 North also had investments in the Anglo @-@ Belgian India Rubber Company which operated a concession in the Congo Free State . This company was involved in the extraction and export of rubber from the state , another highly profitable business , but later became involved in abuses of human rights against those under its power . However North 's finances were eventually depleted and when he died his business empire had collapsed . 
 = = Early life = = 
 North was born in Leeds , Yorkshire on 30 January 1842 , the son of a coal merchant and a churchwarden . At the age of fifteen he was apprenticed to millwrights and engineers before working for several years as a mechanic . He moved to Chile in South America at the age of 23 where his first occupation was as a boiler riveter in <unk> . He moved from <unk> to Iquique in the province of Tarapacá , which was then part of Peru . Here North established what later became a large business empire , working as a waterworks operator , importer and ship owner . 
 = = War of the Pacific = = 
 Territorial disputes between Chile , Peru and Bolivia triggered the War of the Pacific in 1879 with Chile invading and occupying Peruvian and Bolivian land . In the course of the war , North suffered damage to his waterworks , and one of his ships was sunk . However he also befriended the Chilean Admiral Patricio Lynch who later supported him in his business ventures . During the war , North was assisted by two British men : Robert Harvey , who had worked for the Peruvian government in the nitrates ( saltpetre ) industry , and John Dawson , a banker . North was able to use Harvey 's knowledge of the nitrates business and credit provided by Dawson to purchase nitrates bond certificates at low prices from investors who were panicked by Peru 's poor military performance during the war . After the war , the Chilean government annexed Tarapacá and allowed the bond holders to take possession of the title deeds to the nitrate fields , perhaps influenced by appeals from North 's friends . North thus managed to secure a large share of the Chilean nitrate industry for a very small initial investment in almost worthless bonds . The reason that the Chilean government allowed this is that it would have cost them GBP £ 4 million to buy the bonds from the mainly British nitrate speculators . By allowing the speculators to start mining the Chilean government could take a share of profits via export duties without having to provide the initial capital costs to begin production of nitrates . 
 North left Chile and returned to the United Kingdom in order to raise credit to provide for machinery , transport and employment costs . It was there , in February 1883 — still eight months before Peru officially ceded the nitrate fields to Chile — that he established the Liverpool Nitrate Company . North dispatched Robert Harvey to Chile with equipment and engineers to begin construction of the mines whilst North remained in Britain to manage the financial side of the enterprise . The mines were operation by 1884 and producing 3 @,@ 000 short tons of nitrates per month . The company turned large profits and was able to pay dividends in excess of 20 % each year until 1886 when it was liquidated by North and his partners in order to found other companies . As a result of his fantastic profits North became known as " The King Of Nitrates " and was a well known public figure in England . 
 Nitrates were an important source of income for the Chilean government and an increase in export duty from CLP 4 pesos per ton in 1878 to CLP 22 in 1882 resulted in revenue from nitrates increasing from CLP 6 to 25 million . This allowed the government to make cuts in both income and land tax . The reliance of Chile upon its nitrate income caused conflict between the government and the nitrate production cartel . The cartel wanted to maximise the price of nitrates by cutting production whilst the government wanted to maximise their duty income by maximising exports . The nature of the trade meant that the Chilean economy was also totally dependent on imports and exports to and from Britain . The periodic downturns in nitrate revenue caused by the cartel cutting production eventually forced the Chilean government to print more money , causing inflation to increase and the peso to devalue . 
 = = North 's monopolies = = 
 In the meantime North continued to invest in Chile and founded the Nitrate Railway Company which held a monopoly on nitrate rail transport in Tarapacá and also held a monopoly on the water supply in Iquique . He also owned several coal and iron fields along the <unk> River and a gasworks at Iquique . In Britain he set up North 's Navigation Collieries ( 1889 ) Ltd. in Glamorgan , south Wales , a venture which turned out to be one of his most successful . By 1920 his Welsh company employed over 6 @,@ 000 miners and produced over one million tons of coal per year . The development of North 's Navigation Collieries Ltd. was largely responsible for the rapid growth of Maesteg and the <unk> Valley during the years 1890 to 1910 . In addition , his nitrate business was the primary cause of the development of the towns of Iquique and Pisagua . To maintain his monopolies , North employed lawyers to block competing entrepreneurs both in court and the Chilean National Congress . Under president Domingo Santa María , North 's monopolies went unchallenged , and Santa María 's successor in 1886 , José Manuel Balmaceda , initially allowed the situation to continue . However , Balmaceda became concerned that the situation in Tarapacá was starting to resemble a " state within a state " and decided to break North 's monopoly . Congress was not supportive and Balmaceda had to force through reforms to restore competition in the province . Increasing disputes between Balmaceda and Congress resulted in the outbreak of the Civil War in 1891 . 
 In the meantime North enjoyed the status of a famous high society gentleman in Britain and was worth US $ 10 million in 1889 . He was a friend of the Prince of Wales , later to become Edward VII , and was described , by The New York Times as a " lion " of the London social season . He was the owner of a 600 @-@ acre ( 2 @.@ 4 km2 ) estate with extensive stables and a mansion , Avery Hill , near to Eltham in Kent . North owned several racing horses and won several British racing trophies . North visited the United States in July 1889 where he was described as a member of the nouveau riche and a " Chilean Monte Cristo " because of his recent rise to fame and fortune . He became known as Colonel North as he was appointed Honorary Colonel of the Tower Hamlets Regiment of Volunteer Engineers on 25 March 1885 . He regularly allowed the regiment of 250 men to camp in the gardens of his estate for three days at a time . During this time he would hold festivals for the men and the local villagers and at one of these events he challenged the Lieutenant @-@ Colonel to a footrace and won . 
 = = Financial decline = = 
 North was approached by King Leopold II of Belgium at a horse racing event to provide funds to establish a concession company to extract rubber from the Congo Free State . North agreed and provided GBP £ 40 @,@ 000 of the <unk> initial investment to set up the Anglo @-@ Belgian India Rubber Company ( <unk> ) at Antwerp on 6 August 1892 . <unk> had exclusive rights to all forest products from the Maringa @-@ Lopori basin for 30 years and had police powers within the limits of the concession to enforce the collection of rubber as a tax . The company was initially very successful but by 1898 , two years after North 's death , his heirs had sold his shares in the company . The company later became infamous for human rights abuses of the inhabitants of its concession and fell into financial troubles . 
 Despite his varied investments across the world North 's finances eventually dwindled , his decline was accelerated by the Chilean Civil War . By the time he died on 5 May 1896 his business empire had collapsed . His death occurred within half an hour of eating some oysters and the shells were sent for analysis but it was suspected that heart problems were the cause of death . In his will he donated Kirkstall Abbey to the city of Leeds and made donations to Leeds Infirmary and the Yorkshire College of Science , which later became the University of Leeds . 
 = Escape from New York = 
 Escape from New York is a 1981 British @-@ American dystopian action film co @-@ written , co @-@ scored , and directed by John Carpenter . The film is set in the then near @-@ future 1997 in a crime @-@ ridden United States that has converted Manhattan Island in New York City into a maximum security prison . Ex @-@ soldier Snake Plissken ( Kurt Russell ) is given 24 hours to find the President of the United States ( Donald Pleasence ) , who has been captured by prisoners after the crash of Air Force One . 
 Carpenter wrote the film in the mid @-@ 1970s as a reaction to the Watergate scandal . After the success of Halloween , he had enough influence to begin production and filmed it mainly in St. Louis , Missouri on an estimated budget of $ 6 million . Debra Hill and Larry J. Franco served as the producers . The film was co @-@ written by Nick Castle , who collaborated with Carpenter previously by portraying Michael Myers in Halloween . 
 Escape from New York was released in the United States on July 10 , 1981 . The film received positive reviews from critics and was a commercial success , grossing $ 25 @,@ 244 @,@ 700 at the box office . It was nominated for four Saturn Awards , including Best Science Fiction Film and Best Direction . The film gained a cult following and was followed by a sequel , Escape from L.A. 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1988 , following a 400 % increase in crime , the United States Government has turned Manhattan into a giant maximum @-@ security prison . A 50 @-@ foot ( 15 m ) containment wall surrounds the island and routes out of Manhattan have been dismantled or mined , while armed helicopters patrol the rivers . In 1997 , while travelling to a peace summit between the United States , China and the Soviet Union , Air Force One is hijacked by a terrorist . The President is given a security bracelet , and has a briefcase ( containing an audiotape describing a powerful new bomb ) handcuffed to his wrist . He makes it to an escape pod , and lands in Manhattan just before Air Force One crashes , killing everyone else aboard . 
 Police officers are dispatched to rescue the President . However , Romero , the right @-@ hand man of the Duke of New York , the top crime boss in the prison , warns them that the Duke has taken the President hostage , and that he will be killed if the police mount any further rescue attempts . Police Commissioner Bob Hauk offers a deal to " Snake " Plissken , a former Special Forces soldier convicted of attempting to rob the Federal Reserve in Denver , Colorado : if Snake rescues the President and retrieves the cassette tape , Hauk will arrange a presidential pardon . To ensure his compliance , Hauk has him injected with explosives that will rupture Snake 's carotid arteries within 22 hours ; if Snake returns with the President and the tape in time , Hauk will neutralize the explosives . 
 Snake is sent into Manhattan in a stealth glider , landing atop the World Trade Center . He tracks the President 's life @-@ monitor bracelet to a vaudeville theatre , only to find it on the wrist of an old man . He meets " Cabbie , " who takes Snake in his armored taxi cab to Harold " Brain " Hellman , an advisor to the Duke based in the New York Public Library . Brain tells Snake that the Duke plans to unify the gangs in a mass exodus across the heavily @-@ guarded Queensboro Bridge , using the President as a human shield and a map Brain has created to avoid the mines . Snake forces Brain and his girlfriend Maggie to lead him to the Duke 's compound at Grand Central Station . He finds the President and tries to free him , but is captured by the Duke 's men . 
 While Snake is forced to fight to the death with Slag , a prisoner , Brain and Maggie trick Romero into letting them see the President , killing him and fleeing with the President . As Snake kills Slag , the Duke learns of Brain 's treachery and rallies his gang to chase them down . Snake , Brain , Maggie , and the President attempt to use Snake 's glider to escape from New York . After a group of crazies destroy it , the group returns to the street and encounters Cabbie , who offers to take them across the bridge . When Cabbie reveals that he has the secret tape ( having traded it to Romero earlier for his hat ) , the President demands it , but Snake keeps it . 
 With the Duke chasing in another car , the cab is blown in half by a mine and Cabbie is killed . As they flee on foot , Brain is killed when he steps on another mine . Maggie refuses to leave him , and shoots repeatedly at the Duke ; he runs her over . Snake and the President reach the wall and the guards raise the President on a rope . The Duke kills the guards and attacks Snake , but the President , now armed atop the wall , gleefully shoots the Duke dead . Snake is lifted to safety and the implanted explosives are deactivated with seconds to spare . 
 As the President prepares for a televised speech to the leaders at the summit meeting , he thanks Snake for saving him . Snake asks how he feels about the people who died saving his life , but the President only offers halfhearted regret . Hauk offers Snake a job , but Snake walks away . The President 's speech commences , and he offers the contents of the cassette ; to his embarrassment , the tape is Cabbie 's cassette of the swing song " Bandstand Boogie " . As Snake walks away , he tears the magnetic tape out of the real cassette . 
 = = Cast = = 
 The character " <unk> " was named after producer Robert <unk> , while " Taylor " , " Romero " and " Cronenberg " were named after the directors Don Taylor , George Romero and David Cronenberg respectively . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Carpenter originally wrote the screenplay for Escape from New York in 1976 , in the aftermath of the Watergate scandal . Carpenter said , " The whole feeling of the nation was one of real cynicism about the President . I wrote the screenplay and no studio wanted to make it " because , according to Carpenter , " it was too violent , too scary , too weird . " He had been inspired by the film Death Wish , which was very popular at the time . He did not agree with this film 's philosophy but liked how it conveyed " the sense of New York as a kind of jungle , and I wanted to make a science fiction film along these lines " . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 <unk> Embassy Pictures , the film 's financial backer , preferred either Charles Bronson or Tommy Lee Jones to play the role of Snake Plissken to Carpenter 's choice of Kurt Russell , who was trying to overcome the " lightweight " screen image conveyed by his roles in several Disney comedies . Carpenter refused to cast Bronson on the grounds that he was too old , and because he worried that he could lose directorial control over the picture with an experienced actor . At the time , Russell described his character as " a mercenary , and his style of fighting is a combination of Bruce Lee , The Exterminator , and Darth Vader , with Eastwood 's vocal @-@ ness . " All that matters to Snake , according to the actor , is " the next 60 seconds . Living for exactly that next minute is all there is . " Russell used a rigorous diet and exercise program in order to develop a lean and muscular build . He also endeavored to stay in character between takes and throughout the shooting , as he welcomed the opportunity to get away from the Disney comedies he had done previously . He did find it necessary to remove the eyepatch between takes , as wearing it constantly seriously affected his depth perception . 
 = = = Pre @-@ production = = = 
 Carpenter had just made Dark Star but no one wanted to hire him as a director , so he assumed that he would make it in Hollywood as a screenwriter . The filmmaker went on to do other films with the intention of making Escape later . After the success of Halloween , Avco @-@ Embassy signed him and producer Debra Hill to a two @-@ picture deal . The first film from this contract was The Fog . Initially , the second film that he was going to make to finish the contract was The Philadelphia Experiment , but because of script @-@ writing problems , Carpenter rejected it in favor of this project . However , Carpenter felt that something was missing and recalls , " This was basically a straight action film . And at one point , I realized it really doesn 't have this kind of crazy humor that people from New York would expect to see . " He brought in Nick Castle , a friend from his film school days at University of Southern California who played " The Shape " in Halloween . Castle invented the Cabbie character and came up with the film 's ending . 
 The film 's setting proved to be a potential problem for Carpenter , who needed to create a decaying , semi @-@ destroyed version of New York City on only a shoe @-@ string budget . He and the film 's production designer Joe Alves rejected shooting on location in New York City because it would be too hard to make it look like a destroyed city . Carpenter suggested shooting on a movie back lot but Alves nixed that idea " because the texture of a real street is not like a back lot . " They sent Barry Bernardi , their location manager ( and associate producer ) , " on a sort of all @-@ expense @-@ paid trip across the country looking for the worst city in America , " producer Debra Hill remembers . 
 Bernardi suggested East St. Louis , Illinois , because it was filled with old buildings " that exist in New York now , and [ that ] have that seedy run @-@ down quality " that the team was looking for . East St. Louis , sitting across the Mississippi River from the more prosperous St. Louis , Missouri , had entire neighborhoods burned out in 1976 during a massive urban fire . Hill said in an interview , " block after block was burnt @-@ out rubble . In some places there was absolutely nothing , so that you could see three and four blocks away . " As well , Alves found an old bridge to double for the " 69th St. Bridge " . The filmmaker purchased the Old Chain of Rocks Bridge for one dollar from the government and then gave it back to them , for the same amount , once production was completed , " so that they wouldn 't have any liability , " Hill remembers . Locations across the river in St. Louis , Missouri were used , including Union Station and the Fox Theatre , both of which have since been renovated , as well as the building which would eventually become the Schlafly Tap Room microbrewery . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Carpenter and his crew persuaded the city to shut off the electricity to ten blocks at a time at night . The film was shot from August to November 1980 . It was a tough and demanding shoot for the filmmaker as he recalls . " We 'd finish shooting at about 6 am and I 'd just be going to sleep at 7 when the sun would be coming up . I 'd wake up around 5 or 6 pm , depending on whether or not we had dailies , and by the time I got going , the sun would be setting . So for about two and a half months I never saw daylight , which was really strange . " 
 The gladiatorial fight to the death scene between Snake and Slag ( played by professional wrestler Ox Baker ) was filmed in the Grand Hall at St. Louis Union Station . Russell has stated , " That day was a nightmare . All I did was swing a [ spiked ] bat at that guy and get swung at in return . He threw a trash can in my face about five times ... I could have wound up in pretty bad shape . " In addition to shooting on location in St. Louis , Carpenter shot parts of the film in Los Angeles . Various interior scenes were shot on a sound stage ; the final scenes were shot at the Sepulveda Dam , in Sherman Oaks . New York served as a location , as did Atlanta , in order to utilize their then futuristic @-@ looking rapid @-@ transit system . 
 When it came to shooting in New York City , Carpenter managed to persuade federal officials to grant access to Liberty Island . " We were the first film company in history allowed to shoot on Liberty Island at the Statue of Liberty at night . They let us have the whole island to ourselves . We were lucky . It wasn 't easy to get that initial permission . They 'd had a bombing three months earlier and were worried about trouble . " 
 Carpenter was interested in creating two distinct looks for the movie . " One is the police state , high tech , lots of neon , a United States dominated by underground computers . That was easy to shoot compared to the Manhattan Island prison sequences which had few lights , mainly torch lights , like feudal England . " 
 Certain matte paintings were rendered by James Cameron , who was at the time a special effects artist with Roger Corman 's New World Pictures . Cameron was also one of the directors of photography on the film . 
 As Snake pilots the glider into the city , there are three screens on his control panel displaying wireframe animations of the landing target on the World Trade Center and surrounding buildings . What appears on those screens was not computer @-@ generated . Carpenter wanted high @-@ tech computer graphics which were very expensive at the time , even for such a simple animation . To get the animation he wanted , the effects crew filmed the miniature model set of New York City they used for other scenes under black light with reflective tape placed along every edge of the model buildings . Only the tape is visible and appears to be a 3D wireframe animation . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Escape from New York grossed $ 25 @.@ 2 million in American theaters in summer 1981 . The film received generally positive reviews . As of March 2016 , it has a rating of 85 % on Rotten Tomatoes , with the critical consensus " Featuring an atmospherically grimy futuristic metropolis , Escape from New York is a strange , entertaining jumble of thrilling action and oddball weirdness . " Newsweek magazine commented on Carpenter , saying , " [ He has a ] deeply ingrained B @-@ movie sensibility - which is both his strength and limitation . He does clean work , but settles for too little . He uses Russell well , however . " In Time magazine , Richard Corliss wrote , " John Carpenter is offering this summer 's moviegoers a rare opportunity : to escape from the air @-@ conditioned torpor of ordinary entertainment into the hothouse humidity of their own paranoia . It 's a trip worth taking . " Vincent Canby , in his review for the New York Times , wrote , " [ The film ] is not to be analyzed too solemnly , though . It 's a <unk> told , very tall tale , one of the best escape ( and escapist ) movies of the season . " However , in his review for the Chicago Reader , Dave Kehr , wrote " it fails to satisfy – it gives us too little of too much . " 
 Cyberpunk pioneer William Gibson credits the film as an influence on his novel Neuromancer . " I was intrigued by the exchange in one of the opening scenes where the Warden says to Snake ' You flew the <unk> over Leningrad , didn 't you ? ' It turns out to be just a throwaway line , but for a moment it worked like the best SF where a casual reference can imply a lot . " Popular videogame director Hideo Kojima has referred to the movie frequently as an influence on his work , in particular the Metal Gear series . Solid Snake is partially influenced by Snake Plissken . In Metal Gear Solid 2 : Sons of Liberty Snake actually uses the alias " <unk> " to hide his real identity during most of the game . J. J. Abrams , producer of the 2008 film Cloverfield , mentioned that a scene in his film , which shows the head of the Statue of Liberty crashing into a New York street , was inspired by the poster for Escape from New York . Empire magazine ranked Snake Plissken # 71 in their " The 100 Greatest Movie Characters " poll . 
 American Film Institute lists 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Thrills – Nominated 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Heroes and Villains : 
 Snake Plissken – Nominated Hero 
 AFI 's 10 Top 10 – Nominated Science Fiction Film 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 = = Home media = = 
 = = = DVD releases = = = 
 Escape from New York was released on DVD twice by MGM ( USA ) , and once by Momentum Pictures ( UK ) . One MGM release is a barebones edition containing just the theatrical trailer . Another version is the Collector 's Edition , a two @-@ disc set featuring a High Definition remastered transfer with a 5 @.@ 1 Stereo audio track , two commentaries ( one by John Carpenter and Kurt Russell , another by producer Debra Hill and Joe Alves ) , a making @-@ of featurette , the first issue of a comic book series titled John Carpenter 's Snake Plissken Chronicles , and the ten @-@ minute Colorado bank robbery deleted opening sequence . 
 MGM 's special edition of the 1981 film was not released until 2003 because the original negative had disappeared . The workprint containing deleted scenes finally turned up in the Hutchinson , Kansas salt mine film depository . The excised scenes feature Snake Plissken robbing a bank , introducing the character of Plissken and establishing a backstory . Director John Carpenter decided to add the original scenes into the special edition release as an extra only : " After we screened the rough cut , we realized that the movie didn 't really start until Snake got to New York . It wasn 't necessary to show what sent him there . " The film has been released on the UMD format for Sony 's PlayStation Portable . 
 = = = Blu @-@ ray release = = = 
 On August 3 , 2010 , MGM Home Entertainment released Escape From New York as a bare @-@ bones Blu @-@ ray . Scream Factory , in association with Shout ! Factory , released the film on a special edition Blu @-@ ray on April 21 , 2015 . 
 = = = Novelization = = = 
 In 1981 , Bantam Books published a movie tie @-@ in novelization written by Mike <unk> that adopts a lean , humorous style reminiscent of the film . The novel is significant because it includes scenes that were cut out of the film , such as the Federal Reserve Depository robbery that results in Snake 's incarceration . The novel provides motivation and backstory to Snake and Hauk — both disillusioned war veterans — deepening their relationship that was only hinted at it in the film . The novel explains how Snake lost his eye during the Battle for Leningrad in World War III , how Hauk became warden of New York , and Hauk 's quest to find his crazy son who lives somewhere in the prison . The novel fleshes out the world that these characters exist in , at times presenting a future even bleaker than the one depicted in the film . The book explains that the West Coast is a no @-@ man 's land , and the country 's population is gradually being driven crazy by nerve gas as a result of World War III . 
 = = = Comic Books = = = 
 Marvel Comics released the one @-@ shot The Adventures of Snake Plissken in January 1997 . The story takes place sometime between Escape from New York and before his famous Cleveland escape mentioned in Escape from L.A. Snake has robbed Atlanta 's Center for Disease Control of some engineered <unk> and is looking for buyers in Chicago . Finding himself in a deal that 's really a set @-@ up , he makes his getaway and exacts revenge on the buyer for ratting him out to the United States Police Force . In the meantime , a government lab has built a robot called A.T.A.C.S. ( Autonomous Tracking And Combat System ) that can catch criminals by imprinting their personalities upon its program in order to predict and anticipate a specific criminal 's every move . The robot 's first test subject is America 's public enemy number one , Snake Plissken . After a brief battle , the tide turns when A.T.A.C.S. copies Snake to the point of fully becoming his personality . Now recognizing the government as the enemy , A.T.A.C.S. sides with Snake . <unk> , Snake sucker punches the machine and destroys it . As A.T.A.C.S. shuts down , it can only ask him , " Why ? " Snake just walks off answering , " I don 't need the competition " . 
 In 2003 , <unk> published John Carpenter 's Snake Plissken Chronicles , a four @-@ part comic book miniseries . The story takes place a day or so after the events of Escape from New York . Snake has been given a military Humvee after his presidential pardon and makes his way to Atlantic City . Although the director 's cut of Escape from New York shows Snake was caught after a bank job , this story has Snake finishing up a second heist that was pre @-@ planned before his capture . The job entails stealing the car in which John F. Kennedy was assassinated from a casino before delivering it to a buyer in the Gulf of Mexico . Snake partners with a man named Marrs who ends up double crossing him . Left for dead in a sinking crab cage , Snake escapes and is saved by a passing fisherman named Captain Ron ( an in @-@ joke referring to Kurt Russell 's 1992 comedy , Captain Ron ) . When Ron denies Snake 's request to use his boat in order to beat Marrs to the robbery , Snake decides to kill him . When Snake ends up saving Ron from the Russian mob who wants money , Ron changes his mind and helps Snake . Once at the casino , Snake comes face @-@ to @-@ face with Marrs and his men , who arrive at the same time , ending in a high @-@ speed shootout . Snake gets away with the car and its actress portraying Jackie Kennedy , leaving Marrs to be caught by the casino owner , who cuts him a deal to bring his car back and live . After some trouble , Snake manages to finally get the car to the buyer 's yacht , using Ron 's boat , and is then attacked by Marrs . Following the firefight , the yacht and car are destroyed , Marrs and Captain Ron are dead , and Snake makes his escape in a helicopter with the 30 million credits owed to him for the job . 
 In 2014 , BOOM ! Studios began publishing an Escape From New York comic book by writer , Christopher <unk> . The first issue of the series was released on December 3 , 2014 and the story picks up moments after the end of the film . 
 BOOM ! will release a crossover comics miniseries between Snake and Jack Burton titled Big Trouble in Little China / Escape from New York in October 2016 . 
 = = = Game = = = 
 An Escape from New York board game was released in 1981 by TSR , Inc . 
 = = = Anime = = = 
 Carpenter was planning an anime spin @-@ off of Escape from New York , with Outlaw Star 's Mitsuru Hongo slated to direct . However , nothing new has emerged since that announcement . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 A sequel , Escape from L.A. , was released in 1996 , with Carpenter returning along with Russell , now also acting as producer and co @-@ writer . 
 = = Remake = = 
 In 2007 , Scottish actor Gerard Butler was close to signing a deal in which he would play Snake Plissken in a remake of Carpenter 's film . Neal Moritz was to produce and Ken Nolan was to write the screenplay which would combine an original story for Plissken with the story from the 1981 film , although Carpenter hinted that the film might be a prequel . 
 New Line Cinema ( one @-@ time video distributor of the original ) acquired the rights to the film from co @-@ rights holder StudioCanal , who will control the European rights , and Carpenter , who will serve as an executive producer and said , " Snake is one of my fondest creations . Kurt Russell did an incredible job , and it would be fun to see someone else try . " Russell has commented on the remake and on the casting of Butler as Plissken , saying , " I will say that when I was told who was going to play Snake Plissken , my initial reaction was ' Oh , man ! ' [ Russell winces ] . I do think that character was quintessentially one thing . And that is , American . " 
 Len Wiseman was attached to direct but he dropped out of the project ; rumors then circulated that Brett Ratner would helm the film . As Ratner did not formally commit to the project , the identity of the director became unclear . The studio brought Jonathan Mostow in to rewrite , with an option to direct . In addition , Gerard Butler bowed out of his role , claiming " creative differences " . Allan Loeb wrote a script for the New Line Cinema project . Breck Eisner was then announced as the director of the remake , which was said to have scrapped the idea of a post @-@ apocalyptic New York like the original , but rather would feature a New York that had been built after the bomb . 
 In November 2010 , reports cited Jeremy Renner as being in talks to play Snake Plissken . In July 2011 , Deadline Hollywood reported that New Line and Warner Bros. had dropped the option to remake the film , allowing other studios to potentially option it . On March 18 , 2013 , Joel Silver and his studio company Silver Pictures teamed with StudioCanal to reboot the film as a trilogy , starting with an origin story in a fashion similar to the way Rise of the Planet of the Apes restarted that franchise . On February 10 , 2014 , Collider interviewed Silver about the film saying that the film 's script is inspired by the video game Batman : Arkham City . On January 13 , 2015 , 20th Century Fox won the bid for the film rights of the remake with Andrew Rona and Alex Heineman 's The Picture Company will produce . On October 12 , 2015 , Neil Cross was announced to write the film 's script . 
 = Romney Classical Institute = 
 Romney Classical Institute was a 19th @-@ century coeducational collegiate preparatory school in Romney , Virginia ( present @-@ day West Virginia ) , which was in operation between 1846 and some time after 1866 . Prior to its establishment , Romney was served by Romney Academy . By 1831 , the academy had outgrown its facilities , and the Romney Literary Society set about raising the necessary funds for the construction of a new educational building . The Virginia General Assembly permitted the society to raise funds through a lottery . By 1845 construction of the building had commenced and was completed in 1846 . On December 12 , 1846 , the Virginia General Assembly formally established the Romney Classical Institute , and empowered the Romney Literary Society with its operation . 
 From 1846 to 1849 , the institute was operated under the direction of Presbyterian Reverend William Henry Foote , who had been a teacher and principal at Romney Academy . In 1849 , when the Romney Literary Society established a new operating code for the institute and a new system of bylaws , Foote took offense and in 1850 founded a rival school , which was known as the Potomac Seminary . Professor E. J. Meany succeeded Foote , followed by John Jeremiah Jacob who served as the school 's principal from 1851 to 1853 . Jacob later served as West Virginia 's first Democratic governor . Reverend Joseph Nelson later served as the school 's principal until the American Civil War , and shortly after hostilities ended . 
 The institute and the society experienced a hiatus during the course of the war . The school held sessions under Reverend Nelson , and subsequently William C. Clayton in 1866 . Clayton later served in the West Virginia Senate . The Romney Literary Society was revived in 1869 , and following the passage of a bill which established the West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind in March 1870 , the society offered the institute 's building and grounds to the state of West Virginia for the new school . The institute 's property was transferred to the state and the West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind opened for its first term on September 29 , 1870 . Following the schools ' subsequent expansions , the institute 's former building became the center portion of the administration building of the West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind , in which capacity it serves at the present day . In addition to Jacob and Clayton , Robert White , Attorney General of West Virginia , was also an alumnus of the institute . 
 = = Background = = 
 Prior to the establishment of the Romney Classical Institute in 1846 , Romney and its environs had been served by a school as early as 1752 , and by Romney Academy , which had been incorporated by the Virginia General Assembly on January 11 , 1814 . By 1831 , Romney Academy had outgrown its educational facilities in an old stone building just north of the Hampshire County Courthouse in Romney . Also at this time , several academies in present @-@ day West Virginia were aspiring to collegiate status , as there were few colleges operating in the region prior to the American Civil War . 
 To remedy this issue and improve the educational opportunities for local children , the Romney Literary Society commenced an initiative to raise funds for the construction of a new school building . On January 6 , 1832 , the Virginia General Assembly authorized the society to raise $ 20 @,@ 000 by way of a lottery for the funding of educational purposes . Following an intermission of ten years , the society made arrangements with James Gregory of Jersey City and Daniel McIntyre of Philadelphia to finance the lottery , " for raising a sum of money not exceeding twenty thousand dollars , for the purpose of erecting a suitable building for their accommodation , the purchase of library and Philosophical apparatus " . The lottery was conducted over a ten @-@ year period , and sums of $ 750 , $ 1 @,@ 000 , and $ 1 @,@ 500 were to be raised in semiannual installments . 
 = = Construction and establishment = = 
 The society was successful in raising the necessary funds by 1845 . By April 4 , 1845 , bids were called for contractors to build the new school and library facility , and the bids were to be submitted to the society by May 24 . On that date , the land was deeded for the new school . Construction commenced that year , and the building and its grounds cost approximately $ 8 @,@ 000 to complete . 
 According to an 1845 bid advertisement , the building was originally planned as a brick building , 36 by 40 feet ( 11 by 12 m ) and 22 feet ( 6 @.@ 7 m ) in height from the foundation . Plans also called for a tin roof to " be surmounted by a cupola . " The bid advertisement also stated that the end of the building was to be the main façade , which was to be embellished with a " handsome portico the whole width of the house " . This advertisement was signed by the committee for the school building 's construction , which consisted of E. M. Armstrong , John B. Kercheval , and David Gibson . 
 On December 12 , 1846 , the Virginia General Assembly further empowered the Romney Literary Society : " To establish at or near the town of Romney a Seminary of Learning for the instruction of youth in various branches of science and literature ; and the Society may appropriate to the same such portion of the property which it now has or may acquire , as it may deem expedient " . Following the passage of this act , the Romney Classical Institute was formally established . That same year , the new two @-@ story brick educational building was completed and the society 's library and classes were relocated there . The completed building measured 54 by 40 feet ( 16 by 12 m ) , with an additional wing which served as the residence of the institute 's principal . The society utilized the second story of the building , which was divided into two rooms : a hall for society meetings and a hall for its library . Only society members , Romney clergymen , and the institute 's principal were given library privileges , and were each furnished with keys to visit the library at any time . 
 = = Growth and curriculum = = 
 From its foundation , the Romney Classical Institute was a coeducational collegiate preparatory school . The institute first operated under the principalship of Presbyterian Reverend William Henry Foote , who had been a teacher and principal at Romney Academy . Foote served as the school 's principal until 1849 . Theology was one of the courses taught at the institute under Foote 's leadership . In 1849 , the Romney Literary Society established a new operating code for the institute and a new system of bylaws for the governance of the school , which empowered the society to appoint teachers , fix salaries , and provide conditions of payment . Foote took this new code as a criticism of his leadership , and he resigned . In 1850 , he founded a rival institution known as the Potomac Seminary . Foote raised the necessary funds , and a brick building for the seminary was constructed approximately 902 feet ( 275 m ) north of the institute building . 
 Professor E. J. Meany was selected by the society to head the institute following Foote 's departure . Meany 's assistant principals were John Jeremiah Jacob , Mrs. Meany , and Miss Kern . Jacob was West Virginia 's first Democratic governor , who had attended both the institute and its predecessor , Romney Academy . Meany remained principal of the institute until at least 1851 . Following his graduation from Dickinson College in 1849 , Jacob became the institute 's assistant principal under principal Meany . He became the school 's principal in 1851 and served in that position until 1853 , during which time he taught classes and practiced law . 
 While the school was operated under the leadership of the Romney Literary Society , the institute became associated with another literary organization known as the <unk> <unk> Society . On November 15 , 1850 , the society debated the question , " Would the Southern States be justified in seceding from the Confederacy under present circumstances ? " There are no existing records of the debate 's conclusion . 
 In 1850 , the Virginia House of Delegates amended the act of December 12 , 1846 , establishing the school , and empowered the Governor of Virginia to appoint the institute 's Board of Visitors . According to an advertisement for a female teacher in the Baltimore Sun on November 9 , 1853 , William C. Clayton was serving as the institute 's principal in 1853 . Clayton stated in the advertisement that the institute was seeking an experienced female teacher to lead the school 's Female Department . The candidate for the female teacher was to be qualified to teach French , English , and music . Later in 1853 , Reverend Joseph Nelson became principal , and he continued to serve in this capacity until the outbreak of the American Civil War in 1861 . By 1859 , John Kern , Jr . , was the secretary of the school 's Board of Visitors , and Nelson had accepted a position in Mississippi . In December 1859 the institute advertised the position of principal , and received applications until January 5 , 1860 . In the school 's December 1859 advertisements in the Richmond Dispatch , the institute sought " a gentleman well qualified to teach the classics thoroughly , whose lady could teach French and music , would be preferred " . At that time , the institute had 50 students . Nelson 's replacement was expected to take charge by February 1860 . There are no records to indicate that Nelson left his post prior to the American Civil War . 
 According to its May 1853 advertisement in the Virginia Argus and Hampshire Advertiser , the institute provided instruction to the following grades during its summer session : fifth grade for $ 5 , fourth grade for $ 8 , third grade for $ 10 , second grade for $ 12 , and first grade ( its highest grade ) for $ 15 . Boarding , including laundry , meals , and lighting , was $ 45 , and music lessons with use of the piano were $ 25 . An additional fee of 25 cents was charged if a student was suspended . The fifth grade was taught by the institute 's Primary Department , and lessons included spelling , reading and elementary arithmetic . The fourth grade was taught by the institute 's Junior Department and included courses in writing and preparatory English grammar and geography . The third grade was instructed by the English Department and offered studies in geography and English ; and the second grade was also taught by the English Department with courses in history and natural philosophy . The school 's highest grade , first grade , was instructed by the Classical and Mathematical Department and offered studies in Greek , Latin , French , geometry , algebra , trigonometry , surveying , mensuration , navigation , astronomy , and bookkeeping . 
 By 1853 , the Romney Literary Society received an endowment of $ 20 @,@ 000 , and possessed a permanent fund of $ 12 @,@ 000 , which yielded $ 720 per year . Half of this yield was utilized to support the institute , including for the purchase of textbooks . These figures remained the same in 1859 . 
 = = Hiatus and final years = = 
 The institute and the society both continued to grow in importance until the outbreak of the American Civil War in 1861 . After the war began , the institute 's professors and older students joined the Confederate States Army and other Confederate partisan groups , and the institute and the society experienced a hiatus . 
 The Romney Literary Society 's library suffered significant losses during the war , and by the war 's end in 1865 , only about 400 volumes of its once large 3 @,@ 000 @-@ volume library could be located . Many of the society 's members never returned from the war , and those who did were at first too weary and discouraged to revive the society or the Romney Classical Institute . 
 In August 1865 Nelson attempted to resurrect the institute following the war , and he submitted an advertisement to the Civilian & Telegraph newspaper in Cumberland , Maryland , in which he billed the institute as " A Male and Female Boarding and Day School " . The institute opened on the first Monday in September in 1865 for its fall and winter session . According to Nelson in the advertisement , " parents desiring for their children a sound English , Classical and Mathematical Education would do well to patronize this School . " Student education was divided into three levels : the Lowest Grade level for $ 10 for a five @-@ month session , Intermediate level for $ 15 , and the Highest level for $ 20 . Latin and Greek each cost $ 5 additional per quarter . Boarding at the school cost $ 3 per week ; however , laundry , fuel , and lighting were not included in this fee . Music lessons were also taught " at Professor 's charges " . 
 In 1866 William C. Clayton became the institute 's principal and presided over the school for a few more terms . Like his predecessor John Jeremiah Jacob , Clayton had been a student at both the Romney Academy and at the institute , and he later served in the West Virginia Senate . A Mr. Dinwiddie was also a teacher at the school during this period following the war . 
 = = Disestablishment and legacy = = 
 Despite the institute 's effective disestablishment after 1866 , a meeting was held on May 15 , 1869 , with nine original members of the Romney Literary Society : James L. Armstrong , David Entler , William Harper , John C. Heiskell , Andrew Wodrow Kercheval , Samuel R. Lupton , James Parsons , Alfred P. White , and Robert White . These nine men set about expanding the society 's membership rolls and reviving its library . Over the next few years , 20 younger members were added to the society 's rolls . 
 By 1869 , the state of West Virginia was considering the establishment of a school for deaf and blind students , and the newly reorganized Romney Literary Society resolved to secure the institution for Romney as part of its Reconstruction development efforts . On March 3 , 1870 , the West Virginia Legislature passed an act providing for the establishment of the West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind . The society passed a resolution on April 12 , 1870 , by which it agreed to deed , free of cost , the institute 's building and grounds to the state for the planned West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind . On April 20 , 1870 , the society sent its members Robert White and Andrew Wodrow Kercheval to the then @-@ state capital of Wheeling to offer " the grounds and buildings of the Romney Classical Institute ... to the Board of Regents , free of debt , and in good repair " on the condition that the proposed institution be located at Romney . At the time of the society 's offer , the institute 's grounds consisted of 15 acres ( 61 @,@ 000 m2 ) . Offers for campus locations were also made by citizens of Clarksburg and Parkersburg . 
 The society 's offer was the only one to include an existing building on its grounds . The Board of Regents accepted the society 's offer , and a formal transfer of the Romney Classical Institute 's former campus was made . The society discovered that , in order to make good on its promise , it had to raise more than $ 1 @,@ 000 , a close to impossible task during the Reconstruction Era in Romney . Following a resolution on July 11 , 1870 , to raise between $ 1 @,@ 200 and $ 1 @,@ 300 , a subscription of $ 1 @,@ 383 @.@ 60 was raised after 118 individuals and firms donated the needed funds , and shortly thereafter the formal transfer of the property was completed . At that time , the institute 's property was valued at about $ 20 @,@ 000 . 
 The West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind opened for its first term on September 29 , 1870 , in the former Romney Classical Institute building , which provided space for administration offices , classrooms and dormitories . Following the schools ' subsequent expansions , the institute 's former building became the center portion of the administration building of the West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind , which it remains as of June 2015 . Between 1871 and 1872 , the schools added two wings to the old institute building , each measuring 70 by 30 feet ( 21 @.@ 3 by 9 @.@ 1 m ) . Following the transfer of the institute 's grounds , the Romney Literary Society built a new building between 1869 and 1870 , which became known as Literary Hall . 
 = = Alumni = = 
 During the existence of the Romney Classical Institute , the school educated several prominent educators , lawyers , military officers , and politicians . In West Virginia and Its People ( 1913 ) , historians Thomas Condit Miller and Hu Maxwell averred that the Romney Classical Institute " exerted a great influence upon the educational work of the South Branch Valley " . As stated above , West Virginia 's first Democratic governor , John Jeremiah Jacob , was educated at the institute , and later served as an assistant principal , and finally principal . West Virginia state senator William C. Clayton also attended this school , and later served as its principal following the American Civil War . Craig Woodrow McDonald , son of Angus William McDonald , attended the school in its early years of operation . Following his education here , he attended the Virginia Military Institute and the University of Virginia , then taught school in Culpeper County . During the American Civil War , McDonald served in the Confederate States Army as aide @-@ de @-@ camp to General Arnold Elzey and was killed in battle on May 29 , 1862 . Robert White attended the institute prior to serving as a law apprentice to his father John Baker White , Hampshire County Clerk of Court , and attending Lexington Law School . White later served as Attorney General of West Virginia . 
 = Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock = 
 Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock is a music rhythm game , the third main installment in the Guitar Hero series , and the fourth title overall . The game was published by Activision and distributed by RedOctane . It is the first game in the series to be developed by Neversoft after Activision 's acquisition of RedOctane and MTV Games ' purchase of Harmonix , the previous development studio for the series . The game was released worldwide for the PlayStation 2 , PlayStation 3 , Wii and Xbox 360 in October 2007 , with Budcat Creations assisting Neversoft on developing the PlayStation 2 port and Vicarious Visions solely developing on the Wii port respectively . Aspyr Media published the Microsoft Windows and Mac OS X versions of the game , releasing them later in 2007 . 
 Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock retains the basic gameplay from previous games in the Guitar Hero series , where the player uses a guitar @-@ shaped controller to simulate the playing of lead , bass , and rhythm guitar parts in rock songs by playing in time to scrolling notes on @-@ screen . The game , in addition to existing single @-@ player Career modes , includes a new Co @-@ Op Career mode and competitive challenges that pit the player against in @-@ game characters and other players . Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock is the first game in the series to include an online multiplayer feature , which is enabled in the PlayStation 3 , Wii and Xbox 360 versions . Initially the game offers over 70 songs , most of which are master tracks . The PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 versions feature the ability to download additional songs . The musicians Tom Morello ( of the bands Rage Against the Machine and Audioslave ) and Slash ( of Guns N ' Roses and Velvet Revolver ) make appearances both as guitar battle opponents and playable characters in the game . The PlayStation 3 , Xbox 360 and Microsoft Windows versions also include Bret Michaels ( of Poison ) as a non @-@ playable character . 
 Critics were generally favorable towards the game , but reviewers noted a difference in the game 's style compared to previous installments , associating it with it being Neversoft 's first development attempt with the series . The game is often cited to be too difficult , creating " walls of notes " that are difficult to complete , and led to alterations in note placement for future games in the series . According to Activision , Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock is the best @-@ selling video game of 2007 , both in terms of units sold and revenue earned , and that it is the first single retail video game to exceed one billion dollars in sales . The company also claimed that it is the second @-@ best selling video game title since 1995 , following Wii Play , and is one of the best @-@ selling third @-@ party games available for the Wii . 
 = = Development = = 
 Activision purchased RedOctane in 2006 for $ 100 million to achieve " an early leadership position in music @-@ based gaming " . In September of that year , MTV acquired Harmonix , the developer of all Guitar Hero games up to that point ; this purchase would later lead to the development of the competing music @-@ game series , Rock Band . Without Harmonix 's availability , Activision selected Neversoft Entertainment to develop Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock . Neversoft president Joel Jewett stated his company was asked to develop the game because of a conversation that Jewett had with RedOctane 's founders Kai and Charles Huang at the 2006 E3 Convention , in which Jewett mentioned how the first Guitar Hero game helped reduce the stress in the Neversoft offices during their development of Tony Hawk 's Project 8 . Several months later , Jewett was contacted by the Huangs , asking if Neversoft wanted to work on Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock . Dusty Welch , head of publishing at RedOctane , recognized Neversoft had a " 10 @-@ year track record of launching a game every single year and being in the top of the charts " and felt that the development group " brought a better and deeper sense of music sensibilities " to the series . Despite the experience from the previous games , Alan Flores , head of development at Neversoft , commented that the game was " deceptively simple " and that it took much work for their 30 @-@ person team to recreate the gameplay for Guitar Hero III . Though they " wanted to take the Guitar Hero experience to the next level " by adding additional instruments in the same manner as Rock Band , they opted to focus on perfecting the guitar gameplay . In 2010 , Activision CEO Bobby Kotick stated that they believed Neversoft would help them to develop great games for the series , but has since come to regret their failure to seek Harmonix for further development responsibility and believed this would have been a better move for both companies . 
 The note tracks , on @-@ stage motions of the band , and stage lighting and effect synchronization were created by the same team of developers who were all musicians and had previous experience in note tracking either from other music video games or from MIDI tracking . The note tracks were developed by placing notes in time with the song ; for sections that had difficult parts to track within the game 's engine , they opted to use sequences of notes that would seem to the match the music but still be playable . Hammer @-@ ons and pull @-@ offs ( " <unk> " ) for the previous Guitar Hero games were automatically placed by the software ; in this iteration , the engine was designed to allow manual placement of <unk> to make it easier to create certain effects in songs , such as sustained string bends . Character animations were selected from several made available by the animation team , while stage lighting and effects were selected to mimic those used in live performances from YouTube or from concert appearances . A separate team came up with the concepts for the various stages and arenas in the game . The team wanted keep the same art style as the previous Guitar Hero games but add " a certain spark " to improve upon previous designs . Once a stage idea was brainstormed , the team sought visual references from real stages to expand upon , and a 2D drawing of the envisioned stage was prepared for review and to remain a constant goal of the stage design . From that , a " pop up " three @-@ dimensional version of the stage was created , and elements from the 2D concept art were added to determine the appropriate placement of set decorations . This team worked with the animation department to place the band members , stage lighting , and other effects in the game before the final 3D version of the stage was completed . The final stages included several animated elements to help further bring the stage to life . 
 For the game 's characters , the developers intended to keep the comical looks from the previous games , but they decided to update their appearances with realistic materials and textures to take advantage of the more powerful level of graphics capabilities of seventh @-@ generation consoles . The designers first drew character sketches to determine the characters ' looks and clothing , creating a main and an alternate outfit for each character , which were then made into reference artwork . Afterward , low @-@ level meshes for each character were created , with details added with <unk> , resulting in characters that , before being scaled down for the game environment , had more than six million polygons . Textures and pixel shaders were added using the team 's previous work on Tony Hawk 's Project 8 to match the style of earlier Guitar Hero games . Unlike the Tony Hawk games , each character in the game was given a unique skeleton to match their variations in sizes and shapes , allowing the animators to create unique moves for individual characters . Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock introduces three new characters modeled after real @-@ life musicians . Slash , Tom Morello , and Bret Michaels , each performing one or more songs from their past recordings . All three were brought into the game using motion capture from the Motion Analysis Corporation . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 = = Release = = 
 Activision 's original announcement of Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock indicated a planned release in their 2008 fiscal year , ending on March 31 , 2008 . ; RedOctane later clarified a release in the last quarter of 2007 , and further revealed that all versions of the game would feature wireless controllers as well as online multiplayer and downloadable content . The game was officially announced by Activision and RedOctane on May 23 , 2007 for the PlayStation 2 , PlayStation 3 , Wii and Xbox 360 . Budcat Creations ported the game to the PlayStation 2 , and Vicarious Visions ported it to the Wii . In September 2007 , Aspyr Media announced they would be publishing Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock for the Microsoft Windows and Mac OS X ports . Demos of Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock appeared in Tony Hawk 's Proving Ground for the Xbox 360 in the Xbox Live Marketplace , and from the Internet as an ISO image . The demo features five songs ( " Lay Down " , " Rock You Like a Hurricane " , " Even Flow " , " Hit Me with Your Best Shot " , and " The Metal " ) played within the Desert Rock Tour venue . As shipped , the game did not offer offline Co @-@ Op Quickplay mode , a feature that was included in Guitar Hero II . This mode was added to the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 versions via a patch . 
 Activision called Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock its " largest product launch ever " , selling more than 1 @.@ 4 million copies , and making over $ 100 million in its first week of release in North America ; another 1 @.@ 9 million copies were sold in the following month . Subsequently , the company was concerned that they were unable to meet the game 's demand for the 2007 holiday season . As of July 15 , 2008 , the game has sold more than eight million copies . During the first seven months of 2008 , the game sold 3 @.@ 037 million units in the United States , 412 @,@ 000 in the United Kingdom , and 26 @,@ 000 in Japan , for a total of 3 @.@ 475 million units , according to the NPD Group , GfK Chart @-@ Track , and Enterbrain . More than two million copies of the game were sold for the Wii platform , making it the best @-@ selling third @-@ party title for the platform . Game sales during the first 12 months after the game 's release were over $ 750 million . At the 2009 Consumer Electronics Show , Activision CEO Mike Griffith stated that Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock is the first retail video game to exceed one billion dollars in sales . According to accumulated data from NPD Group in January 2010 , Guitar Hero III is the second best @-@ selling video game in the United States since 1995 , following Wii Play . In March 2011 , the title had become the top selling game with $ 830 @.@ 9 million in lifetime sales . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock generally received positive reviews , although it scored lower than its predecessors on review aggregator Metacritic . The Gibson Les Paul controller included with the game 's bundled version received particular praise . GameSpy , in a review of the four console versions , favorable reviewed the new controllers , and called the Wii guitar the best guitar peripheral that they had seen , praising the vibration option . 
 Several reviews criticized the changes made to Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock compared to previous games in the Guitar Hero series . IGN 's review of the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 versions considered the game a " pretty safe effort " from Neversoft , doing little to change the game due to it being their first time working on the series . They also criticized the lack of customizable characters . IGN 's review of the Wii version described the game 's presentation and art direction as feeling " forced " , and , as a result , less visually appealing than previous installments . GameDaily questioned the " white boy soundtrack " and would have liked to have seen more tracks from legends like Jimi Hendrix and Prince in the mix . " GameSpy criticized some of the difficulty tweaks in the game . They stated that " Medium simply feels like Hard @-@ minus @-@ the @-@ orange @-@ button , " and that the Star Power phrases were too long , comparing the overall game to a " trial by fire " in contrast to the previous games in the series . They were also critical of the <unk> approach used for the PlayStation 3 controllers , and failings in the online support for the PlayStation 3 version . GameSpot criticized the game for its " heavy dose of in @-@ game advertising . " GameSpy stated that the PlayStation 2 version received " the short end of the stick " because of a lack of online play . Official Xbox Magazine also criticized the game for being " too competitive " , a facet not readily found in the previous games . The PC version has been criticized for its high system requirements , and for lag and slowdown problems even on high @-@ end systems . 
 = = = Guinness World Record = = = 
 Recognizing the game 's popularity , Guinness World Records created a category for the Highest Score for a Single Song on Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock in its Gamer 's Edition , using the song " Through the Fire and Flames " , noted as the most difficult song in the game . The record has been traded back and forth between Chris Chike , who also won the 2008 Play N Trade National Guitar Hero III Tournament , and Danny Johnson , the present holder of the record . Both Chike and Johnson have completed the song without missing a note , documenting their performances on YouTube , though both Chike and Johnson have hit 100 % of the notes at an official event leading to a hard world record breaker . 
 = = = Lawsuit = = = 
 In November 2010 , Axl Rose sued Activision for $ 20 million for misuse of Guns N ' Roses music and its musicians ( specifically Slash ) in Guitar Hero III . In the lawsuit , Rose claims that when he learned that a Slash @-@ like character and other Velvet Revolver songs would be included in Guitar Hero II , he refused to allow Activision to use " Welcome to the Jungle " within Guitar Hero III , nor promotional images of Slash that had already been created . According to Rose 's claims , Activision stated that these would only be used as promotional material for a trade show , but ended up using them within the game . Furthermore , Rose asserts that Activision had used " Sweet Child o ' Mine " , which was only licensed for use on Guitar Hero II , was used for promotional material within Guitar Hero III . The judge in the case has allowed the trial to move forward after an initial hearing in March 2011 . A jury trial was expected to start in May 2012 . At initial hearings in August 2012 , the judge dismissed a fraud claim made by Rose , considering that it took three years for Rose and his publisher Black Frog Music to file these claims after the release of the game , an excessively long time for such a claim . The judge maintained the likelihood of the breach of contract argument , setting a jury trial to likely occur in early 2013 . In January and February 2013 , the judge dismissed the case , indicated that the lateness of the filing of the lawsuit , about three years since the release of the game , gave him grounds to throw out the suit , though Rose stated that the delay was due to promises made by Activision for a Guns N ' Roses @-@ themed game as compensation for the violation of contract terms . 
 = = Technical issues = = 
 Although the Wii version of the game was advertised as supporting Dolby Pro Logic II , players reported that the game would output audio in neither Pro Logic II nor stereo , providing only mono sound . Activision had offered a free replacement remastered game disk that corrects this issue for North American and European releases . Later , Activision further extended the replacement program to include a full refund of the game 's purchase price as an alternative to obtaining a replacement disc . A class @-@ action lawsuit over the mono sound issue was settled out of court , and Activision agreed to ship free faceplates for the Les Paul guitar controller to those who requested a replacement disc . Additionally , during the first few days of the game 's release , players experienced difficulties uploading their scores to the official Guitar Hero website . Neversoft attributed the problem to " heavy amounts of traffic " . 
 = When You Dish Upon a Star = 
 " When You Dish Upon a Star " is the fifth episode of The Simpsons ' tenth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on November 8 , 1998 . When the family spend the day at Lake Springfield , Homer meets Alec Baldwin and Kim Basinger ( voicing themselves ) , who are hiding from the media in their secluded summer home . Homer starts to work for them , developing a good friendship , but he soon reveals their secrets to the public , damaging his new friendship with them . It was the last Simpsons episode written by Richard Appel , and was directed by Pete Michels . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Bart and Lisa persuade their parents to spend the day at Lake Springfield . While there , Homer attempts parasailing and is involved in an accident when he tells Marge to send him up far too high ; as a result , his rope detaches . He crashes through a glass roof and into the bedroom of Alec Baldwin and Kim Basinger 's secluded summer home . The couple and Homer become acquainted . Homer convinces the couple to allow him to be their assistant , while keeping it secret that the celebrity couple are in Springfield . Homer , at first , works well with the couple , and they all become good friends . Homer scares Ron Howard when he visits the couple , and soon attempts to pitch a screenplay about a " killer robot driving instructor that travels back in time for some reason , " as well as a talking pie , the robot 's best friend . Both his attempts at writing for the couple are unsuccessful . 
 Homer , due to his inability to keep a secret , eventually releases the information that Baldwin and Basinger are in Springfield , and the couple 's house is discovered by Springfield citizens and the media . Baldwin and Basinger are furious at Homer for breaking their trust , and immediately end their friendship with him and kick him out of their house , and Homer sadly walks to the gate while being pelted with rocks by the citizens . Bitter about losing his celebrity friends and once again feeling like a nobody , Homer begins a mobile museum , entitled " Museum of Hollywood Jerks " , which displays the couple 's personal belongings in an attempt to expose them as being selfish and uncaring . Basinger , Baldwin and Howard discover the museum while intending to apologize to Homer . A high @-@ speed chase quickly ensues between Homer , in his mobile museum , and the celebrities in their Hummer . Homer agrees to stop after Ron Howard is injured during the chase . Homer is ordered by a court of law to remain 500 miles away from any celebrity , both living or dead . One month later , Ron Howard pitches Homer 's screenplay from earlier to Brian Grazer of 20th Century Fox , and over a still of Howard rejoicing over securing the deal , a snippet of the theme song of Happy Days is played . 
 = = Production = = 
 During the opening sequence , Bart originally wrote " <unk> " on the chalkboard , however , it was modified to <unk> , due to <unk> being a real website . The storyline of famous celebrities moving to Springfield was pitched by Mike Scully ; Scully originally pitched Bruce Springsteen as the celebrity to move to town , however , Springsteen turned down the opportunity to appear . Richard Appel then offered the guest appearance opportunity to Bruce Willis and Demi Moore , but they too turned down the offer . Appel then offered Alec Baldwin and Kim Basinger the opportunity to provide their voices , and they agreed to guest star in the episode . The episode was originally intended to be directed by Mike B. Anderson , but it was held over from season 9 and Pete Michels directed it . 
 In December 2008 , in an interview , Ron Howard commented that guest voicing himself " was an honour . Probably , from my kids ' perspective , my coolest turn . " Howard once again guest starred on The Simpsons as himself in the season eleven episode " Hello Gutter , Hello <unk> " ( 1999 ) . Howard was set to appear in " Children of a Lesser Clod " ( 2001 ) , but dropped out for unknown reasons . 
 The author of the 2003 book Ron Howard : From Mayberry to the Moon … and Beyond , Beverly Gray , noted that by playing himself in these episodes , " Howard showed once again that he could laugh at his own public persona . His appearances on The Simpsons also suggest how much he remains an American icon , long after the end of his acting career . It 's rare indeed for a director or producer to be as instantly recognizable as most Hollywood stars . " 
 The title episode is a reference to the 1940 film Pinocchio ( film ) , which features the song When You Wish Upon a Star . At the beginning of the episode , Homer has a dream that is a spoof of Hanna @-@ Barbera 's series The Yogi Bear Show ( 1961 ) , with Homer as Yogi Bear , Bart as Boo Boo and Ned as Ranger Smith . The time machine drawing in Homer 's screenplay contains a Flux capacitor , the device from the film Back to the Future ( 1985 ) . The drinks wobbling as the townspeople approach Kim Basinger and Alec Baldwin 's house is a reference to the film Jurassic Park ( 1993 ) . Posters for 9 ½ Weeks ( 1986 ) and L.A. Confidential ( 1997 ) , both starring Basinger , are seen in Homer 's museum . At the end of the episode , Brian Grazer has a poster of the movie Titanic ( 1997 ) in his office . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " When You Dish Upon a Star " finished 32nd in the weekly ratings for the week of November 2 – 8 , 1998 with a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 2 . In his review of The Simpsons ' tenth season , James Plath of Dvdtown.com noted " When You Dish upon a Star " was written to be " one of the funnier episodes " . In a Simpsons flashback review , Robert Canning of IGN reviewed the episode positively , commenting " I 'm not saying this episode is one of the greatest the series has every produced , but it is very , very funny , and it features one of my all @-@ time favorite guest performances . " The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , wrote in a negative review : " Despite three very high @-@ profile guest actors , this episode is really rather dull and uninspired . The only real moment of interest is the car chase at the end , and Kim Basinger 's delightfully self @-@ deprecating quips about her constant adoration of her Oscars , Alec Baldwin apparently not having one himself . " IGN rated Ron Howard as the twelfth greatest guest appearance on The Simpsons . Total Film 's Nathan Ditum ranked Baldwin and Basinger 's performances as the second best guest appearances in the show 's history . 
 = Republic F @-@ 105 Thunderchief = 
 The Republic F @-@ 105 Thunderchief was a supersonic fighter @-@ bomber used by the United States Air Force . The Mach 2 capable F @-@ 105 conducted the majority of strike bombing missions during the early years of the Vietnam War ; it was the only U.S. aircraft to have been removed from combat due to high loss rates . Originally designed as a single @-@ seat , nuclear @-@ attack aircraft , a two @-@ seat Wild Weasel version was later developed for the specialized Suppression of Enemy Air Defenses ( SEAD ) role against surface @-@ to @-@ air missile sites . The F @-@ 105 was commonly known as the " Thud " by its crews . 
 As a follow @-@ on to the Mach 1 capable North American F @-@ 100 Super Sabre , the F @-@ 105 was also armed with missiles and a cannon ; however , its design was tailored to high @-@ speed low @-@ altitude penetration carrying a single nuclear weapon internally . First flown in 1955 , the Thunderchief entered service in 1958 . The F @-@ 105 could deliver a greater bomb load than some American heavy bombers of World War II such as the Boeing B @-@ 17 Flying Fortress and Consolidated B @-@ 24 Liberator . The F @-@ 105 was one of the primary attack aircraft of the Vietnam War ; over 20 @,@ 000 Thunderchief sorties were flown , with 382 aircraft lost including 62 operational ( non @-@ combat ) losses ( out of the 833 produced ) . Although less agile than smaller MiG fighters , USAF F @-@ 105s were credited with 27 @.@ 5 kills . 
 During the war , the single @-@ seat F @-@ 105D was the primary aircraft delivering the heavy bomb loads against the various military targets . Meanwhile , the two @-@ seat F @-@ 105F and F @-@ 105G Wild Weasel variants became the first dedicated Suppression of Enemy Air Defenses ( SEAD ) platforms , fighting against the Soviet @-@ built S @-@ 75 Dvina ( NATO reporting name : SA @-@ 2 Guideline ) surface @-@ to @-@ air missiles . Two Wild Weasel pilots were awarded the Medal of Honor for attacking North Vietnamese surface @-@ to @-@ air missile sites , with one shooting down two MiG @-@ 17s the same day . The dangerous missions often required them to be the " first in , last out " , suppressing enemy air defenses while strike aircraft accomplished their missions and then left the area . 
 The Thunderchief was the largest single @-@ seat , single @-@ engine combat aircraft in history , weighing approximately 50 @,@ 000 pounds ( 23 @,@ 000 kg ) . It could exceed the speed of sound at sea level and reach Mach 2 at high altitude ; the F @-@ 105 could carry up to 14 @,@ 000 lb ( 6 @,@ 400 kg ) of bombs and missiles . The Thunderchief was later replaced as a strike aircraft over North Vietnam by both the McDonnell Douglas F @-@ 4 Phantom II and the swing @-@ wing General Dynamics F @-@ 111 Aardvark . However , the " Wild Weasel " variants of the F @-@ 105 remained in service until 1984 after being replaced by the specialized F @-@ 4G " Wild Weasel V " . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Design phase = = = 
 Republic Aviation started the Thunderchief as an internal project to replace the RF @-@ 84F Thunderflash , which first used the characteristic wing @-@ root air intakes to place cameras in a pointed nose . The design team led by Alexander <unk> examined some 108 configurations before settling on a large , single @-@ engine AP @-@ <unk> ( Advanced Project 63 Fighter Bomber , Experimental ) , specifically AP @-@ 63 @-@ 31 . The new aircraft was intended primarily for supersonic , low altitude penetration to deliver a single , internally carried nuclear bomb . The emphasis was placed on low @-@ altitude speed and flight characteristics , range and payload . The aircraft would be fitted with a large engine , and a relatively small wing with a high wing loading for a stable ride at low altitudes , and less drag at supersonic speeds . Traditional fighter attributes such as maneuverability were a secondary consideration . 
 Enthusiastic at first , the United States Air Force awarded Republic with a contract for 199 aircraft in September 1952 . However , by March 1953 , the USAF had reduced the order to 37 fighter @-@ bombers and nine tactical reconnaissance aircraft , citing the approaching end of the Korean War . By the time the F @-@ 105 mock @-@ up had been completed in October 1953 , the aircraft had grown so large that the Allison <unk> turbojet intended for it was abandoned in favor of the more powerful Pratt & Whitney J75 . Anticipating a protracted development of the engine , it was expected that the first aircraft would use the smaller Pratt & Whitney J57 . Near the end of 1953 , the entire program was canceled by the USAF due to a number of delays and uncertainties regarding the aircraft . However , on 28 June 1954 , the USAF officially ordered 15 F @-@ 105s ( two YF @-@ <unk> , four YF @-@ 105Bs , six F @-@ 105Bs and three RF @-@ 105Bs ) under the Weapon System designation WS @-@ <unk> . 
 The YF @-@ 105A prototype first flew on 22 October 1955 , with the second YF @-@ 105A following on 28 January 1956 . In spite of being powered by a less potent J57 @-@ P @-@ 25 engine with 15 @,@ 000 pounds @-@ force ( 67 kN ) of afterburning thrust , the first prototype attained the speed of Mach 1 @.@ 2 on its maiden flight . ( The J75 was expected to generate 24 @,@ 500 lbf ( 109 kN ) with afterburner . ) Both aircraft featured conventional wing root air intakes and slab @-@ sided fuselages typical of the early jets ; Republic viewed the prototypes as not being representative of the true capability of the aircraft due to numerous changes prior to production . Insufficient power and aerodynamic problems with transonic drag , as well as Convair 's experience with their F @-@ 102 , led to a redesign of the fuselage to conform to the Area rule , giving it a characteristic " wasp waist " . In combination with the distinctive forward @-@ swept variable @-@ geometry air intakes which regulated airflow to the engine at supersonic speeds and the J75 engine , this redesign enabled the F @-@ 105B to attain Mach 2 @.@ 15 . 
 = = = Into production = = = 
 In March 1956 , the USAF placed a further order for 65 F @-@ 105Bs and 17 RF @-@ 105Bs . In order to conduct the nuclear mission , an MA @-@ 8 fire control system , AN / APG @-@ 31 ranging radar , and K @-@ 19 gunsight to allow for toss bombing were integrated . The first pre @-@ production YF @-@ 105B flew on 26 May 1956 . Five of the F @-@ 105C trainer variant were added to the procurement plan in June 1956 , before being canceled in 1957 . The RF @-@ 105 reconnaissance variant was canceled in July 1956 . The first production F @-@ 105B was accepted by the Air Force on 27 May 1957 . In June 1957 , Republic Aviation requested that the F @-@ 105 be named Thunderchief , continuing the sequence of the company 's Thunder @-@ named aircraft : P @-@ 47 Thunderbolt , F @-@ 84 Thunderjet , and F @-@ 84F Thunderstreak . The USAF made the name official a month later . 
 To fulfill the Air Force requirement for all @-@ weather attack , Republic proposed the F @-@ 105D variant in 1957 . This version featured an enlarged nose and radome housing the AN / ASG @-@ 19 Thunderstick bombing / navigation system . The AN / ASG @-@ 19 was designed around the Autonetics R @-@ 14A radar , which operated in both air @-@ to @-@ air and air @-@ to @-@ ground modes , and the AN / APN @-@ 131 Doppler navigation radar . In the cockpit , the F @-@ 105D featured vertical @-@ tape instrument displays for adverse weather operation . The ability to carry the TX @-@ 43 nuclear weapon was also added . The RF @-@ 105 reconnaissance development was also restarted , now based on the F @-@ 105D . The first D @-@ model took its maiden flight on 9 June 1959 . Plans to build over 1 @,@ 500 F @-@ 105Ds were cut short when Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara decided to equip no more than seven combat wings with the type . In November 1961 , production was cut in favor of the Air Force adopting the Navy 's F @-@ 4 Phantom II , and in the longer term , the General Dynamics F @-@ 111 Aardvark of the TFX program . 
 The final 143 Thunderchiefs built were of the two @-@ seat F @-@ 105F trainer variant . Based on the F @-@ 105D , this model was 31 inches ( 79 cm ) longer to provide room for the rear cockpit ; otherwise , the aircraft had similar flight performance to the preceding F @-@ 105D . A total of 833 F @-@ 105s were completed before production ended in 1964 . The F @-@ 105 had been designed for a short nuclear campaign , leading to shortcomings that became evident in a lengthy conventional war , such as a poor hydraulics layout and fuel tanks that were not self @-@ sealing . Subsequent upgrades improved the reliability and weapons capacity of the existing F @-@ 105Ds . In response to the surface @-@ to @-@ air missile ( SAM ) threat experienced in the skies above Vietnam , dozens of F @-@ 105Fs were converted into anti @-@ radar " Wild Weasel " aircraft , culminating with the F @-@ 105G . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 The F @-@ 105 was a mid @-@ wing monoplane with a 45 ° swept wing and tail surfaces . The single engine was fed by two intakes in the wing roots , leaving the nose free for a radome housing the multi @-@ mode radar . Its fuselage provided room for 1 @,@ 184 US gallons ( 4 @,@ 480 L ) of fuel and an internal bomb bay . The bomb bay measured 15 feet 10 inches ( 4 @.@ 83 m ) by 32 in ( 0 @.@ 81 m ) by 32 in ( 0 @.@ 81 m ) ; it was originally to carry a single nuclear weapon but typically held an additional 350 US gal ( 1 @,@ 300 L ) fuel tank . It featured four under @-@ wing and one centerline pylon ; the two inner wing and centerline pylons were capable of accepting fuel from 450 and 650 US gal ( 1 @,@ 700 and 2 @,@ 500 L ) drop tanks . Two outer dry stations were wired for missiles or bombs . One M61 Vulcan ( initially designated T @-@ <unk> ) 20 mm 6 @-@ barrel Gatling @-@ style cannon was installed in the left side of the nose . A short @-@ range AIM @-@ 9 Sidewinder air @-@ to @-@ air missile could be carried on each of the outer wing pylons . 
 The F @-@ 105 was designed primarily for low @-@ level interdiction and its low @-@ altitude speed was its greatest asset when dealing with enemy fighters such as the MiG @-@ 17 / J @-@ 5s and MiG @-@ 21 . The F @-@ 105 managed 27 @.@ 5 air @-@ to @-@ air victories . Based on combat experience , the F @-@ 105D was updated with a better ejection seat , additional armor , improved gun sights , and Electronic Counter Measures ( ECM ) pods on the wings . 
 = = = Flight characteristics = = = 
 Former North American F @-@ 86 Sabre pilot Jerry Noel Hoblit recalled being in awe of the F @-@ 105 's size after seeing it for the first time ; he could not manage to reach the air intake lip even with a running jump . The F @-@ 105 had a spacious cockpit with good visibility and layout ( particularly after introduction of " tape " instruments ) ; the advanced electronics were easy to learn and operate . <unk> and landings were often performed in the 230 mph ( 370 km / h ) range . The spoilers provided good roll control at all speeds and the distinctive four @-@ petal airbrakes ( which also opened slightly when the afterburner was engaged to allow for the larger flow of exhaust gases ) were highly effective even at supersonic speeds . Loss of control due to a spin or complications of adverse yaw required deliberate effort from the pilot and spontaneous spin recovery was rapid . 
 The initial reaction of the fighter pilot community to their new aircraft was lukewarm . Between its massive dimensions and troubled early service life , the F @-@ 105 had garnered a number of uncomplimentary nicknames . In addition to the aforementioned " Thud " , nicknames included the " Squat Bomber " , " Lead Sled " , and the " Hyper Hog " and / or " Ultra Hog " . The latter two names arose from the F @-@ 105 's predecessors , the Republic P @-@ 47 Thunderbolt and F @-@ 84 Thunderstreak , nicknamed " Hog " and " Super Hog " , respectively . According to F @-@ 105 pilots and crews , the " Thud " nickname was inspired by the character " Chief <unk> " from the Howdy Doody television series . 
 The aircraft 's offensive capabilities were sarcastically referred to as a " Triple Threat " — it could bomb you , strafe you , or fall on you . Positive aspects , such as the F @-@ 105 's responsive controls , strong performance at high speed and low altitude , and its outfit of electronics won over some pilots . For some , " Thud " was a term of endearment ; retroactively the RF @-@ 84F Thunderflash became known as " Thud 's Mother " . F @-@ 105 pilot Colonel Jack Broughton said of the nickname : " The Thud has justified herself , and the name that was originally spoken with a sneer has become one of utmost respect through the air fraternity " . 
 = = = Special modifications = = = 
 = = = = Commando Nail = = = = 
 The rear cockpits of several two @-@ seat F @-@ 105Fs were modified under project Commando Nail with an R @-@ 14A radar and a radar scope that offered high resolution . These aircraft were used for all @-@ weather and night low @-@ level strikes against especially dangerous targets by a unit from the 13th Tactical Fighter Squadron ( 1966 – 1975 ) dubbed " Ryan 's Raiders " starting in April 1967 . Some of these aircraft were later converted to the Wild Weasel III standard . 
 In an effort to thwart MiG attacks , several F @-@ 105Fs were also fitted with <unk> QRC @-@ 128 communication jamming system under project Combat Martin . The North Vietnamese interceptor force followed Soviet air @-@ defense doctrine , with pilots under rigid direction of ground controllers over radio links . The QRC @-@ 128 , nicknamed " Colonel Computer " , filled up the rear cockpit of the F @-@ 105F . It bounced voice communications over the radio channel back out after a delay , resulting in an obnoxious garble . However , the first time the Combat Martin was used , the US National Security Agency ( NSA ) , in charge of US strategic signals intelligence , ordered the Air Force to cease and desist immediately , since the NSA believed that the intelligence obtained by monitoring the channels outweighed the benefits of jamming them . 
 = = = = Thunderstick II = = = = 
 Experience in Vietnam demonstrated the need for a better visual and blind bombing capability . In March 1968 , the Air Force ordered development of an upgraded bombing / navigation system , incorporating a Singer @-@ General Precision inertial navigation system , improvements to the AN / APN @-@ 131 navigation radar , and solid @-@ state circuitry for the R @-@ 14A radar , which was redesignated R @-@ 14K . Furthermore , the digital AN / ARN @-@ 92 long @-@ range navigation receiver replaced the problematic AN / ARN @-@ 85 receiver . The additional avionics were housed in a long , raised dorsal spine . The modified bombing / navigation system was known as Thunderstick II . F @-@ 105s with this system could achieve a bombing circular error of probability ( CEP ) of 50 feet ( 15 m ) from an altitude of 15 @,@ 000 ft ( 4 @,@ 600 m ) . Although the first Thunderstick II aircraft flew in 1969 , they were not used in Vietnam . A total of 30 F @-@ 105Ds received this modification . 
 = = = Wild Weasel = = = 
 In 1965 , the USAF began operating two @-@ seat North American F @-@ 100F Super Sabres specially equipped for Suppression of Enemy Air Defenses mission in Vietnam . Nicknamed the Wild Weasel , these aircraft achieved a number of victories against North Vietnamese surface @-@ to @-@ air missile radars . The second crew member was a Navigator trained as an Electronic Warfare Officer ( <unk> ) to decipher sensor information and guide the pilot towards the targets . However , the F @-@ 100F was an interim solution , since its limited payload often required multiple aircraft to conduct a successful strike ; it also lacked the speed and endurance to effectively protect the F @-@ 105 . 
 The resulting EF @-@ 105F Wild Weasel III ( the EF designation was popularly used but unofficial ) supplemented its sensors and electronic jamming equipment with AGM @-@ 45 Shrike anti @-@ radiation missiles and conventional bombs , giving it an offensive capability lacking in the F @-@ 100F . The first of these aircraft flew on 15 January 1966 and they began arriving in Southeast Asia in May , flying their first mission on 6 June 1966 , with five assigned to the 13th TFS at Korat RTAFB and six more to the 354th TFS at Takhli RTAFB . 
 In a typical early mission , a single EF @-@ 105F would accompany one or two flights of F @-@ 105Ds to provide protection from enemy ground fire . While this strategy was effective in reducing F @-@ 105D losses , the Weasel aircraft suffered heavy casualties with five of the first 11 lost in July and August 1966 . Attacks into high @-@ risk environments saw the Weasels operating in " Iron Hand " Hunter @-@ Killer flights of mixed single @-@ seat and two @-@ seat Thunderchiefs , suppressing sites during attacks by the strike force and attacking others en route . In the fall of 1967 , EF @-@ 105Fs began to be upgraded to the definitive Wild Weasel Thunderchief , the F @-@ 105G . 
 The F @-@ 105G incorporated a considerable amount of new SEAD @-@ specific avionics , including an upgraded Radar Homing and Warning ( <unk> ) system which required a redesign of the wingtips . To free outboard hardpoints for additional weapons , the Westinghouse AN / ALQ @-@ 105 electronic countermeasures were permanently installed in two long blisters on the underside of the fuselage . Thirty aircraft were fitted with pylons to carry the AGM @-@ 78 Standard anti @-@ radiation missile . On a typical mission , the F @-@ 105G carried two <unk> on outboard pylons , a single Standard on an inboard pylon balanced by a 450 US gal ( 1 @,@ 700 L ) fuel tank on the other side , and a 650 US gal ( 2 @,@ 500 L ) centerline fuel tank . 
 = = = Costs = = = 
 Notes : The costs above are in approximately 1960 United States dollars and have not been adjusted for inflation . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 = = = Introduction = = = 
 The F @-@ 105B entered USAF service with the Tactical Air Command 's 335th Tactical Fighter Squadron of the 4th Tactical Fighter Wing in August 1958 , although the squadron did not become fully operational until 1959 . On 11 December 1959 , an F @-@ 105B piloted by Brig Gen Joseph Moore ( commander of the 4th Tactical Fighter Wing ) set a world record of 1 @,@ 216 @.@ 48 miles per hour ( 1 @,@ 958 km / h ) over a 62 miles ( 100 km ) circuit . Difficulties with its avionics and the MA @-@ 8 fire @-@ control system were experienced early on ; typically the F @-@ 105 required 150 hours of maintenance for each flying hour . Most of these problems were addressed under Project <unk> . The lack of spares resulted in the entire F @-@ 105B fleet being briefly grounded in 1960 . In 1964 , modified F @-@ 105Bs with ballast replacing the cannon , fuselage and wing reinforcement for aerobatics , and the addition of a smoke generator , briefly flew with the United States Air Force Thunderbirds demonstration team . After only six shows , a fatal accident from overstressing the airframe led to the reintroduction of the F @-@ 100 Super Sabre . 
 By 1964 , the F @-@ 105B was relegated to USAF Air National Guard ( ANG ) squadrons . It was replaced in frontline service by the definitive F @-@ 105D whose advanced <unk> R @-@ 14A radar and AN / ASG @-@ 19 Thunderstick fire @-@ control system gave it all @-@ weather capability . The R @-@ 14A radar also added a terrain @-@ avoidance radar capability , while a completely new instrument panel was fitted , replacing dial @-@ type instrument with vertical tape instruments which were easier to read in combat . In order to accommodate the new radar , with a much larger radar dish , the forward fuselage was redesigned , increasing overall length by 16 inches ( 41 cm ) . 
 The F @-@ 105D entered service with the 335th TFS in September 1960 , although it was not fully operational on the F @-@ 105D until early 1961 . The first overseas F @-@ 105 units formed in West Germany in 1961 , with the 36th Tactical Fighter Wing at Bitburg Air Base in May and the 49th Tactical Fighter Wing at Spangdahlem Air Base in October . Both wings had a primary tactical nuclear strike role for NATO . The F @-@ 105D was also deployed to the Pacific , with the 18th Tactical Fighter Wing at Kadena in Okinawa converting in 1962 and the 8th Tactical Fighter Wing converting from 1963 . 
 Like the F @-@ 105B , the F @-@ 105D 's early career was plagued with maintenance problems and in @-@ flight failures . The origins of the nickname " Thud " were obscure ; some claim that it stood for the sound of an F @-@ 105 crashing into the ground . The entire F @-@ 105D fleet was grounded in December 1961 and then again in June 1962 . Many of the issues were worked out during the production run and by 1964 , early F @-@ 105Ds were upgraded with these fixes under Project Look Alike , although engine failures and fuel system problems persisted until 1967 . 
 Meanwhile , the USAF was gradually changing the anticipated F @-@ 105 mission from nuclear interdiction to conventional bombing . The Look Alike upgrades increased the aircraft 's capacity from four to 16 conventional 750 lb ( 340 kg ) bombs on underwing and fuselage centerline hardpoints and added the equipment to launch AGM @-@ 12 Bullpup air @-@ to @-@ ground missiles . In June 1961 , an F @-@ 105D delivered 15 @,@ 430 lb ( 7 @,@ 000 kg ) of conventional bombs during a USAF test — at the time a record for a single @-@ engine aircraft with a payload three times heavier than American four @-@ engine heavy bombers of World War II such as the Boeing B @-@ 17 Flying Fortress and the Consolidated B @-@ 24 Liberator , though aerial refueling would be required for long missions . One of the F @-@ 105Ds was named Memphis Belle II after the famed World War II B @-@ 17 . 
 = = = Vietnam War = = = 
 In spite of a troubled early service life , the F @-@ 105 became the dominant attack aircraft early in the Vietnam War . The F @-@ 105 could carry more than twice the bomb load farther and faster than the F @-@ 100 , which was used mostly in South Vietnam . In a foreshadowing of its Wild Weasel role , the first F @-@ 105D combat mission of the war involved an attack on 14 August 1964 against an anti @-@ aircraft artillery site on Plaine des <unk> . This mission was carried out by aircraft of the 36th TFS , <unk> Tactical Fighter Wing deployed from Yokota Air Base , Japan to Korat Royal Thai Air Force Base , Thailand . The first Thunderchief lost in the war also occurred during this mission , although the pilot managed to return the aircraft to Korat . The first strike mission took place on 13 January 1965 with the destruction of the Ben Ken bridge in Laos . In early 1965 additional F @-@ 105 squadrons were deployed to Korat and Takhli air bases in Thailand . At the start of Operation Rolling Thunder in March 1965 , large numbers of F @-@ 105Ds were shipped to these bases to participate in intense bombing missions . 
 On 3 April 1965 , a total of 79 aircraft , including 45 F @-@ 105 Thunderchiefs , were sent against the Thanh Hoa Bridge , nicknamed " Dragon 's Jaw " . The next day , enemy MiGs were encountered during a second run upon the bridge ; a total of eight MiG @-@ 17s faced 46 F @-@ 105s escorted by a MiGCAP flight of 21 F @-@ 100 Super Sabres . The MiG @-@ 17s evaded the escorts using altitude and cloud cover , instead focusing upon the bomb @-@ laden Thunderchiefs . Two Thunderchiefs were lost to the MiG @-@ 17s ; a third , thought to be lost to <unk> , was later claimed by the North as downed by a MiG @-@ 17 . An F @-@ 100 claimed the only probable MiG @-@ 17 kill , although a Vietnamese pilot believes three of his comrades were shot down by F @-@ 105s . One F @-@ 105 piloted narrowly escaped . USAF Chief of Staff General John P. McConnell was " hopping mad " to hear that two F @-@ 105s had been shot down by Korean War @-@ era subsonic North Vietnamese MiGs . The Thanh Hoa Bridge proved resistant to aerial bombing , multiple missions were flown to damage the bridge both by F @-@ 105s and U.S. Navy aircraft . 
 In December 1966 , the VPAF 's MiG @-@ 21 pilots of the 921st regiment downed 14 F @-@ 105s without any losses . 
 On a typical combat mission into North Vietnam , the F @-@ 105D carried two 450 US gal ( 1 @,@ 700 L ) wing @-@ mounted fuel tanks , a 390 US gal ( 1 @,@ 500 L ) fuel tank in the bomb bay , and five 1 @,@ 000 lb ( 450 kg ) or six 750 lb ( 340 kg ) bombs , and required inflight refueling going to and sometimes returning from Hanoi 700 mi ( 1 @,@ 100 km ) distant . F @-@ 105s flying in the vicinity of Hanoi would routinely travel around mountainous terrain nicknamed Thud Ridge to evade the air defenses surrounding the city . Colonel Jack Broughton , an F @-@ 105 pilot in Vietnam , noted the demands of flying close to Hanoi gave " simply no room for error " . 
 On 11 August 1967 , F @-@ 105Ds from 335th Tactical Fighter Squadron with support from F @-@ 105 Wild Weasels from 338th Tactical Fighter Squadron made the first of many successful attacks on the Paul Doumer bridge over the Red River . Flying low @-@ altitude missions and conducting dive bombings forced the F @-@ 105s into range of North Vietnamese anti @-@ aircraft guns , sometimes coming under heavy fire . 
 USAF F @-@ 105s were escorted by F @-@ 4s to protect them against enemy fighters . However , the Thunderchief was officially credited with 27 @.@ 5 air @-@ to @-@ air victories against North Vietnamese aircraft at the cost of 17 aircraft lost to enemy fighters ( North Vietnamese pilots claimed to have shot down an additional 23 F @-@ 105s but none have been confirmed by USAF ) . All victories were against MiG @-@ 17s . Of these 24 @.@ 5 were shot down with cannon fire ( one victory was shared with an F @-@ 4 ) , and three with AIM @-@ 9 Sidewinder missiles . One F @-@ 105F is unofficially credited with downing three MiGs — one by air @-@ to @-@ air missile , the second by cannon fire and the third by jettisoning the centerline rack full of bombs directly into the path of a surprised MiG . 
 On 31 May 1968 , a dedication ceremony took place at the United States Air Force Academy to honor graduates who had served in Vietnam . An F @-@ 105 , which had been assembled using parts from ten different F @-@ 105s that had seen service in Vietnam , was placed on permanent static display . The ceremony included the entire cadet wing , the superintendent and commandant of cadets of the USAFA , a representative of Republic Aircraft , members of the press , among others . To conclude the ceremony , a flight of four F @-@ 105s from McConnell AFB were to fly over in formation at 1 @,@ 000 feet above the ground and then fly over singly at 250 feet . The formation portion happened as planned . But the flight leader , Lt Col James " Black Matt " Matthews , came back for the single @-@ file pass and exceeded the speed of sound at less than 100 feet . The ensuing sonic boom broke hundreds of windows and fifteen people sustained cuts . 
 = = = = Medal of Honor recipients = = = = 
 Two Wild Weasel pilots received the Medal of Honor : 
 USAF Captain Merlyn H. <unk> was awarded the Medal of Honor and Capt Kevin " Mike " Gilroy the Air Force Cross for an F @-@ 105F Wild Weasel mission on 10 March 1967 , flying F @-@ 105F , serial number 63 @-@ <unk> . After their aircraft was damaged by ground fire , <unk> and Gilroy elected to stay in the skies above the steel works at Thai Nguyen until the SAM site was found and destroyed . 
 USAF Captain Leo K. Thorsness was awarded the Medal of Honor and Capt Harold Johnson the Air Force Cross for an F @-@ 105F Wild Weasel mission on 19 April 1967 , flying F @-@ 105F , serial number 63 @-@ <unk> . Thorsness and Johnson protected an attempted rescue of another Wild Weasel crew that had been shot down , in the process destroying two MiG @-@ 17s . After running out of ammunition , Thorsness and Johnson continued to act as decoys to draw the MiGs away from the rescue aircraft . 
 = = = Phase @-@ out and retirement = = = 
 As production of F @-@ 105s had ended , the type was replaced in the Vietnam War by other aircraft , primarily the McDonnell Douglas F @-@ 4 Phantom II . In October 1970 , the 355th Tactical Fighter Wing , based at Takhli RTAFB , Thailand , the last F @-@ 105D unit in Vietnam , began to return to the U.S. The F @-@ 105G Wild Weasel versions soldiered on until the end of the war . They were gradually replaced by F @-@ 4G Wild Weasel IVs . 
 The Thunderchief was rapidly withdrawn from USAF service after the end of the Vietnam War . Of the 833 F @-@ 105s built , a combined 395 F @-@ 105s were lost in Southeast Asia , including 334 ( 296 F @-@ 105Ds and 38 two @-@ seaters ) lost to enemy action and 61 lost in operational accidents . Following the war the U.S. Air Force began transferring the remaining aircraft to Air Force Reserve ( <unk> ) and Air National Guard ( ANG ) units . By the late 1970s , these aging Thunderchiefs were becoming difficult to maintain . The last F @-@ <unk> with the 128th Tactical Fighter Squadron of the Georgia ANG were retired on 25 May 1983 . The last flight of the F @-@ 105 Thunderchief was by the <unk> 466th Tactical Fighter Squadron with F @-@ 105Ds on 25 February 1984 . 
 = = Variants = = 
 YF @-@ 105A 
 Two pre @-@ production prototypes with P & W J57 engine model . 
 YF @-@ 105B 
 Four pre @-@ production aircraft with P & W J75 engine . 
 F @-@ 105B 
 Initial production model with AN / APN @-@ 105 navigational radar , 71 built . 
 JF @-@ 105B 
 Test aircraft built from re @-@ allocated RF @-@ 105B airframes ; three built . 
 RF @-@ 105B 
 Proposed reconnaissance version of the F @-@ 105B ; none built . Three were ordered but completed as JF @-@ 105Bs . 
 F @-@ 105C 
 Proposed dual @-@ control trainer ; canceled in 1957 , none built . 
 F @-@ 105D 
 The definitive production model , all @-@ weather capability because of advanced avionics , including AN / APN @-@ 131 navigational radar ; 610 built . 
 RF @-@ 105D 
 Proposed reconnaissance version of the F @-@ 105D ; none built . 
 F @-@ <unk> 
 Proposed trainer version of F @-@ 105D ; cancelled in 1959 , none completed . 
 F @-@ 105F 
 Two @-@ seat trainer version of F @-@ 105D with lengthened forward fuselage . It was fully combat @-@ capable and had dual controls , taller fin , and increased takeoff weight ; its first flight took place on 11 June 1963 . A total of 143 were built . It featured the AN / APN @-@ 148 navigational radar . 
 EF @-@ 105F 
 Initial designation for a Wild Weasel / SEAD version , 54 converted from F @-@ 105Fs . 
 F @-@ 105G 
 Two @-@ seat Wild Weasel / SEAD improved version of EF @-@ 105F conversions . The variant used the AN / APN @-@ 196 navigational radar . 
 = = Operators = = 
 United States 
 United States Air Force 
 United States Air Force Thunderbirds 
 Air Force Reserve 
 Air National Guard 
 = = Survivors = = 
 = = Specifications ( F @-@ 105D ) = = 
 Data from The Great Book of Fighters and Quest for Performance 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : 1 ( 2 for F @-@ 105C / E / F / G variants ) 
 Payload : 14 @,@ 000 lb ( 6 @,@ 700 kg ) of weapons 
 Length : 64 ft 4 @.@ 75 in ( 19 @.@ 63 m ) 
 Wingspan : 34 ft 11 @.@ 25 in ( 10 @.@ 65 m ) 
 Height : 19 ft 8 in ( 5 @.@ 99 m ) 
 Wing area : 385 ft ² ( 35 @.@ 76 m ² ) 
 Airfoil : NACA <unk> root , NACA <unk> tip 
 Empty weight : 27 @,@ 500 lb ( 12 @,@ 470 kg ) 
 Loaded weight : 35 @,@ 637 lb ( 16 @,@ 165 kg ) 
 Max. takeoff weight : 52 @,@ 546 lb ( 23 @,@ 834 kg ) 
 Powerplant : 1 × Pratt & Whitney J75 @-@ P @-@ 19W afterburning turbojet 
 Dry thrust : 14 @,@ 300 <unk> ( <unk> ) 
 Thrust with afterburner : 24 @,@ 500 <unk> ( 109 kN ) 
 Zero @-@ lift drag coefficient : 0 @.@ <unk> 
 Drag area : 6 @.@ 65 ft ² ( 0 @.@ 62 m ² ) 
 Aspect ratio : 3 @.@ 16 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : Mach 2 @.@ 08 ( 1 @,@ 372 mph , 2 @,@ 208 km / h ) at 36 @,@ 000 ft ( 11 @,@ 000 m ) 
 Combat radius : 780 mi ( 680 nmi , 1 @,@ 250 km ) 
 Ferry range : 2 @,@ 210 mi ( 1 @,@ 920 nmi , 3 @,@ 550 km ) 
 Service ceiling : 48 @,@ 500 ft ( 14 @,@ 800 m ) 
 Rate of climb : 38 @,@ 500 ft / min ( 195 m / s ) 
 Wing loading : 93 lb / ft ² ( 452 kg / m ² ) 
 Thrust / weight : 0 @.@ 74 
 Lift @-@ to @-@ drag ratio : 10 @.@ 4 
 Time to altitude : 1 @.@ 7 min to 35 @,@ 000 ft ( 11 @,@ 000 m ) 
 Armament 
 Guns : 1 × 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 787 in ) M61A1 Vulcan 6 @-@ barreled Gatling cannon , 1 @,@ 028 rounds 
 Hardpoints : 5 total : 4 × under @-@ wing , 1 × centerline pylon stations plus an internal bomb bay with a capacity of Up to 14 @,@ 000 lb ( 6 @,@ 400 kg ) of ordnance , including conventional and nuclear bombs , and AIM @-@ 9 Sidewinder and AGM @-@ 12 Bullpup missiles . 
 Avionics 
 <unk> R @-@ 14A radar 
 AN / ASG @-@ 19 Thunderstick fire control system 
 AN / ARN @-@ 85 LORAN ( AN / ARN @-@ 92 in Thunderstick II @-@ modified aircraft ) 
 = Jabala Upanishad = 
 The Jabala Upanishad ( Sanskrit : <unk> उपनिषत ् , IAST : Jabala Upaniṣad ) , also called <unk> , is a minor Upanishad of Hinduism . The Sanskrit text is one of the 20 Sannyasa Upanishads , and is attached to the Shukla Yajurveda . 
 The Jabala Upanishad is an ancient text , composed before 300 CE . It is among the oldest Upanishads that discuss the subject of renouncing the worldly life for the exclusive pursuit of spiritual knowledge . The text discusses the city of Banaras in spiritual terms , as Avimuktam . It describes how that city became holy , then adds that the holiest place to revere is one within – the Atman ( soul , self ) . 
 The Upanishad asserts that anyone can renounce – this choice is entirely up to the individual , regardless of which Ashrama ( stage of life ) he is in . The Jabala Upanishad seems to justify suicide as an individual choice in certain circumstances , a view opposed by earlier Vedic texts and Principal Upanishads . Those too sick may renounce the worldly life in their mind . The Jabala Upanishad presents the Vedanta philosophy view that one who truly renounces lives an ethical life , which includes not injuring anyone in thought , word or deed . Such a sannyasi ( renunciate ) abandons all rituals , is without attachments to anything or anyone , and is one who is devoted to the oneness of Atman and Brahman . 
 = = History = = 
 The Jabala Upanishad is an ancient text , composed before 300 CE and likely around the 3rd century BCE , and among the oldest that discuss the subject of renouncing the worldly life for the exclusive pursuit of spiritual knowledge . The text is also referred to as <unk> ( Sanskrit : <unk> ् ) or <unk> Upanishad . 
 The themes of this Upanishad are meditation and renunciation . Sage Yajnavalkya " as the expounder of the precepts of this Upanishad " elaborates on the aspects of renunciation of the worldly life , in the interests of achieving spiritual enlightenment as the " transcendence of attachment to every desire , including the desire for renunciation itself " . According to Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan , a professor of Eastern Religions and Ethics , this Upanishad seems to justify suicide in certain circumstances , a view opposed by earlier Vedic texts and principal Upanishads . The text discusses the city of Banaras as " one Shiva never leaves " , and as a holy place to revere . It also is among the earliest texts which states that the four stages of life are not necessarily sequential in that anyone can renounce their worldly life at any time . The Jabala Upanishad presents the Vedanta philosophy view that the proper life of a sannyasi is not about any rituals , nor wearing any sacrificial thread , but about the knowledge of one 's soul ( Atman , self ) . 
 In the Vedic @-@ era literature , only three <unk> ( life stages ) were mentioned , with Brahmacharya ( student ) as the first stage and the Grihastha ( householder ) as the second stage . The third stage of life , in the Vedic texts , combined Vanaprastha ( retired or forest dweller ) and Sannyasa ( renunciation ) as one ashrama . According to <unk> <unk> Chandra , a scholar at the Rohilkhand University , the separation of Vanaprastha and Sannyasa as two different stages of life is first mentioned in the Jabala Upanishad . However , Patrick Olivelle , a professor at the University of Texas at Austin , states that the Sannyasa ashrama as a separate stage is mentioned in Aruni Upanishad , which likely is a more ancient Upanishad . 
 = = Chronology and anthology = = 
 It is unclear when the Jabala Upanishad was composed , as is true with most ancient Indian texts . Textual references and literary style suggest that this Hindu text is ancient , composed before the Asrama Upanishad which is dated to 300 CE . Hajime Nakamura , a Japanese scholar of Vedic literature , dates Jabala Upanishad along with Paramahamsa Upanishad to around the start of the common era . The German scholar of Upanishads , Joachim <unk> , assigns it to be from the last few centuries prior to the beginning of the common era , while the German Indologist Georg Feuerstein dates it to around 300 BCE . The text is one of the oldest renunciation @-@ related Upanishads . 
 In the anthology of 108 Upanishads of the Muktika canon , narrated by Rama to Hanuman , it is listed at number 13 . In the Colebrooke anthology of 52 Upanishads , which is popular in North India , the Jabala Upanishad is listed at number 51 . In Narayana 's anthology of 52 Upanishads , which is popular in South India , the Jabala Upanishad is listed at number 39 or 40 depending on the manuscript . In later compilations brought out in South India , it is part of the 108 Upanishads . In the 30 minor Upanishads published by the 19th @-@ century Sanskrit scholar <unk> <unk> in the <unk> Indica , the Jabala Upanishad is given the name <unk> Upanishad and listed at number 28 . 
 The Jabala Upanishad is one of the 20 Sannyasa Upanishads . The Sultan Mohammed Dara <unk> , in 1656 helped organize and publish a collection of 50 Upanishads translated into the Persian language , with the title of Oupanekhat ; in this collection the Jabala Upanishad is listed at number 29 and " Jabala " is spelled " <unk> " . This Persian translation was itself translated into Latin by Anquetil du Perron in 1801 – 02 , wherein Anquetil remarked that the Indians are reading this collection of Upanishads all the time " knowing it to be the best book on religion " . The Anquetil translation brought the Upanishads to the attention of Arthur Schopenhauer and other western philosophers . 
 = = Structure = = 
 The Sanskrit text of this Upanishad has six chapters . Sage Yajnavalkya answers questions in the first five , wherein the questions are posed by Brihaspati , Atri , students of Brahman @-@ Atman , King Janaka and by Atri again . The last chapter lists the names of famous sages who were model <unk> ( <unk> ) . 
 The extant texts are found in two versions . One consists of six chapters structured into 14 verses , while the other version has six chapters with the same content but does not number the 14 verses . 
 The first three chapters are devoted to defining the place where the seat of all beings and ultimate reality ( Brahman ) resides , and how to reach it through meditation , the Hindu god Shiva and the city of Varanasi . The next three chapters relate to renunciation . They describe the characteristics of a Paramahamsa as one who has reached the highest status of spirituality , who abandons all external signs of asceticism and discards all relationships or worldly comforts to know " Brahman , the nature of the Self " . 
 = = Contents = = 
 = = = Holy city of Varanasi = = = 
 The first chapter of the Upanishad opens as a conversation between Brihaspati and Yajnavalkya , where Brihaspati asks Yajnavalkya for information about the place where the seat of all beings , the Brahman , lives . Yajnavalkya states that true Brahman @-@ seat of all beings , or Kurukshetra , is Avimuktam – a place that Shiva never left . This Avimuktam is a part of Varanasi ( Banaras ) . All renouncers , after having wandered places , should stay at this Avimuktam . This is the place , asserts the Upanishad , where Rudra imparts the moksha knowledge just when the last vital breaths of the dying are departing , leading one to <unk> ( salvation after death ) . This place is holy , a place to revere and not leave . 
 In the second chapter , sage Atri asks Yajnavalkya " how can I know this infinite , non @-@ manifested Atman ? " The Atman , states Yajnavalkya , can be found in Avimuktam . Atri then asks how to find Avimuktam . The Jabala Upanishad uses wordplay to express a literal and hidden allegorical meaning . Yajnavalkya answers that Avimuktam is to be found between Varana and Nasi , or <unk> and <unk> . 
 Geographically , the city of Varanasi is situated on the Ganges river , where two small , mostly dry rivers named Varana and Asi join the Ganges . Metaphorically , the text adds , Varana is named as it wards off errors of organs ( <unk> ) , and Nasi is named as it destroys the sins committed by one 's organs ( <unk> ) . Atri , after listening to this metaphorical answer , repeats his question , with " but where is this place of Avimuktam ? " Yajnavalkya replies that Avimuktam is already within Atri , " where his nose and eye brows meet , for there is the place of the world of heaven and highest world of Brahman . " This Avimuktam is the " abode of Brahman " . 
 A person who is aware of Brahman reveres it as the Atman in the Avimuktam within him . Ramanathan interprets this verse to mean that one who knows the true nature of Avimuktam understands that " the individual Self ( soul ) is no other than the <unk> Brahman " . 
 In the third chapter , the shortest in the Upanishad , the students of Brahman ask Yajnavalkya to recommend a hymn that guides someone to immortality . Yajnavalkya recommends the <unk> , the hymn with the hundred names of the god Rudra . This hymn is found in sections 16 @.@ 1 to 16 @.@ 66 of the <unk> Samhita in Yajurveda , and is conceived as many epithets of Atman . 
 = = = How to renounce = = = 
 In the fourth chapter of the Upanishad , King Janaka of Videha asks Yajnavalkya , " Lord , explain Sannyasa [ renunciation ] . " 
 Yajnavalkya answers that one may complete Brahmacharya ( the student stage of life ) , then Grihastha ( householder ) , followed by Vanaprastha ( retirement ) and finally Sannyasa ( pilgrimage as <unk> <unk> , renunciation ) . Or , continues Yajnavalkya , one may renounce immediately after completing the student stage of life , or after the householder stage , regardless of whether or not one has completed the sacred fire ritual or any other rituals . Olivelle interprets the sacred fire ritual reference as an indirect reference to marriage , and thus the text asserts that those who have married or never married can both renounce . The Jabala Upanishad herein recommends that a person may renounce on the day he feels detached from the world , regardless of which stage of life he is in , and whether he has completed that stage . 
 Yajnavalkya states that some people perform the Prajapati ritual [ 1 ] when they renounce , but this should not be done . A person should instead make an offering to Agni ( fire ) that is one 's own vital breath . He should make the " three @-@ element offering " , namely , to " Sattva [ goodness ] , Rajas [ energy ] and Tamas [ darkness ] " within . He should revere Prana ( internal life force ) because it is the yoni ( womb , birthplace ) of all fires . If he cannot obtain this fire , he should offer the oblation " Om ! I offer to all godheads , svaha " with water as he begins the renunciation stage of life . As he offers this oblation , he should learn that the liberating mantra of Om is the three Vedas and the Brahman to be revered . 
 = = = Life is sacred , ending it a choice = = = 
 In the fifth chapter , Atri asks Yajnavalkya whether someone pursuing Brahman can be without the sacred thread . According to the translation by Paul Deussen , a professor and German Indologist , Yajnavalkya answers that " this very thing is sacred thread , namely the Atman " . A renouncer or <unk> ( another term for renouncer ) performs a sacrifice to the Atman whenever he feeds himself or rinses his mouth with water . Feeding and dressing his Prana ( life force ) is the only duty of the renouncer . 
 Yajnavalkya states that the renouncer can choose a hero 's death by dying in a " just war " , or abstain from eating any food , or go into water or fire , or start off on the " great journey " . This section has led some scholars to believe that this Upanishad may be giving the choice of ending life to the individual and justifying suicide in certain circumstances . This view is different from Vedic texts and Principal Upanishads which consider suicide to be wrong . 
 According to this Upanishad , the renouncer pilgrim undertakes the journey to the knowledge of Brahman with purity of thought , without belongings , with his head shaved , wearing discoloured garments , free from enmity towards all , and he lives on alms . This method is not essential for anyone too sick or in mortal danger – such a person may renounce verbally or mentally . 
 = = = Paramahamsa : the ideal renouncer = = = 
 In the sixth and final chapter , Yajnavalkya lists exemplars of Paramahamsas , the highest renouncers : the sages <unk> , Aruni , <unk> , Durvasa , Ribhu , <unk> , <unk> , Dattatreya and <unk> . The Paramahamsas do not carry articles or show signs that suggest they have renounced , their conduct is concealed , they may only seem insane . They do not carry staves , nor bowl , nor hair tuft , nor sacred thread , but they are the ones who seek after the Atman ( self , soul ) . 
 Naked as he was born , beyond the pair of opposites ( joy versus sorrow etc . ) , without belongings , <unk> devoted to the way to truth , the Brahman , with a pure heart , going out , begging alms at a proper time only to sustain his life , with the belly as his utensil , even @-@ tempered whether he gets anything or not , staying homeless , whether in a deserted house , in a temple , on a heap of grass , on an ant @-@ hill , at the roots of tree , in a potter 's workshop , on a river bank , in a mountain cave , in a ravine , in a hollow tree , at a waterfall , or just bare ground , not striving , free from feeling of " mine " , given to pure contemplation , firmly rooted in the supreme Self , eradicating all evil deeds , [ ... ] he is called a Paramahamsa . 
 The Paramahamsa is the renouncer who seeks his own self , abandons impure acts and evil within , who devotes himself to meditating on the Atman and the Brahman . 
 = = Influence = = 
 Five important Upanishad texts , according to Olivelle – the Jabala plus the Aruni , <unk> @-@ <unk> , <unk> and Paramahamsa Upanishads – provide different answers to the question of when someone may renounce the worldly life to lead a monastic one . The <unk> @-@ <unk> Upanishad , <unk> Upanishad and Paramahamsa Upanishad suggest that a man may renounce after sequentially completing the student , householder and retirement stages of life , and then getting the consent of his elders and direct family members . In contrast , the Jabala Upanishad and Aruni Upanishad assert that the choice is entirely up to the individual , without needing to have completed any stage of life nor requiring the consent of anyone else . 
 If an individual feels Vairagya ( detachment from the world ) , the Jabala Upanishad maintains that no preconditions apply , and the individual has the spiritual right to renounce immediately . This principle in the Jabala Upanishad was cited by medieval @-@ era scholars such as Adi Shankara , <unk> , <unk> , and Nilakantha as the Vedic basis that makes renunciation an individual choice and right . This choice has been referred to as a <unk> by the later scholars , which the society and state must respect . The Jabala Upanishad concurred with some <unk> on the right to renounce and lead a monastic life , but its views contradicted others such as those in Manusmriti verses 6 @.@ 35 – 37 . The text fed a debate on the right of the individual , and medieval Hindu scholars relied on and sided with the Jabala Upanishad . 
 The Jabala Upanishad influenced other scholarly works as well . The Jivanmukti @-@ <unk> , written by the 14th @-@ century Advaita Vedanta scholar and Vijayanagara Empire mentor Vidyaranya , refers to the Jabala Upanishad while describing those who achieve living liberation . 
 = Yoko Ono = 
 Yoko Ono ( 小野 <unk> , Ono Yōko , born February 18 , 1933 ) is a Japanese multimedia artist , singer , songwriter , and peace activist who is also known for her work in performance art , music , and filmmaking . She is the widow and second wife of singer @-@ songwriter John Lennon . 
 Ono grew up in Tokyo , and studied at Gakushuin . She withdrew from her course after two years and rejoined her family in New York in 1953 . She spent some time at Sarah Lawrence College , and then became involved in New York City 's downtown artists scene , including the Fluxus group . She first met Lennon in 1966 at her own art exhibition in London , and they became a couple in 1968 . Ono and Lennon famously used their honeymoon at the Hilton Amsterdam as a stage for public protests against the Vietnam War with their performance , Bed @-@ Ins for Peace , in Amsterdam and Montreal in 1969 . She brought feminism to the forefront in her music , influencing artists as diverse as the B @-@ 52s and Meredith Monk . Ono achieved commercial and critical acclaim in 1980 with the chart @-@ topping album Double Fantasy , a collaboration with Lennon released three weeks before his death . 
 Public appreciation of Ono 's work has shifted over time , helped by a retrospective at a Whitney Museum branch in 1989 and the 1992 release of the six @-@ disc box set Onobox . Retrospectives of her artwork have also been presented at the Japan Society in New York City in 2001 , in Bielefeld , Germany , and the UK in 2008 , and Frankfurt , and Bilbao , Spain , in 2013 . She received a Golden Lion Award for lifetime achievement from the Venice Biennale in 2009 and the 2012 Oskar Kokoschka Prize , Austria 's highest award for applied contemporary art . 
 As Lennon 's widow , Ono works to preserve his legacy . She funded Strawberry Fields in New York City , the Imagine Peace Tower in Iceland , and the John Lennon Museum in Saitama , Japan ( which closed in 2010 ) . She has made significant philanthropic contributions to the arts , peace , Philippine and Japan disaster relief , and other causes . Ono continues her social activism , inaugurating a biennial $ 50 @,@ 000 LennonOno Grant for Peace in 2002 and co @-@ founding the group Artists Against Fracking in 2012 . She has a daughter , Kyoko Chan Cox , from her marriage to Anthony Cox and a son , Sean Taro Ono Lennon , with whom she collaborates musically , from her marriage to Lennon . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 Ono was born on February 18 , 1933 , in Tokyo , to Isoko Ono ( 小野 <unk> Ono Isoko ) and Eisuke Ono ( 小野 <unk> Ono Eisuke ) , a banker and former classical pianist . Isoko 's father was ennobled in 1915 . Isoko 's maternal grandfather <unk> Yasuda ( <unk> <unk> Yasuda Zenjirō ) was an affiliate of the Yasuda clan and zaibatsu . Eisuke came from a long line of samurai warrior @-@ scholars . The kanji translation of Yoko 's first name Yoko means " ocean child " . 
 Two weeks before Yoko 's birth , Eisuke was transferred to San Francisco by his employer , the Yokohama Specie Bank . The rest of the family followed soon after , with Yoko meeting Eisuke when she was two . Her younger brother Keisuke was born in December 1936 . Yoko was enrolled in piano lessons from the age of 4 . In 1937 , the family was transferred back to Japan and Ono enrolled at Tokyo 's Gakushuin ( also known as the Peers School ) , one of the most exclusive schools in Japan . 
 In 1940 , the family moved to New York City . The next year , Eisuke was transferred from New York City to Hanoi , and the family returned to Japan . Ono was enrolled in <unk> Gakuen , an exclusive Christian primary school run by the Mitsui family . She remained in Tokyo through the great fire @-@ bombing of March 9 , 1945 , during which she was sheltered with other family members in a special bunker in the Azabu district of Tokyo , far from the heavy bombing . Ono later went to the Karuizawa mountain resort with members of her family . 
 Ono and her family were forced to beg for food while pulling their belongings in a wheelbarrow . It was during this period in her life , Ono says , that she developed her " aggressive " attitude and understanding of " outsider " status when children taunted her and Keisuke , who were once well @-@ to @-@ do . Other stories have her mother bringing a large number of goods with them to the countryside , where they bartered them for food . In one anecdote , her mother bartered a German @-@ made sewing machine for 60 kilograms ( 130 lb ) of rice to feed the family . Her father remained in the city , unknown to the family , who believed he was in a prisoner of war camp in China . Ono told Amy Goodman of Democracy Now on October 16 , 2007 , that " He was in French Indochina , which is Vietnam actually .... in Saigon . He was in a concentration camp . " 
 By April 1946 , Gakushuin was reopened and Ono re @-@ enrolled . The school , located near the imperial palace , had not been damaged by the war , and Ono found herself a classmate of Prince Akihito , the future emperor of Japan . She graduated in 1951 and was accepted into the philosophy program of Gakushuin University as the first woman to enter the department . However , she left the school after two semesters . 
 = = New York City = = 
 = = = College and downtown beginnings = = = 
 Ono 's family moved to Scarsdale , New York , without her after the war . When she later rejoined her family in the US , she enrolled nearby in Sarah Lawrence College . While her parents approved of her college choice , Ono said they disapproved of her lifestyle and chastised her for befriending people they felt were beneath her . In spite of her parents ' disapproval , Ono loved meeting artists , poets , and others who represented the bohemian lifestyle to which she aspired . Visiting galleries and art happenings in the city whetted her desire to display her own artistic endeavors publicly . American avant @-@ garde artist , composer , and musician La Monte Young , her first important contact in the New York art world , helped Ono start her career by using her Chambers Street loft in Tribeca as a performance space . After Ono set a painting on fire at one performance , her mentor John Cage advised her to treat the paper with flame retardant . 
 = = = Return to Japan , early career , and motherhood = = = 
 In 1956 , Ono left college to elope with composer Toshi Ichiyanagi , a star in Tokyo 's experimental community . After living apart for several years , they filed for divorce in 1962 . Ono returned home to live with her parents and , suffering from clinical depression , she was briefly placed in a mental institution . Later that year , on November 28 , 1962 , Ono married Anthony Cox , an American jazz musician , film producer , and art promoter , who was instrumental in securing her release from the Japanese mental institution . However , because Ono had neglected to finalize her divorce from Ichiyanagi , her second marriage was annulled on March 1 , 1963 . After finalizing the divorce , Cox and Ono married again on June 6 , 1963 . She gave birth to their daughter Kyoko Chan Cox two months later on August 8 , 1963 . 
 The marriage quickly fell apart , but the <unk> stayed together for the sake of their joint careers . They performed at Tokyo 's Sogetsu Hall , with Ono lying atop a piano played by John Cage . Soon , the couple returned to New York with Kyoko . In the early years of the marriage , Ono left most of Kyoko 's parenting to Cox while she pursued her art full @-@ time . Cox also managed her publicity . She and Cox divorced on February 2 , 1969 . However , in 1971 , Cox disappeared with their then @-@ eight @-@ year @-@ old daughter , in the midst of the custody battle . He won custody after claiming Ono was an " unfit mother " due to her drug use . Ono 's ex @-@ husband subsequently raised Kyoko under the name Ruth Holman in an organization known as the Church of the Living Word ( or " the Walk " ) . Ono and Lennon searched for Kyoko for years , to no avail . She first saw Kyoko again in 1998 . 
 = = John Lennon = = 
 Fluxus , a loose association of Dada @-@ inspired avant @-@ garde artists that developed in the early 1960s , was active in New York and Europe . Ono visited London to meet artist and political activist Gustav Metzger 's Destruction in Art Symposium in September 1966 , as the only woman artist chosen to perform her own events and only one of two invited to speak . 
 There are two versions of the story regarding how Lennon met Ono . According to the first , on November 9 , 1966 , Lennon went to the Indica Gallery in London , where Ono was preparing her conceptual art exhibit , and they were introduced by gallery owner John Dunbar . Lennon was initially unimpressed with the exhibits he saw , including a pricey bag of nails , but one piece had a ladder with a spyglass at the top . When he climbed the ladder , Lennon felt a little foolish , but he looked through the spyglass and saw the word " YES " which he said meant he didn 't walk out , as it was positive , whereas most concept art he encountered was " anti " everything . 
 Lennon was also intrigued by Ono 's Hammer a Nail . Viewers hammered a nail into a wooden board , creating the art piece . Although the exhibition had not yet opened , Lennon wanted to hammer a nail into the clean board , but Ono stopped him . Dunbar asked her , " Don 't you know who this is ? He 's a millionaire ! He might buy it . " Ono supposedly had not heard of the Beatles , but relented on the condition that Lennon pay her five shillings , to which Lennon replied , " I 'll give you an imaginary five shillings and hammer an imaginary nail in . " 
 In a second version of Ono 's and Lennon 's first meeting , told by Paul McCartney , Ono was in London in 1965 compiling original musical scores for a book on which John Cage was working entitled Notations . McCartney declined to give her any of his own manuscripts , but suggested that Lennon might oblige . Lennon did , giving Ono the original handwritten lyrics to " The Word . " 
 In a 2002 interview , she said , " I was very attracted to him . It was a really strange situation . " The two began corresponding and , in September 1967 , Lennon sponsored Ono 's solo show at <unk> Gallery in London . When Lennon 's wife Cynthia asked for an explanation for Ono 's telephoning their home , he told her that Ono was only trying to obtain money for her " avant @-@ garde bullshit . " In early 1968 , while the Beatles were making their famous visit to India , Lennon wrote " Julia " and included a reference to Ono : " Ocean child calls me " , referring to the translation of Yoko 's Japanese spelling . In May 1968 , while his wife was on holiday in Greece , Lennon invited Ono to visit . They spent the night recording what would become the Two Virgins album , after which , he said , they " made love at dawn " . When Lennon 's wife returned home , she found Ono wearing her bathrobe and drinking tea with Lennon who simply said , " Oh , hi . " 
 Lennon wrote and recorded " Happiness Is a Warm Gun " on September 24 and 25 , 1968 @.@ which contains sexual references to Ono . A few weeks after Lennon 's divorce from Cynthia was granted , Ono became pregnant though she suffered a miscarriage of what would have been a male child on November 21 , 1968 . 
 = = = Bed @-@ Ins and other early collaborations = = = 
 During Lennon 's last two years with the Beatles , he and Ono began attending as well as creating their own public protests against the Vietnam War . They were married at the registry office in Gibraltar on March 20 , 1969 , and spent their honeymoon in Amsterdam campaigning with a week @-@ long Bed @-@ In for Peace . They planned another Bed @-@ In in the US , but were denied entry to the country . They held one instead at the Queen Elizabeth Hotel in Montreal , where they recorded " Give Peace a Chance " . Lennon later stated his regrets about feeling " guilty enough to give McCartney credit as co @-@ writer on my first independent single instead of giving it to Yoko , who had actually written it with me . " The famous couple often combined advocacy with performance art , such as in " <unk> " , first introduced during a Vienna press conference , where they satirised prejudice and stereotyping by wearing a bag over their entire bodies . Lennon detailed this period in the Beatles ' song " The Ballad of John and Yoko " . 
 Lennon changed his name by deed poll on April 22 , 1969 , switching out Winston for Ono as a middle name . Although he used the name John Ono Lennon thereafter , official documents referred to him as John Winston Ono Lennon , since he was not permitted to revoke a name given at birth . The couple settled at Tittenhurst Park at Sunninghill , Berkshire , in southeast England . When Ono was injured in a car accident , Lennon arranged for a king @-@ sized bed to be brought to the recording studio as he worked on the Beatles ' last recorded album , Abbey Road . 
 The two collaborated on many albums , beginning in 1968 when Lennon was still a Beatle , with Unfinished Music No.1 : Two Virgins , an album of experimental musique concrète . The same year , the couple contributed an experimental piece to The White Album called " Revolution 9 " . Also on The White Album , Ono contributed backing vocals on " Birthday " , and one line of lead vocals on " The Continuing Story of Bungalow Bill . " The latter marked the only occasion in a Beatles recording in which a woman sings lead vocals . 
 = = = The Plastic Ono Band = = = 
 Ono influenced Lennon to produce more " autobiographical " output and , after " The Ballad of John and Yoko " , they decided it would be better to form their own band rather than put the material out under the Beatles name . In 1969 , the Plastic Ono Band 's first album , Live Peace in Toronto 1969 , was recorded during the Toronto Rock and Roll Revival festival . This first incarnation of the group also consisted of guitarist Eric Clapton , bass player Klaus Voormann , and drummer Alan White . The first half of their performance consisted of rock standards . During the second half , Ono took to the microphone and performed an avant @-@ garde set along with the band , finishing with music that consisted mainly of feedback , while she screamed and sang . 
 = = = First solo album and Fly = = = 
 Ono released her first solo album , Yoko Ono / Plastic Ono Band , in 1970 as a companion piece to Lennon 's better @-@ known John Lennon / Plastic Ono Band . The two albums also had companion covers : Ono 's featured a photo of her leaning on Lennon , and Lennon 's a photo of him leaning on Ono . Her album included raw , harsh vocals , which bore a similarity with sounds in nature ( especially those made by animals ) and free jazz techniques used by wind and brass players . Performers included Ornette Coleman , other renowned free jazz performers , and Ringo Starr . Some songs on the album consisted of wordless vocalizations , in a style that would influence Meredith Monk and other musical artists who have used screams and vocal noise in lieu of words . The album reached No. 182 on the US charts . 
 When Lennon was invited to play with Frank Zappa at the Fillmore ( then the Filmore West ) on June 5 , 1971 , Ono joined them . Later that year , she released Fly , a double album . In it , she explored slightly more conventional psychedelic rock with tracks including " Midsummer New York " and " Mind Train " , in addition to a number of Fluxus experiments . She also received minor airplay with the ballad " Mrs. Lennon " . The track " Don 't Worry , Kyoko ( Mummy 's Only Looking for Her Hand in the Snow ) " was an ode to Ono 's missing daughter , and featured Eric Clapton on guitar . That same year , while studying with Maharishi Mahesh Yogi in Majorca , Spain , Ono 's ex @-@ husband Anthony Cox accused Ono of abducting their daughter Kyoko from his hotel . Accusations flew between the two , as well as the matter of custody . Cox eventually moved away with Kyoko ; Ono would not see her daughter until 1998 . It was during this time that she wrote " Don 't Worry Kyoko " , which also appears on Lennon and Ono 's album Live Peace In Toronto 1969 , in addition to Fly . Kyoko is also referenced in the first line of " Happy Christmas ( War Is Over ) " when Yoko whispers " Happy Christmas , Kyoko " , followed by Lennon whispering , " Happy Christmas , Julian . " The song reached No. 4 in the UK , where its release was delayed until 1972 , and has periodically reemerged on the UK Singles Chart . Originally a protest song about the Vietnam War , " Happy Xmas ( War Is Over ) " has since become a Christmas standard . That August the couple appeared together at a benefit in Madison Square Garden with Roberta Flack , Stevie Wonder , and Sha Na Na for mentally handicapped children organized by WABC @-@ TV 's Geraldo Rivera . 
 = = Separation from Lennon and reunion = = 
 After the Beatles disbanded , Ono and Lennon lived together in London and then in New York — the latter to escape tabloid racism towards Ono . Their relationship , however , became strained by the threat of deportation Lennon faced ( because of drug charges filed in England ) , and Ono 's separation from her daughter . The couple separated in 1973 , with Ono pursuing her career and Lennon living between Los Angeles and New York with personal assistant May Pang , with Ono 's blessing . 
 By December 1974 , Lennon and Pang were considering buying a house together , and he was refusing to accept Ono 's phone calls . The next month , Lennon agreed to meet Ono , who claimed to have found a cure for smoking . After the meeting , he failed to return home or call Pang . When Pang telephoned the next day , Ono told her Lennon was unavailable , being exhausted after a hypnotherapy session . Two days later , Lennon reappeared at a joint dental appointment with Pang , stupefied and confused to such an extent that Pang believed he had been brainwashed . He told her his separation from Ono was now over , though Ono would allow him to continue seeing her as his mistress . 
 Ono and Lennon 's son , Sean , was born on October 9 , 1975 , Lennon 's 35th birthday . John did not help relations with his first son when he described Julian in 1980 as being part of the " ninety percent of the people on this planet [ who resulted from an unplanned pregnancy ] " and that " Sean is a planned child , and therein lies the difference . " He said , " I don 't love Julian any less as a child . He 's still my son , whether he came from a bottle of whiskey or because they didn 't have pills in those days . " The couple maintained a low profile for the next five years . Sean has followed in his parents ' footsteps with a musical career , performing solo work , working with Ono , and forming a band , the Ghost of a Saber Tooth Tiger . 
 = = = Lennon 's murder , tributes , and memorials = = = 
 John Lennon retired from music , becoming a househusband to care for Sean , until shortly before his murder in December 1980 , which Ono witnessed at close range . She has stated that the couple were thinking about going out to dinner after spending several hours in a recording studio , but were returning to their apartment instead , because Lennon wanted to see Sean before he was put to bed . Following the murder , Ono went into complete seclusion for an extended period . 
 Ono funded the construction and maintenance of the Strawberry Fields memorial in New York City 's Central Park , directly across from the Dakota Apartments where they lived and Lennon died . It was officially dedicated on October 9 , 1985 , which would have been his 45th birthday . In 1990 , Ono collaborated with music consultant Jeff Pollack to honor what would have been Lennon 's 50th birthday with a worldwide broadcast of " Imagine " . Over 1 @,@ 000 stations in over 50 countries participated in the simultaneous broadcast . Ono felt the timing was perfect , considering the escalating conflicts in the Middle East , Eastern Europe , and Germany . 
 In 2000 , she founded the John Lennon Museum in Saitama , Saitama , Japan . In March 2002 , she was present with Cherie Blair at the unveiling of a 7 @-@ foot statue of Lennon , to mark the renaming of Liverpool airport to Liverpool John Lennon Airport . ( Julian and Cynthia Lennon were present at the unveiling of the John Lennon Peace Monument next to ACC Liverpool in the same city eight years later . ) On October 9 , 2007 , she dedicated a new memorial called the Imagine Peace Tower , located on the island of Viðey , 1 km outside the <unk> harbour in Reykjavík , Iceland . Each year , between October 9 and December 8 , it projects a vertical beam of light high into the sky . In 2009 , Ono created an exhibit called " John Lennon : The New York City Years " for the NYC Rock and Roll Hall of Fame Annex . The exhibit used music , photographs , and personal items to depict Lennon 's life in New York , and a portion of the cost of each ticket was donated to Spirit Foundation , a charitable foundation set up by Lennon and Ono . 
 Every time Mark Chapman has requested release from prison — as he is allowed to do every two years — Yoko Ono has come out strongly against it . As a relative of the victim , her opinion has a strong influence on the parole board . 
 = = Artwork = = 
 = = = Fluxus = = = 
 Ono is often associated with the Fluxus group , whose founder George Maciunas , her friend during the 1960s , admired and promoted her work enthusiastically , giving Ono her US show at his AG Gallery in 1961 . Maciunas invited her formally join the Fluxus group , but she declined because she wanted to remain independent . She did however , collaborate with him , Charlotte Moorman , George Brecht , and the poet Jackson Mac Low , among others associated with the group . 
 John Cage and Marcel Duchamp were significant influences on Ono 's art . She learned of Cage at Sarah Lawrence and met him through his student Ichiyanagi Toshi in Cage 's legendary experimental composition class at the New School for Social Research : She was thus introduced to more of Cage 's unconventional neo @-@ Dadaism first hand and his New York City protégés Allan Kaprow , Brecht , Mac Low , Al Hansen and the poet Dick Higgins . 
 After Cage finished teaching at the New School in the summer of 1960 , Ono was determined to rent a place to present her works along with the work of other avant @-@ garde artists in the city . She eventually found a cheap loft in downtown Manhattan at 112 Chambers Street that she used as a studio and living space . Supporting herself through secretarial work and lessons in the traditional Japanese arts at the Japan Society , Ono allowed composer La Monte Young to organize concerts in the loft . Both began organizing a series of events there from December 1960 through June 1961 , with people such as Marcel Duchamp and Peggy Guggenheim attending , and both Ono and Young claimed to have been the primary curator of these events , with Ono claiming to have been eventually pushed into a subsidiary role by Young . The Chambers Street series hosted some of Ono 's earliest conceptual artwork , including Painting to Be Stepped On , which was a scrap of canvas on the floor that became a completed artwork upon the accrual of footprints . With that work , Ono suggested that a work of art no longer needed to be mounted on a wall and inaccessible . She showed this work and other instructional work again at <unk> 's AG Gallery in July 1961 . 
 = = = Cut Piece , 1964 = = = 
 Ono was a pioneer of conceptual art and performance art . A seminal performance work is Cut Piece , first performed in 1964 at the Sogetsu Art Center in Tokyo . The piece consisted of Ono , dressed in her best suit , kneeling on a stage with a pair of scissors in front of her . She invited then instructed audience members to join her on stage and cut pieces of her clothing off . Confronting issues of gender , class and cultural identity , Ono sat silently until the piece concluded at her discretion . The piece was subsequently performed at New York 's Carnegie Hall in 1965 and London 's Africa Center in 1966 . Of the piece , John Hendricks in the catalogue to Ono 's Japan Society retrospective wrote : " [ Cut Piece ] unveils the interpersonal alienation that characterizes social relationships between subjects , dismantling the disinterested Kantian aesthetic model ..... It demonstrates the reciprocity between artists , objects , and viewers and the responsibility beholders have to the reception and preservation of art . " 
 Other performers of the piece have included Charlotte Moorman and John Hendricks . Ono reprised the piece in Paris in 2003 , in the low post @-@ 9 / 11 period between the US and France , saying she hoped to show that this is " a time where we need to trust each other . " In 2013 , the Canadian singer , Peaches reprised it at the multi @-@ day Meltdown festival at the Southbank Centre in London , which Ono curated . 
 = = = Grapefruit book , 1964 = = = 
 Another seminal piece of conceptual art is Ono 's small book titled Grapefruit . First published in 1964 , the book reads as a set of instructions through which the work of art is completed @-@ either literally or in the imagination of the viewer participant . One example is " Hide and Seek Piece : Hide until everybody goes home . Hide until everybody forgets about you . Hide until everybody dies . " Grapefruit has been published several times , most widely distributed by Simon & Schuster in 1971 , who reprinted it again in 2000 . David Bourdon , art critic for The Village Voice and Vogue , called Grapefruit " one of the monuments of conceptual art of the early 1960 's . " He noted that her conceptual approach was made more acceptable when white male artists like Joseph <unk> and Lawrence Weiner came in and " did virtually the same things " she did , and that her take also has a poetic and lyrical side that sets it apart from the work of other conceptual artists . 
 Ono would enact many of the book 's scenarios as performance pieces throughout her career , which formed the basis for her art exhibitions , including the highly publicized retrospective exhibition , This Is Not Here in 1971 at the Everson Museum in Syracuse , New York , that was nearly closed when it was besieged by excited Beatles fans , who broke several of the art pieces and flooded the toilets . It was her last major exhibition until 1989 's Yoko Ono : Objects , Films retrospective at the Whitney . 
 Nearly fifty years later , in July 2013 , she released a sequel to Grapefruit , another book of instructions , Acorn via OR Books . 
 = = = Experimental films , 1964 – 72 = = = 
 Ono was also an experimental filmmaker who made 16 short films between 1964 and 1972 , gaining particular renown for a 1966 Fluxus film called simply No. 4 , often referred to as Bottoms . The five @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ minute film consists of a series of close @-@ ups of human buttocks walking on a treadmill . The screen is divided into four almost equal sections by the elements of the gluteal cleft and the horizontal gluteal crease . The soundtrack consists of interviews with those who are being filmed , as well as those considering joining the project . In 1996 , the watch manufacturing company Swatch produced a limited edition watch that commemorated this film . 
 In March 2004 , the ICA London , showed most of her films from this period in their exhibition The Rare Films of Yoko Ono . She also acted in an obscure exploitation film in 1965 , Satan 's Bed . 
 = = = Wish Tree , 1981 – present = = = 
 Another example of Ono 's participatory art was her Wish Tree project , in which a tree native to the installation site is installed . Her 1996 Wish Piece had the following instructions : 
 Make a wish 
 Write it down on a piece of paper 
 Fold it and tie it around a branch of a Wish Tree 
 Ask your friends to do the same 
 Keep wishing 
 Until the branches are covered with wishes . 
 Her Wish Tree installation in the Sculpture Garden of the Museum of Modern Art , New York , established in July 2010 , has attracted contributions from all over the world . Other installation locations include London ; St. Louis ; Washington , DC ; San Francisco ; the Stanford University campus in Palo Alto , California ; Japan ; Venice ; and Dublin . 
 = = = Recognition and retrospectives = = = 
 John Lennon once described her as " the world 's most famous unknown artist : everybody knows her name , but nobody knows what she does . " Her circle of friends in the New York art world has included Kate Millett , Nam June Paik , Dan Richter , Jonas Mekas , <unk> Cunningham , Judith Malina , Erica Abeel , Fred DeAsis , Peggy Guggenheim , Betty Rollin , Shusaku Arakawa , Adrian Morris , Stefan <unk> , Keith Haring , and Andy Warhol ( she was one of the speakers at Warhol 's 1987 funeral ) , as well as George Maciunas and La Monte Young . In addition to Mekas , Maciunas , Young , and Warhol , she has also collaborated with DeAsis , Yvonne Rainer , and Zbigniew Rybczyński . 
 In 1989 , the Whitney Museum held a retrospective of her work , Yoko Ono : Objects , Films , marking Ono 's reentry into the New York art world after a hiatus . At the suggestion of Ono 's live @-@ in companion at the time , interior decorator Sam <unk> , she recast her old pieces in bronze after some initial reluctance . " I realized that for something to move me so much that I would cry , there 's something there . There seemed like a shimmering air in the 60s when I made these pieces , and now the air is <unk> . Now it 's the 80s , and bronze is very 80s in a way - solidity , commodity , all of that . For someone who went through the 60s revolution , there has of course been an incredible change . . . . I call the pieces petrified bronze . That freedom , all the hope and wishes are in some ways petrified . " 
 Over a decade later , in 2001 , Y E S YOKO ONO , a 40 @-@ year retrospective of Ono 's work , received the International Association of Art Critics USA Award for Best Museum Show Originating in New York City , considered one of the highest accolades in the museum profession . YES refers to the title of a 1966 sculptural work by Yoko Ono , shown at Indica Gallery , London : viewers climb a ladder to read the word " yes " , printed on a small canvas suspended from the ceiling . The exhibition 's curator Alexandra Munroe wrote that " John Lennon got it , on his first meeting with Yoko : when he climbed the ladder to peer at the framed paper on the ceiling , he encountered the tiny word YES . ' So it was positive . I felt relieved . ' ” The exhibition traveled to 13 museums in the U.S. , Canada , Japan , and Korea from 2000 through 2003 . In 2001 , she also received an honorary Doctorate of Laws from Liverpool University and , in 2002 , was presented with the honorary degree of Doctor of Fine Arts from Bard College , as well as the Skowhegan Medal for work in assorted media . The next year , she was awarded the fifth MOCA Award to Distinguished Women in the Arts from the Museum of Contemporary Art Los Angeles . In 2005 , she received a lifetime achievement award from the Japan Society of New York , which had hosted Yes Yoko Ono and where she had worked in the late 1950s and early 1960s . 
 In 2008 , she showed a large retrospective exhibition , Between The Sky And My Head , at the Kunsthalle Bielefeld , Bielefeld , Germany , and the Baltic Centre for Contemporary Art in Gateshead , England . The following year , she showed a selection of new and old work as part of her show " Anton 's Memory " in Venice , Italy . She also received a Golden Lion Award for lifetime achievement from the Venice Biennale in 2009 . In 2012 , Ono held a major exhibition of her work To The Light at the Serpentine Galleries , London . She was also the winner of the 2012 Oskar Kokoschka Prize , Austria 's highest award for applied contemporary art . In February 2013 , to coincide with her 80th birthday , the largest retrospective of her work , Half @-@ a @-@ Wind Show , opened at the <unk> Kunsthalle Frankfurt and travelled to Denmark 's Louisiana Museum of Modern Art , Austria 's Kunsthalle Krems , and Spain 's Guggenheim Museum Bilbao . In 2014 she contributed several artworks to the triennial art festival in Folkestone , England 
 = = Musical career = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ Lennon = = = 
 Ono studied piano from the age of 4 to 12 or 13 . She attended kabuki performances with her mother , who was trained in shamisen , koto , <unk> , kotsuzumi , nagauta , and could read Japanese musical scores . At 14 Yoko took up vocal training in lieder @-@ singing . At Sarah Lawrence , she studied poetry with Alastair Reid , English literature with Kathryn Mansell , and music composition with the Viennese @-@ trained André Singer . Of this time Ono has said that her heroes were the twelve @-@ tone composers Arnold Schoenberg and Alban Berg . She said , " I was just fascinated with what they could do . I wrote some twelve @-@ tone songs , then my music went into [ an ] area that my teacher felt was really a bit off track , and ..... he said , ' Well , look , there are people who are doing things like what you do and they 're called avant @-@ garde . ' " Singer introduced her to the work of Edgar Varèse , John Cage , and Henry Cowell . She left college and moved to New York in 1957 , supporting herself through secretarial work and lessons in the traditional Japanese arts at the Japan Society . 
 She met Cage through Ichiyanagi Toshi in Cage 's legendary composition class at the New School for Social Research , and in the summer of 1960 , she found a cheap loft in downtown Manhattan at 112 Chambers Street and allowed composer La Monte Young to organize concerts in the loft with her , with people like Marcel Duchamp and Peggy Guggenheim attending . Ono only presented work once during the series . In 1961 , years before meeting Lennon , Ono had her first major public performance in a concert at the 258 @-@ seat Carnegie Recital Hall ( smaller than the " Main Hall " ) . This concert featured radical experimental music and performances . She had a second engagement at the Carnegie Recital Hall in 1965 , in which she debuted Cut Piece . She premiered The Fog Machine during her Concert of Music for the Mind at the Bluecoat Society of Arts in Liverpool , England in 1967 . 
 = = = 1980s = = = 
 In early 1980 , Lennon heard Lene <unk> and the B @-@ 52 's ' " Rock Lobster " on vacation in Bermuda . The latter reminded him of Ono 's musical sound and he took this as an indication that she had reached the mainstream ( the band in fact had been influenced by Ono ) . In addition to her collaborations with experimental artists including John Cage and jazz legend Ornette Coleman , many other musicians , particularly those of the new wave movement , have paid tribute to Ono ( both as an artist in her own right , and as a muse and iconic figure ) . For example , Elvis Costello recorded a version of Ono 's song " Walking on Thin Ice " , the B @-@ 52 's ( who drew from her early recordings ) covered " Don 't Worry , Kyoko ( Mummy 's Only Looking for Her Hand in the Snow ) " ( shortening the title to " Don 't Worry " ) , and Sonic Youth included a performance of Ono 's early conceptual " Voice Piece for Soprano " on their experimental album <unk> : Goodbye 20th Century . 
 On December 8 , 1980 , Lennon and Ono were in the studio working on Ono 's song " Walking on Thin Ice " . When they returned to The Dakota , their home in New York City , Lennon was shot dead by Mark David Chapman , a deranged fan who had been stalking Lennon for two months . " Walking on Thin Ice ( For John ) " was released as a single less than a month later , and became Ono 's first chart success , peaking at No. 58 and gaining major underground airplay . In 1981 , she released the album Season of Glass , which featured the striking cover photo of Lennon 's bloody spectacles next to a half @-@ filled glass of water , with a window overlooking Central Park in the background . This photograph sold at an auction in London in April 2002 for about $ 13 @,@ 000 . In the liner notes to Season of Glass , Ono explained that the album was not dedicated to Lennon because " he would have been offended — he was one of us . " The album received highly favorable reviews and reflected the public 's mood after Lennon 's assassination . 
 In 1982 , she released It 's Alright ( I See Rainbows ) . The cover featured Ono in her famous wrap @-@ around sunglasses , looking towards the sun , while on the back the ghost of Lennon looks over her and their son . The album scored minor chart success and airplay with the single " Never Say Goodbye " . 
 In 1984 , a tribute album titled Every Man Has a Woman was released , featuring a selection of Ono songs performed by artists such as Elvis Costello , Roberta Flack , Eddie Money , Rosanne Cash , and Harry Nilsson . It was one of Lennon 's projects that he never got to finish . Later that year , Ono and Lennon 's final album , Milk and Honey , was released as an unfinished demo . It peaked at No. 3 in the UK and No. 11 in the U.S. , going gold in both countries as well as in Canada . 
 Ono 's final album of the 1980s was Starpeace , a concept album that she intended as an antidote to Ronald Reagan 's " Star Wars " missile defense system . On the cover , a warm , smiling Ono holds the Earth in the palm of her hand . Starpeace became Ono 's most successful non @-@ Lennon effort . The single " Hell in Paradise " was a hit , reaching No. 16 on the US dance charts and No. 26 on the Billboard Hot 100 , and the video , directed by Zbigniew Rybczyński received major airplay on MTV and won " Most Innovative Video " at Billboard Music Video Awards in 1986 . In 1986 , Ono set out on a goodwill world tour for Starpeace , primarily visiting Eastern European countries . 
 = = = 1990s = = = 
 Ono went on a musical hiatus until signing with Rykodisc in 1992 to release the comprehensive six @-@ disc box set Onobox . It included remastered highlights from all of Ono 's solo albums , as well as unreleased material from the 1974 " lost weekend " sessions . She also released a one @-@ disc sampler of highlights from Onobox , simply titled Walking on Thin Ice . That year , she sat down for an extensive interview with music journalist Mark Kemp for a cover story in the alternative music magazine Option . The story took a revisionist look at Ono 's music for a new generation of fans more accepting of her role as a pioneer in the merger of pop and the avant @-@ garde . 
 In 1994 , Ono produced her own off @-@ Broadway musical entitled New York Rock , featuring Broadway renditions of her songs . In 1995 , she released Rising , a collaboration with her son Sean and his then @-@ band , Ima . Rising spawned a world tour that traveled through Europe , Japan , and the United States . The following year , she collaborated with various alternative rock musicians for an EP entitled Rising Mixes . Guest remixers of Rising material included Cibo Matto , Ween , Tricky , and Thurston Moore . In 1997 , Rykodisc reissued all her solo albums on CD , from Yoko Ono / Plastic Ono Band through Starpeace . Ono and her engineer Rob Stevens personally remastered the audio , and various bonus tracks were added , including outtakes , demos , and live cuts . 
 = = = 2000s = = = 
 2001 , saw the release of Ono 's feminist concept album Blueprint for a Sunrise . In 2002 , Ono joined The B @-@ 52 's in New York for their 25th anniversary concerts , coming out for the encore and performing " Rock Lobster " with the band . Starting the next year , some DJs remixed other Ono songs for dance clubs . For the remix project , she dropped her first name and became known simply as " ONO " , in response to the " Oh , no ! " jokes that dogged her throughout her career . Ono had great success with new versions of " Walking on Thin Ice " , remixed by top DJs and dance artists including Pet Shop Boys , Orange Factory , Peter Rauhofer , and Danny <unk> . 
 In April 2003 , Ono 's Walking on Thin Ice ( Remixes ) was rated No. 1 on Billboard 's Dance / Club Play chart , gaining Ono her first No. 1 hit . She returned to No. 1 on the same chart in November 2004 with " Everyman ... <unk> ... " , a reworking of her song " Every Man Has a Woman Who Loves Him " , in January 2008 , with " No No No " , and in August 2008 , with " Give Peace a Chance " . In June 2009 , at the age of 76 , Ono scored her fifth No. 1 hit on the Dance / Club Play chart with " I 'm Not Getting Enough " . 
 Ono released the album Yes , I 'm a Witch in 2007 , a collection of remixes and covers from her back catalog by various artists including The Flaming Lips , Cat Power , Anohni , DJ Spooky , Porcupine Tree , and Peaches , released in February 2007 , along with a special edition of Yoko Ono / Plastic Ono Band . Yes I 'm a Witch has been critically well received . A similar compilation of Ono dance remixes entitled Open Your Box was also released in April of that year . 
 In 2009 , Ono recorded Between My Head and the Sky , her first album to be released as " Yoko Ono / Plastic Ono Band " since 1973 's Feeling the Space . The all @-@ new Plastic Ono Band lineup included Sean Lennon , Cornelius , and Yuka Honda . On February 16 , 2010 , Sean organized a concert at the Brooklyn Academy of Music called " We Are Plastic Ono Band " , at which Yoko performed her music with Sean , Clapton , Klaus Voormann , and Jim Keltner for the first time since the 1970s . Guests including Bette Midler , Paul Simon and his son Harper , and principal members of Sonic Youth and the Scissor Sisters interpreted her songs in their own styles . 
 = = = 2010s = = = 
 In April 2010 , <unk> <unk> made available free downloads of Junior Boys ' mix of " I 'm Not Getting Enough " , a single originally released 10 years prior on Blueprint for a Sunrise . That song and " <unk> ( I 'm a Star ) " , released September 14 , made it to Billboard 's end of the year list of favorite Dance / Club songs at # 23 and # 50 respectively . The next year , " Move on Fast " became her sixth consecutive number @-@ one hit on the Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs chart and her eighth number @-@ one hit overall . In January 2012 , a Ralphi Rosario mix of her 1995 song " Talking to the Universe " became her seventh consecutive No. 1 hit on the Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs chart , and both songs charted again as favorites on Billboard 's year @-@ end lists for Dance / Club songs for 2011 . In 2013 , She and her band released the LP Take Me to the Land of Hell which featured numerous guests including Yuka Honda , Cornelius , Hirotaka " Shimmy " Shimizu , mi @-@ gu 's Yuko Araki , Wilco 's Nels Cline , <unk> @-@ <unk> , Questlove , Lenny Kravitz , and Ad @-@ Rock and Mike D of the Beastie Boys . Her online video for " Bad Dancer " released in November 2013 , which featured some of these guests , was well @-@ liked by the press . By the end of the year she had become one of three artists with two songs in the Top 20 Dance / Club and had two consecutive No. 1 hits on Billboard 's Hot Dance Club Play Charts . On the strength of the singles " Hold Me " ( Featuring Dave Audé ) and " Walking on Thin Ice " the artist , the then @-@ 80 @-@ year @-@ old beat Katy Perry , Robin Thicke , and her friend Lady Gaga . In 2014 , " Angel " was Ono 's twelfth number one on the US Dance chart . 
 = = = Collaborations = = = 
 During her career , Ono also has collaborated with Earl Slick , David Tudor , Fred DeAsis , and Richard Maxfield . As a dance music artist , Ono has worked with re @-@ mixers / producers including Basement Jaxx , Bill Kates , Keiji <unk> , Nick Vernier Band , Billy Martin , DJ Spooky , Apples In Stereo , Damien Price , DJ Chernobyl , Bimbo Jones , DJ Dan , Craig Armstrong , Jorge <unk> , Shuji <unk> , and Konrad Behr . 
 In 2012 , the album <unk> was released featuring a collaboration with Sonic Youth 's Thurston Moore and Kim Gordon . Notable also as the first collaboration between Moore and Gordon after their divorce , it was characterized by AllMusic as " focused and risk @-@ taking " and " above the best " of the couple 's experimental music , with Ono 's voice described as " one @-@ of @-@ a @-@ kind . " 
 = = Public image = = 
 Ono was frequently criticized by the press and the public for many years . She was blamed for the breakup of the Beatles and repeatedly criticized for her influence over Lennon and his music . Her experimental art was also not popularly accepted . The English press were particularly negative , and prompted the couple 's move to the US . As late as December 1999 , NME was calling her a " no @-@ talent charlatan " , and in October 2013 , the mother of tennis pro Andy Murray took over a Twitter handle entitled Destroying Yoko Ono on Twitter . 
 Her name still connotes the figure of the evil female interloper to the mainstream . Courtney Love , Kurt Cobain 's widow , has endlessly been compared to Ono for her supposed bothersome role in Nirvana 's businesses and as a scapegoat for Cobain 's suicide . 
 In 2007 , when American singer Jessica Simpson was dating Dallas Cowboys quarterback Tony Romo , the Simpson @-@ Romo relationship was blamed for Romo 's poor performances . In response , some Cowboys ' fans gave her the moniker " Yoko Romo . " 
 In March 2015 , Perrie Edwards , member of English girl group Little Mix , was compared to Yoko Ono and criticised for being the supposed reason for Zayn Malik 's departure from the British boy band One Direction , creating tension within the group and causing widespread controversy . 
 = = 2000s = = 
 One month after the 9 / 11 attacks , she organized the concert " Come Together : A Night for John Lennon 's Words and Music " at Radio City Music Hall . Hosted by the actor Kevin Spacey and featuring Lou Reed , Cyndi Lauper and Nelly Furtado , it raised money for September 11 relief efforts and aired on TNT and the WB . 
 During the Liverpool Biennial in 2004 , Ono flooded the city with two images on banners , bags , stickers , postcards , flyers , posters and badges : one of a woman 's naked breast , the other of the same model 's vulva . ( During her stay in Lennon 's city of birth , she said she was " astounded " by the city 's renaissance . ) The piece , titled My Mummy Was Beautiful , was dedicated to Lennon 's mother , Julia , who had died when he was a teenager . According to Ono , the work was meant to be innocent , not shocking ; she was attempting to replicate the experience of a baby looking up at its mother 's body , those parts of the mother 's body being a child 's introduction to humanity . 
 Ono performed at the opening ceremony for the 2006 Winter Olympic Games in Turin , Italy , wearing white , like many of the other performers during the ceremony , to symbolize the snow of winter . She read a free verse poem calling for world peace as an introduction to Peter Gabriel 's performance of " Imagine " . 
 On December 13 , 2006 , one of Ono 's bodyguards was arrested after he was allegedly taped trying to extort $ 2 million from her , threatening to release private conversations and photographs . His bail was revoked , and he pleaded not guilty to two counts of attempted grand larceny . In February 16 , 2007 a deal was reached where extortion charges were dropped , and he pleaded guilty to attempted grand larceny in the third degree , a felony , and sentenced to the 60 days he had already spent in jail . After reading an unapologetic statement , he was released to immigration officials because he had also been found guilty of overstaying his business visa . 
 On June 26 , 2007 , Ono appeared on Larry King Live along with McCartney , Ringo Starr , and Olivia Harrison . She headlined the Pitchfork Music Festival in Chicago on July 14 , 2007 , performing a full set that mixed music and performance art . She sang " Mulberry , " a song about her time in the countryside after the Japanese collapse in World War II for only the third time ever , with Thurston Moore : She had previously performed the song with John and with Sean . On October 9 of that year , the Imagine Peace Tower on Viðey Island in Iceland , dedicated to peace and to Lennon , was turned on with her , Sean , Ringo , George Harrison 's widow Olivia in attendance . 
 Ono returned to Liverpool for the 2008 Liverpool Biennial , where she unveiled Sky Ladders in the ruins of Church of St Luke ( which was largely destroyed during World War II and now stands roofless as a memorial to those killed in the Liverpool Blitz ) . Two years later , on March 31 , 2009 , she went to the inauguration of the exhibition " Imagine : The Peace Ballad of John & Yoko " to mark the 40th anniversary of the Lennon @-@ Ono Bed @-@ In at the Queen Elizabeth Hotel in Montreal , Canada , from May 26 to June 2 , 1969 . ( The hotel has been doing steady business with the room they stayed in for over 40 years . ) That year she became a grandmother , when Emi was born to Kyoko . 
 In May 2009 , she designed a T @-@ shirt for the second Fashion Against AIDS campaign and collection of HIV / AIDS awareness , NGO Designers Against AIDS , and H & M , with the statement " Imagine Peace " depicted in 21 languages . Ono appeared onstage at Microsoft 's June 1 , 2009 , E3 Expo press conference with Olivia Harrison , Paul McCartney , and Ringo Starr to promote the Beatles : Rock Band video game , which was universally praised by critics . Ono appeared on the Basement Jaxx album Scars , featuring on the single " Day of the Sunflowers ( We March On ) " . 
 = = 2010s = = 
 On February 16 , 2010 , Ono revived an early Plastic Ono Band lineup with Eric Clapton , and special guests including Paul Simon and Bette Midler . On April 1 of that year , she was named the first " Global Autism Ambassador " by the Autism Speaks organization . She had created an artwork the year before for autism awareness and allowed it to be auctioned off in 67 parts to benefit the organization . Ono appeared with Ringo Starr on July 7 at New York 's Radio City Music Hall in celebration of Starr 's 70th birthday , performing " With a Little Help from My Friends " and " Give Peace a Chance " . On September 16 , she and Sean attended the opening of Julian Lennon 's photo exhibition at the Morrison Hotel in New York City , appearing for the first time photos with Cynthia and Julian . She also promoted his work on her website . On October 2 , Ono and the Plastic Ono Band performed at the Orpheum Theatre in Los Angeles , with special guest Lady Gaga , whom she deeply admires . 
 On February 18 , 2011 , her 78th birthday , Ono took out a full page advert in the UK free newspaper Metro for " Imagine Peace 2011 " . It took the form of an open letter , inviting people to think of , and wish for , peace . With son Sean , she held a benefit concert to aid in the relief efforts for earthquake and tsunami @-@ ravaged Japan on March 27 in New York City . The effort raised a total of $ 33 @,@ 000 . In July 2011 , she visited Japan to support earthquake and tsunami victims and tourism to the country . During her visit , Ono gave a lecture and performance entitled " The Road of Hope " at Tokyo 's Mori Art Museum , during which she painted a large calligraphy piece entitled " Dream " to help raise funds for construction of the Rainbow House , an institution for the orphans of the Great East Japan Earthquake . She also collected the 8th Hiroshima Art Prize for her contributions to art and for peace , that she was awarded the year prior . 
 In January 2012 , a Ralphi Rosario mix of her 1995 song " Talking to the Universe " became her seventh consecutive No. 1 hit on the Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs chart . In March of the same year , she was awarded the 20 @,@ 000 @-@ euro ( $ 26 @,@ 400 ) Oskar Kokoschka Prize in Austria . From June 19 to September 9 , her work To the Light was exhibited at the Serpentine Gallery in London . It was held in conjunction with the London 2012 Festival , a 12 @-@ week UK @-@ wide celebration featuring internationally renowned artists from Midsummer 's Day ( June 21 ) to the final day of the Paralympic Games on September 9 . 
 On June 29 , 2012 , Ono received a lifetime achievement award at the Dublin Biennial . During this ( her second ) trip to Ireland ( the first was with John before they married ) , she visited the crypt of Irish leader Daniel O 'Connell at Glasnevin Cemetery and Dún Laoghaire , from where Irish departed for England to escape the famine . In February 2013 , Ono accepted the Rainer Hildebrandt Medal at Berlin 's Checkpoint Charlie Museum , awarded to her and Lennon for their lifetime of work for peace and human rights . The next month , she tweeted an anti @-@ gun message with the Season of Glass image of Lennon 's bloodied glasses on what would have been her and Lennon 's 44th anniversary , noting that more than 1 million people have been killed by guns since Lennon 's death in 1980 . She was also given a Congressional citation from the Philippines for her monetary aid to the victims of typhoon Pablo . She also donated to disaster relief efforts after typhoon <unk> in 2009 , and she assists Filipino schoolchildren . 
 In June 2013 , she curated the Meltdown festival in London , where she played two concerts , one with the Plastic Ono Band , and the second on backing vocals during Siouxsie Sioux 's rendition of " Walking on Thin Ice " at the Double Fantasy show . In July , OR Books published Ono 's sequel to 1964 's Grapefruit , another book of instruction @-@ based ' action poems ' this time entitled , Acorn . She was made an honorary citizen of Reykjavík , Iceland , on October 9 , 2013 . That same year , she became an honorary patron to Alder Hey Charity . 
 On February 26 , 2016 , Ono was hospitalized after suffering what was rumored to be a possible stroke . It was later announced that she was experiencing extreme symptoms of influenza . 
 = = Political activism and social media = = 
 Ono has been an activist for peace and human rights since the 1960s . After their wedding , she and Lennon held a " Bed @-@ In for Peace " in their honeymoon suite at the Amsterdam Hilton Hotel in March 1969 , where the pair of newlyweds in pajamas invited visitors and members of the press , eager to talk about and promote world peace . Another Bed @-@ In two months later at the Queen Elizabeth Fairmont in Montreal resulted in the recording of their first single , " Give Peace A Chance " , a top @-@ 20 hit for the newly christened Plastic Ono Band . Other performance / demonstrations with John included " <unk> , " iterations with John of the Bag Pieces she introduced in the early 1960s , which encouraged a disregard for physical appearance in judging others . In December 1969 , the two continued spread their message of peace with billboards in 12 major world cities reading " WAR IS OVER ! If You Want It - Happy Christmas from John & Yoko . " 
 In the 1970s , Ono and Lennon became close to many radical , counterculture leaders , including Bobby Seale , Abbie Hoffman , Jerry Rubin , Michael X , John Sinclair ( for whose rally in Michigan they flew to sing Lennon 's song " Free John Sinclair " that effectively released the poet from prison ) , Angela Davis , and street musician David Peel . Friend and Sexual Politics author Kate Millett has said Ono inspired her activism . Ono and Lennon appeared on The Mike Douglas Show , taking over hosting duties for a week . Ono spoke at length about the evils of racism and sexism . She remained outspoken in her support of feminism , and openly bitter about the racism she had experienced from rock fans , especially in the UK . Her reception within the UK media was not much better . For example , an Esquire article of the period was titled " John <unk> 's <unk> <unk> " and featured an unflattering David Levine cartoon . 
 In 1999 , after the Columbine High School massacre , Ono paid for billboards to be put up in New York City and Los Angeles that bore the image of Lennon 's blood @-@ splashed spectacles . Early in 2002 she paid about £ 150 @,@ 000 ( $ 213 @,@ 375 ) for a billboard in Piccadilly Circus with a line from Lennon 's " Imagine " : " Imagine all the people living life in peace . " Later the same year , she inaugurated a peace award , the LennonOno Grant for Peace , by giving $ 50 @,@ 000 ( £ 31 @,@ 900 ) in prize money originally to artists living " in regions of conflict " . The award is given out every two years in conjunction with the lighting of the Imagine Peace Tower , and was first given to Israeli and Palestinian artists . Its program has since expanded to include writers , such as Michael Pollan and Alice Walker , activists such as Vandana Shiva and Pussy Riot , organizations such as New York 's Center for Constitutional Rights , even an entire country ( Iceland ) . 
 On Valentine 's Day 2003 , on the eve of the Iraqi invasion by the US and UK , Ono heard about a couple , Andrew and Christine Gale , who were holding a love @-@ in protest in their tiny bedroom in <unk> , West Yorkshire . She phoned them and said , " It 's good to speak to you . We 're supporting you . We 're all sisters together . " The couple said that songs like " Give Peace a Chance " and " Imagine " inspired their protest . In 2004 , Ono remade her song " Everyman ..... <unk> ..... " to support same @-@ sex marriage , releasing remixes that included " Every Man Has a Man Who Loves Him " and " Every Woman Has a Woman Who Loves Her " . 
 In August 2011 , she made the documentary film about the Bed @-@ Ins Bed Peace available for free on YouTube , and as part of her website " Imagine Peace " . In January 2013 , the 79 @-@ year @-@ old Ono , along with Sean Lennon and Susan Sarandon , took to rural Pennsylvania in a bus under the banner of the Artists Against Fracking group she and Sean created with Mark Ruffalo in August 2012 to protest against hydraulic fracturing . Other group members include Lady Gaga and Alec Baldwin . 
 Ono promotes her art , and shares inspirational messages and images , through a robust and active Twitter , Instagram , and Facebook presence . In April 2014 her Twitter followers reached 4 @.@ 69 million , while her Instagram followers exceeded 99 @,@ 000 . Her tweets are short instructional poems , comments on media and politics , and notes about performances . 
 = = Relationship with the Beatles = = 
 According to journalist Barry Miles , after Lennon and Ono had been injured in a car accident in June 1969 , partway through recording Abbey Road , a bed was installed in the studio with a microphone so the latter could make artistic comments about the album . Miles thought Ono 's continual presence in the studio during the latter part of the Beatles ' career put strain on Lennon 's relationship with the other band members . George Harrison verbally assaulted her after she took one of his chocolate digestive biscuits without asking . The English press dubbed her " the woman who broke up the Beatles " , but Ono has stated that the Beatles broke up themselves without any direct involvement from her , adding " I don 't think I could have tried even to break them up . " In an interview with Dick Cavett , Lennon explicitly denied that Ono broke up The Beatles and even Harrison said in an interview with Cavett that The Beatles had problems long before Ono came on the scene . 
 While the Beatles were together , every song written by Lennon or McCartney was credited as Lennon – McCartney regardless of whether the song was a collaboration or written solely by one of the two ( except for those appearing on their first album , Please Please Me , which originally credited the songs to McCartney – Lennon ) . In 1976 , McCartney released a live album called Wings over America , which credited the five Beatles tracks as P. McCartney – J. Lennon compositions , but neither Lennon nor Ono objected . After Lennon 's death , however , McCartney again attempted to change the order to McCartney – Lennon for songs that were solely or predominantly written by him , such as " Yesterday , " but Ono would not allow it , saying she felt this broke an agreement that the two had made while Lennon was still alive , and the surviving Beatle argued that such an agreement never existed . A spokesman for Ono said McCartney was making " an attempt to rewrite history " . 
 In a Rolling Stone interview in 1987 , Ono pointed out McCartney 's place in the process of the disintegration of the band . On the 1998 John Lennon anthology , Lennon Legend , the composer credit of " Give Peace a Chance " was changed to " John Lennon " from its original composing credit of " Lennon – McCartney . " Although the song was written by Lennon during his tenure with the Beatles , it was both written and recorded without the help of the band , and released as Lennon 's first independent single under the " Plastic Ono Band " moniker . Lennon subsequently expressed regret that he had not given co @-@ writing credit to Ono instead , who actually helped him write the song . In 2002 , McCartney released another live album , Back in the U.S. Live 2002 , and the 19 Beatles songs included are described as " composed by Paul McCartney and John Lennon " , which reignited the debate over credits with Ono . Her spokesperson Elliott Mintz called it " an attempt to rewrite history . " , but nevertheless , Ono did not sue . 
 In 1995 , after the Beatles released Lennon 's " Free as a Bird " and " Real Love " , with demos provided by Ono , McCartney and his family collaborated with her and Sean to create the song " Hiroshima Sky is Always Blue " , which commemorates the 50th anniversary of the atomic bombing of that Japanese city . Of Ono , McCartney stated : " I thought she was a cold woman . I think that 's wrong ..... she 's just the opposite ..... I think she 's just more determined than most people to be herself . " Two years later , however , Ono publicly compared Lennon to Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart , while McCartney , she said , more closely resembled his less @-@ talented rival Antonio Salieri . This remark infuriated McCartney 's wife Linda , who was dying from breast cancer at the time , and when Linda died less than a year later , McCartney did not invite Ono to his wife 's memorial service in Manhattan . 
 Accepting an award at the 2005 Q Awards , Ono mentioned that Lennon had once felt insecure about his songwriting . She had responded , " You 're a good songwriter . It 's not June with spoon that you write . You 're a good singer , and most musicians are probably a little bit nervous about covering your songs . " 
 In an October 2010 interview , Ono spoke about Lennon 's " lost weekend " and her subsequent reconciliation with him . She credited McCartney with helping save her marriage to John . " I want the world to know that it was a very touching thing that [ Paul ] did for John . " While visiting with Ono in March 1974 , McCartney , on leaving , asked " [ W ] hat will make you come back to John ? " McCartney subsequently passed her response to Lennon while visiting him in Los Angeles . " John often said he didn 't understand why Paul did this for us , but he did . " In 2012 , McCartney revealed that he did not blame Ono for the breakup of the Beatles and credited Ono with inspiring much of Lennon 's post @-@ Beatles work . 
 = = = Relationship with Julian Lennon = = = 
 Ono had a difficult relationship with her stepson , Lennon 's son Julian , which has improved over the years . He has expressed disappointment at her handling of Lennon 's estate , and at the difference between his upbringing and Sean 's , adding , " when Dad gave up music for a couple of years to be with Sean , why couldn 't he do that with me ? " More egregiously , however , Julian was left out of his father 's will , and he battled Ono in court for years , settling in 1996 for an unspecified amount which the papers reported was " believed to " be in the area of £ 20 million , which Julian has denied . 
 He has admitted that he is his " mother 's boy " , which Ono has cited as the reason why she was never able to get close to him : " Julian and I tried to be friends . Of course , if he 's too friendly with me , then I think that it hurts his other relatives . He was very loyal to his mother . That was the first thing that was in his mind . " Nevertheless , she and Sean attended the opening of Julian 's photo exhibition at the Morrison Hotel in New York City in 2010 , appearing for the first time for photos with Cynthia and Julian . She also promoted the exhibition on her website , and Julian and Sean are close . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Canadian rock band Barenaked Ladies ' debut single was " Be My Yoko Ono , " first released in 1990 and later appearing on their 1992 album Gordon . The lyrics are “ a shy entreaty to a potential girlfriend , caged in terms that self @-@ <unk> compare himself to one of pop music 's foremost geniuses . ” It also has a “ sarcastic imitation of Yoko Ono 's unique vocal style in the bridge ” . 
 In 2000 , American folk singer Dar Williams recorded a song titled " I Won 't Be Your Yoko Ono . " Bryan <unk> of the website Ultimate Classic Rock described the song as " us [ ing ] John and Yoko as a starting point for exploring love , and particularly , love between artists . " 
 The British band Elbow mentioned Ono in their song " New York Morning " from their 2014 album The Take Off and Landing of Everything ( " Oh , my giddy aunt , New York can talk / It 's the modern Rome and folk are nice to Yoko " ) . In response Ono posted an open letter to the band on her website , thanking them and reflecting on her and Lennon 's relationship with the city . 
 The post @-@ punk rock band Death of Samantha named themselves after a song from Ono 's 1973 album Approximately Infinite Universe . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Albums = = = 
 = = = Albums with John Lennon = = = 
 = = = Compilations , soundtrack albums and EPs = = = 
 Onobox ( 1992 ) 
 Walking on Thin Ice ( 1992 ) 
 New York Rock ( 1994 ) ( Original cast recording ) 
 A Blueprint for the Sunrise ( 2000 ) ( 3 @-@ track EP included with YES YOKO ONO book ) 
 Don 't Stop Me ! EP ( 2009 ) 
 = = = Remix albums = = = 
 Rising Mixes ( 1996 ) 
 Yes , I 'm a Witch ( 2007 ) 
 Open Your Box ( 2007 ) 
 <unk> ( 2012 ) 
 Yes , I 'm a Witch Too ( 2016 ) 
 = = = Tribute albums = = = 
 Every Man Has a Woman ( 1984 ) 
 Mrs. Lennon ( 2010 ) 
 = = Singles = = 
 = = = B @-@ side appearances on John Lennon singles = = = 
 " Remember Love " ( on " Give Peace a Chance " ) ( 1969 ) 
 " Don 't Worry , Kyoko " ( on " Cold Turkey " ) ( 1969 ) 
 " Who Has Seen the Wind ? " ( on " Instant Karma ! " ) ( 1970 ) 
 " Why " ( on " Mother " ) ( 1971 ) 
 " Open Your Box " ( on " Power to the People " ) ( 1971 ) 
 " Listen , the Snow is Falling " ( on " Happy Xmas ( War Is Over ) " ) ( 1971 ) 
 " Sisters , O Sisters " ( on " Woman Is the Nigger of the World " ) ( 1972 ) 
 " Kiss Kiss Kiss " ( on " ( Just Like ) Starting Over " ) ( 1980 ) 
 " Beautiful Boys " ( on " Woman " ) ( 1981 ) 
 " Yes , I 'm Your Angel " ( on " Watching the Wheels " ) ( 1981 ) 
 " O <unk> " ( on " Nobody Told Me " ) ( 1984 ) 
 " Your Hands ( <unk> " ) ( on " Borrowed Time " ) ( 1984 ) 
 " Sleepless Night " ( on " I 'm Stepping Out " ) ( 1984 ) 
 " It 's Alright " ( on " Every Man Has a Woman Who Loves Him " ) ( 1985 ) 
 = = Books and monographs = = 
 Grapefruit ( 1964 ) 
 Summer of 1980 ( 1983 ) 
 <unk> ( Tada @-@ no Watashi – Just Me ! ) ( 1986 ) 
 The John Lennon Family Album ( 1990 ) 
 Instruction Paintings ( 1995 ) 
 Grapefruit Juice ( 1998 ) 
 YES YOKO ONO ( 2000 ) 
 Odyssey of a Cockroach ( 2005 ) 
 Imagine Yoko ( 2005 ) 
 Memories of John Lennon ( editor ) ( 2005 ) 
 2 : 46 : Aftershocks : Stories From the Japan Earthquake ( contributor ) ( 2011 ) 
 <unk> Vocal China Forever Love Song 
 Acorn ( 2013 ) 
 = = Films = = 
 = = = Director = = = 
 Eye blink ( 1966 , 5 min ) 
 Bottoms ( 1966 , 5 ½ min ) 
 Match ( 1966 , 5 min ) 
 Cut Piece ( 1965 , 9 min ) 
 Wrapping Piece ( 1967 , approx . 20 min , music by Delia Derbyshire ) 
 Film No. 4 ( Bottoms ) ( 1966 / 1967 , 80 min ) 
 Bottoms , advertisement / commercial ( 1966 / 1967 , approx . 2 min ) 
 Two Virgins ( 1968 , approx . 20 min ) , a portrait film consisting of super @-@ impositions of John 's and Yoko 's faces . 
 Film No . Five ( Smile ) ( 1968 , 51 min ) 
 Rape ( 1969 , 77 min ) , filmed by Nick Rowland , a young woman is relentlessly pursued by a camera crew . 
 Apotheosis ( 1970 , 18 ½ mins ) 
 Freedom ( 1970 , 1 min ) , a slow @-@ motion film showing a woman attempting to take off her bra . 
 Making of Fly ( 1970 , approx . 30 min ) 
 Up Your Legs Forever ( 1970 , 70 min ) , a film consisting of continuous panning shots up a series of 367 human legs . 
 Erection ( 1971 , 20 min ) , a film of a hotel 's construction over many months , based on still photographs by Iain McMillan . 
