 The release was limited to 5 @,@ 000 copies , all of which were individually numbered , although some pressings had higher numbers , as jackets damaged during the manufacturing process were destroyed and reprinted with newer numbers . An owner of a Milwaukee , Wisconsin store compared ordering the EP to a roulette , and said he " ordered 15 [ copies ] hoping to get 6 " . Twenty of the copies were given away in a December 2010 sweepstakes for U2.com site subscribers . 
 Pre @-@ orders for the EP were available from online retailer The Ideal Copy , but had sold out by the end of October , almost a month prior to the release . New Jersey @-@ based retailer Vintage Vinyl Records described the EP as an " Indie @-@ Exclusive Black Friday item " , and also sold pre @-@ orders online , but had ended pre @-@ orders early to ensure copies were available for Black Friday . On the day of its release , several record shops in the US reported Wide Awake in Europe as one of their best @-@ sellers . The EP was sold for around US $ 10 – 20 , but copies were selling on eBay the following day for $ 75 . 
 = = Content = = 
 The title and cover of the EP are references to U2 's 1985 EP Wide Awake in America . All the tracks were recorded by Alastair McMillan , and mixed by the EP 's producer , Declan Gaffney . 
 Side A of the record features " Mercy " , which was debuted during the U2 360 ° Tour in September 2010 . Previously , " Mercy " had leaked online as a track from the sessions for U2 's 2004 album How to Dismantle an Atomic Bomb , but Wide Awake in Europe was the first official release of the song . The performance included on the EP is taken from band 's concert in Brussels during the month of its debut , and was the fourth @-@ ever live performance of the song . 
 Side B features performances of " I 'll Go Crazy If I Don 't Go Crazy Tonight " ( from Dublin in July 2009 ) and " Moment of Surrender " ( from Paris in September 2010 ) , both of which are from U2 's 2009 studio album , No Line on the Horizon . The EP 's live version of the " I 'll Go Crazy " live remix from Dublin was previously released on the 2009 U2.com member @-@ exclusive remix album , Artificial Horizon , and was remixed by <unk> and Dirty South . The track also features a clip of " <unk> Az Ney / Windfall " by <unk> <unk> . 
 In a review published by Sputnikmusic two weeks after Wide Awake in Europe 's release , critic Irving Tan praised the EP , stating how " Mercy " was " the biggest treat to fans " , while the " I 'll Go Crazy " remix gives the EP a " party vibe " , and that " Moment of Surrender " " manages to be hopeful , glorious , and resplendent all at once " . Tan concluded by saying that the EP sends a message of the band 's " youthful defiance " and stated that he looks forward to U2 's fourth decade . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by Bono , all music composed by U2 . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Production – Declan Gaffney 
 Recording – Alastair McMillan 
 Mixing – Declan Gaffney , Russell <unk> ( assistance on " I 'll Go Crazy If I Don 't Go Crazy Tonight " ) 
 Mastering – Scott Sedillo at Bernie Grundman Mastering 
 Audio post production – Cheryl Engles at Partial Productions 
 Photography – Aaron Harris 
 Sleeve design – Shaughn McGrath at Amp Visual 
 = The Quest Begins = 
 The Quest Begins is the first novel in the Seekers series . It was written by Erin Hunter , which is a pseudonym used by authors Cherith Baldry , Kate Cary , Tui Sutherland and editor Victoria Holmes . The novel follows the adventures of four bears , Toklo , Kallik , Lusa and Ujurak . Each bear is stranded by themselves in the wild and must learn to survive . The declining environment of the bears is the main theme conveyed throughout the novel . Like the Warriors series also written by Erin Hunter , Seekers began as a request from HarperCollins who requested another animal story . The company and Victoria Holmes agreed to write about bears after discarding dogs , horses and dolphins . The novel was released in the US on 27 May 2008 and has also been released in the UK , Canada and translated into Russian . Critical reception was positive with reviewers praising the realistic behaviour of the bears . 
 = = Development and publication = = 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 The Quest Begins began as a request from HarperCollins who wanted Victoria Holmes , editor and creator of the Warriors series which followed the adventures of feral cats , to write another series about animals . The company suggested dogs to Holmes , but the idea was rejected since dogs behave very similarly to the cats in the Warriors series . Both horses and dolphins were suggested , but rejected due to their tendency to run away rather than fight and the slowness of battles underwater . Out of ideas , HarperCollins consulted with Holmes on what she wanted to write about . After a bit of thinking Holmes replied , " <unk> ! They live much more solitary lifestyles than cats , they are wild through and through with no history of domestication whatsoever ( performing bears don ’ t count ) , and they are much bigger animals , with a whole lot more potential for fighting " . 
 = = = Publication history = = = 
 The Quest Begins was first featured on the <unk> 's <unk> Program in November 2007 . Readers who signed up for the program had a chance to read an early edition of this book , an Advanced Reader 's Copy , before it was published in stores . The Quest Begins was released in the US on 27 May 2008 . The book was also released as a paperback on 10 February 2009 and an e @-@ book on 6 October 2009 . 
 The books have also been released in the UK and Canada . Canada received the first book on 25 May 2008 . The first three books have also been translated into Russian . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 The novel follows the adventure of four bears , Kallik ( a polar bear ) , Lusa ( a black bear ) , Toklo ( a brown bear ) and Ujurak ( a brown bear ) . 
 The novel first follows Kallik who lives with her mother and brother . However , they are separated on ice when a group of killer whales attacks them and Kallik must survive by herself . On her own , Kallik decides to go to a gathering place for polar bears that her mom told her about . At the gathering , Kallik asks other polar bears if they have seen her brother , but no one has . Alone , Kallik meets a female bear Nanuk who helps Kallik around the area . However , Nanuk is killed by a helicopter crash shipping her and Kallik back to the wild . Before she dies , Nanuk tells Kallik about a place where the ice never melts . Hearing this , Kallik sets off to this place . 
 Somewhere is the Rocky Mountains in southern Canada , Toklo 's mom is bringing Toklo and his sickly brother to a river to teach them how to catch salmon . However , in insanity , Toklo 's mom abandons Toklo after a mental break because his brother died . Now Toklo must survive on his own , just like Kallik . Wandering randomly , Toklo gets chased by human hunters and then meets a bear who is also getting chased by hunters . The bear gets injured , but they make it to safety and requests that Toklo to retrieve certain herbs , which he does . The bear turns into a human and later introduces himself as Ujurak . It is revealed that Ujurak is a Shapeshifter , to Toklo 's disbelief , before turning back into a bear . The two end up traveling together . 
 Lusa is a pampered black bear living in the Bear Bowl , a zoo in Canada . Despite knowing that the wilderness is harsh , Lusa has dreams about one day escaping and living outside . Her father , King , once lived in the wild and is strongly against Lusa 's idea . One day , Toklo 's mom is brought into the Bear Bowl . She talks with Lusa about how much she regretted abandoning her cubs , but that it was too late and that she couldn 't find them . Hearing this , Lusa decides to bring a message to Toklo about how sorry his mother is . Although Lusa succeeds in escaping , she realizes the dangers of the wild . At the end of the story , Ujurak and Toklo meet up with Lusa . 
 = = Style and themes = = 
 The novel is written in a similar style to the Warriors series . Holly Koelling from Booklist notes that " Despite the change in species , much will be familiar to readers . Alternating narratives tell the tales of three young bear cubs , who will be brought together in future installments " . Nancy Gilson from the Columbus Dispatch praised how easily the separate stories are handled and noticed how many chapters end on a cliffhanger . 
 The main theme addressed throughout the novel is decline of the environment and habitats of the bears . In the novel , Kallik watches her mother die by a pod of killer whales while Toklo is abandoned by his mother . Koelling realised how " Each tale touches on environmental issues " . Publishers Weekly noted how the " bears ' struggle to survive , along with Hunter 's environmental theme " . At the same time , older bears are " comforted by their belief in mythical bear spirits as they navigate the harsh realities of life in the wild " . Jennifer @-@ Lynn Draper from School Library Journal recognised that " The bears ' declining habitat is evident , and often throughout their journey the animals have to dodge cars and humans with guns " . Gilson noticed that every adventure " involves hunger , hardship and the loss of family that turns the young bears into solitary travelers " . Gilson also noted the environmental theme writing " This one offers prominent themes about the dangers of global warming and diminished wild places " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The Quest Begins reached number 6 on Publishers Weekly 's Children 's Fiction Bestsellers during the week of 9 June 2008 . The novel was also chosen as number 9 on Al Roker 's Al 's Book Club on The Today Show . 
 Reception to the novel was positive and many reviewers praised the realistic setting and behaviours of the main characters . Koelling noted how the novel has a balance of cute anthropomorphic characterisation and also gives a realistic view of how hard it is for the bears to survive on their own . Koelling also recommended the novel to Warriors fans . Kirkus Reviews praised how " Hunter creates a richly sensuous world filled with cruelty , beauty , tenderness , savagery and just enough underlying legendary background to add mystery " , but felt that there is little advancement of the plot due to the time introducing and developing the characters . Still , the reviewer felt that the novel would appeal the animal fantasy lovers for the its extreme detail . Publishers Weekly found the novel written more loosely than the Warriors series , but still appealing to readers as they follow the bears survival . Draper praised the fast pace and how Erin Hunter " is apt at creating and sustaining the adrenaline @-@ charged mood of these youngsters on their own " . Matt Berman , writing for Half Moon Bay Review , praised the cliffhanger ending which would invite in more readers for the second novel , but felt that Warriors fans would be disappointed while " animal lovers will find this story ’ s mix of anthropomorphism and realism appealing , and Hunter may find an entirely new audience " . 
 = Ancient Egyptian literature = 
 Ancient Egyptian literature was written in the Egyptian language from ancient Egypt 's pharaonic period until the end of Roman domination . It represents the oldest corpus of Egyptian literature . Along with Sumerian literature , it is considered the world 's earliest literature . 
 Writing in ancient Egypt — both hieroglyphic and hieratic — first appeared in the late 4th millennium BC during the late phase of predynastic Egypt . By the Old Kingdom ( 26th century BC to 22nd century BC ) , literary works included funerary texts , epistles and letters , hymns and poems , and commemorative autobiographical texts recounting the careers of prominent administrative officials . It was not until the early Middle Kingdom ( 21st century BC to 17th century BC ) that a narrative Egyptian literature was created . This was a " media revolution " which , according to Richard B. Parkinson , was the result of the rise of an intellectual class of scribes , new cultural sensibilities about individuality , unprecedented levels of literacy , and mainstream access to written materials . However , it is possible that the overall literacy rate was less than one percent of the entire population . The creation of literature was thus an elite exercise , monopolized by a scribal class attached to government offices and the royal court of the ruling pharaoh . However , there is no full consensus among modern scholars concerning the dependence of ancient Egyptian literature on the sociopolitical order of the royal courts . 
 Middle Egyptian , the spoken language of the Middle Kingdom , became a classical language during the New Kingdom ( 16th century BC to 11th century BC ) , when the vernacular language known as Late Egyptian first appeared in writing . Scribes of the New Kingdom canonized and copied many literary texts written in Middle Egyptian , which remained the language used for oral readings of sacred hieroglyphic texts . Some genres of Middle Kingdom literature , such as " teachings " and fictional tales , remained popular in the New Kingdom , although the genre of prophetic texts was not revived until the Ptolemaic period ( 4th century BC to 1st century BC ) . Popular tales included the Story of Sinuhe and The Eloquent Peasant , while important teaching texts include the Instructions of Amenemhat and The Loyalist Teaching . By the New Kingdom period , the writing of commemorative graffiti on sacred temple and tomb walls flourished as a unique genre of literature , yet it employed formulaic phrases similar to other genres . The acknowledgment of rightful authorship remained important only in a few genres , while texts of the " teaching " genre were pseudonymous and falsely attributed to prominent historical figures . 
 Ancient Egyptian literature has been preserved on a wide variety of media . This includes papyrus scrolls and packets , limestone or ceramic ostraca , wooden writing boards , monumental stone edifices and coffins . Texts preserved and unearthed by modern archaeologists represent a small fraction of ancient Egyptian literary material . The area of the floodplain of the Nile is under @-@ represented because the moist environment is unsuitable for the preservation of papyri and ink inscriptions . On the other hand , hidden caches of literature , buried for thousands of years , have been discovered in settlements on the dry desert margins of Egyptian civilization . 
 = = Scripts , media , and languages = = 
 = = = Hieroglyphs , hieratic , and Demotic = = = 
 By the Early Dynastic Period in the late 4th millennium BC , Egyptian hieroglyphs and their cursive form hieratic were well @-@ established written scripts . Egyptian hieroglyphs are small artistic pictures of natural objects . For example , the hieroglyph for door @-@ bolt , pronounced se , produced the s sound ; when this hieroglyph was combined with another or multiple hieroglyphs , it produced a combination of sounds that could represent abstract concepts like sorrow , happiness , beauty , and evil . The Narmer Palette , dated c . 3100 BC during the last phase of Predynastic Egypt , combines the hieroglyphs for catfish and chisel to produce the name of King Narmer . 
 The Egyptians called their hieroglyphs " words of god " and reserved their use for exalted purposes , such as communicating with divinities and spirits of the dead through funerary texts . Each hieroglyphic word both represented a specific object and embodied the essence of that object , recognizing it as divinely made and belonging within the greater cosmos . Through acts of priestly ritual , like burning incense , the priest allowed spirits and deities to read the hieroglyphs decorating the surfaces of temples . In funerary texts beginning in and following the Twelfth dynasty , the Egyptians believed that disfiguring , and even omitting certain hieroglyphs , brought consequences , either good or bad , for a deceased tomb occupant whose spirit relied on the texts as a source of nourishment in the afterlife . <unk> the hieroglyph of a venomous snake , or other dangerous animal , removed a potential threat . However , removing every instance of the hieroglyphs representing a deceased person 's name would deprive his or her soul of the ability to read the funerary texts and condemn that soul to an inanimate existence . 
 Hieratic is a simplified , cursive form of Egyptian hieroglyphs . Like hieroglyphs , hieratic was used in sacred and religious texts . By the 1st millennium BC , calligraphic hieratic became the script predominantly used in funerary papyri and temple rolls . Whereas the writing of hieroglyphs required the utmost precision and care , cursive hieratic could be written much more quickly and was therefore more practical for scribal record @-@ keeping . Its primary purpose was to serve as a shorthand script for non @-@ royal , non @-@ monumental , and less formal writings such as private letters , legal documents , poems , tax records , medical texts , mathematical treatises , and instructional guides . Hieratic could be written in two different styles ; one was more calligraphic and usually reserved for government records and literary manuscripts , the other was used for informal accounts and letters . 
 By the mid @-@ 1st millennium BC , hieroglyphs and hieratic were still used for royal , monumental , religious , and funerary writings , while a new , even more cursive script was used for informal , day @-@ to @-@ day writing : Demotic . The final script adopted by the ancient Egyptians was the Coptic alphabet , a revised version of the Greek alphabet . Coptic became the standard in the 4th century AD when Christianity became the state religion throughout the Roman Empire ; hieroglyphs were discarded as idolatrous images of a pagan tradition , unfit for writing the Biblical canon . 
 = = = Writing implements and materials = = = 
 Egyptian literature was produced on a variety of media . Along with the chisel , necessary for making inscriptions on stone , the chief writing tool of ancient Egypt was the reed pen , a reed fashioned into a stem with a bruised , brush @-@ like end . With pigments of carbon black and red ochre , the reed pen was used to write on scrolls of papyrus — a thin material made from beating together strips of pith from the Cyperus papyrus plant — as well as on small ceramic or limestone ostraca known as potsherds . It is thought that papyrus rolls were moderately expensive commercial items , since many are palimpsests , manuscripts that have their original contents erased to make room for new written works . This , alongside tearing off pieces of papyrus documents to make smaller letters , suggests that there were seasonal shortages caused by the limited growing season of Cyperus papyrus . It also explains the frequent use of ostraca and limestone flakes as writing media for shorter written works . In addition to stone , ceramic ostraca , and papyrus , writing media also included wood , ivory , and plaster . 
 By the Roman Period of Egypt , the traditional Egyptian reed pen had been replaced by the chief writing tool of the Greco @-@ Roman world : a shorter , thicker reed pen with a cut nib . Likewise , the original Egyptian pigments were discarded in favor of Greek lead @-@ based inks . The adoption of Greco @-@ Roman writing tools influenced Egyptian handwriting , as hieratic signs became more spaced , had rounder flourishes , and greater angular precision . 
 = = = Preservation of written material = = = 
 Underground Egyptian tombs built in the desert provide possibly the most protective environment for the preservation of papyrus documents . For example , there are many well @-@ preserved Book of the Dead funerary papyri placed in tombs to act as afterlife guides for the souls of the deceased tomb occupants . However , it was only customary during the late Middle Kingdom and first half of the New Kingdom to place non @-@ religious papyri in burial chambers . Thus , the majority of well @-@ preserved literary papyri are dated to this period . 
 Most settlements in ancient Egypt were situated on the alluvium of the Nile floodplain . This moist environment was unfavorable for long @-@ term preservation of papyrus documents . Archaeologists have discovered a larger quantity of papyrus documents in desert settlements on land elevated above the floodplain , and in settlements that lacked irrigation works , such as Elephantine , El @-@ Lahun , and El @-@ Hiba . 
 Writings on more permanent media have also been lost in several ways . Stones with inscriptions were frequently re @-@ used as building materials , and ceramic ostraca require a dry environment to ensure the preservation of the ink on their surfaces . Whereas papyrus rolls and packets were usually stored in boxes for safekeeping , ostraca were routinely discarded in waste pits ; one such pit was discovered by chance at the Ramesside @-@ era village of Deir el @-@ Medina , and has yielded the majority of known private letters on ostraca . Documents found at this site include letters , hymns , fictional narratives , recipes , business receipts , and wills and testaments . Penelope Wilson describes this archaeological find as the equivalent of sifting through a modern landfill or waste container . She notes that the inhabitants of Deir el @-@ Medina were incredibly literate by ancient Egyptian standards , and cautions that such finds only come " ... in rarefied circumstances and in particular conditions . " 
 John W. Tait stresses , " Egyptian material survives in a very uneven fashion ... the unevenness of survival comprises both time and space . " For instance , there is a dearth of written material from all periods from the Nile Delta but an abundance at western Thebes , dating from its heyday . He notes that while some texts were copied numerous times , others survive from a single copy ; for example , there is only one complete surviving copy of the Tale of the shipwrecked sailor from the Middle Kingdom . However , Tale of the shipwrecked sailor also appears in fragments of texts on ostraca from the New Kingdom . Many other literary works survive only in fragments or through incomplete copies of lost originals . 
 = = = Classical , Middle , Late , and Demotic Egyptian language = = = 
 Although writing first appeared during the very late 4th millennium BC , it was only used to convey short names and labels ; connected strings of text did not appear until about 2600 BC , at the beginning of the Old Kingdom . This development marked the beginning of the first known phase of the Egyptian language : Old Egyptian . Old Egyptian remained a spoken language until about 2100 BC , when , during the beginning of the Middle Kingdom , it evolved into Middle Egyptian . While Middle Egyptian was closely related to Old Egyptian , Late Egyptian was significantly different in grammatical structure . Late Egyptian possibly appeared as a vernacular language as early as 1600 BC , but was not used as a written language until c . 1300 BC during the Amarna Period of the New Kingdom . Late Egyptian evolved into Demotic by the 7th century BC , and although Demotic remained a spoken language until the 5th century AD , it was gradually replaced by Coptic beginning in the 1st century AD . 
 Hieratic was used alongside hieroglyphs for writing in Old and Middle Egyptian , becoming the dominant form of writing in Late Egyptian . By the New Kingdom and throughout the rest of ancient Egyptian history , Middle Egyptian became a classical language that was usually reserved for reading and writing in hieroglyphs . For the rest of ancient Egyptian history , Middle Egyptian remained the spoken language for more exalted forms of literature , such as historical records , commemorative autobiographies , hymns , and funerary spells . However , Middle Kingdom literature written in Middle Egyptian was also rewritten in hieratic during later periods . 
 = = Literary functions : social , religious and educational = = 
 Throughout ancient Egyptian history , reading and writing were the main requirements for serving in public office , although government officials were assisted in their day @-@ to @-@ day work by an elite , literate social group known as scribes . As evidenced by Papyrus Anastasi I of the Ramesside Period , scribes could even be expected , according to Wilson , " ... to organize the excavation of a lake and the building of a brick ramp , to establish the number of men needed to transport an obelisk and to arrange the provisioning of a military mission " . Besides government employment , scribal services in drafting letters , sales documents , and legal documents would have been frequently sought by illiterate people . Literate people are thought to have comprised only 1 % of the population , the remainder being illiterate farmers , herdsmen , artisans , and other laborers , as well as merchants who required the assistance of scribal secretaries . The privileged status of the scribe over illiterate manual laborers was the subject of a popular Ramesside Period instructional text , The Satire of the Trades , where lowly , undesirable occupations , for example , potter , fisherman , laundry man , and soldier , were mocked and the scribal profession praised . A similar demeaning attitude towards the illiterate is expressed in the Middle Kingdom Teaching of <unk> , which is used to reinforce the scribes ' elevated position within the social hierarchy . 
 The scribal class was the social group responsible for maintaining , transmitting , and <unk> literary classics , and writing new compositions . Classic works , such as the Story of Sinuhe and Instructions of Amenemhat , were copied by schoolboys as pedagogical exercises in writing and to instill the required ethical and moral values that distinguished the scribal social class . Wisdom texts of the " teaching " genre represent the majority of pedagogical texts written on ostraca during the Middle Kingdom ; narrative tales , such as Sinuhe and King Neferkare and General <unk> , were rarely copied for school exercises until the New Kingdom . William Kelly Simpson describes narrative tales such as Sinuhe and The shipwrecked sailor as " ... instructions or teachings in the guise of narratives " , since the main protagonists of such stories embodied the accepted virtues of the day , such as love of home or self @-@ reliance . 
 There are some known instances where those outside the scribal profession were literate and had access to classical literature . <unk> , a draughtsman working at Deir el @-@ Medina during the Twentieth dynasty of Egypt , quoted passages from the Middle Kingdom narratives Eloquent Peasant and Tale of the shipwrecked sailor in an instructional letter reprimanding his disobedient son . <unk> 's Ramesside contemporary Hori , the scribal author of the satirical letter in Papyrus Anastasi I , admonished his addressee for quoting the Instruction of Hardjedef in the unbecoming manner of a non @-@ scribal , semi @-@ educated person . Hans @-@ Werner Fischer @-@ <unk> further explains this perceived amateur affront to orthodox literature : 
 What may be revealed by Hori 's attack on the way in which some Ramesside scribes felt obliged to demonstrate their greater or lesser acquaintance with ancient literature is the conception that these venerable works were meant to be known in full and not to be misused as quarries for popular sayings mined deliberately from the past . The classics of the time were to be memorized completely and comprehended thoroughly before being cited . 
 There is scant but solid evidence in Egyptian literature and art for the practice of oral reading of texts to audiences . The oral performance word " to recite " ( <unk> ) was usually associated with biographies , letters , and spells . Singing ( <unk> ) was meant for praise songs , love songs , funerary laments , and certain spells . Discourses such as the Prophecy of Neferti suggest that compositions were meant for oral reading among elite gatherings . In the 1st millennium BC Demotic short story cycle centered on the deeds of <unk> , the stories begin with the phrase " The voice which is before Pharaoh " , which indicates that an oral speaker and audience was involved in the reading of the text . A fictional audience of high government officials and members of the royal court are mentioned in some texts , but a wider , non @-@ literate audience may have been involved . For example , a funerary stela of Senusret I ( r . 1971 – 1926 BC ) explicitly mentions people who will gather and listen to a scribe who " recites " the stela inscriptions out loud . 
 Literature also served religious purposes . Beginning with the Pyramid Texts of the Old Kingdom , works of funerary literature written on tomb walls , and later on coffins , and papyri placed within tombs , were designed to protect and nurture souls in their afterlife . This included the use of magical spells , incantations , and lyrical hymns . Copies of non @-@ funerary literary texts found in non @-@ royal tombs suggest that the dead could entertain themselves in the afterlife by reading these teaching texts and narrative tales . See also Egyptian influences in the Hebrew Bible . 
 Although the creation of literature was predominantly a male scribal pursuit , some works are thought to have been written by women . For example , several references to women writing letters and surviving private letters sent and received by women have been found . However , Edward F. Wente asserts that , even with explicit references to women reading letters , it is possible that women employed others to write documents . 
 = = Dating , setting , and authorship = = 
 Richard B. Parkinson and Ludwig D. Morenz write that ancient Egyptian literature — narrowly defined as belles @-@ lettres ( " beautiful writing " ) — was not recorded in written form until the early Twelfth dynasty of the Middle Kingdom . Old Kingdom texts served mainly to maintain the divine cults , preserve souls in the afterlife , and document accounts for practical uses in daily life . It was not until the Middle Kingdom that texts were written for the purpose of entertainment and intellectual curiosity . Parkinson and Morenz also speculate that written works of the Middle Kingdom were transcriptions of the oral literature of the Old Kingdom . It is known that some oral poetry was preserved in later writing ; for example , litter @-@ bearers ' songs were preserved as written verses in tomb inscriptions of the Old Kingdom . 
 Dating texts by methods of palaeography , the study of handwriting , is problematic because of differing styles of hieratic script . The use of orthography , the study of writing systems and symbol usage , is also problematic , since some texts ' authors may have copied the characteristic style of an older archetype . Fictional accounts were often set in remote historical settings , the use of contemporary settings in fiction being a relatively recent phenomenon . The style of a text provides little help in determining an exact date for its composition , as genre and authorial choice might be more concerned with the mood of a text than the era in which it was written . For example , authors of the Middle Kingdom could set fictional wisdom texts in the golden age of the Old Kingdom ( e.g. Kagemni , Ptahhotep , and the prologue of Neferti ) , or they could write fictional accounts placed in a chaotic age resembling more the problematic life of the First Intermediate Period ( e.g. Merykare and The Eloquent Peasant ) . Other fictional texts are set in illo tempore ( in an indeterminable era ) and usually contain timeless themes . 
 Parkinson writes that nearly all literary texts were pseudonymous , and frequently falsely attributed to well @-@ known male protagonists of earlier history , such as kings and viziers . Only the literary genres of " teaching " and " laments / discourses " contain works attributed to historical authors ; texts in genres such as " narrative tales " were never attributed to a well @-@ known historical person . Tait asserts that during the Classical Period of Egypt , " Egyptian scribes constructed their own view of the history of the role of scribes and of the ' authorship ' of texts " , but during the Late Period , this role was instead maintained by the religious elite attached to the temples . 
 There are a few exceptions to the rule of <unk> . The real authors of some Ramesside Period teaching texts were acknowledged , but these cases are rare , localized , and do not typify mainstream works . Those who wrote private and sometimes model letters were acknowledged as the original authors . Private letters could be used in courts of law as testimony , since a person 's unique handwriting could be identified as authentic . Private letters received or written by the pharaoh were sometimes inscribed in hieroglyphics on stone monuments to celebrate kingship , while kings ' decrees inscribed on stone stelas were often made public . 
 = = Literary genres and subjects = = 
 Modern Egyptologists categorize Egyptian texts into genres , for example " laments / discourses " and narrative tales . The only genre of literature named as such by the ancient Egyptians was the " teaching " or <unk> genre . Parkinson states that the titles of a work , its opening statement , or key words found in the body of text should be used as indicators of its particular genre . Only the genre of " narrative tales " employed prose , yet many of the works of that genre , as well as those of other genres , were written in verse . Most ancient Egyptian verses were written in couplet form , but sometimes triplets and quatrains were used . 
 = = = Instructions and teachings = = = 
 The " instructions " or " teaching " genre , as well as the genre of " reflective discourses " , can be grouped in the larger corpus of wisdom literature found in the ancient Near East . The genre is didactic in nature and is thought to have formed part of the Middle Kingdom scribal education syllabus . However , teaching texts often incorporate narrative elements that can instruct as well as entertain . Parkinson asserts that there is evidence that teaching texts were not created primarily for use in scribal education , but for ideological purposes . For example , Adolf Erman ( 1854 – 1937 ) writes that the fictional instruction given by Amenemhat I ( r . 1991 – 1962 BC ) to his sons " ... far exceeds the bounds of school philosophy , and there is nothing whatever to do with school in a great warning his children to be loyal to the king " . While narrative literature , embodied in works such as The Eloquent Peasant , emphasize the individual hero who challenges society and its accepted ideologies , the teaching texts instead stress the need to comply with society 's accepted dogmas . 
 Key words found in teaching texts include " to know " ( rh ) and " teach " ( <unk> ) . These texts usually adopt the formulaic title structure of " the instruction of X made for Y " , where " X " can be represented by an authoritative figure ( such as a vizier or king ) providing moral guidance to his son ( s ) . It is sometimes difficult to determine how many fictional addressees are involved in these teachings , since some texts switch between singular and plural when referring to their audiences . 
 Examples of the " teaching " genre include the Maxims of Ptahhotep , Instructions of Kagemni , Teaching for King Merykare , Instructions of Amenemhat , Instruction of Hardjedef , Loyalist Teaching , and Instructions of Amenemope . Teaching texts that have survived from the Middle Kingdom were written on papyrus manuscripts . No educational ostraca from the Middle Kingdom have survived . The earliest schoolboy 's wooden writing board , with a copy of a teaching text ( i.e. Ptahhotep ) , dates to the Eighteenth dynasty . Ptahhotep and Kagemni are both found on the <unk> Papyrus , which was written during the Twelfth dynasty of the Middle Kingdom . The entire Loyalist Teaching survives only in manuscripts from the New Kingdom , although the entire first half is preserved on a Middle Kingdom biographical stone stela commemorating the Twelfth dynasty official <unk> . Merykare , Amenemhat , and Hardjedef are genuine Middle Kingdom works , but only survive in later New Kingdom copies . Amenemope is a New Kingdom compilation . 
 = = = Narrative tales and stories = = = 
 The genre of " tales and stories " is probably the least represented genre from surviving literature of the Middle Kingdom and Middle Egyptian . In Late Egyptian literature , " tales and stories " comprise the majority of surviving literary works dated from the Ramesside Period of the New Kingdom into the Late Period . Major narrative works from the Middle Kingdom include the Tale of the Court of King Cheops , King Neferkare and General <unk> , The Eloquent Peasant , Story of Sinuhe , and Tale of the shipwrecked sailor . The New Kingdom corpus of tales includes the Quarrel of Apepi and Seqenenre , Taking of Joppa , Tale of the doomed prince , Tale of Two Brothers , and the Report of Wenamun . Stories from the 1st millennium BC written in Demotic include the story of the Famine Stela ( set in the Old Kingdom , although written during the Ptolemaic dynasty ) and short story cycles of the Ptolemaic and Roman periods that transform well @-@ known historical figures such as Khaemweset ( Nineteenth Dynasty ) and Inaros ( First Persian Period ) into fictional , legendary heroes . This is contrasted with many stories written in Late Egyptian , whose authors frequently chose divinities as protagonists and mythological places as settings . 
 Parkinson defines tales as " ... non @-@ commemorative , non @-@ functional , fictional narratives " that usually employ the key word " narrate " ( <unk> ) . He describes it as the most open @-@ ended genre , since the tales often incorporate elements of other literary genres . For example , Morenz describes the opening section of the foreign adventure tale Sinuhe as a " ... funerary self @-@ presentation " that parodies the typical autobiography found on commemorative funerary stelas . The autobiography is for a courier whose service began under Amenemhat I. Simpson states that the death of Amenemhat I in the report given by his son , coregent , and successor Senusret I ( r . 1971 – 1926 BC ) to the army in the beginning of Sinuhe is " ... excellent propaganda " . Morenz describes The shipwrecked sailor as an expeditionary report and a travel @-@ narrative myth . Simpson notes the literary device of the story within a story in The shipwrecked sailor may provide " ... the earliest examples of a narrative quarrying report " . With the setting of a magical desert island , and a character who is a talking snake , The shipwrecked sailor may also be classified as a fairy tale . While stories like Sinuhe , Taking of Joppa , and the Doomed prince contain fictional portrayals of Egyptians abroad , the Report of Wenamun is most likely based on a true account of an Egyptian who traveled to Byblos in Phoenicia to obtain cedar for shipbuilding during the reign of Ramesses XI . 
 Narrative tales and stories are most often found on papyri , but partial and sometimes complete texts are found on ostraca . For example , Sinuhe is found on five papyri composed during the Twelfth and Thirteenth dynasties . This text was later copied numerous times on ostraca during the Nineteenth and Twentieth dynasties , with one ostraca containing the complete text on both sides . 
 = = = <unk> , discourses , dialogues , and prophecies = = = 
 The Middle Kingdom genre of " prophetic texts " , also known as " laments " , " discourses " , " dialogues " , and " apocalyptic literature " , include such works as the Admonitions of Ipuwer , Prophecy of Neferti , and Dispute between a man and his Ba . This genre had no known precedent in the Old Kingdom and no known original compositions were produced in the New Kingdom . However , works like Prophecy of Neferti were frequently copied during the Ramesside Period of the New Kingdom , when this Middle Kingdom genre was canonized but discontinued . Egyptian prophetic literature underwent a revival during the Greek Ptolemaic dynasty and Roman period of Egypt with works such as the Demotic Chronicle , Oracle of the Lamb , Oracle of the Potter , and two prophetic texts that focus on Nectanebo II ( r . 360 – 343 BC ) as a protagonist . Along with " teaching " texts , these reflective discourses ( key word <unk> ) are grouped with the wisdom literature category of the ancient Near East . 
 In Middle Kingdom texts , connecting themes include a pessimistic outlook , descriptions of social and religious change , and great disorder throughout the land , taking the form of a syntactic " then @-@ now " verse formula . Although these texts are usually described as laments , Neferti digresses from this model , providing a positive solution to a problematic world . Although it survives only in later copies from the Eighteenth dynasty onward , Parkinson asserts that , due to obvious political content , Neferti was originally written during or shortly after the reign of Amenemhat I. Simpson calls it " ... a blatant political pamphlet designed to support the new regime " of the Twelfth dynasty founded by Amenemhat , who usurped the throne from the Mentuhotep line of the Eleventh dynasty . In the narrative discourse , Sneferu ( r . 2613 – <unk> BC ) of the Fourth dynasty summons to court the sage and lector priest Neferti . Neferti entertains the king with prophecies that the land will enter into a chaotic age , alluding to the First Intermediate Period , only to be restored to its former glory by a righteous king — <unk> — whom the ancient Egyptian would readily recognize as Amenemhat I. A similar model of a tumultuous world transformed into a golden age by a savior king was adopted for the Lamb and Potter , although for their audiences living under Roman domination , the savior was yet to come . 
 Although written during the Twelfth dynasty , Ipuwer only survives from a Nineteenth dynasty papyrus . However , A man and his Ba is found on an original Twelfth dynasty papyrus , Papyrus Berlin 3024 . These two texts resemble other discourses in style , tone , and subject matter , although they are unique in that the fictional audiences are given very active roles in the exchange of dialogue . In Ipuwer , a sage addresses an unnamed king and his attendants , describing the miserable state of the land , which he blames on the king 's inability to uphold royal virtues . This can be seen either as a warning to kings or as a legitimization of the current dynasty , contrasting it with the supposedly turbulent period that preceded it . In A man and his Ba , a man recounts for an audience a conversation with his ba ( a component of the Egyptian soul ) on whether to continue living in despair or to seek death as an escape from misery . 
 = = = Poems , songs , hymns , and afterlife texts = = = 
 The funerary stone slab stela was first produced during the early Old Kingdom . Usually found in mastaba tombs , they combined raised @-@ relief artwork with inscriptions bearing the name of the deceased , their official titles ( if any ) , and invocations . 
 Funerary poems were thought to preserve a monarch 's soul in death . The Pyramid Texts are the earliest surviving religious literature incorporating poetic verse . These texts do not appear in tombs or pyramids originating before the reign of Unas ( r . 2375 – 2345 BC ) , who had the Pyramid of Unas built at Saqqara . The Pyramid Texts are chiefly concerned with the function of preserving and nurturing the soul of the sovereign in the afterlife . This aim eventually included safeguarding both the sovereign and his subjects in the afterlife . A variety of textual traditions evolved from the original Pyramid Texts : the Coffin Texts of the Middle Kingdom , the so @-@ called Book of the Dead , Litany of Ra , and Amduat written on papyri from the New Kingdom until the end of ancient Egyptian civilization . 
 Poems were also written to celebrate kingship . For example , at the Precinct of Amun @-@ Re at Karnak , Thutmose III ( r . 1479 – 1425 BC ) of the Eighteenth dynasty erected a stela commemorating his military victories in which the gods bless Thutmose in poetic verse and ensure for him victories over his enemies . In addition to stone stelas , poems have been found on wooden writing boards used by schoolboys . Besides the glorification of kings , poems were written to honor various deities , and even the Nile . 
 Surviving hymns and songs from the Old Kingdom include the morning greeting hymns to the gods in their respective temples . A cycle of Middle @-@ Kingdom songs dedicated to Senusret III ( r . 1878 – 1839 BC ) have been discovered at El @-@ Lahun . Erman considers these to be secular songs used to greet the pharaoh at Memphis , while Simpson considers them to be religious in nature but affirms that the division between religious and secular songs is not very sharp . The Harper 's Song , the lyrics found on a tombstone of the Middle Kingdom and on Papyrus Harris 500 from the New Kingdom , was to be performed for dinner guests at formal banquets . 
 During the reign of Akhenaten ( r . 1353 – 1336 BC ) , the Great Hymn to the Aten — preserved in tombs of Amarna , including the tomb of Ay — was written to the Aten , the sun @-@ disk deity given exclusive patronage during his reign . Simpson compares this composition 's wording and sequence of ideas to those of Psalm 104 . 
 Only a single poetic hymn in the Demotic script has been preserved . However , there are many surviving examples of Late @-@ Period Egyptian hymns written in hieroglyphs on temple walls . 
 No Egyptian love song has been dated from before the New Kingdom , these being written in Late Egyptian , although it is speculated that they existed in previous times . Erman compares the love songs to the Song of Songs , citing the labels " sister " and " brother " that lovers used to address each other . 
 = = = Private letters , model letters , and epistles = = = 
 The ancient Egyptian model letters and epistles are grouped into a single literary genre . Papyrus rolls sealed with mud stamps were used for long @-@ distance letters , while ostraca were frequently used to write shorter , non @-@ confidential letters sent to recipients located nearby . Letters of royal or official correspondence , originally written in hieratic , were sometimes given the exalted status of being inscribed on stone in hieroglyphs . The various texts written by schoolboys on wooden writing boards include model letters . Private letters could be used as epistolary model letters for schoolboys to copy , including letters written by their teachers or their families . However , these models were rarely featured in educational manuscripts ; instead fictional letters found in numerous manuscripts were used . The common epistolary formula used in these model letters was " The official A. saith to the scribe B " . 
 The oldest @-@ known private letters on papyrus were found in a funerary temple dating to the reign of Djedkare @-@ Izezi ( r . 2414 – 2375 BC ) of the Fifth dynasty . More letters are dated to the Sixth dynasty , when the epistle subgenre began . The educational text Book of <unk> , dated to the Eleventh dynasty , contains a list of epistolary greetings and a narrative with an ending in letter form and suitable terminology for use in commemorative biographies . Other letters of the early Middle Kingdom have also been found to use epistolary formulas similar to the Book of <unk> . The <unk> papyri , written by a gentleman farmer , date to the Eleventh dynasty and represent some of the lengthiest private letters known to have been written in ancient Egypt . 
 During the late Middle Kingdom , greater standardization of the epistolary formula can be seen , for example in a series of model letters taken from dispatches sent to the Semna fortress of Nubia during the reign of Amenemhat III ( r . 1860 – 1814 BC ) . Epistles were also written during all three dynasties of the New Kingdom . While letters to the dead had been written since the Old Kingdom , the writing of petition letters in epistolary form to deities began in the Ramesside Period , becoming very popular during the Persian and Ptolemaic periods . 
 The epistolary Satirical Letter of Papyrus Anastasi I written during the Nineteenth dynasty was a pedagogical and didactic text copied on numerous ostraca by schoolboys . Wente describes the versatility of this epistle , which contained " ... proper greetings with wishes for this life and the next , the rhetoric composition , interpretation of aphorisms in wisdom literature , application of mathematics to engineering problems and the calculation of supplies for an army , and the geography of western Asia " . Moreover , Wente calls this a " ... polemical tractate " that counsels against the rote , mechanical learning of terms for places , professions , and things ; for example , it is not acceptable to know just the place names of western Asia , but also important details about its topography and routes . To enhance the teaching , the text employs sarcasm and irony . 
 = = = Biographical and autobiographical texts = = = 
 Catherine Parke , Professor Emerita of English and Women 's Studies at the University of Missouri in Columbia , Missouri , writes that the earliest " commemorative inscriptions " belong to ancient Egypt and date to the 3rd millennium BC . She writes : " In ancient Egypt the formulaic accounts of Pharaoh 's lives praised the continuity of dynastic power . Although typically written in the first person , these pronouncements are public , general testimonials , not personal utterances . " She adds that as in these ancient inscriptions , the human urge to " ... celebrate , commemorate , and immortalize , the impulse of life against death " , is the aim of biographies written today . 
 Olivier Perdu , a professor of Egyptology at the Collège de France , states that biographies did not exist in ancient Egypt , and that commemorative writing should be considered autobiographical . Edward L. Greenstein , Professor of Bible at the Tel Aviv University and Bar @-@ Ilan University , disagrees with Perdu 's terminology , stating that the ancient world produced no " autobiographies " in the modern sense , and these should be distinguished from ' autobiographical ' texts of the ancient world . However , both Perdu and Greenstein assert that autobiographies of the ancient Near East should not be equated with the modern concept of autobiography . 
 In her discussion of the Ecclesiastes of the Hebrew Bible , Jennifer Koosed , associate professor of Religion at Albright College , explains that there is no solid consensus among scholars as to whether true biographies or autobiographies existed in the ancient world . One of the major scholarly arguments against this theory is that the concept of individuality did not exist until the European Renaissance , prompting Koosed to write " ... thus autobiography is made a product of European civilization : Augustine begat Rosseau begat Henry Adams , and so on " . Koosed asserts that the use of first @-@ person " I " in ancient Egyptian commemorative funerary texts should not be taken literally since the supposed author is already dead . Funerary texts should be considered biographical instead of autobiographical . Koosed cautions that the term " biography " applied to such texts is problematic , since they also usually describe the deceased person 's experiences of journeying through the afterlife . 
 Beginning with the funerary stelas for officials of the late Third dynasty , small amounts of biographical detail were added next to the deceased men 's titles . However , it was not until the Sixth dynasty that narratives of the lives and careers of government officials were inscribed . Tomb biographies became more detailed during the Middle Kingdom , and included information about the deceased person 's family . The vast majority of autobiographical texts are dedicated to scribal bureaucrats , but during the New Kingdom some were dedicated to military officers and soldiers . Autobiographical texts of the Late Period place a greater stress upon seeking help from deities than acting righteously to succeed in life . Whereas earlier autobiographical texts exclusively dealt with celebrating successful lives , Late Period autobiographical texts include laments for premature death , similar to the epitaphs of ancient Greece . 
 = = = Decrees , chronicles , king lists , and histories = = = 
 Modern historians consider that some biographical — or autobiographical — texts are important historical documents . For example , the biographical stelas of military generals in tomb chapels built under Thutmose III provide much of the information known about the wars in Syria and Palestine . However , the annals of Thutmose III , carved into the walls of several monuments built during his reign , such as those at Karnak , also preserve information about these campaigns . The annals of Ramesses II ( r . 1279 – 1213 BC ) , recounting the Battle of Kadesh against the Hittites include , for the first time in Egyptian literature , a narrative epic poem , distinguished from all earlier poetry , which served to celebrate and instruct . 
 Other documents useful for investigating Egyptian history are ancient lists of kings found in terse chronicles , such as the Fifth dynasty Palermo stone . These documents legitimated the contemporary pharaoh 's claim to sovereignty . Throughout ancient Egyptian history , royal decrees recounted the deeds of ruling pharaohs . For example , the Nubian pharaoh Piye ( r . 752 – 721 BC ) , founder of the Twenty @-@ fifth dynasty , had a stela erected and written in classical Middle Egyptian that describes with unusual nuances and vivid imagery his successful military campaigns . 
 An Egyptian historian , known by his Greek name as Manetho ( c . 3rd century BC ) , was the first to compile a comprehensive history of Egypt . Manetho was active during the reign of Ptolemy II ( r . 283 – 246 BC ) and used The Histories by the Greek Herodotus ( c . 484 BC – c . 425 BC ) as his main source of inspiration for a history of Egypt written in Greek . However , the primary sources for Manetho 's work were the king list chronicles of previous Egyptian dynasties . 
 = = = Tomb and temple graffiti = = = 
 Fischer @-@ <unk> distinguishes ancient Egyptian graffiti writing as a literary genre . During the New Kingdom , scribes who traveled to ancient sites often left graffiti messages on the walls of sacred mortuary temples and pyramids , usually in commemoration of these structures . Modern scholars do not consider these scribes to have been mere tourists , but pilgrims visiting sacred sites where the extinct cult centers could be used for communicating with the gods . There is evidence from an educational ostracon found in the tomb of Senenmut ( <unk> ) that formulaic graffiti writing was practiced in scribal schools . In one graffiti message , left at the mortuary temple of Thutmose III at Deir el @-@ Bahri , a modified saying from The Maxims of Ptahhotep is incorporated into a prayer written on the temple wall . Scribes usually wrote their graffiti in separate clusters to distinguish their graffiti from others ' . This led to competition among scribes , who would sometimes denigrate the quality of graffiti inscribed by others , even ancestors from the scribal profession . 
 = = Legacy , translation and interpretation = = 
 After the Copts converted to Christianity in the first centuries AD , their Coptic Christian literature became separated from the pharaonic and Hellenistic literary traditions . Nevertheless , scholars speculate that ancient Egyptian literature , perhaps in oral form , influenced Greek and Arabic literature . Parallels are drawn between the Egyptian soldiers sneaking into Jaffa hidden in baskets to capture the city in the story Taking of Joppa and the Mycenaean Greeks sneaking into Troy inside the Trojan Horse . The Taking of Joppa has also been compared to the Arabic story of Ali Baba in One Thousand and One Nights . It has been conjectured that Sinbad the Sailor may have been inspired by the pharaonic Tale of the shipwrecked sailor . Some Egyptian literature was commented on by scholars of the ancient world . For example , the Jewish Roman historian Josephus ( 37 – c . 100 AD ) quoted and provided commentary on Manetho 's historical texts . 
 The most recently carved hieroglyphic inscription of ancient Egypt known today is found in a temple of Philae , dated precisely to 394 AD during the reign of Theodosius I ( r . 379 – 395 AD ) . In the 4th century AD , the Hellenized Egyptian <unk> compiled a survey of almost two hundred Egyptian hieroglyphs and provided his interpretation of their meanings , although his understanding was limited and he was unaware of the phonetic uses of each hieroglyph . This survey was apparently lost until 1415 , when the Italian Cristoforo Buondelmonti acquired it at the island of Andros . Athanasius Kircher ( 1601 – 1680 ) was the first in Europe to realize that Coptic was a direct linguistic descendant of ancient Egyptian . In his Oedipus <unk> , he made the first concerted European effort to interpret the meaning of Egyptian hieroglyphs , albeit based on symbolic inferences . 
 It was not until 1799 , with the Napoleonic discovery of a trilingual ( i.e. hieroglyphic , Demotic , Greek ) stela inscription on the Rosetta Stone , that modern scholars were able to decipher ancient Egyptian literature . The first major effort to translate the hieroglyphs of the Rosetta Stone was made by Jean @-@ François Champollion ( 1790 – 1832 ) in 1822 . The earliest translation efforts of Egyptian literature during the 19th century were attempts to confirm Biblical events . 
 Before the 1970s , scholarly consensus was that ancient Egyptian literature — although sharing similarities with modern literary categories — was not an independent discourse , uninfluenced by the ancient sociopolitical order . However , from the 1970s onwards , a growing number of historians and literary scholars have questioned this theory . While scholars before the 1970s treated ancient Egyptian literary works as viable historical sources that accurately reflected the conditions of this ancient society , scholars now caution against this approach . Scholars are increasingly using a multifaceted hermeneutic approach to the study of individual literary works , in which not only the style and content , but also the cultural , social and historical context of the work are taken into account . Individual works can then be used as case studies for reconstructing the main features of ancient Egyptian literary discourse . 
 = Music of Barbados = 
 The music of Barbados includes distinctive national styles of folk and popular music , including elements of Western classical and religious music . The culture of Barbados is a syncretic mix of African and British elements , and the island 's music reflects this mix through song types and styles , instrumentation , dances , and aesthetic principles . 
 Barbadian folk traditions include the Landship movement , which is a satirical , informal organization based on the British navy , tea meetings , tuk bands and numerous traditional songs and dances . In modern Barbados , popular styles include calypso , spouge , contemporary folk and world music . Barbados is , along with Guadeloupe , Martinique , Trinidad , Cuba , Puerto Rico , and the Virgin Islands , one of the few centers for Caribbean jazz . 
 = = Characteristics and musical identity = = 
 Bajan culture is syncretic , and the island 's musical culture is perceived as a mixture of African and British musics , with certain unique elements that may derive from indigenous sources . Tension between African and British culture has long been a major element of Bajan history , and has included the banning of certain African @-@ derived practices and black Barbadian parodies of British traditions . Simple entertainment is the basis for most Barbadians ' participation in music and dance activities , though religious and other functional musics also occur . Barbadian folk culture declined in importance in the 20th century , but then rekindled in the 1970s , when many Barbadians became interested in their national culture and history . This change was heralded by the arrival of spouge , a popular national genre that reflects Barbadian heritage and African origins ; spouge helped kindle a resurgence in national pride , and became viewed as Barbados ' answer to the popular Caribbean genres reggae and calypso from Jamaica and Trinidad , respectively . 
 The religious music of the Barbadian Christian churches plays an important role in Barbadian musical identity , especially in urban areas . Many distinctive Barbadian musical and other cultural traditions derive from parodies of Anglican church hymns and British military drills . The British military performed drills to both provide security for the island 's population , as well as intimidate slaves . Modern Barbadian tea meetings , tuk bands , the Landship tradition and many folk songs come from slaves parodying the practices of white authorities . British @-@ Barbadians used music for cultural and intellectual enrichment and to feel a sense of kinship and connection with the British Isles through the maintenance of British musical forms . Plantation houses featured music as entertainment at balls , dances and other gatherings . For Afro @-@ Barbadians , drum , vocal and dance music was an integral part of everyday life , and songs and performance practices were created for normal , everyday events , as well as special celebrations like Whitsuntide , Christmas , Easter , Landship and Crop Over . These songs remain a part of Barbadian culture and form a rich folk repertoire . 
 Western classical music is the most socially accepted form of musical expression for Barbadians in Bridgetown , including a variety of vocal music , chamber and orchestral music , and piano and violin . Along with hymns , oratorios , cantatas and other religious music , chamber music of the Western tradition remains an important part of Barbadian music through an integral role in the services of the Anglican church . 
 = = History = = 
 Though inhabited prior to the 16th century , little is known about Barbadian music before the arrival of the Portuguese in 1536 and then the English in 1627 . The Portuguese left little influence , but English culture and music helped shape the island 's heritage . Irish and Scottish settlers emigrated in the 17th century , working in the tobacco industry , bringing still more new music to the island . The middle of the 17th century saw the decline of the tobacco industry and the rise of sugarcane , as well as the introduction of large numbers of African slaves . Brazilian exiles however , along with sugarcane introduced Samba to the island which featured a mixture of Latin music with African influences which soon developed into Soca @-@ Samba which is indigenous to Barbados . Modern Barbadian music is thus largely a combination of English and African elements , with Irish , Scottish , and modern American and Caribbean ( especially Jamaican ) influences as well . 
 By the 19th century , the Barbadian colonialists grew to fear slave revolts , and specifically , the use of music as a tool of communication and planning for revolution . As a result , the government passed laws to restrict musical activities among slaves . At the same time , American and other forms of imported music were brought to Barbados , while many important elements of modern Barbadian music , like tuk bands , also emerged . In the 20th century , many new styles were imported to Barbados , most influentially including jazz , ska , reggae , calypso and soca . Barbados became home to many performers of these new genres , especially soca and calypso , while the island also produced an indigenous style called spouge , which became an important symbol of Barbadian identity . 
 = = Folk music = = 
 Barbadian culture and music are mixtures of European and African elements , with minimal influence from the indigenous peoples of the island , about whom little is known . Significant numbers of Asian , specifically Chinese and Japanese , people have moved to Barbados , but their music is unstudied and has had little impact on Barbadian music . 
 The earliest reference to Afro @-@ Barbadian music may come from a description of a slave rebellion , in which the rebels were inspired to fight by music played on skin drums , conch trumpets and animal horns . Slavery continued , however , and the colonial and slaveowning authorities eventually outlawed musical instruments among slaves . By the end of the 17th century , a distinctly Barbadian folk culture developed , based around influences and instruments from Africa , Britain and other Caribbean islands . 
 Early Barbadian folk music , despite legal restrictions , was a major part of life among the island 's slave population . For the slaves , music was " essential for recreation and dancing and as a part of the life cycle for communication and religious meaning " . African musicians also provided the music for the white landowners ' private parties , while the slaves developed their own party music , culminating in the crop over festival , which began in 1688 . The earliest crop over festivals featured dancing and call @-@ and @-@ response singing accompanied by shak @-@ shak , banjo , bones and bottles containing varying amounts of water . 
 = = = Folk song = = = 
 Barbadian traditional folk songs are heavily influenced by the music of England . Many traditional songs concern events current at the time of their composition , such as the emancipation of the slaves of Barbados , and the coronations of Victoria , George V , and Elizabeth II ; this song tradition dates back to 1650 . The most influential Barbadian folk songs are associated with the island 's lower @-@ class laborers , who have held on to their folk heritage . 
 Some Barbadian songs and stories made their way back to England , most famously " <unk> the English Sailor " and " <unk> the Indian Maid " , which became English plays and an opera by George Coleman with music by Samuel Arnold , and first performed in London in 1787 . 
 Contemporary Barbadian folk songs , especially through the pioneering albums of author and singer @-@ songwriter Anthony Kellman , show a bold fusion of indigenous rhythms such as tuk and calypso with African , Latin , jazz , pop , and East Indian influences . Kellman 's songs such as " Mountain " ( from 2000 album " Wings of A Stranger " ) ; " King Jaja " and " My Dog , Your Dog " ( from 2005 album " Limestone " ) ; and " If You See My Girl " and " Tuk , Tabla , and <unk> " ( from 2009 album Blood Mates ) , exemplify his eclectic style . More than any of his contemporaries , Kellman , through his songs , poems , and novels , demonstrates what it means to be Barbadian through a hybrid mix of African and European cultural elements . ≤ [ 25 ] 
 = = = Dance = = = 
 Barbadian folk dances include a wide variety of styles , performed at Landship , holidays and other occasions . Dancers and other performers at the crop over festivals , for example , are popular and an iconic part of Barbadian culture , known for dancing in the costumes of sugarcane @-@ cutters . The Landship movement features song and dance meant to imitate the passage of a British navy ship through rough seas ; Landship and other occasions also feature African @-@ derived improvised and complexly @-@ rhythmic dances , and British hornpipes , jigs , maypole dances and Marches . 
 The Jean and Johnnie dance was an important part of Barbadian culture until it was banned in the 19th century . This was a popular fertility dance performed outdoors at plantation fairs and other festivals , and was functional in that it allowed women to show off to men , and more rarely , vice versa . The dance was eventually banned because the dance was associated with non @-@ Christian African traditions . 
 = = = Instrumentation = = = 
 The Barbadian folk tradition is home to a great variety of musical instruments , imported from Africa , Great Britain or other Caribbean islands . The most central instrument group in Barbadian culture is the percussion instruments . These include numerous drums , among them the pump and the tum tum , made from a hollowed @-@ out tree trunk , the side snare drum and a double @-@ headed bass drum of tuk bands . Folk musicians also use gongs made from tree trunks , bones , rook jaw , triangle , cymbals , bottles filled with water , and xylophones . Rattles are also widespread , and include the pan @-@ Antillean shak @-@ shak and the calabash , de shot and rattle . More recently imported folk percussion instruments include the conga and bongo from Puerto Rico , Dominican Republic and Cuba , and the tambourine . 
 String and wind instruments play an important role in Barbadian folk culture , especially the bow @-@ fiddle , banjo and acoustic guitar ; more modern groups also use an electric and bass guitar . The <unk> is a distinctive instrument , made by stretching a guitar string between two sides of a house . Traditional Barbadian wind instruments are largely metal , but in their folk origins , were made out of locally found materials . Barbadian villagers burned <unk> , for example , on bamboo tubes , made trumpets out of conch shells and pipes from pumpkin vines . Many modern groups use harmonica , accordion , alto and tenor saxophone , trumpet and trombone . 
 = = = Religious music = = = 
 Though Western classical and other musics play an important role in Anglican church services on Barbados , religion and folk music are closely intertwined in the everyday lives of most Barbadians . The basis for religious folk music is the Anglican hymn , a kind of praise song mostly sung on Sundays , a day when Christian Barbadians come together with family members to sing and praise God to ask for strength for the next week 's work . 
 Pentecostal music has become a part of Barbadian religious and musical traditions since the 1920s . Music plays a role in Pentecostal ceremonies , and is provided by emotional and improvised performances accompanied tambourines . In addition to the Anglican and Pentecostal traditions , Rastafarian music has spread to the island in more recent years , along with African American musical forms , especially gospel , and the Spiritual Baptist religion , which derives from the Trinidadian Shango cult that spread to Barbados in the 1960s . One of the more Internationally known religious music groups from Barbados are The <unk> of Barbados . 
 = = = Holidays , festivals and other celebrations = = = 
 A number of holidays , festivals and other celebrations play an integral role in Barbadian folk , and popular , music . Whitsuntide , Christmas , and Easter are important , each associated with their own musical traditions , as are distinctly Barbadian festivities like the crop over festival and the Landship movement . 
 The original crop over festival celebrated the end of the sugarcane harvest . These festivals were held in the great house of the plantations , and included both slaves and plantation managers . Celebrations included drinking competitions , feasting , song and dance , and climbing a greased pole . Musical accompaniment was provided by triangle , fiddle , drums and a guitar , played by slave entertainers . Crop over festivals continue to play a part of Barbadian culture , and always feature music by performers in sugarcane @-@ cutting costumes , even though many modern performers are not themselves sugarcane @-@ cutters . 
 The Barbadian Landship movement is an informal entertainment organization which mocks , through mimicry and satire , the British navy . Landship began in 1837 , founded by an individual known variously as Moses Ward and Moses Wood , in Britton 's Hall in Seamen 's Village . The structure of the Landship organization mirrors the structure of the British navy , with a " ship " which is connected to a " dock " ( a wooden house similar to a chattel house ) , and leaders known as Lord High Admiral , Captain , Boatswain and other navy ranks . Each unit is named like a typical navy ship and may include actual names of British ships or places . Landship performances symbolize and reflect the passage of ships through rough seas . Parades , jigs , hornpipes , maypole dances and other music and dance types are a part of the Landship Society 's celebrations . The Council of the Barbados Landship Association regulates the movement . 
 Barbadian Christmas music is mostly based on church and concert hall performances , where typical North American Christmas carols are performed , such as " White Christmas " and " Silver Bells " , alongside works by English composers like William Byrd , Henry Walford Davies and Thomas Tallis . In more recent years , calypso , reggae and other new elements have become a part of local Christmas traditions . As recently as the 1960s , Barbados was home to a distinctive practice , in which scrubbers traveled from house to house singing hymns and receiving rewards from households . 
 = = = Tuk bands and tea meetings = = = 
 Tuk bands are Barbadian musical ensembles , consisting of a bow @-@ fiddle or pennywhistle flute , <unk> triangle and a snare and double @-@ headed bass drum . The <unk> and bass drum provide the rhythm , while the flute gives the melody . The drums are light @-@ weight so they can be carried easily , and are made by both rural villagers and drummers using cured sheepskin and goatskin . Tuk bands are based on the British military 's regimental bands , which played for many years for special occasions , like visiting royalty and coronations . The tuk sound has evolved over the years , as has the instrumentation , with the bow @-@ fiddle used before being most commonly replaced by the pennywhistle flute . Tuk bands are now most common in Landship events , but are still sometimes independent . On their own , tuk bands are generally accompanied by a range of iconic Barbadian characters , including " shaggy bears " , " mother sally " , " the steel donkey " and " green monkeys " . The upbeat modern sound of tuk ensembles are a distinctly Barbadian blend of African and British musics . 
 Tea meetings are celebrations held in society lodges or school halls , and feature both solo and group performance , theatrical rhetoric and oratory , and other activities . After declining following World War I , tea meetings have recently been revived and have regained their widespread popularity . They are held at nighttime , beginning at 9 : 00 pm and continuing until midnight , when there is a two @-@ hour break for food and drink before the tea meeting is resumed . 
 = = Popular music = = 
 Barbados has produced few internationally popular musicians , with worldwide pop superstar Rihanna being the most famous . It has however created a well @-@ developed local scene playing imported styles like American jazz and calypso , as well as the indigenous spouge style . Calypso was the first popular music in Barbados , and dates back to the 1930s . Barbadian calypso is a comedic song form , accompanied by guitar and banjo . More recent styles of calypso have also kept a local scene alive , and produced a number of famous calypsonians . Spouge is a mixture of calypso and other styles , especially ska , and became very popular in the 1960s , around the same time as the Barbadian jazz scene grew in stature and became home to a number of famous performers . Modern Barbadian popular music is largely based around reggae , ragga and soca , and includes some elements of indigenous styles . Artists like <unk> Coward have used modern popular music with instrumentation borrowed from folk tuk bands . Two of the more popular bands of Barbadian popular music are <unk> and Square One [ now defunct ] ; the new wave of singers , largely soca , include Rupee , Lil ' Rick and <unk> with lead vocalist Bruce and Barry Chandler , all recent winners at crop over . A more experimental artist such as poet and fiction writer Anthony Kellman writes thoughtful poetic lyrics delivered in a musical style deeply rooted in Barbadian indigenous folk music with strong elements of African and Latin influences . His albums Wings of a Stranger , Limestone , and Blood Mates have been described as groundbreaking due to his highly original style . 
 = = Calypso = = 
 Prior to the 1930s , Barbadian calypso was called <unk> , and was performed by laborers in village @-@ <unk> areas . Itinerant minstrels like Mighty Jerry , Shilling Agard and Slammer were well @-@ known forerunners of modern Barbadian calypso . Their song tradition embraced sentimentality , humor , and opinionated lyrics that continued to the 1960s , often by then accompanied by guitar or banjo . 
 The mid @-@ 20th century brought new forms of music from Trinidad , Brazil , the United States , Cuba and the Dominican Republic to Barbados , and the Barbadian calypso style came to be viewed as lowbrow or inferior . Promoters like Lord Silvers and Mighty Dragon , however , kept the popular tradition alive through shows at the Globe Theatre , featuring pioneers Mighty Romeo , Sir Don Marshall , Lord Radio and the <unk> Boys and Mike Wilkinson . These performers set the stage for the development of popular Barbadian calypso in the 1960s . 
 In the early 1960s , Barbadian calypso grew in popularity and stature , led by Viper , Mighty Gabby and The Merrymen . The first calypso competitions were held in 1960 , and they quickly grew larger and more prominent . The Merrymen became the island 's most prominent contribution to calypso by the 1970s and into the 80s . Their style , known as blue beat , incorporated Barbadian folk songs and ballads , as well as American blues , country music , and a distinctive sound created by harmonica , guitar and banjo . 
 By the beginning of the 1980s , <unk> , a form of stage @-@ presented calypso pioneered in Trinidad , was widespread at crop over and other celebrations . The foundation of the National Cultural Foundation in 1984 helped to promote and administer calypso festivals , which attracted tourists , stimulating the calypso industry . As a result , calypso has become a very visible and iconic part of Barbadian culture , and some calypsonians have become internationally renowned , including Mighty Gabby and Red Plastic Bag . 
 = = = Spouge = = = 
 Spouge is a style of Barbadian popular music created by Jackie Opel in the 1960s . It is primarily a fusion of Jamaican ska with Trinidadian calypso , but is also influenced by a wide variety of musics from the British Isles and United States , include sea shanties , hymns and spirituals . Spouge instrumentation originally consisted of cowbell , bass guitar , trap set and various other electronic and percussion instruments , later augmented by saxophone , trombone and trumpets . Of these , the cowbell and the guitar are widely seen as the most integral part of the instrumentation , and are said to reflect the African origin of much of Barbadian music . 
 Two different kinds of spouge were popular in the 1960s , raw spouge ( Draytons Two style ) and dragon spouge ( Cassius Clay style ) . The spouge industry grew immensely by the end of the 1970s , and produced popular stars like Blue Rhythm Combo , the Draytons Two and The Troubadours . Recent years has seen a resurgence of interest in spouge among some quarters , with people like Desmond Weekes of the Draytons Two indicating that spouge should be encouraged because it is a national form that can reach international audiences and inspire the nation 's pride in their cultural heritage . 
 = = = Jazz = = = 
 Jazz is a genre of music from the United States which reached Barbados by the end of the 1920s . The first major performer from the island was Lionel Gittens , who was followed by Percy Green , Maggie Goodridge and Clevie Gittens . These bandleaders played a variety of music , including swing , a kind of pop @-@ jazz , Barbadian calypso and waltzes . With little recorded music on the island , radio broadcasts such as Willis Conover 's Voice of America had a major influence . In 1937 , riots over poverty and disenfranchisement occurred , and people like Clement Payne had risen to fame advocating reform . In that year , Payne was deported and riots broke out in Bridgetown , spreading throughout the island . The following year , the Barbados Labour Party was formed by C. A. Braithwaite and Grantley Adams . 
 As political awareness among the black majority on the island spread , so did bebop , a kind of jazz which was associated , in the United States , with social activism and Afrocentrism . The first Barbadian bebop musician from the island was Keith Campbell , a pianist who had learned to play many styles while living in Trinidad during a time when American soldiers were stationed there , providing a ready market for bands that could play American music . Other musicians of this period included Ernie Small , a trumpeter and pianist , and bandleader St. Clare Jackman . 
 In the 1950s , R & B and rock and roll became popular on the island , and many jazz bands found themselves pushed aside . A wave of Guyanese musicians also appeared on the island , including Colin Dyall , a saxophonist who later joined the Police Band , and the <unk> Gilkes Quartet . Though mainstream audiences were still listening to R & B and rock , modern jazz retained a small core of followers into the 1960s . The foundation of the Belair Jazz Club in Bridgetown in 1961 helped to keep this scene alive . With independence in 1966 came a focus on black Barbadian culture , and music like calypso , reggae and spouge , rather than the preoccupation with British standards of musical development . Calypso jazz arose during this period , pioneered by groups like the Schofield Pilgrim . The genre had developed by 1965 , when original works like " <unk> Morning " and " Calypso Lament " were composed . Artists like the pianist Adrian Clarke became popular during the 60s as well . 
 In the early 1970s , jazz fan and critic Carl Moore launched a project to keep jazz alive on the island , while Zanda Alexander 's performance in Bridgetown in 1972 is said to be the first Caribbean jazz festival . Oscar Peterson 's 1976 performance in Trinidad also inspired Barbadian musicians , as did the radio program Jazz Jam , which was broadcast starting in the mid @-@ 70s on the Caribbean Broadcast Corporation . In 1983 , however , the Belair Jazz Club closed , and was not replaced by any long @-@ term clubs . Later in the 1980s , jazz declined greatly in popularity , though The National Cultural foundation organized the International Barbados / Caribbean Jazz Festival , which after a brief hiatus due to lack of sponsorship was resurrected by Gilbert Rowe of GMR international tours . Other performances were organized by a group called the Friends of Jazz . More jazz calypso fusion musicians appeared on the scene during this period , including Arturo Tappin , Nicholas Brancker , Andre Woodvine and Raf Robertson . 
 = = = Rock = = = 
 Rock music is alive and well in Barbados , there have been several bands through the years that perform alternative , rock and even metal music . Most recently the Alt / Rock / Metal band Standing Penance formed in 2009 . The band continues to operate in present @-@ day and is the only act of this genre to be signed to an American record label . 
 = = Education and musicology = = 
 Academic study of Barbadian music remains limited . Some song collections and other activities have been conducted , but there remain significant holes in scholarship , such as the musics of recent immigrants from China and India , who presumably have brought with them styles of Indian and Chinese musics . Due to a lack of archaeological and historical records , the island 's indigenous music is unknown . Since the 1970s , an increase in general interest in Barbadian culture has spurred greater study of music , and given an incentive to radio and television stations to create and maintain archives of cultural practices . 
 On modern Barbados , oral transmission remains the primary mode of music education , and there are few opportunities for most people to become formally educated in music of any kind . The elders of the island , who are the most educated in oral traditions , are held in high esteem due to their knowledge of folk culture . Modern Barbados is home to several institutions of musical education . There are dedicated schools for ballet : Dance Place and the Liz Mahon Dancers . A number of schools sponsor orchestras , <unk> and tuk bands , including the St. Lucy Secondary School Steel Orchestra . Music is a part of the curriculum for early childhood as well as primary and secondary education . The Barbados Community College has an associate degree programme in music . However , the University of the West Indies , though it has a campus on Barbados , does not offer degree programs in music . As a matter of fact , only recently has the University started offering students the opportunity to pursue a minor in music . 
 = = Music institutions and festivals = = 
 The main music festival in Barbados is crop over , which is celebrated with song , dance , calypso tent competitions and parades , especially leading up to the first Monday in August , <unk> Day . The crop over festival celebrates the end of the sugarcane harvest , and is inaugurated by the ritual delivery of the last of the harvest on a cart pulled by mules . The champion sugarcane workers are crowned King and Queen for the event . In addition to crop over , music plays an important role in many other Barbadian holidays and festivals . The Easter <unk> Fish Festival , for example features a street party with music to celebrate the signing of the Charter of Barbados and the fishing industry of the island , and the <unk> Festival , which commemorates the arrival of the first settlers in 1627 . 
 The annual December Classical / Pops Festival comprises an all @-@ star orchestra accompanied by pop and rock stars , Broadway performers , opera singers , and film composers as featured guests . Opera , cabaret and sports are a major part of the Easter Holders Season . On 30 November , the Barbadian Independence Day , military bands in parades play marches , <unk> and other popular songs . This is preceded for several weeks by the National Independence Festival of Creative Arts . The National Independence Festival of Creative Arts and Crop Over are two of the festivals sponsored by the National Cultural Foundation ( NCF ) ; the other is <unk> , a recently organized street party that begins in April and ends on May Day . NCF also assists with the <unk> Opera Season , <unk> Fish Festival , <unk> Festival and the B <unk> Jazz Festival . 
 Other major musical institutions in Barbados include the Barbados Chamber Orchestra and the Cavite Choral . There are also dance and ballet groups known as Dance National Afrique , Barbados Dance Theatre Company , Dance Strides , The Dance Place and Dancing Africa . The island 's music industry is home to several recording studios , the largest being Blue Wave , a 48 @-@ track system , and Paradise Alley , a 24 @-@ track system . Others include Chambers ' Studio , Gray Lizard Productions and Ocean Lab Studios . 
 = Brazilian Dreams = 
 Brazilian Dreams is a live album by Cuban jazz performer Paquito D 'Rivera . It was recorded at the Manchester Craftsmen 's Guild in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , between April 26 and 29 , 2001 , and released by MCG Jazz on August 27 , 2002 . The album features guest performances by the American vocal group New York Voices and trumpeter Claudio Roditi . In the United States , it peaked at number 22 on Billboard 's Top Jazz Albums chart . 
 Produced by Jay Ashby , the album features seven songs written by Brazilian performers including Antônio Carlos Jobim , Luiz Bonfá , João Donato and Caetano Veloso , and three original songs , and was conceived as a tribute to the music of Brazil of which D 'Rivera has always been an admirer . Brazilian Dreams received mixed reviews by critics , some praising the performers and the musical selection , and others being critical about the lack of improvement on the arrangements on the classic songs of the genre included . The album earned D 'Rivera the Latin Grammy Award for Best Latin Jazz Album . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 Cuban saxophonist and clarinet player Paquito D 'Rivera decided to record an album paying tribute to Brazilian music after being invited by several Brazilian performers to play their native music . D 'Rivera also featured in Americanos : Latino Life in the United States , a 2000 documentary produced by American actor Edward James Olmos , representing Brazil . " I feel a great passion for the culture and music of Brazil , and it gives me pleasure to declare publicly that my heart is half Brazilian , " D 'Rivera declared on his autobiography My Sax Life ( 2005 ) . The album features the American group New York Voices since D 'Rivera has always been an admirer of vocal quartets and wanted to " kill two birds with one stone " . He further explained that in Cuba " musicians listened to radio stations from Miami mostly for the jingles sung by gringo vocal groups . " Brazilian Dreams was released by MCG Jazz on August 27 , 2002 and was the tenth album recorded by the Manchester Craftsmen 's Guild , following A Nancy Wilson Christmas by Nancy Wilson , Joe Williams Presents : Nicole <unk> Live at The Manchester Craftsman Guild and the Dizzy Gillespie All @-@ Stars 's Things to Come , among others . 
 = = Content = = 
 Brazilian Dreams was recorded live at the Manchester Craftsmen 's Guild in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania between April 26 and 29 , 2001 . The album includes ten songs and features Kim Nazarian , Lauren <unk> , Darmon Meader and Peter Eldridge of the New York Voices as backing vocalists . Performer Claudio Roditi is also featured playing trumpet , while D 'Rivera plays clarinet . Most of the songs included are written by Brazilian songwriters paying homage to the music of the country ; the setlist includes eight songs written by Antônio Carlos Jobim , Gene Lees , Luiz Bonfá , Matt Dubey , João Donato , Caetano Veloso and three original songs by Roditi and D 'Rivera . The first track , " Corcovado " , includes a " vocal texture " inspired by Brazilian vocal groups <unk> em Cy , <unk> and The Swingle Singers . " One for Tom " is based on " Se <unk> <unk> <unk> a voce " by Jobim and features a tenor sax solo by Darmon Meader . " <unk> Amigo " is supported by D 'Rivera 's clarinet and backing vocals in " an exquisite interplay of harmonies and solo sax with the slightest bass . " " Retrato Em Branco E <unk> " features Nazarian performing vocals in Portuguese language . 
 = = Reception and accolades = = 
 Brazilian Dreams received mixed reviews from critics . Paula Edelstein of AllMusic gave the album four stars out of five , praising the performer skills " leading his own ensembles or playing with renowned jazz masters , Paquito D 'Rivera continues to make a decidedly fresh imprint on Latin and Brazilian jazz . " William Grim of All About Jazz wrote that Brazilian Dreams was " a very satisfying album " hoping that D 'Rivera , Roditi and the New York Voices record another album based on Brazilian music due to the large extension of the musical catalog of the country . C. Michael Bailey , also of All About Jazz , stated that the album " is superb and fantastic in every way . " Morrice Blackwell of Jazz Review named the album a " musical match made in heaven " , praising the performers and the sound quality , considering that it is a live performance . Blackwell also commented on the Manchester Craftsmen 's Guild which " continually offer a complete jazz experience . " On a second review by Jazz Review , Lee Prosser referred to the album as a " classic Brazilian music collection ... something all jazz listeners can appreciate , enjoy , and want to have in their CD library collections " , to finally declare that it was " one of the very finest collections of music released in the year 2002 . " Maurice Bottomley of PopMatters wrote that the record is " gentle , cultured , and perhaps overly refined , but it is very accomplished and does actually swing , " further commenting that " it is also truer to the spirit of bossa nova in its first North American flowering than some will care to admit . " 
 However , Leila Cobo of Billboard magazine was critical about the fact that some tracks do not add much to the originals , but the album " stays merely pleasant , notably in ' <unk> ' and ' Manhã de Carnaval / Gentle Rain ' . " On a negative review by Mike Quinn of JazzTimes stated that the album should be renamed " Brazilian Nightmares " a it is " impossible to escape the insipid vocal stylings of the ' New York Voices ' or the cliched horn arrangements that can be heard on bossa nova records going back as far as the ' 50s . " Quinn was also critical of the repertoire since " Brazil has produced more music than the usual 20 or 30 tunes that keep getting led to the butcher 's block . " 
 Brazilian Dreams reached number 35 at the CMJ Jazz Albums chart and peaked at number 22 on Billboard 's Top Jazz Albums chart . D 'Rivera was awarded the Latin Grammy Award for Best Latin Jazz Album at the 4th Latin Grammy Awards , and with this recognition became the only performer to receive accolades in the Jazz and Classical music fields , after his album Historia del Soldado ( Histoire du <unk> by Igor Stravinsky ) earned the Best Classical Album at the same ceremony . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Track listing adapted from AllMusic . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from AllMusic . 
 = Hurricane Allen = 
 Hurricane Allen was a rare and extremely powerful Cape Verde @-@ type hurricane which struck the Caribbean , eastern and northern Mexico then southern Texas . It was the first and strongest hurricane of the 1980 Atlantic hurricane season . The first named storm and first tropical cyclone of the 1980 Atlantic hurricane season , it was one of the strongest hurricanes in recorded history and one of the few hurricanes to reach Category 5 status on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale on three separate occasions , and spent more time as a Category 5 than any other Atlantic hurricane . Allen is the only hurricane in the recorded history of the Atlantic basin to achieve sustained winds of 190 mph ( 305 km / h ) , thus making it the strongest Atlantic hurricane by wind speed . Until Hurricane Patricia in 2015 , this was also the highest sustained winds in the entire Western Hemisphere . 
 Throughout its life , Allen moved through the deep tropics on a west @-@ northwesterly course through the tropical Atlantic Ocean , Caribbean Sea , and Gulf of Mexico before making its final landfall near the United States – Mexico border . At peak strength , it passed near Haiti , causing hundreds of deaths and heavy damage . After crossing the Gulf of Mexico , Allen weakened as it struck the lower Texas coast , causing high winds , a significant storm surge , and heavy rainfall , which caused damage to southern Texas . Overall , Allen killed 290 people and left just over 1 @.@ 24 billion in damage ( 1980 USD ) , mostly within the United States and Haiti . Due to its impact , the name Allen was retired from the six @-@ year revolving list of Atlantic tropical cyclone names in 1981 and the name was replaced by Andrew . The name Andrew was subsequently retired after the 1992 season 's Hurricane Andrew . The dissipating storm precipitated the end of the Heat Wave of 1980 in places like Dallas / Fort Worth , Texas , which had recorded 69 days of 100 ° F ( 38 ° C ) heat . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Allen was an early Cape Verde @-@ type hurricane which originated from a tropical wave that previously moved off the African coastline on July 30 . The system developed as it moved westward , becoming a tropical depression on August 1 . However , the National Hurricane Center did not initiate advisories on Allen until almost 24 hours later , while centered 1 @,@ 300 mi ( 2 @,@ 100 km ) east of the Windward Islands . Early on August 2 , as the depression moved towards the Caribbean , it had intensified , and became the first named storm of the season . The National Hurricane Center noted that conditions appeared favorable for further intensification . However , it was also noted that a large cold @-@ low north of Puerto Rico was producing strong westerly wind shear , which would cause Allen to possibly encounter unfavorable conditions within 72 hours . Although slower forward movement was anticipated , Allen kept at generally the same westward pace between 17 and 23 mph ( 27 and 37 km / h ) . By August 3 , the National Hurricane Center retracted predictions of less favorable conditions from the cold @-@ low north of Puerto Rico , since that weather system was weakening and moving westward . 
 At 1600 UTC on August 3 , the National Hurricane Center upgraded Allen to hurricane status , as an Air Force Plane recorded winds of 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) . However , in post @-@ analysis , it was discovered that Allen had been a hurricane since 0000 UTC on August 3 . Shortly after the upgrade , Allen began a period of rapid deepening , and intensified into a major hurricane at 0000 UTC August 4 , while roughly 38 mi ( 61 km ) northwest of Bridgetown , Barbados . Six hours later , Allen passed only 8 mi ( 13 km ) south of St. Lucia at 0600 UTC . Although the National Hurricane Center noted that conditions favored slow strengthening , Allen continued to rapidly intensify , and became a Category 4 hurricane only two hours after that advisory . Later on August 4 , the National Hurricane Center noted a barometric pressure of 946 mbar ( 946 hPa ; 27 @.@ 9 inHg ) , and that the it would not drop significantly within 24 hours . Shortly before 0000 UTC on August 5 , the minimum pressure decreased to 924 mbar ( 924 hPa ; 27 @.@ 3 inHg ) , which was noted as equivalent to Hurricane David in the previous season . 
 By August 5 , Allen intensified into a Category 5 hurricane while south of Puerto Rico . This made Allen the earliest Category 5 hurricane in the Atlantic on record , but was later surpassed by Hurricane Emily which reached that intensity on July 16 , 2005 . During this time , Allen attained a central pressure of 911 mbar ( 911 hPa ; 26 @.@ 9 inHg ) , the lowest pressure on record in the eastern Caribbean sea . Hence , the barometric pressure dropped by 35 mbar ( 35 hPa ; 1 @.@ 0 inHg ) less than 10 hours after the National Hurricane Center stated that the pressure would not decrease significantly within 24 hours . 
 The eye passed between Hispaniola and Jamaica as a Category 4 hurricane . After weakening due to friction with the mountains of Haiti and Jamaica , Allen intensified back to a Category 5 hurricane , retaining this intensity for over a day . It then moved past the islands of Cayman Brac and Little Cayman causing moderate damage on Cayman Brac with winds near 135 mph . The storm then moved between Cuba and the Yucatán Peninsula , reaching its peak intensity of 190 mph ( 310 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 899 mbar ( 899 hPa ; 26 @.@ 5 inHg ) while crossing the Yucatán Channel . During Allen 's trek through the Caribbean Sea and the Gulf of Mexico , its center of circulation never crossed over land despite its close passage to various islands in and around the Caribbean sea . 
 Allen again weakened to a Category 4 storm due to friction with Mexico and Eyewall replacement cycle , but restrengthened into a Category 5 hurricane for a third time as it moved over the open waters of the Gulf of Mexico , keeping this intensity for nearly a full day and with a pressure drop to 909 mbar ( 909 hPa ; 26 @.@ 8 inHg ) , the lowest pressure ever recorded in the western Gulf of Mexico . Shortly before landfall , a dry air mass in the western Gulf of Mexico caused the storm to weaken substantially . Allen made landfall north of Brownsville , Texas as a Category 3 storm with maximum sustained winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) . Allen became extratropical on August 11 . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 As Allen approached the Caribbean Sea , gale warnings and a hurricane watch were issued for the islands of Barbados , St. Lucia , St. Vincent , Dominica , Grenada , Martinique , and Guadeloupe during the daylight hours of August 3 . Gale warnings were in effect for Antigua from 11 am on August 3 until 11 am on August 4 . Hurricane warnings were raised for Barbados , St. Vincent , St. Lucia , Martinique , and Dominica from the early afternoon of August 3 until the late morning of August 4 . As Allen moved into the Caribbean sea , hurricane watches were issued for southeastern sections of the Dominican Republic and the southwestern peninsula of Haiti from 11 am on August 4 until the morning of August 5 . Gale warnings were then in effect for the southern Dominican Republic from the night of August 4 into the night of August 5 , while southern Haiti maintained the warnings from the night of August 4 into the morning of August 5 . The hurricane watch was issued for Jamaica during the morning hours of August 5 , while hurricane warnings were raised for the southwest peninsula of Haiti from the late morning of August 5 into the morning of August 6 . Hurricane warnings went into effect for Jamaica from around noon on August 5 until late in the afternoon of August 6 . The Cayman Islands saw hurricane watches issued from the afternoon of August 5 into the morning of August 6 before the watches were upgraded to hurricane warnings from the morning until late afternoon of August 6 . 
 As Allen approached the Gulf of Mexico , hurricane warnings were raised for the northeast Yucatán peninsula of Mexico from the afternoon of August 6 into the morning of August 8 . Gale warnings were in effect for the Florida Keys from the evening of August 6 into the early morning of August 8 . As Allen approached its final landfall , the northeast Mexican coast and Texas coast were placed under a hurricane watch from the morning of August 8 until the morning of August 9 for Mexico and the afternoon of August 9 for Texas . Hurricane warnings were posted for the Texas coast during the afternoon of August 8 , and were lowered north of Freeport , Texas during the afternoon of August 9 and south of Freeport during the afternoon of August 10 . Gale warnings and a hurricane watch were issued for the Louisiana coast from Vermilion Bay westward from the afternoon of August 8 into the afternoon of August 9 . Hurricane warnings were in effect for northeast Mexico from the early afternoon of August 9 into the late afternoon of August 10 . Hurricane warnings were downgraded to gale warnings between High Island , Texas and Freeport , Texas between the late afternoon of August 9 and the late afternoon of August 10 . Hurricane watches were dropped for the Louisiana coast during the late afternoon of August 9 . Hurricane warnings were downgraded to gale warnings for the lower Texas coast south of Freeport from the late afternoon of August 10 into the early morning of August 11 . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Allen caused just under $ 1 billion ( 1980 USD ) in damages and killed at least 269 people throughout its course ( including indirect deaths ) . 
 = = = Caribbean islands = = = 
 In Barbados , preliminary damages were estimated to be $ 1 @.@ 5 million ( 1980 USD ) . About 500 houses were either damaged or destroyed . No deaths were reported . St. Lucia sustained catastrophic damage from the strong category 3 hurricane . Sustained winds of 90 knots ( 170 km / h ) and a sea level pressure as low as 967 millibars ( 28 @.@ 6 inHg ) were reported at Hewanorra . Eighteen people lost their lives as a result of the storm 's passage . One death in Guadeloupe was attributed to Allen . In Martinique , damage was extensive as the storm passed 50 miles ( 80 km ) south of the island . Waves 6 metres ( 20 ft ) high battered the coast of the island during the storm . 
 In the central Caribbean , Cayman Brac was hit by winds in excess of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) which caused considerable property damage . A coral reef at Discover Bay , Jamaica was devastated by the wave action from the storm . Offshore Jamaica , greater numbers of smaller @-@ sized <unk> was witnessed in the wake of Allen . Eight deaths in Jamaica were attributed to Allen . Damage was very significant along the northeast coast , where the hurricane made its closest approach to the island and created a 12 metres ( 39 ft ) storm surge . Three deaths were attributed to Allen in Cuba . 
 Extensive damage occurred in Haiti due to high winds and flash flooding . Total costs for that country were estimated to be at more than $ 400 million ( 1980 USD ) . Roughly 60 % of the nation 's coffee crop was destroyed . In all , 220 people were killed and 835 @,@ 000 were left homeless . In Port @-@ au @-@ Prince , 41 deaths were caused by tin roofs flying off and around 1200 were made homeless by flooding . Another 140 people were reported dead from flooding . 
 = = = Mexico = = = 
 Areas of northeastern Mexico saw heavy rains with the passage of Allen , with the highest totals exceeding 7 inches ( 180 mm ) . The hurricane earlier brushed the Yucatán Peninsula . As Allen only affected sparsely populated regions of Mexico , there were no reports of significant damage . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 In Texas , the storm surge was reported as high as 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) at Port Mansfield , though it may have been higher elsewhere along the Texas coast . A peak wind gust of 129 mph ( 208 km / h ) was also measured at Port Mansfield . Tropical storm @-@ force winds in Corpus Christi , Texas blew roof gravel through the city , which led to substantial glass breakage to the 18 @-@ story Guarantee Bank Building and a 12 @-@ story wing of <unk> hospital . The storm caused seven deaths in Texas and 17 in Louisiana ( most resulting from the crash of a helicopter evacuating workers from an offshore platform ) . Allen spawned several tornadoes in Texas . One tornado caused $ 100 million in damage when it hit Austin , Texas , making it the costliest tropical cyclone @-@ spawned tornado in recorded history . Overall , however , the storm caused limited damage in the United States due to its suddenly diminished power and because its highest tides and winds hit a sparsely @-@ populated portion of the Texas coast . 
 Allen dumped 10 inches ( 250 mm ) to 20 inches ( 510 mm ) of rain in south Texas , ending a summer @-@ long drought during the Heat Wave of 1980 . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 Because of the destruction , extreme death tolls and intensity , the name Allen was retired from the Atlantic tropic storms list by the World Meteorological Organization in the spring of 1981 , and will never be used again for a future Atlantic hurricane . It was replaced with Andrew in the 1986 season , which was also retired due to widespread damage in Florida following its second usage in 1992 and was replaced with Alex in 1998 . 
 = = Records = = 
 When Allen reached Category 5 intensity on August 5 , it became the earliest Category 5 storm ever recorded . This record stood until Hurricane Emily surpassed it on July 16 , 2005 . Allen is one of three Atlantic hurricanes to reach Category 5 on the Saffir @-@ Simpson hurricane scale on three separate occasions , the others being Hurricane Ivan and Hurricane Isabel . Allen also produced the fifth @-@ lowest minimum pressure ever recorded in the Atlantic basin at 899 mbar ( hPa ) and was the strongest known hurricane in the basin , in terms of pressure , since 1935 . Until then , it was the second strongest hurricane by pressure in the Atlantic Basin , but was since pushed down to fifth , and no hurricane has achieved 190 miles per hour ( 310 km / h ) winds in this basin since then . It remains the most intense storm ever in August . Allen spent nearly 3 days as a Category 5 storm , initially the longest stretch of any previous Atlantic hurricane on record . However , a reanalysis of the 1932 Cuba hurricane showed that it spent 3 hours longer at Category 5 intensity than Allen . Five typhoons have spent longer as Category 5 storms , including most recently Karen and Nancy in the early 1960s . 
 = 2000 – 01 South @-@ West Indian Ocean cyclone season = 
 The 2000 @-@ 01 South @-@ West Indian Ocean cyclone season was fairly quiet with only five named storms , although there was an additional unnamed tropical storm and two subtropical cyclones with gale @-@ force winds . It started early , with a tropical disturbance forming on August 1 – the first day of the cyclone year . However , the first named storm , Ando , was not named until January 2 , which at the time was the 4th latest on record . Ando would become the most intense cyclone of the year , reaching peak winds of 195 km / h ( 120 mph ) according to the Météo @-@ France office ( MFR ) on Réunion , the official Regional Specialized Meteorological Center for the basin . The agency tracked storms south of the Equator and west of 90 ° E to the east coast of Africa . 
 In addition to being the strongest storm , Cyclone Ando was one of two deadly storms during the season . It passed about 205 km ( 105 mi ) west of Réunion , producing 1 @,@ 255 mm ( 49 @.@ 4 in ) of rainfall in the mountainous peaks . The rains led to flooding that killed two people . Ando was one of three storms to attain tropical cyclone status – winds of at least 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) – in the month of January . The others were Bindu , which alternated its trajectory several times over open waters , and Charly , which rapidly weakened after encountering hostile wind shear . The next storm to form was Tropical Cyclone Dera , which intensified near Mozambique in early March and killed two people there due to flooding rains . It later moved southward through the Mozambique Channel , maintaining its intensity unusually far to the south before becoming extratropical . There was a month of inactivity in March , including three weeks in which there were no storms worldwide , the first such instance . Subsequently , two storms formed in early April ; one was a small , unnamed tropical storm , and the other was Severe Tropical Storm Evariste , which brought light rainfall to two islands . The season ended with an unusual subtropical storm forming rapidly in the southern Mozambique Channel on June 19 , the only such storm to form in that body of water in the month . It became the strongest storm on record for so late in the season , although it weakened without affecting land , dissipating on June 24 . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 During the season , the Météo @-@ France office ( MFR ) on Réunion island issued warnings in tropical cyclones within the basin . The agency estimated intensity through the Dvorak technique , and warned on tropical cyclones in the region from the coast of Africa to 90 ° E , south of the equator to 30 ° S. At the time , the cyclone year was from August 1 to July 31 of the subsequent year . The Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) , which is a joint United States Navy – United States Air Force task force , also issued tropical cyclone warnings for the southwestern Indian Ocean in an unofficial capacity . 
 Aside from a tropical disturbance in August , the season began later than usual , the fourth consecutive season to do so . At the time it had the 4th latest start on record for the first named storm . Only about 20 % of seasons have their first storm form after the middle of December , and the first named storm of this season , Ando , did not become a tropical storm until early January . However , January was active with three tropical cyclones , two of which became intense tropical cyclones , due to the active phase of the Madden – Julian oscillation ( MJO ) . February returned to a period of inactivity , and generally there was minimal convection across the basin due to unusually dry air . This was spread by a powerful and persistent ridge that extended eastward from Madagascar , as well as an inactive phase of the MJO . Drought conditions occurred on Réunion due to the lack of rainfall . After three weeks of no tropical cyclones developing worldwide , an event unseen since 1995 , the tropics became active again in early April . 
 In contrast with the busy preceding season , this season had much lower activity than usual , with only 36 days in which there was a tropical storm or cyclone active ; this was 17 less than normal . However , the number of days with a tropical cyclone was slightly above normal at 15 . In general , the southern hemisphere as a whole had the least active season since 1954 . There were only five named storms , only the fifth such time since the beginning of the satellite era in 1967 . As most storms formed toward the eastern periphery of the basin , damage was much less than the preceding year . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Intense Tropical Cyclone Ando = = = 
 The beginnings of Ando can be traced to a circulation within the Intertropical Convergence Zone ( ITCZ ) about 400 km ( 250 mi ) south @-@ west of Diego Garcia , which became evident on satellite imagery on December 30 . Associated convection , or thunderstorms , gradually organized into a central dense overcast , and the system became Tropical Disturbance 3 at 06 : 00 UTC on December 31 . The upper @-@ level environment generally favored further development , but the system failed to develop more initially due to some easterly wind shear . A large ridge to the south steered the nascent disturbance to the west @-@ southwest . After the shear subsided , the system intensified into a moderate tropical storm on January 2 , given the name " Ando " by the Mauritius Meteorological Service . Also on that day , the JTWC began issuing advisories on the storm as Tropical Cyclone 04S , and around that time , Ando was passing about 465 km ( 290 mi ) east @-@ southeast of Agalega island . 
 Ando rapidly intensified after forming and attained tropical cyclone status early on January 4 , developing an eye in the center of the thunderstorms and outflow to the east . A tropical low over the southern Mozambique Channel weakened the ridge , causing Ando to turn more to the southwest . Late on January 4 , the storm intensified further into an intense tropical cyclone , and early the next day passed about 120 km ( 75 mi ) northeast of Tromelin Island . According to the JTWC , however , Ando attained peak 1 minute winds of 220 km / h ( 140 mph ) late on January 5 . In contrast , the MFR assessed Ando as weakening due to the becoming larger and less defined , while still maintaining a small cloud diameter of about 400 km ( 250 mi ) . However , the eye re @-@ organized , and Ando attained peak 10 minute winds of 195 km / h ( 120 mph ) on January 6 , with a 60 km ( 35 mi ) eye at the time . Continuing around the ridge , the cyclone passed about 205 km ( 125 mi ) west of Réunion that day before starting to weaken due to increased wind shear . On January 8 , Ando weakened below tropical cyclone status , and the convection increasingly separated from the circulation while turning to the southeast . On January 10 , the storm became extratropical , although the remnants turned back to the northwest due to the ridge , dissipating on January 13 . 
 As a developing storm , Ando produced some heavy rain between December 30 and January 2 over Seychelles . Swaziland also reported that Ando drew moisture from the continent , aggravating a persistent dry spell . While near Agalega island , Ando dropped 108 mm ( 4 @.@ 3 in ) of rainfall , compared to a January average precipitation there of 150 mm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) . On Tromelin Island , gusts peaked at 125 km / h ( 78 mph ) and rainfall reached 141 mm ( 5 @.@ 6 in ) . Passing north of Réunion , Ando produced gusts of 70 km / h ( 45 mph ) along the coast , but 133 km / h ( 83 mph ) was recorded at Plaine des Cafres in the mountainous peaks . Most parts of the island did not receive much rain , with the exception of mountainous peaks due to orographic lift , particularly after the center passed to the west . Pas de Bellecombe at an elevation of 2 @,@ 200 m ( 7 @,@ 200 ft ) reported 1 @,@ 255 mm ( 49 @.@ 4 in ) over 48 hours . The rains caused flooding and some landslides , which washed away one house and killed two people . Ando also damaged crops and killed several livestock . The highest wave recorded was 5 @.@ 4 m ( 18 ft ) in La Possession . High waves injured several people , several of whom required rescue from lifeguards . 
 = = = Tropical Cyclone Bindu = = = 
 On January 2 , an area of convection persisted in the eastern portion of the ITCZ in the Australian basin , located northwest of Cocos Island , or about 1165 km ( 625 mi ) southwest of Sumatra . With a ridge to the south , the system moved generally westward . A nearby ship confirmed that a circulation formed , and on January 3 , it crossed 90 ° E into the south @-@ west Indian Ocean as a tropical disturbance . With easterly wind shear , the system initially remained weak , but convection increased and organized on January 5 . On the next day , the disturbance intensified into a tropical depression , although the circulation was still exposed from the thunderstorms at that time . After turning to the southwest , wind shear decreased , and the depression became Moderate Tropical Storm Bindu on January 7 . On the same day , the JTWC also initiated advisories as Tropical Cyclone 05S . Moving around the ridge to the south , Bindu slowly intensified , developing outflow and improved rainbands . Early on January 9 , the MFR upgraded the storm to tropical cyclone status as an eye 19 km ( 12 mi ) in diameter formed . The next day , Bindu weakened due to increased wind shear , causing the circulation to be exposed from the convection and for the cyclone to be downgraded into a severe tropical storm . 
 The building ridge caused the storm to slow and turn back to the west . After the formerly hostile shear relaxed , Bindu became a tropical cyclone again on January 11 , redeveloping an eye . On the next day , the MFR estimated peak 10 minute winds of 150 km / h ( 90 mph ) , while the JTWC estimated maximum 1 minute winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) . By that time , the cyclone had turned back to the south @-@ southwest . Drier air and wind shear resulted in weakening , and Bindu was downgraded to a severe tropical storm on January 14 . At 18 : 00 UTC the next day , the storm passed about 140 km ( 85 mi ) southeast of Rodrigues island , by which time the circulation was exposed north of the dwindling convection . The MFR downgraded Bindu to tropical depression status on January 16 . An approaching trough turned the system to the south on the next day , and Bindu became extratropical late on January 17 . The remnants turned sharply eastward due to a ridge , later looping back to the west on January 20 . Another trough turned the storm southward on January 21 and absorbed the circulation the next day . 
 = = = Intense Tropical Cyclone Charly = = = 
 A small circulation formed north of the Cocos Islands on January 8 within the near @-@ equatorial trough . For about a week , it drifted west @-@ southwestward without much development , although an area of convection formed within the system on January 11 about 1240 km ( 770 mi ) southwest of Sumatra . Persistent wind shear prevented much strengthening , and the circulation crossed into the south @-@ west Indian Ocean on January 16 . Another increase in convection merited its classification as a tropical disturbance on the next day , which organized into a central dense overcast . Slow development continued , allowing the disturbance to become a tropical depression and later Tropical Storm Charly on January 19 . On the same day , the JTWC also began tracking it as Tropical Cyclone 06S . Taking a track similar to earlier Tropical Cyclone Bindu , the storm moved southwestward around a ridge to the south . Charly gradually developed outflow and increasingly organized convection due to decreasing wind shear . A ragged eye formed on January 20 and became better defined , and early on January 21 , Charly intensified into a tropical cyclone . 
 By January 22 , Charly developed a 37 km ( 23 mi ) wide eye , surrounded by deep convection . Based on the increased organization , the storm became an intense tropical cyclone , reaching peak 10 minute winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) , according to the MFR . In contrast , the JTWC estimated peak 1 minute winds of 195 km / h ( 120 mph ) . Late on January 22 , the wind shear and dry air increased while waters became cooler , all of which became detrimental to the storm 's structure . The eye rapidly dissipated as the convection dwindled , and within 24 hours of peak intensity , Charly was downgraded to tropical storm status . On January 24 , the storm passed about 320 km ( 200 mi ) southeast of Rodrigues . By that time , the circulation was exposed from the thunderstorms , and Charly weakened to tropical depression status on January 25 . Caught in the weak low @-@ level flow , the circulation moved erratically , first to the west , then drifting before turning to the southeast . It continued to produce some convection during this time , which spread rainfall over Mauritius and Réunion . A cold front swept Charly to the southeast , absorbing it on January 31 . 
 = = = Tropical Cyclone Dera = = = 
 After an extended period of inactivity lasting nearly a month , the ITCZ produced an area of convection on March 1 between Diego Garcia and the Seychelles . There were initially two weak circulations , although the one south @-@ southwest of Diego Garcia ultimately became Cyclone Dera . It moved southwestward without much development at first due to hostile wind shear , with the circulation often exposed from the thunderstorms . On March 4 , the system developed into a tropical disturbance off the northeast coast of Madagascar . Two days later , the storm moved ashore Madagascar about 50 km ( 30 mi ) southeast of Antsiranana . It weakened and became indistinct over land , emerging into the Mozambique Channel near Nosy Be as a weak low . Convection gradually increased across the region as the track shifted westward . After moving toward Mozambique , the system rounded the ridge and turned to the south just off the coast , passing only 10 km ( 6 mi ) east of Angoche . Around that time , the thunderstorms began organizing more , allowing the disturbance to intensify into a tropical depression on March 8 . With warm waters and an anticyclone providing outflow , the depression quickly intensified , becoming Tropical Storm Dera on March 9 and soon after developing an eye feature . Also on that day , the JTWC initiated advisories on the system as Tropical Cyclone 15S . 
 Late on March 9 , Dera passed about 20 km ( 12 mi ) east of Europa Island , although the large eye passed over the island . On March 10 , Dera attained tropical cyclone status , and after a brief bout of wind shear , the eye became better defined . The cyclone attained peak 10 minute winds of 150 km / h ( 90 mph ) on March 11 , according to the MFR , and 1 minute winds of 165 km / h ( 105 mph ) according to the JTWC . Despite being located unusually far to the south , Dera maintained its intensity due to warm waters , and it accelerated southeastward due to an approaching cold front . Wind shear increased on March 12 , and only on that day did water temperatures drop off , causing a marked decrease in intensity and for the eye to dissipate . Late on March 12 , Dera became extratropical , which continued southeastward along the cold front . 
 The precursor of Dera dropped heavy rainfall in Mayotte , reaching 193 mm ( 7 @.@ 6 in ) on <unk> . The precipitation came in intense squalls , with hourly peaks of 49 mm ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) recorded , which flooded rivers and some houses . In addition , the system produced gusts of 101 km / h ( 63 mph ) , strong enough to damage roofs , cause power outages , and damage fields and trees . Heavy rainfall also spread across Mozambique , producing additional river flooding Zambezi in a region that had been flooded for weeks . The floods wrecked dozens of homes and covered many roads , while killing two people . Later , gusts peaked at 155 kilometres per hour ( 96 mph ) on Europa Island , while rainfall reached 72 mm ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Evariste = = = 
 The ITCZ became active in late March , spawning several areas of convection across the Indian Ocean and into the adjacent Australian basin . The westernmost system had a circulation as of March 31 about 600 km ( 370 mi ) west @-@ southwest of Diego Garcia . Despite favorable conditions , the system failed to organize at first , although it became Tropical Disturbance 9 on April 2 after the structure improved . Drifting to the southwest and later to the south , the associated convection waxed and waned , finally organizing more on April 4 ; on that day , the disturbance quickly intensified into Moderate Tropical Storm Evariste . A day prior , the JTWC had initiated advisories on the system as Tropical Cyclone 18S . A trough to the south weakened the ridge , turning the storm to the southwest . A small eye formed on April 5 , but later dissipated after an increase in thunderstorm activity . On that day , the MFR estimated peak 10 minute winds of 110 km / h ( 70 mph ) , just shy of tropical cyclone status , while the JTWC estimated 1 minute winds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) . On April 6 , increased wind shear from the approaching trough began weakening Evariste and turned it to the south . That day , it passed about 135 km ( 85 mph ) east of St. Brandon , and on April 7 , Evariste bypassed Rodrigues about 200 km ( 125 mi ) to the southwest . The convection gradually deteriorated and left the circulation exposed . Late on April 7 , the storm suddenly turned southwestward toward a developing low east of Madagascar , although the southwest motion resumed soon after . On April 8 , Evariste dissipated , dissipating ahead of the nearby trough . 
 Evariste produced peak gusts of 91 km / h ( 57 mph ) on St. Brandon , with 23 mm ( 0 @.@ 91 in ) of rainfall recorded . Stronger winds were recorded on Rodrigues while the storm passed , reaching 109 km / h ( 68 mph ) . Rainfall was minimal , reaching only 15 mm ( 0 @.@ 59 in ) , and failing to alleviate drought conditions . 
 = = = Moderate Tropical Storm 10 = = = 
 A small area of convection not associated from the ITCZ became Tropical Disturbance 10 on April 1 , about 215 km ( 350 mi ) west @-@ northwest of the Cocos Islands in the Australian region . It moved west @-@ southwestward , entering the south @-@ west Indian Ocean on April 2 , and on the same date the JTWC classified it as Tropical Cyclone 16S . The thunderstorms organized into a small central dense overcast , and there was evidence of an eye feature , suggesting the system could have been much stronger . Although satellite imagery had difficulty in tracking the low @-@ level circulation , a nearby ship on April 3 confirmed the presence of a circulation . Operationally the system was only classified as a tropical depression . However , data from QuikSCAT helped upgrade the system to moderate tropical storm status in a post @-@ season analysis , with peak winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) on April 3 ; as a result , it was not named . After previously moving to the west @-@ southwest , the small storm turned back to the west due to a strengthening ridge to the south . Wind shear increased on April 4 , which rapidly dwindled the convection and thereby leaving behind an exposed circulation . It underwent the Fujiwhara effect with a larger disturbance to the east , causing the system to turn back to the north and dissipate on April 5 . 
 = = = Subtropical Cyclone 11 = = = 
 Similar to a Subtropical Depression 13 in April 2000 , there was an unusual subtropical cyclone that formed in June to end the season . A trough exited South Africa on June 18 with an associated frontal wave in the southern Mozambique Channel . On the next day , the system separated from the front and became a cut @-@ off low . It moved north @-@ northwestward along the eastern periphery of a ridge in southern Africa , becoming a subtropical depression on June 20 . The associated convection initially diminished , although the thunderstorms redeveloped due to the atmospheric instability in the region . On June 21 , the depression passed about 100 km ( 60 mi ) east of Maputo , Mozambique , while moving into an area of much warmer waters . As such , the structure became more tropical , with a small central dense overcast forming over the circulation only 75 km ( 45 mi ) in diameter . The JTWC initiated advisories on June 21 as Tropical Cyclone 12S . The small size of the storm merited the MFR calling it a " midget cyclone " , with a small eye forming late on June 21 . Based on the feature , the JTWC estimated peak 1 winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) ; in contrast , the MFR estimated 10 minute winds of 95 km / h ( 60 mph ) . Despite the structure , the convection was shallow , which brought uncertainty to the true intensity of the storm . Turning to the northeast and east , the subtropical storm rapidly weakened on June 22 to depression status after the environment became hostile , and the convection largely dissipated . The exposed low turned northwestward on June 23 , dissipating the next day . 
 The storm was the only one on record to form in the Mozambique Channel in June . In addition , it was the strongest storm to form so late in the season . 
 = = = Other storms = = = 
 On August 1 , in the middle of the southern hemisphere 's winter , an area of convection persisted in the northeastern portion of the basin about 740 km ( 460 mi ) northeast of Diego Garcia . At that time , an associated circulation was exposed to the east of the thunderstorms . At 06 : 00 UTC that day , the MFR initiated advisories on Tropical Disturbance 1 . After the system organized further , the JTWC also began tracking the system as Tropical Cyclone 01S , estimating winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) . With a ridge to the south , the system tracked generally westward , briefly becoming a tropical depression on August 1 . An approaching trough weakened the ridge , allowing the depression to turn southwestward . Located in an area of moderate wind shear , the system failed to intensify further , and it dissipated on August 3 . 
 An area of convection formed on November 9 to the east of Diego Garcia , possibly the result of the MJO . A circulation was evident by November 11 , and the following day it developed into Tropical Disturbance 2 about 830 km ( 515 mi ) southeast of Diego Garcia . Also on November 12 , the JTWC classified the system as Tropical Cyclone 02S . It moved to the southwest , but looped back to the east on November 13 , during which time the MFR upgraded it to tropical depression status . Later that day , the agency ceased issuing advisories , but the system reorganized on November 14 . On November 17 , it turned back to the southwest , but the MFR discontinued advisories on the next day . 
 An area of convection persisted on January 19 off the east coast of Madagascar , which became Tropical Disturbance 6 two days later . It drifted to the east , strengthening to tropical depression status on January 22 , and passing 330 km ( 205 mi ) west of Réunion . Increased wind shear caused the system to weaken as it turned back to the west , dissipating over Madagascar on January 24 . On Réunion , the system dropped about 100 mm ( 4 in ) of rainfall , including a total of 50 mm ( 2 in ) falling in a 90 minute period in Cape Bernard . 
 On January 23 , a weak tropical low began affecting Mozambique for two days , causing flooding that killed six people . Although newspaper sources indicated that the system was a tropical storm , it remained unclassified by MFR . 
 Toward the end of January , a broad low persisted south of the Chagos archipelago , becoming a tropical disturbance on January 30 about 650 km ( 400 mi ) south of Diego Garcia . The convection gradually organized as the system moved to the south @-@ southwest , steered by a break in the ridge to the south caused by the remnants of Cyclone Charly . Initially the circulation was very broad , and due to its involvement with the monsoon , it resembled a monsoon depression . Early on February 1 , the disturbance intensified into a tropical depression while turning more to the south . Around that time , it passed about 500 km ( 310 mi ) east of Rodrigues . The system became extratropical on February 3 , after increased wind shear weakened the convection . The former depression intensified as an extratropical storm , attaining gale force winds while accelerating its forward motion due to an approaching trough . The system was no longer tracked after February 6 as it approached the polar latitudes . 
 On April 17 , a weak low exited from the coast of South Africa and moved southeastward over the warm waters of the southern Mozambique Channel . By April 19 , it had organized into a subtropical depression and produced gale force winds . The MFR did not classify the system , however , due to it being located from 33 – 35 ° S , which was outside of the agency 's area of warning responsibility at the time . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 A tropical disturbance is named when it reaches moderate tropical storm strength . If a tropical disturbance reaches moderate tropical storm status west of 55 ° E , then the Sub @-@ regional Tropical Cyclone Advisory Centre in Madagascar assigns the appropriate name to the storm . If a tropical disturbance reaches moderate tropical storm status between 55 ° E and 90 ° E , then the Sub @-@ regional Tropical Cyclone Advisory Centre in Mauritius assigns the appropriate name to the storm . A new annual list is used every year so no names are retired . 
 = = Contemporaneous seasons = = 
 List of Southern Hemisphere tropical cyclone seasons 
 Atlantic hurricane seasons : 2000 , 2001 
 Pacific hurricane seasons : 2000 , 2001 
 Pacific typhoon seasons : 2000 , 2001 
 North Indian Ocean cyclone seasons : 2000 , 2001 
 = Vnukovo Airlines Flight 2801 = 
 Vnukovo Airlines Flight 2801 was an international charter flight that , on 29 August 1996 at 10 : 22 : 23 Central European Summer Time , crashed in Operafjellet , Svalbard , Norway . All 141 people aboard the Tupolev Tu @-@ 154M were killed during the approach to Svalbard Airport , Longyear , making it the deadliest aviation accident ever in Norway . The accident was the result of a series of small navigational errors causing the aircraft to be 3 @.@ 7 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 3 mi ) from the approach centerline at the time of impact . The accident was investigated by the Accident Investigation Board Norway with assistance from the Interstate Aviation Committee and became known as the <unk> Accident ( Norwegian : <unk> @-@ ulykken ) . 
 The Vnukovo Airlines aircraft , registration number RA @-@ <unk> , was chartered by Arktikugol , a Russian state owned coal mining company , to fly Russian and Ukrainian workers from Vnukovo International Airport in Moscow , Russia to Svalbard Airport , Longyear in Longyearbyen , Norway . The passengers all belonged to the Russian communities of Barentsburg and Pyramiden . The fatalities included 11 crew members and 130 passengers , of which 3 were children . The accident was a contributing cause for Arktikugol 's closure of Pyramiden two years later . After the accident , there were a series of lawsuits to determine the compensations to the victims ' families . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Flight = = = 
 Flight 2801 was a chartered flight flown by Vnukovo Airlines on behalf of Arktikugol , which operated mines at the two company towns of Barentsburg and Pyramiden in Svalbard . The aircraft was a Tupolev Tu @-@ 154M , with registration RA @-@ <unk> , serial number 86A 742 and date of manufacture 14 January 1987 . The flight consisted of a crew of eleven , including a cockpit crew of four ( two aircraft pilots , one engineer and one navigator ) , a cabin crew of five and two technicians . The pilot in command ( <unk> ) had previously landed at Svalbard Airport ; the first officer had not and was the piloting pilot . 
 On board were 130 passengers , of whom 3 were children , consisting of Arktikugol employees and their families . Waiting at the airport for the return flight were 120 other employees and their families . The aircraft left Vnukovo Airport at 04 : 44 Coordinated Universal Time ( UTC ) or 08 : 44 Moscow Summer Time . Estimated flight time was 3 hours and 30 minutes , and alternative airports were Murmansk Airport and Severomorsk @-@ 3 , both in Murmansk Oblast , Russia . The flight proceeded normally until descent , following the routing W 29 from Moscow to <unk> ( west of Murmansk ) , before crossing to Bodø Flight Information Region over the Barents Sea cruising at FL 350 at an average airspeed of 500 kilometres per hour ( 310 mph ) . It then proceeded over Bjørnøya non @-@ directional beacon ( NDB ) , Isfjord NDB and Advent NDB . 
 The weather at the accident area was dominated by a low pressure trough , giving rain showers and wind from 15 to 30 knots ( 28 to 56 km / h ; 17 to 35 mph ) at 240 – 270 ° . Visibility exceeded 10 kilometres ( 6 mi ) . Between 08 : 00 and 09 : 00 , a weak trough passed , reducing visibility to 6 kilometres ( 4 mi ) and a cloud base at 400 to 450 metres ( 1 @,@ 300 to 1 @,@ 500 ft ) . 
 Svalbard Airport , Longyear , is the main airport serving the Svalbard archipelago . It is located on the south shore of Isfjord , with high terrain to the south , southeast and east . It has a single , 10 / 28 runway ( roughly east – west ) which is 2 @,@ 140 metres ( 7 @,@ 020 ft ) long . The airport has an elevation of 28 metres ( 92 ft ) above mean sea level ( MSL ) , and has an aerodrome flight information service ( AFIS ) , which is subordinate Bodø Air Traffic Control Center ( Bodø ATCC ) . The airport is regarded as uncontrolled and does not provide approach service . On that day , all aircraft had used Runway 28 , due to favorable wind conditions , climb @-@ up conditions and short distance from the terminal . 
 = = = Accident = = = 
 At 07 : 55 UTC ( 09 : 55 local Central European Summer Time , CEST ) , the crew requested clearance to start descent . Because of lack of communication with Bodø ATCC , this was not obtained . At 07 : 56 , information from Longyear AFIS was given that there was no conflicting traffic , allowing a descent to 1 @,@ 800 metres ( 6 @,@ 000 ft ) MSL . The crew tried to request use of Runway 10 , but this was , due to language problems , not understood as such by AFIS . Instead , Longyear communicated the actual weather and informed that Runway 28 was in use . An additional request for use of Runway 10 was again not understood , because of the misunderstanding of the term " runway in use " . Because of this , the crew decided to instead use Runway 28 . 
 The crew used Jeppesen charts dated 21 January 1994 . According to procedures , both horizontal situation indicators ( HSI ) were set to 283 ° , but the magnetic localizer course of 300 ° was not set . A global positioning system ( GPS ) was used as a back @-@ up . No requests were made for VHF direction finding . From 3 @,@ 000 metres ( 10 @,@ 000 ft ) MSL until impact , the flight was carried out in instrument meteorological conditions ( IMC ) and the flight controlled by automatic stabilization mode , with lateral navigation controlled by the navigator . 
 At 08 : 10 UTC , the aircraft reached 1 @,@ 524 metres ( 5 @,@ 000 ft ) MSL , which is the minimum altitude to Advent and the initial approach altitude . At 08 : 15 : 32 UTC , it reached Advent and entered a base turn , reaching a magnetic heading of 160 ° at 08 : 16 : 28 UTC . While the crew had adjusted for the wind drift , they did not attempt to intercept the magnetic course 155 ° outbound from Advent . During this turn , there was a malfunction in the electric trimming mechanism , which caused the piloting pilot to deactivate the aircraft flight control systems ' <unk> in the pitch channel at 08 : 15 : 58 . This was again activated at 08 : 16 : 42 UTC . 
 At 08 : 17 : 08 UTC , the crew started the turn to bring the aircraft to 300 ° magnetic inbound , however , the lateral deviation from the outbound magnetic course was 155 ° , or 3 @.@ 7 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 3 mi ) to the left . At 08 : 17 : 57 UTC , the navigator said " Ah , abeam eight miles 2801 inbound " , to which AFIS replied two seconds later " Correct " . This was the last radio communication between the crew and Longyear . At 08 : 18 : 30 UTC , the piloting pilot turned off the autopilot pitch channel . For the rest of the flight , the plane continued with autopilot only in roll . 
 Following the aircraft passing through the localizer centerline and having rolled out on 290 ° , there was a discussion among the crew if the turn had been made at the right time . The initial comment about this was made by the first officer at 08 : 19 : 06 UTC . This resulted in a roll out of the turn to final approach and corrective turn to magnetic heading 306 ° . At this time , the aircraft was 27 @.@ 4 nautical miles ( 50 @.@ 7 km ; 31 @.@ 5 mi ) from the airport and 2 @.@ 8 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 7 mi ) right of the centerline at 1 @,@ 520 metres ( 5 @,@ 000 ft ) MSL with an airspeed of 330 kilometres per hour ( 210 mph ) . Instead of intercepting the centerline , the crew continued to track on the right side , nearly paralleling the localizer course . 
 At 08 : 20 : 17 UTC , the pilot in command ordered the aircraft turned to 291 ° , which adjusted for drift resulted in a course close to 300 ° . At this time , the aircraft had a lateral deviation from the approach centerline of 3 @.@ 7 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 3 mi ) . The aircraft started descending at 08 : 20 : 24 UTC . A corrective turn was made at 08 : 21 : 13 UTC and completed 11 seconds later at magnetic heading 300 ° . At the time , the aircraft was descending 5 to 7 metres per second ( 16 to 23 ft / s ) . The aircraft started turning left at 08 : 22 : 05 UTC , and immediately entered an area of turbulence created by the surrounding mountains . 
 During initial approach , the radio altimeter warning had been activated several times , which indicated less than 750 metres ( 2 @,@ 460 ft ) from the aircraft to the terrain . During final approach , the ground proximity warning system was activated nine seconds before impact , which lasted until impact . Six seconds before impact , the radio altimeter warning was activated . At 08 : 22 : 23 UTC ( 10 : 22 : 23 local CEST ) the aircraft collided with the top of Operafjellet at 907 metres ( 2 @,@ 976 ft ) elevation , located 14 @.@ 2 kilometres ( 8 @.@ 8 mi ) from Svalbard Airport and 3 @.@ 7 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 3 mi ) right of the approach centerline . The aircraft was destroyed and all occupants perished instantly . It is the single deadliest plane crash to have occurred on Norwegian soil . 
 = = = Recovery = = = 
 The Joint Rescue Coordination Centre of Northern Norway received a message about the crash at 10 : 30 CEST ( 8 : 30 UTC ) and the search and rescue service was immediately deployed . This included seven Norwegian aircraft that were in the area . The area had bad weather with a low cloud height , resulting in difficult searching conditions . The aircraft was found at 12 : 06 CEST at Operafjellet , 14 kilometres ( 8 @.@ 7 mi ) east of Svalbard Airport . Most of the aircraft was located on the mountain 's plateau , although some debris had slid down a vertical cliff and was scattered along the valley and partially covered by an avalanche . Rescue workers and medics from Longyearbyen Hospital arrived at 12 : 36 , and quickly established that there were no survivors . 
 The responsibility of the recovery was transferred to the Governor of Svalbard on 30 August , since there were no survivors . In addition , police personnel from the mainland were transferred to Svalbard to work with the investigation and recovery . The work was supplemented by local volunteers . Because of the bad weather , which included fog and snow , it was often impossible to transport workers to the plateau , and work therefore started in the valley . 
 Governor Ann @-@ Kristin Olsen traveled to Barentsburg on 30 August to inform the communities about the accident , and distributed ample written information in Russian about the then @-@ known details about the crash . Later in the day , a Russian aircraft arrived with Deputy Minister Aleksandr Petrovich of the Ministry of Emergency Situations along with a team of 11 rescue workers , and representatives from the Interstate Aviation Committee ( IAC ) , the Embassy of Ukraine in Moscow , the Federal Air Transport Agency and Vnukovo Airlines . In a meeting that evening , the Governor accepted Russia assistance , while it was confirmed by international agreement that the investigation would be led by the authorities in the country where the accident occurred , Norway . On 31 August , Minister of Justice Grete <unk> visited the Russian settlements as a representative from the Government of Norway . 
 The accident had a large impact on the community , with only 1 @,@ 600 people living in the two Russian settlements . The population in the communities do not speak Norwegian , and do not have a road connection to Longyearbyen . This made it difficult for the Governor to give accurate and detailed information . Issues were further complicated by erroneous reports in Russian media that there were five survivors . The Governor 's cabin in Barentsburg was manned during the aftermath , and bulletins were distributed with updated information in Russian . The accident was one of the triggers causing <unk> to abandon Pyramiden in 1998 . 
 = = Investigation = = 
 Agreements between Norwegian and Russian authorities were made on 31 August , where Norway resumed full responsibility for the recovery and investigation , but Russian help was accepted . To allow the Russian workers access from the morning of 1 September , the crew was allowed to fly in and establish a base camp , but no work was to be done until Norwegian supervisors arrived in the morning . However , two people were observed at the wreck at about 20 : 00 CEST , who were brought to the Governor 's offices for questioning . As they were both members of the Russian team , it was decided that the base would be disbanded . 
 There was still fog on the plateau on 1 September , but by 15 : 00 CEST it was possible to fly a team there by helicopter . Because the fog stayed , the team retained work until 03 : 00 CEST in the night . In the following days , the fog lifted , making work and transport easier . By 5 September , all bodies had been recovered and the work at the plateau could be terminated . The recovery in the valley was completed two days later . The accident resulted in about 40 journalists staying in Svalbard to cover the story . The Norwegian authority 's costs related to the investigation and other activities related to the accident were estimated at 30 million Norwegian krone ( NOK ) . 
 All identification of people was performed in Tromsø , as a cooperation between Troms Police District , National Criminal Investigation Service and the University Hospital of North Norway . By 18 September , all people had been identified , and the bodies were transported to Russia and Ukraine on 20 September after a short memorial in <unk> . An autopsy was performed on all crew members , without finding any abnormalities . 
 The official responsibility for investigating the incident lay with the Air Accident Investigation Board / Norway ( AAIB / N ) , although the investigation and report was a close cooperation with the Interstate Aviation Committee and to a lesser extent , the Federal Air Transport Agency . AAIB / N had the primary responsibility for investigations at the crash site , cooperation with the Norwegian police and the Norwegian Civil Aviation Administration , and writing the report . IAC was responsible for handling the investigations in Russia , the reading of the cockpit voice recorder , the flight data recorder , the relationship with Vnukovo Airlines and a test flight . Both agencies agreed that English was to be the language of the final report ; English is one of the ICAO languages . 
 = = = Cause = = = 
 The official investigation concluded that the flight , regarded as a controlled flight into terrain , was caused by pilot errors and that there was no fault with the aircraft . Contributing factors causing the accident were lack of a procedure for offset localizer approach for setting approach course on the HSIs . Thus , both HSIs were set incorrectly , which along with the course deviation indicator hinted that the plane was being blown to the left and needed to adjust course to the right . Because he was in a stressed situation , the navigator set the GPS in the wrong mode . He also did not have sufficient time to <unk> his work , allowing mistakes to happen , and his work was not monitored by the pilots . As the navigator was overworked , it was inappropriate for the first officer to transfer the responsibility of lateral control to him . 
 The AFIS air controller has a different role in Norway than in Russia , and the crew were not aware that they were being given information and advice , rather than orders . Communication with AFIS was left with the navigator , which is a breach of norms . Communication between air control and the crew was problematic , since the crew lacked sufficient English skills . The pilot in command had insufficient crew resource management . After the crew decided to carry out the approach to Runway 28 , a new approach briefing was not accomplished . The aircraft overshot the approach centerline when turning inbound , because they did not try to intercept the outbound track from Advent . The crew showed a lack of situational awareness following their uncertainty of the aircraft position in relation to <unk> 28 , caused by indications on the HSIs . 
 Situational awareness was also reduced because the pilots did not have a chart in front of them at all times . The crew was not aware that they could check the aircraft location in relation to the centerline with a <unk> . The crew probably put too much emphasis on the indications displayed by the GPS . The aircraft descended into mountainous terrain without control over the lateral navigation . Despite uncertainty and disagreement in the group , the approach was not abandoned , as the aircraft should have climbed to a safe altitude while the problem was solved . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 On 20 September , the surviving relatives of each decedent received 2 million Russian rubles about US $ 40 @,@ 000 for each person who died in the accident . Ukrainian relatives stated to Norwegian media that they had not received information about the cause and other issues surrounding the accident . At the time , Ukraine was experiencing very high unemployment , and Arktikugol offered wages many times what was then offered in mainland Ukraine . Many miners not only had to support their immediate family , but also relatives . Vnukovo Airlines stated on Ukrainian television that the relatives would receive US $ 20 @,@ 000 per deceased person . About a year after the accident , all relatives had been offered US $ 20 @,@ 000 , but about two @-@ thirds of them chose not to accept the amount , and instead started a process to sue the insurance company . Their lawyer , Gunnar <unk> , stated that according to both Norwegian and Russian law , they could demand at least US $ 140 @,@ 000 . 
 In February 1998 , the Norwegian Ministry of Justice stated that the relatives did not have a right to occupational injury compensation from the Norwegian National Insurance . Because of the Svalbard Treaty , the archipelago is an economic free zone and Arktikugol is exempt from paying social insurance , so its employees did not have a right to Norwegian benefits . Had this been the case , widows would have received about NOK 600 @,@ 000 per worker . By 1998 , a few of the relatives had accepted the US $ 20 @,@ 000 compensation , while the rest of them were planning to sue both the airline 's insurance company and Arktikugol . Among the issues in the case , which took place at Nord @-@ Troms District Court , was whether the accident was to be considered a working accident , and thus result in injury compensation from the mining company . In November , it was decided that the Ukrainians needed to make a guarantee for NOK 2 @.@ 5 million to run the case , which they could not afford . They therefore had no alternative than to accept the proposal from the insurance company . In June 1999 , the parties agreed on a settlement , where the compensation was not disclosed to the public . It was later disclosed that the settlement was about three times the initial offer from the insurance company . In 1999 , the Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs established a scholarship to help children who lost a parent in the accident to take senior secondary and tertiary education . 
 = Alapalooza = 
 Alapalooza is the eighth studio album by " Weird Al " Yankovic , released in 1993 . By the completion of his previous album , Off the Deep End , Yankovic had already written all of the original songs that he planned to use on his next release . This new album , which would eventually be titled Alapalooza in reference to the music festival Lollapalooza , consisted of seven original songs and five parodies . It produced three parody singles : " Jurassic Park " , " Bedrock Anthem " , and " Achy Breaky Song " . " Jurassic Park " was a top five hit on the Canadian magazine The Record 's single chart . 
 Among the album 's original creations were " Talk Soup " , a tune originally intended to replace the theme song of the television show of the same name , and " Harvey the Wonder Hamster " , a oft @-@ requested jingle from one of Yankovic 's Al TV specials . A music video compilation , entitled Alapalooza : the Videos , was released the following year and contained four videos , only two of which were from its eponymous album . One of the videos , the one for " Jurassic Park " , was animated entirely in the style of claymation and received a nomination for the Grammy Award for Best Short Form Music Video at the 37th Grammy Awards , losing to " Love Is Strong " from The Rolling Stones . 
 Alapalooza met with average to negative reception upon its release , with some critics commenting that the album seemed hurried and out of touch with contemporary music . The video offering received a similarly lukewarm response . Nonetheless the album was certified " gold " in the United States by the Recording Industry Association of America by the end of the year , peaking at number 46 on the Billboard 200 , and went " double platinum " in Canada . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Yankovic 's 1992 album Off the Deep End , his best @-@ selling album since 1984 's " Weird Al " Yankovic in 3 @-@ D , had revived his career and displayed his " credibility as an evolving artist " after the commercial failures of his 1986 work Polka Party ! and his feature film UHF . By the time production for Off the Deep End was nearing completion , Yankovic had already written all of the original songs that would be eventually included on Alapalooza . Fearing that his track " I Was Only Kidding " would be outdated by the time of his next album , he rearranged Off the Deep End to allow for the song to be released with the album , saving " Waffle King " for Alapalooza . Nevertheless , " Waffle King " was released as a B @-@ side to Off the Deep End 's " Smells Like Nirvana " single , " just in case there wasn 't going to be a next album . " He recorded all of the album 's original songs , except " Talk Soup " and " Harvey the Wonder Hamster " , by the end of 1992 and , in July 1993 , recorded all of Alapalooza 's remaining tracks , aside from " Livin ' In The Fridge " . Yankovic eventually decided to title his new album Alapalooza , a reference to the Lollapalooza music festival . The Yankovic dinosaur in the album 's booklet was designed by David Peters , who had worked previously with the singer on the " Dare to Be Stupid " video . 
 Alapalooza was released on October 5 , 1993 in the United States . Globally , some versions included a notice distinguishing it from the official Jurassic Park film soundtrack , as the two cover designs were similar . The Japanese edition contained a bonus track of Yankovic singing " Jurassic Park " in Japanese . A music video compilation for the album , entitled Alapalooza : the Videos , was released in February 1994 and contained four videos , only two of which ( Jurassic Park and Bedrock Anthem ) were from Alapalooza . 
 = = = Originals = = = 
 Alapalooza contains seven original songs among its twelve tracks , although " Young , Dumb & Ugly " and " Frank 's 2000 " TV " were meant to be stylistic parodies of AC / DC and the early work of R.E.M. , respectively . For the former , Yankovic wanted to parody the heavy metal music genre while at the same time avoiding a repetition of what had already been done by Spinal Tap . He ended up disliking the final product because he sang it " in a register that was really too high for [ his ] singing voice " . The latter was a song about consumerism and modern electronics that described the neighborhood 's envy of the eponymous character 's new television . 
 The song " Talk Soup " , which is about a man who desires to go on television to tell the world about his strange life , was originally commissioned as a new theme for the E ! Entertainment Television show of the same name . Although the producers approved the lyrics and enjoyed the final result , they decided against using it . " Waffle King " , the track that had been intended for Off the Deep End , was written as " a song about a guy who becomes incredibly famous for doing something kinda stupid , and then starts taking himself way too seriously " . Yankovic included " Harvey the Wonder Hamster " , a short tune from one of his Al TV appearances , after receiving numerous requests to include it on an album . 
 = = = Parodies = = = 
 Yankovic 's first single from Alapalooza was " Jurassic Park " , a parody of the Jimmy Webb song " MacArthur Park " that was first performed by Richard Harris in 1968 . After hearing " Lola " by The Kinks on the radio and recalling how much he had enjoyed his previous pairing of a contemporary film with a classic song ( 1985 's " Yoda " ) , Yankovic came up with the idea for a tune based around the recently released Jurassic Park film . He received permission from Webb , Jurassic Park author Michael Crichton , and director Steven Spielberg to produce the track . For the music video Yankovic collaborated with animators Mark Osborne and Scott Nordlund to produce a claymation feature that parodied scenes from the movie ; the song itself was a comedic retelling of the film 's plot interspersed with the gripes about his visit to the park . The music video was directed by Osborne and Nordlund , while Yankovic came up with the original concept and ideas for some of the shots ; Osborne said that the directors " came up with about half the ideas in collaboration " with Yankovic . 
 Having always wanted to write a tribute to The Flintstones , Yankovic next focused his energy on creating a song that he hoped would be current with the impending release of The Flintstones live action film in 1994 . In order to collect sound bites and animation and " re @-@ familiarize " himself with the characters , Yankovic watched over 100 episodes of the original show . A parody of both Red Hot Chili Peppers 's " Under the Bridge " and " Give It Away " , the resulting song was a comedic tribute to the program . It ended up becoming the second single released from Alapalooza . Yankovic directed the video for the single , which featured scenes of band members playing the song in Bedrock dressed as characters from the show . In the third and final single , " Achy Breaky Song " , a parody of Billy Ray Cyrus ' " Achy Breaky Heart " , Yankovic lists things he would rather experience than having to listen to the original track . The parody received radio play on country music stations in the United States . The proceeds from the track were donated to United Cerebral Palsy , as both Cyrus and Yankovic felt that the song was " a little bit [ ... ] mean @-@ spirited " . 
 " Livin ' in the Fridge " , a parody of Aerosmith 's " Livin ' on the Edge " that discusses leftovers that have grown sentient in the refrigerator , was the last song to be recorded for the album . With a deadline looming , Yankovic sent requests to several artists to do parodies of their songs and went with Aerosmith because they replied first . It was recorded a month after the rest of the tracks had been finalized and less than two months prior to the album 's release . The album includes a polka medley , a staple of Yankovic 's albums , called " Bohemian Polka " . Unlike previous medleys , which had featured portions of multiple songs , " Bohemian Polka " contains only one tune , Queen 's " Bohemian Rhapsody " , and is a rearrangement of the entire song as a polka . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Critical response to Alapalooza ranged from average to negative . In The Rolling Stone Album Guide Alapalooza earned 2 @.@ 5 stars out of 5 , which ranked it somewhere between " mediocre " and " good " . Anthony Violanti of The Buffalo News gave the album three stars out of five , claiming that " [ o ] nce again , Weird Al gets the last laugh on rock ' n ' roll " . Barry Weber of Allmusic , on the other hand , criticized the album for failing to engage contemporary musical trends and said it " sounds sloppy and mostly like a compilation of old B @-@ sides " . Christopher Thelen of The Daily Vault agreed , calling the album " rushed " and " an incredible disappointment " , and said it was one of the lows of Yankovic 's career . Thelen 's limited praise is directed at only two songs on the album : " Livin ' In The Fridge " and " Achy Breaky Song " , both of which he claimed " have [ their ] moments " . In reference to the album 's polka tune , Mark Jenkins of The Washington Post wrote that it " doesn 't sound all that different " from the original . 
 Entertainment Weekly felt that overall Alapalooza : the Videos was " amusing " , but referred to the claymation video for the " Jurassic Park " as " clever but toothless " . The magazine gave the collection an overall grade of " C " and argued that Yankovic 's parodies did not satirize the original material , but instead transposed new elements on top of them . The video for " Jurassic Park " was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Short Form Music Video at the 37th Grammy Awards , but lost to the video for " Love Is Strong " by The Rolling Stones . Nonetheless , it received attention in animation festivals worldwide for its use of claymation effects . 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 Released in October 1993 , Alapalooza was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America on December 23 , 1993 , representing sales of at least 500 @,@ 000 units . The video compilation , released on February 1 , 1994 , went gold in the United States on August 14 , 1995 , representing sales of at least 50 @,@ 000 units . In Canada the album went gold on November 16 , 1993 , platinum on January 31 , 1994 , and double platinum on February 12 , 1998 , representing sales of 50 @,@ 000 , 100 @,@ 000 , and 200 @,@ 000 units respectively . The album peaked at number 46 on the United States ' Billboard 200 chart on October 30 , 1993 , but produced no charting singles . In Canada , however , " Jurassic Park " was a top five hit on the The Record 's single chart . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 The following is adapted from the album liner notes . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = HMS Cochrane ( 1905 ) = 
 HMS Cochrane was a Warrior @-@ class armoured cruiser built for the Royal Navy in the first decade of the 20th century . She served in the 2nd Cruiser Squadron during the First World War under Rear @-@ Admiral Herbert Heath , taking part in the Battle of Jutland in 1916 . She was based in Murmansk in mid @-@ 1918 during the Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War . She became stranded in the River Mersey on 14 November 1918 and broke in two . The wreck was broken up in place by June 1919 . 
 = = Description = = 
 Cochrane displaced 13 @,@ 550 long tons ( 13 @,@ 770 t ) as built and 14 @,@ 500 long tons ( 14 @,@ 700 t ) fully loaded , with a length of 505 feet 4 inches ( 154 @.@ 0 m ) , a beam of 73 feet 6 inches ( 22 @.@ 4 m ) and a draft of 27 feet 6 inches ( 8 @.@ 4 m ) . She was powered by four @-@ cylinder triple @-@ expansion steam engines , driving two shafts , which developed a total of 23 @,@ 650 indicated horsepower ( 17 @,@ 640 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 23 @.@ 3 knots ( 43 @.@ 2 km / h ; 26 @.@ 8 mph ) . The engines were powered by 19 Yarrow water @-@ tube boilers and six cylindrical boilers . The ship carried a maximum of 2 @,@ 050 long tons ( 2 @,@ 080 t ) of coal and an additional 600 long tons ( 610 t ) of fuel oil that was sprayed on the coal to increase its burn rate . At full capacity , she could steam for 7 @,@ 960 nautical miles ( 14 @,@ 740 km ; 9 @,@ 160 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 Her main armament consisted of six BL 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch ( 234 mm ) Mark X guns in single Mk V turrets distributed in two centerline turrets ( one each fore and one aft ) and four turrets disposed in the corners about the funnels . Her secondary armament of four BL 7 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 191 mm ) Mark II or Mark V guns in single Mk II turrets was carried amidships , between the wing 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch guns . Twenty @-@ six Vickers QF 3 pounders were fitted , ten on turret roofs and eight each on the forward and aft superstructures . The last four ships of the Duke of Edinburgh @-@ class cruisers had a secondary armament of turreted 7 @.@ 5 @-@ inch guns rather than the 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) guns in open barbettes of the first two ships ; these latter four were sometimes referred to as the Warrior class . Because of the extra topweight of the turrets in comparison to their half @-@ sisters their stability was reduced which made them very good seaboats and steady gun platforms . 
 = = = Wartime modifications = = = 
 A single Hotchkiss QF 6 @-@ pounder anti @-@ aircraft gun on a high @-@ angle Mark Ic mounting was mounted on the quarterdeck in 1915 . It had a maximum depression of 8 ° and a maximum elevation of 60 ° . The gun fired a 6 @-@ pound ( 2 @.@ 7 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 765 ft / s ( 538 m / s ) at a rate of fire of 20 rounds per minute . They had a maximum ceiling of 10 @,@ 000 ft ( 3 @,@ 000 m ) , but an effective range of only 1 @,@ 200 yards ( 1 @,@ 100 m ) . It was replaced by a QF 3 inch 20 cwt guns on a high @-@ angle Mark II mount in 1916 . This gun had a maximum depression of 10 ° and a maximum elevation of 90 ° . It fired a 12 @.@ 5 @-@ pound ( 5 @.@ 7 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 500 ft / s ( 760 m / s ) at a rate of 12 – 14 rounds per minute . It had a maximum effective ceiling of 23 @,@ 500 ft ( 7 @,@ 200 m ) . A pair of Vickers QF 3 pounder on HA Mark III mountings were probably installed amidships during 1915 – 16 . They could elevate to + 80 ° and depress to -5 ° . This gun fired a 3 @.@ 3 @-@ pound ( 1 @.@ 5 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 575 ft / s ( 785 m / s ) at a rate of 25 rounds per minute . They had a maximum ceiling of 15 @,@ 000 ft ( 4 @,@ 600 m ) , but an effective range of only 2 @,@ 000 yards ( 1 @,@ 800 m ) . 
 The guns on top of ' A ' and ' Y ' turrets were removed in 1915 – 16 . The aftermost 3 @-@ pounder guns on the superstructure were removed during 1917 as well as the guns on top of the forward 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch wing turrets . This reduced her total to twenty 3 @-@ pounder guns , excluding the AA guns . Some of these guns were landed at Murmansk while she was based there . Seventeen 3 @-@ pounders were on board when she was lost in 1919 , but it is unclear if that total includes the AA guns . Cochrane 's foremast was converted to a tripod mast to support the weight of a fire @-@ control director in 1917 , but the director was not actually fitted until August 1918 . 
 = = Service = = 
 Cochrane was laid down on 24 March 1904 and launched on 28 May 1905 at Fairfield Shipbuilding and Engineering , Govan , Scotland . The ship was commissioned with a nucleus crew on 18 February 1907 and cost £ 1 @,@ 193 @,@ 121 . She " joined the Nore Division of the Home Fleet on 6 March 1907 and shortly afterwards was brought into to full commission for service with the 5th Cruiser Squadron . On 1 April 1909 she recommissioned for service with the 2nd Cruiser Squadron with which she remained until September 1917 . " She escorted the Royal Yacht Medina in 1911 – 12 . Cochrane , accompanied by her sister Achilles and three other armoured cruisers were sent to reinforce the defences of the Shetland Islands on 2 August 1914 , days before the start of the First World War . She , and her squadron , were assigned to the Grand Fleet for most of the First World War . She took part in the Battle of Jutland on 31 May – 1 June 1916 , along with the cruisers Minotaur , Shannon , and Hampshire under the command of Rear @-@ Admiral Heath . However , the ship remained unengaged throughout the battle , and did not fire her 9 @.@ 2 or 7 @.@ 5 @-@ inch guns at all during the battle . 
 Cochrane was transferred to the North America and West Indies station in November 1917 , but rejoined the 2nd Cruiser Squadron early in 1918 . She was based in Murmansk between March and September 1918 during the Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War . She ferried Soviet troops to Pechenga on 3 May to forestall an attempt by White Finns to seize the town . On 14 November 1918 she was stranded in the Mersey Estuary , while under the control of the pilot , and later broke in two , becoming a total loss . The wreck had been broken up in situ by June 1919 . 
 = French destroyer Jaguar = 
 The French destroyer Jaguar was a Chacal @-@ class destroyer ( contre @-@ torpilleur ) built for the French Navy during the 1920s . She spent most of her pre @-@ World War II career as a flagship for various destroyer units . The ship was assigned convoy escort duties in the Atlantic after the start of the World War II in September 1939 until she was badly damaged during a collision in January 1940 . Five months later , after her repairs were completed , she was committed to the English Channel after the Battle of France began in May 1940 . Jaguar was torpedoed by German E @-@ boats on 23 May and had to beach herself ; her wreck was written off as <unk> . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The Chacal @-@ class ships were designed to counter the large Italian Leone @-@ class destroyers . They had an overall length of 126 @.@ 8 meters ( 416 ft 0 in ) , a beam of 11 @.@ 1 meters ( 36 ft 5 in ) , and a draft of 4 @.@ 1 meters ( 13 ft 5 in ) . The ships displaced 2 @,@ 126 metric tons ( 2 @,@ 092 long tons ) at standard and 2 @,@ 980 – 3 @,@ 075 metric tons ( 2 @,@ 933 – 3 @,@ 026 long tons ) at deep load . They were powered by two geared steam turbines , each driving one propeller shaft , using steam provided by five du Temple boilers . The turbines were designed to produce 50 @,@ 000 metric horsepower ( 37 @,@ 000 kW ; 49 @,@ 000 shp ) , which would propel the ship at 35 @.@ 5 knots ( 65 @.@ 7 km / h ; 40 @.@ 9 mph ) . During her sea trials on 18 May 1926 , Jaguar 's turbines provided 57 @,@ 850 metric horsepower ( 42 @,@ 550 kW ; 57 @,@ 060 shp ) and she reached 35 @.@ 27 knots ( 65 @.@ 32 km / h ; 40 @.@ 59 mph ) for a single hour . The ships carried 530 metric tons ( 522 long tons ) of fuel oil which gave them a range of 3 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 5 @,@ 600 km ; 3 @,@ 500 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . Their crew consisted of 10 officers and 187 crewmen in peacetime and 12 officers and 209 enlisted men in wartime . Jaguar was unique among the Chacals in being fitted to serve as a flagship and equipped to accommodate the admiral and his staff of four officers . 
 The main armament of the Chacal @-@ class ships consisted of five Canon de 130 mm modèle 1919 guns in single mounts , one superfiring pair fore and aft of the superstructure and the fifth gun abaft the aft funnel . The guns were numbered ' 1' to ' 5' from front to rear . Their anti @-@ aircraft armament consisted of two Canon de 75 mm modèle 1924 guns in single mounts positioned amidships . The ships carried two above @-@ water triple sets of 550 @-@ millimeter ( 21 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes . A pair of depth charge chutes were built into their stern ; these housed a total of twenty 200 @-@ kilogram ( 440 lb ) depth charges . They were also fitted with four depth @-@ charge throwers for which they carried a dozen 100 @-@ kilogram ( 220 lb ) depth charges . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 Jaguar , named after the eponymous feline , was ordered on 18 April 1922 from the Arsenal de Lorient . She was laid down on 24 August 1922 on No. 7 slipway , launched on 17 November 1923 , completed on 7 October 1926 and entered service on 19 November . Completion was delayed by problems with her propulsion machinery and late deliveries by sub @-@ contractors . Even before she was formally completed , she participated in a Baltic cruise in mid @-@ 1926 and visited Dakar , French West Africa in December . She made another port visit in April 1927 at Seville , Spain . The following month she was one of the ships that escorted Gaston Doumergue , President of France , across the English Channel during his state visit to Britain . Jaguar then accompanied the light cruiser Lamotte @-@ <unk> as she visited Dakar and Buenos Aires , Argentina between June and September . The ship became the flagship of the Group of Torpedo Boat Flotillas ( later redesignated as the 1st Torpedo Boat Flotilla ) of the 1st Squadron ( <unk> Escadre ) , based at Toulon , on 1 May 1928 . Two months later , she hosted <unk> as he reviewed the fleet off Le Havre on 3 July . 
 Two years later , the ship participated in the naval review at Algiers on 10 May 1930 commemorating the centenary of the first French landing in Algeria on 13 June 1830 . The four depth charge throwers were removed in 1932 . About two years later , the 75 @-@ millimeter guns were replaced by four twin mounts for 13 @.@ 2 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 5 in ) anti @-@ aircraft machineguns . Jaguar became the flagship of the 2nd Torpedo Boat Flotilla of the 2nd Squadron ( 2e Escadre ) at Brest on 5 July 1935 . After completing their maneuvers , the combined Brest and Toulon squadrons , including Jaguar , were reviewed in the Baie de <unk> by the Naval Minister , François <unk> , on 27 June 1936 . The following year , the ship participated in the fleet review by the new Navy Minister , Alphonse <unk> @-@ Duparc , off Brest on 27 May 1937 . The ship was relieved as flagship on 26 September , but temporarily resumed her former role from 1 March to 22 June 1939 while Bison was under repair after a collision . 
 When the war started in September 1939 , Jaguar belonged to the 2nd Large Destroyer Division ( 2e division de contre @-@ torpilleur ) ( DCT ) with her sisters Chacal and Léopard . Between October and December , the ship had two depth @-@ charge throwers reinstalled , No. 3 gun removed , and her depth charge stowage reduced to a dozen 200 kg and eight 100 kg depth charges to improve her stability . She was assigned to the Western Command ( Forces maritimes de l 'Ouest ) for convoy escort duties from October to January 1940 where she guarded convoys traveling between Gibraltar and Brest as well as Casablanca , French Morocco , and Le Verdon @-@ sur @-@ Mer . On the night of 16 / 17 January 1940 , Jaguar was accidentally rammed by the British destroyer Keppel . The collision killed one crewman aboard the French ship and Keppel 's bow penetrated all the way to Jaguar 's midline . The ship was able to reach Brest on 19 January to begin repairs that lasted until early May . She had a British Type 123 ASDIC installed in March and was fitted with degaussing equipment the following month . 
 After the beginning of the Battle of France on 10 May , the 2nd DCT was transferred to the English Channel to support British forces there . On 23 May , entering Dunkirk harbor with a demolition team aboard , Jaguar was struck by a torpedo fired by either the E @-@ boat S @-@ 21 or S @-@ 23 . The detonation killed 13 men and wounded 23 ; the ship had to be beached at Malo @-@ les @-@ Bains lest she sink , and was written off . 
 = The Boat Race 1841 = 
 The 5th Boat Race took place on the River Thames on 14 April 1841 . It was the fourth of the University Boat Races , a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford and the University of Cambridge , to be contested in London . The race was held between Westminster Bridge and Putney Bridge and was won by Cambridge , whose crew featured two pairs of brothers rowing , who defeated Oxford by a distance of 22 lengths in a time of 32 minutes and 30 seconds . The victory took the overall record in the event to 4 – 1 in Cambridge 's favour . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and takes place on the River Thames in southwest London . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having won the previous year 's race by three @-@ quarters of a length . 
 There was some disagreement over the day selected for the race , mainly in an attempt to coincide with a suitable tide . The Cambridge cox for the 1839 race , Thomas Selby Egan , along with Oxford 's R. G. Walls were umpires for the race along with referee Edmund Antrobus from St John 's College , Cambridge . Both universities rowed in boats constructed by Searle of <unk> ; the vessels were " justly and generally admired " , the only significant difference between them being that Oxford 's boat was carvel built while Cambridge 's was clinker built . The race took place on a five @-@ and @-@ three @-@ quarter @-@ mile ( 9 @.@ 2 km ) stretch of the Thames between Westminster Bridge and Putney Bridge . No arrangements had been made for the police to keep the course clear : according to Cambridge 's number seven George Denman " it was often <unk> work for the coxswains to decide whether to go ahead or astern of a train of barges catering across the river " . According to a report in The Morning Chronicle , " both crews ... have agreed that the match will be off if any of the steamers attempt to lead " . 
 Oxford arrived at the Thames fifteen days prior the race , and rowed the full course ; Cambridge started their practice runs four days later , often racing against a crew from the Cambridge Subscription Room ( who subsequently won the Grand Challenge Cup at the Henley Royal Regatta ) . George Denman suffered an injury during practice , struck " by a tremendous blow on the shoulder " which was all but cured by the application of " just one leech " . Oxford 's crew was not settled until three days before the race , when they competed against a crew from Leander Club . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Cambridge crew weighed an average of 11 st 4 @.@ 625 lb ( 71 @.@ 8 kg ) , 0 @.@ 5 pounds ( 0 @.@ 2 kg ) per rower more than their Dark Blue opposition . Cambridge 's crew contained three Blues : John Matthew Ridley , Francis Penrose and Charles Marsh <unk> , all of whom had rowed in the previous year 's race . Similarly , Oxford saw the return of four members with Boat Race experience : Jacob G. Mountain , E. Royds , G. Meynell and J. J. T. Somers @-@ Cocks . For the first time in the history of the race , two pairs of brothers rowed for Cambridge , the <unk> ( Joseph and William ) and the <unk> ( George and Lewis ) . 
 = = Race = = 
 Cambridge were considered favourites for the race , mainly as they had won the previous three races on the Thames . The Light Blues won the toss and elected to start at the first arch from the centre of Westminster Bridge on the Surrey side , Oxford from the next arch along . The race commenced at 6 : 10 p.m. , with the Light Blues making the better start , taking an early lead , and getting clear by Lambeth . A lead of at least two lengths by Vauxhall Bridge was extended to around six lengths by Battersea Bridge . 
 Cambridge won by 22 lengths in a time of 32 minutes 30 seconds . It was their fourth consecutive victory and took the overall record to 4 – 1 in their favour . Despite earlier fears , " the steamers were well managed , and offered no obstruction to the boats " . 
 = Polaris expedition = 
 The Polaris expedition ( 1871 ) was led by the American Charles Francis Hall , who intended it to be the first expedition to reach the North Pole . Sponsored by the United States government , it was one of the first serious attempts at the Pole , after that of British naval officer William Edward Parry , who in 1827 reached latitude 82 ° 45 ′ North . The expedition failed at its main objective , having been troubled throughout by insubordination , incompetence , and poor leadership . 
 Under Hall 's command , the Polaris departed from New York City in June 1871 . By October , the men were wintering on the shore of northern Greenland , making preparations for the trip to the Pole . Hall returned to the ship from an exploratory sledging journey , and promptly fell ill . Before he died , he accused members of the crew of poisoning him . An exhumation of his body in 1968 revealed that he had ingested a large quantity of arsenic in the last two weeks of his life . 
 The expedition 's notable achievement was reaching 82 ° <unk> latitude by ship , a record at the time . On the way southward , nineteen members of the expedition became separated from the ship and drifted on an ice floe for six months and 1 @,@ 800 miles ( 2 @,@ 900 km ) before being rescued . The damaged Polaris was run aground and wrecked near Etah , Greenland , in October 1872 . The remaining men were able to survive the winter , and were rescued the following summer . A naval board of inquiry investigated Hall 's death , but no charges were ever laid . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 In 1827 , William Edward Parry led a British Royal Navy expedition with the aim to be the first men to reach the North Pole . In the 50 years following Parry 's attempt , the Americans would mount three such expeditions : Elisha Kent Kane in 1853 – 55 , Isaac Israel Hayes in 1860 – 61 , and Charles Francis Hall with the Polaris in 1871 – 73 . 
 Hall had no special academic background or sailing experience ( he was a blacksmith , engraver , then owner of a Cincinnati newspaper ) , but he was a voracious reader with an obsession for the Arctic . After John Franklin 's 1845 expedition was lost , Hall 's focus was directed toward the Arctic . He was able to launch two expeditions in search of Franklin and his crew ; one in 1860 – 63 , and a second in 1864 – 69 . These experiences established him as a seasoned Arctic explorer , and gave him valuable contacts among the Inuit people . The renown he gained eventually allowed him to convince the United States government to fund his third expedition , an attempt on the North Pole . 
 = = = Finance and materiel = = = 
 In 1870 , a bill was introduced in the Senate called the Arctic Resolution , to fund an expedition to the North Pole . Hall , aided by the Secretary of the Navy George M. Robeson , successfully lobbied for , and received , a grant of $ 50 @,@ 000 from the U.S. Congress to command the expedition and began recruiting personnel in late 1870 . He secured the U.S. Navy tugboat <unk> , a 387 @-@ ton screw @-@ propelled steamer . At the Washington Navy Yard the ship was fitted as a fore topsail schooner , and renamed Polaris . She was prepared for Arctic service by the addition of solid oak timber all over her hull , and the bow was sheathed in iron . A new engine was added , and one of the boilers was retrofitted to burn seal or whale oil . 
 The ship was also outfitted with four whaleboats , 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) long and 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) wide , and a flat @-@ bottomed scow . During his previous Arctic expeditions , Hall came to admire the Inuit <unk> , and brought a similarly constructed collapsible boat which could hold 20 men . Food packed on board consisted of tinned ham , salted beef , bread and sailor 's biscuit . The men intended to supplement their diet with fresh muskox , seal and polar bear , in order to ward off scurvy . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 In the spring of 1871 , U.S. President Ulysses S. Grant had named Hall as overall commander of the expedition , and he was being referred to as Captain . Though Hall had abundant Arctic experience , he had no sailing experience , and so the title was purely honorary . In selecting the officers and seamen , Hall relied heavily on whalers with experience in the Arctic . This was markedly different from the polar expeditions of the British Admiralty , which tended to use naval officers and highly disciplined crews . 
 For his selection of sailing master , Hall first turned to Sidney O. Budington , then to George Tyson , who both initially declined due to prior whaling commitments . When those commitments fell through , Hall named Budington as sailing master and Tyson assistant navigator . Budington and Tyson had decades of experience between them captaining whaling vessels . In effect , the Polaris now had three captains , a fact which would weigh heavily on the fate of the expedition . Further complicating matters , in 1863 Budington and Hall had quarrelled because Budington had denied permission for Hall to bring his Inuit guides , Joseph Ebierbing and Tookoolito , with him on an expedition at a time when they were ill and in Budington 's care . 
 The rest of the officers and scientific staff were Americans ( first mate Hubbard Chester , second mate William Morton , and astronomer and chaplain <unk> Bryan ) and Germans ( chief scientist and surgeon Emil Bessels and meteorologist Frederick Meyer ) . The seamen were mostly German , as was chief engineer Emil Schumann . In addition to the 25 officers , crew , and scientific staff , Hall brought Inuit interpreter and hunter Ebierbing , his wife Tookoolito , and their child . A Greenlandic aboriginal named Hans Hendrik , his wife <unk> and three children also joined the expedition . 
 = = Expedition = = 
 = = = New York to Upernavik = = = 
 Even before leaving the Brooklyn Navy Yard on June 29 , 1871 , the expedition ran into personnel troubles . The cook , a seaman , a fireman , and assistant engineer Wilson deserted . The steward turned out to be a drunk , and was left in port . 
 The ship stopped in New London , Connecticut , to pick up a replacement assistant engineer , leaving on July 3 , 1871 . By the time the ship reached St. John 's , there was dissension among the officers and scientific staff . Bessels , backed up by Meyer , had openly rejected Hall 's command over the scientific staff . The dissension spread to the crew , which was divided along nationalist lines . In his diary , Assistant Navigator George Tyson wrote that by the time they reached Disko Island , Greenland , " ... expressions are freely made that Hall shall not get any credit from this expedition . Already some have made up their minds how far they will go and when they will get home again . " Hall asked Captain Davenport of the supply ship Congress to intervene . Davenport threatened to have Meyer shackled for insubordination and sent back to the United States , at which point all of the Germans threatened to quit . Hall and Davenport were forced to back down , however Davenport delivered a strongly worded speech on naval discipline to the crew . 
 In another open display of dissent , the ship 's boilers had been tampered with by one of the crew . The special blubber @-@ fired boilers had disappeared , apparently thrown overboard . 
 On Aug 18 , 1871 , the ship reached Upernavik on Greenland 's west coast , where they picked up the Inuit hunter and interpreter Hans Hendrik . The Polaris proceeded north through Smith Sound and Nares Strait , passing previous furthest north records ( by ship ) held by Elisha Kane and Isaac Hayes . 
 = = = Polar preparations and Hall 's death = = = 
 By Sept . 2 , 1871 , Polaris had reached her furthest north of 82 ° <unk> . Tension flared again as the three leading officers could not agree on whether to proceed further or not . Hall and Tyson wanted to press north , to cut down the distance they would have to travel to the Pole by <unk> . Budington did not want to further risk the ship , and walked out on the discussion . In the end , they sailed into Thank God Harbor ( now called Hall Bay ) on Sept . 10 , 1871 , and settled in for the winter on the shore of northern Greenland . 
 Within a few weeks , Hall was making preparations for a sledging trip with the aim of beating Sir William Parry 's furthest north record . Mistrust amongst the men in charge showed again when Hall told Tyson that " I cannot trust that man ( Captain Budington ) . I want you to go with me , but don 't know how to leave him alone with the ship . " There is some evidence that Budington may have been an alcoholic ; on at least three occasions he raided the ship 's stores , including the alcohol kept by the scientists for preservation of specimens . Hall had complained about Budington 's drunken behavior , and it fully came to light from the crew 's testimony at the inquest following the expedition . With Tyson watching over the ship , Hall took two sledges with first mate Chester , and the native guides Ebierbing and Hendrik , leaving on Oct 10 , 1871 . The day after leaving , Hall sent Hendrik back to the ship to retrieve a number of forgotten items . Hall also sent back a note to Bessels , reminding him to wind the chronometers at the right time every day . In his book Trial by Ice , Richard Parry postulated that such a note from the uneducated Hall must have rankled Bessels , who held a number of degrees from Stuttgart , Heidelberg , and Jena . It was another example of Hall 's micromanagement of the expedition . Before he left on the overland trip , Hall gave Budington a detailed list of instructions regarding how to manage the ship in his absence . This likely did not sit well with a sailing master with over 20 years of experience . 
 Upon their return on Oct 24 , 1871 , Hall suddenly fell ill after drinking a cup of coffee . His symptoms started with an upset stomach , then progressed to vomiting and delirium the following day . Hall accused several of the ship 's company , including Bessels , of having poisoned him . Following these accusations , he refused medical treatment from Bessels , and drank only liquids delivered directly by his Inuit friend Tookoolito . He seemed to improve for a few days , and was even able to go up on deck . Bessels had prevailed upon Bryan , the ship 's chaplain , to convince Hall to allow the doctor to see him . By November 4 , Hall relented , and Bessels resumed treatment . Shortly after , Hall 's condition began to deteriorate , and he suffered vomiting and delirium , and collapsed . Bessels diagnosed apoplexy , and Hall finally died on November 8 . He was taken ashore and given a formal burial . 
 = = = Attempt at North Pole = = = 
 According to the protocol provided by Navy Secretary George M. Robeson , command of the expedition was turned over to Budington , under whom discipline further devolved . The precious coal was being burned at a high rate : 6 @,@ 334 pounds ( 2 @,@ 873 kg ) in November , which was 1 @,@ 596 pounds ( 724 kg ) more than the previous month , and close to 8 @,@ 300 pounds ( 3 @,@ 800 kg ) in December . Budington was often seen to be drunk , but he was far from the only one to pilfer the alcohol stores ; according to testimony at the Inquiry , Tyson was also seen " drunk like old mischief " , and Schumann had gone so far as to make a duplicate of Budington 's key so that he could help himself to alcohol as well . Whatever the role of alcohol , it was clear that shipboard routine was breaking down ; as Tyson remarked , " There is so little regularity observed . There is no stated time for putting out lights ; the men are allowed to do as they please ; and , consequently , they often make nights hideous by their carousing , playing cards to all hours . " For purposes unknown , Budington chose to issue the ship 's supply of firearms to the crew . 
 There is some evidence of a morally questionable plan being formulated among the senior officers that winter . On Jan 1 , 1872 , Tyson wrote in his diary : " Last month such an astonishing proposition was made to me that I have never ceased thinking of it since ... It grew out of a discussion as to the feasibility of attempting to get farther north next summer . " And then on April 19 , 1872 : " Had a talk with Chester about the astounding proposition made to me in the winter . We agreed it was monstrous and must be prevented . Chester said he is determined , when he got home , to expose the matter . " Author Farley Mowat has suggested the officers were contemplating faking a journey to the Pole , or at least to a very high latitude . 
 Whatever the unmentioned plan was , an expedition to try for the Pole was dispatched on June 6 , 1872 . Chester led the expedition in a whaleboat , but this was crushed by the ice within a few miles of Polaris . Chester and his men hiked back to the ship , and persuaded Budington to give them the collapsible boat . With this , and Tyson piloting another whaleboat , the men set northward again . In the meantime , the Polaris had found open water , and was searching for a route south . Budington , not eager to spend another winter in the ice , sent Ebierbing north with orders for the Tyson and Chester : return to the ship at once . The men were forced to abandon both craft and walk 20 miles ( 32 km ) back to Polaris . Now three of the ship 's precious lifeboats were lost , and a fourth ( the small scow ) would be crushed by ice in July after being carelessly left out overnight . The expedition had failed in its main objective to reach the North Pole . 
 = = = Fate of Polaris and journeys home = = = 
 With the expedition 's main goal abandoned , Polaris turned south for home . In Smith Sound , west of the Humboldt Glacier , she ran aground on a shallow iceberg and could not be freed . On the night of October 15 , 1872 , with an iceberg threatening the ship , Schuman reported that water was coming in and the pumps could not keep up . Budington ordered cargo to be thrown onto the ice to buoy the ship . Men began throwing goods overboard , as Tyson put it , " with no care taken as to how or where these things were thrown " . Much of the jettisoned cargo was lost . 
 A number of the crew were out on the surrounding ice during the night when a break @-@ up of the pack occurred . When morning came , the group , consisting of Tyson , Meyer , six of the seamen , the cook , the steward , and all of the Inuit , found themselves stranded on an ice floe . The castaways could see the Polaris 8 to 10 miles ( 13 to 16 km ) away , but attempts to attract the ship 's attention with a large black cloth were futile . Resigned to the ice , the Inuit soon had igloo shelters built , and Tyson estimated that they had 1 @,@ 900 pounds ( 860 kg ) of food . They also had the ship 's two whaleboats , and two kayaks , although one kayak was soon lost during a breakup of the ice . Meyer reckoned that they were drifting on the Greenland side of the Davis Strait and would soon be within rowing distance of Disko . He was incorrect ; the men were actually on the Canadian side of the strait . The error caused the men to reject Tyson 's plans for conserving . The seamen soon broke up one of the whaleboats for firewood , making a safe escape to land very unlikely . One night in November , the men went on an eating binge , consuming a large quantity of the food stores . The group drifted on the ice floe for the next six months over 1 @,@ 800 miles ( 2 @,@ 900 km ) before being rescued off the coast of Newfoundland by the sealer Tigress on April 30 , 1873 . All probably would have perished had the group not included the skilled Inuit hunters Ebierbing and Hendrik , who were able to kill seal on a number of occasions . Despite this , scarcely a word was written about the Inuit in either the official reports of the expedition , or the press . 
 On October 16 , with the ship 's coal stores running low , Captain Budington decided to run the Polaris aground near Etah . Having lost much of their bedding , clothing , and food when it was haphazardly jettisoned from the ship on October 12 , the remaining 14 men were in poor condition to face another winter . They built a hut from lumber salvaged from the ship , and on October 24 , extinguished the ship 's boilers to conserve coal . The bilge pumps stopped for good , and the ship heeled over on her side , half out of water . Fortunately , the Etah Inuit helped the men survive the winter . After wintering ashore , the crew built two boats from salvaged wood from the ship , and on June 3 the crew sailed south . They were spotted and rescued in July by the whaler Ravenscraig , and returned home via Scotland . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Inquiry = = = 
 On June 5 , 1873 , a United States Navy board of inquiry began . At this time , the crew and Inuit families had been rescued from the ice floe , however the fate of Budington , Bessels , and the remainder of the crew was still unknown . The board consisted of Admiral Louis M. Goldsborough , Secretary of the Navy Robeson , Commodore Reynolds , Captain Henry W. Howgate of the Army , and Spencer F. Baird of the Academy of Sciences . Tyson was the first to appear for questioning , and related the friction between Hall , Budington , and Bessels , and Hall 's deathbed accusations of poisoning . The board also inquired about the whereabouts of Hall 's journals and records . Tyson responded that while Hall was delirious , he instructed Budington to burn some of the papers , and the rest had disappeared . Later , journals of other crew members were discovered at the site of the Polaris wreck , but these had the sections regarding Hall 's death cut out . Meyer testified to Budington 's drinking , saying that the sailing master was " drunk most always while we were going southward " . Steward John Herron testified that he had not made the coffee that Hall had suspected of being laced with poison ; he explained that the cook made the coffee , and that he had not kept track of how many people had touched the cup before it was brought to Hall . 
 After Budington and the remainder of the crew were rescued and returned to the United States , the board of inquiry continued . Budington attacked Tyson 's credibility , disputing Tyson 's claim that he had obstructed Hall 's efforts to sail the ship further north . He also disputed reports of his drinking , saying that he " [ made ] it a practice to drink but very little " . Bessels was questioned about Hall 's cause of death . Bessels stated that " My idea of the cause of the first attack is that he had been exposed to very low temperature during the time that he was on the sledge journey . He came back and entered a warm cabin without taking off his heavy fur clothing , and then took a warm cup of coffee . And anyone knows what the consequences of that might be . " Bessels testified that Hall was " taken by hemiplegia " , and his left arm and side were paralyzed , and that he had injected Hall with quinine to correct his elevated temperature before he died . 
 Faced with conflicting testimony , lack of official records and journals , and no body for an autopsy , no charges were laid in connection with Hall 's death . In the inquiry 's final report , the surgeons general of the Army and Navy wrote : " From the circumstances and symptoms detailed by him , and comparing them with the medical testimony of all the witnesses , we are conclusively of the opinion that Captain Hall died from natural causes , viz . , apoplexy ; and that the treatment of the case by Dr. Bessel [ sic ] was the best practicable under the circumstances . " 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 There has been speculation as to why Budington and the men aboard the Polaris did not attempt a rescue of those stranded on the ice floe . Tyson was perplexed as to why the ship could not see them 8 miles ( 13 km ) distant , a group of men and supplies waving a dark colored flag in a sea of white . The day after the storm was clear and calm , and the men on the floe could see the ship was under both steam and sail . Aboard the ship , first mate Chester reported that he could see " provisions and stores " on a distant floe , however there were never any orders to retrieve the stores or search for the castaways . 
 Budington 's decision to beach the Polaris is equally controversial . Budington said that he " believed the propeller was smashed and the rudder broken " . The official report of the expedition states that the vessel should have been abandoned because " there was only coal enough to keep the fires alive for five days " . However , the same report states that the propeller and rudder were in fact discovered to be intact after the ship was run aground , and the ship 's boiler and sails were available . Even if she ran out of coal , the ship was perfectly able to travel under sail alone . In defense of Budington 's decision , when low tide exposed the ship 's hull , the men found that the stem had completely broken away at the six @-@ foot mark , taking iron sheeting and planking with it . Budington wrote in his journal that he " called the officer 's attention to it , who only wondered she had kept afloat so long " . 
 Regarding Hall 's fate , the official investigation that followed ruled the cause of death was apoplexy ( an early term for stroke ) . Some of Hall 's symptoms — partial paralysis , slurred speech , delirium — certainly fit that diagnosis . Indeed , the pains that Hall complained about down one side of his body , which he attributed to many years ' huddling in an igloo , may have been due to a previous minor stroke . However , in 1968 , Hall 's biographer Chauncey C. Loomis , a professor at Dartmouth College , made an expedition to Greenland to exhume Hall 's body . Because of the permafrost , Hall 's body , flag shroud , clothing and coffin were remarkably well @-@ preserved . Tests on tissue samples of bone , fingernails and hair showed that Hall had received large doses of arsenic in the last two weeks of his life . Arsenic poisoning appears consistent with the symptoms party members reported : stomach pains , vomiting , stupor , and mania . Arsenic can have a sweet taste , and Hall had complained that the coffee had tasted too sweet , and had burned his stomach . It also appears that at least three of the crew , Budington , Meyer , and Bessels , expressed relief at Hall 's death and said that the expedition would be better off without him . In his book The Arctic Grail , Pierre Berton suggests that it is possible that Hall accidentally dosed himself with the poison , as arsenic was common in medical kits of the time . But it is considered more probable that he was murdered by one of the other members of the expedition , possibly Bessels , who was in nearly constant attendance of Hall . No charges were ever filed . 
 = = Research resources = = 
 <unk> on the Polaris Expedition held at the American Geographical Society Library , UW Milwaukee 
 = Ayumi Hamasaki = 
 Ayumi Hamasaki ( <unk> <unk> , Hamasaki Ayumi , born October 2 , 1978 ) is a Japanese recording artist , lyricist , model , and actress . Hamasaki has achieved popularity in Japan and Asia by enforcing her position as an artist and not trying to be forced as a " product " , which was a common factor within the Japanese music culture and Avex Trax . Through her entire career , she has written all her lyrical content , produced her own music and has sometimes co @-@ composed her music , which is evident in her albums I Am ... , Rainbow and My Story . 
 Born and raised in Fukuoka , she moved to Tokyo at fourteen to pursue a career in entertainment . In 1998 , under the tutelage of Avex CEO Max Matsuura , Hamasaki released her debut single " Poker Face " and released her million @-@ selling record A Song for XX . The album debuted at the top of the Oricon charts and remained there for four weeks , establishing her popularity in Japan . Her next five albums accomplished over one million shipments in Japan , with her third effort Duty selling near three million units , becoming her best selling studio album . A Best , her first compilation album , is her best selling album , with more than four million copies sold in Japan . In 2008 , after her album Next Level was released , album and single sales declined due to ongoing competition with new upcoming artists . Throughout her career , Hamasaki has had all her albums within the top five position in Japan and has five million @-@ selling singles , including " Boys & Girls " , " A " , " Seasons " , " M " and " H " . 
 Also called " Ayu " by her fans , Hamasaki has been dubbed the " Empress of J @-@ pop " because of her popularity and widespread influence in Japan and throughout Asia . Hamasaki 's constantly changing image and tight control over her artistry has helped her popularity extend across Asia ; music and fashion trends she has started have spread regionally to China , Singapore and other countries across Southeast Asia . She has appeared in or lent her songs to many advertisements and television commercials . Though she originally supported the exploitation of her popularity for commercial purposes , she later reconsidered and eventually opposed her status as an Avex " product " . 
 Hamasaki has sold over 51 million records , making her one of the best @-@ selling artists in Japan . Hamasaki has several domestic record achievements for her singles , such as the most number @-@ one hits by a female artist ( 38 ) ; the most consecutive number @-@ one hits by a solo artist ( twenty @-@ five ) , and the most million @-@ sellers . From 1999 to 2010 , Hamasaki had at least one single each year topping the charts . Hamasaki is the first female recording artist to have eight studio albums since her debut to top the Oricon and the first artist to have a number @-@ one album for 13 consecutive years since her debut . Hamasaki 's second remix album , Super Eurobeat Presents Ayu @-@ ro Mix , is recognized as one of the best selling remix albums of all time and remains her only album to be recognized in a worldwide accreditation . 
 = = Life and music career = = 
 = = = Childhood and early endeavors = = = 
 Born in Fukuoka Prefecture , Hamasaki was raised as an only child by her mother and grandmother . Her father had left the family when she was three and never again came into contact with her . Hamasaki 's mother worked to support the family , so Hamasaki was primarily taken care of by her grandmother . She described herself as a " tomboy " when she was a teenager , and as a “ strange kid ” who “ liked to be alone ” . 
 At age seven , Hamasaki began modeling for local institutions , such as banks , in order to supplement the family 's income . She continued this career path by leaving her family at fourteen and moving to Tokyo as a model under SOS , a talent agency . Her modeling career did not last long ; SOS eventually deemed her too short for a model and transferred her to Sun Music , a musicians ' agency . Under the name of " Ayumi " , Hamasaki released a rap EP , Nothing from Nothing , on the Nippon Columbia label in 1995 . She was dismissed from the label when the album failed to chart on the Oricon . After this failure , Hamasaki took up acting and starred in B @-@ movies such as <unk> <unk> ! ! <unk> Saigo no Hi and television dramas such as <unk> , which were poorly received by the public . From August 1995 to March 1996 , Hamasaki also co @-@ hosted the SoundLink " magazine " Hōkago no <unk> ( After @-@ school King ) for the Nintendo Satellaview once a week with Shigeru <unk> . Growing dissatisfied with her job , Hamasaki quit acting and moved in with her mother , who had recently moved to Tokyo . 
 Hamasaki was initially a good student , earning good grades in junior high school . Eventually , she lost faith in the curriculum , thinking that the subjects taught were of no use to her . Her grades worsened as she refused to put her mind to her studies . While living in Tokyo , she attempted to further her studies at <unk> Gakuen , a high school for the arts , but dropped out in the first year . Hamasaki did not attend school or have a job , so she spent much of her time shopping at Shibuya boutiques and dancing at <unk> , an Avex @-@ owned disco club . 
 At <unk> , she was introduced to her future producer , Max Matsuura , through a friend . After hearing Hamasaki sing karaoke , Matsuura offered her a recording deal , but Hamasaki suspected ulterior motives and turned the offer down . He persisted and succeeded in recruiting her for the Avex label in the following year . Hamasaki started vocal training , but skipped most of her classes after finding her instructors to be too rigid and the classes dull . When she confessed this to Matsuura , he sent her to New York to train her vocals under another method . During her foreign sojourn , Hamasaki frequently corresponded with Matsuura and impressed him with her style of writing . On her return to Japan , he suggested that she try writing her own lyrics . 
 = = = 1998 – 99 : Musical beginnings , A Song for xx and Loveppears = = = 
 Hamasaki made her debut under Avex at 19 on April 8 , 1998 with the single " Poker Face " . It — and the following four singles — were not major hits , however each release was better than the last , thus gradually increasing her exposure and presence on the market . Hamasaki 's debut album , A Song for × × ( 1999 ) , was likewise " unassuming " : the tracks , composed by Yasuhiko Hoshino , Akio Togashi ( of Da Pump ) , and Mitsuru Igarashi ( of Every Little Thing ) , were " cautious " pop @-@ rock songs . However , Hamasaki 's lyrics , introspective observations about her feelings and experiences that focused on loneliness and individualism , resonated with the Japanese public . The songs gained Hamasaki a growing following , and the release of the album was a success : it topped the Oricon charts for five weeks and sold over a million copies . For her achievements , she earned a Japan Gold Disc Award for " Best New Artist of the Year " . 
 With Ayu @-@ mi @-@ x ( March 1999 ) , the first of a series of remix albums , Hamasaki began moving beyond the pop @-@ rock of A Song for × × and began to incorporate different styles including trance , dance , and orchestra . Hamasaki began to experiment with different musical styles in her singles as well , releasing dance tunes and ballads as well as remixes on the singles which spanned reggae and house . The singles were milestones : Hamasaki earned her first number @-@ one single ( " Love : Destiny " ) and first million @-@ selling single ( " A " ) . Her second studio album , Loveppears ( November 1999 ) , not only topped the Oricon charts , it sold nearly 3 million copies . The album also showcased a change in Hamasaki 's lyrics . Though the lyrics of Loveppears still dealt with loneliness , many of them were written from a third @-@ person perspective . In support of Loveppears , she held her first tour , Ayumi Hamasaki Concert Tour 2000 A. 
 A Film for XX is the first video clip collection by Ayumi Hamasaki , it was released on September 15 , 1999 . 
 = = = 2000 – 02 : Duty , compilation releases , I Am ... and Rainbow = = = 
 From April to June 2000 , Hamasaki released the " Trilogy " , a series of singles consisting of " Vogue " , " Far Away " , and " Seasons " . The lyrics of these songs focused on hopelessness , a reflection of Hamasaki 's disappointment that she had not expressed herself thoroughly in any of her previous lyrics and a sense of shame of her public image . Likewise , many of the songs she wrote for her subsequent studio album , Duty ( September 2000 ) , involved feelings of loneliness , chaos , confusion , and the burden of her responsibilities . She described her feelings after the writing as " unnatural " and " nervous " . The musical style was darker as well ; in contrast with Loveppears , Duty was a rock @-@ influenced album with only one dance song , " Audience " . Duty resonated with fans : the " Trilogy " were " hit singles " ( " Seasons " was a million @-@ seller ) , and the album became Hamasaki 's best @-@ selling studio album . At the end of 2000 , Hamasaki held her first New Year countdown concert at the Yoyogi National Gymnasium . 
 In 2001 , Avex forced Hamasaki to release her first compilation album , A Best , on March 28 , putting the album in " competition " with Hikaru Utada 's second studio album , Distance . The " competition " between the two singers ( which both claimed was merely a creation of their record companies and the media ) was supposedly the reason for the success of the albums ; both sold over 5 million copies . In support of Duty and A Best , Hamasaki held a tour of Japan 's domes , making her one of few " top @-@ drawer " Japanese artists to hold a concert at the Tokyo Dome . 
 I Am ... ( January 2002 ) marked several milestones for Hamasaki . Hamasaki increased her control over her music by composing all of the songs on the album under the pseudonym " Crea " , of which the 2000 single " M " was the first . " Connected " ( November 2002 ) and " A Song Is Born " ( December 2001 ) were the exceptions . I Am ... also showed evolution in Hamasaki 's lyrical style : it was a retreat from the themes of " loneliness and confusion " of some of her earlier songs . Moved by the September 11 attacks , Hamasaki revised her vision of I Am ... , focusing on issues such as faith and world peace . " A Song Is Born " , in particular , was directly influenced by the events . The single , a duet with Keiko Yamada , was released as part of Avex 's non @-@ profit Song Nation project , which raised money for charity . She also dropped the planned cover and opted instead to be portrayed as a " peace muse " , explaining , 
 I had a completely different idea for the cover at first . We 'd already reserved the space , decided the hair and makeup and everything . But after the incident , as is typical of me , I suddenly changed my mind . I knew it wasn 't the time for gaudiness , for elaborate sets and costumes . It sounds odd coming from me , but I realize what I say and how I look has a great impact . 
 The outlook inspired by the September 11 attacks extended beyond I Am .... In 2002 , Hamasaki held her first concert outside Japan , at the MTV Asia music awards ceremony in Singapore , a move interpreted as the beginning of a campaign prompted by a sluggish Japanese market . At the ceremony , she received the award for " Most Influential Japanese Singer in Asia " . In support of I Am ... , Hamasaki held two tours , Ayumi Hamasaki Arena Tour 2002 A and Ayumi Hamasaki Stadium Tour 2002 A. In November 2002 , as " Ayu " , she released her first European single , " Connected " , a trance song from I Am ... composed by DJ Ferry Corsten . It was released in Germany on the <unk> label . Hamasaki continued to release singles ( all of them remixes of previously released songs ) in Germany on <unk> until 2005 . 
 In April 2002 , Hamasaki released the single " Free & Easy " . In collaboration with the magazine Free & Easy , Hamasaki also released Hamasaki Republic , a photobook that was actually a special issue of Free & Easy , in conjunction with the single . " H " , Hamasaki 's next single , became the best @-@ selling single of 2002 . Hamasaki released her last single of 2002 , " Voyage " , on September 26 . In lieu of a regular @-@ length music video , the short film Tsuki ni <unk> , starring Hamasaki , was created for " Voyage " and was released at a select theater in Shibuya . Hamasaki 's next studio album , Rainbow ( December 2002 ) was her first to use English lyrics . After performing at the 2002 MTV Asia music awards , Hamasaki felt that by writing only Japanese lyrics , she was not able to bring her " message " to other countries . Realizing that English was a " common global language " , she included English lyrics in three songs . The album was stylistically diverse ; Hamasaki included rock- and trip hop @-@ influenced tracks as well as " summery " , " up @-@ tempo " and " grand gothic " songs and experimented with new techniques such as gospel choruses and the yells of an audience . The lyrics were also varied : themes in the album included freedom , the struggles of women , and " a summer that ends in sadness " . 
 = = = 2003 – 06 : Decline in sales , My Story , ( Miss ) <unk> and Secret = = = 
 In 2003 , Hamasaki released three singles , " & " , " Forgiveness " , and " No Way to Say " . To celebrate the release of her thirtieth single ( " Forgiveness " ) , Hamasaki held the A Museum concert at the Yoyogi National Gymnasium . Her mini @-@ album Memorial Address ( December 2003 ) was her first album to be released in CD + DVD format in addition to the regular CD @-@ only format , a decision that came from her increased interest in the direction of her music videos . Like her previous albums , Memorial Address topped the Oricon chart and sold over a million copies . Sales of Hamasaki 's singles began to wane . Although all three of the album 's singles topped the Oricon charts , " & " was Hamasaki 's last single to sell over 500 @,@ 000 copies . 
 By the end of her Arena Tour 2003 – 2004 , Hamasaki had grown dissatisfied with her position in Avex : she felt that the company was treating her as a product instead of a person . Along with her dissatisfaction over her last two studio albums ( which she thought had been rushed ) , this led her to begin work on My Story ( December 2004 ) early . In contrast with her previous albums , My Story had no set theme , nor did Hamasaki attempt to write " something good " or even " something that would give people hope " ; rather , she simply wrote freely and honestly . As a result , the album contained mostly autobiographical lyrics about her emotions and reminiscences of her career . She approached the composition of the music with the same freedom as the lyrics , with the album 's notable rock overtones expressing her liking for rock music . She was so pleased with the result that she declared My Story the first album she felt satisfied with . My Story and its singles , " Moments " , " Inspire " , and " Carols " , all topped the weekly Oricon charts ; moreover , with sales of over 1 @,@ 100 @,@ 000 units , My Story became Hamasaki 's last million @-@ selling studio album according to Oricon . From January to April 2005 , Hamasaki held the nationwide My Story arena tour , her first album @-@ based tour . Also in January , she began working with <unk> Orchestra to create My Story Classical , a classical version of My Story ; the album served as an " alter @-@ ego " of the mostly aggressive My Story . The orchestra also created a classical version of " A Song Is Born " , which was included on My Story Classical and which Hamasaki performed at the opening of the Expo 2005 . 
 ( Miss ) understood ( January 2006 ) , Hamasaki 's seventh studio album , showed new musical directions . Wanting to sing a tune like those of the group Sweetbox , Hamasaki obtained the permission of Sweetbox composer Roberto " Geo " <unk> to use demo songs he had intended to use in Sweetbox 's upcoming album . She edited the songs to fit her personal vision , rewriting the lyrics and rearranging some of the songs . The result was more musically diverse than the previous album ; ( Miss ) understood included ballads , funk , dance @-@ pop , R & B , and rock songs . All of ( Miss ) understood 's singles reached the top of the Oricon ; " Bold & Delicious " became Hamasaki 's twenty @-@ fifth number @-@ one single , tying her with Seiko Matsuda for the record of most number @-@ one singles by a solo female artist . Though ( Miss ) understood also reached the top of the charts , Oricon stated that it sold fewer than a million copies — Hamasaki 's first studio album to do so . In support of the album , Hamasaki held the ( Miss ) understood arena tour , which spanned three months with thirty concerts , from Saitama on March 11 , 2006 to Yoyogi on June 11 , 2006 . 
 Hamasaki 's first single of 2006 , " Startin ' " , became Hamasaki 's twenty @-@ sixth number @-@ one single , setting a new record for most number @-@ one singles held by a solo female artist . The subsequent studio album , Secret , was released in November 2006 . " Secrets " was , appropriately , the theme of the album ; the album also explored strong female figures , love , and sadness ; songs depicted the artist 's struggles and were written to encourage women . Although Secret was originally intended to be a mini @-@ album , Hamasaki " began brimming with things to say " while producing the album and wrote five more songs . The album consisted mostly of rock songs and ballads ; to complement these , Hamasaki experimented with new vocal techniques . The album also topped the Oricon weekly charts , making Hamasaki the only artist to have eight consecutive number @-@ one studio albums . Her sales , however , continued to decline : according to both Oricon and the RIAJ , Secret failed to sell a million copies . 
 = = = 2007 – 08 : Compilation releases and Guilty = = = 
 On February 28 , 2007 , Hamasaki released A Best 2 , a pair of compilation albums containing songs from I Am ... to ( Miss ) understood . The two versions , White and Black , debuted at the first and second positions on the Oricon weekly charts , making Hamasaki the first female artist in thirty @-@ six years to hold the top two positions on any Oricon album chart . At the end of 2007 , the pair became Japan 's fifth and seventh best @-@ selling albums of the year respectively . In support of A Best 2 and Secret , Hamasaki held the four @-@ month @-@ long Tour of Secret from March to the end of June . It was her first international tour , and aside from Japan , she performed in Taipei , Shanghai , and Hong Kong . Her foreign fanbase highly anticipated the concerts , and tickets for the Taipei and Hong Kong performances sold out in less than three hours . 
 In July 2007 , Hamasaki released her first single in over a year , " Glitter / Fated " . A short film , Distance Love , was used as the music video for " Glitter " and " Fated " . The film , shot in Hong Kong , co @-@ starred Hong Kong actor Shawn Yue as Hamasaki 's romantic interest . " Glitter / Fated " and the following single " Talkin ' 2 Myself " reached the top of their respective charts , continuing Hamasaki 's streak of number @-@ one singles . In December , Hamasaki released her first digital @-@ only single , " Together When ... " , which topped the RIAJ 's monthly download chart . Unlike its predecessors , the writing of Hamasaki 's ninth studio album , Guilty ( January 2008 ) , was not an emotional experience for her , nor did it have a set theme . However , she said later that the album 's tracks appeared to tell a story . Most of the songs were dark ; the album had a notable rock tinge . It contained some upbeat dance tracks and ballads , though the latter also had rock overtones . Guilty peaked at the number @-@ two position on the weekly Oricon charts , making it Hamasaki 's first studio album not to reach the top and ended Hamasaki 's streak of 8 consecutive number @-@ one albums . Guilty was later released as a digital album in twenty @-@ six countries outside Japan , nineteen of them Western nations . That , along with Hamasaki 's decision to employ western DJs such as The Young <unk> , Coldcut , Para One and Armand Van Helden for her 2008 remix albums Ayu @-@ mi @-@ x 6 : Gold and Ayu @-@ mi @-@ x 6 : Silver , has been interpreted as her first step into the global market . 
 In April 2008 , to commemorate her tenth anniversary in Avex , Hamasaki released the single " <unk> World " ; it topped the Oricon , making Hamasaki the only female solo artist to have a number @-@ one single every year for ten consecutive years . Hamasaki also held her second tour of Asia , Asia Tour 2008 : 10th Anniversary , to celebrate her tenth anniversary . From April until June , she toured Japan , holding seventeen concerts . Taiwan , Hong Kong , and Shanghai were again the foreign stops after the domestic performances . On September 10 , 2008 , Hamasaki released A Complete : All Singles , a compilation album that includes the A @-@ sides of all her singles along with previously unreleased footage from her A @-@ nation concerts which is the 8th best selling album of 2008 . 
 = = = 2009 – 11 : Next Level , Rock n Roll Circus and Five = = = 
 Hamasaki 's next two singles , " Days / Green " ( December 2008 ) and " Rule / Sparkle " ( February 2009 ) , continued Hamasaki 's streak of number @-@ one singles . " Rule " is used as the international theme song for the film Dragonball Evolution . The subsequent studio album , Next Level , was released on March 25 , 2009 in several formats : CD , CD + DVD , 2CD + DVD and a two @-@ gigabyte USB flash drive . Sonically , Next Level was mainly an electronic dance album . Next Level reached the top of the Oricon charts , making Hamasaki the only artist to have a number @-@ one album every year for eleven years in a row since her debut . However , the album was only certified double platinum , making it Hamasaki 's lowest @-@ selling studio album to that date . On August 12 , 2009 , Hamasaki released her forty @-@ sixth single , " Sunrise / Sunset ( Love Is All ) " . " Sunrise ( Love Is All ) " , one of the A @-@ sides , is being used as the opening theme song for the Japanese television drama Dandy Daddy ? . The single reached the top of the weekly charts , making it her twenty @-@ first consecutive ( thirty @-@ third total ) number @-@ one single . " Sunrise / Sunset " is also her forty @-@ fourth single to enter the Top 10 , making Hamasaki the artist with the most Top 10 singles ever . Hamasaki 's third single of the year , " You Were ... / Ballad " , was released on December 29 , 2009 . Hamasaki 's eleventh studio album Rock ' n ' Roll Circus was released on April 14 , 2010 . Though the album contained a few " powerful and melodramatic gothic rock " tracks , it was mainly " pure and classic J @-@ pop " , with pop @-@ rock songs and ballads . The album topped the charts , making Hamasaki the first female solo artist in twenty years to have ten number @-@ one original studio albums . Hamasaki also began expanding her online presence , setting up accounts on MySpace , Ustream , and Twitter . In July , entertainment company <unk> announced that Hamasaki 's 2009 Next Level tour would be shown in 3D at Toho cinemas nationwide beginning on August 28 . 
 On July 14 , Hamasaki released her forty @-@ eighth single , " Moon / Blossom " . The single was released as the first of a three @-@ part project to celebrate her yet @-@ unreleased fiftieth single . The two other singles in the project ( her forty @-@ ninth and fiftieth singles respectively ) , " Crossroad " and " L " , were released within a week of each other , " Crossroad " on September 22 and " L " on September 29 . " Crossroad " was composed by Tetsuya Komuro and its coupling was her cover version of Komuro 's band TM Network 's 1988 song " Seven Days War " , which was her first cover of a male song . The three singles all topped the Oricon , becoming Hamasaki 's twenty @-@ third , twenty @-@ fourth and twenty @-@ fifth consecutive number @-@ one singles and setting a new record for the most consecutive number @-@ one singles by any female artist ( solo or group ) as well as by any solo artist . On December 22 , Hamasaki released her twelfth original studio album , Love Songs . On the same day , Naoya Urata of AAA released his debut solo single " Dream On " . The song , which featured Hamasaki , was written and produced by her as well , marking the first record she produced for another singer . Love Songs and " Dream On " both reached the top spots on their respective Oricon charts . Love Songs became Hamasaki 's fourth consecutive and seventeenth total number @-@ one album . The album also marked Hamasaki 's thirteenth consecutive year with a number @-@ one album , breaking her old record . 
 In February 2011 , it was announced that her arena tour of the year , Hotel Love Songs , would start in April . Shortly after the 2011 Tohoku earthquake and tsunami hit , it was announced that the tour was rescheduled to start in late May and the tour was renamed to Power of Music . Deeply affected by the Tohoku Earthquake and tsunami devastation , Hamasaki decided to collaborate with fashion magazine , Vivi , with the sale of charity shirts and the profits going to help the victims in the devastation . On April 20 , 2011 , Hamasaki simultaneously released four new remix albums , Ayu @-@ mi @-@ x 7 : House , Acoustic Orchestra , Trance 4 , Ayu @-@ ro Mix 4 , and a Limited Complete Box Set , which were also released internationally on iTunes . On that same day , Hamasaki also released 2010 Rock ' n ' Roll Circus Tour and A 50 Singles : Live Selection which topped the weekly chart at No. 1 and No. 2 respectively . The simultaneous releases made Hamasaki the first artist ever to have 4 albums in Oricon 's top 10 and also the first artist to hold 2 top positions in the Oricon DVD chart . Their original release date of March 30 was postponed due to the 2011 Tohoku earthquake and tsunami and was pushed back to April 20 instead . On April 21 , 2011 , it was announced that she would perform in a @-@ nation 10th Anniversary for Life Charge & Go ! On May 4 , it was announced that she broke another record – the female artist with the highest DVD sales with 2 @,@ 313 @,@ 000 . 
 On August 31 , Hamasaki released her second mini album Five , her first since Memorial Address in 2003 . This is her first album to have no singles released . Five topped the Oricon Charts for 2 consecutive weeks , her first to do so since ( Miss ) understood . The lead song , " Progress " , was used as a theme song for the videogame , Tales of Xillia . The album also features collaborations , with singers Juno and Naoya Urata from AAA . This album managed to be certified Gold by RIAJ , making Hamasaki 's first album not to be certified Platinum . Complete Clip Box 1998 – 2011 , consisting all her music videos from her first single , " Poker Face " till her latest mini @-@ album , Five , was released on January 1 , 2012 . " How Beautiful You Are " will be the theme song for a drama Saigo Kara <unk> no Koi , and also Hamasaki 's second digital single ( 55th single overall ) , which is released fully on February 8 . Hamasaki describe the song as a mid @-@ tempo ballad and a feeling of gratitude towards someone . 
 = = = 2012 – 13 : 15th anniversary , Love Again and compilation releases = = = 
 In 2012 , The International 3D Society announced the winners of its 2012 3D Creative Arts Awards with Hamasaki receiving an award for " Electronic Broadcast Media ( Television ) – Live Event " for her A3D <unk> <unk> Arena Tour 2009 A ( Next Level ) tour . On March 21 , Hamasaki released her thirteenth studio album , Party Queen . The album peaked at number two on the Oricon charts , becoming her second studio album to do so after 2007 's Guilty . On August 6 , 2012 , Hamasaki released her sixth compilation album A Summer Best . It included two new songs which were digitally released for the promotion of the album : the TRF cover , Happening Here , and You & Me . 
 In September 2012 , it was announced that , to commemorate Hamasaki 's 15th anniversary in the music industry on April 8 , 2013 , she would be releasing new material for five consecutive months starting on the 8th day of November , 2012 , until the 8th of March , 2013 . The first releases were two mini albums , Love and Again , which were put on sale on the 8th of November and December , respectively . The third release for the 8th of January was her compilation album A Classical , which included classical arrangements of previously released songs . The fourth release was Hamasaki 's 14th studio album , Love Again , which compiled the songs included in the two previous mini albums . And finally the fifth was the DVD / Blu @-@ ray of her Arena Tour 2012 : Hotel Love Songs , released in March . In April 2013 Hamasaki began her 15th Anniversary Tour : A Best Live , which lasted for four months until the end of July . Its setlist was chosen by fans through online voting , and was later released as her first live album CD on September 18 . The DVD and Blu @-@ ray versions were released on October 30 , 2013 . On December 25 , 2013 , Hamasaki released " Feel the Love / Merry @-@ go @-@ round " , her first physical single in three years . " Feel the Love " was composed by Tetsuya Komuro and produced by <unk> Hello Kitty , while " Merry @-@ go @-@ round " was produced by M @-@ Flo 's Taku Takahashi and features rapper Verbal . Both songs are heavily influenced by Western dance @-@ pop music . 
 = = = 2014 – 2015 : Colours , A One , <unk> = = = 
 In January 2014 , it was announced that a new song entitled " Pray " was chosen to be the theme song for the anime film Osamu Tezuka 's <unk> 2 — <unk> Tabi , which premiered on February 8 , 2014 in Japan . The song was released digitally on January 27 , 2014 . Another new song , entitled " Hello New Me " , was presented as theme song for a new season of Fuji TV drama Zoku — Saigo Kara <unk> no <unk> which started broadcasting in April , 2014 . The song was released digitally on May 14 , 2014 . From May 30 to July 6 , 2014 , Hamasaki held her Premium Showcase : Feel the love tour , on which she offered 11 concerts at 3 locations : Nagoya , Osaka and Tokyo . On this tour Hamasaki abandoned for the first time the traditional format of her previous concerts and presented a uninterrupted , shorter show , on which she also debuted as an aerial acrobat . Hamasaki 's fifteenth studio album , entitled Colours , was released on July 2 , 2014 . The album featured internationally renowned producers , such as RedOne , Rodney Jerkins , Armin van Buuren and Fedde le Grand , making the first time in Hamasaki 's career in which primarily Western producers were appointed to produce one of her studio albums . Colours peaked at number five on its first week on the Oricon charts , becoming Hamasaki 's first studio album to debut out of the Top 3 . However , it also marked a new record for her , as with this achievement she became the second artist in Japan 's history — after Yumi Matsutoya — to have 47 of her albums within the Top 10 of the charts . In September 2014 , Hamasaki released two recut singles from Colours : " Terminal " and " <unk> " on the <unk> platform . The single was released under Machine Shop Records for the American release . 
 On October 18 , 2014 , Hamasaki performed as the closing act in the A @-@ Nation premium concert held at the Marina Bay Sands ’ MasterCard Theatres in Singapore . This was the second time performing in Singapore after her MTV Asia Awards performance 12 years ago . On November 2 , 2014 , Hamasaki announced through her official Facebook page that she had started recording new material composed by Tetsuya Komuro , Kunio Tago and Tetsuya <unk> for a " winter ballad trilogy " single . On November 6 , 2014 , the title of the single was revealed to be " Zutto ... / Last Minute / Walk " , and its release date was set for December 24 , 2014 . On November 10 , 2014 , it was announced that Hamasaki would be collaborating in a tribute cover album for Hikaru Utada , entitled Utada Hikaru no Uta , to be released on December 9 , 2014 . For the album she contributed with a cover of Utada 's 1998 single " Movin ' on Without You " , which was arranged by the RedOne production team . The winter ballad trilogy single , " Zutto ... / Last Minute / Walk " , was released on December 24 , 2014 and peaked at number five on the Oricon charts . With this achievement , Hamasaki became the first solo artist in Japan 's history to have 50 singles within the Top 10 of the Oricon charts . As for artists in general , Hamasaki became the third artist with more Top ten singles since Oricon 's foundation in 1968 — being surpassed by groups Morning <unk> and SMAP , with 57 and 53 Top ten singles respectively In December 2014 Hamasaki announced that she would be not attending the New Year show Kōhaku Uta Gassen for the first time in 15 years . She explained her decision stating that she wanted to lower her responsibilities and things she felt pressured to do , in order to focus on the projects she had for her career , mainly regarding her plans to expand her influence throughout Asia . 
 On February 15 , 2015 , Hamasaki made a surprise guest appearance during Singaporean singer JJ Lin 's concert in Taipei , Taiwan . They performed a duet version of Hamasaki 's 2000 single " Seasons " , and announced that JJ Lin would be producing a song for Hamasaki 's next studio album , A One . The album was released on April 8 , 2015 , including singles " Zutto ... " , " Last Minute " , " Walk " , Utada 's cover " Movin ' on Without You " , and JJ Lin @-@ produced song " The Gift " , for which a promotional music video was also made . Between April and July 2015 , Hamasaki embarked on her Arena Tour 2015 A Cirque de Minuit tour throughout Japan , which was planned as an expanded version of her previous Countdown Live concerts held in late 2014 . The tour consisted of a 34 @-@ song setlist show with a duration of 3 hours and 45 minutes , her longest concert held to date . At the final show of the aforementioned tour , Hamasaki announced that she would start another tour in September , this time exclusively for members of her official fan club , TeamAyu . The TA Limited Live Tour , Hamasaki 's first fan club exclusive tour in twelve years after 2003 , began on September 29 , 2015 and included a total of 16 concerts at 7 venues . 
 In April 2015 , a new song entitled " Step by Step " began to be broadcast as the theme song of NHK TV drama <unk> to <unk> , and was subsequently released as a digital single on July 1 . On August 5 , 2015 , Hamasaki released her sixth extended play , entitled <unk> . The mini album featured six new songs , including drama theme song " Step by Step " , and " Sayonara " , a new song featuring Taiwanese boyband <unk> . " Sayonara " became # 1 on digital downloads charts in Taiwan , Hong Kong , Singapore and Malaysia , according to KK BOX , Asia ’ s largest digital distribution site . In addition , Hamasaki participated as one of the headliners of the A @-@ Nation Stadium Fes 2015 held on August 30 at the <unk> Stadium , where she also performed a cover of Globe 's hit ballad song " Departures " , joined by Tetsuya Komuro and Naoya Urata onstage . She also recorded a cover of Globe 's " Many Classic Moments " , which was included in the group 's tribute album released on December 16 , 2015 . On December 23 , 2015 , Hamasaki released a winter @-@ themed concept album entitled Winter Diary : A7 Classical , which included songs from her previous two albums -A One and <unk> remixed with Classical arrangements , and also new song " Winter Diary " , which was produced by Tetsuya Komuro . Hamasaki promoted the album by starting an Instagram account that would be active for only a month until the end of January 2016 . She shared pictures of the music video shooting of " Winter Diary " recorded in Taiwan , and also the preparations for her 2015 @-@ 2016 countdown live concerts . 
 = = = 2016 : Made in Japan = = = 
 On her last Instagram post , Hamasaki confirmed that she has been working on her seventeenth studio album for 2016 . A 15th anniversary edition of Hamasaki 's 2001 greatest hits album A Best was released on March 28 , 2016 . In May 2016 , Hamasaki started her nationwide tour Arena Tour 2016 A : Made in Japan , which will be an expanded version of her 2015 @-@ 2016 Countdown Live Made in Tokyo . On May 11 , Hamasaki made a surprise release of her 17th studio album , entitled Made in Japan , through music streaming website AWA , where it reached 1 million legal streams after 5 days of release . The album is set to be released on physical formats on June 29 , 2016 . 
 = = Image and artistry = = 
 Time magazine has noted that Hamasaki lacked talents such as the dance moves of Namie Amuro , the " supermodel allure " of Hitomi , and the " vocal pyrotechnics " of Hikaru Utada . Her own fans even considered her high @-@ pitched voice screechy . However , her music is sometimes considered one of the major forces in shaping Japan 's current music trends ; this has been attributed to her constantly changing image as well as her self @-@ penned lyrics , though critics credit clever marketing strategies . Hamasaki is also noted for the visual aspects of her artistry : she is considered a fashion trendsetter , with her influence extending beyond Japan . The Guardian says that Hamasaki has " married accessible , mainstream hits with over @-@ the @-@ top costumes and high @-@ concept videos " . The widespread influence of her music and her constantly changing image has meant that Hamasaki has often been compared to Madonna . 
 Hamasaki 's lyrics and image have gained a following predominantly among the Generation X of Asia , mainly because of the " conflicting or inharmonious beauty " of her fashion and lyrics ; Hamasaki 's fashions combine Eastern and Western elements , and her songs , unlike those of many of her contemporaries , mostly all have English titles but contained no English lyrics ( until Rainbow ) . Music critic Tetsu Misaki believed that the juxtaposition of her fashionable appearance and her personal lyrics was one of her most important selling points . The popularity of her music extends beyond Japan ; she has a " sizable [ following ] across Asia " and is one of the few Japanese singers whose albums have sold over 10 @,@ 000 copies in Singapore . In 2002 , however , Hamasaki 's domestic sales began declining due to a sluggish Japanese market and increasing piracy in Japan . As a result , she began moving toward the Asian market in 2002 , performing at the 2002 MTV Asia awards in Singapore , at South Korea 's " Asia Song Festival " , and at a concert in Beijing to celebrate Sino @-@ Japanese relations . With her popularity declining ( due in part to the rising popularity of other singers ) , she made a foray into the Asian market , starting with her first tour of Asia in 2007 . 
 = = = Musical style = = = 
 Hamasaki 's lyrics , all her own , have resonated among her fans , who praise them as being honest and heartfelt and " expressing determination " ; in two surveys conducted by Oricon , respondents voted Hamasaki 's lyrics as their favorite aspect of her artistry . Steve McClure of The Japan Times noted that Hamasaki has " developed a reputation as a thoughtful , introspective lyricist " ; Barry Walters of The Village Voice comments that Hamasaki 's lyrics " pack unlikely insights . " Having " trouble voicing her thoughts " , Hamasaki uses her lyrics as an outlet ; she draws inspiration from her own ( and occasionally her friends ' ) experiences and emotions and tries to put them " honestly into words " . She has stated that honesty is essential to her lyrics , saying , " If I write when I 'm low , it will be a dark song , but I don 't care . I want to be honest with myself at all times . " This meant that she did not use English lyrics until her album Rainbow , as she felt that she could best express herself in Japanese . As with her musical style , the themes of her lyrics have varied . Her debut album A Song for × × dealt mostly with themes of " loneliness and confusion " , as did her second album Loveppears . Duty likewise expressed feelings of disappointment and confusion . Hamasaki began to take on a more global outlook with her following albums I Am ... and Rainbow , branching out to wider themes such as faith and peace . Music critic Tetsu Misaki noted a large change in her lyrics style between her debut album A Song for × × ( 1999 ) , which mostly dealt with personal problems , and her following albums Loveppears and Duty . Misaki believed Hamasaki had begun thinking about her influence on society more , and began writing songs with important messages she wanted to express to her listeners . This was signalled by her not using first person pronouns as much , and instead using the words <unk> ( <unk> , " we " ) and <unk> ( <unk> , " convey " ) more often . As Hamasaki matured , her lyrics began to express more confidence ; themes in her later albums included love and the struggles of women . With Guilty , Hamasaki began to compose her lyrics not only as an exposition of her personal feelings but as encouragements for her listeners , an outlook she applied in Next Level as well . In songs such as " Talkin ' 2 Myself " and " <unk> World " , Hamasaki deals with the " awareness and fighting spirit of surviving in a high @-@ risk age " to encourage listeners ; in " Rollin ' " ( from Next Level ) , Hamasaki writes , " The age is rolling around / At the speed of heading toward the end / Beyond the border / Disappointment and hope fight with each other " . In addition to personal experiences and feelings , Hamasaki bases lyrics on sources such as historical events . The life of Joan of Arc was the inspiration for " Free & Easy " , while a story told to her by her friend about a saint named Mary served as the basis for " M " ; the September 11 attacks inspired " A Song Is Born " . 
 In addition to writing her own lyrics , Hamasaki has also involved herself in other aspects of production such as artistic direction . Though Max Matsuura is officially credited as the producer of her records , he said of Hamasaki , " Ayu is a very meticulous worker behind the scenes . A lot of the work she does by herself is more in the producer 's arena . I think really we should say ' Produced by [ A ] <unk> [ H ] <unk> ' . " Until her single " M " , however , Hamasaki left the task of composing to her staff ; as she has explained , " I 'm not a professional ; I lack even basic knowledge about writing music . " However , she started to compose her own melodies after her staff had failed to compose a tune for " M " that appealed to her . Wanting to produce works faithful to her visions , Hamasaki took control of most aspects of her artistry . I Am ... is representative of this stage in Hamasaki 's career ; she directed the production of its songs , videos , and artwork . She began to compose less after I Am ... : whereas nearly all of I Am ... was her work , only nine of Rainbow 's fifteen tracks were composed by her . She was even less involved in the composition of subsequent albums , composing two tracks on Memorial Address , three on My Story , and one on ( Miss ) understood ; since Secret , none of the songs on her studio albums have listed her as a composer . With later albums , Hamasaki also began to delegate to her staff tasks she had once handled herself . Hamasaki cites Madonna , soul musicians Babyface and En Vogue , and rock bands Led Zeppelin and Deep Purple as her influences and states that she admires Michelle Branch , Kid Rock , Joan Osborne , Seiko Matsuda , Rie Miyazawa , and Keiko Yamada ; these diverse influences have led to the variety of her own music . Hamasaki began commissioning remixes of her songs early in her career , and this practice also influenced the diversity of her music . Found on many of her records , these remixes span different genres of electronic dance music including Eurobeat , house , and trance , as well as acoustic genres such as classical and traditional Chinese music . She has employed Western as well as Japanese musicians ; among those she has worked with are Above & Beyond , the <unk> Orchestra of France , and traditional Chinese music ensemble Princess China Music Orchestra . Hamasaki has released more than a hundred original songs ; through them , she has covered a wide range of musical styles , such as dance , metal , R & B , progressive rock , pop , and classical . She uses different instruments and techniques including piano , orchestra , gospel choirs , guitars , traditional Japanese strings , music boxes , and effects such as yells , claps , and scratching . 
 Hamasaki is often involved in the artistic direction of her music videos . They are often artistic productions through which Hamasaki tries to convey the meaning or feeling of their respective songs . The themes of the videos are varied ; she has made " sad and fragile " or " emotional " videos ( " Momentum " , " Endless Sorrow " ) , " refreshing " summer videos ( " Blue Bird " , " Fairyland " ) , surreal or " scary " videos ( " 1 Love " , " Marionette " ) , and humorous videos ( " Evolution " , " Angel 's Song " , " Beautiful Fighters " ) . Additionally , many of the videos contain short storylines , some of which use symbolism to convey their respective messages . The video of " Voyage " depicts Hamasaki as a woman in a mental hospital whose previous incarnation was a woman in feudal Japan who was sacrificed to the moon ; the video of " Endless Sorrow " features a young boy living in a society where speaking is forbidden by law . In the video for " Free & Easy " , Hamasaki portrayed a " twenty @-@ first @-@ century Joan of Arc " to convey her message " freedom cannot be easily obtained ; there is a price to pay for it " and to express her opposition to her marrying at the time ; the video for " Ourselves " featured masked people destroying " effigies of [ Hamasaki 's ] past " such as photographs and album covers to symbolize destruction and rebirth . Additionally , the videos of " Fairyland " , " My Name 's Women " , " Jewel " , " Green " , and " Virgin Road " are among the top twenty or so most expensive music videos , making Hamasaki the only non @-@ American artist to hold such a distinction . Hamasaki is also involved in the production and artistic direction of her live performances ; they , like her videos , are often lavish productions and use a variety of props , extravagant costumes , and choreographed dances . She has used large video screens , fireworks , simulated rain drops , trick stage floors , and suspended devices . 
 = = = Public image = = = 
 Hamasaki 's influence goes beyond music ; she is often considered a fashion icon and trend @-@ setter , a status attributed to her tight control over her image . Besides her frequent appearances in fashion magazines , such as Vivi , <unk> , and <unk> ! , Hamasaki has often been lauded for her trendy choices in <unk> and accessories ; Oricon has repeatedly named her the " Most Fashionable Female Artist " . Many aspects of Japan 's fashions — including clothing , hair , nails , and accessories — have in some way been influenced by her . As with her music , trends Hamasaki started have spread to Asian countries as Taiwan , China , and Singapore . Among the trends Hamasaki has started is hime @-@ kei ( a look inspired by the fashions of 18th century French aristocracy ) ; she has also heavily influenced the <unk> subculture . Hamasaki 's constantly changing image is apparent not only in her fashion photo shoots and commercial endorsements but also in her record covers , an element she considers essential in conveying her message . She has portrayed herself as a vine @-@ clad " peace muse " or " Greek goddess " ( on her album I Am ... ) , as a " twenty @-@ first @-@ century Joan of Arc " ( for her single " Free & Easy " ) , and as a " funky Lolita " . Though Hamasaki has portrayed herself in earlier releases as a " girl next door " , she has adopted a more sexualized image since the release of Loveppears . The covers for records including Loveppears , I Am ... , Rainbow , and Party Queen feature Hamasaki in states of partial nudity , for which she has generated controversy . Hamasaki also garnered criticism after she modeled bra for lingerie manufacturer <unk> , though most of the criticism alleged that Hamasaki was only trying to " play catch @-@ up " with Kumi Koda , who gained popularity for her overtly sexual image . 
 Hamasaki has accepted offers by numerous brands to endorse their products . Throughout her career under Avex , she has promoted products that ranged from electronics ( Tu @-@ Ka cell phones and Panasonic ) to various snack foods . Among the products she has advertised on television are the Honda Crea scooter , <unk> cosmetics , Mister Donut donuts , and Boss coffee . As well as serving as background music for television advertisements , some of Hamasaki 's songs have been used as themes for video games , television shows and motion pictures , such as Onimusha : Dawn of Dreams , <unk> , Shinobi : Heart Under Blade and Tales of Xillia . Although Hamasaki initially supported the exploitation of her popularity for commercial purposes , saying that it was " necessary that [ she is ] viewed as a product " , she eventually opposed Avex 's decision to market her as a " product rather than a person " . 
 = = Other activities = = 
 = = = MTRLG = = = 
 Hamasaki launched her own fashion brand , MTRLG ( Material Girl ) , in 2001 ; the clothes were sold at MTRLG boutiques and at Mise S * <unk> stores . 
 = = = Ayupan = = = 
 In 2002 , Hamasaki created Ayupan , a cartoon version of herself that appeared in a line of merchandise ( mainly figurines ) and in a 2003 cartoon . For her 2007 tour Tour of Secret , Hamasaki collaborated with Sanrio to create a line of merchandise , " Ayumi Hamasaki x Hello Kitty , " that features Ayupan and Hello Kitty together . The merchandise included cell phone straps and <unk> cameras decorated with a picture of Hello Kitty behind Hamasaki 's " A " logo ; the former product was a result of a collaboration with Sanrio and Japanese fashion brand Ash & Diamonds , the latter a collaboration with Sanrio and Panasonic . 
 = = = Ayu ready ? = = = 
 She briefly hosted her own television show , Ayuready ? ( October 2002 ) , on Fuji Television . The talk show , aired on Saturday nights from 11 : 30 to midnight , often featured her performing songs with guests , among whom were Goto Maki , Puffy , and Akina Nakamori . To promote the program ( and her album Rainbow ) , Hamasaki opened a restaurant , Rainbow House , on <unk> Beach ; it was occasionally used in episodes of Ayuready ? . After less than two years , the last episode aired in March 2004 . 
 = = Philanthropy = = 
 In March 2011 , Hamasaki donated 30 million yen to relief efforts for the Tohoku Earthquake and Tsunami . She also collaborated with fashion magazine <unk> to sell charity T @-@ shirts . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 On January 1 , 2011 , Hamasaki announced her upcoming marriage to Austrian actor and model Manuel Schwarz , whom Hamasaki met in August 2010 on the set of her music video for " Virgin Road " . On January 2 , her office announced that she and Schwarz had gotten married in the United States the day before . However , on January 16 , 2012 , Hamasaki announced on her website that she would be divorcing Schwarz . The reason for the divorce was that , initially , Hamasaki wanted to move in with Schwarz in United States but due to the earthquake and tsunami that hit her home country on March , 2011 , she began to have a strong desire not to leave Japan . 
 On December 13 , 2013 , it was announced on her official TeamAyu site that she had become engaged to an American medical student , Tyson Bodkin , 10 years her junior , whom she had been with since the spring of that year , adding " As my partner is an ordinary student , I would be very happy if you could watch over us quietly . " 
 On March 3 , 2014 , the singer announced on her fan club site " Team Ayu " that she was officially married to Bodkin . According to her agency , the couple already finished their marriage procedure in the United States near the end of February . On the 3rd , Hamasaki 's mother , as a deputy , submitted the marriage registration to Japan . 
 = = = Health = = = 
 In a January 8 , 2008 entry on her TeamAyu blog , Hamasaki announced that an inoperable condition , possibly tinnitus or Ménière 's disease , had caused complete deafness in her left ear . She disclosed that she had been diagnosed with the condition in 2006 and that the problem dated back to 2000 . Despite the setback , Hamasaki stated that she wished to continue singing , and that she would " not give up " on her fans and that " as a professional " , she wanted to " deliver the best performance for everyone " . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 A Song for × × ( 1999 ) 
 Loveppears ( 1999 ) 
 Duty ( 2000 ) 
 I Am ... ( 2002 ) 
 Rainbow ( 2002 ) 
 My Story ( 2004 ) 
 ( Miss ) understood ( 2006 ) 
 Secret ( 2006 ) 
 Guilty ( 2008 ) 
 Next Level ( 2009 ) 
 Rock ' n ' Roll Circus ( 2010 ) 
 Love Songs ( 2010 ) 
 Party Queen ( 2012 ) 
 Love Again ( 2013 ) 
 Colours ( 2014 ) 
 A One ( 2015 ) 
 Made in Japan ( 2016 ) 
 = = Concerts = = 
 = = = Concert tours = = = 
 = = = New Years countdown concerts = = = 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = HMCS Protecteur ( AOR 509 ) = 
 Her Majesty 's Canadian Ship ( HMCS ) Protecteur ( AOR 509 ) was the lead ship of the Protecteur @-@ class replenishment oilers in service with the Royal Canadian Navy . She was part of the Maritime Forces Pacific ( <unk> ) , homeported at CFB Esquimalt , British Columbia . Built by Saint John Shipbuilding and Dry Docks in Saint John , New Brunswick , she was commissioned on 30 August 1969 . She was the first Canadian naval unit to carry the name Protecteur ; however , there have been several units , including a base , named HMCS Protector . 
 Mostly known for her humanitarian efforts , Protecteur had also served in times of war including Operation Friction and Operation Apollo in the Persian Gulf region , multi @-@ national naval exercises and as part of the INTERFET in East Timor . Operation Apollo was the largest deployment of the Royal Canadian Navy since the Korean War . In six months Protecteur logged over 50 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 93 @,@ 000 km ; 58 @,@ 000 mi ) , delivering over 150 @,@ 000 barrels ( ~ 20 @,@ 000 t ) of fuel and 390 pallets of dry goods to deployed coalition ships . Protecteur , as well as her sister ship Preserver , were scheduled to be paid off in 2017 , however damage due to an engine fire aboard the ship in 2014 forced Protecteur to be prematurely paid off . Protecteur was decommissioned at a farewell ceremony on 14 May 2015 . 
 = = Building Protecteur = = 
 Protecteur was the first Canadian naval unit to carry the name Protecteur ; however , there have been two Australian and seven British naval units named Protector . The name was also used for a Canadian base , named HMCS Protector . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 First authorized in 1959 , HMCS Protecteur was constructed by Saint John Shipbuilding and Dry Docks in Saint John , New Brunswick starting on 17 October 1967 , was launched on 18 July 1968 , and was officially commissioned by the Royal Canadian Navy on 30 August 1969 . 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 Protecteur was one of two ships in the Protecteur @-@ class of replenishment oilers in service with the Royal Canadian Navy . The ship is 171 @.@ 9 metres ( 564 ft 0 in ) long and 23 @.@ 2 metres ( 76 ft 1 in ) wide , with a displacement between 8 @,@ 380 and 24 @,@ 700 tonnes ( 8 @,@ 248 and 24 @,@ 310 long tons ) depending on her load . Protecteur 's draught is 10 @.@ 1 m ( 33 ft 2 in ) , and she had been given an ice rating of three . 
 Two Babcock & Wilcox boilers feed a single General Electric steam turbine rated at 21 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 16 @,@ 000 kW ) that drives a single propeller , allowing the ship to reach a maximum speed of 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) . At 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) , the range of Protecteur was limited to 4 @,@ 100 nautical miles ( 7 @,@ 600 kilometres ; 4 @,@ 700 miles ) , but her range could be extended to 7 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 13 @,@ 900 km ; 8 @,@ 600 mi ) when only traveling at 11 @.@ 5 knots ( 21 @.@ 3 km / h ; 13 @.@ 2 mph ) . 
 Protecteur 's primary role was to deliver supplies to deployed ships . Fully loaded , Protecteur could store up to 14 @,@ 590 t ( 14 @,@ 360 long tons ) of fuel , 400 t ( 394 long tons ) of aviation fuel , 1 @,@ 048 t ( 1 @,@ 031 long tons ) of dry cargo , and 1 @,@ 250 t ( 1 @,@ 230 long tons ) of ammunition . Fuel could be transferred at a rate of 1 @,@ 500 t ( 1 @,@ 476 long tons ) per hour and 2 @,@ 500 lb ( 1 @,@ 100 kg ) of dry cargo per hour could be transferred all while traveling at her top speed . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Four BAE Systems Mark 36 SRBOC chaff launchers and an AN / SLQ @-@ 25 Nixie towed decoy were the ship 's primary defenses . When Protecteur was originally launched , she was fitted with a twin 3 " / 50 caliber gun mounted on her bow , however the 3 " guns were replaced with two 20 mm Phalanx CIWS mounts , one at the bow and one astern in August 1990 . The CIWS emplacements were part of the upgrades that Protecteur received before deploying to the Persian Gulf region . 
 Her former 3 " / 50 guns were temporarily fitted , together with two Bofors 40 mm guns , six 0 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 12 @.@ 7 mm ) machine guns , as well as <unk> and Javelin <unk> during the Gulf War . The CIWS mounts were retained after the war , but the Bofors and 76 mm gun were removed from Protecteur after returning from war . 
 Originally Protecteur was to be fitted with Mark 29 NATO Sea Sparrow . However , due to delays in procurement , the Sea Sparrow system was never installed . The Sikorsky CH @-@ 124 Sea King helicopters on board Protecteur also provided weapons support , carrying Mark 46 torpedoes and a 7 @.@ 62 mm machine gun . 
 = = = Crew = = = 
 Three hundred sixty five men and women served on Protecteur . There were 27 officers aboard ship and a total of 45 crew members who were part of the air detachment that flew three CH @-@ 124 Sea King helicopters off the back of the ship . In 1988 the crew of the Protecteur was officially desegregated , allowing both men and women to serve on board her . Protecteur was equipped with a small dental clinic , which provided dental care for the Royal Canadian Navy when deployed . 
 = = Service = = 
 The Polish yacht <unk> left Resolute Bay and went missing on 30 August 1975 . <unk> was a sailboat , and was only the second pleasure craft to attempt to traverse the Northwest Passage ; however they were turned back due to regulations regarding the passage . The sailboat was on a journey to circumnavigate the North and South American continents . The crew of Protecteur initiated a $ 400 thousand ( equivalent to $ 1 @.@ 75 million in 2016 ) search for the lost ship before it completed its journey . 
 In 1980 , while Protecteur was operating off the coast of Portugal , Commanding Officer Captain Larry <unk> hoisted an Esso flag on the ship 's mast , joking that they were the " biggest floating gas station in the neighbourhood " . In 1981 , Protecteur served in <unk> 81 off the coast of Puerto Rico , along with at least two Canadian destroyers . Protecteur and her CH @-@ 124 helicopters performed a nighttime rescue of the crew of a disabled Norwegian chemical tanker in June 1982 . The Norwegian crew was forced to abandon their ship after a fire had broken out . For the 75th anniversary of the Royal Canadian Navy , Protecteur hosted a dinner with the captains of 35 ships , including ships from Belgium , Brazil , Denmark , France , Great Britain , Italy , the Netherlands , Norway , Portugal , and the United States , as well as then Governor General Jeanne Sauvé and Prince Andrew . 
 In 1991 , Protecteur was part of the Canadian contingent sent to the Persian Gulf as part of Operation Desert Shield and later Operation Friction ( the Canadian name for its operations during the Gulf War ) . The ship , part of a three @-@ vessel force , the other two being the Iroquois @-@ class destroyer Athabaskan and the Restigouche @-@ class destroyer Terra Nova , saw extensive service in the Central Gulf . The ship was honoured with the Gulf and Kuwait Medal and the Arabian Sea award for her service in the war . In 1992 , Protecteur was sent to help after Hurricane Andrew in Florida , with tasks including repairing schools , community centres , and hospitals in the region . A small pool was built on the helipad of Protecteur providing some relief to hurricane ravaged Floridians . Homes , churches , and a senior centre were also repaired in the Bahamas . The homeport of Protecteur was changed from CFB Halifax to CFB Esquimalt after the hurricane relief efforts . The frigate Vancouver and Protecteur participated in the multi @-@ national RIMPAC 98 off the coast of Hawaii in June 1998 . 
 Protecteur was deployed to East Timor as part of the Australian @-@ led INTERFET peacekeeping taskforce from 23 October 1999 to 23 January 2000 . Crew from Protecteur helped reconstruct a police academy in Dili during their deployment in support of INTERFET . The Royal Canadian Mounted Police then used the newly reconstructed academy to set up a training school for the National Police of East Timor . Protecteur participated in Operation Apollo for six months , logging over 50 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 93 @,@ 000 km ; 58 @,@ 000 mi ) and delivering over 150 @,@ 000 barrels ( ~ 20 @,@ 000 t ) of fuel and 390 pallets of dry goods , returning to CFB Esquimalt in November 2002 . Operation Apollo was the largest Canadian deployment since the Korean War . Protecteur participated in RIMPAC again in 2004 , along with the Algonquin and Regina . 
 On 19 September 2011 , Protecteur departed from CFB Esquimalt for a two month deployment off southern California as part of the USS Abraham Lincoln carrier strike group . Protecteur joined the destroyer Algonquin and the frigate Ottawa in Fleet Week activities in San Diego , California , between 26 and 30 September 2011 . On 30 August 2013 , the ship was involved in a collision with Algonquin during towing exercises . There were no injuries to personnel , although Protecteur sustained damage to her bow . The damage was repaired in time for Protecteur to participate in a Task Group Exercise with the United States Navy in mid @-@ October 2013 . 
 On 20 February 2014 , Protecteur suffered an engine room fire and breakdown 340 nautical miles ( 630 km ; 390 mi ) northeast of Pearl Harbor , Hawaii . She was moving at limited speeds and the United States Navy Arleigh Burke @-@ class destroyer Michael Murphy , Ticonderoga @-@ class cruiser Chosin , and the Military Sealift Command @-@ operated Powhatan @-@ class fleet ocean tug Sioux were dispatched to assist . Chosin attempted to tow Protecteur , but the towing line broke . About 20 members of the ship 's crew were injured as a result of the fire , and her engines were badly damaged . After a preliminary assessment , it was decided that the vessel could not be repaired in Pearl Harbor . On 16 May Protecteur left Pearl Harbor under tow from the United States Military Sealift Command @-@ operated Safeguard @-@ class rescue and salvage ship <unk> for an expected three week journey to her home port of CFB Esquimalt . Protecteur was delivered to Esquimalt on 31 May 2014 . 
 = = Retirement and replacement = = 
 Protecteur was decommissioned at a farewell ceremony on 14 May 2015 . Plans for replacing Protecteur and her sister ship , Preserver , were first brought up in 2004 . Lack of spare parts for the ship 's boiler and the fact that she is a single @-@ skinned tanker were the main driving points to replacing Protecteur and Preserver . 
 It had been planned that the ship would have continued to operate until 2015 ; however , the Joint Support Ship Project would not have been completed until two years later , leaving a gap in the ability of the RCN to refuel and resupply her own ships while deployed . Following extensive damage as a result of a fire in February 2014 , Protecteur 's decommissioning was brought forward as repairs would have been " ... too expensive for the navy to consider " given that she was due to be retired in 2017 . 
 On 19 September 2014 , Vice @-@ Admiral Mark Norman of the Royal Canadian Navy announced the retirement of Protecteur , along with her sister ship HMCS Preserver and the Iroquois @-@ class destroyers HMCS Iroquois and HMCS Algonquin . The Royal Canadian Navy is looking at other options to fill the supply gap until the arrival of the two Queenston @-@ class auxiliary vessels in 2019 at the earliest . Protecteur , along with Algonquin , was sold for scrapping on 27 November 2015 to R.J. MacIsaac Ltd. of Antigonish , Nova Scotia . They will be towed to Nova Scotia where the work will be done at Liverpool . 
 In October 2015 , MS Asterix , a container ship , was acquired by Davie Shipyards to be converted into an auxiliary vessel , to be leased to the RCN as a temporary bridge between the Protecteur class until the Queenston class becomes available . However , no contract has yet been signed . 
 = Ipswich serial murders = 
 The Ipswich serial murders took place between 30 October and 10 December 2006 , during which time the bodies of five murdered women were discovered at different locations near Ipswich , Suffolk , England . All of the victims were women who had worked as prostitutes in the Ipswich area . Their bodies were discovered naked , but there were no signs of sexual assault . Two of the victims , Anneli Alderton and Paula Clennell , were confirmed to have been killed by asphyxiation . A cause of death for the other victims , Gemma Adams , Tania Nicol and Annette Nicholls , was not established . 
 Suffolk Police linked the killings and launched a murder investigation codenamed Operation Sumac . Due to the size of the investigation police officers were drafted from several other police forces . Two arrests were made in connection with the murders . The first suspect , who was never officially named by police , was released without charge . Forklift truck driver Steven Gerald James Wright , then aged 48 , was arrested on suspicion of murder on 19 December 2006 and charged with the murders of all five women on 21 December . 
 Wright was remanded in custody and his trial began on 14 January 2008 at Ipswich Crown Court . Wright pleaded not guilty to the charges , although he admitted having sex with all five victims and that he had been patronising prostitutes since the 1980s . DNA and fibre evidence was presented to the court that linked Wright to the victims . He was found guilty of all five murders on 21 February 2008 and was sentenced the following day to life imprisonment with a recommendation that he should never be released from prison . 
 The murders received a large amount of media attention , both nationally and internationally . The press often compared the murders to those committed by the Yorkshire Ripper , Peter Sutcliffe , who murdered 13 women and attacked seven others ( mostly prostitutes ) between 1975 and 1981 . There was some concern that the level of media coverage at the time could jeopardise a trial . The murders also sparked debates in the media over the laws surrounding prostitution . 
 = = Police investigation = = 
 The body of a young woman was discovered in the water of <unk> Brook at Thorpe 's Hill , near Hintlesham , by a member of the public on 2 December 2006 . The body , later identified as 25 @-@ year @-@ old Gemma Adams , had not been sexually assaulted . Six days later , on 8 December , the body of 19 @-@ year @-@ old Tania Nicol , a friend of Adams who had been missing since 30 October , was discovered in water at Copdock Mill just outside Ipswich . There was no evidence of sexual assault . On 10 December , a third victim , found by a member of the public in an area of woodland by the A14 road near Nacton , was later identified as 24 @-@ year @-@ old Anneli Alderton . According to a police statement , she had been asphyxiated and was about three months pregnant when she died . 
 In a press conference police warned all women to stay away from the red light district of Ipswich . On 12 December , Suffolk police announced that the bodies of two more women had been found . On 14 December , the police confirmed one of the bodies as 24 @-@ year @-@ old Paula Clennell . Clennell had disappeared on 10 December and was last seen in Ipswich . According to Suffolk Police , Clennell died from " compression of the throat " . On 15 December , the police confirmed that the other body was that of 29 @-@ year @-@ old Annette Nicholls , who disappeared on 5 December . The bodies of Clennell and Nicholls were found in Nacton near the Levington turn @-@ off of the <unk> , close to where Alderton was found . A member of the public had seen Clennell 's body twenty feet ( six metres ) from the main road and a police helicopter dispatched to the scene discovered the second body of Nicholls nearby . 
 Suffolk police linked the killings and launched a murder investigation , codenamed Operation Sumac . Chief Constable Alastair McWhirter acknowledged that Suffolk Constabulary would be reliant on external assistance due to the magnitude of the investigation . A senior investigator with the Metropolitan Police , Commander Dave Johnston , was reported to have been drafted into the murder inquiry team from Scotland Yard in London in an advisory capacity . The day @-@ to @-@ day investigation was conducted by Detective Chief Superintendent Stewart Gull . 
 During press conferences on 13 and 14 December , DCS Gull revealed that police believed the locations where the five bodies were found to have been ' deposition sites ' , not murder scenes , indicating that the victims were all killed elsewhere and transported to the locations where they were later found ; no comment was made on where the women may have been murdered . DCS Gull also revealed that some items of women 's clothing and accessories , including a handbag and jacket , had been recovered and were being forensically tested to establish whether they belonged to any of the murdered women . 
 During the course of the press briefings , DCS Gull stated that over 300 police officers were involved in the investigation , and some 400 – 450 calls were being received daily by detectives . 
 On 15 December , Suffolk Constabulary 's website revealed that a total of 7 @,@ 300 telephone calls had been made to police regarding the investigation , and that over 300 police staff and specialists were working on the cases , with support from at least 25 other police forces . As of 18 December , the number of officers involved in the investigation had increased to 650 including 350 officers from 40 other police forces who had assisted in the inquiry . The number of calls received regarding the case had also increased to around 10 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Victims = = 
 = = = Tania Nicol = = = 
 Tania Nicol , aged 19 , from Ipswich , the first of the victims to be reported missing , disappeared on 30 October and was reported missing by her mother 48 hours later . Her body was discovered on 8 December near Copdock Mill in a river by police divers ; there was no evidence of sexual assault and a post mortem could not establish a definite cause of death . Nicol attended Chantry High School but had left home at 16 to live in a hostel , where she began to use heroin . Nicol , the youngest of the five victims , worked as a prostitute to fund her addiction to heroin and cocaine . She had originally worked in massage parlours , using the alias of Chantelle in one , but was asked to leave on suspicion that she was using drugs . Her mother was unaware she was a prostitute , and thought she had been working in a bar or a hairdressers . 
 = = = Gemma Adams = = = 
 Gemma Rose Adams aged 25 , born in <unk> , last seen outside a BMW dealership on West End Road in Ipswich , where she had been living , disappeared on 15 November at about 01 @.@ 15 ( UTC ) . She was reported missing the same day by her partner , with whom she had been for ten years . Her body was found on 2 December , in a river at Hintlesham ; she was the first of the victims to be found . Adams was found naked , in a brook , but had not been sexually assaulted . Adams had been a popular child ; she came from a middle @-@ class family and had a love of animals . As a teenager she started taking hard drugs , becoming addicted to heroin . She had been working as a prostitute to cover the cost of her drug addiction , which had already led to her being dismissed from her job with an insurance firm . Her partner was at the time also a heroin user , and was aware she was working as a prostitute , although her family were not . 
 = = = Anneli Alderton = = = 
 Anneli Sarah Alderton , aged 24 , a mother of one who was also in the early stages of pregnancy , had been living in Colchester , Essex . Alderton disappeared on 3 December and was last seen on the 17 @.@ 53 train from Harwich to Manningtree . Alderton got off the train at Manningtree at 18 @.@ 15 before going on to Ipswich on another train , arriving at 18 @.@ 43 . Alderton 's body was found on 10 December near Nacton , in woodland in front of <unk> School . Alderton had been asphyxiated and was found naked , and was posed in the cruciform position . Her pregnancy was also revealed by the autopsy and her family were first informed of it by police officers . Anneli moved to Cyprus with her mother in 1992 after her parents separated , and they returned to Ipswich in 1997 . Alderton attended Copleston High School and gained good grades in her exams . Alderton had been addicted to drugs since age 16 , shortly after her father 's death from lung cancer in 1998 . 
 = = = Annette Nicholls = = = 
 Annette Nicholls , aged 29 , a mother of one from Ipswich , was initially thought to have gone missing on 4 December , but at the trial it was revealed she was last seen in Ipswich town centre on 8 December . Her family reported her missing after they grew concerned at the news of the other murders . Nicholls ' body was found on 12 December near Levington , naked but not sexually assaulted , and also posed in the cruciform position ; a definite cause of death could not be established , but her breathing had been hampered . Nicholls , the oldest victim , had been a drug addict since the early 2000s , shortly after completing a beautician 's course at Suffolk College . Soon afterwards , she had started working as a prostitute to fund her addiction . After moving to a housing association home from her council house , Nicholls asked her mother to look after her son . She was thought to be staying with a man in Ipswich at the time of her death . 
 = = = Paula <unk> = = = 
 Paula Lucille Clennell , aged 24 , born in Northumberland and living in Ipswich , disappeared on 10 December in Ipswich at approximately 00 @.@ 20 . Clennell 's body was found on 12 December near Levington on the same day as Nicholls ' . Clennell was found naked but not sexually assaulted and a post mortem reported that she had been killed by a compression of her throat . Prior to her death , Clennell commented on the then recent murders in an interview with Anglia News , stating that despite them making her " a bit wary about getting into cars " she continued to work because " I need the money . " Clennell moved to East Anglia ten years before her death , following the break @-@ up of her parents ' marriage . Clennell had three children with her partner ; all had been taken into care and adopted due to her drug addiction . Clennell herself had spent some of her childhood in a referral unit , and it was shortly after being placed there that she started taking drugs . 
 = = Arrest of suspects = = 
 On 18 December 2006 , Suffolk Constabulary reported that they had arrested a 37 @-@ year @-@ old man on suspicion of murdering all five women . The man was arrested at 07 @.@ 20 at a house in <unk> St. Martin near Felixstowe , Suffolk . The detention of the suspect was extended by magistrates by a further period of 24 hours , to the maximum of 96 hours allowed under English law . On 19 December , at 05 @.@ 00 , police arrested a second suspect , a 48 @-@ year @-@ old , at a residence in Ipswich , on suspicion of committing murder . The following day , 20 December , police were granted a 36 @-@ hour extension to question the second suspect in detention . On 21 December , a joint statement was issued by DCS Gull and Michael Crimp , senior prosecutor for the Crown Prosecution Service in Suffolk , announcing that the second suspect identified as Steve Wright had been charged with the murder of all five women . Police said that the first suspect , who was not officially named , was released on police bail . Bail conditions were cancelled on 6 June 2007 for the first suspect , as no more inquiries concerning the case were planned involving this person . 
 = = Court appearances = = 
 Wright appeared before magistrates in Ipswich on 22 December 2006 and was remanded in custody . On 2 January 2007 , Wright appeared before Ipswich Crown Court and was remanded in custody to appear before a court on 1 May . At the 1 May appearance , Wright formally entered a plea of not guilty . In July 2007 , Wright appeared at a pre @-@ trial hearing in London where it was announced the trial would begin 14 January 2008 . 
 On 14 January 2008 , Wright appeared at Ipswich Crown Court ahead of his trial , which began on 16 January , with the prosecution opening their case . The court heard how the bodies of two of the victims , Anneli Alderton and Annette Nicholls , were deliberately posed in the cruciform position , with DNA evidence linking Steve Wright to three of the victims and fibre evidence also connecting him to the victims . The defence argued that Wright was a frequenter of prostitutes , and he had " full sex " with all of the victims , barring Tania Nichols , whom he " picked up " with the intention of sexual relations , but apparently changed his mind and dropped her off back in the red light district of Ipswich . This contradicted Wright 's earlier statement when stopped by police in the district in the early hours of the morning , when he gave the police the impression he was unaware he was in the red light district and that he was driving around because he could not sleep . Wright 's rented flat is located in the red light area . 
 On 21 January , jurors were taken to sites involved in the case . These included Wright 's rented house , which they viewed only from the outside , and the areas where the victims were found . 
 During the trial , the prosecutor , Peter Wright QC , suggested that Steve Wright may not have acted alone , as the remains of Anneli Alderton were found some distance from the road but with no evidence that her body had been dragged by one person . 
 = = = Jury = = = 
 The jury in the trial was the second group chosen for the task , as a member of the original jury had a health issue which would have been prohibitive for the trial . The jury consisted of nine men and three women . All potential jurors had to complete a questionnaire , which asked if the candidates knew any of the victims , witnesses , or the suspect . The judge told jurors that they should not do their own research or obtain information from the media on the case . When it came time to sum up the evidence in the case , Mr. Justice Gross asked the jury to put aside their emotions stating : 
 = = = Verdict = = = 
 On 21 February 2008 , after eight hours of deliberation , the jury returned a unanimous guilty verdict against Steve Wright on all five counts of murder . A murder conviction carries an automatic term of life imprisonment but the judge could decide if Wright would be awarded parole at any point . The prosecution QC argued that Wright should receive a whole life tariff and thus never be released from prison . Subsequently , on 22 February 2008 , Wright was sentenced to life imprisonment and Mr Justice Gross recommended that life should mean life , on the basis that the murders resulted from a " substantial degree of pre @-@ meditation and planning " . 
 After the verdict , relatives of the victims thanked the police for their efforts to solve the crime , while some expressed their feelings that life imprisonment was not enough ( even if Wright were to ultimately end his life behind bars ) , and that he should face the death penalty . Craig Bradshaw , brother @-@ in @-@ law of Paula <unk> , stated : 
 However , other family members seemed satisfied with the verdict . The father of Gemma Adams said : 
 Prime minister Gordon Brown praised the " professionalism and dedication " of the police and prosecutors involved in the case , whilst using it as an example of what he believed to be the importance of the national DNA database . 
 = = Steve Wright biography = = 
 Steve Gerald James Wright was born in the Norfolk village of Erpingham in April 1958 . Wright joined the Merchant Navy after leaving school . In 1978 , he married and had a son soon afterwards ; the couple later divorced . In 1987 he married another woman ; they separated in 1988 , and later divorced . He worked as a dock worker , a steward on the QE2 , a lorry driver , a barman , and , just prior to his arrest , a fork @-@ lift truck driver . He became a father again with another lover in 1992 . Wright built up large debts largely through gambling , and had recently been declared bankrupt . Wright had twice tried to commit suicide , firstly by carbon monoxide poisoning and then , in 2000 , by an overdose of pills . Wright met his last girlfriend , Pamela Wright ( the shared surname is a coincidence ) , in 2001 in Felixstowe , and they moved to the house in Ipswich together in 2004 . Wright had always admitted that he had used prostitutes , firstly whilst in the Merchant Navy , and continuously throughout his life . 
 Investigations into other crimes Wright might have committed continue , including the possibility of an involvement in the Suzy Lamplugh disappearance . However Metropolitan Police have stated that this is not a strong line of enquiry . 
 = = Media coverage = = 
 The murders have been likened to those by Peter Sutcliffe , the " Yorkshire Ripper " who was convicted of murdering 13 women ( and wounding seven others ) , mainly those who worked as prostitutes , over a period of five years from 1975 to 1980 in northern England ; and to " Jack the Ripper " , the infamous Victorian serial murderer who also targeted prostitutes . 
 As with previous serial killers dating back to Jack the Ripper , many sections of the media have attempted to coin a name for the presumed murderer , using the " Suffolk Strangler " , and other terms to refer to the case . 
 A reward was offered , first by local business Call Connection , who initially offered £ 25 @,@ 000 and later raised it to £ 50 @,@ 000 . Shortly after , the News of the World offered a £ 250 @,@ 000 reward for leads to a direct arrest and conviction of the murderer / murderers , bringing the total reward on offer to £ 300 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Concerns about the media coverage = = = 
 On 21 December 2006 , the then Attorney General Lord Goldsmith issued guidance to the media after concerns were raised by Suffolk Constabulary about the coverage and potential prejudice of a future trial . Lord Goldsmith urged the media to show restraint in what they reported about the two suspects being held , for fear of prejudicing any possible trial . A senior prosecutor on the case , Michael Crimp , also expressed his concerns that media coverage could jeopardise the trial , stating : 
 = = = Coverage of related issues = = = 
 The murders refocused press attention on a number of controversial issues in British politics . 
 The first is that of prostitution in the United Kingdom . The murders have highlighted the vulnerability of prostitutes and the lack of action taken by the government , whether to be more punitive in the hope of reducing the numbers of prostitutes on the streets , to move towards legalised brothels and other measures to improve the safety of the women , or to target the demand for prostitution through prosecution of the clients , as is done in Sweden . The government has moved in the direction of tough " anti @-@ prostitution " laws which target the clients . The government had at one point considered allowing " mini brothels " , but abandoned this plan after fears that such establishments would bring pimps and drug dealers into residential areas . Instead , the laws became tougher : the Policing and Crime Act 2009 made it illegal to pay for sex with a prostitute who has been " subjected to force " and this is a strict liability offense ( clients can be prosecuted even if they did not know the prostitute was forced ) . 
 The second is that of drug use and whether it should be legalised or decriminalised , provided on prescription to registered addicts , or penalised more harshly . High numbers ( 95 % according to the Home Office ) of street prostitutes in the United Kingdom have a history of substance abuse , and prostitution is one means of funding addiction , known to have been used by all five of the victims . 
 = = Appeals = = 
 On 19 March 2008 , it was announced that Wright would be lodging an appeal against his five convictions for murder , as well as the trial judge 's recommendation that his life sentence should mean life . Amongst other things , Wright has claimed that the trial should not have been held in Ipswich , and that the evidence against him was not sufficient proof of his guilt , thus giving him grounds for an appeal . Wright was reported to have written to the court of appeal " All five women were stripped naked of clothing / jewellery / phones / bags and no evidence was found in my house or car . " Wright has also applied to receive a new solicitor . 
 The news of his planned appeal sparked outrage among those affected by his crimes , including Brian Adams , father of victim Gemma Adams , who remains convinced of Wright 's guilt and urged him to instead " come clean and stop wasting everyone 's time " . This first appeal was rejected in July 2008 . 
 On 15 July 2008 , it was announced that Steve Wright had renewed his appeal against convictions , and it would be considered by three judges in an open court hearing , the Royal Courts of Justice said . In February 2009 , it was reported that Wright had dropped this bid to appeal against the convictions , though some of his family hoped to convince the Criminal Cases Review Commission ( CCRC ) to take the case on . 
 On 3 December 2012 , Wright announced that he would be launching a third appeal against his conviction . 
 = = Dramatisations = = 
 The BBC Drama department commissioned a dramatisation of the murders and the investigation from screenwriter Stephen <unk> . The three @-@ part production , entitled Five Daughters , began filming in November 2009 , and was broadcast on BBC One from 25 – 27 April 2010 . Only a few days after the BBC 's announcement of the drama , Brian Clennell , the father of Paula Clennell , complained that it would portray the victims in " a bad light " . Wright 's brother David also complained that it would jeopardise any future retrial . Sarah Lancashire and Ian Hart led the cast . 
 A musical play , London Road , commissioned by the Royal National Theatre and written by <unk> Blythe and Adam Cork , is based on interviews with residents of the street in Ipswich where Steve Wright lived . A film adaptation of the play was released in the UK in 2015 . 
 The case was featured in an episode of the documentary series Real Crime . 
 = Arlen F. Gregorio = 
 Arlen F. Gregorio ( born September 11 , 1931 ) is an American attorney , politician and commercial mediator . He was a member of the California State Senate from 1970 to 1978 . As a Senator he chaired the Senate Health and Welfare Committee from 1979 to 1984 and was an elected member of the San Mateo County Board of Supervisors from 1979 to 1984 . After leaving politics in 1985 he began a career in mediation . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Gregorio was born in San Francisco on September 11 , 1931 to a family who has lived in California for four generations . He grew up in the Bernal Heights district until his family moved to Burlingame , California , where he attended Hoover School , Burlingame High School and the College of San Mateo . Gregorio served as a U.S. Naval Air Officer for three years in the 1950s receiving the China Service Medal for combat duty . He received his bachelor 's and law degrees from Stanford University in 1955 . He was an adjunct faculty member at Stanford University , Notre Dame University in Belmont , and College of San Mateo . 
 = = Career = = 
 Gregorio became a member of the California State Bar in 1955 . He was a partner in general law practice from 1958 to 1970 and held the position of Assistant City Attorney for San Bruno from 1962 to 1970 . He also chaired the San Mateo County Democratic Central Committee from 1964 to 1970 . 
 = = = Politics = = = 
 In 1970 , he was elected to represent San Mateo County in the California State Senate . According to fellow Senator Alan Robbins , Gregorio " refused special @-@ interest money " and " contributions over $ 100 " . During his two terms in the Senate ( 1970 - 1978 ) , Gregorio authored laws dealing with legislation and campaign finance reform , alcohol and drug abuse , the arts , environment , education and health . He was chairman of the Senate Health and Welfare Committee from 1973 to 1978 . Gregorio had a particular interest in reforming campaign financing and the political process in general . His political reforms included allowing the public to attend state budget conference committee meetings and to access legislator committee voting results . 
 In 1975 , Gregorio challenged then Governor Edmund G. Brown Jr. to a debate after the Governor vetoed his " alcohol tax bill . " In 1976 he created legislation that would give members of the public the " voting majority on most regulatory boards . " Gregorio lost his November 1978 Senate bid by a margin of only 90 votes after a vote recount . In 1979 , he won a special election to the San Mateo County Board of Supervisors and was re @-@ elected in 1980 , serving through 1984 . Gregorio 's last political race was in 1984 , when he left the Board of Supervisors to run again for the state Senate . In that political contest , Gregorio and his opponent , Becky Morgan , set a " new Senate campaign spending record " of $ 1 @.@ 6 million . 
 = = = Mediation = = = 
 After leaving politics , Gregorio began an attorney mediation practice in San Francisco in 1985 . He founded the non @-@ profit , Peninsula Conflict Resolution Center in San Mateo , California in 1986 . In 1989 , he created the first law partnership that focused exclusively on the mediation of civil trial matters . The firm is known as Gregorio , Haldeman & Rotman and is located in San Francisco . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Gregorio learned the Transcendental Meditation technique after reading a Wall Street Journal article about it in 1971 . He appeared with Maharishi Mahesh Yogi , Clint Eastwood and others on an episode of the Merv Griffin show in 1975 . 
 He has three sons by his first marriage and began his second marriage in 1980 . 
 = German destroyer Z11 Bernd von Arnim = 
 Z11 Bernd von Arnim was a Type 1934A @-@ class destroyer built for Nazi Germany 's Kriegsmarine in the late 1930s . At the beginning of World War II , the ship was initially deployed to blockade the Polish coast , but she was quickly transferred to the German Bight to lay minefields in German waters . In late 1939 the ship made one successful minelaying sortie off the English coast that claimed one British warship and seven merchant ships . During the early stages of the Norwegian Campaign , Bernd von Arnim fought the British destroyer Glowworm while transporting troops to the Narvik area in early April 1940 , but neither ship was damaged during the action . The ship fought in both naval Battles of Narvik several days later and had to be scuttled after she exhausted her ammunition . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Bernd von Arnim had an overall length of 119 meters ( 390 ft 5 in ) and was 114 meters ( 374 ft 0 in ) long at the waterline . The ship had a beam of 11 @.@ 30 meters ( 37 ft 1 in ) , and a maximum draft of 4 @.@ 23 meters ( 13 ft 11 in ) . She displaced 2 @,@ 171 long tons ( 2 @,@ 206 t ) at standard load and 3 @,@ 190 long tons ( 3 @,@ 240 t ) at deep load . The Wagner geared steam turbines were designed to produce 70 @,@ 000 metric horsepower ( 51 @,@ 000 kW ; 69 @,@ 000 shp ) which would propel the ship at 36 knots ( 67 km / h ; 41 mph ) . Steam was provided to the turbines by six high @-@ pressure Benson boilers with superheaters . Bernd von Arnim carried a maximum of 752 metric tons ( 740 long tons ) of fuel oil which was intended to give a range of 4 @,@ 400 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 100 km ; 5 @,@ 100 mi ) at 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) , but the ship proved top @-@ heavy in service and 30 % of the fuel had to be retained as ballast low in the ship . The effective range proved to be only 1 @,@ 530 nmi ( 2 @,@ 830 km ; 1 @,@ 760 mi ) at 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) . 
 Bernd von Arnim carried five 12 @.@ 7 cm SK C / 34 guns in single mounts with gun shields , two each superimposed , fore and aft . The fifth gun was carried on top of the rear deckhouse . Her anti @-@ aircraft armament consisted of four 3 @.@ 7 cm SK C / 30 guns in two twin mounts abreast the rear funnel and six 2 cm C / 30 guns in single mounts . The ship carried eight above @-@ water 53 @.@ 3 @-@ centimeter ( 21 @.@ 0 in ) torpedo tubes in two power @-@ operated mounts . A pair of reload torpedoes were provided for each mount . Four depth charge throwers were mounted on the sides of the rear deckhouse and they were supplemented by six racks for individual depth charges on the sides of the stern . Enough depth charges were carried for either two or four patterns of 16 charges each . Mine rails could be fitted on the rear deck that had a maximum capacity of 60 mines . ' GHG ' ( Gruppenhorchgerät ) passive hydrophones were fitted to detect submarines . 
 = = Career = = 
 The ship was ordered on 4 August 1934 and laid down at Germania , Kiel on 26 March 1935 as yard number <unk> . She was launched on 8 July 1936 and completed on 6 July 1938 . When World War II began in September 1939 , Bernd von Arnim was initially deployed in the Baltic to operate against the Polish Navy and to enforce a blockade of Poland , but she was soon transferred to the German Bight where she joined her sisters in laying defensive minefields . The ship also patrolled the Skagerrak to inspect neutral shipping for contraband goods . Bernd von Arnim joined the other destroyers in laying minefields off the British coast in November , when Bernd von Arnim , Hermann Künne and Wilhelm Heidkamp laid about 180 magnetic mines in the middle of the Thames Estuary on the night of 17 / 18 November . The destroyer HMS Gipsy , one trawler , and seven other ships totalling 27 @,@ 565 Gross Register Tons ( GRT ) were sunk by this minefield . Four days later , she was one of the destroyers escorting the battleships Gneisenau and Scharnhorst through the North Sea to break out into the North Atlantic . Together with her sisters Hans Lody and Erich Giese , Bernd von Arnim was to lay a minefield off Cromer during the night of 6 / 7 December , but she had trouble with two of her boilers and had to shut them down . The ship was ordered to return to port while the other two destroyers continued their mission . 
 = = = Norwegian campaign = = = 
 Bernd von Arnim was allocated to Group 1 for the Norwegian portion of Operation Weserübung in April 1940 . The group 's task was to transport the 139th Mountain Infantry Regiment ( 139 . Gebirgsjäger Regiment ) and the headquarters of the 3rd Mountain Division ( 3 . Gebirgs @-@ Division ) to seize Narvik . The ships began loading troops on 6 April and set sail the next day . Bernd von Arnim was spotted by the British destroyer Glowworm in a storm on the morning of 8 April and the ship turned away to the north @-@ west at full speed after laying a smoke screen . The German ship was suffering damage from the heavy seas at 35 knots ( 65 km / h ; 40 mph ) and was forced to reduce speed to 27 knots ( 50 km / h ; 31 mph ) after she had lost two men overboard . The British destroyer was better suited for the conditions and began to close on Bernd von Arnim . Lieutenant Commander ( Korvettenkapitän ) Curt <unk> , captain of von Arnim , turned his ship to the north @-@ east , closer to the heavy cruiser Admiral Hipper . The ships exchanged fire without effect for an hour until Hipper came within range and sank Glowworm shortly afterward . 
 The German destroyers reached the Ofotfjord on the morning of 9 April and Commodore Friedrich Bonte took his flagship Wilhelm Heidkamp , Bernd von Arnim and Georg Thiele down the fjord to Narvik . A heavy snowstorm allowed von Arnim and Thiele to enter the harbor without challenge and tie up at a pier . The mountain troops immediately began disembarking , but the ship was spotted by the coast defense ship Norge a few minutes later . The latter ship immediately opened fire and was able to fire approximately 13 shells at 600 – 800 meters ( 660 – 870 yd ) range before von Arnim was able to fire seven torpedoes . Only two struck the Norwegian ship , but they detonated one or more of the ship 's magazines and she immediately capsized and sank . None of the Norwegian shells hit either of the two German destroyers due to the darkness and falling snow , despite the short range . Von Arnim lowered boats to rescue the surviving Norwegian sailors and was able to pick up 96 men together with boats from the merchantmen in harbor . 
 Von Arnim and Thiele were the first to refuel from the single tanker that had made it safely to Narvik and later moved to the <unk> , a southern arm of the Ofotfjord , closer to the entrance . Shortly before dawn on 10 April , the five destroyers of the British 2nd Destroyer Flotilla surprised the five German destroyers in Narvik harbor . They torpedoed two destroyers and badly damaged the other three while suffering only minor damage themselves . As they were beginning to withdraw they encountered the three destroyers of the 4th Flotilla which had been alerted in the Herjansfjord when the British began their attack . The Germans opened fire first , but the gunnery for both sides was not effective due to the mist and the smoke screen laid by the British as they retreated down the Ofotfjord . The German ships had to turn away to avoid a salvo of three torpedoes fired by one of the destroyers in Narvik , but von Arnim and Thiele had also been alerted and were coming up to engage the British . 
 The two German destroyers crossed the T of the British flotilla and were able to fire full broadsides at a range of only 4 @,@ 000 meters ( 13 @,@ 000 ft ) . They first engaged the British flagship , HMS Hardy , and badly damaged her . Both of her forward guns were knocked out and the forward superstructure was set afire . Hardy was forced to beach herself lest she sink , and the German ships switched their fire to HMS Havock , the next ship in line . Their fire was relatively ineffective and both sides fired torpedoes without scoring any hits . Havock pulled out and dropped to the rear to fight off any pursuit by the ships of the 4th Flotilla . This placed HMS Hunter in the lead and she was quickly set on fire by the German ships . Thiele probably also hit her with a torpedo and she was rammed from behind by HMS Hotspur when the latter ship lost steering control . Hotspur was able to disengage , but Hunter capsized shortly afterward . The three remaining British ships were able to escape from the Germans under the cover of a smoke screen . Von Arnim had been hit by five British shells , which had knocked out one boiler . This was repaired by the morning of 13 April and she received six torpedoes from the badly damaged destroyers . 
 On the night of 12 April , Commander Erich Bey , the senior surviving German officer , received word to expect an attack the following day by British capital ships escorted by a large number of destroyers and supported by carrier aircraft . The battleship Warspite and nine destroyers duly appeared on 13 April , although earlier than Commander Bey had expected , and caught the Germans out of position . The five operable destroyers , including Bernd von Arnim , charged out of Narvik harbor and engaged the British ships . Although no hits were scored , they did inflict splinter damage on several of the destroyers . The ship was able to make a torpedo attack on the British destroyers before being driven off , but her torpedoes all missed . Lack of ammunition forced the German ships to retreat to the Rombaksfjorden ( the easternmost branch of the Ofotfjord ) , east of Narvik , where they might attempt to ambush pursuing British destroyers . Von Arnim had exhausted her ammunition and she was beached at the head of the fjord . Her crew placed demolition charges and abandoned the ship . By the time the British reached the ship she had rolled over onto her side . The ship 's crew joined the German troops ashore and participated in the campaign until the British evacuated the area in June . 
 = Joe Darling = 
 Joseph " Joe " Darling CBE ( 21 November 1870 – 2 January 1946 ) was an Australian cricketer who played 34 Test matches as a specialist batsman between 1894 and 1905 . As captain , he led Australia in a total of 21 Tests , winning seven and losing four . In Test cricket , he scored 1657 runs at an average of 28 @.@ 56 per innings , including three centuries . Darling toured England four times with the Australian team — in 1896 , 1899 , 1902 and 1905 ; the last three tours as captain . He was captain of the Australian cricket team in England in 1902 , widely recognised as one of the best teams in Australian cricket history . 
 He was a stocky , compact man and a strong driver of the ball , playing most of his cricket as an opening batsman . He was a patient batsman and was known for his solid defence , but he was able to score quickly when required . In Sydney in 1897 – 98 , he scored 160 in 165 minutes , including 30 boundaries to assist his team in defeating the English . He was the first man to score 500 runs in a Test series and was also the first to score three centuries in a series . His captaincy was disciplinarian in nature but his teammates respected his broad cricket knowledge . Even tempered with a strong personality , he was a stickler for fair play on the field . His teammates gave him the nickname " Paddy " due to a supposed resemblance to the Australian boxer , Frank " Paddy " Slavin . 
 His cricket career was interrupted several times due to his obligations as a farmer , first growing wheat in South Australia , and later as a wool @-@ grower in Tasmania . He was a member of several bodies dedicated to agriculture in Tasmania , including the responsible authority for the Royal Hobart Show . He was a pioneer in activities such as rabbit eradication and pasture improvement . He entered politics in 1921 , standing as an independent in the Tasmanian Legislative Council , where he was a forceful speaker . He retained his seat in the Tasmanian Parliament until his death following a gall bladder operation in 1946 . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Darling was born on 21 November 1870 in Glen Osmond , South Australia , the sixth son of John Darling , a grain merchant and his wife Isabella , née Ferguson . He was educated at Prince Alfred College , where he took an interest in cricket . At the age of 15 , he scored a record 252 runs in the " inter @-@ collegiate " match , the annual fixture against fierce rival St Peter 's College . His future Test team mate , Clem Hill , would later beat this record , scoring 360 . Not long after , he was included in a combined South Australian / Victoria XV that played the Australian XI in 1886 . He made only 16 runs , but the manner in which he made them saw senior players hail him as a future champion . 
 His father , disapproving of Darling 's fondness for sport , sent him away from his cricket and Australian rules football teams to spend twelve months at <unk> Agricultural School . Later , Darling worked in a bank for a time and before his father appointed him manager of one of a wheat farm . Working on the farm added size and strength to an already stocky and athletic frame . He was selected for the South Australian team at age 19 , but his father would not allow him time off the farm to play . 
 After two years in the bush , Darling returned to Adelaide and cricket . He opened a sports store on Rundle Street , Adelaide and was soon selected to represent South Australia in inter @-@ colonial cricket . He made his first @-@ class cricket debut against New South Wales at the Adelaide Oval ; scoring 5 and 32 as South Australia won the match by 237 runs . The next season , against the touring England team captained by Andrew Stoddart , Darling made 115 , his maiden first @-@ class century . 
 = = Test career = = 
