 Sisters , O Sisters ( 1971 , 4 min ) 
 Luck of the Irish ( 1971 , approx . 4 min ) 
 Blueprint for the Sunrise ( 2000 , 28 min ) 
 <unk> ( 2004 , continuous loop ) 
 = = = Collaborations = = = 
 With John Lennon , Bed @-@ In , ( 1969 , 74 min ) 
 With Jonas Mekas , Fly ( 1970 , 25 min ) , a fly crawls slowly across a woman 's naked body . Premiered at the Cannes Film Festival in May 1971 . 
 = = = Actress or as self = = = 
 Satan 's Bed ( as an actress ) , directed by Michael Findlay 
 Let It Be ( 1970 , 81 min ) 
 Imagine ( 1971 , 70 min ) 
 Flipside ( Canadian TV show , 1972 , approx . 25 min ) 
 Mad About You ( American TV show , guest star in 1995 episode " Yoko Said " ) 
 = Operation Colossus = 
 Operation Colossus was the codename given to the first airborne operation undertaken by the British military , which occurred on 10 February 1941 during World War II . The British airborne establishment was formed in June 1940 by the order of the British Prime Minister , Winston Churchill , in response to the successful airborne operations conducted by the German military during the Battle of France . Training began immediately , but a shortage of proper equipment and training facilities , as well as bureaucratic difficulties , meant that only a small number of volunteers could immediately be trained as parachute troops . The first airborne unit to be formed was actually a re @-@ trained Commando unit , No. 2 Commando , which was subsequently renamed as No. 11 Special Air Service Battalion and numbered approximately 350 officers and other ranks by September 1940 . The battalion finished its training in December 1940 , and in February 1941 thirty @-@ eight members of the battalion , known as X Troop , were selected to conduct an airborne operation , which was intended to test the capability of the airborne troops and their equipment , as well as the ability of the Royal Air Force to accurately deliver them . 
 The target chosen for the operation was a fresh @-@ water aqueduct near <unk> in southern Italy , which supplied water to a large portion of the Italian population as well as several ports used by the Italian military ; it was also hoped that its destruction would hamper Italian military efforts in North Africa and Albania . The airborne troops were delivered by converted Armstrong Whitworth Whitley medium bombers to the target on 10 February , but equipment failures and navigational errors meant that a significant portion of the troops explosives , and a team of Royal Engineer sappers , landed in the wrong area . Despite this setback the remaining members of the troop successfully destroyed the aqueduct and withdrew from the area , but were all captured by the Italian authorities within a short time ; an Italian translator was tortured and executed and one paratrooper managed to escape captivity , but the rest remained as prisoners of war . The aqueduct was rapidly repaired before local water reserves ran out , ensuring that the local population and the ports were not deprived of water , and , consequently , that the Italian war efforts were not hampered . However , it served as a morale boost for the fledgling airborne establishment , and the technical and operational lessons learnt from the operation helped the development of further airborne operations . 
 = = Background = = 
 The German military was one of the pioneers of the use of airborne formations , conducting several successful airborne operations during the Battle of France in 1940 , including the Battle of Fort Eben @-@ Emael . Impressed by the success of German airborne operations , the Allied governments decided to form their own airborne formations . This decision would eventually lead to the creation of two British airborne divisions , as well as a number of smaller units . The British airborne establishment began development on 22 June 1940 , when the Prime Minister , Winston Churchill , directed the War Office in a memorandum to investigate the possibility of creating a corps of 5 @,@ 000 parachute troops . Despite the Prime Minister 's desire to have 5 @,@ 000 airborne troops within a short period , a number of problems were rapidly encountered by the War Office . Very few gliders existed in Britain in 1940 , and these were too light for military purposes , and there was also a shortage of suitable transport aircraft to tow gliders and carry paratroopers . On 10 August , Churchill was informed that although 3 @,@ 500 volunteers had been selected to train as airborne troops , only 500 could currently begin training due to limitations in equipment and aircraft . The War Office stated in a memorandum to the Prime Minister in December 1940 that 500 parachute troops could probably be trained and be ready for operations by the spring of 1941 , but this figure was purely arbitrary ; the actual number that could be trained and prepared by that period would rely entirely on the creation of a training establishment and the provision of required equipment . 
 A training establishment for parachute troops was set up at RAF Ringway near Manchester on 21 June 1940 and named the Central Landing Establishment , and the initial 500 volunteers began training for airborne operations . The Royal Air Force provided a number of Armstrong Whitworth Whitley medium bombers for conversion into transport aircraft for paratroopers . A number of military gliders were also designed , starting with the General Aircraft Hotspur , but gliders were not used by the British until Operation Freshman in 1942 . Organizational plans were also being laid down , with the War Office calling for two parachute brigades to be operational by 1943 . However , the immediate development of any further airborne formations , as well as the initial 500 volunteers already training , was hampered by three problems . With the threat of invasion in 1940 , many War Office officials and senior British Army officers did not believe that sufficient men could be spared from the effort to rebuild the Army after the Battle of France to create an effective airborne force ; many believed that such a force would only have a nuisance raiding value and would not affect the conflict in any useful way . There were also material problems ; all three of the armed services were expanding and rebuilding , particularly the Army , and British industry had not yet been organized to a sufficient war footing to support all three services as well as the fledgling airborne force . Finally , the airborne forces lacked a single , coherent policy , with no clear idea as to how they should be organized , or whether they should come under the command of the Army or the RAF ; inter @-@ organizational rivalry between the War Office and the Air Ministry , in charge of the RAF , was a major factor in delaying the further expansion of British airborne forces . 
 = = Preparation = = 
 On 26 April 1941 , the Prime Minister was shown a demonstration of the airborne force that Britain currently possessed , and was informed that although some 800 parachute troops had been trained , their deployment was severely limited by the lack of suitable aircraft which could be used to transport them to any prospective targets . The primary airborne formation in existence by this time was No. 11 Special Air Service Battalion , which numbered approximately 350 officers and other ranks , and had been formed from No. 2 Commando , a Commando unit which had been selected for conversion into an airborne unit . The Commando began intensive airborne training in June 1940 , originally 500 strong , but this had been reduced to 21 officers and 321 other ranks by September 1940 ; despite already receiving rigorous training , many of the commandos failed their training by refusing to conduct a parachute drop . One senior RAF officer at the Central Landing Establishment believed that such a large number refused due to a combination of inexperience and a fear that their parachute would not open when they jumped out of the aircraft . On 21 November 1940 the Commando was officially renamed as No. 11 Special Air Service Battalion and reorganized to form a battalion headquarters , one parachute wing and one glider wing . By 17 December the battalion had officially completed its parachute training , including taking part in a number of demonstrations for military observers , and was considered to be ready for active duty . 
 There were few airborne resources available to the British Army by mid @-@ 1941 . The only unit trained and available for an airborne operation was No. 11 Special Air Service Battalion , there were very few transport aircraft available to transport an airborne force , there were few RAF flight crews with experience of parachute droppings and none with operational experience , and there were no specialized overseas facilities to cater exclusively for airborne operations . However , it had been decided that some form of airborne operation would have to be carried out . The reasons for mounting an operation with such meagre resources were two @-@ fold ; firstly a successful raid would demonstrate to the rest of the world that Britain was still a force to be reckoned with and had not been defeated , and secondly a raid would test the fighting ability of the battalion and its equipment , as well as the RAF 's ability to deliver paratroopers at a predetermined location at a required time . The target chosen for the operation was an aqueduct that crossed the <unk> river in the Campania province of southern Italy near the town of <unk> . The aqueduct carried the main water supply for the province of Apulia , which at the time was inhabited by approximately two million Italians and included the strategically important port of Taranto ; it was hoped that destroying the aqueduct and depriving the population of their regular water supply would damage their morale , and also have some impact on the Italian war efforts in North Africa and Albania . The aqueduct was a significant distance from the Italian coast , making it unlikely that a sea @-@ borne raiding party could reach it , and it was believed that it was too strongly constructed to be destroyed by aerial bombing ; as such , an airborne raid conducted by parachute troops was thought to be the ideal way to eliminate the aqueduct . 
 A small force of thirty @-@ eight men – seven officers and thirty @-@ one other ranks – was selected from the battalion and designated X Troop , commanded by Major T.A.G. Pritchard of the Royal Welch Fusiliers . Three Italian @-@ speaking interpreters were attached to the troop for the duration of the operation : Squadron Leader Lucky MC , Rifleman Nasri from the Rifle Brigade and a civilian named Fortunato <unk> , a waiter in the Savoy Hotel . Training for the operation began in January 1941 and lasted for six weeks , in order to allow time for six Whitley bombers to be converted to drop parachutists . A full @-@ scale model of the aqueduct was built in early February to allow the troop to practice its assault , and during training one enlisted man was killed when he parachuted into an ice @-@ covered pond and drowned before he could be rescued . The plan for the operation called for six Whitleys of No. 51 Squadron RAF to transport X Troop from Malta to the target area on 10 February , while another two bombers would carry out a diversionary raid against railway yards at Foggia , approximately 60 miles ( 97 km ) to the north of the aqueduct . At 21 : 30 the troop would be dropped around the objective , attack and demolish it , and then withdraw 50 miles ( 80 km ) to the coast to the mouth of the Sele River , where the submarine HMS Triumph would pick them up on the night of 15 February . 
 = = Battle = = 
 On 7 February X Troop boarded the six converted Whitley bombers and were transported 1 @,@ 600 miles ( 2 @,@ 600 km ) to Malta without incident despite a significant portion of the journey being over occupied France . There the troop were briefed with aerial reconnaissance photographs of the objective that were provided by the Photographic Reconnaissance Unit , which showed that there were actually two aqueducts in the area , one larger than the other ; after a brief discussion it was decided that the larger of the two would be targeted . At 18 : 30 on 10 February the six Whitleys took off from Malta , each carrying one officer and five other ranks of X Troop ; the flight to the target area was uneventful , with clear weather and perfect visibility . The lead Whitley reached the drop zone , which was approximately 500 metres ( 550 yd ) from the aqueduct , at 21 : 42 . All six men and their equipment containers landed within 250 metres ( 270 yd ) of the drop zone , as did the men from the next four aircraft ; however two of the bombers failed to drop their containers due to the icing up of the release mechanisms , and the sixth aircraft failed to locate the drop zone and eventually dropped its six men and containers two hours later in a valley two miles from the aqueduct . The six men who had not landed in the drop zone were Royal Engineer sappers who were supposed to rig the aqueduct for demolition , and their Whitley had been carrying most of the explosives to be used in the operation . Despite these losses , the troop gathered up the remaining containers and took up positions around the aqueduct . However , on examining the aqueduct it was found the piers supporting it were made of reinforced concrete and not brick as had been expected , leading Pritchard to suspect that the remaining explosives might be insufficient to demolish the aqueduct . After closer inspection , Pritchard ordered that the majority of the explosives be placed around the western pier and the rest against its abutment , in the hope that this would cause enough damage to destroy the aqueduct . A small amount of explosives were also placed under a nearby bridge that bridged the Ginestra river . 
 At 00 : 30 on 11 February the explosives were detonated and the western pier destroyed , causing the aqueduct to crumble and effectively break in half , and the Ginestra bridge was also successfully destroyed . Leaving one man who had broken his ankle when he had landed with a nearby farmer , the remainder of the Troop withdrew from the area at 01 : 00 , splitting into three groups and heading towards the coast . The three groups moved as fast as possible towards the coast , but were all captured within a few hours of the aqueduct being demolished . The group commanded by Major Pritchard was spotted by a farmer who raised the alarm at a nearby village , leading to a local carabinieri unit surrounding the group ; with little ammunition and heavily outnumbered , Pritchard decided to surrender . The other three groups , including the six sappers who had landed two miles from the objective , fared little better . The two groups from the aqueduct were soon located by Italian soldiers and ambushed , forcing them to surrender after brief firefights . The third group were found by a group of civilians as they moved towards the coast ; after attempting to bluff their way past by claiming to be German soldiers on a special field exercise , which failed when the local Mayor demanded identity papers , they were captured by carabinieri . All were stripped of their weapons and equipment and transported to Naples , with the exception of the Italian translator , <unk> ; he was handed over to the Blackshirts , a Fascist paramilitary group , who tortured and then executed him . Even if any of the groups had managed to make their way to the coast and the rendezvous point , they would not have been picked up by HMS Triumph . One of the two Whitleys conducting the diversionary raid at Foggia suffered engine trouble after bombing the railway yards . The pilot radioed Malta , informing his airfield that he was ditching in the mouth of the River Sele , coincidentally the area where the rendezvous was to occur . Fearing that the message had been monitored by the Italians and that the submarine might sail into a trap , the decision was made by senior officers not to send it to the rendezvous point . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The destruction of the <unk> aqueduct had a negligible effect on the Italian war effort in North Africa and Albania , as it did not create a serious interruption to the water supplies of Taranto and other ports ; the water supplies in local reservoirs lasted for the short period needed for the aqueduct to be repaired . However , the operation did create a certain amount of alarm in the Italian population and caused stringent new air raid precautions to be introduced by the Italian government , which were still in place when Italy surrendered in 1943 . Major General Julian Thompson has criticized the operation , claiming that although there was a great deal of planning in terms of how to insert the airborne troops , there was insufficient planning devoted to how they would be extracted . He is also critical about the lack of information gathered about the aqueduct , despite it being " hardly difficult to obtain . " 
 Lessons taken from the operation provided the British military with valuable operational and technical experience that helped shape future airborne operations , such as Operation Biting . It demonstrated the range and flexibility of airborne troops and proved that they could pose a threat to the Axis powers , and also provided a morale boost for the British military and the fledgling airborne establishment . In terms of technical experience , it was found that the containers used to drop equipment for the troop were manufactured from a soft @-@ skinned material , which sagged during flight and blocked the bomb bay doors from opening ; future containers were constructed from metal to ensure this did not occur . All of the surviving members of X Troop would remain as prisoners of war until they were repatriated with the Italian surrender , with one exception ; Lieutenant Anthony Deane – Drummond managed to escape after being captured and eventually returned to England in 1942 , joining the newly formed 1st Airborne Division . When the airborne establishment was expanded , No. 11 Special Air Service Battalion was renamed 1st Parachute Battalion , and eventually formed the nucleus of 1st Parachute Brigade when it was created in September 1941 . 
 = Quehanna Wild Area = 
 Quehanna Wild Area is a wildlife area within parts of Cameron , Clearfield , and Elk counties in the U.S. state of Pennsylvania ; with a total area of 48 @,@ 186 acres ( 75 sq mi ; 195 km2 ) , it covers parts of Elk and Moshannon State Forests . Founded in the 1950s as a nuclear research center , Quehanna has a conflicting legacy of radioactive and toxic waste contamination , while also being the largest state forest wild area in Pennsylvania , with herds of native elk . The wild area is bisected by Pennsylvania Route 1011 , the Quehanna Highway , and is home to second growth forest with mixed hardwoods and evergreens . Quehanna has two state forest natural areas : the 1 @,@ 215 @-@ acre ( 492 ha ) Wykoff Run Natural Area , and the 917 @-@ acre ( 371 ha ) Marion Brooks Natural Area . The latter has the largest stand of white birch in Pennsylvania and the eastern United States . 
 The land that became Quehanna Wild Area was home to Native Americans , including the Susquehannock and Iroquois , before it was purchased by the United States in 1784 . Settlers soon moved into the region and , in the 19th and early 20th centuries , the logging industry cut the virgin forests ; clearcutting and forest fires transformed the once verdant land into the " Pennsylvania Desert " . Pennsylvania bought this land for its state forests and in the 1930s the Civilian Conservation Corps worked to improve them . In 1955 the Curtiss @-@ Wright Corporation bought 80 square miles ( 210 km2 ) of state forest for a research and manufacturing facility to focus on developing nuclear @-@ powered jet engines . They named their facility Quehanna for the nearby West Branch Susquehanna River , itself named for the Susquehannocks . 
 Curtiss @-@ Wright left in 1960 , after which a succession of tenants further contaminated the nuclear reactor facility and its hot cells with radioactive isotopes , including strontium @-@ 90 and cobalt @-@ 60 . The manufacture of radiation @-@ treated hardwood flooring continued until 2002 . Pennsylvania reacquired the land in 1963 and 1967 , and in 1965 established Quehanna as a wild area , albeit one with a nuclear facility and industrial complex . The cleanup of the reactor and hot cells took over eight years and cost $ 30 million ; the facility was demolished and its nuclear license terminated in 2009 . Since 1992 the industrial complex has been home to Quehanna Motivational Boot Camp , a minimum @-@ security prison . Quehanna Wild Area has many sites where radioactive and toxic waste was buried , some of which have been cleaned up while others were dug up by black bear and white @-@ tailed deer . 
 In 1970 the name was officially changed to Quehanna Wild Area , and later that decade the 75 @-@ mile ( 121 km ) Quehanna Trail System was built through the wild area and surrounding state forests . Primitive camping by hikers is allowed , but the area has no permanent residents . The trails are open to cross @-@ country skiing in the winter , but closed to vehicles . Quehanna is on the Allegheny Plateau and was struck by a tornado in 1985 . <unk> insects have further damaged the forests . Quehanna Wild Area was named an Important Bird Area by the Pennsylvania Audubon Society , and is home to many species of birds and animals . Eco @-@ tourists come to see the birds and elk , and hunters come for the elk , coyote , and other game . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Native Americans = = = 
 The Iroquoian @-@ speaking Susquehannocks were the earliest recorded inhabitants of the West Branch Susquehanna River basin , which includes Quehanna Wild Area . They were a matriarchal society that lived in stockaded villages of large long houses . The Susquehannocks ' numbers were greatly reduced by disease and warfare with the Five Nations of the Iroquois , and by 1675 they had died out , moved away , or been assimilated into other tribes . After this , the Iroquois exercised nominal control of the lands of the West Branch Susquehanna River valley . They also lived in long houses , primarily in what is now New York , and had a strong confederacy which gave them power beyond their numbers . To fill the void left by the demise of the Susquehannocks , the Iroquois encouraged such displaced eastern tribes as the Shawnee and Lenape ( or Delaware ) to settle in the West Branch watershed . 
 The Seneca tribe of the Iroquois hunted in much of Pennsylvania and the Quehanna area . The Iroquois and other tribes used the Great Shamokin Path , the major native east – west path connecting the Susquehanna and Allegheny River basins , which passed south of what is now the wild area . The native village of <unk> ( or Chingleclamouche ) was on this path at the West Branch Susquehanna River , at what is now Clearfield to the southwest of Quehanna . The Sinnemahoning Path along Sinnemahoning Creek ran north of Quehanna ; as the path with the gentlest grade , it may have been the route the first Paleo @-@ Indians took entering this part of Pennsylvania from the west . 
 The French and Indian War ( 1754 – 1763 ) and the subsequent colonial expansion encouraged the migration of many Native Americans westward to the Ohio River basin . In October 1784 , the United States acquired a large tract of land , including what is now Quehanna Wild Area , from the Iroquois in the Second Treaty of Fort Stanwix ; this acquisition is known as the Last Purchase in Pennsylvania . 
 Although most of the Native Americans left this area of Pennsylvania , the state 's Native American heritage can be found in many of its place names . The Susquehannocks were also known as the Susquehanna , from which the Susquehanna River and its West Branch obtained their names . In the 1950s the Curtiss @-@ Wright Corporation coined the name " Quehanna " for its nuclear reservation , which it derived from the last three syllables of " Susquehanna " , " in honor of the river that drained the entire region " . Part of Quehanna Wild Area lies in the Moshannon State Forest , named for Moshannon Creek , which means " moose stream " or " elk stream " in the Lenape language . Sinnemahoning Creek 's name means " stony salt lick " in Lenape . 
 = = = Lumber era = = = 
 Prior to the arrival of William Penn and his Quaker colonists in 1682 , forests covered up to 90 percent of what is now Pennsylvania : more than 31 @,@ 000 square miles ( 80 @,@ 000 km2 ) of eastern white pine , eastern hemlock , and a mix of hardwoods . Scull 's 1770 map of the Province of Pennsylvania showed the colonists ' ignorance of the land north of the West Branch Susquehanna River ; Sinnemahoning Creek was missing and the region that includes Quehanna was labeled " <unk> Swamp " . This began to change when the land was purchased from the Iroquois in 1784 , and became part of Northumberland County . In 1795 it became part of Lycoming County ; as the new county was divided into more townships , Quehanna became part of Chingleclamouche Township ( named for the native village ) . Chingleclamouche Township was included in Clearfield County when it was established in 1804 . Later it was divided between at least three counties and many townships , and no longer exists under that name . 
 The southern part of Quehanna Wild Area is now in parts of Covington , Girard , and Karthaus townships in Clearfield County ; they were incorporated in 1817 , 1832 , and 1841 . The northwest part of Quehanna is in <unk> Township in Elk County , established in 1843 . The northeast part of Quehanna is in Cameron County ( incorporated in 1860 ) in Gibson Township , which was formed in 1804 while part of Clearfield County . 
 The first European American settlers arrived in Chingleclamouche Township in about 1793 , and the first sawmill in Clearfield County began operating in 1805 . Settlers initially occupied land along the river and creeks , as these provided a means of transportation . Some settlers would harvest timber and float it downstream once a year to make money for items they could not produce themselves , but by 1820 the first full @-@ time lumbering operations began in the region . The white pine was the most sought after tree , yielding spars for ships and timber for buildings . <unk> were also harvested , and eventually hemlocks were cut for their wood and their bark , which contained tannins used in tanning leather . 
 As lumber became an industry in Pennsylvania , the rivers and creeks were declared public highways by the Pennsylvania General Assembly . This permitted their use to float logs to sawmills and markets . Log booms were placed on the West Branch Susquehanna River to catch the floating timber ; Lock Haven built a boom in 1849 , and Williamsport 's Susquehanna Boom opened in 1851 . Businesses purchased vast tracts of land and built splash dams on the creeks ; these dams controlled water in small streams that would otherwise be unable to carry logs and rafts . For example , in 1871 a single splash dam on the Bennett Branch of Sinnemahoning Creek could release enough water to produce a wave 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 6 m ) high on the main stem for two hours . Mosquito Creek , which drains much of the southern part of Quehanna Wild Area , had at least nine splash dams in its watershed . This was the predominant lumber transport system in the Quehanna region from 1865 to 1885 and after 1850 , five different kinds of lumber rafts could be found on its streams and river . 
 Much of the timber was too remote to be transported via the streams , and logging railroads were the next development in the Quehanna lumber era . In or around 1880 , these railroads allowed the clearcutting of the remaining forests . The Quehanna plateau was unusual in using standard gauge track for its logging railroads : most such railways were narrow gauge . The logging railroads used special geared steam locomotives , such as the Shay , Climax and Heisler . Nine companies operated logging railroads in what became Moshannon State Forest ; the Goodyear Lumber Company was the largest and cut much of what became Quehanna Wild Area between 1902 and 1912 . The Central Pennsylvania Lumber Company logged land in the northern part of the wild area between 1907 and 1911 . 
 There were only two major roads on the Quehanna plateau in the 19th and early 20th centuries , both originally turnpikes . The Caledonia Pike ran east – west from Bellefonte to Smethport , and passed south of what became the wild area , while the Driftwood Pike ran from near Karthaus north to Driftwood on the Sinnemahoning , and passed through the wild area . Wagon trains and railroads brought supplies to the lumber camps in the woods ; some wood hicks set up small farms on cleared land that also provided food . There were at least eight farms in Quehanna , though they were not very productive because of " poorly drained acid soil and a short growing season " . 
 The lumber era in Quehanna did not last ; the old @-@ growth and second @-@ growth forests were clearcut by the early 20th century . Fire had always been a hazard ; the sparks from logging steam engines started many wildfires , and more wood may have been lost to fires than to logging in some areas . On the clearcut land nothing remained except the discarded , dried @-@ out tree tops , which were very flammable ; much of the land burned and was left barren . The soil was depleted of nutrients , fires baked the ground hard , and jungles of blueberries , blackberries , and mountain laurel covered the clearcut land , which became known as the " Pennsylvania Desert " . 
 = = = State forests = = = 
 As the timber was exhausted and the land burned , many companies simply abandoned their holdings . Conservationists such as Joseph Rothrock became concerned that the forests would not regrow without proper management . They called for a change in the philosophy of forest management and for the state to purchase land from the lumber companies . In 1895 , Rothrock was appointed the first forestry commissioner in what became the Pennsylvania Department of Forests and Waters , the forerunner of today 's Department of Conservation and Natural Resources ( DCNR ) . In 1897 , the Pennsylvania General Assembly passed legislation that authorized the purchase of " unseated lands for forest reservations " and the first of the Pennsylvania state forest lands were acquired the following year . 
 The state first bought land that became the Moshannon State Forest in 1898 ; the second purchase , and first in the Quehanna region , was 3 @,@ 263 acres ( 1 @,@ 320 ha ) in the Three Runs area , acquired for $ 1 an acre ( $ 2 @.@ 47 a hectare ) in 1900 . Three smaller state forests ( Karthaus , Sinnemahoning , and Moshannon ) were merged to form the present Moshannon State Forest ; in 1997 , the forest covered 131 @,@ 622 acres ( 53 @,@ 266 ha ) . The first purchase for the Elk State Forest was made in 1900 and , in 1997 , it encompassed 197 @,@ 729 acres ( 80 @,@ 018 ha ) . Forty @-@ six percent , or 22 @,@ 179 acres ( 8 @,@ 976 ha ) , of the total 48 @,@ 186 acres ( 19 @,@ 500 ha ) of Quehanna Wild Area lies in the Elk State Forest . The remainder lies in the Moshannon State Forest . 
 The state established a tree nursery in the Moshannon State Forest in 1911 , which became the largest in Pennsylvania before it closed in 1980 . In addition to planting millions of trees , in 1913 the state encouraged use of state forest lands by allowing permanent leases for camp sites ; when the state stopped issuing new permits in 1970 , 4 @,@ 500 campsites had been leased . The Pennsylvania Game Commission began purchasing land for state game preserves in 1920 , and , by 1941 , State Game Lands 34 , which is partly in Quehanna Wild Area , had been established . Despite these conservation efforts , major forest fires swept the Moshannon and Elk state forests in 1912 , 1913 , 1926 , and 1930 , and minor fires occurred in other years . 
 During the Great Depression , the Civilian Conservation Corps ( CCC ) established ten camps in Moshannon State Forest , and ten in Elk State Forest . The young men of the CCC planted trees , blazed new trails , built roads and bridges , and fought fires , which continued to be a problem . In 1938 a fast @-@ moving fire in the Elk State Forest , north of Quehanna , killed eight firefighters . The CCC also built structures and established or improved many of the state parks , including Parker Dam and S. B. Elliott State Parks on the western Quehanna plateau . The United States ' entry into the Second World War ended the CCC , and all its camps were closed by the summer of 1942 . The Quehanna Trail System passes near or through the sites of several former CCC camps . 
 Other Depression @-@ era public works projects shaped the area . The Works Progress Administration ( WPA ) had at least two camps for World War I veterans in the Quehanna area , and built the Karthaus emergency landing field for airmail planes , similar to those that became Mid @-@ State Regional Airport and Cherry Springs Airport . The 3 @,@ 700 @-@ by @-@ 1 @,@ 800 @-@ foot ( 1 @,@ 100 by 550 m ) airfield was built in 1935 and 1936 along Hoover Road ( the old Driftwood Pike ) , just north of what is now Wykoff Run Natural Area . During World War II the landing strip was blocked to prevent enemy planes from secretly landing there . 
 In 1946 the Mosquito Creek Sportsmen 's Association was founded to promote conservation in the region . One of the Association 's initial concerns was the acidification of streams , which they originally attributed to tannic acid from the trees used by the beavers to construct their dams . With the assistance of Pennsylvania 's Department of Forests and Waters , Game Commission , and Fish and Boat Commission , they dynamited 79 dams . Afterward , they discovered the water was acidic upstream of the dams too , and eventually realized that the problem was caused by acid rain , not the beavers . The Association has operated several stations to reduce the acidity of Mosquito Creek and its tributaries , with technical assistance from the Pennsylvania State University ( Penn State ) . 
 = = = Atoms for Peace = = = 
 In a December 8 , 1953 , speech to the United Nations , President Dwight D. Eisenhower announced a new Atoms for Peace policy , and the United States Congress enacted his program into law the following year . Atoms for Peace " made funding accessible to anyone who had the imagination , if not the ability , to harness the atom 's power for peaceful purposes " . Under the new program , the airplane manufacturer Curtiss @-@ Wright Corporation sought a large isolated area in central Pennsylvania " for the development of nuclear @-@ powered jet engines and to conduct research in <unk> , metallurgy , ultrasonics , electronics , chemicals and plastics " . Curtiss @-@ Wright worked closely with the state and , in June 1955 , George M. Leader , the Governor of Pennsylvania , signed legislation that authorized the construction of a research facility at Quehanna . The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania sold Curtiss @-@ Wright 8 @,@ 597 acres ( 3 @,@ 479 ha ) for $ 181 @,@ 250 ( $ 22 @.@ 50 an acre , $ 55 @.@ 60 a hectare ) , and gave the company a 99 @-@ year lease on the remaining 42 @,@ 596 acres ( 17 @,@ 238 ha ) at $ 30 @,@ 000 a year . Curtiss @-@ Wright controlled 51 @,@ 193 acres ( 80 @.@ 0 sq mi ; 207 @.@ 2 km2 ) in a regular 16 @-@ sided polygon , which was easier to fence than a circular area . 
 The state constructed $ 1 @.@ 6 million of roads to the area ; the Quehanna Highway was built on parts of an old CCC road , which followed an earlier logging railroad grade . Pennsylvania also canceled 212 camp site leases to help ensure security for the installation . Curtiss @-@ Wright built three facilities on its land . The first was a nuclear research center with a nuclear reactor and six shielded radiation containment chambers for handling radioactive isotopes , referred to as hot cells , at the end of Reactor Road . The second was for jet engine trials and had two test cells with bunkers just north of Quehanna Highway , about 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) apart . The northern test cell was at the center of the 16 @-@ sided polygon ; even if a jet engine broke its moorings , it could not leave the polygonal area . Both of these were on the land which Curtiss @-@ Wright had purchased , which was a regular octagon surrounded with a 24 @-@ mile ( 39 km ) fence built by forest rangers , supervised from three guard houses on Quehanna Highway and Wykoff Run Road . The third installation was an industrial complex at the southeast edge of the polygon , in Karthaus Township , on the Quehanna Highway . At this site , a Curtiss @-@ Wright division manufactured Curon foam for furniture and household products and used beryllium oxide to make high @-@ temperature ceramics for application in the nuclear industry . 
 In 1956 Curtiss @-@ Wright began isotope work at the facility , and The New York Times published two stories on the new nuclear research laboratory that year , followed by a November 1957 report that the one @-@ megawatt nuclear reactor was completed . In 1958 , the corporation received a twenty @-@ year license from the United States Atomic Energy Commission ( AEC ) to operate a four @-@ megawatt pool @-@ type nuclear research reactor , and received permission from the Pennsylvania Sanitary Water Board to dispose of some radioactive waste in Meeker Run , a tributary of Mosquito Creek . The project was billed as " the greatest thing that ever happened in North Central Pennsylvania " , and was expected to employ between 7 @,@ 000 and 8 @,@ 000 people . Curtiss @-@ Wright spent $ 30 million on the project , and developed a community for its scientific and technical staff at the village of Pine Glen , southeast of Karthaus in Centre County . 
 By 1960 the Air Force had decided not to pursue nuclear @-@ powered aircraft , and the federal government canceled $ 70 million in " high @-@ altitude testing contracts " with Curtiss @-@ Wright . By June 1960 , the reactor was on standby and only 750 employees remained , 400 of which were in the Curon foam division ; many engineers and scientists had already left . On August 20 , 1960 , Curtiss @-@ Wright announced that it was donating the reactor facility to Penn State and selling its Curon foam division ; the remaining 235 employees lost their jobs . Penn State , located about an hour south of Quehanna , had its own nuclear reactor , but intended to use the Quehanna facility for research and training . 
 The Curtis @-@ Wright reactor was dismantled and its fuel returned to the AEC . Martin Company , which soon became Martin Marietta , leased the hot cells , intending to use them in the manufacture of small radioisotope thermoelectric generators . Curtiss @-@ Wright warned Penn State " that the radiation involved in Martin 's operations would be ' extremely high ' and of a type that posed a particular risk to human health " , but Curtiss @-@ Wright itself had left both solid and liquid radioactive waste in the facility . Some of the Curtiss @-@ Wright waste was contaminated with toxic beryllium oxide . Penn State had acquired the reactor license and with it came legal responsibility for the nuclear waste on the site ; its plan with the AEC called for the release of 90 percent of the liquid radioactive waste into the environment and the burial of most radioactive solids on site . Items coated with beryllium oxide dust " were covered in plastic and buried out in the woods " , where some were subsequently unearthed by black bears and white @-@ tailed deer . Once jet engine testing stopped , the bunkers at the test cells were used " to store hazardous and explosive material " . 
 In 1962 Martin Marietta began to manufacture Systems for Nuclear Auxiliary Power ( SNAP ) thermoelectric generators under a contract with the AEC ; their AEC license allowed them to have up to 6 million curies of radioactive strontium @-@ 90 in the form of strontium titanate , which powered the SNAP generators . A SNAP @-@ 7 reactor made at Quehanna was used in the world 's first nuclear @-@ powered lighthouse , the Baltimore Harbor Light , from May 1964 to April 1966 . In early 1963 , Curtiss @-@ Wright still owned or leased all of Quehanna and sublet land along Quehanna Highway to a firm that recovered copper from wire by burning off its insulation , a procedure that contaminated the soil . On July 12 , 1963 , Pennsylvania Governor William Scranton announced the termination of Curtiss @-@ Wright 's lease on 42 @,@ 596 acres ( 17 @,@ 238 ha ) ; the state paid the company for the roads it had built , and Curtiss @-@ Wright donated six of the eight buildings in the industrial complex to the state . In 1965 the state legislature passed an act declaring the former leased area a wilderness area , and Maurice K. Goddard , secretary of the Department of Forests and Waters , named it the Quehanna Wilderness Area . 
 Although Martin Marietta completed its AEC contract and its lease expired on December 21 , 1966 , it had to stay at the reactor site " until radiation contamination was brought to acceptable levels " . Martin Marietta partially decontaminated the site and , in April 1967 , undertook a joint radiological survey with Penn State and the AEC . The survey found " <unk> [ sic ] quantities of strontium @-@ 90 stayed behind as structural contamination and residual radioactivity in piping and tanks , estimated at about 0 @.@ 2 curies " . This met the standards for that day , although Penn State did raise questions about the contamination remaining . Strontium is chemically very similar to calcium ( both are alkaline earth metals ) and can be absorbed by the body , where it is chiefly incorporated into bones . Strontium @-@ 90 decays by beta decay and has a half @-@ life of 29 years ; when it is in the body , its radioactivity can lead to bone cancer and leukemia . 
 Many in the conservation movement urged the state to buy back the land , especially after the Curtiss @-@ Wright lease was canceled . In April 1967 Penn State vacated the site and gave the reactor complex to the state . Martin Marietta departed in June 1967 , and early in that same year , Pennsylvania bought the remaining land back from Curtiss @-@ Wright for $ 992 @,@ 500 , about $ 811 @,@ 000 more than they had sold it for in 1955 . Various usage plans for the area were proposed , including : a vacation resort with a large artificial lake , motels , golf courses , and honeymoon resort ; a Penn State game preserve stocked with exotic animals like bison and boar ; a large youth camp for several hundred children ; and a radioactive waste disposal site . By November 1967 , all of the land was back in the state forests and state game lands . 
 = = = Protected area and reclamation = = = 
 = = = = Reactor facility = = = = 
 In 1967 , Pennsylvania leased the reactor complex to the Nuclear Materials and Equipment Corporation ( NUMEC ) , which already had a federal license to work with nuclear materials . NUMEC , which soon became a subsidiary of Atlantic @-@ Richfield Corporation ( ARCO ) , set up a large irradiator in what had been the reactor pool . The irradiator contained over 1 million curies of cobalt @-@ 60 to produce intense gamma rays , which were used to sterilize medical equipment and irradiate food and wood . In the spring of 1967 the state had concluded that radiation contamination at the Quehanna site " could never be completely cleaned up " , and so was glad to find a tenant with nuclear experience . 
 A group of NUMEC employees discovered that irradiating hardwood treated with plastics produced very durable flooring . In 1978 they formed PermaGrain Products , Inc. as a separate company from ARCO , and purchased the rights to the process as well as " the main irradiator , a smaller shielded irradiator and related equipment " . PermaGrain sold the flooring for use in basketball courts and gymnasiums , and was the longest occupant of the Quehanna facility , operating there from 1978 to December 2002 . PermaGrain also let Neutron Products , Inc . , a Maryland company , do cobalt @-@ 60 work in its hot cells , which required an amendment of their license from the Nuclear Regulatory Commission ( NRC , the successor to the AEC ) . 
 In 1993 , strontium @-@ 90 contamination in the reactor facility led the NRC to require PermaGrain to begin decontamination work , and the Pennsylvania DEP commissioned a " site characterization study " . In 1998 , a firm named NES began the cleanup work ; they changed their name to Scientech in 1999 and to EnergySolutions in 2006 . The cleanup was originally estimated to take six months ; by 2006 it had taken 8 years and cost $ 30 million . According to the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection 's ( DEP ) Bureau of Radiation Protection : " Inadequate characterization of the site and the presence of ongoing industrial operations resulted in many project delays and increased costs . " The hot cells proved to have more radioactive sources than originally thought . In October 1998 a Scientech worker doing decontamination cut a tube in hot cell number 4 , which accidentally released strontium @-@ 90 into PermaGrain 's work area . As a result , a robot had to be constructed to remove 3 @,@ 000 curies of cobalt @-@ 60 in two of the hot cells , dismantle cell 4 , and decontaminate the rest remotely . 
 After the accidental release , another radiological survey was performed and the state government concluded that PermaGrain needed to be relocated . The DCNR made the policy decision that Quehanna Wild Area would be closed to industrial uses . After looking at multiple sites with Clearfield County development authorities , a new site for PermaGrain Products was purchased , and the company submitted its plans for a new building and license to the NRC in October 2001 . In order to approve the move to the new site , the NRC required PermaGrain to provide an inventory of all their cobalt @-@ 60 sources , dispose of a damaged source , and dispose of any other sources not mechanically certified . However in late December 2002 , PermaGrain filed for bankruptcy under Chapter Seven . PermaGrain had employed 135 people in 1988 and 80 in 1995 . 
 When PermaGrain went bankrupt , about 100 @,@ 000 curies of cobalt @-@ 60 were abandoned at the reactor facility , which was now under the control of Pennsylvania 's government . The DEP assumed responsibility for the NRC license and legacy contamination . The United States Environmental Protection Agency , working with the NRC and state , removed the cobalt @-@ 60 from the site for disposal at the low @-@ level radioactive waste facility in Barnwell , South Carolina , in September 2003 . Scientech continued decontamination work and demolished the hot cells ; much of this work was done robotically , with financial aid from the United States Department of Energy . 
 The cleanup was thought finished , so a final survey was done in December 2004 , and a Final Status Survey Report was filed in February 2005 . However , when the NRC and scientists from the Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education surveyed the facility in May 2005 , they found many areas of contamination above the legal limits . According to the NRC 's Quehanna Site Status Summary , strontium @-@ 90 had contaminated the " buildings as well as ... surface and subsurface soil " but was not in groundwater . More cleanup work was done in the summer of 2005 , but the site still did not meet NRC regulations . DEP concluded that " some type of migration of radioactive material [ was ] taking place in the concrete at the facility " , and changed its disposal plan . The new plan called for demolition of the building without completing decontamination , and disposal of the above ground material in a regular landfill . This plan was approved by the NRC in October 2006 , and a December 2006 survey showed " that the above grade structure met the release limits " of the disposal plan . The former reactor structure was demolished and on May 13 , 2009 the NRC released the state from its license for the site . As of 2011 , a small octagonal " restricted area " around the reactor site is still shown on official DCNR maps . 
 = = = = Contamination and cleanup = = = = 
 On September 20 , 1967 , two Bureau of Forestry employees attempted to remove a metal ladder from a 20 @,@ 000 @-@ US @-@ gallon ( 76 @,@ 000 l ; 17 @,@ 000 imp gal ) metal storage tank for jet fuel at the northern jet engine test cell . Both were killed in an explosion when the acetylene torch cut through the tank wall and ignited fumes inside it . A tract within the Elk State Forest at the northern edge of the wild area is known as Noble @-@ Chambers Memorial Forest in their memory . Although Fergus reports entering a bunker in his 2002 book , and Young describes a bunker 's slit windows in his 2008 book , as of 2010 the southern bunker is covered with earth , while the northern bunker is still completely intact and enter @-@ able . 
 In 1986 , former Curtiss @-@ Wright and Martin Marietta employees testified about hazards and waste disposal practices before a hearing of the Pennsylvania House of Representatives . A former employee told how a night watchman walked through a spill in the reactor complex without knowing it ; the man 's car and the carpets in his house had to be destroyed as a result of the contamination . Others told about burying hundreds of drums of unknown waste from the reactor facility and digging a trench 125 by 25 feet ( 38 @.@ 1 by 7 @.@ 6 m ) and 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) deep for waste drums north of Wykoff Run Road . The locations of some sites , which included radioactive waste , beryllium oxide , and other toxic compounds , were not recorded . A forest ranger testified that he had dismantled a CCC @-@ built drinking water fountain fed by a spring because it was downhill from the reactor and he feared people might drink contaminated water from it . 
 In 1964 , drilling revealed that the Quehanna Wild Area 's geology and hydrology made it unsuitable for burying waste . However , according to Seeley 's Great <unk> Swamp , a history of the Quehanna region , there are 180 contamination sites in the wild area . Waste has been found at the former air field , within the Wykoff Run Natural Area , near the industrial complex , at the former Lincoln Farm , and at the copper wire @-@ burning site on the highway . These last three waste sites were cleaned in 1991 at a cost of $ 187 @,@ 698 . At the wire @-@ burning site 150 short tons ( 140 t ) of contaminated soil were removed from 3 acres ( 1 @.@ 2 ha ) , with clean earth and grass seed placed on top of the area . The waste was also removed from the farm site , but at the industrial complex the waste was covered with 2 @,@ 500 cubic yards ( 1 @,@ 900 m3 ) of soil on 4 acres ( 1 @.@ 6 ha ) and fenced off . 
 = = = = Piper complex and boot camp = = = = 
 The industrial complex covers about 100 acres ( 40 ha ) on both sides of Quehanna Highway at the southeast edge of the Quehanna Wild Area . Although the industrial complex lies within the historic 16 @-@ sided polygon , it is no longer part of the wild area . After Curtiss @-@ Wright 's lease ended and it donated six of the eight buildings in the complex to the state in 1963 , Pennsylvania formed the Commonwealth Industrial Research Corporation to administer and lease the Quehanna facilities , which it did until 1967 . Over the years a series of tenants have occupied parts of the industrial complex . One company manufactured logging trailers there from 1967 to 1971 , while another processed frozen meat from 1968 to 1970 . In 1968 Piper Aircraft established a plant to make metal and plastic parts for airplanes . The complex was renamed from Quehanna to Piper , a name it retains . Piper employed up to 1 @,@ 000 people , but moved its operations from Pennsylvania to Florida in 1984 . 
 The Young Adult Conservation Corps was also based at Piper from 1977 to 1982 . This federally funded program employed up to 45 young people for local conservation projects in the state parks and forests and on state game lands . In addition , Sylvania Electric Products used two buildings in the industrial complex as warehouses for light bulbs until 1993 . In 1992 , the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation began a heavy equipment training school at Piper , which is still in operation . 
 In 1992 the Pennsylvania Department of Corrections opened the Quehanna Motivational Boot Camp at Piper as the state 's " first military @-@ style motivational boot camp " . The minimum security program for non @-@ violent , first @-@ time offenders has accepted both male and female inmates from the start . Originally designed to house 200 , the Department of Corrections expanded the facility in the late 1990s to a capacity of 500 on about 50 acres ( 20 ha ) . The inmates spend six months in a military @-@ style program that offers opportunities for education and builds positive life skills ; they also are offered drug and alcohol therapy . Those who successfully complete the boot camp program , which is considered an alternative to prison , are released on parole . The boot camp began to receive men and women from the " general population of state prison inmates " in 2005 and 2006 , respectively . At the end of June 2009 , the facility had 494 inmates , 61 percent of whom were in the boot camp program , and cost just over $ 17 million a year to operate . 
 = = = = Wild area = = = = 
 In December 1970 the state forest commission officially changed the designation from Quehanna Wilderness Area to Quehanna Wild Area , making it the first state forest wild area in Pennsylvania . Elk and Moshannon state forests jointly administer Quehanna 's 48 @,@ 186 acres ( 75 @.@ 3 sq mi ; 195 @.@ 0 km2 ) ; for comparison , this is over three times larger than the 23 @-@ square @-@ mile ( 60 km2 ) area of Manhattan , making Quehanna the largest of the 16 wild areas in the state . According to the Pennsylvania Bureau of Forestry , " a wild area is an extensive area , which the general public will be permitted to see , use and enjoy for such activities as hiking , hunting , and fishing . No development of a permanent nature will be permitted in order to retain the undeveloped character of the area . These areas will be administered according to the principals of forest protection ... " . 
 Consequently , within a wild area , no new permanent camp leases , mines , wells , roads , or rights @-@ of @-@ way for utility lines are allowed , although existing camps , roads , and rights @-@ of @-@ way may remain . Vehicles are allowed only on public roads ; trails are limited to hikers , bicyclists , equestrians , and wheelchairs , and only primitive camping by backpackers is allowed . Quehanna has two paved roads open to vehicles , and is crossed by rights @-@ of @-@ way for three electrical power lines and two natural gas pipelines . It is one of the largest areas in Pennsylvania without permanent inhabitants . 
 The state forest system also has natural areas , with more restricted usage . According to the Bureau of Forestry , " A natural area is an area of unique scenic , historic , geologic or ecological value that will be maintained in a natural condition by allowing physical and biological processes to operate , usually without direct human intervention . " Quehanna Wild Area contains two state forest natural areas : the 1 @,@ 215 @-@ acre ( 492 ha ) Wykoff Run Natural Area in the center , and the 917 @-@ acre ( 371 ha ) Marion Brooks Natural Area on the northwest edge . Marion Brooks Natural Area , known for its 22 @-@ acre ( 8 @.@ 9 ha ) stand of white birch , was formerly known as Paige Run Natural Area ; in 1975 it was renamed for Marion E. Brooks , a pioneering environmentalist from Elk County . Quehanna Wild Area also has two wildlife viewing areas with blinds for observing elk and other animals : Beaver Run Dam 's pond and wetlands and Hoover Farm 's fields and feeding plots . 
 The Quehanna plateau is home to the Quehanna Trail System , a 75 @-@ mile ( 121 km ) loop hiking trail , 33 @.@ 6 miles ( 54 @.@ 1 km ) of which are in Quehanna Wild Area . The trail was built in 1976 and 1977 with help from a federally funded jobs program , the Young Adult Conservation Corps , and the Pennsylvania Conservation Corps . As of 2010 it is maintained by the Quehanna Area Trails Club . Parts of the trail have been moved , away from damage caused by the 1985 tornado , to avoid pipelines , to circumvent the Piper Boot Camp , and to pass closer to streams . The wild area also has six shallow ponds for waterfowl and other wildlife , the result of dams built on marshy areas in the 1970s . In 1997 the whole Quehanna Wild Area was declared Pennsylvania Important Bird Area # 31 by the Pennsylvania Audubon Society . In 2003 , the Bureau of Forestry proposed expanding the Quehanna Wild Area by incorporating more of the surrounding Elk and Moshannon State Forests . 
 Despite efforts to restrict use , some environmentalists criticize Quehanna 's administration . Christopher <unk> , author of Wilderness Comes Home : <unk> the Northeast , notes that the Pennsylvania wild areas are not true wilderness areas . He is especially critical of the continued use of roads through the wild areas and limited logging allowed " for forest health and wildlife habitat improvements " . 
 = = Geology and climate = = 
 Quehanna Wild Area lies at an elevation of 1 @,@ 896 feet ( 578 m ) on the Allegheny Plateau . The area falls into portions of two distinct geological physiographic provinces , with all but the northernmost part in the Pittsburgh Low Plateau , known for its coal and mineral deposits , and characterized by steep @-@ cut stream beds . The northernmost part of the wild area , including Marion Brooks Natural Area , is in the Deep Valleys section , home to some of the most remote and wild areas of the state ; streams here have cut deep valleys with steep @-@ sided slopes . In the southern part of Quehanna Wild Area , the Mosquito Creek gorge is up to 500 feet ( 150 m ) deep , while the Red Run gorge in the north is almost 900 feet ( 270 m ) deep . 
 The Allegheny Plateau formed in the Alleghenian orogeny some 300 million years ago , when the part of Gondwana that became Africa collided with the landmass that became North America , forming Pangaea . In the dissected plateau , years of erosion have cut away the soft rocks , forming the valleys , and leaving the hardest rocks relatively untouched . The land on which Quehanna Wild Area sits was part of the coastline of a shallow sea that covered a great portion of what is now North America in the Pennsylvanian subperiod . The high mountains to the east of the sea gradually eroded , causing a buildup of sediment made up primarily of clay , sand and gravel . Tremendous pressure on the sediment caused the formation of the rocks that are found today . 
 At least five major rock formations from the Devonian and Carboniferous periods are present in Quehanna Wild Area . The youngest of these , which forms the highest points on the plateau , is the Pennsylvanian Allegheny Formation , which has clay , coal , limestone , sandstone , and shale . Below this is the Pennsylvanian Pottsville Formation , a gray conglomerate that may contain sandstone , siltstone , and shale , as well as anthracite coal , and which forms much of the Quehanna plateau . The next formations are found in the valleys and gorges which the creeks have eroded over time . The first of these is the Mississippian Pocono Formation , which is buff colored with shale , coal , and conglomerate inclusions ; parts of this formation are also known as the Burgoon Sandstone . Below this is the late Devonian and early Mississippian Huntley Mountain Formation , which is made of relatively soft grayish @-@ red shale and olive @-@ gray sandstone . The lowest and oldest layer is the red shale and siltstone of the Catskill Formation . 
 The Allegheny Plateau has a continental climate , with occasional severe low temperatures in winter and average daily temperature ranges ( the difference between the daily high and low ) of 20 ° F ( 11 ° C ) in winter and 26 ° F ( 14 ° C ) in summer . Quehanna Wild Area is part of the Mosquito Creek and Wykoff Run watersheds , where the mean annual precipitation is 40 to 42 inches ( 1 @,@ 016 to 1 @,@ 067 mm ) . Weather records are not available for Quehanna Wild Area , but they are known for the nearby village of Karthaus . The highest recorded temperature at Karthaus was 106 ° F ( 41 ° C ) in 2011 , and the record low was − 22 ° F ( − 30 ° C ) in 1994 . On average , January is the coldest month , July is the hottest month , and June is the wettest month . 
 = = = 1985 tornado = = = 
 On May 31 , 1985 , an outbreak of 43 tornadoes struck northeastern Ohio , western and central Pennsylvania , New York , and southern Ontario , killing 88 people . The Storm Data Center of the National Weather Service rated the outbreak " the 12th most ' significant ' tornado event of all time " . Pennsylvania was struck by 17 tornadoes that Memorial Day , including the only F5 tornado on the Fujita scale in the state 's history . The tornadoes caused 65 deaths in Pennsylvania and were not dissipated by the state 's mountainous landscape , " forever putting to rest the myth that such terrain can deter them " . 
 An F4 tornado passed through Quehanna Wild Area ; its path of destruction crossed the Quehanna Highway at the Clearfield – Cameron county line . It traveled over 69 miles ( 111 km ) of mainly dense forest and wilderness in central Pennsylvania , and damaged or destroyed buildings early in its life , including a CCC @-@ built lodge at Parker Dam State Park . The damage path from this storm was estimated to be at least 2 @.@ 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 5 km ) wide . Its winds — 200 to 260 miles per hour ( 320 to 420 km / h ) — ripped up small and medium sized trees and shrubs , tore leaves and limbs from some of the big trees , and snapped others like matchsticks . As it headed west through Moshannon State Forest in Clearfield and Centre counties , Gregory S. Forbes , then a meteorology professor at Penn State , said the debris from the tornado was visible on his WSR @-@ 57 radar scanners . The reactor building was just north of the tornado 's path and suffered $ 200 @,@ 000 in damage , but no radiation leaks occurred . 
 The tornado outbreak injured more than 1 @,@ 000 people and caused $ 450 million in total damages and destruction . Moshannon State Forest lost an estimated $ 8 million in lumber to the tornado that hit Quehanna ; after the storm , $ 2 million in timber was salvaged in the state forest . In the ensuing years , the affected forest at Quehanna , though younger and smaller than the surrounding woods , has partly recovered . The official map for the Quehanna Trail is labeled " tornado zone " where the twister passed through the wild area . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 = = = Flora = = = 
 The virgin forests of what became Quehanna Wild Area were different in composition and quality than those of today . Eastern white pine and eastern hemlock were more common , often found on shady slopes and damp areas on plateaus . Chestnut oak and pitch pine favored slopes that were sandy or rocky , and the forest had a mixture of hardwoods , including ash , beech , birch , chestnut , maple , and yellow poplar . Each acre ( 0 @.@ 4 ha ) of these virgin forests could produce up to 100 @,@ 000 board feet ( 236 m3 ) of white pine and 200 @,@ 000 board feet ( 472 m3 ) of hemlock and hardwoods . For comparison , the same area of forest today produces a total of 5 @,@ 000 board feet ( 11 @.@ 8 m3 ) on average . The virgin forests cooled the land and streams . Centuries of accumulated organic matter in the forest soil caused slow percolation of rainfall into the streams , so they flowed more evenly year @-@ round . 
 The clearcutting and repeated fires changed all of this . New growth was often composed of different plants and trees than had originally been there . Near Beaver Run in Quehanna there are wetlands that were originally hemlock forest . <unk> transpire large amounts of water and once they were gone the soil was too wet to support most trees ; the bracken and ferns that replaced the hemlocks altered the soil qualities to discourage trees as well . Within the Quehanna Wild Area 650 acres ( 260 ha ) are wetlands . Fires and erosion removed nutrients from the soil , and in some areas the soil was so poor in nutrients that only white birch , a pioneer species , would grow there . Marion Brooks Natural Area has the largest stand of white birch in Pennsylvania and the eastern United States . These trees are now 80 to 90 years old and reaching the end of their lifespans . 
 Besides forest fires and tornado damage , there have been other threats to Quehanna 's forests in the 20th century . Many trees were lost when chestnut blight wiped out the American chestnut trees by 1925 ; in the Quehanna area , this species constituted between one @-@ quarter and one @-@ half of the hardwoods . In the 1960s , white and chestnut oak trees had high mortality from pit scale insects and associated fungi . Larvae of oak leaf roller moths , which defoliate oaks , first appeared on 8 @,@ 200 acres ( 3 @,@ 300 ha ) of Quehanna Wild Area in the late 1960s ; at their peak in the late 1960s and early 1970s they had defoliated 234 @,@ 700 acres ( 95 @,@ 000 ha ) of Moshannon State Forest and 110 @,@ 000 acres ( 45 @,@ 000 ha ) in Elk State Forest , with moderate to heavy tree mortality . A similar pest , oak leaf tier , stripped 375 @,@ 000 acres ( 152 @,@ 000 ha ) of oaks in Elk State Forest by 1970 . The gypsy moth defoliated over 156 @,@ 000 acres ( 63 @,@ 000 ha ) of deciduous trees in the 1970s and 1980s . The forests within the Quehanna Important Bird Area are 84 percent hardwoods , 4 percent mixed hardwood and evergreens , less than 1 percent evergreens , 7 percent transitional between forests and fields , and 3 percent perennial herbaceous plants . As well as trees , the forests have blueberry and huckleberry bushes and thickets of mountain laurel and rhododendron . 
 = = = Fauna = = = 
 Some animals , previously present in abundance , have disappeared , or the populations declined , through habitat loss . By 1912 , after the forests had been clearcut , Quehanna was covered by " vast expanses of brush , created when the root systems of cut @-@ off trees sprouted up through the discarded tops and limbs of the logged forest " . Once the forest fires were controlled , this brush offered habitat for many game species . By the early 1940s , the CCC had thinned brush in many areas , and the forest had matured . Shade from the canopy decreased brush in the understory . By the early 21st century , many of the trees in Quehanna were 80 to 100 years old , and the maturation of the forests led to the disappearance of species like bobwhite quail , ring @-@ necked pheasant , and snowshoe hare , while white @-@ tailed deer , ruffed grouse , black squirrel , and cottontail rabbit all became less common than they had been . Efforts by the Mosquito Creek Sportsmen 's Association ( <unk> ) to reintroduce bobwhite quail , ring @-@ necked pheasant , and snowshoe hare have been unsuccessful . 
 Other animals became locally extinct through overhunting . The last elk in Pennsylvania was killed in Elk County in 1867 . The Pennsylvania Game Commission brought 177 animals from the Rocky Mountains to the state from 1913 to 1926 ; today the elk herd of over 600 animals can often be seen in Quehanna Wild Area . Between 1906 and 1925 , Pennsylvania became so concerned about declining numbers of white @-@ tailed deer that it imported nearly 1 @,@ 200 animals from Michigan to re @-@ establish the species , and made it the official state animal in 1959 . In the early 21st century , over @-@ grazing by deer threatens plant diversity . By the early 20th century , the fisher , a small mammal similar to the European polecat or American marten , was hunted to extinction in Pennsylvania . Between 1994 and 1998 , 190 animals were released in five sites in the northern part of the state , including 23 animals along Quehanna 's Wykoff Run in 1995 . Breeding populations of fisher appear to have been reestablished . 
 Still other animals seem to thrive regardless of the maturity of the forest or the presence of the understory . Common animals found in Quehanna include chipmunks , porcupine , and beaver , omnivores such as the black bear and raccoon , and predators like bobcat , red fox , and coyote ( which has been in Pennsylvania since the 1930s ) . Many of the streams in Quehanna Wild Area are known for trout ( brook , brown and rainbow ) ; some populations are wild and others are stocked by the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission and Mosquito Creek Sportsmen 's Association . The wild area is also home to timber rattlesnake , eastern garter snake , and spring peeper ( a type of frog ) , as well as butterflies like great spangled fritillary , monarch , red @-@ spotted purple , and black , eastern tiger , and spicebush swallowtails . Any of these mammals , especially the white @-@ tailed deer , can carry ticks , and such tick @-@ borne diseases as Lyme disease are a health concern for hikers . 
 As an International Bird Area , Quehanna 's forests are recognized as a " large , unfragmented tract with exceptional diversity of woodland species " and are home to 102 species of birds . Common birds include American crow , black @-@ capped chickadee , blue jay , broad @-@ winged hawk , common raven , hermit thrush , house sparrow , northern waterthrush , starling , whip @-@ poor @-@ will , and wild turkey . Quehanna Wild Area includes a variety of forest , riparian , and wetland habitats that support a diversity of animals . The shrub and scrubland areas left by the 1985 tornado and cleared for elk to feed in are home to indigo bunting and prairie warbler , while ponds and wetlands attract waterfowl such as hooded merganser and wood duck , and wading birds like great blue heron . The birch forest of Marion Brooks Natural Area is home to downy , hairy , and pileated woodpeckers , the oak forest of Wykoff Run Natural Area has black @-@ throated green warbler , red @-@ eyed vireo , and white @-@ breasted nuthatch , and its aspen groves have woodcock . In addition to the commonly seen red @-@ tailed hawk , other raptors include the northern goshawk and the golden and bald eagles . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 According to the DCNR , Quehanna Wild Area is for the public " to see , use and enjoy for such activities as hiking , hunting , and fishing " . The main hiking trail on the Quehanna plateau is the Quehanna Trail , a 75 @-@ mile ( 121 km ) loop trail that passes through the wild area and Moshannon and Elk State Forests . The main trailhead for most hikers is at Parker Dam State Park to the west of the wild area . From there the trail , which is blazed in orange , heads east to the southern part of Quehanna Wild Area , skirts Piper and the Boot Camp there , then turns north , crosses Wykoff Run and turns west again . After passing through Marion Brooks Natural Area , the trail leaves the wild area and completes the loop back at Parker Dam . The Quehanna Trail is considered a strenuous hike not just because of its length , but for its 9 @,@ 700 feet ( 2 @,@ 957 m ) of changes in elevation . Two blue @-@ blazed connector trails add 30 miles ( 48 km ) to the system , and there are many side trails and small trails off the Quehanna Highway . Most trails are open to cross @-@ country skiing in the winter . According to the DCNR , the Quehanna Trail " passes through some of the most wild and beautiful country Pennsylvania has to offer " . 
 Susan Stranahan 's Susquehanna : River of Dreams reports that before Curtiss @-@ Wright took over the area in 1955 , Quehanna was considered " some of the best hunting land in the state " . While no hunting or fishing were initially allowed on the leased land , by July 1959 fishing on Mosquito Creek was allowed again , as was limited hunting to help control the deer . In October 1963 hunting resumed throughout the wild area , four years before the state purchased the land back from Curtiss @-@ Wright . As of 2010 , the Pennsylvania Game Commission allows hunting of the following species found in Quehanna Wild Area : American crow , beaver , black bear , black squirrel , bobcat , bobwhite quail , cottontail rabbit , coyote , elk , house sparrow , raccoon , red fox , ring @-@ necked pheasant , ruffed grouse , white @-@ tailed deer , wild turkey , and woodcock . The Mosquito Creek Sportsmen 's Association has sponsored an annual coyote hunt each winter hunt since 1992 . The club has also provided food plots for deer and elk , fed game animals in winter , planted and pruned fruit trees , stocked fish , and treated streams for acid rain . Fishing is primarily for trout . 
 The Quehanna Wild Area is also seen , used , and enjoyed by bird watchers attracted by its status as an Important Bird Area . Audubon Pennsylvania and the DCNR have prepared the Susquehanna River Birding and Wildlife Trail guide which lists three sites in Quehanna : Wykoff Run , Beaver Run Wildlife Viewing Area , and the whole wild area . The DCNR has published a guide to Elk Scenic Drive which lists 23 attractions , four in Quehanna : Marion Brooks and Wykoff Run Natural Areas , and Beaver Run and Hoover Farm Wildlife Viewing Areas . 
 = Avianca Flight 52 = 
 Avianca Flight 52 was a regularly scheduled flight from Bogotá to New York , via Medellín that crashed on January 25 , 1990 , at 21 : 34 ( UTC − 05 : 00 ) . The Boeing 707 flying this route ran out of fuel on approach to John F. Kennedy International Airport ( JFK ) , causing the aircraft to crash onto a hillside in the small village of Cove Neck , New York , on the north shore of Long Island . Eight of the nine crew members and 65 of the 149 passengers on board were killed . The National Transportation Safety Board ( NTSB ) determined that the crash occurred due to the flight crew failing to properly declare a fuel emergency , resulting in air traffic control underestimating the seriousness of the situation . 
 The flight left Medellín with more than enough fuel for the journey and progressed toward JFK normally . While en route , the flight was placed in three holding patterns . Due to poor communication between the air crew and the air traffic controllers , as well as an inadequate management of the fuel load by the pilots , the flight became critically low on fuel . This dire situation was not recognized as an emergency by the controllers . The flight attempted to make a landing at JFK , but bad weather , coupled with poor communication and inadequate management of the aircraft , forced it to abort and attempt a go @-@ around . The flight ran out of fuel before it was able to make a second landing attempt . The airplane crashed approximately 20 miles ( 32 km ) from JFK . 
 Hundreds of emergency personnel responded to the crash site and helped save victims . Many of those who survived were severely injured and required months or years to physically recover . NTSB investigators looked at various factors that contributed to the crash . The failures of the flight crew were cited as the probable cause of the crash , but the weather , air traffic controller performances , and FAA traffic management were also cited as contributing to the events that led to the accident . This conclusion was controversial , with disagreement between investigators , passengers , and Avianca as to who was ultimately responsible . Eventually , the U.S. government joined with Avianca and settled to pay for the damages to the victims and their families . The crash was also portrayed in a variety of media . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Avianca Flight 52 aircraft was a Boeing 707 @-@ <unk> ( registration number HK 2016 ) . The aircraft was manufactured in June 1967 and was purchased by Avianca from Pan Am in 1977 . By the time of the crash , the aircraft had over 61 @,@ 000 flight hours . The 707 was equipped with four JT3D @-@ 3B engines modified with a hush kit to reduce noise pollution . Avianca personnel reported that they factored in a five @-@ percent fuel <unk> into the performance calculations due to the hush kit along with an additional five @-@ percent <unk> due to the age of the aircraft . Additionally , maintenance crews had noted recurring issues with the aircraft 's autopilot , including the altitude hold function . 
 The flight was manned by a crew of nine , including six flight attendants and three flight crewmen . The flight crew was captained by 51 @-@ year @-@ old Laureano Caviedes with 28 @-@ year @-@ old first officer ( copilot ) Mauricio Klotz and 45 @-@ year @-@ old flight engineer Matias Moyano . At the time of the crash , Captain Caviedes had been employed with Avianca for over 27 years and had logged over 16 @,@ 000 hours of flight time , including over 1 @,@ 500 in the 707 . Caviedes had 478 hours of night flying experience in the 707 and had no record of any prior accidents . Copilot Klotz had been employed with Avianca for three years and had 1 @,@ 837 hours of flight time . Klotz had transitioned to the 707 the previous October and had logged 64 flight hours in the airframe , including 13 at night . Flight engineer Moyano had been employed with Avianca for over 23 years and had over 10 @,@ 000 hours of flight time , including over 3 @,@ 000 hours in the 707 and over 1 @,@ 000 hours of night flying in the same airframe . 
 = = Flight = = 
 Avianca Flight 52 was a regularly scheduled international passenger flight from El Dorado International Airport in Bogotá , Colombia , to John F. Kennedy International Airport ( JFK ) in Queens , New York , with an intermediate stop in José María Córdova International Airport near Medellín , Colombia . 
 = = = Departure and flight = = = 
 Flight 52 departed Bogotá at 13 : 10 Eastern Standard Time , five minutes ahead of schedule , on January 25 , 1990 . The flight landed at Medellín at 14 : 04 and prepared to fly the leg to JFK . At Medellín , the aircraft landed with 67 @,@ 200 pounds ( 30 @,@ 500 kg ) of fuel . The flight plan filed for the journey to JFK called for 55 @,@ 520 pounds ( 25 @,@ 180 kg ) of fuel required for the trip to JFK , 4 @,@ 510 pounds ( 2 @,@ 050 kg ) for reserve fuel , 7 @,@ 600 pounds ( 3 @,@ 400 kg ) for alternate fuel , 4 @,@ 800 pounds ( 2 @,@ 200 kg ) for holding fuel , and 1 @,@ 500 pounds ( 680 kg ) of taxi fuel totaling 73 @,@ 930 pounds ( 33 @,@ 530 kg ) minimum of block fuel . The dispatcher at Medellín ordered a total fuel load of 78 @,@ 000 pounds ( 35 @,@ 000 kg ) , including 4 @,@ 070 pounds ( 1 @,@ 850 kg ) of " top off " fuel to raise the aircraft weight to the maximum allowable for the planned departure runway . At Medellín , the captain and dispatcher decided to use another runway and requested an additional 2 @,@ 000 pounds ( 910 kg ) of fuel . 
 The flight departed Medellín at 15 : 08 , bound for JFK . The flight first entered U.S. airspace of Miami Air Route Traffic Control Center at 17 : 28 , flying at 35 @,@ 000 feet ( 11 @,@ 000 m ) , and proceeded northward , climbing to 37 @,@ 000 feet ( 11 @,@ 000 m ) . The flight was cleared to fly Atlantic route 7 to the <unk> navigational aid and jet airway 174 to Norfolk , Virginia . Flight 52 entered its first holding pattern over Norfolk at 19 : 04 and remained circling until 19 : 23 . From there , Flight 52 continued on to the <unk> intersection near Atlantic City , New Jersey where it was placed in a second holding pattern from 19 : 43 to 20 : 12 . The flight proceeded to the CAMRN intersection where it entered its third holding pattern from 20 : 18 to 20 : 47 . Flight 52 entered the CAMRN holding pattern at 14 @,@ 000 feet ( 4 @,@ 300 m ) , having been cleared to descend prior to arrival at the intersection , and the flight descended further to 11 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 400 m ) while in the CAMRN holding pattern . At 20 : 44 : 09 , while still holding at CAMRN , the New York Air Route Traffic Control Center ( <unk> ) advised Flight 52 that there was an " indefinite hold " and to continue holding at CAMRN . At 20 : 44 : 43 , the <unk> controller told the flight to " expect further clearance " at 21 : 05 . The flight had previously been given two delay estimates that had passed . 
 At that point , First Officer Klotz radioed the controller , saying , " ah well I think we need priority we 're passing [ unintelligible ] . " The controller inquired as to how long the flight could hold as well as what their alternate airport was . Klotz replied at 20 : 46 : 03 that they could hold for five more minutes . The controller once again inquired as to their alternate airport and Klotz replied at 20 : 46 : 24 , " It was Boston but we can 't do it now we , we , don 't , we run out of fuel now . " A handoff controller listening in on the conversation called the New York Terminal Radar Approach Control ( NY TRACON ) at 20 : 46 : 24 and advised the TRACON controller that Avianca Flight 52 could only hold for five more minutes . The handoff controller asked whether NY TRACON could take the flight or whether to send Avianca to its alternate airport . The NY TRACON controller replied , " Slow him to one eight zero knots and I 'll take him . " The handoff controller later testified that he had not heard Flight 52 say that they could no longer reach their alternate airport . At 20 : 46 : 47 , the NY ARTCC radar controller cleared the flight to proceed to JFK at 11 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 400 m ) and to slow to 180 knots ( 210 mph ) . Flight 52 departed the CAMRN holding pattern at 20 : 47 . 
 = = = Landing attempt = = = 
 At 20 : 47 : 27 , the NY TRACON feeder controller told the flight crew to " expect an ILS two two left " " altimeter two niner six niner proceed direct Deer Park . " At 20 : 54 : 40 , the feeder controller directed Flight 52 to make a 360 ° turn . At 20 : 56 : 16 , the controller gave the flight a wind shear advisory of an " increase of ten knots at fifteen hundred feet and then an increase of ten knots at five hundred feet . " The flight crew acknowledged the advisory . At 21 : 00 , JFK was experiencing light drizzle and fog with 1 ⁄ 4 mile visibility , an indefinite ceiling with 200 feet ( 61 m ) obscured , and a wind of 21 knots ( 24 mph ) at 190 ° . 
 At 21 : 03 : 07 , Flight 52 contacted the NY TRACON final controller who cleared them to descend progressively to 2 @,@ 000 feet ( 610 m ) . At 21 : 03 : 46 , the flight crew discussed the go @-@ around procedures . At 21 : 09 : 29 , flight engineer Moyano stated that the controllers " already know that we are in [ a ] bad condition . " The captain said , " No they are descending us , " and the second officer added , " They are giving us priority . " At 21 : 11 : 07 , the NY TRACON final vector controller informed the flight that they were fifteen miles from the outer marker and instructed them to maintain an altitude of 2 @,@ 000 feet ( 610 m ) " until established on the localizer . " The flight crew began preparing for an instrument landing approach , extending flaps and discussing the appropriate airspeed . The final controller instructed the flight crew to contact the JFK tower controllers and signed off . Klotz acknowledged the transmission . 
 At 21 : 15 : 19 , Klotz contacted the tower controllers and informed that Flight 52 was " established two two left . " One minute later , the captain asked if he should lower the landing gear , but the first officer replied , " No I think it 's too early now . " At 21 : 17 : 30 , JFK tower asked Flight 52 to increase their airspeed by ten knots to 150 knots ( 170 mph ) . At 21 : 18 : 11 , the flight was three miles from the outer marker . Twenty @-@ one seconds later , the first officer remarked " glideslope alive . " At 21 : 19 : 09 , the captain requested the landing gear be deployed . Almost a minute later , the JFK tower cleared the flight to land on runway <unk> . The captain asked the first officer to confirm that the flight was cleared to land . At 21 : 20 : 28 , the first officer began informing the captain that the aircraft was below the glideslope . At 21 : 22 : 07 , Flight 52 descended to 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) . The aircraft began descending beyond the angle of the glideslope , then began climbing above it , followed by a steeper descent . At 21 : 22 : 57 , the first officer commented , " This is the wind shear . " The first officer warned the pilot about the sink rate and noted an altitude of 500 feet ( 150 m ) at 21 : 23 : 10 . As he warned the pilot , the ground proximity warning system ( <unk> ) began eleven " whoop whoop pull up " audible warnings . At 21 : 23 : 13 , the pilot called for lights , followed by questions as to where the runway was a few seconds later . The <unk> began four " glideslope " audible warnings a few seconds later , alerting the flight crew that the aircraft was below the glideslope . In response to the captain 's inquiries , the first officer replied that he did not see the runway . At 21 : 23 : 23 , the flight began climbing again , having come within 250 feet ( 76 m ) of crashing two miles short of the runway . The landing gear was raised and the first officer announced that the flight was executing a missed approach . 
 = = = Crash = = = 
 The JFK tower controller asked the flight to climb to 2 @,@ 000 feet ( 610 m ) and make a left turn . At 21 : 24 : 06 , the captain asked the first officer to " tell them we are in [ an ] emergency . " The first officer told the JFK tower controller that " we 'll try once again [ ; ] we 're running out of fuel , " to which the controller replied , " okay . " A few seconds later , the captain again told the first officer to " advise him we are [ in an ] emergency " and asked if he did so . The first officer replied , " Yes sir , I already advised him . " The JFK controller directed the flight to contact the NY TRACON approach controller once more at 21 : 24 : 39 . The TRACON controller asked the flight to climb once more to 3 @,@ 000 feet ( 910 m ) . The captain asked the first officer again to " advise him we don 't have fuel . " The first officer replied , " Climb and maintain three thousand and ah we 're running out of fuel sir . " The captain once again asked whether the first officer had advised the controller of the fuel emergency , and the first officer replied , " Yes sir . I already advise him [ ; ] hundred and eighty on the heading [ ; ] we are going to maintain three thousand feet and he 's going to get us back . " 
 A minute later , the controller instructed the flight to turn to the northeast and asked the flight crew if they had enough fuel to be directed fifteen miles from the airport . First Officer Klotz replied , " I guess so thank you very much . " At 21 : 29 : 11 , Klotz asked the controller if he " can give us a final now ... ? " The controller said , " affirmative sir [ ; ] turn left heading zero four zero . " At 21 : 30 : 12 , the controller cleared another aircraft for landing . Klotz briefly thought the clearance was directed at Avianca and began to tell Captain Caviedes to change course before the controller corrected him . The controller then asked Avianca to climb to 3 @,@ 000 feet ( 910 m ) . Klotz replied , " negative sir we just running out of fuel we okay three thousand now okay . " The controller continued to direct the flight northward , away from the airport . At 21 : 31 : 01 , the controller said , " Okay and you 're number two for the approach [ ; ] I just have to give you enough room so you make it without ah having to come out again . " 
 At 21 : 32 : 38 , the cockpit voice recorder ( CVR ) recorded a temporary interruption in power . A second later , Flight Engineer Moyano exclaimed , " Flame out [ ; ] flame out on engine number four . " The CVR recorded another interruption in power one second after that , and Moyano said , " Flame out on engine number three [ ; ] essential on number two or number one . " The captain acknowledged . At 21 : 32 : 49 , Klotz radioed the controller , informing him that the flight had " just ah lost two engines [ , ] and ... we need priority please . " The controller instructed the flight to fly southwest to intercept the localizer . Klotz acknowledged this . The flight crew selected the ILS . At 21 : 33 : 04 , the controller informed the flight that they were fifteen miles from the outer marker and cleared them for an ILS approach on runway <unk> . Klotz acknowledged . That was the final radio transmission from Flight 52 . Caviedes asked if the ILS had been selected . Klotz replied , " It is ready on two " at 21 : 33 : 23 . One second later , the CVR stopped recording . At 21 : 34 : 00 , the controller tried to radio the flight , asking , " You have enough fuel to make it to the airport ? " There was no response . 
 The NTSB report estimates that around this time , the flight crashed . The aircraft descended without power , clipped several trees and posts , and crashed onto a hill with a 24 ° slope in Cove Neck , New York . The fuselage partially fragmented into three distinct pieces . The cockpit and forward cabin separated from the rest of the airframe and were hurled over the crest of the hill , coming to a stop 90 feet ( 27 m ) from the rest of the wreckage . The rest of the fuselage stopped within 25 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) after impact . The main fuselage came to rest on the upslope of the hill , facing south , with the forward end extending over the crest of the hill . The right side of the forward end of the fuselage fractured a residential wooden deck . 
 = = Recovery = = 
 = = = First response = = = 
 Residents of Cove Neck immediately called emergency services . Jeff Race , a paramedic and member of New York City 's Emergency Medical Service who lived half a mile from the crash site was the first rescuer on site . He reported that most passengers were still strapped in their seats and the survivors were crying out for help . Survivors later commented that it took about half an hour for rescue teams to arrive . Initial reports to emergency services reported that a much larger Boeing 747 had crashed . Fire Chief Thomas Reardon of Oyster Bay Fire Company No. 1 was in charge of the initial effort to remove people from the wreckage . In his first call to the Nassau County Fire Commission dispatch , he requested all the help available . Thirty @-@ seven fire and ambulance companies , as well as more than seven hundred Nassau County police officers arrived to help . Other companies that were not called showed up voluntarily to assist . The swell of support created major problems for extricating survivors . 
 The crash was only accessible to vehicles via a single residential street . With the surge of rescue personnel who converged on the area , the roads leading to the site soon became choked with traffic . Emergency vehicle drivers abandoned their vehicles counter to established policy in the course of the rescue efforts . This prevented other vehicles from being able to access the crash area . The road was so impassible , many rescue workers left their vehicles miles away and made it to the scene on foot . Fog also grounded rescue helicopters for two hours . As a result , many critically injured survivors were not evacuated until 23 : 30 . Eventually , four helicopters from the New York City Police Aviation Unit evacuated 21 people from the crash site . There were also major problems with communication by rescuers . Radio frequencies became overloaded and authorities on site were unable to make command decisions in some cases . The head of surgery of the Nassau County Medical Center was present at the scene but unable to direct patients to the best locations because many rescuers were radioing the center itself to get advice on where they should send the survivors . Medical professionals on site reported that some hospitals received the most up @-@ to @-@ date information by watching the news coverage . Despite these problems , however , only three of the passengers found alive died of their injuries . 
 Rescue workers set up two triage areas on the lawn of John and Katy McEnroe , the parents of John McEnroe , and known as the Edward H. Swan House . A morgue and command post was also set up on their property , which was 500 feet ( 150 m ) from the crash site . At least six bodies were found outside the fuselage . Firefighters and medics erected ladders next to the airframe wreckage and led passengers down on stretchers and to the triage sites . At these sites , doctors tagged the critically injured patients for immediate evacuation . At least 30 bodies were gathered on the makeshift morgue at the McEnroe property by 03 : 00 the following morning . Passenger Astrid Lopez was initially believed to be dead due to her severe injuries , and officials placed her body in the morgue . A rescuer soon heard her moans and she was sent to a hospital . Some medical responders were turned away from the scene by police to help ease the congestion . By 03 : 30 , all the survivors had been evacuated to hospitals . At least one emergency responder was hospitalized as a result of the rescue efforts . Throughout the evacuation , priests were on site , offering encouragement , assisting medical personnel , and performing last rites . Many local New York residents showed up at hospitals with food , blankets , or to volunteer as Spanish interpreters . The New York Blood Center reported collecting 2 @,@ 000 units of blood , almost triple their goal . 
 = = = Casualties = = = 
 Of the 158 people on board , 73 died as a result of the crash . The lead flight attendant was the only crew member to survive . Of the surviving passengers , 72 adults and children over three years old sustained serious injuries , while two sustained minor injuries . Of the 11 infants , two sustained minor injuries , eight were seriously injured , and one , Kenneth Fernando Martinez , the four @-@ month @-@ old son of Gloria L. Martinez , died . The surviving steward testified that there had been no communication from the cockpit as to the unfolding situation and , thus , no warning in the end to assume brace positions . The NTSB report held that , had passengers been warned ahead of time to brace for impact , the severity of some injuries might have been avoided . 
 The most common serious injuries were multiple lower leg fractures and dislocations , spinal fractures , hip fractures , head injuries , and multiple lacerations and contusions . The NTSB investigators found severe damage on the floor of the cabin , resulting in many of the passengers ' seats to fracture where the legs met the floor track . This fracturing permitted many of the seats to come loose during the impact and aggravated the passengers ' injuries . The report posits that the passengers ' legs hit the lower seat frames in front of them . At the same time , the seats collapsed and twisted downward and to the left , likely causing hip and spinal fractures . As the impact progressed , the seats , now separated , flung passengers forward into each other as well as into other wreckage , causing head injuries and lacerations . Passengers holding onto infants reported being unable to either prevent their children from being ejected from their grasp in the impact or locate their children in the darkness afterward . The NTSB held that , had the children been in Federal Aviation Administration ( FAA ) <unk> child seats , many injuries might have been mitigated . Rescuers remarked that some infants were found smiling or seemingly unharmed . The NTSB was unable to accurately chart where individual passengers were seated because Avianca only assigned seats to a few passengers and many who were assigned reported moving after takeoff . 
 The cockpit was severely damaged in the impact . It struck an oak tree which penetrated the area occupied by Klotz and Moyano . All the seats occupied by the flight crew were found outside the cockpit . Neither of the pilots ' seats had shoulder straps as were required by United States domestic passenger flights . At least one flight crew member was airlifted to Nassau County Medical Center . The NTSB report states that all of the flight crew " died from blunt force head and upper torso trauma . " Five flight attendants also died from blunt force trauma to the limbs , abdomen , chest , and head . 
 = = Investigation = = 
 The NTSB commenced an investigation , which began shortly after the crash and concluded with the issuance of its final report on April 30 , 1991 . Because it involved a Colombian airline , Colombia 's Departamento <unk> de Aeronáutica Civil ( DAAC ) also conducted an investigation into the accident . 
 A survey of the wreckage revealed that the tail was mostly intact and all control surfaces were connected to the pilots ' controls . Both wings had been severely damaged on impact and fractured into several pieces . The flaps and slats were found in their extended positions , with the flaps set at 14 ° . As with the tail , all wing control surfaces were found to have been connected to the pilots ' controls . There was no evidence of any control surface failure prior to the crash . Investigators realized that none of the four engines had been under power at the time of impact . As the first responders worked to rescue the passengers , investigators recovered the flight data recorder ( FDR ) and cockpit voice recorder ( CVR ) from the wreckage and brought them to the NTSB laboratory in Washington , D.C. The FDR was an older <unk> foil model . In 1989 , the FAA began requiring domestic carriers to change to digital flight recorders to minimize the errors that foil models produced . This requirement did not apply to international carriers . The Avianca FDR foil was found to have been taped down at some point prior to the flight and , thus , was inoperative . The NTSB recommended in the Avianca report that the FAA take an " active role in ensuring upgraded international standards " for flight recorders . The CVR and ATC recordings became vital sources of evidence for the crash . The investigators also looked at meteorological factors that led to flight problems . 
 The NTSB investigators found that the weather data that the flight crew received in Medellín was nine to ten hours old . Additionally , the alternate airport on the flight plan , Logan International Airport in Boston , was forecast to be below the safe minimums for landing . The NTSB also stated that the flight crew should have been more aware of these problems and cited these deficiencies as evidence of inadequacies in the dispatch of the airplane . The NTSB also found no evidence that the flight crew ever requested weather information en route or communicated with Avianca dispatchers about their fuel status and intents as other flights did . Flight 52 did not make contact with FAA flight service stations or flight watch en route , and the NTSB was unable to determine why . The flight did not express any concern to ATC about their fuel situation during the first two holding patterns that the flight made . The first indication of worry came at 20 : 09 when the flight crew inquired about delays at Boston . The NTSB posited that the flight crew might have become confused about the " expect further clearance " ( EFC ) times they were given . This confusion may have been the reason that the flight continued to hold , burning up its reserve fuel to the point where it could no longer divert to Boston . 
 Investigators also cited the flight engineer for failing to calculate the " minimum approach / landing fuel quantity . " The report references the 360 ° turn that the flight was ordered to make at 20 : 54 as evidence that the crew should have known that they were being treated routinely and not given any emergency priority . Instead , the CVR revealed that the flight crew was convinced that they were being given priority . Additionally , the NTSB criticized the first officer for failing to use the word " emergency " as the captain had insisted he do . <unk> with the apparent inability of the captain to hear or understand the radio communications , the NTSB called the situation a " total breakdown in communications by the flightcrew . " Summarizing , the investigators cited " the flightcrew 's failure to notify ATC of their fuel situation while holding at CAMRN in order to ensure arrival at the approach fix with an adequate approach minimum fuel level and a breakdown in communications between the flightcrew and ATC , and among the flight crewmembers " as the two main factors that led to the crash . 
 Investigators asserted that the performances by the traffic controllers were proper and that the misunderstandings that were made were reasonable . None of the controllers involved considered the word " priority " or the assertions by the flight crew that they were running out of fuel to be indicative of an emergency . The report provided various examples of the flight crew failing to convey the danger of their situation , even moments before the engines flamed out . Although the investigators felt that the communications from the ATC personnel were " proper , " the NTSB voiced concern over the controllers not placing significance on the word " priority . " At a public hearing , it was revealed by an unrelated pilot that the emphasis on the word " priority " by the Avianca crew might have come from training and bulletins from Boeing that used the word in relation to fuel emergencies . Avianca also used the word " priority " in its publications on low @-@ fuel status procedures . ATC controllers testified that " Mayday " , " pan @-@ pan " , and " emergency " were the three phrases that they would respond to immediately . The report also stated that " priority " was defined in the ATC Handbook as " precedence , established by order of urgency or importance . " As a result of this linguistic confusion , the NTSB recommended that the FAA work with the International Civil Aviation Organization ( ICAO ) to develop a standard glossary of clearly defined terms as well as notify foreign carriers that they must be knowledgeable of ATC rules and procedures . 
 The NTSB also cited the pilot 's inability to land on his first attempt as contributing to the crash . The investigation revealed that wind shear was a significant factor in the failed approach but that other factors probably contributed . The report cited recurring maintenance problems with the airplane 's autopilot as a possible factor . If the pilot had been forced to fly manually from Medellín , investigators believed this might have added to exhaustion and stress in the cockpit . For evidence , the NTSB pointed to nine instances where the captain asked the copilot to repeat the ATC instructions or to confirm the aircraft configuration . This stress , investigators asserted , would have degraded the flight crew 's performance on final approach . Investigators also looked at the traffic management by the Central Flow Control Facility ( CFCF ) . The CFCF , in communication with NY TRACON , established an airport acceptance rate of 28 aircraft landings per hour that morning . Later , a CFCF supervisor contacted NY TRACON and requested a higher rate of 33 landings per hour . This acceptance rate , investigators concluded , was based on inaccurate weather conditions . The report concluded that these traffic management problems contributed to the conditions that led to the accident but did not lead directly to the accident . 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 The probable cause of the crash was determined by the NTSB to be " the failure of the flightcrew to adequately manage the airplane 's fuel load , and their failure to communicate an emergency fuel situation to air traffic control before fuel exhaustion occurred . " However , two NTSB members filed dissenting opinions in the report . Jim Burnett voted against the adoption of the report because he felt it did not adequately address the failures of the air traffic controllers or the FAA 's role in allowing more traffic than JFK could handle . Christopher Hart filed a partial dissent because he disagreed with the report 's findings of a lack of standardized terminology . In his dissent , he wrote that " we do have standardized understandable terminology ... that would have adequately communicated the existence of a dangerous situation , and the problem was that the pilots failed to use this terminology with the controllers . " 
 Colombia 's DAAC investigators also disagreed with some of the NTSB 's findings . In a comment on a draft of the NTSB 's report , the DAAC recommended that the NTSB place some responsibility on the controllers for their " inadequate handling " of the Avianca flight . The DAAC also recommended that the NTSB encourage modifying the EFC system , and that FAA regulations should require an " active flight following system " to assist flight crews in evaluating weather and traffic delays . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Two male passengers were arrested at North Shore Hospital after a nurse informed police that 46 @-@ year @-@ old Antonio Zuluaga had swallowed containers filled with cocaine . Zuluaga , who had a fractured spine , broken ribs and a dislocated hip , was the second passenger to be found in possession of cocaine packages , after doctors operating on Jose Figueroa on the day after the crash to stop internal bleeding had also discovered packets of <unk> pleaded guilty to second @-@ degree criminal possession of a controlled substance . Figueroa was sentenced to seven years to life in prison , and Zuluaga was sentenced to six years to life . 
 Many crash survivors suffered long recoveries from the physical and psychological traumas they endured . A month after the crash , an orderly caravan of around 1 @,@ 000 vehicles drove to JFK while some demonstrators laid wreaths in the international terminal lobby to protest the handling of the flight . Some survivors sued the FAA , accusing the agency of failing to ensure the flight 's safety . In July 1990 , Avianca offered $ 75 @,@ 000 to crash survivors and the relatives of those killed . The U.S. government eventually joined Avianca and reached a settlement estimated at over $ 200 million in damages to the victims . 
 The same summer , there were two notable fuel emergencies declared by Avianca flights . The first happened in June when a flight declared a " minimum fuel situation " and landed with only ten minutes worth of fuel left . The second happened in August when Avianca Flight 20 declared it had " only 15 minutes of fuel left . " There was confusion as to what the pilot meant , but controllers declared an emergency preemptively and cleared the plane to land immediately . It was later revealed that the flight had over two hours worth of fuel left . 
 = = = In popular culture = = = 
 The Discovery Channel Canada / National Geographic TV series Mayday ( also called Air Crash Investigation or Air Emergency ) featured the story of the disaster in a second season episode titled Missing Over New York . It was also featured on the MSNBC 's Why Planes Crash series , in an episode titled Human Error . The impact of cultural differences between the Colombian pilots and American air traffic controllers was discussed in Malcolm Gladwell 's book Outliers , which does not specifically mention Avianca 52 . Stock footage of the plane wreckage was utilized in the 2004 film , The Day After Tomorrow . Survivor Nestor Zarate also wrote a book about the flight , titled 20 <unk> <unk> ... 20 años <unk> ( 20 Minutes Before ... 20 Years Later ) . 
 = Geneforge 2 = 
 Geneforge 2 is the second video game in the Geneforge series of role @-@ playing video games created by Spiderweb Software . 
 Players create a character from one of three character classes and explore the game 's 84 locations , deciding whether to ally themselves with one of the four factions or remain neutral . The game 's plot concerns an apprentice Shaper and an Agent ( whose name is Shanti ) , both members of a secretive sect of wizards who can create life by using their own life energy . They are sent on a mission to investigate a failing Shaper colony called Drypeak . When they arrive not all is well , the player becomes drawn into a four @-@ way war which has been hidden from the outside world . 
 The game 's development was made more simple by the use of the same game engine to that of its predecessor , though extra dialogue was involved due to the presence of four factions rather than the three in Geneforge . Video game journalists awarded both positive and average review scores , they were impressed by Geneforge 2 's plot and replayability but criticized the game 's graphics and ambient sound effects . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Geneforge 2 is a role @-@ playing game where the player 's choice of answers during conversations with non @-@ player characters affects how the player is regarded amongst the game 's four factions . The player character is an apprentice Shaper , a feared and secretive group who can create life . Players create a character from one of three character classes and explore the area surrounding Drypeak , a failing Shaper colony , solving quests and gaining experience . Each of the three character classes has a particular playing style and can approach tasks in different ways . Guardians are fighters who excel in standard combat skills , especially hand @-@ to @-@ hand fighting . They are capable of shaping creations , but have little affinity for magic . Agents are the game 's version of rogues , and excel in spell casting and are capable of hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat . The Shaper is a summoner , capable of creating living creatures by using their own life essence . Shapers rely on their creations for protection . Players can also convince certain non @-@ player characters to join them . 
 The game is played in 45 ° axonometric perspective , movement through the game 's environs is real @-@ time , combat is turn @-@ based . The game world is divided into 84 areas accessible through a world map . Clearing areas by defeating leaders or successfully traversing the terrain allows players to bypass those areas via the world map , reducing travelling time . The game uses an auto @-@ map , each area is completely darkened and is revealed as the player explores , similar to the fog of war used in real @-@ time strategy games . As the player completes tasks and defeats enemies they receive experience , leading to increased levels and additional skill points . The player character 's skill points can be used to increase their statistics . <unk> which increase skills or add new abilities are scattered throughout the game . Geneforge 2 offers a number of changes and additions over its predecessor . Three new creations are available to players : massive <unk> ; telepathic <unk> ; and acidic , decaying <unk> . Several new spells are available , such as Kill and Aura of Flames . The skill " Anatomy " , which allowed the player to cause extra damage in melee combat , is replaced with " Parry " , which has a chance of blocking incoming attacks . Also the spell " Dominate " which allows the player to take control of one of the enemies is replaced with " Wrack " . The game engine itself , however , is essentially unchanged from the original Geneforge . 
 = = Plot = = 
 An apprentice Shaper is sent on a training mission with a Shaper Agent named Shanti by the Shaper Council . The pair are tasked with assessing the failed Shaper colony Drypeak and making contact with the pair of Shapers , Barzahl and Zakary , who were dispatched years ago to revitalize the colony . The gates of Drypeak are found unmanned , much to Shanti 's disgust , the Agent and her charge are also attacked by rogue Shaper creations . When the pair gain access to the colony , they find a dishevelled Zakary who informs them that both he and Barzahl were unsuccessful in revitalizing the colony , which remains a barren desert . He also states that Barzahl has died . Zakary and the population of Drypeak behave suspiciously . Shanti is shadowed by an armed guard against her will . She instructs the apprentice , who is not guarded , to explore Drypeak and beyond in order to discover the truth behind the colony and Barzahl 's disappearance . 
 After exploring a number of the game 's locations , the apprentice gains access to a guarded tunnel and is astonished to discover what lies on the other side . Whereas the valley where Drypeak is located is a dustbowl devoid of vegetation , the lands on the other side of the tunnel are lush and green , meaning highly illegal shaping is taking place in secret . Serviles , the Shapers ' slaves created from life essence , show abnormal intelligence and self @-@ awareness . While still reeling from the revelation of what lies beyond Drypeak , the Shaper apprentice discovers that Shanti has disappeared during one of her escapes from her armed escorts , her necklace lay broken on the grass outside the tunnel . At this point , approximately a quarter of the way through the game , the player 's choices expand considerably . 
 When confronted with the apprentice 's findings , Zakary confesses to being part of a plot to conceal illegal experiments from the Shaper Council . Both he and Barzahl were sent to Sucia Island , the location where the original Geneforge game is set , where Barred Shaper technology had allowed Shapers to manipulate life in countless ways . Instead of destroying the Geneforge , the pair agreed to spirit away the technology and experiment in private . Several of the intelligent serviles who lived on Sucia were brought along ; a number of Shapers also followed Barzahl . Zakary remained in Drypeak to provide a front for the experimentation and rogue serviles which lay beyond the tunnel . Barzahl moved further into the valleys to build settlements and run experiments . Repeated use of the canisters can render the user cold , detached and possibly mad . When Zakary saw this happening to Barzahl the pair argued , Zakary regretted his part in the deceit . This occurred a year before the arrival of Shanti and the apprentice , Zakary had lost contact with Barzahl since the argument . Zakary pledges his loyalty to the Shaper Council once more and asks for help from the apprentice in dealing with what lies beyond the guarded cave . 
 Using the Geneforge to empower himself and his followers , the Barzites , Barzahl intends to bestow god @-@ like abilities on himself and his followers within the city of Rising . Barzahl cut off contact with Drypeak , preparing to repel the inevitable assault of the Shaper Council , who they wish to remain independent from . The Takers , a faction of intelligent serviles who had originated on Sucia Island , were given powers by Barzahl because they worked for him . In turn the Takers created powerful dragon @-@ like beasts called <unk> , taught the <unk> how to create life themselves , and betrayed Barzahl . The Takers stand for the total destruction of the Shaper Council . The Awakened , the other servile faction in Geneforge 2 , believe that Shapers should treat them as equals . They had been working with the Barzites , but the Awakened 's leader Learned Pinner rejected the Barzites ' view that serviles need to be controlled . Trade and communications between Zakary 's now Shaper Council loyalist Drypeak and the other three factions have ceased , replaced with spies and subterfuge . The player is free to decide which faction they wish to join , if any , and to explore the game world , reacting to the characters and situations they encounter . 
 = = Development = = 
 Geneforge 2 was developed in tandem with another Spiderweb Software title , Blades of Avernum . Developer Jeff Vogel described the game 's production as " very relaxing " , since the game engine was already completed from the previous game he was familiar with it and therefore could devote his time to creating the game itself . Due to the different reactions the player receives from the factions , depending on their actions and conversation choices , it required days to complete a single town . This was further increased from the original game , due to there being four factions instead of three . In an interview held during the development of Geneforge 2 Vogel stated " I 'm really excited about the Geneforge series . And we 're already thinking about Geneforge 3 . " A 20 area demo version was released , allowing players access to towns , mines and woodlands . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Geneforge 2 received both positive and average review scores . Video game magazine PC Gamer 's reviewer stated that " graphics aside , Geneforge 2 is a terrific game " for players new to the RPG genre . The reviewer of Computer Games Magazine praised the Spiderweb Software 's titles and said that Geneforge 2 " is probably the best twenty @-@ five bucks an RPG fiend can spend . " CNET 's staff member was more critical , describing the game as " complex enough to keep you interested , but not quite good enough to enjoy . " Indie gaming website Game Tunnel 's Gianfranco Berardi praised Geneforge 2 as " an RPG of amazing quality . " Inside Mac Games ' Ken Newquist stated the game is " a real find " for players who have been disappointed by lack of gameplay in expensive mainstream titles . 
 The game 's graphics and sound effects received a largely negative response , Matt Peckham of GameSpy described them as " yesteryear " and " minimalist " respectively . Ken Newquist called the graphics " far from spectacular " and stated they were worse than older titles such as Baldur 's Gate . He also highlighted that enchanted items look identical to their mundane counterparts and that highly evolved creatures are identical to their standard brethren . Newquist also disliked the ambient sounds , which make up the game 's soundtrack , calling them " numerous , but repetitive " . Gianfranco Berardi was more positive . He stated that " the graphics aren 't exactly top @-@ notch " , but noted variation between different areas . He also said " the sound effects and ambience simply added to the involving storyline . " CNET 's editor described the sound effects as " merely adequate " and the graphics " less so " . 
 Gianfranco Berardi praised the plot , stating that it " isn 't just good background noise like in most games . " He added that he found the plot involving , and that it can cause the player to stop and think about their actions . Matt Peckham described the plot as " fantastic and original " , and praised the game 's replayability . Ken Newquist compared the game 's setting to the pen and paper role @-@ playing game Gamma World , and stated " players get a huge world to explore and — thanks to the intricacies of the game 's plot — re @-@ explore . " 
 = Typhoon Sudal = 
 Typhoon Sudal , known in the Philippines as Typhoon Cosme , was the strongest typhoon to strike the island of Yap in the Federated States of Micronesia ( FSM ) in about 50 years . Yap is one of the four administrative divisions of the FSM . The entire island , only 17 km ( 11 mi ) in length , experienced typhoon force winds , and 90 % of the structures were damaged or destroyed . Damage was most severe in southeastern Yap , where the eyewall struck and winds exceeded 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) , but the center of the typhoon passed south of the island . 
 Typhoon Sudal originally formed on April 2 , 2004 , out of a persistent area of convection east of the FSM . It moved mostly westward for the first week of its duration , with brief northerly and southwesterly turns . Sudal attained tropical storm status on April 5 , and it gradually intensified into a typhoon , which is a tropical cyclone with winds of at least 119 km / h ( 74 mph ) and is the equivalent of a hurricane in the Atlantic Ocean . On April 9 , it passed just south of Yap , and shortly thereafter its peak winds were estimated at 240 km / h ( 150 mph ) . Later , Sudal moved to the northwest and eventually to the northeast , becoming an extratropical cyclone on April 16 and dissipating two days later . 
 In addition to the damage on Yap , the typhoon dropped heavy rainfall in Chuuk in the Federated States of Micronesia , where some minor crop damage occurred . Sudal also brushed the United States islands of Guam and Rota with high waves and light rainfall , and later moved very close to the uninhabited Japanese island of Iwo Jima . Overall damage was $ 14 million ( 2004 USD , $ 16 @.@ 1 million 2010 USD ) , most of which was on Yap , although no fatalities or serious injuries were reported . Due to the heavy damage , the name was retired and replaced with " <unk> " . The name " Sudal " was contributed by South Korea for the Pacific tropical cyclone list and is the Korean name for the otter . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Typhoon Sudal were from a persistent area of convection , or thunderstorms , southeast of Pohnpei in the Federated States of Micronesia toward the end of March 2004 . Initially , it was in an area of high wind shear , which is the change in wind direction with height and is unfavorable for tropical cyclogenesis . The unfavorable conditions gradually abated , which allowed convection to increase over a broad , developing circulation center . On April 2 , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) classified the system as a weak tropical depression near Chuuk in the FSM . It was later classified with the international designation of <unk> , meaning it was the first tropical cyclone of 2004 . Slow development continued as the system moved slowly westward , and two days later it was classified as Tropical Depression 03W by the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) ; this was the third tropical cyclone tracked by the agency . Shortly thereafter , the JTWC upgraded the depression to tropical storm status , after convection increased over the circulation . 
 While steadily intensifying , the system turned toward the north . On April 5 , the JMA named the system Sudal , after assessing its maximum sustained winds at 65 km / h ( 40 mph 10 @-@ min sustained ) . Concurrently , the JTWC estimated winds of 100 km / h ( 65 km / h 1 @-@ min sustained ) . After crossing over the island of Poluwat , a building ridge to the north caused Sudal to turn west @-@ southwestward . On April 6 , an eye feature began forming , and the JTWC upgraded Sudal to typhoon strength about 540 km ( 340 mi ) southeast of Guam , a small island under possession of the United States . The JMA did not follow suit until late the following day , by which time the eye had become more distinct . Around that time , the typhoon turned toward the northwest , and initially it was thought that Sudal would pass safely north of Yap in the FSM . Instead , it turned to the west @-@ southwest toward the island as the ridge intensified . On April 8 , the typhoon intensified rapidly ; the JTWC reported winds of 215 km / h ( 135 mph 1 @-@ min sustained ) , or the equivalent of a Category 4 on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane scale . Weakening slightly as its forward motion slowed , Typhoon Sudal passed about 45 km ( 28 mi ) south of Yap at 0000 UTC on April 9 , which was its closest approach to the island . 
 Intensification continued throughout the day on April 9 , with the appearance of concentric eyewalls on satellite imagery ; such a feature is indicative of an intense tropical cyclone . Early on April 10 , the JTWC estimated that Sudal attained peak winds of 240 km / h ( 150 mph 1 @-@ min sustained ) , making the cyclone a super typhoon . At the same time , the JMA estimated peak winds of 165 km / h ( 105 mph 10 @-@ min sustained ) , as well as a barometric pressure of 940 mbar ( 27 @.@ 76 inHg ) . Also on that day , Sudal entered the area of warning responsibility of the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration ( PAGASA ) , which provided the name " Cosme " for local advisories . For several days , the typhoon continued to the northwest , fluctuating in intensity but remaining powerful . On April 12 , Sudal turned toward the north and northeast through a weakness in the ridge , and its eye increased to a diameter of about 85 km ( 53 mi ) . The next day , the typhoon attained a secondary peak intensity of 230 km / h ( 145 mph 1 @-@ min sustained ) , although it gradually weakened subsequently due to a combination of increasing upper @-@ level wind shear and cooler water temperatures . 
 Early on April 15 , Sudal passed very near the uninhabited Japanese island of Iwo Jima as a rapidly weakening typhoon ; at the time , its circulation center was exposed from the deepest convection . Shortly thereafter , both the JTWC and JMA downgraded Sudal to tropical storm status . Late on April 15 , the JTWC assessed the storm as becoming extratropical , although the JMA maintained advisories until the following day . As an extratropical storm , Sudal continued northeastward until losing its identity early on April 18 , well east of Japan and far south of the Aleutian Islands . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Early in its duration as a weak tropical storm , Sudal passed near Chuuk state in the Federated States of Micronesia ( FSM ) . One station reported 17 cm ( 6 @.@ 68 inches ) of rainfall in a 24 ‑ hour period . The passage of the storm left minor roof damage and some crop damage , due to storm surge contaminating groundwater . No deaths or injuries were reported in the state . The storm briefly threatened Guam , and as it passed south of the island , Sudal produced 5 @.@ 5 m ( 18 ft ) waves and a 0 @.@ 9 m ( 3 ft ) storm surge . A station at Apra Harbor recorded a 69 km / h ( 43 mph ) wind gust , and light rainfall of around 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) was reported , although no damage was reported on the island . High waves also occurred on Rota in the Northern Mariana Islands . The FSM is an independent nation in Compact of Free Association with the United States , and the latter nation is responsible for aid and protection . 
 Further west , Typhoon Sudal intensified quickly as it moved through the Caroline Islands and later Yap state . On Ulithi , a wind gust of 132 km / h ( 82 mph ) was reported , and 6 @.@ 34 inches of rainfall occurred in a 24 ‑ hour period . High waves of over 5 m ( 18 ft ) struck the island , causing severe beach erosion and damaging subsistence crops . The winds downed a few trees and wrecked some poorly built homes . On nearby Faraulep and Fais islands , similar meteorological conditions and damages were reported . The small Ngulu Atoll received gale force winds and heavy rainfall , which destroyed half of the island 's water storage tanks . Later in its duration , Sudal passed near Iwo Jima , producing wind gusts of 141 km / h ( 87 mph ) . 
 = = = Yap = = = 
 The worst of the damage occurred on the island of Yap . Initially , the typhoon was expected to pass north of the island without affecting it significantly , but instead the island experienced the brunt of the storm . Typhoon Lupit affected the island in the previous year , from which the islanders were still recovering . With the last minute change in direction , government officials rushed to complete preparations on the island . On the day before the typhoon struck , storm shelters were opened in schools and government buildings that could withstand the winds of Sudal . In anticipation of significant damage , Yap officials sent a request to the FSM government for emergency aid to clean up after the storm . 
 On April 9 , the eye of Sudal briefly passed over the southern portion of the island , and winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) struck the island for about four hours . The entire island , only 17 km ( 11 mi ) in length , experienced typhoon force winds . Yap International Airport recorded a peak wind gust of 181 km / h ( 112 mph ) ; a subsequent survey estimated wind gusts on the island reached 226 km / h ( 140 mph ) . Heavy rainfall occurred during Sudal 's passage , including 20 @.@ 0 cm ( 7 @.@ 88 inches ) in a 48 ‑ hour period at the airport . The lowest pressure on the island was 958 @.@ 5 mbar ( 28 @.@ 30 inHg ) . Along the coast , the typhoon produced waves of 6 @.@ 7 m ( 22 ft ) in height , along with a 3 @.@ 7 m ( 12 ft ) storm surge ; the combination sunk several ships and heavily damaged the island 's coral reefs , the latter which is one of Yap 's primary tourism attractions . 
 When Typhoon Sudal struck the island , there were about 8 @,@ 000 people living on Yap , with about 1 @,@ 700 houses . The typhoon destroyed 700 homes , and left another 900 damaged ; many of the destroyed homes were wooden . Damage was heaviest in the southeastern portion of the island , including in and around Colonia , the capital city . The strong winds downed trees across the island . Over 90 % of the structures on the island were damaged or destroyed , including the hospital , airport , most government facilities , and the water , power and communications systems . One of the five hotels on the island was also destroyed . About 80 % of the residents lost power or water after the storm . In the southeastern portion of the island , high waves wrecked most of the coastal homes , and also severely damaged the seawall . The intrusion of salt water destroyed almost all of the food crops on the island . Following the typhoon 's passage , about 1 @,@ 000 people were left homeless , and another 500 were forced to stay in shelters . 
 Overall damage from Typhoon Sudal totaled about $ 14 million ( 2004 USD , $ 16 @.@ 1 million 2010 USD ) , most of which on Yap from property damage . Despite the heavy damage , there were no deaths , although there were initial reports of one fatality . Only 8 people required hospital treatment due to injuries , none of them serious . Typhoon Sudal was the strongest typhoon to strike Yap in about 50 years . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following the passage of Sudal , officials in Yap declared a state of emergency , and a day after the typhoon struck , United States President George W. Bush ordered federal disaster aid for the FSM . The latter declaration provided funding for 75 % of the debris removal cost and emergency services . Less than a week after the storm , the Pacific Islands Forum provided $ 11 @,@ 500 to Yap for relief efforts . Over the subsequent weeks , the FSM government established a typhoon relief fund of about $ 250 @,@ 000 . Additionally , the United States government allocated $ 7 @,@ 443 @,@ 000 for relief efforts . 
 Within a few days , the Federal Emergency Management Agency ( FEMA ) identified primary concerns for the small island , including fixing the water supply , distributing water , clearing roads , and fixing damaged shelters . On the island , the water supply was rapidly diminishing ; more than 80 % of the islanders were without clean water , and the water from the treatment plant needed to be boiled for extended periods of time . Health issues included dehydration , sickness , and gastrointestinal problems . Without running water , several people bathed in the oil @-@ contaminated harbor where many boats sunk , which caused skin irritations . 
 Initially , telephone service onto the island was disrupted , and the only method of outside contact was by radio to the University of Guam . The Guam Memorial Hospital dropped a package of medical supplies to Yap , although planes containing aid flying onto the island were disrupted by the damaged runway . About a day after Sudal 's passage , the runway was cleared and repaired , which allowed a United States Coast Guard plane to provide relief supplies , including building materials . By April 12 , or three days after the typhoon , communication links to the island began to be restored . By four days later , the water treatment plant was repaired . One power station on the island was repaired , but since the strong winds damaged most of the power lines , about 85 % of the population remained without electricity . Primary roadways were largely cleared , and all bridges were reopened . 
 About two weeks after the typhoon 's passage , there were still 500 people in 18 shelters in Colonia , the capital city , as well as about 400 people in shelters elsewhere . Many others were either residing with relatives or staying at their damaged properties . The United States Army Corps of Engineers arrived on Yap to coordinate debris removal and installing generators . Officials sent 23 flights of aid to the island , as well as one each to the outlying islands of Ulithi and Fais . About 76 @,@ 000 litres ( 20 @,@ 000 gallons ) of water were sent to the island , and five large water tanks were installed . Members of the United States Forest Service arrived to coordinate the receiving and distribution of relief supplies . The Yap hospital was poorly suited to handle the typhoon , due to the lack of medications or emergency medical equipment . About 60 FEMA personnel worked at the hospital , who required additional items , such as their own supply of water and food , to prevent them from acquiring local diseases . During their stay on the island , the group assisted 163 people , mostly for minor issues . Overall , there were about 100 FEMA workers involved on the island , although only 20 stayed there due to lack of hotels and rental cars . 
 By 26 days after the storm , more than half of the island had power restored , and the cell phone system was fixed . In the weeks and months after the passage of Sudal , water temperatures around Yap decreased from 30 ° C ( 86 ° F ) to 24 ° C ( 75 ° F ) , due to significant upwelling . The drastic decrease caused unusual amounts of fog over the island , as well as significantly lower tides . By September 2004 , rebuilding was still underway , and half of the schools , which had previously been used as shelters , reopened to students . Power and water lines were completely restored . The hospital remained damaged with a temporary roof , and although private businesses quickly re @-@ opened , government buildings took longer to be rebuilt ; this was due to the lengthy process of receiving aid from FEMA . Additionally , officials required a land survey to determine where structures were safe to be rebuilt . 
 Due to the heavy damage on Yap , the name Sudal was retired during the 38th session of the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific and World Meteorological Organization typhoon committee in November 2005 ; it was replaced with the name <unk> . 
 = The Adventures of Totor = 
 The Adventures of Totor , Chief Scout of the <unk> ( French : Les Aventures de Totor , C.P. des hannetons ) is the first comic strip series by the Belgian cartoonist Hergé , who later came to notability as the author of The Adventures of Tintin series . It was serialised monthly from July 1926 to summer 1929 in Belgian scouting magazine Le Boy Scout Belge , with a nine month break in 1927 . The plot synopsis revolved around the eponymous Totor , a Belgian boy scout who travels to visit his aunt and uncle in Texas , the United States . Once there , he comes across hostile Native American tribes and gangsters , each of whom he outwits , before returning to Belgium . 
 Like the comics of Christophe , which were common in Western Europe at the time , the series is a text comic , consisting of pictures with separate captions , although Hergé had begun to experiment with the use of speech bubbles throughout , something influenced by American comics . In 1929 , Hergé created the character of Tintin for the new story , Tintin in the Land of the Soviets , which would be largely based on Totor . Literary critics have expressed mixed views on the narrative and artwork . 
 = = Characters and story = = 
 Totor leaves Brussels to go and visit his uncle Pad Hatt and aunt Save Hatt in Texas , the United States . Along the way he is pulled overboard by a shark and then thrown onto an American submarine which takes him to New York City . Totor is awed by the skyscrapers and is unintentionally hit by a car which flings him into a passing stranger who turns out to be a criminal named John Blood . After Totor receives a $ 5 @,@ 000 reward for the gangster he takes a train to his uncle 's ranch in <unk> . His uncle picks him up at the station and on their way back a group of Native Americans hold them up . Totor manages to distract the Natives and the two of them escape . However , a few hours later at the ranch , the same tribe kidnaps Totor in revenge . Standing tied to a torture stake Totor is made into a target for knives , axes and arrows . One of the arrows cut the ropes binding him and when the Chief draws close to scalp the young boy , Totor digs his feet into the Sachem 's stomach and makes a quick getaway into a river , pretending to have drowned . Underwater , he finds an old chest full of countless jewels and buries them at the base of a boulder . 
 A trapper in a canoe takes Totor up the river . Leaving the trapper , Totor goes back to the ranch to find it deserted . As he searches the place a hand reaches out and pulls him through a doorway where a fierce brawl ensues in the darkness . Totor is victorious , and throws his three captors out of the building . He discovers his uncle tied to a chair ; Totor frees him , and Pad tells his nephew that the bandits kidnapped his aunt Save . Totor suddenly has an idea to use the treasure he found as a ransom for his aunt . The two of them set out to go fetch it , but along the way a criminal steals their map while they sleep . After discovering the loss of their jewels they follow the thief 's unique footprints for a few miles . When they see another set of footprints join the first and then head up into some mountains , Totor continues on his own . Having eluded several Native sentries he spies the chest in the hands of the Chief . After recovering the box and outrunning the Natives back to his uncle , they hurriedly head home . There they find a ransom note from the leader of the bandits , Jim <unk> , saying to meet them under a big fir tree that day or they would kill his aunt . Totor rushes to the rendezvous where he overwhelms the criminals and orders them to tell him where they are keeping his aunt hostage . After a heroic rescue and an emotional reunion between his aunt and uncle , he finds out that it is time for him to go back to Belgium . Once back , he tells everyone of his adventures and wistfully yearns for more . 
 = = Publication = = 
 Aged 12 , Georges Remi — who later became best known under the pen name Hergé — joined the Boy Scout brigade attached to Saint @-@ Boniface School in his native Brussels , becoming troop leader of the Squirrel Patrol and earning the name " Curious Fox " ( Renard curieux ) . With the Scouts , he travelled for summer camps in Italy , Switzerland , Austria and Spain , and in the summer of 1923 his troop hiked 200 miles across the Pyrenees . His experiences with Scouting would have a significant influence on the rest of his life , sparking his love of camping and the natural world , and providing him with a moral compass that stressed personal loyalty and keeping one 's promise . His Scoutmaster , Rene Weverbergh , encouraged his artistic ability , and published one of Remi 's drawings in the newsletter of the Saint @-@ Boniface Scouts , Jamais <unk> ( Never Enough ) ; his first published work . When Weverbergh became involved in the publication of Boy @-@ Scout , the newsletter of the Federation of Scouts , he published more of Remi 's illustrations , the first of which appeared in the fifth issue , from 1922 . Remi continued publishing cartoons , drawings and woodcuts in subsequent issues of the magazine , which was soon renamed Le Boy @-@ Scout Belge ( The Belgian Boy Scout ) . During this time , he experimented with different pseudonyms , using " Jérémie " and " <unk> " before settling on " Hergé " , the pronunciation of his reversed initials ( R.G. ) , a name that he first published under in December 1924 . 
 Les Aventures de Totor , C.P. des hannetons began serialisation in Le Boy @-@ Scout Belge in July 1926 , and would continue to appear in the magazine until July 1929 . The meaning of the name has been translated differently ; Hergé biographer Pierre Assouline translated it as " The Adventures of Totor , C.P. of the June Bugs " , while Tintinologist Harry Thompson instead translated it as " The Adventures of Totor , patrol leader of the Cockchafers " , but conversely , biographer Benoît Peeters had it as " The Adventures of Totor , patrol chief of the <unk> " . ( " <unk> " is French for Cockchafer , a type of beetle , but also the French for " <unk> " ) . Hergé had hoped that being the author of an ongoing comic strip would improve his job prospects , for at the time he was beginning to develop a reputation as a designer of postcards , stationary , and advertisements . Rather than representing an example of a comic as the medium would come to be understood in the following decade , The Adventures of Totor consisted of square boxes containing illustrations with the captions written separately underneath , as was the style found in French comic creator Christophe 's works La Famille <unk> ( The <unk> Family ) and <unk> Camembert ( Sapper Camembert ) . Initially using four boxes per page , as the series progressed this was increased to six and then eight , with each page ending on a cliffhanger . 
 Hergé did not make use of speech bubbles to convey into the comic , an innovation that was yet to become widespread in Europe , and instead his captions were accompanied by captions of three to five lines long . He would begin to add simple speech bubbles into the series , stating simple comments like " Eureka ! " , " Bang ! " , and " Hip ! Hip ! Hip ! Hurrah ! " . Hergé later noted that " From time to time ... I risked a timid question mark , or perhaps a few stars , when , for example , a character was punched . I must have seen that in L <unk> or Les Belles Images , the illustrated papers of the time . " Hergé had come under the influence of other comic strips , such as those of the French author Alain Saint @-@ Ogan , and British comic magazine The Rainbow . He was also influenced by the contemporary American comics that reporter Léon Degrelle had sent back to Belgium from Mexico , where he was stationed to report on the Cristero War . These American comics included George McManus 's Bringing Up Father , George Herriman 's Krazy Kat and Rudolph Dirks 's Katzenjammer Kids . Totor 's button nose was influenced by the illustrations in Bringing Up Father . 
 In creating the series , he was also heavily influenced by the films of Charlie Chaplin and Harry Langdon , which he had enjoyed in childhood . This influence was evident in his decision to sign some of the images with the signature " Hergé Moving Pictures " or " Hergé , Director " , and giving many of them titles such as " United Rovers presents a great comic film : Les Aventures de Totor , C.P. des hannetons " and " United Rovers presents a stupendous film . " He had continued writing and drawing installments in the series during his military service in 1926 , but in early 1927 ceased producing the series for nine months as he focused on other projects , only returning to it in late 1927 , when he included a résumé of the series at the start . 
 Gaining work for the conservative newspaper Le Vingtième Siècle ( " The Twentieth Century " ) , in January 1929 he began serialisation of Tintin in the Land of the Soviets , the first of The Adventures of Tintin , in the newspaper 's children 's supplement , Le Petit Vingtième ( The Little Twentieth ) . Tintinologist Michael Farr described the character of Totor as a " natural prototype " for Tintin , while literary critic Jean @-@ Marie Apostolidès thought that Hergé " adopted his former hero to the new circumstances " . The <unk> Jean @-@ Marc and Randy Lofficier thought that graphically , Totor was " virtually identical " to Tintin . The early installments of Tintin in the Land of the Soviets and The Adventures of Totor were contemporary with each other . Hergé decided that he wanted to focus on the new character , bringing the Totor story to an end in July 1929 , when he had the main character return to Belgium . In all , the series had lasted for 26 pages . The Adventures of Totor would continue to influence his new series , as the encounters with cowboys and Native Americans would subsequently be reused in the third installment in The Adventures of Tintin , Tintin in America , although Thompson commented that the latter was " a great improvement " on Totor . 
 = = Critical analysis = = 
 Tintinologist Harry Thompson described Totor as " a brave , resourceful young character " , noting that in several years he would " metamorphose " into Tintin . He nevertheless thought that the text was " slightly rambling and uninspired . " Hergé biographer Pierre Assouline described the Totor story as being " very Boy Scout in spirit and clearly a prefiguration of Tintin . " He nevertheless had mixed views of the illustrations , commenting that the lines were " awkward , hesitant , incomplete , but the movement , rhythm , and above all , the humor is apparent . " Another biographer , Benoît Peeters , thought that the intrigue of the series was " extremely fragmented " because the main goal was to string gags and fight scenes together rather than to develop a plot . He commented that although by the early 21st century it appeared " puerile " , being " a long way " from the formula of The Adventures of Tintin , it was nevertheless " an important step toward the modern comic strip " . 
 Tintinologist Phillipe Goddin considered the series to be " a milestone " , describing it as " full of promise " and containing " <unk> [ sic ] of humour , rich in developments " . The <unk> Jean @-@ Marc and Randy Lofficier commented that " Everything that made Tintin what it later became was <unk> present in Totor " , including the artistic style , the pace of the story , the use of humour , and the manner in which it imitated motion pictures . They also commented that Totor read like " an adult was retelling one of those early American western serials ... to a group of children . On the one hand he is exciting the children , but on the other he is winking at the adults as if to say , " you and I know this is not serious . " " 
 = = <unk> and pastiches = = 
 An artist named <unk> created a comic series titled Les Nouvelles Aventures de Rotor : C.P. des <unk> ( The New Adventures of Rotor : Patrol Leader of the Hooks ) . 
 = Battle of Tamatave = 
 The Battle of Tamatave ( sometimes called the Battle of Madagascar or the Action of 20 May 1811 ) was fought off Tamatave in Madagascar between British and French frigate squadrons during the Napoleonic Wars . The action was the final engagement of the Mauritius campaign of 1809 – 1811 , and it saw the destruction of the last French attempt to reinforce their garrison on Mauritius . Although the news had not reached Europe by February 1811 when the reinforcement squadron left Brest , Mauritius had been captured in December 1810 by a British invasion fleet , the French defences hampered by the lack of the supplies and troops carried aboard the frigate squadron under the command of Commodore François Roquebert in Renommée . Roquebert 's heavily laden ships reached Mauritius on 6 May and discovered that the island was in British hands the following day , narrowly escaping a trap laid by a squadron of British frigates ordered to hunt and destroy them . 
 On 20 May the British squadron , under the command of Captain Charles Marsh Schomberg , discovered the French off Tamatave and attacked , both sides hampered by light winds which impeded movement for much of the day . During a period of calm weather early in the battle , the French were better positioned than the disorganised British squadron and Roquebert 's ships inflicted severe damage on several British vessels before an increasing breeze allowed Schomberg to press home his attack . As the evening approached , the French attempted to escape , Roquebert sacrificing his flagship and ultimately his life to allow the frigates Clorinde and the badly damaged Néréide to escape . Five days later , Schomberg 's squadron rediscovered Néréide at Tamatave and persuaded the town 's commander to surrender without a fight . The battle was the last action of the Mauritius campaign and confirmed British dominance of the seas east of the Cape of Good Hope for the rest of the Napoleonic Wars . 
 = = Background = = 
 In August 1810 , the French squadron on Isle de France ( now Mauritius ) achieved the most significant French naval victory of the Napoleonic Wars , when they captured or destroyed four Royal Navy frigates at the Battle of Grand Port . The battle was fought inside Grand Port , one of the harbours of Isle de France into which the French squadrons , dominant in the Indian Ocean during 1809 , had been steadily pushed and blockaded by pressure from a British squadron under Commodore Josias Rowley . The British defeat had a noticeable galvanising effect on both the British and French naval commands : both recognised that the campaign would be won by the first to reinforce and resupply their forces . Although the French had achieved a significant victory , the naval bases on Isle de France lacked the military stores and food supplies to repair the battle damage to their ships or supply lengthy raiding voyages against British trade routes . 
 The British reaction was immediate : ships were dispatched from regional bases at Madras , the Cape of Good Hope and Rodriguez to replace Rowley 's losses while a larger force was collected at Rodriguez in preparation for a major invasion of Isle de France intended to permanently eliminate the island as a raiding base . The French response from their squadron on Isle de France , based at Port Napoleon under Commodore Jacques Hamelin , was to exercise their regional superiority by attacking British reinforcements at the actions of 13 September 1810 and 18 September 1810 . Despite inflicting severe damage on two British frigates , the French lost one of their own , captured with Hamelin aboard , and suffered two more damaged . Without supplies or reinforcements to replace these losses , the French were unable to resist the British invasion in November 1810 and the island fell within four days . 
 The French had also been preparing reinforcements for the region , but their nearest naval bases were in France itself , several thousand miles away across oceans almost totally controlled by the Royal Navy . These distances also delayed the arrival of news from the Indian Ocean , and therefore word had still not reached France of the fall of Isle de France by 17 : 00 on 2 February 1811 , when a reinforcement squadron set sail from Brest . This squadron consisted of three powerful frigates , Renommée under Commodore François Roquebert , Clorinde under Captain Jacques Saint @-@ Cricq and Néréide under Captain Jean @-@ François Lemaresquier . Each ship carried over 200 soldiers for the Isle de France garrison and significant food and military supplies with which to refit Hamelin 's squadron and resupply the island . The French authorities were aware of the possibility that Isle de France had been captured , and had ordered that if the island was in British hands , the squadron should continue on to the Dutch city of Batavia on Java , to operate against the British from there . 
 = = February to May 1811 = = 
 By 1811 , the Royal Navy enjoyed a worldwide naval supremacy over the French , including the seas immediately off the French coast . To avoid being attacked as they left Brest , French ships had to attempt to slip out either under cover of darkness or during storms that drove the British away from the dangerous coastline . This also however forced the French ships to fight against the wind to leave their harbours and as a result , Roquebert 's ships only covered 600 nautical miles ( 1 @,@ 100 km ) in the first 18 days . On 24 February , the squadron captured a Portuguese merchant ship and discovered Lisbon newspapers aboard that announced the British invasion , although not its outcome . On 13 March , Roquebert 's ships crossed the Equator and on 18 April they passed the Cape of Good Hope at distance , benefitting from good weather and a strong breeze during the latter stages of the journey . At 23 : 00 on 6 May at 23 : 00 , 93 days after leaving Brest , the French convoy arrived off Île de la Passe at the entrance to Grand Port . 
 The British had not been idle during the six months they had occupied Isle de France , now renamed Mauritius . The invasion fleet had broken up soon after the island fell and command of the remaining naval forces on the island had been given to Captain Philip Beaver . On 5 January , a small French dispatch ship had been captured off Port Louis ( formerly Port Napoleon ) and from the messages aboard the nature and destination of Roquebert 's squadron was discovered . Information was also received describing a second French force being prepared for operations in the region , consisting of the frigates Nymphe and Méduse . Aware of the impending arrival of French reinforcements , Admiral Robert Stopford at the Cape of Good Hope sent Captain James Hillyar in HMS Phoebe to reinforce Beaver on Mauritius . Beaver ordered Hillyar , with HMS Galatea under Captain Woodley Losack and HMS Racehorse under Captain James de Rippe , to prepare for the arrival of Roquebert 's convoy . Beaver then began eliminating French harbours in the western Indian Ocean , sending the brig HMS Eclipse to attack Tamatave on Madagascar , which was captured on 12 February . After the end of the hurricane season in March , Beaver personally sailed in HMS Nisus to invade the Seychelles , before collecting specie from Madras to refloat the Mauritian economy . In his absence , Mauritius came under the command of Captain Charles Marsh Schomberg in HMS Astraea . 
 When Roquebert 's ships appeared off Grand Port , Hillyar had his three ships in the harbour ready to sail at short notice and ensured that French <unk> were flying from Île de la Passe and other landmarks in the hope that the French could be lured into the shallow waters of the bay and defeated in a similar manner to the British defeat at the battle at Grand Port the previous year . Signals were exchanged between the French squadron and the shore but Roquebert was wary : the signals from Île de la Passe were out of date and he knew of the British invasion from the Lisbon newspapers captured two months before . Waiting offshore , the French commodore sent three boats ashore during the night with instructions to discover the situation on the island . Seizing two black inhabitants , one of the boats returned on the morning of 7 May and from his captives Roquebert learned that the British had captured the island six months earlier . The other landing parties were captured by British troops and did not return . With Hillyar 's trap uncovered , Roquebert raised French colours and turned eastwards away from Grand Port , Hillyar emerging from the harbour to give chase . 
 = = Roquebert 's escape = = 
 At 04 : 00 on 8 May , Roquebert realised that his overladen ships were too slow to outrun Hillyar 's squadron , which was 6 nautical miles ( 11 km ) behind and gaining rapidly . At 08 : 00 , he decided to turn and meet the British ships head @-@ on rather than be overtaken . Hillyar , aware that his squadron was weaker than Roquebert 's , held back in anticipation of the arrival of Schomberg in Astraea from Port Louis , to whom he had sent an urgent message the night before . As the British fell back towards the Île Ronde off the northeastern shore of Mauritius , Roquebert declined to follow them through the dangerous gap between Île Ronde and Île du Serpent and instead sailed southwards , escaping before Hillyar and Schomberg could join up . Although Losack , supported by many crew members on board both Phoebe and Galatea , remonstrated with Hillyar for not pursuing the French , the British commander could not be persuaded and Roquebert slipped away . The British retired to Port Louis , arriving on the 12 May . 
 Roquebert 's squadron sailed westwards towards Bourbon , initially planning to raid the eastern coast of island for food supplies , as his own were running low . Although the British garrison in the eastern part of the island was weak , the plan was thwarted by heavy surf on the landing beaches and Roquebert continued eastwards on half rations , reaching Tamatave in Madagascar on 19 May . The British garrison at Tamatave , 100 men of the 22nd Regiment of Foot , were afflicted with malaria and surrendered without contesting the town , where the French squadron gathered water and food supplies . 
 When Hillyar 's squadron arrived at Port Louis , Captain Schomberg immediately assumed command and led the squadron out again on 14 May , following the French eastwards . Heading straight for Tamatave , the only resupply point between Bourbon and the Cape of Good Hope , Schomberg rapidly gained on the French and when dawn broke on 20 May the French were within sight off the harbour . During the day , both commanders were frustrated by light winds and periods of calm in which none of the ships were able to move . Roquebert completed resupplying his ships at 12 : 00 and pulled away from the harbour in battle line , Clorinde followed by Renommée and Néréide while the British , although initially intending to form a line with Astraea at its head , gradually broke into a loose formation created by the vagaries of the wind . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Firing began at 16 : 00 , when Renommée attempted to engage Astraea at extreme range . The British returned fire , Phoebe and Galatea joining the attack as they advanced , but the long distances and slow speeds involved meant that little damage was caused by either side . The British squadron gradually drifted beyond the range of the French , Schomberg desperately but unsuccessfully attempting to turn back towards them . With the British becalmed , Roquebert 's ships began to close the distance , using the breeze to position their broadsides close to the sterns of the British ships . From this position the French were able to unleash a destructive raking fire , Clorinde concentrating on Phoebe and Renommée on Galatea . The rearmost ship , Néréide , was unable to manoeuvre successfully in the light winds and remained beyond the effective range of Astraea and Racehorse , despite an ineffectual cannonade in her direction . 
 Over the next two hours , Néréide advanced on Phoebe , sandwiching the British frigate between two opponents and exposing her to a destructive fire . Both squadrons had been rendered immobile by the lack of wind , and although Schomberg ordered de Rippe to use boats to tow Racehorse within range of the main engagement , the brig was still over a mile away at 18 : 30 , when the breeze picked up and Hillyar was able to advance on Néréide , engaging her at close quarters . Stranded by light winds , Renommée and Clorinde were unable to come to Lemaresquier 's assistance and in half an hour Phoebe had killed Captain Lemaresquier and inflicted such severe damage on her opponent that Néréide could no longer return fire . As Phoebe and Néréide fought , the becalmed Renommée and Clorinde concentrated their fire on Galatea , causing severe damage to Losack 's vessel . As the breeze strengthened at 19 : 00 , Renommée and Clorinde advanced on Phoebe , Losack firing on the French as they pulled away before steering his battered ship westwards and informing Schomberg that the damage was such that he could not continue in action . Continuing to the west with his rigging and masts in disarray and a distress signal flying , Losack 's ship disappeared into the growing darkness at 20 : 30 . Phoebe fell back before the French attack and joined Schomberg . 
 With the wind strengthening , Schomberg marshalled his forces and advanced on Roquebert 's squadron . The French were clustered together in support of Néréide , whose crew were attempting to make hasty repairs while the squadron limped in a northwesterly direction towards Madagascar . Following the French lights , Schomberg pursued the French in the darkness and when Clorinde lost a man overboard and stopped to rescue him at 21 : 50 , Roquebert was forced to fall back and protect his consort from being overwhelmed . Steering Renommée directly at Astraea , Roquebert opened fire at close range but was soon surrounded , with Astraea on one side , Racehorse on the other and Phoebe raking her stern . In a ferocious 25 minute engagement , Roquebert was killed and the French flagship suffered severe damage , surrendering after a shot from Racehorse ignited her mainsail . The British ships were also badly damaged : Racehorse was unable to launch a boat to take possession of Renommée due to a fallen topmast on her deck and Astraea 's boats all badly damaged by shot and leaked severely during the short row to the stricken French vessel . 
 = = Surrender at Tamatave = = 
 During the final battle of the Renommée , Saint @-@ Cricq in Clorinde had remained out of range of the British , refusing to support his commodore . When Renommée surrendered , he made all sail to the north , abandoning both Roquebert and Néréide in his attempt to escape . Although Clorinde was closely pursued by Astraea and Phoebe until 02 : 00 on 21 May , the damage they had suffered prevented them from gaining on the French ship and Clorinde eventually disappeared into the darkness . During the night Schomberg gathered Phoebe , Racehorse and Astraea , and rejoined Renommée at dawn on 21 May . A prize crew of seven men was sufficient to exercise control over the French frigate until Schomberg could remove most of the French crew and replace them with British sailors the following morning . Although Galatea was still within sight at dawn , Losack was unsure of the identity of the approaching squadron and decided to sail directly to Port Louis rather than risk combat with a superior enemy force . 
 While making repairs to his ships , particularly the battered Phoebe , and transferring prisoners from Renommée , Schomberg despatched Racehorse to Tamatave to investigate the situation at the port . De Rippe returned on 24 May and informed Schomberg that Néréide was in the harbour and the town was in the hands of a French garrison . Despite sailing directly to Tamatave , Schomberg 's ships were delayed by a gale and did not arrive until the afternoon of 25 May . Aware that no one in the British squadron had intimate knowledge of the coral reefs that surrounded the entrance to the bay and thus that he was poorly positioned to attack the French if they chose to resist him , Schomberg sent Racehorse into the harbour under a flag of truce . De Rippe presented the French commander , Lieutenant François Ponée , with a demand for surrender , the demand falsely stating that " Renommée and Clorinde have struck after a brave defence " . Ponée refused , instead proposing that the ship 's crew and the garrison of Tamatave be repatriated to France without conditions if the frigate , town and a 12 – gun battery were surrendered to Schomberg 's squadron . Schomberg accepted Ponée 's proposal and Tamatave and Néréide were surrendered without further conflict . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Clorinde had been almost undamaged in the battle and comfortably outran all British pursuit . Without a safe harbour in the entire Indian Ocean , Saint @-@ Criq initially sailed for the Seychelles , hiding among the islands until 7 June . On 26 June , Clorinde landed at Diego Garcia and collected fresh water and coconuts before beginning the return journey to France in defiance of the orders to continue on to Batavia issued before the convoy left Brest . On 1 August , Clorinde passed the Cape of Good Hope , Saint @-@ Criq supplementing his provisions by raiding British and American merchant ships in the Atlantic . On 24 September , Clorinde encountered the British blockade squadron off Brest and was chased by the 80 – gun ship of the line HMS Tonnant under Captain Sir John Gore . Although Tonnant came close enough to Clorinde to discharge her broadside at the frigate , Gore was unable to catch the elusive French ship and was eventually forced to retire to open waters after coming under fire from batteries at Pointe <unk> . By 17 : 00 , Clorinde was anchored in Brest harbour . Saint @-@ Criq was heavily criticised for his failure to support Roquebert and for ignoring his orders to sail to Batavia if Mauritius had been captured . In March 1812 , he was brought to a court martial to examine his behaviour and found to have been negligent in his duty , for which he was dismissed from the service , expelled from the legion of Honour and sentenced to three years imprisonment . Napoleon is reported to have suggested that Saint @-@ Criq be shot for deserting his commanding officer . 
 There were also recriminations among the British squadron , Schomberg praising Astraea and Phoebe but omitting Racehorse and Galatea from the recommendations in his post @-@ battle report . Captain Losack was particularly offended as Schomberg had implied that Galatea 's distress signal was an overreaction in the face of the enemy , despite her casualties being greater than the rest of the squadron combined . He subsequently requested a court martial to clear any suggestion of cowardice from his name but the Admiralty refused , commenting that they were fully satisfied with his conduct . Historian William James claims that opinion within the Navy was also with Losack and that Schomberg had been excessively harsh in his criticism . 
 Due to the variable winds of 20 May , some ships were more heavily engaged than others and as a result the casualties in the action were unevenly spread . According to the French account of the battle , Renommée suffered 93 killed and wounded , including Commodore Roquebert dead and the first lieutenant and commander of the troops on board both badly wounded , although British accounts give a figure of 145 casualties . The French accounts also demonstrate that Néréide had suffered severely , losing 25 dead including Captain Lemaresquier and 32 wounded ( again the British accounts differ , stating that she suffered 130 casualties ) . Clorinde , which had caused severe damage to Galatea while the British ship was immobile but had failed to support Renommée against Schomberg , lost just one man killed and six wounded . British losses were less severe , although still significant , Galatea losing 16 and 46 wounded , Phoebe seven dead and 24 wounded and Astraea two dead and 16 wounded . Racehorse , despite being badly damaged in her masts and rigging , reportedly suffered no casualties . 
 The captured ships were both purchased into the Royal Navy and recommissioned , Renommée becoming HMS Java and Néréide becoming HMS Madagascar . Nearly four decades later the battle was among the actions recognised by a clasp attached to the Naval General Service Medal , awarded upon application to all British participants still living in 1847 . The action marked the end of the final French attempt to operate in the Indian Ocean during the Napoleonic Wars : with their bases now in British hands , any deployment to the region would require a significant quantity of ships and supplies at a time when France was unable to even protect the entrances to her principal harbours , as Clorinde 's brush with Tonnant had demonstrated . The action also ended the threat to British merchant ships , especially the large East Indiamen , from attack in the Indian Ocean and the requirement for a significant Royal Navy presence in the region . With the exception of a few small Dutch ports in the East Indies , the world east of the Cape of Good Hope was now either under British control or in the hands of neutral powers and Britain 's allies . 
 = = Order of battle = = 
 Key 
 A † symbol indicates that the officer was killed during the action or subsequently died of wounds received . 
 The ships are ordered in the sequence in which they formed up for battle . 
 = British Royal Navy , = 
 French Navy . 
 = Taunton Unitarian Chapel = 
 Taunton Unitarian Chapel is on Mary Street , Taunton , Somerset , England . It was built in the early 18th century as a Baptist chapel , but later adopted Unitarianism . The exterior was extensively renovated in the 19th century in an Italianate style . The chapel has been designated as a Grade II * listed building . 
 Despite suffering significant persecution from their peers and the state , Baptists erected their first chapel in Taunton in 1670 , on or near the current site . This was replaced in 1712 with the building that still stands today . During the 18th century , probably during the ministry of Joseph Jeffries , the chapel 's form of worship became Unitarian , although this was forbidden by Parliament until 1813 . The Presbyterians of Taunton merged with the Unitarian church in 1814 , and later that century the chapel underwent significant renovation . 
 In the early 21st century a range of structural and decorative restoration works were carried out on the building , which continues to serve the Taunton congregation , who meet for services twice a month at the chapel . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Baptist Meeting House = = = 
 After the English Reformation of the 16th century , an increasing number of people were unhappy with the control that the government and monarch had over the Church of England . This led to the formation of independent churches and schools by what are known as Dissenters . The worship of any faith other than Anglicanism was illegal , and those discovered taking part were arrested and even sentenced to death . Oliver Cromwell imposed a period of religious tolerance , but his death precipitated further persecution of Dissenters , principally through the Act of Uniformity 1549 , which required the use of the Book of Common Prayer as the only legal form of worship in England . The South West of England in general , and Taunton specifically , had a significant Dissenter population . There was a Baptist community in the town by 1646 , and despite continued persecution they erected their first Meeting House in Taunton , on Mary Street in 1670 . 
 The 1672 Royal Declaration of Indulgence was issued by Charles II in an attempt to introduce greater religious freedom , and within Somerset , 82 places applied for licences to meet and worship , 22 of them for Baptists . However , the Declaration was withdrawn at the urging of Parliament the following year . This led to further hostilities toward Dissenters , which were heightened after the failed Monmouth rebellion , in which a large number of Dissenters fought against the King 's forces . After the Glorious Revolution removed James II , his successor William III introduced the Act of Toleration 1689 , which specifically allowed nonconformist worship . 
 By 1721 , the Baptist community in Taunton had grown large , and reasonably affluent . They built a new chapel , funded entirely by the congregation , very near to the site of the original Meeting House . The pastor of the church at the time was Joseph Jeffries , and during his ministry the church transitioned from a Baptist church to Unitarianism . 
 = = = Unitarian Chapel = = = 
 In his history of Taunton , Joshua Toulmin suggested that the church adopted Unitarian worship in 1722 . This form of worship remained outlawed , as the Act of Toleration did not extend to <unk> . Unitarianism believed in the " One God and Father of all " , rather than the Trinity of God as three consubstantial persons . Writing a series on " Baptists in Taunton " for the Taunton Courier , H. J. Channon disagreed , placing the change in 1733 . Both agreed that the zeal with which Jeffries preached helped to swell his congregation , although a history of the Baptist church in Wellington notes that Jeffries was obstructive regarding a Baptist church being built in that town . Toulmin himself served as the pastor of the chapel from 1764 until 1803 , during which time he " experienced <unk> insult and misrepresentation . " At one time , an effigy was burned at his door , and it was said that Toulmin could have suffered the same fate , but for assistance from his friends . During Toulmin 's ministry , the poet Samuel Taylor Coleridge occasionally preached at the chapel while staying at Coleridge Cottage in Nether Stowey . In a letter , Coleridge wrote , " I walked into Taunton ( eleven miles ) and back again , and performed the divine services for Dr. Toulmin . " The Doctrine of the Trinity Act 1813 legalised Unitarian worship . 
 In 1814 , a Calvinistic Baptist group was formed in Taunton , and the following year they built a church on Silver Street . In the same year , the Presbyterians in Taunton found themselves homeless ; having previously met in chapels on Paul Street and then Tancred Street , the " ruinous condition " of their meeting house led them to abandon it , and they merged into the Unitarian congregation under the ministry of Henry Davies . Upon this merger , the congregation included " a few of the most influential inhabitants of the town " , and the chapel was so full that " children had to sit on the stairs . " An organ was added to the chapel in 1826 , and at the same time , the building renovated and " beautified " at a cost of £ 600 . The chapel was closed for a few months in 1881 , when the building was renovated . At this time , the stucco frontage was added to the building , and a number of internal alterations were made . The building had formerly had two entrance doors , but these were replaced with one central doorway . The Unitarians provided a free school for poor children in Taunton , and were the first in the town to offer this service equally for girls and boys . In 1886 , the Mary Street Memorial Schools were built next to the chapel , replacing a smaller school that had previously stood there . The schools , funded by John Collins Odgers were dedicated to the memory of Odgers late wife , and her father , William Arthur Jones , who had been a pastor of the Taunton chapel . The school was run under the care of the trustees of the Unitarian chapel until it was closed in 1933 during a reorganisation of education in Taunton . The school building was also used by the Unitarians for their Sunday school , and as a function hall for lectures and meetings . 
 The building underwent a series of repairs and redecoration , carried out by the Steel Coleman Davis Partnership in the early 21st century . These included a significant structural repair , as the main supporting roof truss was badly damaged . The frontage was also upgraded to withstand the weathering effects of being north @-@ facing , and the damage caused by being so close to the road . Services continue to be held at the Unitarian Chapel , and as of March 2015 , are held twice a month , on the first and third Sundays of each month . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The Unitarian Chapel retains much of its original interior , including square Corinthian columns , Oak galleries and a carved wooden pulpit . A large brass chandelier was donated to the chapel later in the 18th century by Nathaniel Webb , one the town 's members of parliament . In 1881 , the building 's frontage was decorated with stucco to an Italianate style . Each floor is split by a number of Corinthian pilasters , and the doorway is framed by two pairs of similar identical pilasters , and topped by a triangular pediment . On the ground floor , there are four round @-@ headed windows , while the first floor has five round @-@ headed window bays , though the outer pairs are blocked . It was designated as a Grade II * listed building in 1952 . 
 = New York State Route 38A = 
 New York State Route 38A ( NY 38A ) is a north – south state highway located within Onondaga and Cayuga Counties in central New York in the United States . The southern terminus of the route is at an intersection with NY 38 in the village of Moravia . Its northern terminus is at a junction with U.S. Route 20 ( US 20 ) and NY 5 in downtown Auburn . Much of NY 38A runs through rural , undeveloped areas situated between Owasco Lake and Skaneateles Lake . 
 The southern half of NY 38A was originally designated as part of NY 26 in 1924 . In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , NY 26 was broken up into several routes , including NY 38A , a new route assigned to NY 26 's former alignment between Moravia and Skaneateles and a previously unnumbered highway from Skaneateles to Auburn . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 38A begins at an intersection with NY 38 in the village of Moravia . It proceeds east out of the village on East Cayuga Street and follows it to the vicinity of St. Patrick 's Cemetery , where NY 38A turns to follow Decker Creek northward through a valley surrounding the creek . While in the valley , NY 38A passes through mostly undeveloped areas of the towns of Moravia and Niles . At Globe Hotel Corners , an extremely small hamlet just north of the Niles town line , NY 38A begins to parallel NY 41A , which runs roughly 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) to the east of NY 38A along the top of the valley . 
 Approximately 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) north of Globe Hotel Corners , NY 38A turns to follow a more northwesterly routing , matching the curvature of the river valley . The valley ends at the Cayuga – Onondaga County line , where NY 38A enters an area of flats situated in between Owasco Lake and Skaneateles Lake . Here , NY 38A intersects NY 359 , a short highway leading to NY 41A . NY 38A bears west here , traveling to the south of the Dutch Hollow Country Club as it reenters Cayuga County . 
 The route proceeds west into the town of Owasco and the hamlet of the same name within , the first community of any significant size along the route since it left Moravia . It heads westward through the center of the community before reentering rural surroundings and coming within view of Owasco Lake . The route curves northward at the waterbody and follows the eastern shore of Owasco Lake toward Auburn . Southeast of Auburn , NY 38A crosses a small stream and serves the Lakeview Golf and Country Club and the Owasco Country Club as it curves westward around the northern end of the lake . 
 At Emerson Park , a public park situated near the midpoint of the northern lakeshore , the highway turns back to the north to access Melrose Park , a community built up just north of the lake around the Owasco Outlet . Here , NY 38A meets NY 437 , a short connector highway linking NY 38A to its parent , NY 38 . North of Melrose Park , the route becomes known as Owasco Street as it follows the Owasco Outlet into the city of Auburn . At the city line , ownership and maintenance of the route shifts from the New York State Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) to Auburn . The route heads northeastward through the densely populated city to Walnut Street , where it splits into a one @-@ way couplet along Fulton Street ( northbound ) and John and Owasco Streets ( southbound ) . One block to the north , NY 38A intersects US 20 at Genesee Street . US 20 joins NY 38A for one block to the Auburn Arterial ( NY 5 ) , where NY 38A comes to an end . 
 = = History = = 
 When the first set of posted routes in New York were assigned in 1924 , the segment of modern NY 38A between its southern terminus in Moravia and NY 359 in Skaneateles was designated as part of NY 26 , a north – south highway extending from Ithaca to Syracuse . In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , NY 26 was split into several routes . From Dryden to Moravia , NY 26 became part of NY 38 . Between Moravia and modern NY 359 , it became the southern half of the new NY 38A , an alternate route of NY 38 around the east side of Owasco Lake that continued from the current NY 359 junction to Auburn by way of a previously unnumbered roadway . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = George Hoey = 
 George William Hoey ( born November 14 , 1946 ) is a former American football defensive back , punt returner and kickoff returner . He played college football for the University of Michigan Wolverines ( 1966 – 1968 ) and professionally in the National Football League ( NFL ) for the Arizona Cardinals ( 1971 ) , New England Patriots ( 1972 – 1973 ) , San Diego Chargers ( 1974 ) , Denver Broncos ( 1975 ) , and New York Jets ( 1975 ) . 
 In high school , Hoey was an All @-@ State halfback . At the University of Michigan , College Football Hall of Fame halfback Ron Johnson was in Hoey 's class , and Hoey was therefore used principally as a defensive back . Hoey is most remembered for his work as a punt returner at Michigan . He led the Big Ten Conference in punt return yards in 1967 and 1968 , and still holds Michigan 's modern era ( post @-@ 1949 ) records for most punt return yards in a game ( 140 ) , most return yards per punt in a season ( 24 @.@ 3 ) and most return yards per punt in a career ( 17 @.@ 1 ) . Hoey was also a record @-@ setting sprinter on Michigan 's track and field team . 
 In five seasons in the NFL , Hoey was principally a kickoff returner . In 1971 , he set a St. Louis Cardinals club record with six kickoff returns for 206 yards , including one for 103 yards and a touchdown . He had 534 kickoff return yards in his career . 
 Since 1993 , Hoey has worked in administration at the University of Colorado . He worked first in academic services for the athletic department . After controversies in the late 1990s concerning eligibility of University of Colorado athletes , Hoey accepted a position in the school 's career services department providing career counseling to student athletes . 
 = = High school athlete at Flint Central = = 
 Hoey was born in Gaffney , South Carolina . He moved with his family from South Carolina to Flint , Michigan at age 13 . At Flint Central High School , he excelled in both football and track . When No. 1 ranked Flint Central met No. 2 ranked Bay City Central in 1963 , it was billed as the " Game of the Year . " Flint Central won the game 25 – 18 , as Hoey ( then only a junior ) scored three touchdowns , including a 63 @-@ yard punt return for a touchdown , and a pass interception that Hoey ran back 35 yards for a touchdown on the final play of the game . As a senior in 1964 , Hoey was named an All @-@ State halfback by The Detroit News and UPI . In naming him to its All @-@ State team , the UPI noted : " Hoey , a 5 @-@ foot @-@ 10 , 165 @-@ pounder , gained 502 yards in 64 carries and caught 17 passes . He scored 11 touchdowns to lead the Saginaw Valley Conference for the second straight year . A great broken @-@ field runner , he has scored eight touchdowns on kickoff or punt returns during his two @-@ year stint with the varsity . " He also led the Saginaw Valley Conference in scoring for two seasons . On his high school track team , Hoey won the 60 @-@ yard dash at the Central Michigan Relays Invitational indoor meet with a time of 6 @.@ 3 seconds . He was All @-@ State in track at the 1965 Michigan High School Athletic Association Class A track meet . 
 = = University of Michigan track and football star = = 
 In 1965 , Hoey became the first African @-@ American athlete from Flint to earn a University of Michigan scholarship . At Michigan , Hoey excelled in both football and track . In track , Hoey set a 60 @-@ yard dash record with a time of 6 @.@ 1 in 1966 . He was a member of the Wolverines ' record @-@ setting 4 x 100 metres relay with a time of 40 @.@ 6 . In football , Hoey did not make the team as a halfback , having the misfortune to be in the same class as College Football Hall of Famer Ron Johnson . He started only three games at halfback during his time at Michigan ( and one at fullback ) . With Ron Johnson playing halfback , Hoey was used principally as a defensive back and punt returner . Playing against Navy in 1968 , Hoey had two interceptions which he returned for 31 yards , and punt returns of 63 and 36 yards . He was named an All @-@ Big Ten defensive back in 1968 . 
 = = = Punt return records at Michigan = = = 
 Though he was also an All @-@ Big Ten defensive back , Hoey is most remembered as one of the leading punt returners in Michigan history . He led the Big Ten in punt return yards in 1967 and 1968 , and holds several Michigan school records for punt returns , including most return yards in a game and most yards per return in a season and a career . 
 = = = = Most yards in a game = = = = 
 On October 28 , 1967 , Hoey gained 140 yards on four punt returns against Minnesota — still Michigan 's single @-@ game record for punt return yardage . Hoey and Steve <unk> are the only two Michigan players with two games in the top ten single @-@ game performances by a Michigan punt returner . 
 = = = = Most yards per return in a season = = = = 
 Hoey also holds the modern ( post @-@ 1949 ) Michigan school record for yards per return in a season . His 1967 average of 24 @.@ 3 yards / return exceeds any other modern Michigan punt returner by more than eight yards per return ( minimum 1 @.@ 2 return per team game played ) . Hoey 's 1967 average ranks sixth in NCAA Division I @-@ A history behind the all @-@ time Michigan leader Gene Derricotte who ranks fifth . However , the Michigan record books base single @-@ season leadership based upon minimum 15 returns per game and Hoey 's name is omitted . 
 N.B. : The database used here includes stats since 1949 . Totals before 1949 are not included here ; for example , Gene Derricotte averaged over 24 yards per return prior to 1949 . 
 = = = = Most yards per return in a career = = = = 
 Hoey also holds the Michigan school record for punt return yards per return in a career with an average of 17 @.@ 1 yards per return . 
 = = NFL football player = = 
 Hoey was selected by the Detroit Lions in the 14th round of the 1969 NFL Draft . He played five seasons in the NFL for the St. Louis Cardinals ( 1971 ) , New England Patriots ( 1972 – 1973 ) , San Diego Chargers ( 1974 ) , Denver Broncos ( 1975 ) and New York Jets ( 1975 ) . Hoey played in 53 NFL games and had four punt returns for 38 return yards , 21 kickoff returns for 534 return yards , and two interceptions for 45 return yards . He set a Cardinals club record with six kickoff returns for 206 yards , one for 103 yards and a touchdown against the Philadelphia Eagles . The club record for longest return was broken in 1979 by Roy Green , who posted a 106 @-@ yard return . Hoey had the misfortune of playing with losing teams throughout his NFL career . The best team that he played for was the 1975 Denver Broncos , who recorded a 6 – 8 record . 
 = = Professional career at the University of Colorado = = 
 For many years , Hoey has worked in various capacities at the University of Colorado . From 1993 – 1999 , Hoey was involved in academic services in Colorado 's athletic department . Hoey " came under fire for repeated eligibility problems of prospective CU athletes , " including linebacker <unk> Jones who lost a year of eligibility and was forced to sit out the 1999 NCAA Division I @-@ A football season due to an error in calculating his transfer credits . In 1999 , Hoey transferred out of the athletic department and began working in the university 's career services department . That October , Jones told The Denver Post that Hoey " wasn 't necessarily a scapegoat , but there were definitely mistakes made in his department . " The eligibility issues arose after Rick Neuheisel departed as Colorado 's head football coach and were part of broader problems that resulted in the school 's being placed on two years ' probation for 53 rules violations , 51 occurring while Neuheisel was the Colorado coach . 
 In 2004 , the Colorado Daily reported that Hoey was a career counselor working with student athletes to help them prepare for their future careers . Hoey noted : " Student @-@ athletes are consumed with stuff when they first enter college . I plant seeds that will hopefully lead them towards our department and many resources . " In May 2007 , Hoey was the University of Colorado 's career development coordinator and a co @-@ chair of the Black Faculty / Staff Association , and the Virginia Patterson Chapter of Mortar Board Honors Society at the University of Colorado honored Hoey for his efforts to educate students . 
 = = Family and honors = = 
 Herb Washington , former Oakland A and world @-@ class sprinter , is Hoey 's cousin . Hoey has two sons , William and Sean . He was inducted into the Greater Flint Afro @-@ American Hall of Fame in 2001 , and he was inducted into the Greater Flint Area Sports Hall of Fame in 2003 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = Ontario Highway 23 = 
 King 's Highway 23 , commonly referred to as Highway 23 , is a provincially maintained highway in the Canadian province of Ontario . The route travels from Highway 7 east of Elginfield north to Highway 9 and Highway 89 in Harriston . The total length of Highway 23 is 97 @.@ 7 kilometres ( 60 @.@ 7 miles ) . The highway was first established in 1927 between Highway 8 in Mitchell and Highway 9 in Teviotdale , via Monkton , Listowel and Palmerston . As part of a depression relief program , it was extended south to Highway 7 in 1934 . It remained relatively unchanged until 2003 , when it was rerouted northward from Palmerston to Harriston . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Highway 23 begins at Highway 7 , east of Elginfield , a community straddling the boundary between the municipalities of Middlesex Centre and Lucan Biddulph . The route travels north through the latter , surrounded on both sides by farmland . At Whalen Corners , the highway curves northeast as it exits Middlesex County , becoming the boundary road between Huron County to the west and Perth County to the east . The highway passes through the communities of Woodham and Kirkton , crossing completely into Perth County just north of the latter . It later enters <unk> , meeting the eastern terminus of former Highway 83 ( County Road 83 ) as it swerves north . Approximately 9 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 6 mi ) beyond there it enters the town of Mitchell , where it is known as Blanchard Street . The route intersects Highway 8 ( Huron Street ) , and becomes concurrent with it briefly to cross the North Thames River before branching back northeast along St. George Street . Midway between Mitchell and the village of Monkton , the highway bisects the community of Bornholm within the municipality of West Perth . Prior to entering Monkton , Highway 23 curves gently towards the southeast ; In the middle of the village , drivers must turn at an intersection with Perth County Road 55 to remain on Highway 23 . 
 Continuing its northeasterly course , the highway passes through more farmland , now within the town of North Perth , and serves the communities of Newry and Atwood before encountering former Highway 86 ( County Road 86 ) on the western edge of Listowel . South of this intersection , the route is known locally as Mitchell Road South . It turns southeast onto Main Street West , where it once travelled concurrently with Highway 86 before turning northeast onto Wallace Avenue North . The final leg of the route passes through the village of <unk> . The route gently curves to the east before turning north at an intersection just west of Palmerston , where it crosses the boundary into Wellington County and the Town of Minto . Eight kilometres ( 5 miles ) north of the intersection , Highway 23 encounters the western terminus of former Highway 87 ( County Road 87 ) , where it turns east then northeast . The route enters Harriston , where it is locally known as Arthur Street . The Highway 23 designation ends at a junction with Highway 9 and Wellington County Road 109 ( formerly a segment of Highway 9 ) , locally known as Elora Street . The road continues beyond the junction as Highway 89 . 
 = = History = = 
 Highway 23 was first established on June 22 , 1927 , when the Department of Highways assumed the road from Mitchell to Teviotdale through Perth and Wellington counties , via Monkton , Listowel and Palmerston , connecting Highway 8 and Highway 9 . As part of depression relief work undertaken by the department during the early 1930s , Highway 23 was extended from Highway 8 to Highway 7 east of Elginfield on July 11 , 1934 . Highway 23 remained unaltered between 1934 and 1998 . On January 1 , 1998 , the section from the Highway 89 junction west of Palmerston to Highway 9 in Teviotdale was decommissioned , resulting in the northern terminus of Highway 23 becoming the western terminus of Highway 89 . During the spring of 2003 , the segment of Highway 89 between this junction and Harriston was renumbered as Highway 23 , resulting in the current routing . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The following table lists the major junctions along Highway 23 , as noted by the Ministry of Transportation of Ontario . 
 = Brownimecia = 
 Brownimecia is an extinct genus of ants , the only genus in the tribe <unk> and subfamily <unk> of the Formicidae . Fossils of the single identified species , Brownimecia clavata , are known from the Middle Cretaceous of North America . The genus is one of several ants described from Middle Cretaceous <unk> of New Jersey . Brownimecia was initially placed in the subfamily Ponerinae , until it was transferred to its own subfamily in 2003 ; it can be distinguished from other ants due to its unusual sickle @-@ like mandibles and other morphological features that makes this ant unique among the Formicidae . The ant is also small , measuring 3 @.@ 43 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 135 in ) , and a stinger is present in almost all of the specimens collected . The morphology of the mandibles suggest a high level of feeding specialization . 
 = = History and classification = = 
 Brownimecia is known from three adult fossils : the holotype — specimen number AMNH NJ @-@ 667 — collected by Yale Goldman ; the paratype ; and a third described in 2005 . At the time of the genus description , the type specimens were residing in the American Museum of Natural History , in New York City . All the described specimens are worker caste adult females which have been preserved as inclusions in transparent chunks of New Jersey amber . The amber specimens were recovered from deposits of the South Amboy Fire Clay , part of the Raritan Formation . New Jersey amber has been dated to approximately 90 to 94 mya , placing it in the Turonian of the Late Cretaceous . Analysis of the amber composition indicates it originated as <unk> resins which were deposited in lagoons and salt water marshes along the Cretaceous eastern seaboard . Brownimecia clavata is one of several ant species described from New Jersey amber , the others being Sphecomyrma freyi , Sphecomyrma mesaki , <unk> <unk> , and <unk> <unk> . 
 The type fossils were first studied by <unk> David Grimaldi , Donat <unk> , and James Carpenter of the American Museum . The team 's 1997 type description of the new genus and species was published in the journal American Museum Novitates . The genus name was coined by them as a patronym honoring the ant <unk> William L. Brown , Jr. who co @-@ described the first Cretaceous ant genus and species Sphecomyrma freyi . The specific epithet clavata was chosen as a reference to the distinctive clubbed antennae seen in the workers . Grimaldi , <unk> , and Carpenter placed the new genus into the extant ant subfamily Ponerinae , without tribal assignment , based on a slight constriction of the gaster . They also noted several features that are shared with ants of the <unk> group , then a part of Ponerinae . The workers have genal spurs on the lower edge area under the small compound eyes . Workers also have narrow long mandibles , as do some <unk> genera . Placement in Ponerinae was unchanged until a revision of the subfamily was published in 2003 by myrmecologist Barry Bolton . In that paper the subfamily was shown to be a <unk> grouping and many of the included genera were moved to separate subfamilies , including the <unk> and Brownimecia . Due to the unique combination of morphological features found in Brownimecia , Bolton erected the new subfamily <unk> for the genus . Bolton notes that its sickle @-@ like mandibles which lack teeth are not usual for ants and are often associated with <unk> , or slave @-@ making , behavior in extant genera . In contrast to stem group ants such as the sphecomyrmines , the scapes of Brownimecia workers are more elongated like those of crown group ants . In his 2007 phylogenetic examination of Formicidae , entomologist Philip Ward notes the possibility that Brownimecia is a crown group genus and placed the subfamily into the informal " <unk> " grouping in his <unk> . 
 = = Description = = 
 Both the Brownimecia holotype worker and the 2005 worker are complete and fully preserved in curled positions and have their stings extended . The paratype worker is very incomplete ; the amber in which it is encased is highly likely to have been at least partly tumble polished in a rock causing the ant to be exposed and portions of the head , left antenna , mid legs , hind legs , and all of the right antennae and forelegs are gone . The exposure allowed the interior cavity of the fossil to be examined under scanning electron microscope after being coated in a layer of gold . 
 The holotype has an overall body length of approximately 3 @.@ 43 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 135 in ) with finely scattered setae on all parts except the notum and propodeum . The head is large with small rounded compound eyes comprised of about one hundred ommatidia . The holotype does not clearly show whether the ocelli are present or absent , but they are clearly absent in the 2005 specimen . The mandibles are scimitar @-@ shaped with no teeth present on the interior sides and almost the length of the head . The mandibles cross each other near their mid @-@ length and the oral surfaces bear approximately thirty short needle @-@ like setae . The clypeus is short but wide , crossing almost the whole width of the head . Perpendicular crenelations run along the upper margin of the clypeus on the 2005 specimen . The <unk> have a distinct tooth @-@ like structure on the lower sides . The eleven segmented antennae are distinct in having a definite clubbed tip , a feature not seen in any other described Cretaceous ants . The apical flagellomere segment is nearly twice the width of the other segments , while the third to the sixth segments are the shortest and the second flagellomere is slightly swollen . 
 The metathoracic spiracles are raised on small cones projecting from the alitrunk , while the metapleural gland orifices are not notably raised , having a ridge leading to them . All of the alitrunk gland and spiracle <unk> are to some degree obscured on the holotype by <unk> of bubbles that escaped them soon after the worker was entombed in the sap . The petiole top forms a pointed apex instead of a more rounded dome . There is a covering of fine <unk> hairs on the petiole and a pair of small setae are situated near the apex . At the front of the petiole there is a narrow attachment area to the <unk> , while the rear is flared into a large attachment to the gaster . The <unk> , a small exoskeleton plate between the petiole and gaster , is developed and shows crenelations on the rear edge . There is a small but distinct constriction between the first and second segments of the gaster . Both the holotype and 2005 specimens have a fully preserved gaster tip showing the extended sting , while the paratype is missing the tip area . 
 Due to the unusual morphology of the mandibles , scientists have suggested that Brownimecia may have had a high level of feeding specialization . 
 = One Tree Hill ( song ) = 
 " One Tree Hill " is a song by the rock band U2 and the ninth track on their 1987 album The Joshua Tree . In March 1988 , it was released as the fourth single from the album in New Zealand and Australia , while " In God 's Country " was released as the fourth single in North America . The release charted at number one on the New Zealand Singles Chart . 
 The track was written in memory of Greg Carroll , a Māori man the band first met in Auckland during the Unforgettable Fire Tour in 1984 . He became very close friends with lead singer Bono and later served as a roadie for the group . Carroll was killed in July 1986 in a motorcycle accident in Dublin . Following the tangi ( funeral ) in New Zealand , Bono wrote the lyrics to " One Tree Hill " in Carroll 's memory . The lyrics reflect Bono 's thoughts at the tangi and during his first night in New Zealand when Carroll took him up Auckland 's One Tree Hill . They also pay homage to Chilean singer @-@ songwriter and activist Víctor Jara . Musically , the song was developed in a jam session with producer Brian Eno . The vocals were recorded in a single take , as Bono felt incapable of singing them a second time . 
 " One Tree Hill " was received favourably by critics , who variously described it as " a soft , haunting benediction " , " a remarkable musical centrepiece " , and a celebration of life . U2 delayed performing the song on the Joshua Tree Tour in 1987 because of Bono 's fears over his emotional state . After its live debut on the tour 's third leg and an enthusiastic reaction from audiences , the song was played occasionally for the rest of the tour and semi @-@ regularly during the Lovetown Tour of 1989 – 1990 . It has appeared only sporadically since then , and most renditions were performed in New Zealand . Performances in November 2010 on the U2 360 ° Tour were dedicated to the miners who died in the Pike River Mine disaster . 
 = = Inspiration , writing , and recording = = 
 U2 first visited Australia and New Zealand in 1984 to open The Unforgettable Fire Tour . After a 24 @-@ hour flight into Auckland , lead singer Bono was unable to adjust to the time difference between New Zealand and Europe . He left his hotel room during the night and met some people who showed him around the city . Greg Carroll was part of that group : he had met U2 's production manager Steve Iredale and been offered a job helping the band for their upcoming concert on account of Greg 's experience with local rock bands . They ended up taking Bono up One Tree Hill ( <unk> ) , one of the highest - and more spiritually significant to Māori people - of Auckland 's largest volcanoes . Greg worked as a stage hand gently stopping people getting on stage , and was described as " this very helpful fellah running around the place " . U2 's manager Paul McGuinness thought Carroll was so helpful that he should accompany the band for the remainder of the tour . The group helped him obtain a passport , and he subsequently joined them on the road in Australia and the United States as their assistant . He became very close friends with Bono and his wife Ali Hewson , and following the conclusion of the tour , he worked for U2 in Dublin . 
 On 3 July 1986 , just before the start of the recording sessions for The Joshua Tree , Carroll was killed in a motorcycle accident while on a courier run . A car had pulled in front of him , and unable to stop in the rain , Carroll struck the side of the car and was killed instantly . The event shocked the entire band ; drummer Larry Mullen , Jr. said , " his death really rocked us – it was the first time anyone in our working circle had been killed . " Guitarist the Edge said , " Greg was like a member of the family , but the fact that he had come under our wing and had travelled so far from home to be in Dublin to work with us made it all the more difficult to deal with . " Bassist Adam Clayton described it as " a very sobering moment " , saying , " it inspired the awareness that there are more important things than rock ' n ' roll . That your family , your friends and indeed the other members of the band – you don 't know how much time you 've got left with them . " Bono said , " it was a devastating blow . He was doing me a favour . He was taking my bike home . " He later commented , " it brought gravitas to the recording of The Joshua Tree . We had to fill the hole in our heart with something very , very large indeed , we loved him so much . " Accompanied by Bono , Ali , Mullen , and other members of the U2 organisation , Carroll 's body was flown back to New Zealand and buried in the traditional Māori manner at Kai @-@ iwi Marae near Whanganui , Carroll 's hometown . Bono sang " Let It Be " and " Knockin ' on Heaven 's Door " for him at the funeral . 
 Shortly after returning to Dublin , Bono wrote lyrics for a song about the funeral that he titled " One Tree Hill " after the hill he remembered from his visit to Auckland in 1984 . The music was developed early in the recording sessions for The Joshua Tree . The Edge said , " We were jamming with Brian [ Eno ] . He was playing keyboards ... we just got this groove going , and this part began to come through . It 's almost highlife , although it 's not African at all ... the sound was for me at that time a very elaborate one . I would never have dreamt of using a sound like that before then , but it just felt right , and I went with it . " Bono recorded his vocals in a single take , as he felt that he could not sing the lyrics a second time . Three musicians from Toronto , Dick , Paul and Adele Armin , recorded string pieces for the song in Grant Avenue Studio in Hamilton , Ontario . In a six @-@ hour phone call with the Edge , and under the supervision of producer Daniel Lanois , the <unk> used " sophisticated ' electro @-@ acoustic ' string instrument [ s ] " they developed called <unk> to record a piece created for the song . Dick Armin said , " [ U2 ] were interested in using strings , but not in the conventional style of sweetening . They didn 't want a 19th @-@ century group playing behind them . " Bono found the song so emotional , he was unable to listen to it after it had been recorded . 
 In the song , Bono included the lyric : " Jara sang , his song a weapon in the hands of love / You know his blood still cries from the ground " . This refers to the Chilean political activist and folk singer Víctor Jara , who became a symbol of the resistance against the Augusto Pinochet military dictatorship after he was tortured and killed during the 1973 Chilean coup d 'état . Bono learned of Jara after meeting René Castro , a Chilean mural artist , while on Amnesty International 's A Conspiracy of Hope tour . Castro had been tortured and held in a concentration camp for two years by the military because his artwork criticised the Pinochet @-@ led regime that had seized power in 1973 during the coup . While purchasing a silkscreen of Martin Luther King , Jr. that Castro had created , Bono noticed a print of Jara . He became more familiar with him after reading Una Canción <unk> ( An Unfinished Song ) , written by Jara 's widow Joan Turner . 
 " One Tree Hill " and The Joshua Tree are dedicated to Carroll 's memory . The track was recorded by Flood and Pat McCarthy , mixed by Dave Meegan , and produced by Eno and Lanois . 
 = = Composition and theme = = 
 " One Tree Hill " runs for 5 minutes , 23 seconds . It is played in common time at a tempo of 120 beats per minute . The song begins with a highlife @-@ influenced riff by the Edge on guitar , which repeats in the background throughout the song . Percussion from drummer Larry Mullen , Jr. enters after two seconds . At 0 : 07 , a second guitar enters . At 0 : 15 , Clayton 's bass and Mullen 's drums enter , and at 0 : 31 , the verse chord progression of C – F – B ♭ – F – C is introduced . The first verse begins at 0 : 47 . At 1 : 32 , the song moves to the chorus , switching to a C – B ♭ – F – C chord progression . The second verse then begins at 1 : 49 , and after the second chorus , a brief musical interlude begins at 2 : 36 , in which the Edge 's guitar is replaced by the Raad strings . The third verse begins at 3 : 07 , and the Edge 's guitar resumes at 3 : 38 in the chorus . A guitar solo begins at 4 : 16 and is played until the instrumentation comes to a close at 4 : 36 . After two seconds of silence , the Raad strings fade in and Bono proceeds to sing the coda . The final lyric and strings fade out over the final six seconds . 
 Clayton called it part of a trilogy of songs on the album , along with " Bullet the Blue Sky " and " Mothers of the Disappeared " , that decry the involvement of the United States in the Chilean coup . McGuinness stated that the imagery in the song described the sense of tragedy felt by the band over Carroll 's death . Colm O 'Hare of Hot Press believed the Edge 's guitar riff personified the lyric " run like a river runs to the sea " . Thom Duffy of the Orlando Sentinel felt the song reflected the seduction of a lover . Richard Harrington of the Washington Post acknowledged the tribute to Carroll , adding that it demonstrated U2 's belief that music could spur change . 
 Like many other U2 songs , " One Tree Hill " can be interpreted in a religious manner . Hot Press editor Niall Stokes called it " a spiritual tour de force " , saying " it is a hymn of praise and celebration which described the traditional Māori burial of their friend on One Tree Hill and links it poetically with themes of renewal and redemption . " Beth Maynard , a Church rector from Fairhaven , Massachusetts , felt the song " vows faith in the face of loss , combining elegiac lines about a friend ... and the martyred Chilean activist and folk singer Victor Jara , with a subtle evocation of end @-@ time redemption and a wrenching wail to God to send the pentecostal Latter Rain . " Matt Soper , Senior Minister of the West Houston Church of Christ , believed the lyrics were an attempt by Bono to understand God 's place in the world . Steve Stockman , a chaplain at Queen 's University Belfast , felt that the song alluded to " transcendent places beyond the space and time of earth " . Music journalist Bill Graham noted " the lyrics , with their reference to traditional Māori burial ceremonies on One Tree Hill , indicated that the band 's faith didn 't exclude an empathy with others ' beliefs and rituals . Their Christianity wouldn 't plaster over the universal archetypes of mourning . " 
 = = Release and critical response = = 
 " One Tree Hill " was released as a 7 @-@ inch single in New Zealand and Australia in March 1988 . The cover art ( photographed by Anton Corbijn ) , sleeve ( designed by Steve Averill ) , and B @-@ sides ( " Bullet the Blue Sky " and " Running to Stand Still " ) were identical to those used for U2 's 1987 single " In God 's Country " , released only in North America . A cassette single , available only in New Zealand , was also released . The song reached number one on the New Zealand Singles Chart . " One Tree Hill " was included as a bonus track on the Japanese version of U2 's 1998 compilation album , The Best of 1980 – 1990 . The accompanying video compilation included the song 's music video , directed by Phil Joanou , which features a live performance taken from a previously unreleased cut of U2 's 1988 rockumentary Rattle and Hum . Another rendition was available on the 2004 digital live album Live from the Point Depot . 
 " One Tree Hill " was received favourably by critics . Hot Press editor Niall Stokes described it as one of U2 's best tracks , calling it a " fitting tribute " to Carroll . The Toronto Star felt it was one of the best songs on the album . Steve Morse of The Boston Globe compared Bono 's vocals at the song 's conclusion to the passion of American soul singer Otis Redding , also noting that the coda was reminiscent of the hymn " Amazing Grace " . Steve Pond of Rolling Stone called it " a soft , haunting benediction " . Bill Graham of Hot Press said the song was " hopeful , not grim " , describing the lyric " We run like a river to the sea " as " [ musician Mike Scott 's ] metaphor recast in terms of eternal life and the Maori 's own belief . " He described the Edge 's playing as " a loose @-@ limbed guitar melody with both an African and a Hawaiian tinge " , concluding by saying " despite its moving vocal coda , ' One Tree Hill ' isn 't sombre . It celebrates the life of the spirit not its extinction . " 
 Writing for The New York Times , John Rockwell felt that it was an example of U2 stretching their range , saying " the inclusion of musical idioms [ is ] never so overtly explored before on a U2 record , especially the gospel chorus of ' One Tree Hill ' " . Colin Hogg of The New Zealand Herald called it " a remarkable musical centrepiece " , believing it to be the best song on the album . Colm O 'Hare of Hot Press said it was " arguably the most poignant , emotionally @-@ charged song U2 have ever recorded . " He added that it was the " least instrumentally adorned song on the album , resplendent in a feeling of space and openness . " McGuinness called it one of his favourite U2 songs . 
 The American television drama One Tree Hill was named for the song after series creator Mark <unk> was listening to The Joshua Tree when writing the idea for the show . " One Tree Hill " was also the name of the series finale in which the song was played during the last scene of the show . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 " One Tree Hill " made its live debut on 10 September 1987 in Uniondale , New York , the opening night of the third leg of the Joshua Tree Tour , where it opened the encore . The song had been left out of the set up to this point because Bono feared he would be unable to overcome his emotions in the live setting . Despite his fears , the song received an enthusiastic reaction from the audience . It was performed a further six times and then dropped from the show for a period of two months . It was revived in the main set on 17 November 1987 in Los Angeles , California , and played a further nine times on the tour . " One Tree Hill " was played occasionally on the Lovetown Tour , appearing at 19 of 47 concerts . The penultimate performance , on 31 December 1989 , was broadcast live on radio to 21 countries throughout Europe as a New Year 's Eve present from the band . 
 " One Tree Hill " was absent during the majority of the Zoo TV Tour , only appearing as an extended snippet at the end of " One " at both concerts in New Zealand in 1993 . It did not appear again until 24 November 2006 in Auckland , New Zealand , on the final leg of the Vertigo Tour . It was considered to close the concert , but tour designer Willie Williams voiced concern as it had not been performed in full since 1990 . The song was performed before " Sometimes You Can 't Make It on Your Own " in the main set instead . U2 performed it an additional three times on the tour . " One Tree Hill " was absent for the majority of the U2 360 ° Tour but was revived in November 2010 for two concerts in New Zealand , where it was dedicated to the miners who died in the Pike River Mine disaster ; their names were displayed on the video screen during the song . Dedicating the song , Bono said , " we wrote it for Greg Carroll , whose family are with us tonight . But tonight it belongs to the miners of the West Coast Pike River . " U2 played " One Tree Hill " on 25 March 2011 , in Santiago , Chile , in a duet with Francisca Valenzuela , and they dedicated it to Victor Jara . Its final performance was on 5 July 2011 in Chicago , Illinois , where it was dedicated to Greg Carroll to commemorate the 25th anniversary of his death . 
 In 2009 , when asked about the likelihood of U2 performing the song , the Edge said , " it 's one we kind of keep for special occasions , like playing New Zealand . " Bono added , " it 's a very special song that holds inside of it a lot of strong feelings , and I don 't know if we 're afraid of it or something , but we should be playing it more . " McGuinness said that U2 found it difficult to play live . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by Bono , all music composed by U2 . 
 = = Charting = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = 2008 Japanese Grand Prix = 
 The 2008 Japanese Grand Prix ( formally the XXXIV Fuji Television Japanese Grand Prix ) was a Formula One motor race held on 12 October 2008 , at the Fuji Speedway , Oyama , Japan . It was the 16th race of the 2008 Formula One season . The 67 @-@ lap race was won by Fernando Alonso for the Renault team from fourth position on the starting grid . Robert Kubica finished second for BMW Sauber , and Kimi Räikkönen third for Ferrari . 
 Lewis Hamilton , the eventual Drivers ' Champion , led the Championship going into the race , and started from pole position alongside Räikkönen . Hamilton 's McLaren teammate Heikki Kovalainen began from third , next to Alonso . At the first corner Hamilton braked late , forcing Räikkönen wide . Hamilton was later given a penalty , and was criticised by the British racing press for <unk> driving . Ferrari driver Felipe Massa , Hamilton 's principal Championship rival , was penalised after an incident on lap two in which he touched Hamilton 's car , causing it to spin . The incident dropped Hamilton to the back of the field , from where he was unable to regain a points scoring position . Massa later collided with Sébastien Bourdais of Toro Rosso . Bourdais was penalised after the race , and demoted from sixth to tenth position . The penalty prompted widespread criticism from the racing media and ex @-@ drivers . 
 The victory was Alonso 's second consecutive win ; he started from 15th on the grid to win the Singapore Grand Prix two weeks prior . Kubica held off a determined attack from Räikkönen in the closing laps to take second place . Massa 's seventh place narrowed his gap to Hamilton in the Drivers ' Championship to five points . Ferrari established a seven @-@ point lead over the McLaren team in the Constructors ' Championship , with two races of the season remaining . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The Grand Prix was contested by 20 drivers , in ten teams of two . The teams , also known as " constructors " , were Ferrari , McLaren @-@ Mercedes , Renault , Honda , Force India , BMW Sauber , Toyota , Red Bull Racing , Williams and Toro Rosso . 
 Prior to the race , McLaren driver Lewis Hamilton led the Drivers ' Championship with 84 points , and Ferrari driver Felipe Massa was second with 77 points . Behind them in the Drivers ' Championship , Robert Kubica was third with 64 points in a BMW Sauber , and Massa 's Ferrari teammate Kimi Räikkönen was fourth with 57 points . Kubica 's teammate Nick Heidfeld was fifth with 56 points . In the Constructors ' Championship , McLaren – Mercedes were leading with 135 points , one point ahead of their rivals Ferrari , whom they had overtaken at the previous race . BMW Sauber were third with 120 points . In the battle for fourth place , Renault had 51 points , five points ahead of Toyota . 
 A botched pit stop at the Singapore Grand Prix had demoted Massa from first position to the back of field . With three races remaining in the Championship and a seven @-@ point deficit , Massa remained confident about his title chances : " If you look at what happened to me in Singapore where my gap went from one point to seven so suddenly , then you have to consider it could easily go the other way as well . " Hamilton emphasised the value that a conservative racing strategy could hold for his title chances : 
 I actually think Singapore was a good learning experience : there was less pressure to achieve a victory because of the unusual circumstances , which meant I was actually able to start thinking of the world championship . I hate driving for points , but I think we can all see the benefit of that approach at the moment . 
 Fernando Alonso 's victory at the Singapore Grand Prix was his first Formula One win since rejoining the Renault team , after driving for McLaren in 2007 . After qualifying in 15th and making an early pit stop , Alonso had managed to jump to the front of the race when his teammate Nelson Piquet Jr. crashed . Left with no opportunity to pit , the frontrunners had to delay their stops until the damage was cleared , allowing the heavily fuelled Alonso to move to the front once they did so . Though Alonso questioned whether his Renault team could match the pace of Ferrari and McLaren at Fuji , he said " We must remain focussed and try to repeat our level of performance from Singapore to fight at the front . " Renault 's technical director Bob Bell said that the team 's improvement from the start of the season was encouraging , but " we recognise that we 're not going to overhaul McLaren and Ferrari this season " . Bell said that the objective for the last races was to win more Grands Prix and , importantly , secure fourth position in the Constructors ' Championship from Toyota . 
 The Fédération Internationale de l 'Automobile ( FIA ) , the sport 's governing body , launched the Formula One component of their Make Cars Green campaign at the Japanese Grand Prix . For the weekend , the grooves in the tyres were painted green to promote environmentally friendly driving . FIA president Max Mosley said " The FIA is determined to ensure that future investment in motor sport will also help drive the development of technologies that will benefit the public at large . " As is normal for a Formula One race , Bridgestone brought two different tyre compounds to the race ; the softer of the two marked by a single white stripe down one of the grooves . 
 = = = Practice and qualifying = = = 
 Three practice sessions were held before the Sunday race — two on Friday , and a third on Saturday . The Friday morning and afternoon sessions each lasted 90 minutes . The third session was held on Saturday morning and lasted an hour . The Friday sessions were held in dry and sunny conditions . Hamilton was quickest in the first session , with a time of 1 : 18 @.@ 910 that was less than two @-@ tenths of a second faster than Massa . McLaren driver Heikki Kovalainen was just off Massa 's pace ; Räikkönen , Alonso and Piquet rounded out the top six , still within a second of Hamilton 's time . In the second practice session , Timo Glock , of Toyota , was fastest with a time of 1 : 18 @.@ 383 , ahead of Alonso , Hamilton , Massa , Räikkönen and Red Bull driver Mark Webber . The top seventeen drivers set times within a second of Glock 's fastest lap , indicating a competitive field . The Saturday morning session was held on a damp track , where grip was poor and many drivers were forced to use the run @-@ off areas after sliding off the track . Kubica was quickest with his final lap of the session at 1 : 25 @.@ 087 ; Glock , Piquet , Nick Heidfeld of BMW , Kazuki Nakajima of Williams , Red Bull driver David Coulthard , and Massa rounded out the top seven positions . Hamilton managed only eleventh , but was ahead of Kovalainen and Räikkönen , in 16th and 17th positions , respectively . Both Adrian Sutil and Giancarlo Fisichella of Force India spent most of the session in their garage , suffering numerous mechanical problems . 
 The qualifying session on Saturday afternoon was split into three parts . The first part ran for 20 minutes , and cars that finished the session 16th or lower were eliminated from qualifying . The second part of qualifying lasted 15 minutes and eliminated cars that finished in positions 11 to 15 . The final part of qualifying determined the positions from first to tenth , and decided pole position . Cars which failed to make the final session could refuel before the race , so ran lighter in those sessions . Cars which competed in the final session of qualifying were not allowed to refuel before the race , and as such carried more fuel than in the previous sessions . 
 Hamilton clinched his sixth pole position of the season with a lap time of 1 : 18 @.@ 404 . He was joined on the front row by Räikkönen , who was fastest for most of the final session . Provisionally sitting in third as the session drew to a close , Massa was pushed back to fifth as Kovalainen and Alonso put in last @-@ minute laps to fill the second row of the grid . Kubica took sixth place , ahead of both Toyotas of Jarno Trulli and Glock and the Toro Rossos of Sebastian Vettel and Sébastien Bourdais . Coulthard bettered teammate Webber when he qualified 11th ; Piquet split the Red Bull drivers in 12th . The only Japanese driver in the field , Nakajima , managed 14th ahead of his Williams teammate Nico Rosberg . Heidfeld could only achieve 16th place , ten places behind his BMW teammate Kubica . Heidfeld spent the majority of the first session struggling with the set @-@ up of his car . The Hondas of Rubens Barrichello and Jenson Button filled the ninth row in front of the constructor 's home crowd . The Force Indias qualified last ; Sutil comfortably outqualified his teammate Fisichella by 0 @.@ 8 seconds , to sit in 19th place . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 The conditions on the grid were dry before the race . The air temperature was 16 ° C ( 61 ° F ) and the track temperature was 21 ° C ( 70 ° F ) ; conditions were expected to remain consistent throughout the race . Most of the frontrunners began the race on the harder compound tyre ; only Massa was using the softer option . Räikkönen accelerated faster than Hamilton off the line , getting ahead of him down the first straight , but the McLaren driver pulled into the Ferrari 's slipstream , before swerving to overtake Räikkönen in the inside of the corner . Going into the first corner , Hamilton badly locked @-@ up his front wheels while braking and ran wide ; although there was no contact , Räikkönen was also forced wide in avoidance . This was then followed by contact with Kovalainen , which finally forced Räikkönen off the track . All three drivers dropped back down the field as a result of the incident . Kubica took the lead ahead of Alonso and Kovalainen after the corner , avoiding collisions as other cars locked their tyres on the cold track . Fisichella drove into the back of Barrichello , scattering carbon fibre over the track . Coulthard collided with Bourdais and then Piquet , sustaining suspension damage and sliding into the barriers after turn two . Nakajima left the track trying to avoid Coulthard , although he managed to rejoin after losing his front wing . The Japanese driver pitted at the end of the lap for a new wing . 
 At the end of the first lap , Kubica led from Alonso , Kovalainen , Trulli , Massa , Hamilton and Räikkönen . On lap two , Massa braked late into the chicane at turn 10 , briefly letting Hamilton past , before running over the kerbs on the exit from the corner and hitting the McLaren driver 's car . Hamilton was spun round by the contact and pitted at the end of the lap for new tyres and more fuel , which dropped him to 18th place . Massa continued in seventh place . On lap eight Räikkönen passed Trulli into turn 10 to take fourth position . In third place , more than a second ahead of the Ferrari driver , Kovalainen set a new fastest lap of 1 : 19 @.@ 258 on lap 12 to which Räikkönen responded with a 1 : 19 @.@ 193 four laps later . Two more drivers joined Coulthard in retirement before the first round of fuel stops : Glock pitted on lap five and again on lap six , before retiring because of handling difficulties resulting from a broken seat fixing ; Sutil retired on lap nine with a puncture caused by running over carbon fibre shards . 
 On lap 17 , Massa and Hamilton were given drive @-@ through penalties , Massa for colliding with Hamilton and Hamilton for forcing Räikkönen off the track into turn one . Hamilton took his penalty immediately . Massa pitted for fuel and tyres on the next lap , before coming into the pits again on lap 20 to serve his penalty , which dropped him to 14th place , one place ahead of Hamilton . Meanwhile , Kubica and Räikkönen pitted on lap 17 for tyres and fuel . On the same lap , Kovalainen pulled over to the side of the track with engine problems and retired from the race . Alonso pitted on lap 18 , emerging ahead of Kubica to take the provisional lead , with cars in front still to pit . Trulli , Vettel and Bourdais pitted over the following six laps . Fisichella retired from the race with gearbox problems on lap 21 . Piquet took his first pit stop on lap 28 , emerging ahead of Bourdais as Alonso opened the gap on Kubica to 7 @.@ 8 seconds . Massa overtook Button to take 12th position one lap later . 
 Alonso lapped consistently in the low 1 : 19 range , setting the new fastest lap of the race on lap 41 , a 1 : 19 @.@ 101 , to extend his lead over Kubica to more than 12 seconds . Räikkönen was five seconds behind Kubica in third . Alonso pitted for the second time on lap 43 and changed to the softer compound tyre . Kubica , complaining of understeer over the team radio , made his second stop on lap 46 , two laps ahead of Räikkönen . Trulli , Bourdais , Vettel and Piquet pitted over the next five laps , their teams giving them sufficient fuel to finish the race . As Bourdais exited the pit @-@ lane in seventh place on lap 51 , Massa , who was eighth , but yet to make his final pit stop , attempted to pass him and the two cars collided at the first corner . Massa spun , but rejoined the race behind Bourdais . Three laps later , the stewards announced that they were investigating the incident , and would make their decision after the race . On lap 52 , Räikkönen attempted to pass Kubica on the approach to turn one after drafting behind him up the straight , but Kubica drove right as a blocking manoeuvre , braked late , and defended his position . On the following lap Kubica attempted to replicate his block , but Räikkönen out @-@ braked him into turn one , and the two drew alongside . Kubica held the inside line on the turn three left @-@ hander , and drove the racing line as Räikkönen left the track at the run @-@ off area . Räikkönen then rejoined behind the BMW driver . Kubica faced similar challenges from Räikkönen over the next two laps into turn one , but he successfully defended his position . 
 Massa pitted on lap 53 , and rejoined behind Heidfeld in tenth . He subsequently set the fastest lap of the race on lap 55 , a 1 : 18 @.@ 426 . Meanwhile , Piquet was able to close the gap on Räikkönen to under a second , before losing time by running wide at turn five on lap 60 . Massa passed Heidfeld for ninth on the same lap , and began closing in on Webber . On lap 65 , Massa drafted down the straight and attempted to pass Webber , who defended his position by driving to the right . Crossing the track boundary into the end of the pit @-@ lane , Massa managed to pass Webber , and out @-@ braked him into turn one , to take eighth place . Alonso crossed the finish line on lap 67 to take his second win of the season , five seconds ahead of Kubica . Räikkönen was third , ahead of Piquet , Trulli , Bourdais , Vettel and Massa . Webber took ninth on the line , ahead of Heidfeld , who struggled with a heavy car and failed to improve on a poor qualifying performance . Rosberg finished in front of Hamilton , in 11th . Barrichello and Button took the next two positions ; both drivers blamed their Hondas for their uncompetitive performance at the Fuji circuit . Nakajima finished last , in 15th , unable to recover after his forced pit @-@ stop early in the race . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 The top three finishers appeared in the subsequent press conference where Alonso said that the decision to run a shorter second stint than Kubica ( between the first and second pit stops ) was his decision : " Sometimes you can do it , sometimes you can 't but today the car was perfect and I was able to do it . " Alonso added that he had confidence in the car to perform at the remaining Grands Prix : " The feeling I have now is that we can do anything " . Kubica said that his second @-@ placed finish was better than his win at the Canadian Grand Prix earlier in the season . He added that to finish on the podium after BMW Sauber 's failure to improve the car from the beginning of the season was a " great result for the team in , I think , a very difficult moment " . Räikkönen said that he was " a bit disappointed because being in first place in the first corner but then being pushed out didn 't help and being in the front could have given us a better result but anyhow , that 's racing " . He added that Kovalainen 's impact with him at the first corner had caused handling difficulties in his car , which left him unable to improve on his third @-@ placed finish . 
 Forty minutes after the race , Bourdais received a 25 @-@ second penalty from the stewards for his collision with Massa on lap 50 . This demoted him from sixth to tenth , and promoted Massa to seventh , giving him one more Championship point . Bourdais blamed Massa for the incident : 
 I did everything I could not to run into him and he just squeezed and turned and behaved like I didn 't exist , like I wasn 't there . What am I supposed to do ? ... It 's just a little bit of respect , you give each other room and then everything goes right , but if you don 't for sure it 's going to be an incident . 
 Massa denied responsibility , and agreed with the stewards ' decision : " I think there 's little to say : I had already entered the turn and he hit me from behind , spinning me round . " The penalty was largely criticized in the media . GrandPrix.com called the penalty " bizarre " , saying that Bourdais " could not just disappear " . James Allen of ITV said that in light of FIA race director Charlie Whiting 's announcement prior to the race , which indicated that cars exiting the pit @-@ lane would have right of way , the penalty was " ridiculous " . French sporting newspaper L 'Équipe criticized the stewards for their intervention , saying that both drivers held their lines and the collision was just a racing incident . Mark Blundell , who drove in Formula One for five years , called for former drivers to be part of the stewards meetings which award penalties : " You can examine pieces of paper , graphs , telemetry , but you don 't know what 's going on in a driver 's brain until you 've experienced it . " Blundell 's suggestion eventually became fact - the 2010 season introduced a system whereby a former F1 driver acted as a steward during each Grand Prix . 
 Lewis Hamilton was criticized for his aggressive drive into the first corner by much of the British press . Edward Gorman of The Times described Hamilton 's move as " impetuosity and untamed aggression " , adding that Hamilton " gambled with a kamikaze attempt to get past Räikkönen " . The BBC 's Andrew Benson said that " Hamilton is still in a strong position but the Englishman will have to cut out the mistakes that have characterised his season if he is not to lose the championship for the second year in a row . " In Italy , La Gazzetta dello Sport said that Hamilton 's start suffered from " his usual excessive aggression " . Hamilton said " I made a mistake and I paid for it . " 
 Massa 's touch on Hamilton 's car on lap two was labelled by the McLaren driver " as deliberate as it could be " . Massa rejected the allegation , saying " I had two wheels on the gravel . I could not stop the car and I was on the gravel because he pushed me into the gravel . " Media coverage of the incident suggested that though the contact was Massa 's fault , it was unintentional . Simon Arron , writing for The Daily Telegraph , said Hamilton 's accusation of deliberate contact was " unworthy and unwise " , adding that the contact was simply a racing incident . The gap between the drivers in the Drivers ' Championship after the race stood at five points , in Hamilton 's favour , with two races remaining . In the Constructors ' Championship , McLaren 's failure to score points , combined with Ferrari 's third and seventh , moved Ferrari to a seven @-@ point lead . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race = = = 
 ^ 1 Bourdais given a 25 @-@ second penalty for colliding with Massa . 
 = = Championship standings after the race = = 
 Bold text indicates who still has a theoretical chance of becoming World Champion . 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for both sets of standings . 
 = Jessica Mauboy = 
 Jessica Hilda Mauboy ( born 4 August 1989 ) is an Australian R & B and pop singer , songwriter , and actress . In 2006 , Mauboy was the runner @-@ up on the fourth season of Australian Idol ; she had auditioned for the talent show in Alice Springs , Northern Territory to pursue a recording career . Mauboy subsequently signed a contract with Sony Music Australia . 
 In February 2007 , she released her debut live album , The Journey , which debuted at number four on the ARIA Albums Chart , and was certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association . Later that year , she briefly became a member of all @-@ girl pop group Young Divas , before resuming her solo career early in 2008 . Mauboy released her debut studio album , Been Waiting , in November 2008 , which spawned her first number @-@ one single , " Burn " , as well as the top ten hits , " Running Back " and " Because " . Been Waiting became the second highest @-@ selling Australian album of 2009 , and was certified double platinum . Her second studio album , Get ' Em Girls ( 2010 ) , included the top ten singles , " Saturday Night " and " Inescapable " . Mauboy 's third studio album , Beautiful , was released in 2013 and produced the top @-@ ten singles " Pop a Bottle ( Fill Me Up ) " , " Never Be the Same " and " Can I Get a Moment ? " . 
 Mauboy has received sixteen ARIA Music Awards nominations , of which she has won two . In April 2013 , she was ranked at number 16 on Herald Sun 's list of the " 100 Greatest Australian Singers of All Time " . Aside from her music career , Mauboy has also ventured into acting . She made her acting debut in the 2010 movie musical Bran Nue Dae , and starred in the critically acclaimed film , The Sapphires ( 2012 ) , which earned her the AACTA Award for Best Actress in a Supporting Role . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Jessica Hilda Mauboy was born on 4 August 1989 and raised in Darwin , Northern Territory . Her father , <unk> , is an Indonesian born electrician who came from East Timor , and her mother , Therese , is an Indigenous Australian . Mauboy 's mother is from the indigenous <unk> <unk> people in the rainforest regions of Far North Queensland . Mauboy has three older sisters Sandra , Jenny and Catherine , and a younger sister Sophia . From an early age , she was involved in the local church choir with her grandmother Harriett . Her home was described as the " noisiest house on the block " , with her mother often singing , her father playing guitar and the rest of the family displaying their passion for music . Mauboy attended <unk> Primary School and Sanderson High School in Darwin . She dropped out of school in year 11 . 
 At the age of fourteen , Mauboy 's talents were exposed through the Telstra Road to Tamworth competition at the 2004 Tamworth Country Music Festival in Tamworth , New South Wales . As the first winner of the competition , Mauboy travelled to Sydney to perform and scored a recording deal with Sony Music Australia . She then released a country @-@ inspired rendition of the Cyndi Lauper hit " Girls Just Wanna Have Fun " . A video for her version of the song had a release ; however , the song went nowhere and Mauboy returned to Darwin . 
 = = Music career = = 
 = = = 2006 : Australian Idol = = = 
 In 2006 , Mauboy auditioned for the fourth season of Australian Idol in Alice Springs , Northern Territory singing Whitney Houston 's " I Have Nothing " . Her audition impressed all three judges , and she progressed through to the semi @-@ finals . Following the semi @-@ final process , Mauboy had advanced through to the top twelve . The media cited her previous Sony contract as grounds for dismissal , but since the contract had expired , Australian Idol producers refused to remove her from the show . Throughout the series , Mauboy continued to impress the judges with her performances . In the final eleven week , following her rendition of Kelly Clarkson 's " Walk Away " , judge Kyle Sandilands commented on Mauboy 's weight , that if she wished to succeed in the music industry , she should " lose the jelly belly " . Mauboy appeared stunned by the comment . In an interview with Who magazine 's Alicia Neil , two years after the comment was made , Mauboy stated " I kind of took it as a joke ... I look back on it as a positive thing – it made me a stronger person . " 
 In the final ten @-@ week , Mauboy received the first touchdown of the season from judge Mark Holden for her rendition of Christina Aguilera 's hit , " Beautiful " . During the final nine @-@ week , Mauboy had a sore throat that resulted in a mediocre rendition of Phil Collins ' " Another Day in Paradise " and near @-@ elimination , which landed her in the bottom three . Following that week , she never landed in the bottom three again , and ended up progressing through to the final show with Damien Leith . The grand finale was held on 27 November at the Sydney Opera House . After the viewer votes had been tallied it was announced that Mauboy was runner @-@ up to Leith . In December 2006 , Mauboy signed a recording contract with Sony Music Australia – two weeks after Idol ended . 
 = = = 2007 – 09 : The Journey , Young Divas and Been Waiting = = = 
 Mauboy released her debut live album The Journey on 24 February 2007 , which contained two discs . Disc one contained re @-@ recorded covers of the selected songs Mauboy performed as part of the top twelve on Australian Idol , while disc two included a DVD of her performances on the series . The Journey debuted at number four on the ARIA Albums Chart and was certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association for shipments of 35 @,@ 000 units . In September 2007 , Mauboy joined as the new member of the girl group Young Divas , replacing one of the group 's original members , Ricki @-@ Lee Coulter , who had left in June to resume her solo career . Their second studio album New Attitude was released on 24 November 2007 , and debuted at number 10 and was certified gold . The album was preceded by the lead single " Turn Me Loose " , which peaked at number 15 on the ARIA Singles Chart . In March 2008 , Mauboy signed on to the Australian Government <unk> program , designed to promote closer ties with Indonesia . As a part of the program , she travelled to Indonesia for a three @-@ day trip performing around the country , including an appearance on Indonesian Idol . It was during this time that Mauboy had begun to work on her first solo studio album . In August 2008 , Mauboy announced that after a year with the Young Divas , she had decided to quit in order to concentrate on her solo career . Founding member Paulini had also decided to depart , leaving Kate DeAraugo and Emily Williams as the only remaining members . However , both DeAraugo and Williams resumed their solo careers , and the group officially disbanded . 
 Mauboy 's debut studio album Been Waiting was released on 22 November 2008 ; it peaked at number 11 and was certified double platinum for shipments of 140 @,@ 000 units . Mauboy co @-@ wrote eleven of the album 's songs , which were produced by Audius Mtawarira , Israel Cruz , Jonas Jeberg , <unk> , Adam Reily , <unk> and <unk> . The album received positive reviews from critics . Davey Boy of Sputnikmusic gave the album three out of five stars and wrote that it was an " impressive debut which suggests that there could indeed be quality music to look forward to in the future as she matures and gains experience " . The lead single " Running Back " , featuring American rapper Flo Rida , peaked at number three and was certified double platinum . The second single , " Burn " , became Mauboy 's first number @-@ one single , and was certified platinum . It also reached number 92 on the Japan Hot 100 and became Mauboy 's first single to chart internationally . The album 's third single and title track peaked at number 12 and was certified gold . The following singles , " Because " and " Up / Down " , peaked at numbers nine and 11 , respectively , and both were certified gold . 
 In February 2009 , Mauboy signed with UK record label Ministry of Sound . Been Waiting was released in Japan on 22 April 2009 , and reached number 138 on the Japanese Albums Chart . At the 2009 Deadly Awards , Mauboy won three awards in the categories of Female Artist of the Year , Album of the Year for Been Waiting , and Single Release of the Year for " Burn " . Along with Flo Rida , Mauboy served as a support act for Beyoncé on the Australian leg of her I Am ... World Tour in September 2009 . At the 2009 ARIA Music Awards , Mauboy earned seven nominations for Been Waiting and its singles ; she was nominated for Highest Selling Album , Best Pop Release , Breakthrough Artist Album , Best Female Artist , Breakthrough Artist Single for " Running Back " , and Highest Selling Single for " Running Back " and " Burn " . Eventually , Mauboy won Highest Selling Single for " Running Back " . 
 = = = 2010 – 12 : Get ' Em Girls = = = 
 In January 2010 , Mauboy signed to Universal Music for an exclusive worldwide long @-@ term publishing agreement . In May 2010 , Mauboy collaborated with four other international artists representing their continents — Sean Kingston representing America , Jody Williams representing Africa , Tabitha Nauser ( Asia ) , Steve Appleton ( Europe ) , with Mauboy representing Oceania — on the theme song for the 2010 Summer Youth Olympics titled " Everyone " . Mauboy , Williams , Nauser and Appleton performed " Everyone " at the opening of the Youth Olympics held in Singapore on 14 August 2010 . Kingston was unable to attend the performance , due to a passport mix @-@ up . Mauboy released her second studio album Get ' Em Girls on 5 November 2010 ; it debuted at number six and was certified gold . She had travelled to the United States in February of that year to work on the album in Los Angeles , New York , and Atlanta with American songwriters and producers , most of whom she had not worked with previously . Mauboy co @-@ wrote eight of the album 's songs . Get ' Em Girls received mixed reviews from critics . <unk> Heath of ABC Online Indigenous gave the album two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half out of five stars , writing that it 's a " non @-@ cohesive mess of similar sounding , auto @-@ tuned ravaged pop / R & B that diminishes the talent of this brilliant young songstress " . 
 The album 's title track , featuring American rapper Snoop Dogg , peaked at number 19 . Mauboy performed " Get ' Em Girls " at the 2010 Nickelodeon Australian Kids ' Choice Awards , where she co @-@ hosted the award ceremony with Liam Hemsworth and Jerry Trainor , and won the award for Fave Aussie Muso . The following singles , " Saturday Night " featuring American rapper Ludacris and " What Happened to Us " featuring English singer Jay Sean , peaked at numbers seven and 14 , respectively . The former single was certified double platinum while the latter was only certified platinum . At the 2010 Australian of the Year Awards , Mauboy received her first nomination for Young Australian of the Year . On 10 December 2010 , she performed in front of an audience of 92 @,@ 000 at the Federation Square in Melbourne , ahead of Oprah Winfrey 's visit to the place . Mauboy 's performance was shown in the first of the four Australian specials of The Oprah Winfrey Show on 18 January 2011 . In April 2011 , she served as a support act for Chris Brown 's Australian leg of his F.A.M.E. Tour . 
 Get ' Em Girls was re @-@ released as a deluxe edition on 12 August 2011 , which included the singles " Inescapable " and " Galaxy " featuring Stan Walker . The former single peaked at number four and was certified double platinum , while the latter peaked at number 13 and was certified platinum . " Galaxy " also reached number 36 on the New Zealand Singles Chart and became Mauboy 's first single to chart in that country . On 17 November 2011 , Mauboy performed for the Australian troops at RAAF Base Darwin , ahead of US President Barack Obama 's visit to the place . In January 2012 , Mauboy and Walker embarked on their Galaxy Tour across Australia , which served as her first headlining tour . Mauboy recorded 15 songs for The Sapphires ' soundtrack album , which was released on 27 July 2012 . The album debuted at number one and was certified platinum . Mauboy released " Gotcha " as the album 's lead single , which peaked at number 43 and was certified gold . At the 2012 ARIA Music Awards , she was nominated for Best Female Artist , Best Pop Release for " Gotcha " , and Song of the Year for " Galaxy " . 
 = = = 2013 – 14 : Beautiful = = = 
 Mauboy received two nominations at the 2013 Australian of the Year Awards for Young Australian of the Year and Northern Territory Young Australian of the Year ; she won the latter award . In March 2013 , she participated in a singing quiz segment for Ellen DeGeneres ' two Australian shows in Sydney and Melbourne . In September 2013 , she performed at the 65th Primetime Emmy Awards Governors Ball in Los Angeles . Mauboy 's third studio album Beautiful was released on 4 October 2013 ; it debuted at number three and was certified platinum . The lead single " To the End of the Earth " peaked at number 21 and was certified gold , while the second single " Pop a Bottle ( Fill Me Up ) " debuted at number two and was certified platinum . " Pop a Bottle ( Fill Me Up ) " also reached number 33 in New Zealand and became Mauboy 's third single to chart internationally . The following singles , " Beautiful " and " Never Be the Same " , peaked at numbers 46 and six , respectively , with the latter single being certified platinum . 
 At the 2013 NRL Grand Final on 6 October 2013 , Mauboy performed the Australian national anthem , " Livin ' la Vida Loca " with Ricky Martin , and a medley of " Something 's Got a Hold on Me " and " Pop a Bottle ( Fill Me Up ) " . At the 2013 ARIA Music Awards , Mauboy won Best Female Artist for " To the End of the Earth " . She embarked on the To the End of the Earth Tour , her second headlining tour , from November 2013 to January 2014 . To coincide with the 2014 Australia Day celebrations , Mauboy along with Dami Im , Justice Crew , Nathaniel Willemse , Samantha Jade and Taylor Henderson released a cover of " I Am Australian " which peaked at number 51 . She appeared in an episode of Sesame Street on 20 March 2014 , singing " Count the Kangaroos " in a clip which was filmed in Alice Springs with children from <unk> State Primary School . Mauboy was chosen by SBS to perform at the 2014 Eurovision Song Contest , in recognition of Australia 's love affair with the annual event . She performed the single " Sea of Flags " during the second semi @-@ final in Denmark , making her the first solo artist from outside Europe to perform on the contest as a guest . SBS screened the documentary , Jessica Mauboy 's Road to Eurovision on 10 May 2014 before their coverage of the second semi @-@ final . 
 Mauboy 's first extended play iTunes Session was released on 18 July 2014 , and debuted at number 25 . On 3 August 2014 , she performed during the 2014 Commonwealth Games Flag Handover Ceremony at Hampden Park Stadium in Glasgow , Scotland to mark the official handover of the Commonwealth Games from Glasgow to the Gold Coast in 2018 . Beautiful was re @-@ released as a platinum edition on 21 November 2014 , which included the singles " Can I Get a Moment ? " and " The Day Before I Met You " . The former single debuted at number five and was certified platinum . Mauboy received three nominations at the 2014 ARIA Music Awards , including Album of the Year and Best Female Artist for Beautiful , and Best Video for " Never Be the Same " . 
 = = = 2015 : Upcoming fourth studio album = = = 
 Mauboy performed at the ICC Cricket World Cup opening ceremony held on 12 February 2015 at the Sidney Myer Music Bowl in Melbourne . On 3 May 2015 , she appeared on the US Today show in a segment that was filmed live at the Sydney Opera House with host Savannah Guthrie . In an interview with the Australian Associated Press , Mauboy revealed that she has already begun writing songs for her upcoming fourth studio album , which she hopes to release in February 2016 . She said , " This time around with the album I would like to ... just take risks in terms of the sound and identifying who I am as a woman . It 's more of a rhythmic pop so it 's not going to be extreme pop . It 's going to be a little bit more soul . " The album 's lead single " This Ain 't Love " was released in September 2015 ; it peaked at number five and was certified gold . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In late 2008 , Mauboy moved from Darwin to Sydney , ahead of the release of her debut studio album Been Waiting . In January 2009 , she began a long @-@ distance relationship with <unk> " Magoo " Magripilis , a soccer player and council worker of Greek descent , who was born and raised in Darwin . Magripilis played for the Darwin soccer league 's club Hellenic Athletic , the same club that Mauboy 's younger sister Sophie played for . Mauboy and Magripilis do not see each other often , as she is based in Sydney and he still lives in Darwin . When she is not working , Mauboy returns to Darwin to spend time with her family and Magripilis . 
 = = Artistry = = 
 = = = Music and songwriting = = = 
 Mauboy 's music is generally R & B and pop , but she also incorporates dance , funk , soul and hip hop into some of her songs . Mauboy 's debut studio album Been Waiting ( 2008 ) was described as " a blend of electro beats , heartfelt pop tunes and R & B bass lines . " Most of the themes on the album dealt with boys , love and break @-@ ups , everyday life , family issues , and friendship . Alasdair Duncan from Rave magazine described Mauboy 's second studio album Get ' Em Girls ( 2010 ) as " a more hard @-@ edged take on R & B and pop than her debut , pumped full of hip hop beats , jagged synths and futuristic vocal effects . " Mauboy said that she wanted each song on the album to talk about a " woman 's needs " , and that the album 's theme was " very much about the empowerment of women and the domination of women . " Kylie Northover of The Sydney Morning Herald noted that Mauboy 's third studio album Beautiful ( 2013 ) featured " a mix of more dance @-@ oriented tunes and her usual R & B sound " . 
 Mauboy has also incorporated her Indigenous Australian culture into her music , including songs on the soundtrack album for The Sapphires and in the single " Sea of Flags " . Aside from her vocals work , Mauboy can also play the piano and has co @-@ written some of her material . She co @-@ wrote eleven songs on her first studio album , eight on her second studio album , and fourteen on her third studio album . In 2010 , Mauboy was nominated for Breakthrough Songwriter of the Year at the APRA Awards . Mauboy stated in an interview that while working with American producer Harvey Mason , Jr . , they came up with the melodies and hooks for the songs " Fight for You " and " Here for Me " on the album Get ' Em Girls . She also experimented with an operatic @-@ type voice on her song " Scariest Part " . 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 Mauboy grew up listening to country singers Patsy Cline , Dolly Parton and Slim Dusty , as well as rappers Tupac Shakur , Dr. Dre and Snoop Dogg . Mauboy cites Mariah Carey as her main influence and inspiration , stating that she has " drawn a lot of inspiration from watching and listening to her live performances " . She grew up listening to many of Carey 's songs and was inspired by her vocal style and songwriting , " I loved ' Dream Lover ' and ' Fantasy ' – and picked up loads of tips from her style of singing . She taught me that the lyrics you write have to come from personal experiences – I really felt her music . Now I aspire to writing honest lyrics with real feelings that people can relate to . " Mauboy also names Whitney Houston as another influence , stating that she looks up to her and Carey " for their outstanding vocal performances " . Her other musical influences are John Farnham and Beyoncé . Mauboy is also inspired by fellow Indigenous Australian women such as Olympic gold medalist Cathy Freeman and actress Deborah Mailman . 
 = = = Public image = = = 
 Mauboy is known for her good girl image and is considered a role model to young girls and Indigenous communities in Australia . Ed Gibbs of The Sydney Morning Herald described her as a " wholesome girl @-@ next @-@ door " , while Genevieve Rosen of The Vine wrote that " her flawless public image is no farce . Humble , genuinely engaging and passionate about public service , Mauboy , put simply , is really nice " . Anna Byrne of the Herald Sun observed , " It 's clear this endearing <unk> is not a fame facade . In every respect , the pint @-@ sized pop star embodies one of the most elusive qualities of stardom : relatability . It 's this genuineness that has seen her star ascend to where she actually is . " Fashion has had an impact on Mauboy 's music career and image . Byrne noted that her " fashion choices have mirrored her rise in fame , with her style evolving from shy schoolgirl to confident diva , set to steal the sartorial spotlight . " Mauboy cites Jennifer Lopez as her style icon . She has worn dresses designed by Dolce & Gabbana , J <unk> , Steven Khalil and Toni <unk> , and has appeared on the covers of fashion magazines in Australia , including Elle , InStyle , and Marie Claire . In November 2012 , she appeared on the cover of Who magazine as one of their " Sexiest People of 2012 " . 
 Mauboy 's weight has been the subject of media interest , ever since her rise to fame on Australian Idol when judge Kyle Sandilands publicly told her to " lose the jelly belly " . Mauboy told Women 's Health magazine that she was proud of her curvy figure , saying " having curves is one of my favourite things " . In 2014 , she received media attention for her weight loss transformation from a size 12 to 8 . Mauboy has an alter ego named J Malley , who she described as her " fearless side " and " sort of like Beyoncé 's Sasha Fierce " . Mauboy is often referred to as Australia 's answer to Beyoncé . However , she does not agree with the comparisons , saying " I totally disagree with that one . I 've ... watched her documentary [ Life Is But a Dream ] and was just blown away by how magnificent she really is and it 's so inspiring for me . I just think she 's fantastic and I 'm completely nowhere near where she is , but I aspire to that . " 
 With the release of Mauboy 's second studio album Get ' Em Girls , some critics felt that she was becoming an " R & B sexpot " . Both the album and its title track also received negative reviews from critics . The music video for the title track was heavily criticised by fans who felt that Mauboy had become too sexy and moved away from her good girl image . Speaking of Mauboy 's image for R & B music , Fairfax Media journalist Bernard Zuel said : " It 's a problem , matching the personality to a formula . The formula with young women singing modern R & B is that they have to be out there sexually , thrusting physically and vocally . But that 's just not who she is . " Following the release of her single " Gotcha " in 2012 , Miranda Cashin of Sunshine Coast Daily noted that it was " a return to the Mauboy [ we knew ] before the infamous 2010 sexed @-@ up fist @-@ pumping album , Get ' Em Girls " . 
 = = Other ventures = = 
 = = = Acting career = = = 
 In January 2010 , Mauboy made her acting debut in the film adaptation of the 1990 Aboriginal musical Bran Nue Dae . The film was directed by Rachel Perkins and also starred Ernie Dingo , Geoffrey Rush , Missy Higgins , and Deborah Mailman . In the film , Mauboy played the role of Rosie , a local church singer who has a love interest for a school boy named Willie ( played by Rocky McKenzie ) . Her performance in the film earned her a nomination for Female Actress of the Year at the 2010 Deadly Awards . In November 2010 , Mauboy made a guest appearance in the final episode of the mini @-@ series Underbelly : Razor , and played the role of a nightclub singer named Gloria Starr . 
 In 2012 , Mauboy had a lead role in The Sapphires , a film based on the stage show of the same name . It was directed by Wayne Blair and also starred Mailman , Shari <unk> , and Miranda Tapsell . Mauboy played the role of Julie McCrae , one of the four Indigenous Australian women who travel to Vietnam to sing for the American troops . Mauboy and the cast attended the film 's premiere at the 65th Annual Cannes Film Festival in Cannes , France on 20 May 2012 . Upon its release in the US , Mauboy appeared on The Ellen DeGeneres Show on 18 April 2013 . Her performance in The Sapphires earned her the AACTA Award for Best Actress in a Supporting Role and the Australian Film Critics Association Award for Best Supporting Actress . In September 2013 , Mauboy made a guest appearance as herself in the third and final season of the teen drama Dance Academy . Mauboy will play the lead role in the upcoming drama series The Secret Daughter , which will air on the Seven Network in 2016 . It is Mauboy 's first major TV role and was written especially for her . She will portray the role of Billie , a part @-@ time country pub singer whose life changes after coming in contact with a rich hotelier . 
 = = = Endorsements = = = 
 In 2007 , Mauboy appeared in advertisements for the shampoo product , Head & Shoulders . In April 2009 , she teamed up with Bloom Cosmetics to create two designer collection nail polishes , which included shades of <unk> red and metallic green . Mauboy became the new face of the video game Nintendogs + Cats 3DS in October 2010 , and joined forces with RSPCA and Nintendo to help promote the game . She teamed up with clothing label <unk> in December 2010 to launch her five @-@ dress fashion range , which were made available to buy at Myer stores across Australia . In February 2013 , Mauboy was announced as the ambassador for the National Rugby League ( NRL ) and featured in their television advertising campaign singing her cover version of Etta James ' " Something 's Got a Hold on Me " , the theme song for the 2013 NRL season . The following month , Mauboy became the ambassador of the 2013 Woolworths Earn & Learn program , which enables primary and secondary schools in Australia as well as early learning centres to earn educational resources through the school community shopping at Woolworths . She appeared in two television commercials for the program , featuring students from <unk> Primary School in Darwin . In 2014 , Mauboy became the ambassador for the health and wellness company <unk> and appeared in a television commercial for Telstra 's commitment to its customers campaign . In May 2015 , she became the new face for Target Australia 's <unk> and will represent the brand for a year . Mauboy 's first fragrance , Be Beautiful , was released on 30 October 2015 . The fragrance was developed by Mauboy in partnership with <unk> and was inspired by her hometown of Darwin . 
 = = = Philanthropy = = = 
 Throughout her career , Mauboy has supported various charities in Australia . She is an ambassador for the Sony Foundation , which raises funds for youth @-@ related causes . As an ambassador for the Foundation , Mauboy has made several hospital visits and performed at many of their annual fundraising events such as <unk> , which raises funds to build specialised youth cancer centres across Australia . In April 2009 , sales from the nail polish bottles Mauboy created with Bloom Cosmetics were donated to Children 's Hospital Foundations Australia to support the research into childhood illness . Mauboy has performed at several other fundraising events including charity balls , charity dinners , Christmas carols events , and telethons . For many years , Mauboy has performed at the annual Channel Seven Perth Telethon . In December 2011 , she performed free acoustic concerts across Australia as part of the Indian Pacific Outback Christmas train journey , an annual fund @-@ raiser for the Royal Flying Doctor Service . On 14 December 2012 , she performed a free pop up show at Federation Square in Melbourne , as part of the Optus Carols for a Cause event , which raised funds for Kids Helpline and The Smith Family . Mauboy headlined the Come Together charity concert in Ulverstone , Tasmania on 19 May 2013 , in aid of two boys who were burnt in an explosion . All proceeds from the concert went into a trust fund for the boys ' ongoing treatment . 
 Mauboy has also contributed to Indigenous organisations aimed at improving children 's education . In 2009 , she became a spokesperson for the Indigenous Literacy Project ( ILP ) , which aims to provide " books and learning materials to schools , libraries and women 's centres in remote areas . " As spokesperson for the charity , Mauboy visited schools across Australia and talked to students about the importance of education . In 2011 , she worked with the <unk> organisation " that offers children from regional , rural and remote communities and towns across Australia the opportunity to get a first @-@ class secondary education . " In 2013 , Mauboy was appointed as the ambassador of the independent Aboriginal <unk> School in Alice Springs . Along with making several visits to the school , Mauboy has helped promote the school and assist with its <unk> . In August 2015 , she became an ambassador for the Indigenous Literacy Foundation , which raises support and awareness of literacy in remote indigenous communities . Her songs have been included on charity compilation albums such as Bushfire Aid : Artists for the Bushfire Appeal ( 2009 ) , Spirit of Christmas ( 2009 ) , and Flood Relief – Artists for the Flood Appeal ( 2011 ) . Mauboy along with Guy Sebastian , Sheppard , Jon Stevens , Shannon Noll and Megan Washington were featured on Lee Kernaghan 's 2015 charity single " Spirit of the Anzacs " , which raised funds for Legacy and Soldier On . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Been Waiting ( 2008 ) 
 Get ' Em Girls ( 2010 ) 
 Beautiful ( 2013 ) 
 = = Filmography = = 
 Films 
 Bran Nue Dae ( 2010 ) 
 The Sapphires ( 2012 ) 
 Television 
 The Secret Daughter ( 2016 ) 
 = = Tours = = 
 Headlining 
 Galaxy Tour ( with Stan Walker ) ( 2012 ) 
 To the End of the Earth Tour ( 2013 – 14 ) 
 Supporting act 
 Beyoncé 's I Am ... World Tour : Australian leg ( 2009 ) 
 Chris Brown 's F.A.M.E. Tour : Australian leg ( 2011 ) 
 = Tiger catshark = 
 The tiger catshark ( Halaelurus natalensis ) is a species of catshark , belonging to the family Scyliorhinidae . It is found over sandy areas and near reef peripheries off South Africa and perhaps Mozambique , from close to shore to usually no deeper than 100 m ( 330 ft ) . Reaching a length of 50 cm ( 20 in ) , this small , slim shark has a broad , flattened head with an upturned snout tip . It can additionally be identified by its dorsal colour pattern of ten dark brown saddles on a yellowish brown background . 
 Bottom @-@ dwelling and inactive , the tiger catshark feeds on a wide variety of fishes and invertebrates from on or near the sea floor . An oviparous species , the female retains her eggs internally until the embryos are at an advanced state of development , resulting in a relatively short hatching time after laying . Between 12 and 22 encapsulated eggs are produced at a time , which the female attaches to the bottom . The tiger catshark is caught incidentally by commercial and recreational fishers but has no economic value . It has been listed as Data Deficient by the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) , pending more information . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 British ichthyologist Charles Tate Regan described the tiger catshark in a 1904 issue of the scientific journal Annals and Magazine of Natural History , based on two specimens presented to the British Museum by J. F. <unk> . He placed the species in the genus Scyllium ( a synonym of Scyliorhinus ) and gave it the specific epithet <unk> , because the type specimens were reportedly collected off the Natal coast of South Africa ( though there is suspicion that they were mislabelled and actually came from Algoa Bay ) . Later authors reassigned this species to the genus Halaelurus . The lined catshark ( Halaelurus lineatus ) was once treated as conspecific to the tiger catshark , until it was described as a separate species in 1975 . 
 = = Description = = 
 The body of the tiger catshark is slim and firm , and it grows up to 50 cm ( 20 in ) long . The head is broad and flattened , with a distinct and upturned snout tip . The horizontally oval eyes are situated high on the head and protected by rudimentary nictitating membranes . Beneath each eye is a broad ridge , and behind is a spiracle . The medium @-@ sized nostrils are divided by lobe @-@ like flaps of skin on their anterior rims . The nasal flaps do not reach the large mouth , which forms a wide arch and bears short furrows around the corners . When the mouth is closed , the centre of the lower jaw falls well short of the upper , leaving the upper teeth exposed . The teeth are small and 3 @-@ cusped ( rarely 5 @-@ cusped ) , with the central cusp the longest . The five pairs of gill slits are placed higher than the level of the mouth and face somewhat upwards . 
 The pectoral fins are fairly large and rounded . The origin of the first dorsal fin lies over the last third of the pelvic fin bases , while the origin of the much larger second dorsal fin lies over the rear of the anal fin . The claspers of adult males are moderately long and tapering , though those of some individuals may be knob @-@ shaped and spiky . The anal fin is roughly equal in size to the pelvic fins , and smaller but longer @-@ based than the second dorsal fin . The short caudal fin has an indistinct lower lobe and a ventral notch near the tip of the upper lobe . The skin is thick ; the dermal denticles have three @-@ pointed crowns and are widely spaced compared to other species in the genus . Coloured yellowish brown above and cream below , this shark has a characteristic series of ten dorsal saddles from the head to the tail ; each saddle is dark brown with a darker edge and a lighter middle . Unlike in the similar lined catshark , there are no spots or additional markings between the saddles . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The tiger catshark is endemic to southern Africa , but the limits of its distribution are not well known . It is known to occur off the Western and Eastern Cape , South Africa , while easterly records from KwaZulu @-@ Natal and Mozambique are uncertain due to confusion with the lined catshark . A common , bottom @-@ dwelling inhabitant of the continental shelf , this shark favours sandy flats and the edges of reefs . It is usually found from the shore to a depth of 100 m ( 330 ft ) ; sharks in the eastern part of its range tend to occur in deeper water than those in the west . There are species records from as deep as 172 m ( 564 ft ) , as well as a single dubious record from 355 m ( 1 @,@ 165 ft ) down on the continental slope . It may segregate by size , with the adults found farther from shore . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 The tiger catshark is a sluggish predator of a diverse array of benthic organisms . Its diet is dominated by bony fishes and crustaceans , and also includes cephalopods , polychaete worms , smaller sharks , and scavenged fish offal . It has been observed at the spawning grounds of the chokka squid ( Loligo vulgaris reynaudi ) , feeding on squid that have descended to the bottom to mate and deposit eggs . Documented predators of this species include the broadnose sevengill shark ( Notorynchus cepedianus ) and the ragged tooth shark ( Carcharias taurus ) . 
 Reproduction in the tiger catshark is oviparous : females produce 6 – 11 ( typically 6 – 9 ) eggs in each of their two oviducts at a time . The eggs are contained in tough capsules around 4 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) long and 1 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 59 in ) across ; the capsule has thick tendrils at the corners that allow it to be secured to the sea floor . The female retains the eggs internally until the embryos are substantially developed , measuring at least 4 @.@ 3 cm ( 1 @.@ 7 in ) long . Thus , the eggs hatch within only one or two months of being laid , reducing the amount of time that they are exposed to predators . Males and females begin to reach sexual maturity at lengths of 29 – 35 cm ( 11 – 14 in ) and 30 – 44 cm ( 12 – 17 in ) respectively . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 Harmless to humans , the tiger catshark is caught incidentally by bottom trawlers , recreational anglers , and rarely squid fishers . Though edible , it is not a valued catch and is usually discarded . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) presently lacks sufficient data to assess its conservation status . 
 = Lince ( tank ) = 
 The Lince ( Spanish pronunciation : [ <unk> ] , meaning " Lynx " ) was a Spanish development programme for a proposed main battle tank that unfolded during the late 1980s and early 1990s . The intention was to replace the M47 and M48 Patton tanks that the Spanish Army had received under the U.S. Mutual Defense Assistance Act between 1954 and 1975 , and to complement the AMX @-@ 30E tanks manufactured for the army during the 1970s . Companies from several nations , such as German Krauss @-@ Maffei , Spanish Santa Bárbara , and French GIAT , made bids for the development contract . The main priorities were mobility and firepower , with secondary priority placed on protection ; the Lince tank was to have been lighter and faster than its competitors . The vehicle 's size would also have been restricted by the Spanish rail and highway network . To achieve a sufficient level of firepower and protection , given the size requirements , the Lince was to use Rheinmetall 's 120 mm L / 44 tank @-@ gun and German composite armour from the Leopard 2A4 . 
 The Spanish government decided to upgrade its fleet of AMX @-@ 30Es in the late 1980s . The focus on upgrading Spain 's AMX @-@ 30E 's distracted attention from the Lince plan , which was eventually shelved in 1990 after Spain acquired a large number of M60 Patton tanks , which were no longer required by the U.S. , in accordance with the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe . These tanks replaced the M47s and M48s , and fulfilled Spain 's need to modernize its tank forces in the short term . No prototype of the planned Lince tank was manufactured , and no announcements were made on who would receive the contract . Four years later the Spanish government procured and locally manufactured the Leopard 2 , fulfilling the long @-@ term modernisation goal established in the Lince programme . 
 = = Background = = 
 During the 1950s the Spanish Army was supplied by the United States with 552 M47 and M48 Patton tanks as a mutual defense pact against a potential Soviet invasion of Western Europe . The first tanks were delivered in 1954 , and the fleet was upgraded in the 1970s to equal the capabilities of M60 Patton tanks . Spain was , however , interested in replacing these tanks as early as the 1960s with the French AMX @-@ 30 or German Leopard 1 . Spain eventually decided to buy the French tank and by 1975 the Spanish Army had 299 AMX @-@ 30s , designated as AMX @-@ 30Es . Of these , 280 tanks were manufactured by the local company Empresa Nacional Santa Bárbara ( now Santa Bárbara Sistemas ) who received the AMX @-@ 30 patent from the French company GIAT . As the first batch of production of AMX @-@ 30s ended , the French Army and Santa Bárbara began a research programme for an eventual modernisation of the AMX @-@ 30 to correct deficiencies such as mechanical reliability , armor protection and the fire control system . In fielding the AMX @-@ 30E , the army found its upgraded M47s and M48s to be outdated ; its earliest M47 tank was more than 30 years old . The army required a modern tank that could complement its AMX @-@ 30Es and started looking for a replacement for its Patton fleet . 
 = = Bidding = = 
 In 1984 , the Spanish Ministry of Defense declared its intent to set aside 120 billion pesetas ( 1 @.@ 1 billion U.S. dollars ) for a future tank program and attracted interest from five foreign companies . German company Krauss @-@ Maffei and Spanish company Santa Bárbara presented a joint bid in mid @-@ 1984 that would produce a tank based on 1970s technology . The French government proposed to cooperate with Spain in designing a tank complete with new technology — France would later develop this programme on its own as the AMX @-@ Leclerc . However , the French admitted that there would be restrictions placed on Empresa Nacional Santa Bárbara when it came to exporting the tank . The Italian government proposed a similar deal for a cooperative tank design . The American company General Dynamics and British company Vickers offered the M1 Abrams and Valiant , respectively ; the Spanish government rejected their offers the following year because of the low likelihood of local production and export of the tank . By late 1985 , the only offers still under consideration were those from the German @-@ Spanish collaboration and the French and Italian governments . 
 Krauss @-@ Maffei 's Lince bid provided the clearest technical designs . The tank would be 49 tonnes and equipped with a 120 @-@ millimeter main gun . It could fire this gun on the move and aim at targets with effectiveness in day and night operations . Fitted with a 1 @,@ 200 horsepower ( 890 kW ) engine , the Lince could travel as fast as 70 kilometres per hour ( 43 mph ) on the roads . Although heavily based on the Leopard 2A4 , the Lince was smaller and lighter , trading protection for mobility . Specifically , the Lince prioritised enhanced mobility over the irregular Spanish terrain . Furthermore , size restrictions were imposed because of the existing capabilities of Spain 's railroad and highway network . Although the reduced armor conflicted with the problems that the Spanish had with AMX @-@ 30E 's thin armor , the Lince used a multilayer armor similar to that of the German Leopard 2A4 , providing greater protection than standard armor for a similar weight . The protection was further enhanced by the low profile turret , again similar to that of the Leopard 2A4 . 
 In early 1986 , the Ministry of Defense declared that it would choose a contract within a matter of months . News sources cited said that Krauss @-@ Maffei would most likely gain the contract , although the French might get it because of past and existing French armament contracts with Spain . Apart from producing the French @-@ designed AMX @-@ 30 , the Spanish government also had a contract for Mirage F1 fighter planes and Puma utility helicopters in 1979 . In early 1987 , France again offered Spain the contract to co @-@ develop and co @-@ produce the AMX @-@ Leclerc . This time it added the lucrative term of joint export . Despite the offer and ongoing collaboration with the Italians , Spanish investment in the German @-@ Spanish Lince program grew to 200 billion pesetas ( 1 @.@ 8 billion dollars ) . However , the Spanish government did not announce a winner for the contract . This indecision led Krauss @-@ Maffei to freeze its bid for the Lince . Krauss @-@ Maffei also cited the loss of millions of dollars because of failures on the part of Santa Bárbara Sistemas , who would manufacture the Lince . 
 = = Decline of the programme = = 
 The Spanish Ministry of Defense agreed to modernise the Army 's AMX @-@ 30Es in 1987 and allotted 16 billion pesetas ( 155 million dollars ) to the programme . From July 1987 , the Army upgraded its entire AMX @-@ 30E fleet to <unk> and <unk> standards . This upgraded programme posed a threat to the Lince programme . Around the same time , the Spanish government expressed interest in acquiring American M60 Patton tanks that were being retired from Central Europe , in accordance with the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe . In October and November , the Spanish government began to negotiate for 400 to 500 M60A1 and M60A3 tanks , and planned to upgrade its acquired M60A1 tanks to M60A3 standards . In December , the United States agreed to transfer 532 M60A1 and M60A3 tanks to replace Spain 's M47s and M48s . After receiving 50 of the 272 A1s , Spain cancelled procurement of these tanks and opted to receive only the 260 <unk> . Because of the modernisation of the AMX @-@ 30 , the decision to replace older Patton tanks with the M60A3 and Krauss @-@ Maffei 's criticism of the management of the indigenous tank programme , the Lince was canceled in 1989 . Management issues in Santa Bárbara Sistemas also played a part , including yearly negative balances and the reduction of factory personnel . However , unlike the planned Lince , the M60s only satisfied Spain 's immediate need to modernise the Army 's tank fleet in the short term . They were not a long @-@ term modernisation solution as Spain 's M47s and M48s had already been upgraded to equivalents of the M60 . 
 As a result , Spain negotiated with Germany over the procurement and local production of a large number of Leopard <unk> ; a Memorandum of Understanding was signed between the two in 1995 , and the Germans lent 108 Leopard 2A4s to the Spanish Army for five years starting in 1998 . In 2005 , the Spanish Ministry of Defense declared intention to buy the tanks instead of renting them . The local production terms in the Memorandum allowed Santa Bárbara Sistemas to start producing Leopard 2Es in 2003 , and the first platoon of tanks was delivered in December 2003 . In comparison to the smaller Lince , the Leopard 2A4 weighs 55 t ( 61 short tons ) and is powered by a 1 @,@ 500 hp ( 1 @,@ 100 kW ) diesel engine . The greater weight of the Leopard 2A4 is due in part to its thicker armor , affording greater protection and balancing out the loss in mobility as compared to the Lince . 
 = = Comparison to the alternatives = = 
 = Hughie Edwards = 
 Air Commodore Sir Hughie Idwal Edwards , VC , KCMG , CB , DSO , OBE , DFC ( 1 August 1914 – 5 August 1982 ) was a senior officer in the Royal Air Force , Governor of Western Australia , and an Australian recipient of the Victoria Cross , the highest decoration for gallantry " in the face of the enemy " that can be awarded to members of the British and Commonwealth armed forces . Serving as a bomber pilot in the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) , Edwards was decorated with the Victoria Cross in 1941 for his efforts in leading a bombing raid against the port of Bremen , one of the most heavily defended towns in Germany . He became the most highly decorated Australian serviceman of the Second World War . 
 Born in Fremantle , Western Australia , Edwards joined the Royal Australian Air Force in 1935 , and a year later was granted a short service commission with the RAF . Serving throughout the Second World War , he gained a permanent commission and continued his career in the RAF after the war ; he retired in 1963 with the rank of air commodore . Returning to Australia , he was appointed Governor of Western Australia in 1974 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Edwards was born in Fremantle , Western Australia , on 1 August 1914 , the third of five children to Welsh parents Hugh , a blacksmith and farrier , and his wife Jane ( née Watkins ) , who had emigrated to Australia in 1909 . Named after his father , he was always referred to by his middle name of Idwal in his family . Edwards received his initial education at White Gum Valley School , before attending the Fremantle Boy 's School where he achieved well academically , although he later claimed this was due to a good memory rather than high intelligence . However , Edwards was reluctantly forced to leave school at the age of fourteen as the family finances could no longer support him . Described as a " shy , under @-@ confident , introspective and imaginative lad " at this stage in his life , he gained employment as a shipping office clerk . 
 With the onset of the Great Depression , Edwards found himself unemployed , before gaining a job with a horse racing stable in Fremantle . His position entailed him taking the horses to the beach each morning for a swim , grooming them , and attending the twice weekly race meetings ; a lifelong interest in horse racing consequently emerged at this time . After later working for a brief period in a factory , he enlisted in the Australian Army in March 1933 and was posted to the 6th Heavy Battery , Royal Australian Artillery , with the rank of private . During this period , Edwards was an active sportsman , excelling in Australian rules football — where he played six matches with leading Western Australian Football League ( <unk> ) club South Fremantle — and cricket with the Fremantle garrison team . 
 = = Early Air Force career = = 
 In 1935 , he was selected for flying training with the Royal Australian Air Force at RAAF Point Cook , after which he transferred to the RAF , being granted a short service commission as a pilot officer on 21 August 1936 . Posted to No. 15 Bomber Squadron , he was appointed adjutant of No. 90 Squadron in March 1937 , flying Bristol Blenheim bombers . He received a promotion to flying officer on 21 May 1938 . 
 In August 1938 , Edwards was piloting a Blenheim near the Scottish border when he flew into a storm at 2 @,@ 300 metres ( 7 @,@ 500 ft ) . When the ailerons froze , the aircraft was forced down to 1 @,@ 600 metres ( 5 @,@ 200 ft ) and Edwards ordered the navigator and rear gunner to bale out of the aircraft . Down to 230 metres ( 750 ft ) , he made an effort to jump clear , but his parachute became entangled with the bomber 's radio mast pylon . In the ensuing crash , he sustained head injuries and a badly broken leg , which was only saved after extensive surgery , which left that leg shorter than the other . After the accident , he was declared unfit for flying duties until April 1940 , when he was posted to No. 139 Squadron for active service due to the outbreak of war . He was promoted to flight lieutenant on 21 May 1940 . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 In May 1941 , Edwards became commanding officer of No. 105 Squadron replacing the previous incumbent , who had been killed in an anti @-@ shipping raid on Stavanger . At that time , the Squadron was engaged in a series of daylight operations against Germany and the occupied countries , with its principal targets being enemy shipping , power installations , shipbuilding yards , locomotives , steelworks and marshalling yards . On 15 June , by now an acting wing commander , Edwards led six Blenheims on a search for enemy shipping and soon sighted a convoy of eight merchantmen anchored near The Hague . He launched an attack at low level , his bombs striking a 4 @,@ 000 ton ship . He was subsequently awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross for this action . 
 On 4 July 1941 , Edwards led a daylight attack ( " Operation Wreckage " ) against the port of Bremen , one of the most heavily defended towns in Germany . Edwards ' force of twelve Blenheims attacked at a height of about 50 feet through telephone wires and high voltage power lines . The bombers successfully penetrated fierce anti @-@ aircraft fire and a dense balloon barrage , but further fire over the port itself resulted in the loss of four of the attacking force . Edwards brought his remaining aircraft safely back , although all had been hit and his own Blenheim ( serial <unk> ) had been hit over 20 times . His actions in the raid earned him the Victoria Cross . 
 The full citation for Edwards ' Victoria Cross appeared in the London Gazette on 22 July 1941 , it read : 
 Air Ministry , 22nd July , 1941 . 
 ROYAL AIR FORCE 
 The KING has been graciously pleased to confer the Victoria Cross on the undermentioned officer in recognition of most conspicuous bravery : — 
 Acting Wing Commander Hughie Idwal Edwards , <unk> ( <unk> ) , No 105 . Squadron . 
 Wing Commander Edwards , although handicapped by a physical disability resulting from a flying accident , has repeatedly displayed gallantry of the highest order in pressing home bombing attacks from very low heights against strongly defended objectives . 
 On 4th July , 1941 , he led an important attack on the Port of Bremen , one of the most heavily defended towns in Germany . This attack had to be made in daylight and there were no clouds to afford concealment . During the approach to the German coast several enemy ships were sighted and Wing Commander Edwards knew that his aircraft would be reported and that the defences would be in a state of readiness . Undaunted by this misfortune he brought his formation 50 miles overland to the target , flying at a height of little more than 50 feet , passing under high @-@ tension cables , carrying away telegraph wires and finally passing through a formidable balloon barrage . On reaching Bremen he was met with a hail of fire , all his aircraft being hit and four of them being destroyed . Nevertheless he made a most successful attack , and then with the greatest skill and coolness withdrew the surviving aircraft without further loss . 
 Throughout the execution of this operation which he had planned personally with full knowledge of the risks entailed , Wing Commander Edwards displayed the highest possible standard of gallantry and determination . 
 In July 1941 , Edwards took the Squadron to Malta , in order to conduct operations against Axis shipping carrying reinforcements from Italy to Tripoli and Benghazi . The unit remained in the area until October , when they returned to Britain . Participating in a goodwill mission to the United States , he was appointed chief flying instructor at an operational training unit in January 1942 , before re @-@ assuming command of No. 105 Squadron on 3 August . During this time , Edwards married Cherry Kyrle " Pat " Beresford ; the pair were later to have a son , Anthony , and a daughter , Sarah . He was promoted to temporary wing commander on 1 September . 
 On 6 December 1942 , Edwards participated in a daylight bombing raid on the Philips Factory at Eindhoven , The Netherlands . Despite heavy opposition , the bombers successfully damaged or destroyed many of their targets , with two gun posts being silenced . Several members of the raid were decorated , including Edwards , who was awarded the Distinguished Service Order ; becoming the first airman to receive the Victoria Cross , Distinguished Service Order and Distinguished Flying Cross in the Second World War . Promoted to acting group captain , he assumed command of the bomber station at Binbrook in February 1943 , where , despite his senior position , he continued to participate in operations . On 18 August , he was promoted to war substantive wing commander . 
 With the end of the European campaigns in sight , Edwards was transferred to the Pacific theatre , first to Ceylon as Group Captain , Bomber Operations . In January 1945 , he was mentioned in despatches , and appointed the senior administrative staff officer at Headquarters , South East Asia Command ; serving in this position until the conclusion of the war . 
 = = Later career = = 
 Edwards continued his career in the post @-@ war RAF , and was granted the substantive rank of squadron leader from 1 September 1945 . Posted as a staff officer at Air Headquarters , Malaya , from November 1945 until February 1946 , he served with the Netherlands East Indies Forces for a short period before returning to Malaya as air adviser to the General Officer Commanding . In September 1945 , he was posted as station commander at the RAF Base in Kuala Lumpur ; he remained there until May 1947 , and was awarded an Officer of the Order of the British Empire ( OBE ) for his services in south @-@ east Asia . 
 Returning to Britain in June 1947 , he undertook a six @-@ month course at the Staff College , before receiving a two @-@ year posting as senior personnel staff officer of No. 21 Group , Flying Training Command . Promoted to wing commander on 1 July 1947 , his next posting was as the senior instructor on the leadership course at Digby , Lincolnshire . Subsequently , he was appointed station commander at Wattisham , Suffolk . He was promoted to group captain on 1 January 1954 . Edwards was the Station Commander of the RAF base RAF <unk> in Iraq during the Suez Crisis of 1956 , and also the critical time of the Iraqi Revolution of 14 July 1958 . He returned to Britain on 21 October 1958 to command the Central Fighter Establishment , West Raynham , with the acting rank of air commodore . 
 Awarded a Companion of the Order of the Bath in the 1959 New Year Honours , he was promoted to the substantive rank of air commodore on 1 July 1959 , and appointed as an aide @-@ de @-@ camp to Queen Elizabeth II in March 1960 . His final appointment with the RAF was as Director of Establishments at the Air Ministry , London , from January 1962 until his retirement on 30 September 1963 . 
 = = Later life and governorship = = 
 Returning to Australia , Edwards became the Australian Representative for Selection Trust . In 1966 his wife , Cherry , died ; he married Dorothy Carew <unk> in 1972 . The pair were said to complement each other well , as Dorothy limped on her left leg after being knocked over by a car on a crosswalk in Sydney in 1970 , while Edwards limped with his right after his flying accident in 1938 . In 1974 , Edwards relinquished his position as the Australian Representative for Selection Trust and was appointed Governor of Western Australia . He was sworn in on 7 January 1974 , and appointed a Knight Commander of the Order of St Michael and St George ( KCMG ) the following October . 
 His knighthood involved some controversy , following his wife 's public comment that he was the only Australian state governor without such an honour . As knighthoods were then conferred by the Queen on the recommendation of her Federal and State governments , and the Governor was the Queen 's representative in the state , this was seen as highly inappropriate , especially given the Western Australian ALP State government of the day , led by John Tonkin had a policy of not recommending Imperial Honours . However , the Tonkin Government was defeated in April 1974 and the incoming Liberal Premier , Sir Charles Court , was happy to make the necessary recommendation . 
 While Governor , Edwards ' first official role was to christen Alan Bond 's America Cup challenger , Southern Cross . One of the couple 's first visitors to the Governor 's estate was a man by the name of Thomas Dunhill , who had consumed ten beers and wanted to see the house . Lady Edwards apparently found him in the pantry ; he was arrested by the police but no charges were laid . Ill health forced Edwards to resign his vice @-@ regal appointment on 2 April 1975 , and he and Lady Edwards went to live in Sydney , where he continued in semi @-@ retirement with commercial interests . 
 On 5 August 1982 , while on his way to attend a Test match at the Sydney Cricket Ground , Edwards unexpectedly collapsed and died ; his ashes were buried in the Karrakatta Cemetery , Perth , after a State Funeral and cremation at Northern Suburbs Crematorium in Sydney . His Victoria Cross is on display at the Australian War Memorial , Canberra , and on 26 November 2002 a life @-@ size bronze statue depicting Edwards was unveiled by then Governor of Western Australia , John Sanderson , in Kings Square , Fremantle . The Hugh Edwards Ward at Hollywood Private Hospital has been named in his honour . 
 = Funk ( Glee ) = 
 " Funk " is the twenty @-@ first episode of the American television series Glee . The episode was written by series creator Ian Brennan and directed by Elodie Keene . It premiered on the Fox network on June 1 , 2010 and was watched by 9 million viewers . In " Funk " , New Directions is intimidated by rival glee club Vocal Adrenaline . Jesse St. James ( Jonathan Groff ) defects back to Vocal Adrenaline , and New Directions explores funk music , knowing it is their rival club 's weakness . The episode features cover versions of six songs , all of which were released as singles , available for download , and two of which are included on the soundtrack album Glee : The Music , Volume 3 Showstoppers . 
 The episode received mixed reviews from critics . Lisa Respers France of CNN and Blair Baldwin of Zap2it both received the episode positively . Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club , Entertainment Weekly 's Tim Stack and James <unk> of Time highlighted continuity issues with the show , while VanDerWerff and Henrik Batallones of BuddyTV deemed " Funk " a set @-@ up episode for the season finale . Bobby Hankinson of the Houston Chronicle gave a more positive review , but still found " Funk " lacking compared to previous episodes , a sentiment shared by Aly Semigran of MTV . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Jesse ( Jonathan Groff ) returns to rival glee club Vocal Adrenaline , claiming that he was not appreciated in New Directions . In a successful attempt at intimidation ahead of the Regionals competition , Vocal Adrenaline gives a performance of " Another One Bites the Dust " in the McKinley High auditorium , and toilet paper New Directions ' choir room . The New Directions members become depressed , and club director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) tries to reinvigorate them by asking them to perform funk numbers . Quinn ( Dianna Agron ) performs " It 's a Man 's Man 's Man 's World " to vent her frustration of being an unwed teenage mother . Mercedes ( Amber Riley ) sympathizes with Quinn and invites her to move in with her . Later , Mercedes , Puck ( Mark Salling ) and Finn ( Cory Monteith ) perform " Good Vibrations " as their own " funk " number , based on Marky Mark 's band name being the Funky Bunch . 
 Will and Terri ( Jessalyn Gilsig ) finalize their divorce . Attempting to deal with his sorrow and cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester 's ( Jane Lynch ) incessant bullying , Will seduces Sue with a performance of " Tell Me Something Good " and asks her out on a date , standing her up to humiliate her . Sue withdraws the cheerleading squad from the upcoming Nationals competition and becomes bed @-@ bound . Will sees the negative impact on the cheerleaders and realizes that some of them might lose their college scholarships . Will knows that hurting his nemesis did not make him feel any better , and encourages her to be there for her girls . Sue reenters and wins Nationals , but later gives Will two options : either house her new trophy inside New Directions ' choir room , or kiss her . As Will is about to kiss her , Sue backs out and decides she prefers that the trophy be set up in the choir room as a reminder of her superiority . 
 In retaliation to Vocal Adrenaline 's vandalism , Puck and Finn slash the tires of their rivals ' Range Rovers . Principal Figgins ( Iqbal Theba ) thinks they should be expelled , but Vocal Adrenaline director Shelby Corcoran ( Idina Menzel ) disagrees : she decides not to press charges , but she insists they pay for the damages . She then recommends taking the money out of Glee 's budget , but Will says that the club will go bankrupt . Finn then says that he and Puck will get jobs , and Shelby agrees . They begin working with Terri at Sheets @-@ N @-@ Things . Expressing the dissatisfaction in their lives , Puck , Finn , Terri , customer Sandy Ryerson ( Stephen Tobolowsky ) , and employee Howard Bamboo ( Kent Avenido ) perform " Loser " in a dream sequence . Terri finds that Finn reminds her of Will , and befriends him , helping him with his funk assignment . 
 Jesse further breaks Rachel 's ( Lea Michele ) heart when he lures her to the parking lot , where he and the other Vocal Adrenaline members throw eggs at her , which leaves Rachel distraught . The male New Directions members , led by Puck , are talked out of violent retaliation by Will , and instead the group performs " Give Up the Funk " to show Vocal Adrenaline that they have not been defeated by their bullying . The performance intimidates their rivals , who unlike New Directions have never been able to master a funk number . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Funk " was originally intended to air on May 25 , 2010 , but was switched in the schedule with the episode " Theatricality " . Series creator Ryan Murphy has stated that there are three relationships which are the cornerstone of Glee : those between Finn and Rachel , Will and Emma ( Jayma Mays ) , and Will and Sue . Murphy explained that Will 's seduction of Sue in " Funk " is an attempt to get her to leave the Glee club alone , expanding : " I think he 's just done getting pushed around by Sue , but they had great fun with that . " 
 Will 's wife , Terri , returns to the series in " Funk " , giving her first vocal performance . Murphy planned a redemptive storyline for Terri , in which she realizes that Finn is similar to Will . He explained : " She met Will at 16 , so she sees a way to redemption ... a way to redo that relationship in a positive way [ by acting ] almost as Finn 's guardian angel , his fairy godmother . She gives him proper moral advice . " Murphy enjoyed seeing Gilsig and Monteith work together , so much so that he stated their friendship will continue into the show 's second season . On June 2 , 2010 , Megan Masters of E ! Online reported that Gilsig had yet to be officially invited back for the second season , but was confident that she would be . Discussing Terri 's relationship with Finn , Gilsig explained : " She sees in Finn so much of what she saw in Will when she first met him because he 's the same age as Will was . It 's her way of remembering happier times — when she used to be kind to Will . And she realizes , here 's a chance to be supportive of this kid . " 
 The episode features cover versions of six songs : " Another One Bites the Dust " by Queen , " Tell Me Something Good " by Rufus , " Loser " by Beck , " It 's a Man 's Man 's Man 's World " by James Brown , " Good Vibrations " by Marky Mark and the Funky Bunch featuring <unk> Holloway and " Give Up the Funk ( Tear the Roof off the Sucker ) " by Parliament " . All of the songs performed in the episode were released as singles , available for download . " Loser " is Gilsig 's only vocal performance on the show , and is included on the deluxe edition of the soundtrack album Glee : The Music , Volume 3 Showstoppers . " Give Up the Funk " is included on both the deluxe and standard editions of the album . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Funk " was watched by an average of 9 million American viewers . The episode began with a 3 @.@ 6 / 10 rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic , rising to 4 @.@ 1 / 11 in the last 30 minutes . It was down 21 % on the previous episode , but was Glee 's best 18 – 49 rating for an episode not following American Idol . It was the third most @-@ watched show of the week in the 18 @-@ 49 demographic ( losing to America 's Got Talent the night of the broadcast ) , the highest scripted show , and the eleventh most @-@ watched program amongst all viewers . " Funk " received mixed reviews from critics . CNN 's Lisa Respers France called it " incredible " , and was pleased to see New Directions performing funk music , although noted that she was " slightly disturbed " by Quinn 's " weird " performance of " It 's a Man 's Man 's Man 's World " utilizing pregnant teenagers as backing dancers . In December 2012 , TV Guide named Quinn 's cover one of Glee 's worst performances . Blair Baldwin of Zap2it stated : " While it didn 't have the poignant vocals of previous episodes , it was fresh and fun ... a nice change of pace for the series . " Bobby Hankinson of the Houston Chronicle called it a " pretty good " and " solid " episode , albeit noting that it lacked the " emotional punch " of previous episodes . 
 Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club graded the episode " C " , writing that it felt like " a frantic attempt to raise a bunch of potential storylines for season two and an attempt to put things in place for the season finale " . He criticized the show 's lack of continuity , particularly with regard to the Jesse and Rachel storyline . Entertainment Weekly 's Tim Stack also observed the lack of continuity in the Jesse storyline , calling it " slightly confusing " and " a little half @-@ baked " ; continuity errors in his storyline may have been the result of the change in episode broadcast order . He felt that the episode was " a slight let down " , noting : " There wasn ’ t as much tension as I would have hoped going into the finale but there were still plenty of fun moments to enjoy . " James Poniewozik of Time attributed part of the episode 's problems to it being " an episode that could air easily out of order " , explaining : " Glee is a very serial show , after all , but this episode largely consisted of moments that felt dropped in and random , in a way that undermined even the good moments . " 
 Henrik Batallones of BuddyTV deemed " Funk " a bridge between " Theatricality " and the season finale , writing : " It feels like the episode got itself in a funk , and when things get close to being awesome , it pulls back . " Eric Goldman of IGN rated the episode 6 @.@ 8 / 10 for " <unk> " , but deemed it the weakest episode of Glee thus far , while Gerrick D. Kennedy of the Los Angeles Times called it " just one big funked @-@ up mess . " Broadway World 's Mary Hanrahan felt that : " While " Funk " had some redeeming , even charming , moments , it did nothing to make up for the perplexing episode that preceded it and ultimately left much to be desired . " In contrast , Aly Semigran of MTV had enjoyed the preceding episode , yet still received " Funk " poorly , calling it : " a step down from last week 's strong ' Theatricality ' . " As with Respers France , Semigran noted that Quinn 's performance " felt a little uncomfortable and borderline ' offensive ' . " In contrast , Raymund Flandez of the Wall Street Journal enjoyed Quinn 's song , which he called a " magnificent surprise " , praising the " perfect jazzy – funk choreography " . Flandez criticized the " Good Vibrations " performance , however , deeming it a " song so bad it can 't be saved by irony or nostalgia " , and felt that " Give Up the Funk " was " underdeveloped " asking : " Where 's the soul ? Anger ? Passion ? Emotion ? Isn 't that what this was supposed to be about ? " 
 = Kepler @-@ 9d = 
 Kepler @-@ 9d , formerly known as KOI @-@ 377 @.@ 03 , is a planet in orbit around the sunlike star Kepler @-@ 9 . Initially discovered by Kepler spacecraft , a terrestrial planet @-@ searching satellite built and operated by NASA , Kepler @-@ 9d is most likely a Super @-@ Earth , with an estimated radius approximately 60 % larger than that of Earth 's , although its exact mass cannot be determined . Kepler @-@ 9d orbits Kepler @-@ 9 every 1 @.@ 56 days at a distance of <unk> AU from its star , an extremely close distance . Although Kepler @-@ 9d is the closest planet to its star in its system , it is named Kepler @-@ 9d instead of Kepler @-@ 9b because two gas giants , Kepler @-@ 9b and Kepler @-@ 9c , were confirmed first . The original studies into the system first suggested that Kepler @-@ 9d might be a planet , but a follow @-@ up investigation made by the Kepler team later confirmed that it was ; the confirmation of Kepler @-@ 9d as a planet was made public with the team 's paper , which was published in the Astrophysical Journal on January 1 , 2011 . The team used telescopes at the W.M. Keck Observatory in Hawaii to follow up on the Kepler space telescope 's initial discovery . 
 = = Discovery and name = = 
 Kepler @-@ 9d 's name comes from it being the third planet discovered in the orbit of Kepler @-@ 9 . Kepler @-@ 9 was named for the Kepler spacecraft , a NASA satellite that aims to discover terrestrial planets in transit around , or crossing in front of , their host stars as seen from Earth . This transit causes a regular interval in which the star briefly and slightly dims as the planet crosses it . 
 <unk> initially as a transit event by the satellite , Kepler @-@ 9d was given the designation KOI 377 @.@ 03 . It was recognized as a potential planet after a study into the system confirmed Kepler @-@ 9b and Kepler @-@ 9c , but follow @-@ up studies had to be completed to verify that it was indeed a planet , and that the apparent transit event was not due to a background eclipsing binary star in the aperture of Kepler 's photometer . Kepler 's team exhaustively disproved that the small transit event could have been anything but a planet , and their results were published in the Astrophysical Journal on January 1 , 2011 . Follow @-@ up observations were conducted by the High Resolution Echelle Spectrometer at the W.M. Keck Observatory in Hawaii , as well as the WIYN Observatory in Arizona and the Palomar Observatory in California . 
 = = Host star = = 
 Kepler @-@ 9 is a sunlike star in the constellation Lyra that lies some 650 parsecs away from Earth . With a mass of 1 @.@ 07 M ☉ and a radius of 1 @.@ 02 R ☉ , Kepler @-@ 9 is almost exactly the same size and width of the Sun , being only 7 % more massive and 2 % wider . Kepler @-@ 9 has an effective temperature of 5777 ( ± 61 ) K , as compared to the Sun 's at 5778 K , and is approximately 32 % more metal @-@ rich ( in terms of iron ) than the Sun . Kepler @-@ 9 is younger than the Sun , and is estimated to be one billion years old . Kepler @-@ 9 has two planets other than Kepler @-@ 9d : the gas giants Kepler @-@ 9b and Kepler @-@ 9c . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Based on the size of its light curve , Kepler @-@ 9d is assumed to be a Super @-@ Earth , although its exact mass is not known . It is presumed to be at least 1 @.@ 5 Earth masses . The planet 's radius is inferred to be 1 @.@ 64 RE , or approximately 64 % larger than Earth 's radius . With an equilibrium temperature of 2026 K , it is hotter than all the previous planets discovered by Kepler ( not counting the three previously discovered ones located in its field of view ) . Its density is not known . With an average distance of <unk> AU ( 2 @,@ 537 @,@ 695 @.@ 73 miles ) from its star , which it orbits every 1 @.@ <unk> days , Kepler @-@ 9d is the closest planet to its star in the Kepler @-@ 9 system . To compare , the planet Mercury is .3871 AU away from the Sun , which it orbits every 87 @.@ 97 days . 
 = Sonic X @-@ treme = 
 Sonic X @-@ treme is a cancelled platform video game in the Sonic the Hedgehog series . Developed by Sega Technical Institute ( STI ) , X @-@ treme was designed to capitalize on the success of Sega 's mascot character by being the first fully 3D Sonic game and the first original Sonic title developed for the Sega Saturn . During the course of development , several different styles of gameplay were tried and the plot of the game changed several times . 
 Originally pitched as a two @-@ dimensional platform game for the Sega Genesis , the game was eventually moved to development on the Saturn and for Microsoft Windows , intended for release during the holiday season of 1996 . However , X @-@ treme became stuck in development hell after several incidents , including an unfavorable visit by Sega of Japan executives and issues with acquiring a game engine , made the deadline difficult to achieve . After two of the lead programmers for the project became ill , the game was eventually cancelled . Reviewers and video game journalists have retrospectively considered the possibility of what Sonic X @-@ treme could have done for the Saturn had it been released , including comparisons to competing mascot video games Super Mario 64 and Crash Bandicoot . 
 = = Premise = = 
 With the game constantly changing platforms , engines , and development teams , there were many loose storylines in consideration . According to developer Christian Senn , about six or seven story lines were considered during the three @-@ year development timeframe . While originally based on the Saturday morning cartoon series , the main storyline used in promotion of the final game in magazines involved a Professor Gazebo <unk> and his daughter , Tiara . The two were the guardians of the six magical Rings of Order , as well as the ancient art of ring @-@ smithing . Gazebo and Tiara feared that Dr. Robotnik was after the six Rings of Order , and called on Sonic to get the Rings before Robotnik could . Dr. Robotnik kidnapped Gazebo after he requested Sonic 's help , making it so Sonic had to retrieve both him and the Rings of Order . At one point in the development process , there was a possibility for 4 playable characters : Knuckles the Echidna , Tiara <unk> , Miles " Tails " Prower , and Sonic the Hedgehog . Other characters intended to be included in the game were Nack the Weasel and Metal Sonic , who would have been a boss character in the final level . Various moves were added to the characters , such as a ring toss move for Sonic , which was left out of development . 
 To further the traditional " Sonic formula " , every level was designed in a tube @-@ like fashion ; Sonic would be able to walk onto walls , thus changing the direction of gravity and the rotation of the level itself , much like the special stages in Knuckles ' Chaotix . In addition , an unusual , fish @-@ eye lens @-@ styled camera was put into place so players could see more of their surroundings at any given time . 
 " 3D Sonic is free to move around in a completely open 3D environment . Previously , on the 2D games , things were restricted to a very linear path , whereas now he can run around in the open without any restrictions to his path . The 360 @-@ degree rotation allows for new aspects to the gameplay . It means that Sonic can now do things like run from a wall onto the ceiling and explore lots of new hidden areas . " 
 Senn has highlighted that the 3D gameplay still kept true to the Sonic series formula of collecting rings and speeding through game levels . Wallis also made mention of the game 's overall layout , consisting of three acts per zone and varying in focuses on speed , exploration , and puzzle solving . 
 = = Development = = 
 Following the completion of Sonic & Knuckles in 1994 , Sega began working on the next game in its Sonic the Hedgehog franchise , which was known in development as Sonic X @-@ treme and would have been the first Sonic game to feature fully 3D graphics . Development of the game was started by Sega Technical Institute , a U.S.-based developer that had worked on several previous Sonic games , beginning on the Sega Genesis and subsequently moving to the Sega 32X . In its earliest conception , Sonic X @-@ treme was designed for release on the Sega Genesis as a side @-@ scrolling platform game , much like previous Sonic games for the system . As new consoles and the beginning of the 32 @-@ bit era were on the way , the game was later moved to the Sega 32X and was known at this stage under the development names Sonic 32X and Sonic Mars , after the development name " Project Mars " used for the Sega 32X . Even at this stage , the game 's design changed wildly , including concepts such as an isometric viewpoint side @-@ scroller . Eventually , however , development of the game was settled on a full 3D platform game . 
 As the game 's design had changed significantly and evolved beyond the capabilities of the struggling Sega 32X , the game was shifted again to the Sega Saturn . The Saturn version of the project was initially developed separately by two teams in parallel starting in the second half of 1995 . One team , led by designer Chris Senn and programmer Ofer Alon , was in charge of developing the main game for PC . The other team , led by Robert Morgan and including programmer Chris Coffin , worked on porting Senn and Alon 's work to the Saturn while developing the " free @-@ roaming , ' arena @-@ style ' " 3D boss engine . Senn and Alon 's " fixed @-@ camera side @-@ scroller " with the ability " to move freely in all directions " was similar to Bug ! , and featured a fish @-@ eye camera system ( called the " Reflex Lens " ) that gave players a wide @-@ angle view of the action . As a result , levels appeared to move around Sonic . 
 In March 1996 , Sega of Japan representatives , including CEO Hayao Nakayama , visited STI headquarters to evaluate the game 's progress . They were unimpressed by the main game engine 's performance on the Saturn , although Senn and Alon did not have an opportunity to demonstrate the PC version . Therefore , Nakayama requested the entire game be reworked around the boss engine . To achieve this in time for the strict December 1996 deadline , Coffin 's team was moved into a place of isolation from further company politics and worked between sixteen and twenty hours a day . Then , in April , Bernie Stolar approached the STI team and inquired of Wallis what he could do to help the game meet its deadline . Wallis suggested that the game engine from Sonic Team 's Nights into Dreams ... would be helpful . Stolar agreed and acquired the engine . However , the engine 's creator and lead programmer of the original Mega Drive Sonic games , Yuji Naka , reportedly threatened to leave the company if it was used . STI lost two weeks of development time from the loss of the Nights engine . A playable demo of the game was displayed at the May 1996 Electronic Entertainment Expo . 
 Senn and Alon had initially continued on with their game engine , undeterred by their work 's original rejection , hoping to pitch it to Sega 's PC division . However , it was eventually rejected again , prompting Alon to leave Sega . No part of the STI team worked in unity during development . 
 " We had artists doing art for levels that hadn 't even been concepted out . We had programmers waiting and waiting and waiting until every minute detail had been concepted out , and we had designers doing whatever the hell they wanted . It was a mess , and because of the internal politics , it was even more difficult to get any work done . " 
 By August , Chris Senn had become so ill that he was told he had six months to live — though Senn would survive this ordeal — and Chris Coffin came down with a severe case of pneumonia . With both Senn 's team and Coffin 's team crippled , Wallis was left with an incomplete X @-@ treme and only two months before its deadline . At this point , he made the decision to cancel the game . Although Sega initially stated that X @-@ treme had merely been delayed , the project was cancelled in early 1997 . 
 = = After cancellation = = 
 With the cancellation of X @-@ treme , Sega instead decided to concentrate on a port of the Genesis title Sonic 3D Blast , and Sonic Team 's Nights into Dreams ... for the 1996 holiday season . Sonic Team started work on an original 3D Sonic title for the Saturn , which eventually became Sonic Adventure for the Dreamcast . According to Naka , remnants of the project can be seen in the compilation game Sonic Jam . STI was officially disbanded in 1996 as a result of changes in management at Sega of America . 
 For many years , very little content from the game was ever released beyond screenshots that had been released to the media in promotion of the game prior to its cancellation . However , in 2006 a copy of a very early test engine was sold at auction to an anonymous collector who bought it for US $ 2500 . An animated GIF image of the gameplay was initially released , and the disk image itself was leaked on July 17 , 2007 after a fundraising project by the " <unk> " website community purchased the disc from the collector . In 2006 , Chris Senn opened the " Sonic X @-@ treme Compendium " web site and began revealing large amounts of the game 's development history to the public , including videos of early footage , a playable character named Tiara , and a large amount of previously unreleased concept music related to the title . He also was given permission by Hirokazu Yasuhara , the level designer for the majority of the original 16 @-@ bit Sonic titles , to post level designs that were going to be put in the game . Senn , along with the community , announced intentions to recreate the game , but ultimately the project was canceled in January 2010 . 
 In early 2015 , fans from Sonic fansite " Sonic Retro " obtained the game 's source code , polished it up into a playable build , and released it for download on the internet . The first release only features one level , the Jungle @-@ themed level from the 1996 E3 promotional video , and remaining levels and demos were released during 2015 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Sonic X @-@ treme debacle has been cited as a reason for the ultimate failure of the Sega Saturn . With the Sonic the Hedgehog series being attributed to much of the success of the company 's prior system , the Genesis , and Sony and Nintendo both having flagship 3D platformers available early in the life cycle of their consoles ( Crash Bandicoot and Super Mario 64 , respectively ) , Sega was expected by fans to follow suit and produce an official 3D Sonic game . With the game 's cancellation , the Saturn never did receive an exclusive Sonic platform game , but rather only the Genesis port of Sonic 3D Blast ; Sonic Jam , a compilation of the 2D Genesis Sonic titles ; and Sonic R , a racing game . Sonic 's debut in a full 3D platform game was not until 1998 , with Sonic Adventure as a Dreamcast launch title , well after the discontinuation of the Saturn . 
 Following the game 's cancellation , journalists and fans have speculated about the impact a completed X @-@ treme might have had on the market . David Houghton of GamesRadar described the prospect of " a good 3D Sonic game " on the Saturn as " a ' What if ... ' situation on a par with the dinosaurs not becoming extinct . " IGN 's Travis Fahs called X @-@ treme " the turning point not only for SEGA 's mascot and their 32 @-@ bit console , but for the entire company " , although he also noted that the game served as " an empty vessel for SEGA 's ambitions and the hopes of their fans " . Dave Zdyrko , who operated a prominent website for Saturn fans during the system 's lifespan , offered a more nuanced perspective : " I don 't know if [ X @-@ treme ] could 've saved the Saturn , but ... Sonic helped make the Genesis and it made absolutely no sense why there wasn 't a great new Sonic title ready at or near the launch of the [ Saturn ] " . In a 2013 retrospective , producer Mike Wallis maintained that X @-@ treme " definitely would have been competitive " with Nintendo 's Super Mario 64 . Websites such as Destructoid and GamesRadar have speculated the game could have been a source of inspiration for future games such as 2007 's Super Mario Galaxy . Several journalists would also note similarities between X @-@ treme and the 2013 game Sonic Lost World . 
 = Nydalen ( station ) = 
 Nydalen is a rapid transit station on the Ring Line of the Oslo Metro . It is located at Nydalen in the Nordre Aker borough of Oslo , Norway . The station opened on 20 August 2003 , as part of the first section of the Ring Line to Storo . The station is served by lines 4 , 5 and 6 of the metro , as well as several local bus services . Artistic effort was put into the construction of the station , and the escalators were built into the Tunnel of Light exhibition . Close by the station is the BI Norwegian Business School ( BI ) campus and several large working places . 
 = = History = = 
 The process of establishing a Ring Line to serve the northern parts of Oslo started in the late 1980s . The plans were passed by the city council in 1997 , and financing was secured in 2000 through Oslo Package 2 . Construction started in June 2000 , and Nydalen was opened on 20 August 2003 , at the same time as Storo . 
 The background for building the rapid transit system to Nydalen , was the urban redevelopment from an industrial to a mixed residential and commercial area during the 1990s and 2000s . About 200 companies have moved to the vicinity of the station , and by 2007 there were 14 @,@ 800 jobs in the area . The area has several large information technology and telecommunication companies , including <unk> , <unk> , <unk> Business Partner , <unk> , TDC and <unk> . Large cultural institutions in the area include the national touring theater <unk> and the national touring concerts Concerts Norway , the publishing companies <unk> Mortensen , De Norske <unk> and Schibsted 's printing press . Public offices include the offices of the <unk> Aker Borough and the Norwegian Police Security Service . 
 In 2005 , BI Norwegian Business School moved into their new campus across the street from Nydalen Station . Seven thousand students plus faculty work at the school , of which 85 % use public transport . From 2011 , the new Nydalen Upper Secondary School will also be located in Nydalen . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 Nydalen Station is an underground station located on the tunnel section of the Ring Line between Tåsen and Storo . The 4 @,@ 000 square metres ( 43 @,@ 000 sq ft ) station was drawn by architect Kristin <unk> . The station 's center platform is located 12 metres ( 39 ft ) underground , with an entrance pavilion at street level . The pavilion has a composition of horizontal and vertical levels and planes . Between these , which are dynamically cast in relation to each other , are the modes of descent down to the platform area : i.e. elevators , escalators and staircases . The planes were built of black basalt , supplemented with large glass spaces that opens up the pavilion . A red glass box , that symbolizes the red trains , stands as a " signal " . The platforms is 110 metres ( 360 ft ) long , allowing for six @-@ car trains , and is covered with white granite and a paneled ceiling . The rail area has black concrete walls . There is effect lighting around the columns and recessed spotlights horizontally along the platform . The station is owned by Kollektivtransportproduksjon . 
 The Tunnel of Light is an artistic display of color and sound surrounding the escalator at the station . 1800 fluorescent lamps and 44 speakers are installed behind a layer of glass along the corridor , steadily changing color and mood . The theme is based on different experiences of travel in time and place . There are light and sound combinations for all seasons and all phases of life . The project was initiated by Kristin <unk> . The light system was developed by Per Åge <unk> at <unk> System , and the software that mixes sound and color was developed by Yngve <unk> . The music was composed by Bjarne <unk> , mainly based on recorded samples . Among these are text written and performed by Beate <unk> . 
 = = Service = = 
 Lines 4 , 5 and 6 of the Oslo Metro operate to Nydalen , each with a 15 @-@ minute headway . Lines 4 and 5 operate counterclockwise through the ring via the western part of town into the Common Tunnel , while line 6 operates clockwise via the eastern part into the Common Tunnel . Line 5 continues eastwards only to Storo before stopping ; lines 4 and 6 swap numbers between Nydalen and Storo . Travel time from Nydalen to Stortinget is 13 minutes clockwise and 12 minutes counterclockwise . Therefore , any traveler heading for the city center can get on the first train , independent of its direction ( except line 5 to Storo ) , and can be certain it will be the quickest connection to the downtown area . 
 There is a railway station on the Gjøvik Line also called Nydalen , that is served by NSB Gjøvikbanen as part of the Oslo Commuter Rail . It is located many hundred meters from the metro station , and the two do not offer interconnections . There is a shorter connection to the Gjøvik Line at Storo ( that connects with Grefsen Station ) . Nydalen also serves several bus routes . Line 37 via the city center to Helsfyr operates from across the street at Nydalen , while additional buses are located somewhat further away . They consist a feeder service to Lillo Terrasse ( line 55 ) as well as lines 30 to Bygdøy , 51 to <unk> and 58 to Helsfyr . 
 = New York Jets = 
 The New York Jets are a professional American football team located in the New York metropolitan area . The team is a member of the Eastern Division of the American Football Conference ( AFC ) in the National Football League ( NFL ) . The team is headquartered in Florham Park , New Jersey . In a unique arrangement for the league , the Jets share MetLife Stadium in East Rutherford , New Jersey with the New York Giants . The franchise is legally and corporately registered as New York Jets , LLC . 
 The team was founded in 1959 as the Titans of New York , an original member of the American Football League ; later , the franchise joined the NFL in the AFL – NFL merger . The team began to play in 1960 at the Polo Grounds . Under new ownership , the current name was adopted in 1963 and the franchise moved to Shea Stadium in 1964 and then to the Meadowlands Sports Complex in 1984 . The Jets advanced to the playoffs for the first time in 1968 and went on to compete in Super Bowl III where they defeated the Baltimore Colts , becoming the first AFL team to defeat an NFL club in an AFL @-@ NFL World Championship Game . Since 1968 , the Jets have appeared in the playoffs 13 times , and in the AFC Championship Game four times , most recently losing to the Pittsburgh Steelers in 2010 . However , the Jets have never returned to the Super Bowl , making them one of three NFL teams to win their lone Super Bowl appearance , along with the New Orleans Saints and Tampa Bay Buccaneers . 
 The team 's training facility , Atlantic Health Jets Training Center , which opened in 2008 , is located in Florham Park . The team currently holds their annual training camp sessions on the campus of the State University of New York at Cortland in Cortland , New York while holding occasional sessions at the Florham Park complex . 
 = = Franchise history = = 
 The first organizational meeting of the American Football League took place on August 14 , 1959 . Harry Wismer , representing the city of New York at the meeting , proclaimed the state was ready for another professional football team and that he was more than capable of running the daily operations . Wismer was granted the charter franchise later dubbed the Titans of New York as Wismer explained , " Titans are bigger and stronger than Giants . " He secured the Titans ' home field at the decrepit Polo Grounds , where the team struggled financially and on the field during its first three years . By 1962 , the debt continued to mount for Wismer , forcing the AFL to assume the costs of the team until season 's end . 
 A five @-@ man syndicate , headed by Sonny Werblin , saved the team from certain bankruptcy , purchasing the lowly Titans for $ 1 million . Renamed the Jets , the new owners hired Weeb Ewbank as the general manager and head coach . Ewbank and quarterback Joe Namath led the Jets to prominence in 1969 , when New York defeated the heavily favored Baltimore Colts in Super Bowl III and solidified the AFL 's position in the world of professional football . 
 When the AFL and NFL merged , the team fell into a state of mediocrity along with their star quarterback , Namath , who only had three successful post @-@ merger seasons after injuries hampered much of his career . The Jets continued to spiral downward before enjoying a string of successes in the 1980s , which included an appearance in the 1982 AFC Championship Game , and the emergence of the popular New York Sack Exchange . 
 The early 1990s saw New York struggling . After firing coach Bruce Coslet , owner Leon Hess hired Pete Carroll who struggled to a 6 – 10 record and was promptly fired at the end of the season . Thereafter , Rich Kotite was selected to lead the team to victory ; instead he led the Jets to a 4 @-@ 28 record over the next two years . Kotite stepped down at the end of his second season forcing the Jets to search for a new head coach . 
 Hess lured then @-@ disgruntled New England Patriots head coach Bill Parcells to New York in 1997 . Parcells led the team back to relevance and coached them to the AFC Championship Game in 1998 . Hess died in 1999 while the team , plagued by injuries , produced an eight win record , falling short of a playoff berth . At the end of the season , Parcells stepped down as head coach deferring control to his assistant , Bill Belichick ; Belichick resigned the very next day ( leaving a napkin at the stage for his introduction , on which he had written " I resign as HC of the <unk> " ) and went on to accept the head coaching position with the Patriots . 
 The franchise obtained a new owner in Woody Johnson in 2000 . Additionally , through the 2000s the Jets visited the playoffs five times , a franchise record , under the direction of three different coaches . Rex Ryan was hired in January 2009 . Ryan led the team to back @-@ to @-@ back AFC Championship appearances during his first two years but the team never made the playoffs again during his tenure . 
 = = Ownership = = 
 = = = Wismer = = = 
 Harry Wismer , a businessman , had been interested in sports for much of his life when he was granted a charter franchise in the American Football League . A three @-@ sport letterman , football , particularly , stuck with Wismer who went on to play for the University of Florida and Michigan State before a knee injury ended his playing career . Undeterred , Wismer began his career as a broadcaster originally with Michigan State and became a pioneer of the industry . Later , as the Titans owner , Wismer formulated a league @-@ wide policy which allowed broadcasting rights to be shared equally among the teams . 
 Wismer , who had previously had a 25 % stake in the Washington Redskins , was interested in the American Football League and was given a franchise to develop in New York . Wismer , whose philosophy was who you knew mattered most , tried to make the team and the league a success . His efforts began to accrue debt as the Titans ' first two seasons were mediocre with attendance dropping in the team 's second year . The franchise was sold for $ 1 million to a five @-@ man syndicate headed by Sonny Werblin of the Gotham Football Club , Inc. in February 1963 . 
 = = = Werblin syndicate = = = 
 Sonny Werblin graduated from Rutgers University and was employed by the Music Corporation of America , eventually becoming president of the company 's television division . With a vast knowledge of media , Werblin was determined to put the spotlight on the team . His first order of business , after changing the team 's name and jerseys , was to sign Joe Namath to an unprecedented contract . Werblin 's gamble would later pay off as Namath , who became a public star , led the Jets on to victory in Super Bowl III , though by then Werblin had sold his stake in the team . 
 Werblin 's partners , Townsend B. Martin , Leon Hess , Donald C. Lillis , and Philip H. Iselin , had a falling out with Werblin over the way the team was run — though the franchise had begun to make a profit , Werblin was making all the policies and decisions himself with little or no input from his partners , much to their dismay . Though Werblin initially resisted their ultimatum to dissolve the partnership , Werblin agreed to be bought out in 1968 . Werblin remained involved in the sports community and became the first chairman and CEO of the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority where he helped to create the Meadowlands Sports Complex , including Giants Stadium . 
 = = = Hess = = = 
 Leon Hess became well known for his Hess Corporation gas stations ; however , he also played an instrumental part in the development of the Jets during his tenure as co @-@ owner and eventual sole owner . Hess had often fought for improvements while the team was a tenant at Shea Stadium but generally stayed away from football operations , allowing his coaches and general manager to make football @-@ related decisions . 
 Becoming the team 's majority stockholder in 1973 , Hess bought Philip H. Iselin 's share upon his death in 1976 after which only two of Hess ' partners remained , Townsend Martin and Helen Dillon , who had inherited the stake from her father Donald Lillis , upon his death . Hess began to buy out the remaining partners in 1981 when he bought Martin 's 25 % stake for $ 5 million . Hess bought Dillon 's stake three years later for another $ 5 million , acquiring sole control of the team . 
 Hess had a passion for his team and took losses hard . In 1995 , following a mediocre 6 – 10 season under Pete Carroll , despite generally shying away from football operations , Hess announced " I 'm 80 years old , I want results now " during a conference in which Rich Kotite was introduced as the team 's new coach . After two unsuccessful years with Kotite , Hess heavily involved himself in hiring Bill Parcells in hopes to see his team again reach the Super Bowl . He did not live to see his dream realized as he died on May 7 , 1999 . 
 = = = Woody Johnson = = = 
 With the team for sale , two potential buyers were found in Cablevision and philanthropist Woody Johnson whose grandfather , Robert Wood Johnson II , expanded Johnson & Johnson . Johnson was unknown among the other NFL owners at the time of his $ 635 million purchase of the franchise . However , Johnson had a passion for sports according to former Knicks general manager Ernie Grunfeld and desired to own his own team . Johnson has been considered to be an enabler who wants the best from his employees . 
 Much like Hess , Johnson left many of the football related decisions up to his management team and tended to avoid the spotlight . However , upon hiring head coach Rex Ryan , Johnson had an increased presence as he molded the Jets into his team . 
 = = Stadiums = = 
 Owner Harry Wismer sought out a place for the team to play their home games but was only able to secure the dilapidated Polo Grounds , which had not had a major tenant since the New York Giants vacated the stadium in 1957 . The Titans played their first four seasons at the stadium — in the final season they were renamed the Jets . The Titans shared the stadium with baseball 's new expansion team , the New York Mets , for two years before both teams moved to the Shea Stadium in Queens in 1964 . The Jets hold the distinction of being the final team to host a game at the Polo Grounds , a 19 – 10 loss to the Buffalo Bills on December 14 , 1963 . 
 Wismer hoped the Titans could play in what would become known as Shea Stadium beginning in 1961 . However , funding difficulties and legal problems delayed construction of the stadium . Wismer signed a memorandum of understanding in late 1961 to secure the Titans ' new home . That memorandum recognized that the Mets would have exclusive use of the stadium until they had completed their season . As the team moved to Shea under new ownership , they were , in most years , required to open the season with several road games , a problem made worse in 1969 and 1973 when the Mets had long playoff runs . 
 Feeling that this arrangement put the Jets at a disadvantage , the team announced in 1977 that they would play two home games a year during the month of September at the Giants ' new home in New Jersey , Giants Stadium . Litigation began between New York City and the Jets over the issue , and in the lawsuit 's settlement , the city agreed to allow the Jets to play two September home games a season at Shea beginning in 1978 for the remaining six years in the Jets ' lease . In 1977 , the Jets were to play one September game at Giants Stadium and an October 2 game at Shea . 
 In spite of these issues , majority owner Leon Hess was interested in renewing the team 's lease at Shea , which was due to expire in 1983 . Hess negotiated with New York mayor Ed Koch . Hess wanted the city to redevelop the stadium to expand its capacity . He also hoped to renegotiate other aspects of the lease — the Jets received no money from ticketholders parking at Shea . Hess 's proposals met resistance from Koch . When negotiations reached an impasse , the Jets announced their intention to depart for New Jersey . On December 10 , 1983 the Jets played their final game at Shea and lost to the Steelers 34 – 7 . As fans pillaged the stadium for mementos , the scoreboard read " N.J. Jets " in reference to the Jets ' departure to the Meadowlands . 
 When the Jets joined the Giants at the stadium , many Jets fans hoped the name , Giants Stadium , would be changed . However , the Giants , who had the authority to approve the change , refused . In an effort to conceal the fact that they played in a stadium built and decorated for another team , the stadium grounds crew was assigned to make the stadium more Jet @-@ friendly during Jets games by putting up green banners and placing the Jets ' logo over the Giants ' . No change could be made to the blue and red seating bowl . The Jets were featured in the first NFL playoff game in the stadium 's history , falling to the Patriots on December 28 , 1985 . 
 As the Jets sought to become a stronger franchise and remove themselves from their counterparts ' shadow , the team entered into negotiations with the Metropolitan Transportation Authority in an attempt to build a stadium on the west side of Manhattan , entering a bidding war with <unk> Energy Systems and Cablevision for the rights to the West Side Yard property — Hess , prior to his death , had been approached by former mayor Rudy Giuliani about bringing the team to the West Side when their lease at Giants Stadium expired in 2008 . Cablevision was fixated against the Jets owning the land as Madison Square Garden , located only a few blocks away , would be forced to compete with the stadium . Team owners had voted , 31 – 1 , with the Buffalo Bills the only objectors , to award the 2010 Super Bowl to New York contingent on the Jets winning the bid and completing construction of the stadium prior to 2010 . 
 The MTA unanimously voted to sell the land to the Jets for approximately $ 210 million as the committee agreed that having the stadium would be beneficial in the long run . An angry Cablevision , community groups and transportation advocates were determined to derail the Jets ' attempts at building the stadium and two lawsuits challenging the construction of the stadium on environmental grounds were filed . Though confident they could secure the stadium , their hopes were dashed when Sheldon Silver and Joseph L. Bruno , both of whom held veto power over the stadium construction , refused to support the project , alleging it would hurt rather than help the development of the West Side . 
 Defeated , the Jets agreed to enter a 50 – 50 partnership with their rival , the Giants , to build a new stadium effectively agreeing to a 99 @-@ year lease , which the Giants had signed earlier in the year , to remain in New Jersey . The stadium , known as MetLife Stadium , became the first in the history of the NFL to be jointly built by two franchises . The stadium , which is illuminated in different colors depending on which team is hosting a game , opened in April 2010 and saw the Jets and Giants open the stadium together in a preseason exhibition game . The Jets ' first regular season home game at the new stadium was held on September 13 , 2010 and was shown nationwide on Monday Night Football . New York lost to the Ravens 10 – 9 . Team owners voted to have the stadium host Super Bowl XLVIII , held in 2014 . 
 = = Rivalries = = 
 = = = New England Patriots = = = 
 Since the inception of the American Football League , the Jets have maintained what is considered to be a marquee rivalry with the New England Patriots . The rivalry was relatively docile in its early years until 1966 when the Jets removed the Patriots , who had hopes of appearing in Super Bowl I , from playoff contention with a 38 – 28 defeat at Shea Stadium . The Patriots returned the favor in 1985 when the Jets lost to New England 26 – 14 in the wild card round ; the Patriots went on to Super Bowl XX where they were defeated by the Bears . 
 The rivalry began to escalate and receive increased media attention in 1997 when a disgruntled Bill Parcells vacated his head coaching position with New England to accept the same position with New York . The following year , the Jets signed Pro Bowl running back Curtis Martin from the Patriots . After the Jets declined during Parcells ' third year , Parcells decided to resign as head coach . His assistant , Bill Belichick , resigned the next day in order to become the head coach of the Patriots instead . 
 A critical turning point of the rivalry took place on September 23 , 2001 when Jets linebacker Mo Lewis tackled Drew Bledsoe , leaving the veteran with internal bleeding . This provided an opportunity for Tom Brady to take over as the starting quarterback and during his tenure , Brady successfully guided New England to four Super Bowl titles . In 2006 , Eric Mangini , an assistant under Belichick , left New England to join the Jets as their head coach . Under Mangini , the famous <unk> incident took place , further escalating tensions between both clubs . When Rex Ryan was hired as the team 's head coach , the rivalry further escalated due to an increased war of words between both teams . In January 2011 , the two met in a Divisional Round playoff game . The visiting Jets pulled a 28 – 21 upset to advance to the AFC Championship Game , which they ultimately lost one week later to the Pittsburgh Steelers . 
 = = = Buffalo Bills = = = 
 = = = Miami Dolphins = = = 
 New York has maintained a rivalry with the Miami Dolphins since the Dolphins ' inception in 1966 . One of the most famous games in Jets history took place in 1994 when the Dolphins ran the Fake Spike play , giving them an improbable victory and halting the Jets ' momentum that season , serving as a precursor to the Jets ' next two unsuccessful years under Rich Kotite . The Jets went on to complete an improbable victory of their own on October 23 , 2000 in what is known as The Monday Night Miracle . The Jets , trailing the Dolphins 30 – 7 at the end of the third quarter , rallied in the fourth quarter scoring 23 unanswered points , eventually winning in overtime with a 40 @-@ yard John Hall kick . 
 When Rex Ryan became New York 's head coach , there was an increased war of words between the clubs culminating with Ryan flashing an obscene gesture to heckling Dolphins fans in January 2010 . The rivalry continued between both teams when Sal <unk> , then the strength and conditioning coach of the Jets , tripped Dolphins cornerback Nolan Carroll . Carroll was not seriously injured and <unk> resigned nearly two months later . 
 = = = New York Giants = = = 
 The New York Jets previously maintained a high tension rivalry against their in @-@ town counterparts , the New York Giants , that has since diminished due to the infrequency with which the teams meet in the regular season . The pinnacle of the rivalry came on August 17 , 1969 when both the Jets and Giants met for the first time , in a preseason game which was viewed as a " turf war " by both opponents . The Giants , considered a mediocre team at the time , were regarded as underdogs and were under much scrutiny by the media and their fans . Ultimately , the Jets bested their rival 37 – 14 ; this would result in the firing of Giants coach Allie Sherman . 
 The Jets met the Giants in 1988 during the final game of the regular season . The Jets , with a 7 – 7 – 1 record , had little to lose as their hopes for playoff contention had vanished . The Giants , however , were contending for a playoff spot and a victory would have secured their spot and their division title . Although the six point favorites , the Giants were unable to overcome the Jets defense which saw the Jets sack quarterback Phil Simms eight times . With the Jets ' victory and victories by the Rams and Eagles , the Giants were eliminated from playoff contention and the Jets gained respect in the eyes of many . 
 In spite of the big sibling rivalry that has resulted in trash talk between the players , both teams have formed an unexpected and consequently strong partnership sharing Giants Stadium for 26 years and MetLife Stadium , a venture in which both teams own a 50 % share of the stadium . The rivalry regained much of its tension in the 2011 NFL season when the Jets and Giants met in Week 16 . Both teams needed a victory to keep their playoffs hope alive and there was significant trash talk between Rex Ryan and his players and many of the Giants in the weeks leading up to the game . Ryan and Giants running back Brandon Jacobs reportedly came close to blows after the game , a 29 – 14 win by the Giants . 
 = = Logos and uniforms = = 
 The Jets have undergone three significant uniform changes with minor alterations throughout the years . As the Titans of New York , the team wore blue and gold uniforms similar to that of Notre Dame 's . The well @-@ known green and white uniforms came about in 1963 when the team was renamed . The franchise introduced Titans of New York throwback uniforms in 2007 to commemorate their heritage . 
 = = Cheerleading squad = = 
 The team originally named the Jets Flag Crew was established in 2006 . In 2007 , the group underwent an expansion and was appropriately renamed the Jets Flight Crew . The squad regularly performs choreographed routines during the team 's home contests . Auditions have been held annually since their inception to attract new members . 
 The Jets Junior Flight Crew was established in 2010 offering children the opportunity to train with the Flight Crew while improving their " talent and abilities in a non @-@ competitive environment . " 
 = = Radio and television = = 
 The Jets ' current flagship radio station is WEPN 98 @.@ 7 ESPN with Bob <unk> , as the play @-@ by @-@ play announcer and former Jet Marty Lyons of the Sack Exchange , as the color analyst . 
 Any preseason games not nationally televised are shown on WCBS @-@ TV . SportsNet New York , which serves as the official home of the Jets , airs over 250 hours of " exclusive , in depth " material on the team in high definition . 
 = = Statistics = = 
 This is a partial list of the Jets ' last five completed seasons . For the full season @-@ by @-@ season franchise results , see List of New York Jets seasons . 
 Note : The Finish , Wins , Losses , and Ties columns list regular season results and exclude any postseason play . 
 Record as of December 28 , 2014 
