 On 17 January 1920 , Prohibition was instituted by law in the United States . Soon , the smuggling of alcoholic beverages along the coastlines of the United States became widespread and blatant . The Treasury Department eventually determined that the United States Coast Guard simply did not have the ships to constitute a successful patrol . To cope with the problem , President Calvin Coolidge in 1924 authorized the transfer from the Navy to the Coast Guard of twenty old destroyers that were in reserve and out of commission . Porter was reactivated and transferred to the Treasury Department on 7 June 1924 for use by the Coast Guard . 
 Designated CG @-@ 7 , Porter was commissioned on 20 February 1925 , and was stationed in New York for duties on the " Rum Patrol " to aid in the attempt to enforce prohibition laws . During her Coast Guard service , Porter captured the rum @-@ running vessel <unk> II ( the former Louise ) off the coast of Long Island . 
 After the United States Congress proposed the Twenty @-@ first Amendment to end prohibition in February 1933 , plans were made for Porter to be returned to the Navy . On 27 May 1933 , Porter arrived at the Philadelphia Navy Yard , and was decommissioned nine days later , on 5 June . Porter was transferred back to the Navy on 30 June . Later in 1933 the ship was renamed DD @-@ 59 in order to free the name Porter for a new destroyer of the same name . DD @-@ 59 remained in noncommissioned status until struck from the Naval Vessel Register on 5 July 1934 . She was sold for scrap on 22 August in accordance with the London Naval Treaty . 
 = Fall Down ( will.i.am song ) = 
 " Fall Down " is a song by American recording artist will.i.am featuring Miley Cyrus from his fourth studio album # willpower ( 2013 ) . It was released on April 16 , 2013 by Interscope Records as a promotional single from the record ; it was later serviced to Australian radio stations later that year as the third single from the project . The song was written and produced by will.i.am , Dr. Luke , Benny Blanco , and Cirkut . " Fall Down " is an electropop and hip hop song ; it strays from the electronic dance elements displayed in will.i.am 's earlier singles " Scream & Shout " and " # thatPower " , and instead leans towards an urban contemporary style . 
 " Fall Down " received generally negative reviews from music critics , who were disappointed with its overall production and drew comparisons to the work of American recording artist Kesha . It peaked at number 58 on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 , and charted in the lower ends of several record charts worldwide . However , the song reached numbers 14 and 15 on the Australian ARIA Charts and the Official New Zealand Music Chart , respectively , being certified gold in both countries . In the United States , the track was promoted with live performances on Jimmy Kimmel Live ! and Good Morning America . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Fall Down " marks the first of three collaborations between will.i.am and Cyrus in 2013 . In October , he was credited as a songwriter and producer on the track " Do My Thang " from her fourth studio album Bangerz , while Cyrus was featured on his track " Feelin ' Myself " from the reissue of his fourth studio album # willpower in <unk> will.i.am first became interested in collaborating with Cyrus after hearing an earlier version of her single " Wrecking Ball " , and came in contact with her through producer Mike Will Made It . 
 " Fall Down " was first released on April 16 , 2013 , preceding the release of # willpower in the United States . It served as the follow @-@ up to will.i.am 's earlier singles " Scream & Shout " with Britney Spears and " # thatPower " with Justin Bieber , and served as a promotional single from the <unk> will.i.am and Cyrus promoted the song with live performances on Jimmy Kimmel Live ! and Good Morning America in June . It was released to Australian radio stations in July 2013 as the third single from the record ; an Italian release followed on September 6 . 
 In contrast from the electronic dance music elements presented in " Scream & Shout " and " # thatPower " , " Fall Down " leans towards an urban contemporary musical style . The chorus incorporates electropop elements , while the verses tend towards a hip hop format , while the track itself culminates with an orchestral <unk> will.i.am mentioned the bridge as his favorite piece of # willpower , and described the overall song as if " Quincy Jones just sneezed on it . " Lyrically , the track describes the positive impact a couple has on each other , as seen in the lines " Girl , you 're like an elevator cause you always pick me up / Girl , you 're like a doctor when I 'm sick you always stitch me up " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Fall Down " received generally negative reviews from music critics , who were disappointed with its overall production . Writing for AllMusic , Fred Thomas was displeased that featuring " big gun " Cyrus still resulted in a " manufactured disposable pop moment " , and further elaborated that the song felt like one of # willpower 's " interminable 15 tracks [ that ] were written in the studio moments before they were recorded . " Sam Lansky from Idolator shared a similar sentiment , opining that Cyrus felt " mostly phoned @-@ in " by comparison with the " emotional punch " Cyrus delivered on her collaboration with American rapper Snoop Lion , " <unk> and Heartbreaks " . Andy Peterson of Contactmusic.com criticized the production of the track , stating that listeners are " treated to the sort of identikit trance @-@ plus @-@ autotune sound that 's been annexing American teen culture in the last couple of years " . 
 Writing for entertainment.ie , Karen Lawler criticized lyrics like " you could be my Coca Cola , let me sip it up " for acting as a substitute for the " articulate rhymes on which [ will.i.am ] built his reputation " , Brent Faulkner from PopMatters agreed that the lyrical content was sub @-@ par , and called the song itself " utterly ridiculous " . Mesfin Fekadu from The Huffington Post called Cyrus ' contributions to the song " forgettable " . Gregory Hicks of The Michigan Daily compared " Fall Down " to " Die Young " and " Crazy Kids " by American recording artist Kesha , all three of which were produced by Dr. Luke , which Hicks felt indicated that " Dr. Luke ’ s production and writing continues to dwindle as he copy and pastes his work with Ke $ ha onto this will.i.am track . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 In the United States , " Fall Down " peaked at number 58 on the Billboard Hot 100 . It also charted at number four on the Dance / Electronic Songs component chart . The track reached number 15 on the Canadian Hot 100 , which is also organized by Billboard . In Europe , the track experienced varying commercial success . " Fall Down " peaked at number 17 on the Irish Singles Chart , and charted at number 37 on the Swedish Sverigetopplistan . It reached number 45 on the Ö3 Austria Top 40 and number 48 on the French SNEP . The track respectively peaked at numbers 50 and 52 on the Wallonia Ultratop and the Flanders Ultratip in Belgian , and respectively reached numbers five and 30 on the Dance charts in each region . It also charted at number 59 on the Swiss Hitparade . In Oceania , " Fall Down " respectively peaked at numbers 14 and 15 on the Australian ARIA Charts and the Official New Zealand Music Chart ; it was certified platinum in Australia , and gold in New Zealand . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Joseph Johnson ( publisher ) = 
 Joseph Johnson ( 15 November 1738 – 20 December 1809 ) was an influential 18th @-@ century London bookseller and publisher . His publications covered a wide variety of genres and a broad spectrum of opinions on important issues . Johnson is best known for publishing the works of radical thinkers such as Mary Wollstonecraft , William Godwin , Thomas Malthus , and Joel Barlow , feminist economist Priscilla Wakefield , as well as religious dissenters such as Joseph Priestley , Anna Laetitia Barbauld , Gilbert Wakefield , and George Walker . 
 In the 1760s , Johnson established his publishing business , which focused primarily on religious works . He also became friends with Priestley and the artist Henry Fuseli — two relationships that lasted his entire life and brought him much business . In the 1770s and 1780s , Johnson expanded his business , publishing important works in medicine and children 's literature as well as the popular poetry of William Cowper and Erasmus Darwin . Throughout his career , Johnson helped shape the thought of his era not only through his publications , but also through his support of innovative writers and thinkers . He fostered the open discussion of new ideas , particularly at his famous weekly dinners , the regular attendees of which became known as the " Johnson Circle " . 
 In the 1790s , Johnson aligned himself with the supporters of the French Revolution , and published an increasing number of political pamphlets in addition to a prominent journal , the Analytical Review , which offered British reformers a voice in the public sphere . In 1799 , he was indicted on charges of seditious libel for publishing a pamphlet by the Unitarian minister Gilbert Wakefield . After spending six months in prison , albeit under relatively comfortable conditions , Johnson published fewer political works . In the last decade of his career , Johnson did not seek out many new writers ; however , he remained successful by publishing the collected works of authors such as William Shakespeare . 
 Johnson 's friend John Aikin eulogized him as " the father of the <unk> " . He has also been called " the most important publisher in England from 1770 until 1810 " for his appreciation and promotion of young writers , his emphasis on publishing inexpensive works directed at a growing middle @-@ class readership , and his cultivation and advocacy of women writers at a time when they were viewed with skepticism . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Johnson was the second son of Rebecca Turner Johnson and John Johnson , a Baptist yeoman who lived in Everton , Liverpool . Religious Dissent marked Johnson from the beginning of his life , as two of his mother 's relatives were prominent Baptist ministers and his father was a deacon . Liverpool , at the time of Johnson 's youth , was fast becoming a bustling urban centre and was one of the most important commercial ports in England . These two characteristics of his home — Dissent and commercialism — remained central elements in Johnson 's character throughout his life . 
 At the age of fifteen , Johnson was apprenticed to George Keith , a London bookseller who specialized in publishing religious tracts such as Reflections on the Modern but Unchristian Practice of <unk> . As Gerald Tyson , Johnson 's major modern biographer , explains , it was unusual for the younger son of a family living in relative obscurity to move to London and to become a bookseller . Scholars have speculated that Johnson was indentured to Keith because the bookseller was associated with Liverpool Baptists . Keith and Johnson published several works together later in their careers , which suggests that the two remained on friendly terms after Johnson started his own business . 
 = = = 1760s : Beginnings in publishing = = = 
 Upon completing his apprenticeship in 1761 , Johnson opened his own business , but he struggled to establish himself , moving his shop several times within one year . Two of his early publications were a kind of day planner : The Complete Pocket @-@ Book ; Or , Gentleman and Tradesman 's Daily Journal for the Year of Our Lord , 1763 and The Ladies New and <unk> Pocket Memorandum Book . Such <unk> were popular and Johnson outsold his rivals by publishing his both earlier and cheaper . Johnson continued to sell these profitable books until the end of the 1790s , but as a religious Dissenter , he was primarily interested in publishing books that would improve society . Therefore , religious texts dominated his book list , although he also published works relating to Liverpool ( his home town ) and medicine . However , as a publisher Johnson attended to more than the selling and distributing of books , as scholar Leslie Chard explains : 
 Besides the actual selling of books to the public , the bookseller saw to their publication , arrangements with printers , with advertisers , with other booksellers in the city , the provinces , and even foreign countries , in short to their distribution . He also sold , incongruously but typically , patent medicine . But what probably most occupied his time was the welfare of his authors : at the most he fed and housed them , but at the least he served as banker , postal clerk and packager , literary agent and editor , social chairman , and psychiatrist . 
 As Johnson became successful and his reputation grew , other publishers began including him in <unk> — syndicates that spread the risk of publishing a costly or inflammatory book among several firms . 
 = = = = Formative friendships = = = = 
 In his late twenties , Johnson formed two friendships that were to shape the rest of his life . The first was with the painter and writer Henry Fuseli , who was described as " quick witted and pugnacious " . Fuseli 's early 19th @-@ century biographer writes that when Fuseli met Johnson in 1764 , Johnson " had already acquired the character which he retained during life , — that of a man of great integrity , and encourager of literary men as far as his means extended , and an excellent judge of their productions " . Fuseli became and remained Johnson 's closest friend . 
 The second and possibly more consequential friendship was with Joseph Priestley , the renowned natural philosopher and Unitarian theologian . This friendship led Johnson to discard the Baptist faith of his youth and to adopt Unitarianism , as well as to pursue forms of political dissent . Johnson 's success as a publisher can be explained in large part through his association with Priestley , as Priestley published dozens of books with him and introduced him to many other Dissenting writers . Through Priestley 's recommendation , Johnson was able to issue the works of many Dissenters , especially those from Warrington Academy : the poet , essayist , and children 's author Anna Laetitia Barbauld ; her brother , the physician and writer , John Aikin ; the naturalist Johann Reinhold Forster ; the Unitarian minister and controversialist Gilbert Wakefield ; the moralist William Enfield ; and the political economist Thomas Malthus . Tyson writes that " the relationship between the Academy and the bookseller was mutually very useful . Not only did many of the tutors send occasional manuscripts for publication , but also former pupils often sought him out in later years to issue their works . " By printing the works of Priestley and other of the Warrington tutors , Johnson also made himself known to an even larger network of Dissenting intellectuals , including those in the Lunar Society , which expanded his business further . Priestley , in turn , trusted Johnson enough to handle the logistics of his induction into the Royal Society . 
 = = = = Partnerships = = = = 
 In July 1765 , Johnson moved his business to the more visible 8 Paternoster Row and formed a partnership with B. Davenport , of whom little is known aside from his association with Johnson . Chard postulates that they were attracted by mutual beliefs because the firm of Johnson and Davenport published even more religious works , including many that were " rigidly Calvinistic " . However , in the summer of 1767 , Davenport and Johnson parted ways ; scholars have speculated that this rupture occurred because Johnson 's religious views were becoming more unorthodox . 
 Newly independent , with a solid reputation , Johnson did not need to struggle to establish himself as he had early in his career . Within a year , he published nine first editions himself as well as thirty @-@ two works in partnership with other booksellers . He was also a part of " the select circle of <unk> that gathered at the Chapter Coffee House " , which was the centre of social and commercial life for publishers and booksellers in 18th @-@ century London . Major publishing ventures had started at the Chapter and important writers " clubbed " there . 
 In 1768 Johnson went into partnership with John Payne ( Johnson was probably the senior partner ) ; the following year they published 50 titles . Under Johnson and Payne , the firm published a wider array of works than under Johnson and Davenport . Although Johnson looked to his business interests , he did not publish works only to enrich himself . Projects that encouraged free discussion appealed to Johnson ; for example , he helped Priestley publish the Theological Repository , a financial failure that nevertheless fostered open debate of theological questions . Although the journal lost Johnson money in the 1770s , he was willing to begin publishing it again in 1785 because he endorsed its values . 
 The late 1760s was a time of growing radicalism in Britain , and although Johnson did not participate actively in the events , he facilitated the speech of those who did , e.g. , by publishing works on the disputed election of John Wilkes and the agitation in the American colonies . Despite his growing interest in politics , Johnson ( with Payne ) still published primarily religious works and the occasional travel narrative . As Tyson writes , " in the first decade of his career Johnson 's significance as a bookseller derived from a desire to provide dissent ( religious and political ) a forum " . 
 = = = = Fire = = = = 
 Johnson was on the verge of real success when his shop was ravaged by fire on 9 January 1770 . As one London newspaper reported it : 
 Yesterday morning , between six and seven o 'clock a fire broke out at Messrs. Johnson and Payne 's , Booksellers , in Paternoster Row , which consumed that house , Mr. Cock 's , Printer , and Mr. Upton 's , an Auctioneer ... in which last mentioned house was kept the whole stock of Bibles , Common Prayers , Etc. belonging to the Proprietors of the Oxford Press ... It was a considerable time before the engines could be brought to play to any purpose , on account their being clogged by ice and snow . The several families were all in bed when the fire was first discovered , and Mr. Johnson had but just time to alarm his partner and the rest of the family , and they escaped , saving only some of their books of account , the whole stock in trade and furniture being destroyed . 
 At the time Fuseli had been living with Johnson and he also lost all of his possessions , including the first printing of his Remarks on the Writings and Conduct of J. J. Rousseau . Johnson and Payne subsequently dissolved their partnership . It was an amicable separation , and Johnson even published some of Payne 's works in later years . 
 = = 1770s : Establishment = = 
 By August 1770 , just seven months after fire had destroyed his shop and goods , Johnson had re @-@ established himself at 72 St. Paul 's Churchyard — the largest shop on a street of booksellers — where he was to remain for the rest of his life . How Johnson managed this feat is unclear ; he later cryptically told a friend that " his friends came about him , and set him up again " . An early 19th @-@ century biography states that " Mr. Johnson was now so well known , and had been so highly respected , that on this unfortunate occasion , his friends with one accord met , and contributed to enable him to begin business again " . Chard speculates that Priestley assisted him since they were such close friends . 
 = = = Religious publications and advocacy of Unitarianism = = = 
 Immediately upon reopening his business , Johnson started publishing theological and political works by Priestley and other Dissenters . Starting in the 1770s , Johnson published more specifically Unitarian works , as well as texts advocating religious toleration ; he also became personally involved in the Unitarian cause . He served as a conduit for information between Dissenters across the country and supplied provincial publishers with religious publications , thereby enabling Dissenters to spread their beliefs easily . Johnson participated in efforts to repeal the Test and Corporation Acts , which restricted the civil rights of Dissenters . In one six @-@ year period of the 1770s , Johnson was responsible for publishing nearly one @-@ third of the Unitarian works on the issue . He continued his support in 1787 , 1789 , and 1790 , when Dissenters introduced repeal bills in Parliament , and he published much of the pro @-@ repeal literature written by Priestley and others . 
 Johnson was also instrumental in Theophilus Lindsey 's founding of the first Unitarian chapel in London . With some difficulty , as Unitarians were feared at that time and their beliefs held illegal until the Doctrine of the Trinity Act 1813 , Johnson obtained the building for Essex Street Chapel and , with the help of barrister John Lee , who later became Attorney @-@ General , its licence . To capitalize on the opening of the new chapel in addition to helping out his friends , Johnson published Lindsey 's inaugural sermon , which sold out in four days . Johnson continued to attend and participate actively in this congregation throughout his life . Lindsey and the church 's other minister , John Disney , became two of Johnson 's most active writers . In the 1780s , Johnson continued to advocate Unitarianism and published a series of controversial writings by Priestley arguing for its legitimacy . These writings did not make Johnson much money , but they agreed with his philosophy of open debate and religious toleration . Johnson also became the publisher for the Society for Promoting the Knowledge of the Scriptures , a Unitarian group determined to release new worship materials and commentaries on the Bible . ( See British and Foreign Unitarian Association # Publishing . ) 
 Although Johnson is known for publishing Unitarian works , particularly those of Priestley , he also published the works of other Dissenters , Anglicans , and Jews . The common thread uniting his disparate religious publications was religious toleration . For example , he published the Reverend George Gregory 's 1787 English translation of Bishop Robert Lowth 's seminal book on Hebrew poetry , De Sacra <unk> <unk> . Gregory published several other works with Johnson , such as Essays Historical and Moral ( 1785 ) and Sermons with Thoughts on the Composition and Delivery of a Sermon ( 1787 ) . Gregory exemplified the type of author that Johnson preferred to work with : industrious and liberal @-@ minded , but not bent on self @-@ glorification . Yet , as Helen Braithwaite writes in her study of Johnson , his " enlightened pluralistic approach was also seen by its opponents as inherently permissive , opening the door to all forms of unhealthy questioning and scepticism , and at odds with the stable virtues of established religion and authority " . 
 = = = American revolution = = = 
 Partially as a result of his association with British Dissenters , Johnson became involved in publishing tracts and sermons in defence of the American revolutionaries . He began with Priestley 's Address to Protestant Dissenters of All Denominations , on the Approaching Election of Members of Parliament ( 1774 ) , which urged Dissenters to vote for candidates that guaranteed the American colonists their freedom . Johnson continued his series of anti @-@ government , pro @-@ American pamphlets by publishing Fast Day sermons by Joshua Toulmin , George Walker , Ebenezer Radcliff , and Newcome Cappe . Braithwaite describes these as " well @-@ articulated critiques of government " that " were not only unusual but potentially subversive and disruptive " , and she concludes that Johnson 's decision to publish so much of this material indicates that he supported the political position it espoused . Moreover , Johnson published what Braithwaite calls " probably the most influential English defence of the colonists " , Richard Price 's Observations on the Nature of Civil Liberty ( 1776 ) . Over 60 @,@ 000 copies were sold in a year . In 1780 Johnson also issued the first collected political works of Benjamin Franklin in England , a political risk as the American colonies were in rebellion by that time . Johnson did not usually reprint colonial texts — his ties to the revolution were primarily through Dissenters . Thus , the works published by Johnson emphasized both colonial independence and the rights for which Dissenters were fighting — " the right to petition for redress of grievance , the maintenance and protection of equal civil rights , and the inalienable right to liberty of conscience " . 
 = = = Informative texts = = = 
 After 1770 , Johnson began to publish a wider array of books , particularly scientific and medical texts . One of the most important was John Hunter 's A Natural History of the Human Teeth , Part I ( 1771 ) , which " elevated dentistry to the level of surgery " . Johnson also supported doctors when they questioned the efficacy of cures , such as with John Millar in his Observations on Antimony ( 1774 ) , which claimed that Dr James 's Fever Powder was ineffective . This was a risky publication for Johnson , because this patent medicine was quite popular and his fellow bookseller John Newbery had made his fortune from selling it . 
 In 1777 Johnson published the remarkable Laws Respecting Women , as they Regard Their Natural Rights , which is an explication , for the layperson , of exactly what its title suggests . As Tyson comments , " the ultimate value of this book lies in its arming women with the knowledge of their legal rights in situations where they had traditionally been vulnerable because of ignorance " . Johnson published Laws Respecting Women anonymously , but it is sometimes credited to Elizabeth Chudleigh Bristol , known for her bigamous marriage to the 2nd Duke of Kingston @-@ upon @-@ Hull after having previously privately married Augustus John Hervey , afterwards 3rd Earl of Bristol . This publication foreshadowed Johnson 's efforts to promote works about women 's issues — such as A Vindication of the Rights of Woman ( 1792 ) — and his support of women writers . 
 = = = = Revolution in children 's literature = = = = 
 Johnson also contributed significantly to children 's literature . His publication of Barbauld 's Lessons for Children ( 1778 – 79 ) spawned a revolution in the newly emerging genre . Its plain style , mother @-@ child dialogues , and conversational tone inspired a generation of authors , such as Sarah Trimmer . Johnson encouraged other women to write in this genre , such as Charlotte Smith , but his recommendation always came with a caveat of how difficult it was to write well for children . For example , he wrote to Smith , " perhaps you cannot employ your time and extraordinary talents more usefully for the public & your self [ sic ] , than in composing books for children and young people , but I am very sensible it is <unk> [ sic ] difficult to acquire that simplicity of style which is their great recommendation " . He also advised William Godwin and his second wife , Mary Jane Clairmont , on the publication of their Juvenile Library ( started in 1805 ) . Not only did Johnson encourage the writing of British children 's literature , but he also helped sponsor the translation and publication of popular French works such as Arnaud <unk> 's L 'Ami des <unk> ( 1782 – 83 ) . 
 In addition to books for children , Johnson published schoolbooks and textbooks for <unk> , such as John Hewlett 's Introduction to Spelling and Reading ( 1786 ) , William Nicholson 's Introduction to Natural Philosophy ( 1782 ) , and his friend John Bonnycastle 's An Introduction to <unk> and Practical Mathematics ( 1782 ) . Johnson also published books on education and childrearing , such as Wollstonecraft 's first book , Thoughts on the Education of Daughters ( 1787 ) . 
 By the end of the 1770s , Johnson had become an established publisher . Writers — particularly Dissenters — sought him out , and his home started to become the centre of a radical and stimulating intellectual milieu . Because he was willing to publish multiple opinions on issues , he was respected as a publisher by writers from across the political spectrum . Johnson published many Unitarian works , but he also issued works criticizing them ; although he was an abolitionist , he also published works arguing in favour of the slave trade ; he supported inoculation , but he also published works critical of the practice . 
 = = 1780s : Success = = 
 During the 1780s , Johnson achieved success : he did well financially and his firm published more books with other firms . Although Johnson had begun his career as a relatively cautious publisher of religious and scientific tracts , he was now able to take more risks and he encouraged friends to recommend works to him , creating a network of informal reviewers . Yet Johnson 's business was never large ; he usually had only one assistant and never took on an apprentice . Only in the last years of his life did two relatives assist him . 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 Once Johnson 's financial situation had become secure , he began to publish literary authors , most famously the poet William Cowper . Johnson issued Cowper 's Poems ( 1782 ) and The Task ( 1784 ) at his own expense ( a generous action at a time when authors were often forced to take on the risk of publication ) , and was rewarded with handsome sales of both volumes . Johnson published many of Cowper 's works , including the anonymous satire Anti @-@ <unk> ( 1780 ) , which mocked the work of Cowper 's own cousin , the Rev. Martin Madan , who had advocated polygamy as a solution for prostitution . Johnson even edited and critiqued Cowper 's poetry in manuscript , " much to the advantage of the poems " according to Cowper . In 1791 , Johnson published Cowper 's translations of the Homeric epics ( extensively edited and corrected by Fuseli ) and three years after Cowper 's death in 1800 , Johnson published a biography of the poet by William Hayley . 
 Johnson never published much " creative literature " ; Chard attributes this to " a lingering Calvinistic hostility to ' imaginative ' literature " . Most of the literary works Johnson published were religious or didactic . Some of his most popular productions in this vein were anthologies ; the most famous is probably William Enfield 's The Speaker ( 1774 ) , which went through multiple editions and spawned many imitations , such as Wollstonecraft 's The Female Speaker . 
 = = = Medical and scientific publications = = = 
 Johnson continued his interest in publishing practical medical texts in the 1780s and 1790s ; during the 1780s , he brought out some of his most significant works in this area . According to Johnson 's friend , the physician John Aikin , he intentionally established one of his first shops on " the track of the Medical Students resorting to the Hospitals in the Borough " , where they would be sure to see his wares , which helped to establish him in medical publishing . Johnson published the works of the scientist @-@ Dissenters he met through Priestley and Barbauld , such as Thomas Beddoes and Thomas Young . He issued the children 's book on birds produced by the industrialist Samuel Galton and the Lunar Society 's translation of Linnaeus 's System of Vegetables ( 1783 ) . He also published works by James Edward Smith , " the botanist who brought the Linnaean system to England " . 
 In 1784 , Johnson issued John Haygarth 's An Inquiry How to Prevent Small @-@ Pox , which furthered the understanding and treatment of smallpox . Johnson published several subsequent works by Haygarth that promoted inoculation ( and later vaccination ) for the healthy , as well as quarantining for the sick . He also published the work of James Earle , a prominent surgeon , whose significant book on lithotomy was illustrated by William Blake , and Matthew Baillie 's Morbid Anatomy ( 1793 ) , " the first text of pathology devoted to that science exclusively by systematic arrangement and design " . 
 Not only did Johnson publish the majority of Priestley 's theological works , but he also published his scientific works , such as Experiments and Observations on Different Kinds of Air ( 1774 – 77 ) in which Priestley announced his discovery of oxygen . Johnson also published the works of Carl Wilhelm Scheele and Antoine Lavoisier , both of whom made their own claims of having discovered oxygen . When Lavoisier began to publish works in France on the " new chemistry " that he had developed ( which included today 's modern notions of element and compound ) , Johnson had these translated and printed immediately , despite his association with Priestley who argued strenuously against Lavoisier 's new system . Johnson was the first to publish an English edition of Lavoisier 's early writings on chemistry and he kept up with the ongoing debate . These works did well for Johnson and increased his visibility among men of science . 
 = = = Johnson Circle and dinners = = = 
 With time , Johnson 's home became a nexus for radical thinkers , who appreciated his open @-@ mindedness , generous spirit , and humanitarianism . Although usually separated by geography , such thinkers would meet and debate with one another at Johnson 's house in London , often over dinner . This network not only brought authors into contact with each other , it also brought new writers to Johnson 's business . For example , Priestley introduced John Newton to Johnson , Newton brought John Hewlett , and Hewlett invited Mary Wollstonecraft , who in turn attracted Mary Hays who brought William Godwin . With this broad network of acquaintances and reputation for free @-@ thinking publications , Johnson became the favourite publisher of a generation of writers and thinkers . By bringing inventive , thoughtful people together , he " stood at the very heart of British intellectual life " for over twenty years . Importantly , Johnson 's circle was not made up entirely of either liberals or radicals . Chard emphasizes that it " was held together less by political liberalism than by a common interest in ideas , free enquiry , and creative expression in various fields " . 
 As Tyson notes , although " Johnson 's circle " is usually used in the singular , there were at least two such " circles " . The first was made up of a group of London associates : Fuseli , Gregory , Bonnycastle , and Geddes . The second consisted of Johnson 's writers from farther afield , such as Priestley , Thomas Henry , Thomas Percival , Barbauld , Aikin , and Enfield . Later , more radicals would join , including Wollstonecraft , Wakefield , John Horne Tooke , and Thomas Christie . 
 Johnson 's dinners became legendary and it appears , from evidence collected from diaries , that a large number of people attended each one . Although there were few regulars , except perhaps for Johnson 's close London friends ( Fuseli , Bonnycastle and , later , Godwin ) , the large number of luminaries , such as Thomas Paine , who attended attests to the reputation of these dinners . The enjoyment and intellectual stimulation that these dinners provided is evidenced by the numerous references to them in diaries and letters . Barbauld wrote to her brother in 1784 that " our evenings , particularly at Johnson 's , were so truly social and lively , that we protracted them sometimes till — but I am not telling tales . " At one dinner in 1791 , Godwin records that the conversation focused on " monarch , Tooke , [ Samuel ] Johnson , Voltaire , pursuits , and religion " [ emphasis Godwin 's ] . Although the conversation was stimulating , Johnson apparently only served his guests simple meals , such as boiled cod , veal , vegetables , and rice pudding . Many of the people that met at these dinners became fast friends , as did Fuseli and Bonnycastle ; Godwin and Wollstonecraft eventually married . 
 = = = Friendship with Mary Wollstonecraft = = = 
 The friendship between Johnson and Mary Wollstonecraft was pivotal in both of their lives , and illustrates the active role that Johnson played in developing writing talent . In 1787 , Wollstonecraft was in financial straits : she had just been dismissed from a governess position in Ireland and had moved back to London . She had resolved to be an author in an era that afforded few professional opportunities to women . After Unitarian schoolteacher John Hewlett suggested to Wollstonecraft that she submit her writings to Johnson , an enduring and mutually supportive relationship blossomed between Johnson and Wollstonecraft . He dealt with her creditors , secured lodgings for her , and advanced payment on her first book , Thoughts on the Education of Daughters ( 1787 ) , and her first novel , Mary : A Fiction ( 1788 ) . Johnson included Wollstonecraft in the exalted company of his weekly soirées , where she met famous personages , such as Thomas Paine and her future husband , William Godwin . Wollstonecraft , who is believed to have written some 200 articles for his periodical , the Analytical Review , regarded Johnson as a true friend . After a disagreement , she sent him the following note the next morning : 
 You made me very low @-@ spirited last night , by your manner of talking — You are my only friend — the only person I am intimate with . — I never had a father , or a brother — you have been both to me , ever since I knew you — yet I have sometimes been very petulant . — I have been thinking of those instances of ill @-@ humour and quickness , and they appeared like crimes . Yours sincerely , Mary . 
 Johnson offered Wollstonecraft work as a translator , prompting her to learn French and German . More importantly , Johnson provided encouragement at crucial moments during the writing of her seminal political treatises A Vindication of the Rights of Men ( 1790 ) and A Vindication of the Rights of Woman ( 1792 ) . 
 = = 1790s : Years of radicalism = = 
 As radicalism took hold in Britain in the 1790s , Johnson became increasingly involved in its causes : he was a member of the Society for Constitutional Information , which was attempting to reform Parliament ; he published works defending Dissenters after the religiously motivated Birmingham Riots in 1791 ; and he testified on behalf of those arrested during the 1794 Treason Trials . Johnson published works championing the rights of slaves , Jews , women , prisoners , Dissenters , chimney sweeps , abused animals , university students forbidden from marrying , victims of press gangs , and those unjustly accused of violating the game laws . 
 Political literature became Johnson 's mainstay in the 1790s : he published 118 works , which amounted to 57 % of his total political output . As Chard notes , " hardly a year went by without at least one anti @-@ war and one anti @-@ slave trade publication from Johnson " . In particular , Johnson published abolitionist works , such as minister and former slave @-@ ship captain John Newton 's Thoughts Upon the African Slave Trade ( 1788 ) , Barbauld 's Epistle to William Wilberforce ( 1791 ) , and Captain John Gabriel Stedman 's Narrative , of a Five Years ' Expedition , Against the <unk> Negroes of Surinam ( 1796 ) ( with illustrations by Blake ) . Most importantly he helped organize the publication of The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano ( 1789 ) , the autobiography of former slave Olaudah Equiano . 
 Later in the decade , Johnson focused on works about the French revolution , concentrating on those from France itself , but he also published commentary from America by Thomas Jefferson and James Monroe . Johnson 's determination to publish political and revolutionary works , however , fractured his Circles : Dissenters were alienated from Anglicans during efforts to repeal the Test and Corporation Acts and moderates split from radicals during the French revolution . Johnson lost customers , friends , and writers , including the children 's author Sarah Trimmer . Braithwaite speculates that Johnson also lost business due to his willingness to put out works that promoted the " challenging new historicist versions of the scriptures " , such as those by Alexander Geddes . 
 Scholars are , however , careful to note that except for Benjamin Franklin 's works and Joel Barlow 's pamphlets , Johnson did not print anything truly revolutionary . He refused to publish Paine 's Rights of Man and William Blake 's The French Revolution , for example . It is almost impossible to determine Johnson 's own personal political beliefs from the historical record . Marilyn Gaull argues that " if Johnson were radical , indeed if he had any political affiliation ... it was accidental " . Gaull describes Johnson 's " liberalism " as that " of [ a ] generous , open , fair @-@ minded , unbiased defender of causes lost and won " . His real contribution , she contends , was " as a disseminator of contemporary knowledge , especially science , medicine , and pedagogical practice " and as an advocate for a popular style . He encouraged all of his writers to use " plain syntax and colloquial diction " so that " self @-@ educated readers " could understand his publications . Johnson 's association with writers such as Godwin has previously been used to emphasize his radicalism , but Braithwaite points out that Godwin only became a part of Johnson 's Circle late in the 1790s ; Johnson 's closest friends — Priestley , Fuseli , and Bonnycastle — were much more politically moderate . Johnson was not a populist or democratic bookseller : he catered to the self @-@ educating middle class . 
 = = = Revolution controversy = = = 
 In 1790 , with the publication of his Reflections on the Revolution in France , philosopher and statesman Edmund Burke launched the first volley of a vicious pamphlet war in what became known as the Revolution Controversy . Because he had supported the American Revolution , friends and enemies alike expected him to support the French Revolution . His book , which decries the French Revolution , therefore came as a shock to nearly everyone . Priced at an expensive five shillings , it still sold over 10 @,@ 000 copies in a few weeks . Reformers , particularly Dissenters , felt compelled to reply . Johnson 's periodical , the Analytical Review , published a summary and review of Burke 's work within a couple of weeks of its publication . Two weeks later , Wollstonecraft responded to Burke with her Vindication of the Rights of Men . In issuing one of the first and cheapest replies to Burke ( Vindication cost only one shilling ) , Johnson put himself at some risk . Thomas Cooper , who had also written a response to Burke , was later informed by the Attorney General that " although there was no exception to be taken to his pamphlet when in the hands of the upper classes , yet the government would not allow it to appear at a price which would insure its circulation among the people " . Many others soon joined in the fray and Johnson remained at the centre of the maelstrom . By Braithwaite 's count , Johnson published or sold roughly a quarter of the works responding to Burke within the following year . 
 The most notable of all of these responses was Thomas Paine 's Rights of Man . Johnson originally agreed to publish the controversial work , but he backed out later for unknown reasons and J. S. Jordan distributed it ( and was subsequently tried and imprisoned for its publication ) . Braithwaite speculates that Johnson did not agree with Paine 's radical republican statements and was more interested in promoting the rights of Dissenters outlined in the other works he published . After the initial risk was taken by Jordan , however , Johnson published Paine 's work in an expensive edition , which was unlikely to be challenged at law . Yet , when Paine was himself later arrested , Johnson helped raise funds to bail him out and hid him from the authorities . A contemporary satire suggested that Johnson saved Paine from imprisonment : 
 The time may come when J — n 's aid may fail ; 
 Nor clubs combin 'd preserve thee from a jail . 
 Alarmed at the popular appeal of Paine 's Rights of Man , the king issued a proclamation against seditious writings in May 1792 . Booksellers and printers bore the brunt of this law , the effects of which came to a head in the 1794 Treason Trials . Johnson testified , publicly distancing himself from Paine and Barlow , despite the fact that the defendants were received sympathetically by the juries . 
 = = = Poetry = = = 
 During the 1790s alone , Johnson published 103 volumes of poetry — 37 % of his entire output in the genre . The bestselling poetical works of Cowper and Erasmus Darwin enriched Johnson 's firm . Darwin 's innovative The Botanic Garden ( 1791 ) was particularly successful : Johnson paid him 1 @,@ 000 guineas before it was ever released and bought the copyright from him for £ 800 , a staggeringly large sum . The poem contains three " interludes " in the form of dialogues between a poet and his bookseller . The bookseller asks the poet what Tyson calls " leading questions " in order to elucidate the poet 's theory of poetry . Tyson comments " that although the flat questions of the practical @-@ minded bookseller may be meant to parody Johnson 's manner , most likely Darwin did not have him or any other particular bookseller in mind " . After the success of The Botanic Garden , Johnson published Darwin 's work on evolution , Zoonomia ( 1794 – 96 ) ; his treatise A Plan on the Conduct of Female Education ( 1797 ) ; <unk> ; or , the Philosophy of Agriculture and Gardening ( 1800 ) ; and his poem The Temple of Nature ( 1803 ) . According to Braithwaite , The Temple of Nature was Zoonomia in verse and " horrified reviewers with its warring , factious , overly materialistic view of the universe " . 
 Johnson continued to publish the poetic works of Aikin and Barbauld as well as those of George Dyer , Joseph Fawcett , James <unk> , Joel Barlow , Ann Batten <unk> and Edward Williams . Most of the poets that Johnson promoted and published are not remembered today . However , in 1793 , Johnson published William Wordsworth 's An Evening Walk and Descriptive Sketches ; he remained Wordsworth 's publisher until a disagreement separated them in 1799 . Johnson also put out Samuel Taylor Coleridge 's Fears of Solitude ( 1798 ) . They were apparently close enough friends for Coleridge to leave his books at Johnson 's shop when he toured Europe . 
 Johnson had a working relationship with illustrator William Blake for nearly twenty years : Johnson commissioned around 100 engravings from Blake — more than any other publisher — including the second edition of Wollstonecraft 's Original Stories from Real Life ( 1791 ) and Darwin 's Botanic Garden . Johnson may also have had some connection with Blake as a writer , judging from galley proofs of his French Revolution ( 1791 ) . Yet , in An Island in the Moon , Blake represents Johnson as " a bookseller without aesthetic values whose repetitive questions reveal his ignorance " . 
 = = = Translations = = = 
 As part of his endeavour to expose the public to more foreign @-@ language works , Johnson facilitated the translation of educational texts , serious fiction , and philosophy ( he was less interested in translating popular novels ) . In particular , he promoted the translation of the works of persecuted French Girondins , such as Condorcet 's Outlines of an Historical View of the Progress of the Human Mind ( 1795 ) and Madame Roland 's An Appeal to Impartial Posterity ( 1795 ) , which he had released in English within weeks of its debut in France . His publication of a translation of <unk> Volney 's deistic Les <unk> , ou <unk> sur les <unk> des empires ( 1791 ) quickly became a bestseller . Johnson also had some of the most prominent French children 's literature translated , such as the works of Madame de Genlis . 
 Johnson 's most significant contribution in this area was his promotion of German @-@ language literature . Fuseli encouraged him to publish translations of important new German authors , such as Goethe and Schiller . Johnson was one of the few British publishers arranging for the translation of German moral philosophy in the 1790s , and his most important translated publication was arguably Johann Herder 's <unk> zur Philosophie der Geschichte der <unk> ( 1776 ) , which introduced many of the historical and anthropological methods of thought already present on the Continent to Britons . Instead of attempting to faithfully reproduce texts , almost all of Johnson 's translators followed the 18th @-@ century practice of freely adapting their texts , for example by substituting " British " counterparts of " German " examples . 
 = = = Analytical Review and other periodicals = = = 
 Johnson 's first periodicals , Gospel Magazine ( 1766 – ? ) , The Universal Museum and Complete Magazine ( 1765 – 1770 ) , and The Monthly Record of Literature ( 1767 ) , like many 18th @-@ century journals , lasted only a short while , but his later attempts were much more successful . In 1783 , he financed the first quarterly medical periodical in London , the London Medical Journal , founded by Samuel <unk> Simmons , a prominent physician . Explaining the journal 's goals , Simmons wrote that it would provide " an account of new medical books and useful discoveries in physic , and at the same time be a repository for original essays " . The journal lasted until 1790 when it was replaced by another Johnson @-@ Simmons venture , Medical Facts and Observations , which ran until 1797 . 
 In 1788 , Johnson and Thomas Christie , a Unitarian , liberal , and classicist , founded the Analytical Review . It was a gadfly publication , which offered readers a summary and analysis of the flood of new publications issuing from the presses at the end of the 18th century and provided a forum for radical political and religious ideas . Although it aimed at impartiality , its articles were often critical of the Pitt administration and supportive of the French revolutionaries . Tyson calls it " the most outspoken journal of its day " , but Chard argues that it was " never particularly strident and certainly not radical " . It was also instrumental in promoting scientific , philosophical , and literary foreign @-@ language publications , particularly those in German and French . Compared to Johnson 's earlier periodicals , which were generally " marginal sectarian efforts " , the Analytical Review was quite popular . At 1 @,@ 500 copies per issue , it did not have the circulation of the Gentleman 's Magazine , which averaged around 4 @,@ 550 , but it was influential despite its more limited readership . Its conservative counterpart and nemesis was the Anti @-@ Jacobin Review , established specifically to counteract the effects of the Analytical and other radical media outlets . The Analytical was suspended at the end of 1798 following the deaths of Christie and Wollstonecraft in 1796 and 1797 respectively , and the retirement of other contributing editors . 
 In 1796 Johnson joined in a venture to start The Monthly Magazine . Founded by his neighbour Richard Phillips and edited by his friend John Aikin , it was associated with Dissenting interests and was responsible for importing much German philosophical thought into England . According to Marilyn Butler , it " combined many of the best features of the periodicals of the century . It was a miscellany , but more intellectual and much more bookish than the [ Gentleman 's Magazine ] ; hospitable to readers , it nevertheless high @-@ mindedly projected an ideal of liberal , middle @-@ class intellectuality that anticipates both the innovative writing and projected readership " of Blackwood 's and Fraser 's . 
 = = = Changing political winds = = = 
 With the beginning of the violence of the Reign of Terror ( 1793 – 94 ) , those in Britain who had initially supported the French Revolution began to rethink their position and the government became increasingly concerned about the possibility of a British revolution akin to that of the French . The ardour of radicalism that had prevailed in the early 1790s dissipated . Booksellers were arrested and tried for seditious libel , and many of Johnson 's authors either stopped writing or became more conservative . Only a few , like Paine , veered further left . After being forced to testify at the trial of Paine and Thomas Hardy , Johnson published fewer incendiary works , among them Joel Barlow 's Advice to the Privileged Orders ( 1792 ) . Braithwaite describes it as " without doubt the most extreme that Joseph Johnson ever published ( taking him immoderately close to what he later , jokingly , described as a ' hanging ' offence ) " . However , once it became clear that Barlow , like Paine , was becoming radicalized , Johnson refused to publish any more of his works . In 1794 Johnson even considered emigrating to America with Priestley to escape the increasing pressure he felt from conservatives and the government . 
 = = = = 1798 : Trial and imprisonment = = = = 
 Following the publication of Paine 's provocative Rights of Man in 1791 , a sedition law was passed in Britain and , in 1798 , Johnson and several others were put on trial for selling Gilbert Wakefield 's A Reply to Some Parts of the Bishop Llandaff 's Address to the People of Great Britain , a Unitarian work attacking the privileged position of the wealthy . The indictment against Johnson , written on a six @-@ foot parchment roll , read in part : 
 The said Attorney General of our said Lord the King ... giveth the Court here further to understand and be informed that Joseph Johnson late of London bookseller being a malicious , seditious , and ill @-@ disposed person and being greatly disaffected to our said sovereign Lord the King ... wickedly maliciously and seditiously did publish and cause to be published a certain scandalous malicious and seditious libel . 
 Braithwaite explains , " an English jury , in effect , was being asked to consider whether Joseph Johnson 's intentions as a bookseller were really as dangerous and radical as those of Thomas Paine " . An issue of the Analytical Review was even offered as evidence against Johnson . Despite having retained Thomas Erskine as his lawyer , who had successfully defended Hardy and Horne Tooke at the 1794 Treason Trials , and character references from George Fordyce , Aikin , and Hewlett , Johnson was fined £ 50 and sentenced to six months imprisonment at King 's Bench Prison in February 1799 . Braithwaite speculates : 
 If the conduct of the Attorney @-@ General and the Anti @-@ Jacobin are to serve as any kind of barometer of government opinion , then other scores were clearly being settled and it was not merely for [ Johnson 's ] involvement in the sale of Wakefield 's pamphlet but his tenure ... as a stubbornly independent @-@ minded publisher in St Paul 's Churchyard , prominently serving the irreligious and unconstitutional interests of ' rational ' dissent and dangerously sympathetic to the ideas of foreigners ( most visibly through the pages of the Analytical ) that Joseph Johnson was ultimately being brought to book . 
 Johnson 's friends accused Erskine of using the trial as a political platform and not thinking of the best interests of his client . Johnson 's imprisonment was not harsh ; being relatively wealthy , Johnson rented a home for himself within the prison , where he continued to hold his weekly soirées . 
 Although Johnson still believed in the free exchange of ideas and was not embittered by his stay in prison , his publishing habits changed dramatically . After he was released , Johnson published very few political works and none were controversial . Other booksellers followed suit , and Johnson 's friend , Unitarian minister Theophilus Lindsey , wrote that " Johnson 's fate deters them all " . Johnson lost authors after the trial and experienced a noticeable decline in business . Furthermore , he gained fewer new authors , his stalwarts like Priestley began to complain that he was not attending to their business , and he was forced to cease publishing the Analytical Review . 
 = = 1800s : Declining years and death = = 
 As publishing began to change its form in the late 18th and early 19th centuries , large publishing houses pushed out small , independent booksellers . Johnson did not attempt to form or join one of these new firms . In the late 1790s and early 19th century , Johnson 's business declined , particularly as his relatives , John Miles and Roland Hunter , began to take over the daily operations ; Miles was uninterested in the business , and Hunter did not have Johnson 's commercial sense or his ability to choose successful manuscripts . In January 1806 , Johnson 's premises were wracked by a second fire , destroying the building and all of his stock . 
 Although not as active in routine business , Johnson still took an interest in political events . For example , he spearheaded the efforts of the booksellers of London and Westminster to appeal a new copyright law in 1808 . Moreover , although Johnson did not publish controversial political works after his imprisonment , he still undertook important publishing ventures . For example , he administered the publication of a forty @-@ five volume work entitled The British <unk> , edited by Alexander Chalmers ; the complete works of Samuel Johnson ; and a ten @-@ volume set of Shakespeare . Johnson published in more <unk> during the last decade of his life than at any other time . He also occasionally published important new authors , such as the political economist Thomas Malthus , whose Essay on the Principle of Population ( 1798 ) sparked a long debate between idealists and pragmatists . His emphasis on educational books continued or even increased as his interest in publishing contentious political works diminished . He also continued to support his friends , as with Godwin , who needed financial rescue after his play , <unk> , cost him £ 800 . 
 Johnson 's authors became increasingly frustrated with him towards the end of his life , Wakefield calling him " heedless , insipid , [ and ] inactive " and Lindsey describing him as " a worthy and most honest man , but <unk> [ sic ] neglectful often to his own detriment " . Priestley , by then in Pennsylvania , eventually broke off his forty @-@ year relationship with the publisher , when his book orders were delayed several years and Johnson failed to communicate with him regarding the publication of his works . Most of the authors who became upset with Johnson were those writing religious or literary works , the riskiest publishing ventures . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Afflicted by a " chronic respiratory disease " for many years , Johnson died at his home and office on 20 December 1809 , at the age of 71 . The exact nature of his malady is unclear , but his great @-@ nephew Miles wrote to Maria Edgeworth that Johnson was incapacitated with " spasms " and " asthma " near the end of his life . Never having married , he bequeathed his business concerns to his great @-@ nephews , Hunter and Miles ( Hunter took over the business , but could not retain Johnson 's impressive author list and floundered due to his lack of business " acumen " ) . Johnson 's remaining £ 60 @,@ 000 fortune was shared among friends and family : for example , he willed a £ 200 annuity to Fanny Imlay , daughter of Mary Wollstonecraft , and £ 100 to one of Joseph Priestley 's sons . Johnson was buried at Fulham , where he had rented a country home since 1804 , under an epitaph by his life @-@ long friend Henry Fuseli : 
 Beneficent without ostentation , ever ready to produce merit and to relieve distress ; 
 Unassuming in prosperity , not appalled by misfortune ; 
 <unk> to his own , indulgent to the wants of others ; 
 Resigned and cheerful under the torture and malady which he saw gradually destroy his life . 
 According to Chard , Johnson 's obituaries , both those written by his friends and those not , " consistently stress his generosity and his principles " , particularly his integrity . William Godwin 's obituary of 21 December 1809 in the Morning Chronicle was particularly eloquent , calling Johnson an " ornament to his profession " and praising his modesty , his warm heart , and the integrity and clarity of his mind . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Johnson published more books in more fields than any other publisher of his time : " virtually every giant of the second half of the eighteenth century in medicine , science , religion , philosophy , political thought , education , and poetry published at least one work with Johnson " . Johnson 's publications helped to " demystify medicine " for the public and were integral to the scientific revolution . His periodical , the Analytical Review , can be seen as a precursor to the New Statesman . By the end of his career , Johnson had acquired a majority or monopoly share in the ownership of the works of : Shakespeare , Milton , Alexander Pope , Joseph Addison , Richard Steele , Samuel Johnson , and all of the major novelists of the period ( except Samuel Richardson ) . 
 Johnson was known for fostering the development of new writers without worrying about maximizing profits , and for printing works on principle , even if he knew they would make little money . His risky publication of Joel Barlow 's Advice to the Privileged Orders ( 1792 ) , for example , sold 600 copies and barely broke even . He was also instrumental in the creation of the female professional writer , a role that began opening to women only at the end of the 18th century in Britain . By nurturing the writings of Anna Laetitia Barbauld , Charlotte Smith , Mary Hays , Mary Wollstonecraft , and Maria Edgeworth , he gave women the opportunity to demonstrate that they could be both successful and significant authors . Additionally , he published works promoting women 's equality , such as Hays 's An Appeal to the Men of Great Britain ( 1798 ) , which called for an end to the tyrannical rule of men over women ; Johnson 's Analytical Review reviewed the work extensively and approvingly . 
 Johnson was remarkably adept at recognizing new writing talent and making innovative works appealing to the public . More importantly , he functioned as a catalyst for experimentation by bringing disparate authors together . While Johnson promoted his authors , he retreated into the background himself . His friend John Aikin explained that he had " a decided aversion to all sorts of puffing and parade " ; Johnson 's unassuming character has left historians and literary critics sparse material from which to reconstruct his life . For 200 years , it was assumed that all of Johnson 's business records and correspondence had been destroyed , but in the early 1990s , one of his " letter books " was discovered in an old desk . It contained copies of letters written to business associates as well as friends from 1795 to 1809 . His letters to other publishers discuss " paper , printing , engraving costs , delivery dates , breaches of copyright , binding charges and accounts " whereas his letters to friends include missives to Priestley , Maria Edgeworth , Erasmus Darwin , Charlotte Smith , and others . This material has allowed scholars to theorize more concretely about Johnson 's life and work . 
 Johnson 's publications were rarely luxury goods : he priced his merchandise competitively , but always within the reach of the middle class , the audience he most wanted to serve . One way that he reduced costs was by printing texts in the provinces and then importing them to London ; many of Priestley 's works , for example , were printed locally in Birmingham . Johnson did not take great care with the printing of many of his books ; they are full of errors and poorly bound . But as they were often printed extremely quickly to respond to a particular event , this was expected by his contemporaries . 
 Before Johnson 's generation of booksellers , publishers were not highly respected ; Johnson 's sterling reputation helped publishing to become a more reputable business . His advocacy of cheap books , his desire to foster extensive provincial and foreign connections are all a part of why Johnson has been called " the most important publisher in England from 1770 until 1810 " . 
 = = Publishing statistics = = 
 According to Chard , in the 48 years of his career , Johnson published around 2 @,@ 700 imprints , averaging 56 per year . About half of these were pamphlets ( e.g. sermons , religious tracts , political leaflets ) and many were reprints ; therefore he averaged around 20 to 30 new books per year . About 25 % of his publications were of anonymous authors ; these were usually political or religious works . He published more religious works than any other genre ( 1 @,@ 067 titles ) . Johnson made roughly 750 copies for each print run , although many of his political and religious works would have been printed in editions of 250 , as their topics were often ephemeral . 
 = Beatlemania in the United Kingdom = 
 The phenomenon known as Beatlemania originated in the United Kingdom , birthplace of the Beatles , when the band first realised enormous popularity there in 1963 . Returning in 1962 from a highly formative two @-@ year residency in Germany , the Beatles achieved a commercial breakthrough with their second UK single release , " Please Please Me " early in 1963 , but gained " Superstar " status with the release of " She Loves You " later that year . There followed an almost non @-@ stop series of concerts and tours , attended with feverish enthusiasm across the UK , for the whole of the following year . The Beatles ' popularity in the UK came to exceed even that of the notable American artists Tommy Roe , Chris Montez and Roy Orbison , whose UK chart success at the time did not keep them from being overshadowed by the Beatles during their 1963 nationwide tours with the lower @-@ billed band — an achievement previously unknown for a UK act . 
 With intense media interest in the Beatles during 1963 , the year was also taken up with TV shows , press interviews and a weekly radio show . Despite these demands the band found time for many sessions in the recording studio , releasing two albums and four singles during the year . 1963 was also the year when Lennon 's son Julian was born . 
 By the end of 1963 , Beatlemania would begin to spread internationally . The single " I Want to Hold Your Hand " entered the US charts on 18 January 1964 , selling one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half million copies in under three weeks , and the following month the Beatles made their first visit to America . The great interest in the Beatles brought about a major change in US attitudes to popular music and marked the start of the phenomenon known as the British Invasion . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Return from Hamburg and the Cavern Club = = = 
 Following the Beatles ' Hamburg period , the band had returned from Germany to the UK and were playing regularly at the Cavern Club . Their new manager , Brian Epstein , had made efforts to <unk> the band up , encouraging them to wear suits instead of jeans and leather jackets , and to refrain from swearing , smoking , drinking or eating onstage , or stopping and starting songs when they felt like it : Epstein had seen the band 's potential and was attempting to transform the Beatles into a serious commercial proposition . He had started to approach record companies , but this had not led to any interest in the band . 
 = = = Record contract = = = 
 After failing to impress a number of record companies , most recently at the Decca audition , Epstein went to the HMV store on Oxford Street in London to transfer the Decca tapes to discs . There , recording engineer Jim Foy referred him to Sid Coleman , who ran EMI 's publishing arm . Epstein eventually met with EMI 's George Martin , who signed the group to the Parlophone label on a one @-@ year renewable contract . The Beatles ' first recording session was scheduled for 6 June 1962 at EMI 's Abbey Road Studios in north London . Martin had not been particularly impressed by the band 's demo recordings , but he liked the Beatles ' personalities when he met them . He concluded that they had raw musical talent , but stated in later interviews that what made the difference for him was their wit and humour . The Beatles ' recording contract paid the band a penny for each single sold , which was split amongst the four Beatles — one farthing per group member . This royalty rate was reduced for sales outside the UK , for which they received a halfpenny per single ( again split between the whole band ) . Martin said later that it was a " pretty awful " contract . 
 = = = Change of drummer = = = 
 Martin was critical of Pete Best who , according to Martin , was not able to keep time . Martin privately suggested to Epstein that the band use another drummer in the studio . There was speculation by some that Best 's popularity with fans was another source of friction . In addition , Epstein became exasperated that Best would not adopt the distinctive Beatle haircut as part of the band 's unified look ( although according to Astrid Kirchherr , who was instrumental in originally creating the hairstyle , he had " really curly hair and it wouldn 't work " ) . Best had also missed a number of engagements because of illness . The three founding members of the band asked Epstein to dismiss Best , which he did on 16 August 1962 . They asked Richard Starkey , known as Ringo Starr , to join the band ; Starr was the drummer for one of the top Merseybeat groups , Rory Storm and the Hurricanes , and had performed occasionally with the Beatles in Hamburg . 
 The first recordings of Lennon , McCartney , Harrison and Starr together had been made as early as 15 October 1960 in a series of demonstration records privately recorded in Hamburg while the four were acting as the backing group for singer Lu Walters . Starr played on the Beatles ' second EMI recording session on 4 September 1962 , but Martin hired session drummer Andy White for their next session on 11 September . White 's only released performances were recordings of " Love Me Do " and " P.S. I Love You " , found on the Beatles ' first album . 
 = = = Minor commercial success and first TV appearance = = = 
 The Beatles ' first EMI session on 6 June 1962 did not yield any recordings considered worthy of release , but " Love Me Do " from the September sessions produced a minor UK hit which peaked on the charts at No. 17 . " Love Me Do " would reach the top of the US singles chart over eighteen months later in May 1964 . The band 's first televised performance was on the People and Places programme , transmitted live from Manchester by Granada Television on 17 October 1962 . 
 = = Please Please Me : the breakthrough = = 
 On 26 November 1962 , the Beatles recorded their second single , " Please Please Me " . At the start of the recording session , George Martin attempted to persuade them to record a different song instead ( " How Do You Do It " , subsequently a hit for Gerry & The Pacemakers ) . Martin liked the song and felt the Beatles could have a big hit with it . The Beatles , however , did not like it and , furthermore , they wanted to record their own compositions . They became uncooperative , as they had done at an earlier session when Martin had tried to use the song , so Martin finally abandoned the idea and " Please Please Me " was recorded instead . The single , released in the UK in January 1963 , reached No. 2 on the UK chart of Record Retailer , now considered the most authoritative of the era , and No. 1 on both the NME and Melody Maker charts . Three months after recording " Please Please Me " , the Beatles would record their first album , also titled Please Please Me , which was released in the UK in March 1963 . 
 = = 1963 : a year of touring = = 
 With the runaway success of the single " Please Please Me " , the Beatles found themselves in huge demand for the whole of 1963 . They appeared on ABC TV 's Thank Your Lucky Stars show on 11 January ( televised 19 January ) and recorded for the <unk> Here We Go on 16 January and the BBC 's Saturday Club and Talent Spot on 22 January . As well as completing four nationwide tours in 1963 , they performed at a great many one @-@ off shows across the UK throughout the year , often finishing one show only to travel straight to the next show in another location — sometimes even to perform again the same day . Two of the nationwide tours were led by popular American stars , but at every show during both tours , the crowds would not stop screaming for the Beatles , who proved even more popular than the American stars . Souvenir programmes were hastily reprinted in response , to show the Beatles as the tour leaders . While pleased with the positive reception , the Beatles were also embarrassed for the American performers , as it had never before happened that a UK act had topped an American act at a UK concert . 
 In addition to the four nationwide tours and all the other concerts , what little time remained was taken up with TV shows , press interviews , and recording sessions for the singles and albums released that year . The Beatles also had a weekly radio show . The music papers were full of stories about the Beatles , and magazines for teenage girls regularly contained interviews with the band members , colour posters and other Beatle @-@ related articles . The intense public interest in the Beatles , coupled with Epstein 's demanding schedule , ensured that they had no time for family matters . Lennon 's August 1962 marriage to Cynthia Powell was kept from public view as a closely guarded secret . When Lennon 's son Julian was born on 8 April 1963 , Lennon , visiting the hospital to see his wife and meet his new son for the first time , attempted to disguise himself to prevent people in the hospital from recognising him . Lennon 's attempt to keep the secret was not successful as other patients could see it was him . After the hospital visit , Epstein 's schedule prevailed once more . 
 From April to October 1963 , when the Beatles starred on Val Parnell 's Sunday Night at the London Palladium , the UK 's top variety show , the band had two further UK hit singles , " From Me to You " and " She Loves You " , each successively building the excitement of Britain 's teenagers . The Beatles ' performance on Sunday Night at the London Palladium was televised live and watched by 15 million viewers . One national paper 's headlines in the days following finally gave the phenomenal and increasingly hysterical nationwide interest in the Beatles a name , one which from that day on would be adopted universally : " Beatlemania " . 
 On 7 December 1963 , the Beatles appeared on the BBC 's pop show Juke Box Jury , where new pop records were played and commented on by a selected panel of guests . It was filmed on stage at the Liverpool Empire Theatre and hosted by presenter David Jacobs . 
 = = = February 1963 : first nationwide tour = = = 
 On 2 February 1963 , The Beatles opened their first nationwide tour at a show in Bradford , featuring Helen Shapiro , Danny Williams , Kenny Lynch , Kestrels , and the Red Price Orchestra . Heading the tour bill was the 16 @-@ year @-@ old Shapiro , followed by the other five acts , the last of which was The Beatles . The band used the nationwide tour as an opportunity to generate further interest in " Please Please Me " , and the song was regularly included in their performances throughout the tour . The Beatles , though lowest on the bill , were immensely popular during the tour , as Gordon Sampson , a journalist with the tour , observed . His report did not include the word " Beatlemania " ; the term would not be coined until some months later , but the phenomenon was evident , with Sampson writing that " a great reception went to the colourfully dressed Beatles , who almost stole the show , for the audience repeatedly called for them while other artists were performing ! " . The first tour had a duration of four weeks , and ended on 3 March 1963 . 
 = = = March 1963 : second nationwide tour = = = 
 For The Beatles ' second nationwide tour , which began on 9 March 1963 at the Granada Cinema in London , the group appeared on a bill headed by the American stars Tommy Roe and Chris Montez . Both US artists had already firmly established themselves in the UK singles charts : Montez 's " Let 's Dance " had reached # 2 four months earlier in October 1962 , and another top 10 hit , " Some Kinda Fun " , had recently followed ; likewise Roe 's " Sheila " had reached # 3 five months previously in September 1962 , and his new single , " The Folk Singer " , would enter the charts during the tour , going on to reach # 4 . Throughout the tour , however , the crowds screamed and screamed for The Beatles , and for the first time in UK history , the American stars were less popular than a UK act . While enjoying the overwhelming display of enthusiasm for them , The Beatles also felt embarrassment for the American performers at this unexpected turn of events , which persisted at every show from the first day to the last . The second tour had a duration of three weeks , and ended on 31 March 1963 . 
 = = = May 1963 : third nationwide tour = = = 
 The Beatles began their third nationwide tour on 18 May 1963 , the bill this time headed by Roy Orbison . Orbison had established even greater UK chart success than either Montez or Roe , with eight previous chart entries of his own — four of them entering the top 10 , including the # 2 " Dream Baby " and the # 1 " Only the Lonely " — and was about to achieve his next top 10 entry with " Falling " , which entered the charts during the tour . However , at the tour 's opening show , staged at the Adelphi Cinema , Slough , the American star proved less popular than The Beatles , just as had happened with Roe and Montez throughout the previous nationwide tour . As events unfolded it became obvious this was not going to change , and a week into the tour the covers of the souvenir programs were reprinted to place The Beatles above Roy Orbison . Despite The Beatles ' ascent to the top of the bill , Starr was impressed with the response Orbison still commanded . Starr recalled , " We would be backstage , listening to the tremendous applause he was getting . He was just doing it by his voice . Just standing there singing , not moving or anything . " The third tour had a duration of three weeks , and ended on 9 June 1963 . 
 Publicist Tony Barrow saw Beatlemania as beginning with the band 's TV appearance on Sunday Night at the London Palladium on October 13 , 1963 , at which point he no longer had to contact the press but had the press contacting him instead . 
 = = = November 1963 : fourth nationwide tour = = = 
 On 1 November 1963 , The Beatles began their fourth and final nationwide tour of 1963 . Tour stops this time included Dublin and Belfast . Three days before the tour started , the band , returning from a five @-@ day Swedish tour , were greeted at Heathrow Airport in heavy rain by thousands of screaming fans , 50 journalists and photographers , and a BBC TV camera crew . The wild scenes at the airport caused the British Prime Minister , being chauffeured in the vicinity , to be delayed , his car obstructed by the crowds . Meanwhile , the current Miss World , passing through the airport herself , was completely ignored by journalists and public alike , and when the American TV presenter Ed Sullivan , numbered among those held up at Heathrow , was told the reason for the delay , he asked , " Who the hell are The Beatles ? " . Not long after , there would be similar scenes at an airport in Sullivan 's own country , when the Beatles ' arrived there for the first time , and he would himself introduce the band to the American nation on The Ed Sullivan Show , watched by 73 million viewers . 
 On the tour 's opening night at the Odeon in Cheltenham , the volume of sound created by the screaming crowds was so great that The Beatles ' amplification equipment proved unequal to it , so much so that the band members were unable to hear any sounds they were making themselves , whether speaking , singing , or playing their instruments . As a result , they were unable to count songs in or perform in unison . 
 The tour produced much the same reaction from those attending as the previous three had done , with a fervent , riotous response from fans everywhere the band went . Police attempting to control the crowds employed high @-@ pressure water hoses , and the safety of the police became a matter of national concern , provoking controversial discussions in Parliament over the thousands of police officers putting themselves at risk to protect the Beatles . During a break in the tour , the Beatles sang before Queen Elizabeth , the Queen Mother at the Royal Variety Performance on 4 November , sharing the bill with Marlene Dietrich and Maurice Chevalier . Harrison said at the time : " I don 't want to sound ungrateful , but why are the Beatles on the same stage as a mass of show business greats ? ... We 're just four normal folk who have had a couple of hit records . " The fourth and final nationwide tour of 1963 had a duration of six weeks , and ended on 13 December 1963 . 
 = = Reputation and image = = 
 In 1963 the Beatles were prominent in the public eye with the sweeping phenomenon of Beatlemania but , in addition , the Beatles ' music was beginning to attract the attention of serious critics . On 23 December 1963 , The Times music critic William Mann published an essay extolling the Beatles ' compositions , including their " fresh and euphonious " guitars in " Till There Was You " , their " submediant switches from C major into A flat major " , and the " octave ascent " in " I Want to Hold Your Hand " . The Beatles themselves were perplexed by one analysis by Mann : " ... one gets the impression that they think simultaneously of harmony and melody , so firmly are the major tonic sevenths and ninths built into their tunes , and the flat @-@ submediant key @-@ switches , so natural is the Aeolian cadence at the end of " Not a Second Time " ( the chord progression which ends Mahler 's " Song of the Earth " ) . " 
 That year , The Beatles ' iconic logo ( referred to as the " drop @-@ T " logo ) made its debut . Epstein and Starr visited Drum City , one of Ivor Arbiter 's stores in Shaftesbury Avenue , to purchase a new drum kit . Epstein asked for the band name to appear on the bass drum . Arbiter designed a logo with an extended " T " emphasising the word " Beat " . Drum City was paid £ 5 for the design , which Arbiter sketched on a scrap of paper to be painted on the drum by a local sign @-@ writer . 
 = Regents of the University of California v. Bakke = 
 Regents of the University of California v. Bakke , ( / <unk> / ) 438 U.S. 265 ( 1978 ) was a landmark decision by the Supreme Court of the United States . It upheld affirmative action , allowing race to be one of several factors in college admission policy . However , the court ruled that specific racial quotas , such as the 16 out of 100 seats set aside for minority students by the University of California , Davis School of Medicine , were impermissible . 
 Although the Supreme Court had outlawed segregation in schools , and had even ordered school districts to take steps to assure integration , the question of the legality of voluntary affirmative action programs initiated by universities was unresolved . Proponents deemed such programs necessary to make up for past discrimination , while opponents believed they were illegal and a violation of the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution . An earlier case that the Supreme Court had taken in an attempt to address the issue , DeFunis v. <unk> ( 1974 ) , was dismissed on procedural grounds . 
 Allan P. Bakke , an engineer and former United States Marine Corps officer , sought admission to medical school , but was rejected for admission by several , in part because , in his early thirties , he was considered too old . After twice being rejected by the University of California , Davis , he brought suit in state court . The California Supreme Court struck down the program as violative of the rights of white applicants and ordered Bakke admitted . The U.S. Supreme Court accepted the case amid wide public attention . 
 The case fractured the court ; the nine justices issued a total of six opinions . The judgment of the court was written by Justice Lewis F. Powell , Jr . ; two different blocs of four justices joined various parts of Powell 's opinion . Finding diversity in the classroom to be a compelling state interest , Powell opined that affirmative action in general was allowed under the Constitution and the Civil Rights Act of 1964 . Nevertheless , UC Davis 's program went too far for a majority of justices , and it was struck down and Bakke admitted . The practical effect of Bakke was that most affirmative action programs continued without change . Questions about whether the Bakke case was merely a plurality opinion or binding precedent were answered in 2003 when the court upheld Powell 's position in a majority opinion in Grutter v. Bollinger . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = State of the law = = = 
 In Brown v. Board of Education ( 1954 ) , the Supreme Court of the United States ruled segregation by race in public schools to be unconstitutional . In the following fifteen years , the court issued landmark rulings in cases involving race and civil liberties , but left supervision of the desegregation of Southern schools mostly to lower courts . Among other progressive legislation , Congress passed the Civil Rights Act of 1964 , Title VI of which forbids racial discrimination in any program or activity receiving federal funding . By 1968 , integration of public schools was well advanced . In that year , the Supreme Court revisited the issue of school desegregation in Green v. County School Board , ruling that it was not enough to eliminate racially discriminatory practices ; state governments were under an obligation to actively work to desegregate schools . The school board in Green had allowed children to attend any school , but few chose to attend those dominated by another race . In 1970 , in Swann v. Charlotte @-@ Mecklenburg Board of Education , the Supreme Court upheld an order for busing of students to desegregate a school system . 
 Although public universities were integrated by court decree , selective colleges and graduate programs , and the professions which stemmed from them , remained almost all white . Many African @-@ Americans had attended inferior schools and were ill @-@ prepared to compete in the admissions process . This was unsatisfactory to many activists of the late 1960s , who protested that given the African @-@ American 's history of discrimination and poverty , some preference should be given to minorities . This became a commonly held liberal position , and large numbers of public and private universities began affirmative action programs . Among these were the University of California , Davis School of Medicine ( UC Davis or " the university " ) , which was founded in 1968 and had an all @-@ white inaugural class . The faculty was concerned by this , and the school began a special admissions program " to compensate victims of unjust societal discrimination " . The application form contained a question asking if the student wished to be considered disadvantaged , and , if so , these candidates were screened by a special committee , on which more than half the members were from minority groups . Initially , the entering class was 50 students , and eight seats were put aside for minorities ; when the class size doubled in 1971 , there were 16 seats which were to be filled by candidates recommended by the special committee . While nominally open to whites , no one of that race was admitted under the program , which was unusual in that a specific number of seats were to be filled by candidates through this program . 
 The first case taken by the Supreme Court on the subject of the constitutionality of affirmative action in higher education was DeFunis v. <unk> ( 1974 ) . Marco DeFunis , a white man , had twice been denied admission to the University of Washington School of Law . The law school maintained an affirmative action program , and DeFunis had been given a higher rating by admissions office staff than some admitted minority candidates . The Washington state trial court ordered DeFunis admitted , and he attended law school while the case was pending . The Washington Supreme Court reversed the trial court , but the order was stayed , and DeFunis remained in school . The U.S. Supreme Court granted review and the case was briefed and argued , but by then , DeFunis was within months of graduation . The law school stated in its briefs that even if it won , it would not dismiss him . After further briefing on the question of mootness , the Supreme Court dismissed the case , 5 @-@ 4 , holding that as DeFunis had almost completed his studies , there was no longer a case or controversy to decide . Justice William Brennan , in an opinion joined by the other three members of the minority , accused the court of " sidestepping " the issues , which " must inevitably return to the federal courts and ultimately again to this court " . 
 = = = Allan Bakke = = = 
 Allan Paul Bakke ( born 1940 ) , a 35 @-@ year @-@ old white male , applied to twelve medical schools in 1973 . He had been a National Merit Scholar at Coral Gables Senior High School , in Florida . He was accepted as an undergraduate at the University of Minnesota , deferring tuition costs by joining Naval ROTC . He graduated with a grade @-@ point average ( GPA ) of 3 @.@ 51 . In order to fulfill his ROTC requirements , he joined the Marine Corps and served four years , including a seven @-@ month tour of duty in Vietnam as a commanding officer of an anti @-@ aircraft battery . In 1967 , having achieved the rank of captain , he was granted an honorable discharge . Bakke then worked as an engineer at NASA . He stated that his interest in medicine started in Vietnam , and increased at NASA , as he had to consider the problems of space flight and the human body there . But twelve medical schools rejected his application for admission . 
 Bakke had applied first to the University of Southern California and Northwestern University , in 1972 , and both rejected him , making a point of his age , with Northwestern writing that it was above their limit . Medical schools at the time openly practiced age discrimination . 
 Bakke applied late to UC Davis in 1973 because his mother @-@ in @-@ law was ill . This delay may well have cost him admission : although his credentials were outstanding even among applicants not part of the special program , by the time his candidacy was considered under the school 's rolling admissions process , there were few seats left . His application reflected his anxiety about his age , referring to his years of sacrifice for his country as a cause of his interest in medicine . 
 Bakke received 468 points out of a possible 500 on the admissions committee ’ s rating scale in 1973 . Earlier in the year , a rating of 470 had won automatic admission with some promising applicants being admitted with lower scores . Bakke had a science GPA of 3 @.@ 44 and an overall GPA of 3 @.@ 46 after taking science courses at night to qualify for medical school . On the Medical College Admissions Test ( MCAT ) , Bakke scored in the 97th percentile in scientific knowledge , the 96th percentile in verbal ability , the 94th percentile in quantitative analysis , and the 72nd percentile in general knowledge . Bakke 's MCAT score overall was 72 ; the average applicant to UC Davis scored a 69 and the average applicant under the special program a 33 . In March 1973 , Bakke was invited to UC Davis for an interview . Dr. Theodore West , who met with him , described Bakke as “ a well @-@ qualified candidate for admission whose main hardship is the unavoidable fact that he is now 33 . … On the grounds of motivation , academic records , potential promise , endorsement by persons capable of reasonable judgments , personal appearance and decorum , maturity , and probable contribution to balance in the class , I believe Mr. Bakke must be considered as a very desirable applicant and I shall so recommend him . ” About two months later in May 1973 , Bakke received notice of his rejection . 
 Bakke complained to Dr. George Lowrey , chairman of the admissions committee at the medical school , about the special admissions program . At Lowrey 's request , Assistant Dean Peter Storandt told Bakke his candidacy had come close and encouraged him to reapply . If he was not accepted the second time , “ he could then research the legal question . He had been a good candidate . I thought he ’ d be accepted and that would end the matter . ” Storandt also gave Bakke the names of two lawyers interested in the issue of affirmative action . The general counsel for the University of California said , “ I don ’ t think Storandt meant to injure the university . It ’ s simply an example of a non @-@ lawyer advising on legal matters . ” Storandt stated , “ I simply gave Allan the response you ’ d give an irate customer , to try and cool his anger . I realized the university might be vulnerable to legal attack because of its quota , and I had the feeling by then that somebody somewhere would sue the school , but I surely didn ’ t know this would be the case . ” Storandt was demoted and later left the university . According to Bernard Schwartz in his account of the Bakke case , Storandt was fired . 
 Allan Bakke applied to UC Davis medical school again in 1974 . He was interviewed twice : once by a student interviewer , who recommended his admission , and once by Dr. Lowrey , who in his report stated that Bakke " had very definite opinions which were based more on his personal viewpoints than on a study of the whole problem … He was very unsympathetic to the concept of recruiting minority students . " Lowrey gave Bakke a poor evaluation , the only part of his application on which he did not have a high score . He was rejected again , although minorities were admitted in both years with significantly lower academic scores through the special program . Not all minority applicants whose admission was recommended under the program gained entry — some were rejected by the admissions committee . This , however , did not affect the number of minority students to be admitted , sixteen . Although 272 white people between 1971 and 1974 had applied under this program , none had been successful ; in 1974 the special admissions committee summarily rejected all white students who asked for admission under the program . Only one black student and six Latinos were admitted under the regular admissions program in that time period , though significant numbers of Asian students were given entry . 
 According to a 1976 Los Angeles Times article , the dean of the medical school sometimes intervened on behalf of daughters and sons of the university 's " special friends " in order to improve their chances . Among those who benefitted by Dean C. John Tupper 's interventions ( about five per year ) was the son of an influential state assemblyman , who had not even filed an application . The special picks were ended by order of University of California President David S. Saxon in 1976 . Bakke 's lawyer deemed it impossible to tell if these picks caused Bakke not to be admitted , but according to an attorney who filed an amicus curiae brief on behalf of the National Urban League in support of affirmative action , the practice of dean 's picks made the university reluctant to go into detail about its admission practices at trial , affecting its case negatively . 
 = = = Lower court history = = = 
 On June 20 , 1974 , following his second rejection from UC Davis , Bakke brought suit against the university in the Superior Court of California , Yolo County . He sought an order admitting him on the ground that the special admission programs for minorities violated the U.S. and California constitutions , and Title VI of the Civil Rights Act . UC Davis 's counsel filed a request that the judge , F. Leslie Manker , find that the special program was constitutional and legal , and argued that Bakke would not have been admitted even if there had been no seats set aside for minorities . On November 20 , 1974 , Judge Manker found the program unconstitutional and in violation of Title VI , " no race or ethnic group should ever be granted privileges or immunities not given to every other race . " Manker ordered the medical school to disregard race as a factor , and to reconsider Bakke 's application under a race @-@ free system . After Manker entered final judgment in the case on March 7 , 1975 , both parties appealed , the university on March 20 because the program was struck down , and Bakke on April 17 because he was not ordered admitted . 
 Because of the important issues presented , the Supreme Court of California on June 26 , 1975 ordered the appeal transferred to it , bypassing the intermediate appeals court . On March 19 , 1976 , the case was argued before the state supreme court . Nine amicus curiae briefs were filed by various organizations , the majority in support of the university 's position . The California Supreme Court was considered one of the most liberal appellate courts , and it was widely expected that it would find the program to be legal . Nevertheless , on September 16 , 1976 , the court , in an opinion by Justice Stanley Mosk , upheld the lower @-@ court ruling , 6 – 1 . Mosk wrote that " no applicant may be rejected because of his race , in favor of another who is less qualified , as measured by standards applied without regard to race " . Justice Matthew O. <unk> dissented , stating that Mosk 's suggestion that the state open more medical schools to accommodate both white and minority was unrealistic due to cost : " It is a cruel hoax to deny minorities participation in the medical profession on the basis of such fanciful speculation . " The court barred the university from using race in the admissions process and ordered it to provide evidence that Bakke would not have been admitted under a race @-@ neutral program . When the university conceded its inability to do so in a petition for rehearing , the court on October 28 , 1976 amended its ruling to order Bakke 's admission and denied the petition . 
 = = U.S. Supreme Court consideration = = 
 = = = Acceptance and briefs = = = 
 The university requested that the U.S. Supreme Court stay the order requiring Bakke 's admission pending its filing a petition asking for review . U.S. Supreme Court Justice William Rehnquist , as circuit justice for the Ninth Circuit ( which includes California ) granted the stay for the court in November 1976 . 
 The university filed a petition for writ of certiorari in December 1976 . The papers of some of the justices who participated in the Bakke case reveal that the case was three times considered by the court in January and February 1977 . Four votes were needed for the court to grant certiorari , and it had at least that number each time , but was twice put over for reconsideration at the request of one of the justices . A number of civil rights organizations filed a joint brief as amicus curiae , urging the court to deny review , on the grounds that the Bakke trial had failed to fully develop the issues — the university had not introduced evidence of past discrimination , or of bias in the MCAT . Nevertheless , on February 22 , the court granted certiorari , with the case to be argued in its October 1977 term . 
 The parties duly filed their briefs . The university 's legal team was now headed by former U.S. Solicitor General and Watergate special prosecutor Archibald Cox , who had argued many cases before the Supreme Court . Cox wrote much of the brief , and contended in it that " the outcome of this controversy will decide for future generations whether blacks , Chicanos and other insular minorities are to have meaningful access to higher education and real opportunities to enter the learned professions " . The university also took the position that Bakke had been rejected because he was unqualified . Reynold Colvin , for Bakke , argued that his client 's rights under the Fourteenth Amendment to equal protection of the laws had been violated by the special admission program . Fifty @-@ eight amicus curiae briefs were filed , establishing a record for the Supreme Court that would stand until broken in the 1989 abortion case Webster v. Reproductive Health Services . Future justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg signed the ACLU 's brief ; Marco <unk> , the petitioner in the 1974 case dismissed for mootness , wrote the brief for Young Americans for Freedom . 
 In addition to the various other amici , the United States filed a brief through the Solicitor General , as it may without leave of court under the Supreme Court 's rules . When consideration of Bakke began in the new administration of President Jimmy Carter , early drafts of the brief both supported affirmative action and indicated that the program should be struck down and Bakke admitted . This stance reflected the mixed support of affirmative action at that time by the Democrats . Minorities and others in that party complained , and in late July 1977 , Carter announced that the government 's brief would firmly support affirmative action . That document , filed October 3 , 1977 ( nine days before oral argument ) , stated that the government supported programs tailored to make up for past discrimination , but opposed rigid set @-@ asides . The United States urged the court to remand the case to allow for further fact @-@ finding ( a position also taken by civil rights groups in their amicus briefs ) . 
 While the case was awaiting argument , another white student , Rita Clancy , sued for admission to UC Davis Medical School on the same grounds as Bakke had . In September 1977 , she was ordered admitted pending the outcome of the Bakke case . After Bakke was decided , the university dropped efforts to oust her , stating that as she had successfully completed one year of medical school , she should remain . 
 = = = Argument and deliberation = = = 
 Oral argument in Bakke took place on October 12 , 1977 . There was intense public interest in the case ; prospective attendees began to line up the afternoon before . The court session took two hours , with Cox arguing for the university , Colvin for Bakke , and Solicitor General Wade H. McCree for the United States . Colvin was admonished by Justice Byron White for arguing the facts , rather than the Constitution . Cox provided one of the few moments of levity during the argument when Justice Harry A. Blackmun wondered whether the set @-@ aside seats could be compared to athletic scholarships . Cox was willing to agree , but noted that he was a Harvard graduate , and as for sporting success , " I don 't know whether it 's our aim , but we don 't do very well . " 
 Beginning the day after the argument , the justices lobbied each other through written memorandum . At a conference held among justices on October 15 , 1977 , they decided to request further briefing from the parties on the applicability of Title VI . The supplemental brief for the university was filed on November 16 , and argued that Title VI was a statutory version of the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment and did not allow private plaintiffs , such as Bakke , to pursue a claim under it . Bakke 's brief arrived the following day . Colvin submitted that Bakke did have a private right of action , and that his client did not want the university to suffer the remedy prescribed under Title VI for discriminatory institutions — loss of federal funding — but wanted to be admitted . In November , Justice Blackmun left Washington to have prostate surgery at the Mayo Clinic . 
 Blackmun 's absence did not stem the flow of memos , notably one on November 22 from Justice Lewis Powell , analyzing the minority admissions program under the strict scrutiny standard often applied when government treats some citizens differently from others based on a suspect classification such as race . Concluding that the program did not meet the standard , and must be struck down , Powell 's memorandum stated that affirmative action was permissible under some circumstances , and eventually formed much of his released opinion . 
 At the justices ' December 9 conference , with Blackmun still absent , they considered the case . Counting heads , four justices ( Chief Justice Warren E. Burger and Justices Potter Stewart , Rehnquist , and John Paul Stevens ) favored affirming the California Supreme Court 's decision . Three ( Justices Brennan , White , and Thurgood Marshall ) wanted to uphold the program . Justice Blackmun had not yet weighed in . Powell stated his views , after which Brennan , hoping to cobble together a five @-@ justice majority to support the program , or at least to support the general principle of affirmative action , suggested to Powell that applying Powell 's standard meant that the lower court decision would be affirmed in part and reversed in part . Powell agreed . 
 Even when Blackmun returned in early 1978 , he was slow to make his position on Bakke known . It was not until May 1 that he circulated a memorandum to his colleagues 's chambers , indicating that he would join Brennan 's bloc , in support of affirmative action and the university 's program . This meant that Powell was essential to either side being part of a majority . Over the following eight weeks , Powell fine @-@ tuned his opinion to secure the willingness of each group to join part of it . The other justices began work on opinions that would set forth their views . 
 = = = Decision = = = 
 The Supreme Court 's decision in Bakke was announced on June 28 , 1978 . The justices penned six opinions ; none of them , in full , had the support of a majority of the court . In a plurality opinion , Justice Powell delivered the judgment of the court . Four justices ( Burger , Stewart , Rehnquist , and Stevens ) joined with him to strike down the minority admissions program and admit Bakke . The other four justices ( Brennan , White , Marshall , and Blackmun ) dissented from that portion of the decision , but joined with Powell to find affirmative action permissible under some circumstances , though subject to an intermediate scrutiny standard of analysis . They also joined with Powell to reverse that portion of the judgment of the California Supreme Court that forbade the university to consider race in the admissions process . 
 = = = = Powell 's opinion = = = = 
 Justice Powell , after setting forth the facts of the case , discussed and found it unnecessary to decide whether Bakke had a private right of action under Title VI , assuming that was so for purposes of the case . He then discussed the scope of Title VI , opining that it barred only those racial classifications forbidden by the Constitution . 
 Turning to the program itself , Powell determined that it was not simply a goal , as the university had contended , but a racial qualification — assuming that UC Davis could find sixteen minimally qualified minority students , there were only 84 seats in the freshman class open to white students , whereas minorities could compete for any spot in the 100 @-@ member class . He traced the history of the jurisprudence under the Equal Protection Clause , and concluded that it protected all , not merely African Americans or only minorities . Only if it served a compelling interest could the government treat members of different races differently . 
 Powell noted that the university , in its briefs , had cited decisions where there had been race @-@ conscious remedies , such as in the school desegregation cases , but found them <unk> as there was no history of racial discrimination at the University of California @-@ Davis Medical School to remedy . He cited precedent that when an individual was entirely foreclosed from opportunities or benefits provided by the government and enjoyed by those of a different background or race , this was a suspect classification . Such discrimination was only justifiable when necessary to a compelling governmental interest . He rejected assertions by the university that government had a compelling interest in boosting the number of minority doctors , and deemed too nebulous the argument that the special admissions program would help bring doctors to underserved parts of California — after all , that purpose would also be served by admitting white applicants interested in practicing in minority communities . Nevertheless , Powell opined that government had a compelling interest in a racially diverse student body . 
 In a part of the opinion concurred in by Chief Justice Burger and his allies , Powell found that the program , with its set @-@ aside of a specific number of seats for minorities , did discriminate against Bakke , as less restrictive programs , such as making race one of several factors in admission , would serve the same purpose . Powell offered the example ( set out in an appendix ) of the admissions program at Harvard University as one he believed would pass constitutional muster — that institution did not set rigid quotas for minorities , but actively recruited them and sought to include them as more than a token part of a racially and culturally diverse student body . Although a white student might still lose out to a minority with lesser academic qualifications , both white and minority students might gain from non @-@ objective factors such as the ability to play sports or a musical instrument . Accordingly , there was no constitutional violation in using race as one of several factors . 
 Powell opined that because the university had admitted that it could not prove that Bakke would not have been admitted even had there been no special admissions program , the portion of the California Supreme Court 's decision ordering Bakke 's admission was proper , and was upheld . Nevertheless , the state was entitled to consider race as one of several factors , and the portion of the California court 's judgment which had ordered the contrary was overruled . 
 = = = = Other opinions = = = = 
 Brennan delivered the joint statement of four justices : Marshall , White , Blackmun and himself . In verbally introducing their opinion in the Supreme Court courtroom , Brennan stated that the " central meaning " of the Bakke decision was that there was a majority of the court in favor of the continuation of affirmative action . In the joint opinion , those four justices wrote , " government may take race into account when it acts not to demean or insult any racial group , but to remedy disadvantages cast on minorities by past racial prejudice " . They suggested that any admissions program with the intention of remedying past race discrimination would be constitutional , whether that involved adding bonus points for race , or setting aside a specific number of places for them . 
 White issued an opinion expressing his view that there was not a private right of action under Title VI . Thurgood Marshall also wrote separately , recounting at length the history of discrimination against African @-@ Americans , and concluding , " I do not believe that anyone can truly look into America 's past and still find that a remedy for the effects of that past is impermissible . " Blackmun subscribed to the idea of color consciousness , declaring that , " in order to get beyond racism , we must first take account of race . There is no other way . And in order to treat some persons equally , we must treat them differently . We cannot — we dare not — let the Equal Protection Clause perpetuate racial superiority . " 
 Justice Stevens , joined by Burger , Stewart and Rehnquist , concurring in part and dissenting in part in the judgment , found it unnecessary to determine whether a racial preference was ever allowed under the Constitution . A narrow finding that the university had discriminated against Bakke , violating Title VI , was sufficient , and the court was correct to admit him . " It is therefore perfectly clear that the question whether race can ever be used as a factor in an admissions decision is not an issue in this case , and that discussion of that issue is inappropriate . " According to Stevens , " [ t ] he meaning of the Title VI ban on exclusion is crystal clear : Race cannot be the basis of excluding anyone from a federally funded program " . He concluded , " I concur in the Court 's judgment insofar as it affirms the judgment of the Supreme Court of California . To the extent that it purports to do anything else , I respectfully dissent . " 
 = = Reaction = = 
 Newspapers stressed different aspects of Bakke , often reflecting their political ideology . The conservative Chicago Sun @-@ Times bannered Bakke 's admission in its headline , while noting that the court had permitted affirmative action under some circumstances . The Washington Post , a liberal newspaper , began its headline in larger @-@ than @-@ normal type , " Affirmative Action <unk> " before going on to note that the court had admitted Bakke and curbed quotas . The Wall Street Journal , in a headline , deemed Bakke " The Decision Everybody Won " . According to Oxford University Chair of Jurisprudence Ronald Dworkin , the court 's decision " was received by the press and much of the public with great relief , as an act of judicial statesmanship that gave to each party in the national debate what it seemed to want most " . 
 Attorney General Griffin Bell , after speaking with President Jimmy Carter , stated , " my general view is that affirmative action has been enhanced " , and that such programs in the federal government would continue as planned . Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Chair Eleanor Holmes Norton told the media " that the Bakke case has not left me with any duty to instruct the <unk> staff to do anything different " . 
 Harvard Law School Professor Laurence Tribe wrote in 1979 , " the Court thus upheld the kind of affirmative action plan used by most American colleges and universities , and disallowed only the unusually mechanical — some would say unusually candid , others would say unusually impolitic — approach taken by the Medical School " of UC Davis . Robert M. O 'Neil wrote in the California Law Review the same year that only rigid quotas were foreclosed to admissions officers and even " relatively subtle changes in the process by which applications were reviewed , or in the resulting minority representation , could well produce a different alignment [ of justices ] " . Law professor and future judge Robert Bork wrote in the pages of The Wall Street Journal that the justices who had voted to uphold affirmative action were " hard @-@ core racists of reverse discrimination " . 
 Allan Bakke had given few interviews during the pendency of the case , and on the day it was decided , went to work as usual in Palo Alto . He issued a statement through attorney Colvin expressing his pleasure in the result and that he planned to begin his medical studies that fall . Most of the lawyers and university personnel who would have to deal with the aftermath of Bakke doubted the decision would change very much . The large majority of affirmative action programs at universities , unlike that of the UC Davis medical school , did not use rigid numerical quotas for minority admissions and could continue . According to Bernard Schwartz in his account of Bakke , the Supreme Court 's decision " permits admission officers to operate programs which grant racial preferences — provided that they do not do so as blatantly as was done under the sixteen @-@ seat ' quota ' provided at Davis " . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Allan Bakke , " America 's best known freshman " , enrolled at the UC Davis medical school on September 25 , 1978 . Seemingly oblivious to the questions of the press and the shouts of protesters , he stated only " I am happy to be here " before entering to register . When the university declined to pay his legal fees , Bakke went to court , and on January 15 , 1980 , was awarded $ 183 @,@ 089 . Graduating from the UC Davis medical school in 1982 at age 42 , he went on to a career as an anesthesiologist at the Mayo Clinic and at the Olmsted Medical Group in Rochester , Minnesota . 
 In 1996 , Californians by initiative banned the state 's use of race as a factor to consider in public schools ' admission policies . The university 's Board of Regents , led by Ward Connerly , voted to end race as a factor in admissions . The regents , to secure a diverse student body , implemented policies such as allowing the top 4 % of students in California high schools guaranteed admission to the University of California System — this , it was felt , would aid minority inner @-@ city students . 
 Dworkin warned in 1978 that " Powell 's opinion suffers from fundamental weaknesses , and if the Court is to arrive at a coherent position , far more judicial work remains to be done than a relieved public yet realizes " . The Supreme Court has continued to grapple with the question of affirmative action in higher education . In the 2003 case of Grutter v. Bollinger , it reaffirmed Justice Powell 's opinion in Bakke in a majority opinion , thus rendering moot concerns expressed by lower courts that Bakke might not be binding precedent due to the fractured lineup of justices in a plurality opinion . The court 's decision in the 2013 case of Fisher v. University of Texas made alterations to the standards by which courts must judge affirmative action programs , but continued to permit race to be taken into consideration in university admissions , while forbidding outright quotas . 
 = Cosimo III de ' Medici , Grand Duke of Tuscany = 
 Cosimo III de ' Medici ( 14 August 1642 – 31 October 1723 ) was the penultimate Medici Grand Duke of Tuscany . He reigned from 1670 to 1723 , and was the elder son of Grand Duke Ferdinando II . Cosimo 's 53 @-@ year @-@ long reign , the longest in Tuscan history , was marked by a series of ultra @-@ reactionary laws which regulated prostitution and banned May celebrations . His reign also witnessed Tuscany 's deterioration to previously unknown economic lows . He was succeeded by his elder surviving son , Gian Gastone , when he died , in 1723 . 
 He married Marguerite Louise d 'Orléans , a cousin of Louis XIV . The marriage was solemnized by proxy in the King 's Chapel at the Louvre , on Sunday , 17 April 1661 . It was a marriage fraught with tribulation . Marguerite Louise eventually abandoned Tuscany for the Convent of Montmartre . Together , they had three children : Ferdinando in 1663 , Anna Maria Luisa , Electress Palatine , in 1667 , and Gian Gastone , the last Medicean ruler of Tuscany , in 1671 . 
 In later life , he attempted to have Anna Maria Luisa recognised as the universal heiress of Tuscany , but Charles VI , Holy Roman Emperor , would not allow it because Florence was nominally an imperial fief , and he felt he alone could alter the Tuscan laws of succession . All Cosimo 's efforts to salvage the plan floundered , and in 1737 , upon his younger son 's death , Tuscany passed to the House of Lorraine . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Heir to the throne = = = 
 Cosimo de ' Medici was born on 14 August 1642 , the eldest surviving son of Vittoria della Rovere of Urbino , and Ferdinando II de ' Medici , Grand Duke of Tuscany . Their previous two children had died shortly after birth . Grand Duke Ferdinando wished to give his son the finest scientific education available , but the pious Grand Duchess Vittoria opposed . The latter got her way . <unk> <unk> , a Sienese theologian , was appointed Cosimo 's tutor . His character was analogous to the Grand Duchess 's . 
 As a youth , Cosimo revelled in sports . His uncle Gian Carlo once wrote to another family member with " news that should surprise you .... The young prince [ Cosimo ] has killed a goose in mid @-@ air . " Cosimo , at the age of 11 , killed five pigs with five shots . The <unk> Ambassador praised the young Cosimo to the skies . His successor , however , noticed a somewhat different person , whom he described as " melancholy . " 
 By 1659 , Cosimo had ceased smiling in public . He frequently visited places of religious worship and surrounded himself with friars and priests , concerning Grand Duke Ferdinando . Cosimo 's only sibling , Francesco Maria de ' Medici , the fruit of his parents ' brief reconciliation , was born the next year . 
 = = = Marriage = = = 
 Marguerite Louise d 'Orléans , a granddaughter of Henry IV of France , was married to Cosimo by proxy on 17 April 1661 at the Palais du Louvre . She arrived in Tuscany on 12 June , disembarking at Livorno , and made her formal entry to Florence on 20 June to much pageantry . As a wedding gift , Grand Duke Ferdinando presented her with a pearl the " size of a small pigeon 's egg . " 
 The marriage was unhappy from the start . A few nights following the formal entry , Marguerite Louise demanded the Tuscan crown jewels for her own personal use ; Cosimo refused . The jewels that she did manage to extract from Cosimo were almost smuggled out of Tuscany by her attendants but for the efforts of Ferdinando 's agents . Marguerite Louise 's extravagances perturbed Ferdinando because the Tuscan exchequer was nearly bankrupt ; it was so empty that when the Wars of Castro mercenaries were paid for , the state could no longer afford to pay interest on government bonds . Accordingly , the interest rate was lowered by 0 @.@ 75 % . The economy , too , was so decrepit that barter trade became prevalent in rural market places . In August 1663 Marguerite Louise delivered a boy : Ferdinando . Two more children followed : Anna Maria Luisa in 1667 and Gian Gastone in 1671 . 
 Ferdinando beseeched Louis XIV to do something about his daughter @-@ in @-@ law 's behaviour ; he sent the Comte de Saint Mêmê . Marguerite Louise wanted to return to France , and Mêmê sympathised with this , as did much of the French court , so he left without finding a solution to the heir 's domestic disharmony , incensing both Ferdinando and Louis XIV . She humiliated Cosimo at every chance she got : she insisted on employing French cooks , as she feared the Medici would poison her . In September 1664 Marguerite Louise abandoned her apartments in the Pitti , the grand ducal palace . Cosimo moved her into Villa <unk> . Here , she was watched by forty soldiers , and six courtiers , appointed by Cosimo , had to follow her everywhere . The next year she reconciled with the grand ducal family , and gave birth to Anna Maria Luisa , future Electress Palatine , in August 1667 . The delicate rapprochement that existed between Marguerite Louise and the rest of the family collapsed after Anna Maria Luisa 's birth , when Marguerite Louise caught smallpox and decided to blame Cosimo for all her problems . 
 = = = European travels = = = 
 Grand Duke Ferdinando encouraged Cosimo to go on a European tour to distract him from Marguerite Louise 's renewed hostility . On 28 October 1667 he arrived in Tyrol , where he was entertained by his aunt , Anna de ' Medici , Archduchess of Further Austria . He took a barge down the Rhine to Amsterdam , where he was well received by the art community , meeting painter Rembrandt van Rijn . From Amsterdam , he travelled to Hamburg , where awaiting him was the Queen of Sweden . He reached Florence in May 1668 . 
 The excursion did Cosimo good . His health was better than ever , as was his self @-@ esteem . His wife 's unrelenting enmity towards him , however , undid the aforesaid progressions . Grand Duke Ferdinando , once again , feared for his health , so he sent him on a second tour in September 1668 . 
 When he went to Spain , the King , Carlos II , received him in a private interview . By January , he had arrived in Portugal , and from there endeavoured to England , where he met Charles II and Samuel Pepys , who described him as " a very jolly and good comely man . " Cosimo was amiably welcomed by the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge , for his father 's perceived protection of Galileo from the Inquisition . On the return run , Cosimo visited Louis XIV and his mother @-@ in @-@ law , Marguerite of Lorraine , in Paris . He arrived back in Florence on 1 November 1669 . His travels were described in a detailed journal by his travelling companion Lorenzo , Conte Magalotti ( 1637 @-@ 1712 ) . 
 = = Reign = = 
 = = = Departure of Marguerite Louise = = = 
 Ferdinando II died on 23 May 1670 of apoplexy and dropsy and was interred in the Basilica of San Lorenzo , the Medicean necropolis . At the time of his death , the population of the grand duchy was 720 @,@ 594 souls ; the streets were lined with grass and the buildings on the verge of collapse in Pisa , while Siena was virtually abandoned . 
 Grand Duchess Marguerite Louise and Dowager Grand Duchess Vittoria vied with each other for power . The Dowager , after a protracted battle , triumphed : The Grand Duke assigned his mother the day @-@ to @-@ day administration of the state . Cosimo III commenced his reign with the utmost fervour , attempting to salvage the sinking exchequer and allowing his subjects to petition him for arbitration in disputes . The novelty soon wore off , however . Vittoria , Cosimo having lost his taste for administration , was further empowered by admission to the Grand Duke 's Consulta ( Privy Council ) . Marguerite Louise , deprived of any political influence , went about arranging Prince Ferdinando 's education and <unk> with Vittoria over precedence , which only further encamped Cosimo on his mother 's side . In the midst of this , on the first anniversary of Ferdinando II 's death , Gian Gastone was born to the grand ducal couple . 
 Marguerite Louise feigned illness at the start of 1672 : Louis XIV send Alliot le Vieux , Anne of Austria 's personal physician , to tend to her . Dr. Alliot , unlike Mêmê , did not comply with Marguerite Louise 's plot to be sent to France , ostensibly for the thermal waters to ameliorate her " illness . " In December she went on a pilgrimage to Villa di <unk> — she never returned . Marguerite Louise , instead of going back to Florence , chose to live in semi @-@ retirement at Poggio a Caiano . The Grand Duke eventually consented , but feared she may abscond , so she was not allowed to go to leave without his permission and when she went riding she was to be escorted by four soldiers . All the doors and windows of the villa had to be secured , too . The saga between them continued until 26 December 1674 , after all attempts at conciliation failed , a beleaguered Cosimo agreed to allow his wife to depart for the Convent of <unk> , France . The contract signed that day renounced her rights as a Princess of the Blood and with them the dignity Royal Highness . Cosimo granted her a pension of 80 @,@ 000 livres in compensation . She departed the next June , after stripping bare Poggio a Caiano of any valuables . 
 = = = Persecution of Jews and the Lorrainer succession = = = 
 Without Marguerite Louise to occupy his attentions , Cosimo turned to persecuting the Jewish population of Tuscany . Sexual Intercourse between Jews and Christians was proscribed and Christians , by a law promulgated on 1 July 1677 , could not work in establishments owned by Jews . If they did regardless , a fine of 50 crowns was incurred ; if the person in question had insufficient funds , he was liable to be tortured on the rack ; and if he was deemed unfit for torture , a four @-@ month prison sentence was substituted . The anti @-@ Semitic roster was supplemented by further declarations on 16 June 1679 and 12 December 1680 banning Jews from visiting Christian prostitutes and co @-@ habitation , respectively . 
 Meanwhile , in Lorraine , Charles V was without an heir and Marguerite @-@ Louise , as the daughter of a Lorrainer princess , delegated the right to succeed to the duchy to her elder son , Ferdinando . Grand Duke Cosimo tried to get his son international recognition as heir @-@ apparent , to no avail . Leopold I , Holy Roman Emperor , supported Cosimo 's claim , not wanting to see Lorraine revert to France . The Treaties of Nijmegen , which concluded the Franco @-@ Dutch War , did not rubber stamp Cosimo 's ambitions , as he had wished . The Lorrainer question was concluded with the birth of a son to Charles V in 1679 , ending Cosimo 's dream of a Medici cadet branch , dreams which were to be revived in 1697 by Gian Gastone 's marriage to an heiress . 
 = = = 1679 – 1685 = = = 
 Cosimo kept himself apprised of his wife 's conduct in France through the Tuscan <unk> , Gondi . Marguerite Louise frequently demanded more money from the Grand Duke , while he was scandalised by her behaviour : she took up with a groom named <unk> . In January 1680 the Abbess of <unk> asked Cosimo to pay for the construction of a reservoir , following a scandal at the convent : The Grand Duchess had placed her pet dog 's basket in close proximity to the fire , and the basket burst into flames , but instead of trying to extinguish it , she urged her fellow nuns to flee for their lives . On previous occasions , she had explicitly stated that she would burn down the convent if the Abbess disagreed with her , too , making the Abbess view the accident as an intentional . Cosimo , unable to do much else for fear of upsetting Louis XIV , reproached her in a series of letters . Another scandal erupted that summer , the Grand Duchess bathed nude , as was the custom , in a local river . Cosimo exploded with anger upon hearing of this . Louis XIV , tiring of Florence 's petitions , retorted : " Since Cosimo had consented to the retirement of his wife into France , he had virtually relinquished all right to interfere in her conduct . " Following Louis XIV 's rebuff , Cosimo fell grievously ill , only to be roused by Francesco Redi , his physician , who helped him reform his ways so illness would never strike him again . It was after this event that Cosimo finally stopped bothering with the Grand Duchess 's life . In 1682 Cosimo III appointed his brother , Francesco Maria de ' Medici , Governor of Siena . 
 The Holy Roman Emperor requested Cosimo 's participation in the Great Turkish War . At first , he resisted , but then sent a consignment of munitions to Trieste , and offered to join the Holy League . They defeated the Turks at the Battle of Vienna in September 1683 . To Cosimo 's dismay , " many scandals and disorders continued to occur in the matter of carnal intercourse between Jews and Christian women , and especially putting their children out to be suckled by Christian nurses . " The Grand Duke , wishing to supplement the " foe of heretics " persona he acquired after Vienna , outlawed the practice of Jews using Christian wet @-@ nurses and declared that if a Christian father wished to have his half @-@ Jewish child suckled by a Christian nurse he must first apply to the government for a permit in writing . In addition , public executions increased to six per day . Gilbert Burnet , Bishop of Salisbury and a famed <unk> , visited this Florence in November 1685 , of which he wrote that " [ Florence ] is much sunk from what it was , for they do not reckon that there are fifty thousand souls in it ; the other states , that were once great republic , such as Siena and Pisa , while they retained their liberty , are now shrunk almost into nothing ... " 
 = = = Marriage of the Grand Prince Ferdinando = = = 
 Cosimo went about arranging a marriage for his elder son , Ferdinando , in 1686 . He ushered him into the marriage as the other Tuscan princes , Francesco Maria de ' Medici and Gian Gastone de ' Medici , were sickly and unlikely to produce children . The main suitors were : Violante of Bavaria , a Bavarian princess , Isabel Luisa of Portugal ( the heiress @-@ apparent of Portugal ) , and the Elector Palatine 's daughters . 
 Negotiations with the Portuguese were intense , but stalled over certain clauses : Ferdinando and Isabel Luisa would live in Lisbon , Ferdinando would renounce his right to the Tuscan throne unless the Infanta 's father , King Peter II , remarried and had male issue , and if Isabel Luisa became Queen of Portugal , and Cosimo III , Gian Gastone and Francesco Maria died without any male heirs , Tuscany would be annexed by Portugal . Ferdinando rejected it outright with the fullest support of Louis XIV , his great @-@ uncle . Cosimo 's eyes now fell upon Violente of Bavaria . Choosing her would strengthen ties between France — where Violente 's sister was the dauphine — and Bavaria . There was only one obstacle in the way , Ferdinando II , Cosimo 's father , impartially advised Violente 's father , Ferdinand Maria , to invest 300 @,@ 000 <unk> worth of gold into a bank . Soon after the Elector deposited the sum , the bank collapsed . Ferdinand Maria still had sore feelings ; Cosimo consented to the reduction of her dowry accordingly to reimburse the Elector . Ferdinando was unimpressed with his wife . Violente , however , electrified the Grand Duke . He wrote , " I have never known , nor do I think the world can produce , a disposition so perfect ... " 
 = = = Royal Highness = = = 
 Duke Victor Amadeus II of Savoy procured the style Royal Highness from Spain and the Holy Roman Empire in June 1689 , infuriating Grand Duke Cosimo , who complained to Vienna that a duke was inferior status to a grand duke , and proclaimed it " unjustly exalted ... since the House of Savoy had not increased to the point of vying with kings , nor had the House of Medici diminished in splendour and possessions , so there was no reason for promoting one and degrading the other . " Cosimo also played upon all the times Tuscany provided financial and military assistance to the Empire . The Emperor , anxious to avoid friction , suggested that Anna Maria Luisa should marry the Elector Palatine to compensate for the affront . The Elector Palatine , two years later , several months before his marriage to Anna Maria Luisa , went about acquiring the aforesaid style for Cosimo and his family , despite the fact that they had no claim to any kingdom . Henceforth , Cosimo was His Royal Highness The Most Serene Grand Duke of Tuscany . 
 = = = 1691 – 1694 = = = 
 Louis XIV was angered by Anna Maria Luisa 's marriage to his sworn foe . Cosimo , after much coaxing , persuaded him otherwise . On 9 October 1691 , France , England , Spain , and the United Provinces guaranteed the neutrality of the Tuscan port of Livorno . The Empire , meanwhile , was attempting to extract feudal dues from Cosimo , and ordering him to ally with Austria . The Grand Duke replied that if he did so France would send a naval fleet from Toulon to occupy his state ; the Emperor reluctantly accepted this excuse . Tuscany was not alone in its feudal ties to the Empire : The rest of Italy was also bound to pay the Emperor , but at a much higher magnitude than Cosimo , who merely paid on his few undisputed Imperial fiefs . 
 Cosimo , not having much else to do , instituted more moral laws . Young men were not allowed to " enter into houses to make love to girls , and let them dally at doors and windows , is a great incentive to rapes , abortions , and infanticides ... " If a man did not comply , he was liable to receive enormous fines . The bigotry coincided with a new wave of taxes that stagnated Tuscany 's already declining economy . Harold Acton recounts that a bale of wool " sent from Leghorn and Cortona had to pass though ten intermediate customs . " The Grand Duke oversaw the establishment of the Office of Public Decency , whose goal was to regulate prostitution , also . Prostitutes were oft thrown into the <unk> , a jail for women of that profession , for years , with scant food , if they could not afford the fines levied on them by the Office of Public Decency . Evening permits and exemptions were available for those willing to pay six crowns per month . 
 Cosimo resurrected a law from the regency of his father which banned Students from attending college outside Tuscany , thus strengthening the Jesuits ' hold on education . A contemporary wrote that not a single man in Florence could read or write Greek , a stark contrast to those of the old republic . In a letter dated 10 October 1691 , Cosimo 's personal secretary wrote , " By the Serene Master 's express command I must inform Your Excellencies that His Highness will allow no professor in his university at Pisa to read or teach , in public or in private , by writing or voice , the philosophy of Democritus , or of atoms , or any save that of Aristotle . " 
 Ferdinando and Violante , despite being married for over five years , had not produced any offspring as of 1694 . The Grand Duke responded by declaring special days of devotion , and erecting a " fertility column " in the Cavour district of Florence , an act which attracted popular ridicule . Ferdinando would not attend to Violante , instead lavishing his attentions on his favourite , a castrated Venetian , <unk> de <unk> . The same year , Dowager Grand Duchess Vittoria , who had once exercised great deal of influence over Cosimo , died . Her allodial possessions , the Duchies of <unk> and Rovere , inherited from her grandfather , the last Duke of Urbino , were bestowed upon her younger son , Francesco Maria de ' Medici . 
 = = = Marriage of Gian Gastone = = = 
 Cosimo became perturbed by the question of the Tuscan Succession following the death of his mother . Ferdinando was lacking any children , as was Anna Maria Luisa . The latter , who was high in her father 's estimation , put forward a German princess to marry Gian Gastone . The lady in question , Anna Maria Franziska of Saxe @-@ Lauenburg , nominal heiress of the Duchy of Saxe @-@ Lauenburg , was extremely wealthy . Cosimo once again dreamed of a Medici cadet branch in a foreign land . They were married on 2 July 1697 . Gian Gastone and herself did not get along ; he eventually abandoned her in 1708 . 
 = = = Dawn of the 18th century = = = 
 The 17th century did not end well for the Grand Duke : he still had no grandchildren , France and Spain would not acknowledge his royal status and the Duke of Lorraine declared himself King of Jerusalem without any opposition . In May 1700 Cosimo embarked on a pilgrimage to Rome . Pope Innocent XII , after much persuasion , created Cosimo a Canon of Saint John in the Lateran , in order to allow him to view the <unk> Santo , a cloth thought to have been used by Christ before his crucifixion . Delighted by his warm reception from the Roman people , Cosimo left Rome with a fragment of Saint Francis Xavier 's bowels . 
 Carlos II of Spain died in November 1700 . His death , without any ostensible heir , brought about the War of the Spanish Succession , which involved all of the European powers . Tuscany , however , remained neutral . Cosimo recognised Philip , duc d 'Anjou , as Carlos 's successor , whose administration refused to sanction the <unk> Reale reserved for the royal family . The Grand Duke , soon after the royal altercation , accepted the <unk> of the nominal Spanish fief of Siena from Philip , thereby confirming his status as a Spanish vassal . 
 Gian Gastone was consuming money at a rapid pace in Bohemia , wracking up titanic debts . The Grand Duke , alarmed , sent the Marquis Rinnuci to scrutinise the Prince 's debts . Rinnuci was abhorred to discover that Jan Josef , Count of <unk> and Archbishop of Prague , was among his creditors . In an attempt to salvage Gian Gastone from shipwreck , Rinnuci tried to coerce Anna Maria Franziska to return to Florence , where Gian Gastone longed to be . She blankly refused . Her confessor , hoping to keep her in Bohemia , regaled her with tales of the " poisoned " Eleanor of Toledo and Isabella Orsini , other Medici consorts . 
 = = = Tuscan succession and later years = = = 
 Cosimo 's piety had not faded in the slightest since his youth . He visited the Florentine Convent of Saint Mark on a daily basis . A contemporary recounted that " The Grand Duke knows all the monks of Saint Mark at least by sight ... " This , however , did not occupy all his efforts : He was still trying to coax Anna Maria Franziska to Florence , where he believed her caprices would cease . Additionally , in 1719 , he claimed that God asked him to pledge the Grand Duchy to " the governance and absolute dominion of the most glorious Saint Joseph . " 
 Leopold I , Holy Roman Emperor , died in May 1705 . His successor , Joseph I , took to government with a burst of ebullience . Following the Battle of Turin , a decisive Imperial victory , the Emperor sent an envoy to Florence to collect feudal dues , amounting to 300 @,@ 000 doubloons , an exorbitant sum ; and to force Cosimo to recognise the Archduke Charles as King of Spain . Fearing a Franco @-@ Dutch invasion , Cosimo III refused to recognise Charles 's title , but he did pay a fraction of the dues . 
 The Grand Prince Ferdinando was grievously ill with syphilis ; he had become prematurely senile , not recognising anybody who came to see him . Cosimo despaired . He successfully requisitioned the assistance of Pope Clement XI with Anna Maria Franziska . He sent the Archbishop of Prague to reproach her . She cited the example of Marguerite @-@ Louise , adding that the Pope did not bother himself to <unk> a reconciliation . Cosimo wrote desperate missives to the Electress Palatine : " I can tell you now , in case you are not informed , that we have no money in Florence ... " He added that " two or three quarters of my pension are fallen into arrears . " 
 Gian Gastone arrived in Tuscany , without his wife , in 1708 . The Emperor , thinking it unlikely that any male heirs were to be born to the Medici , prepared to occupy Tuscany , under the pretext of Medici descent . He intimated that upon the Grand Prince 's death the Tuscans would rebel against Cosimo 's autocratic government . Cosimo , in an act of desperation , had Francesco Maria , the Medici family cardinal , renounce his religious vows and marry Eleanor of Gonzaga , the youngest child of the incumbent Duke of Guastalla . Two years later , Francesco Maria died , taking with him any hope of an heir . 
 Without any ostensible heir , Cosimo contemplated restoring the Republic of Florence . However , this presented many obstacles . Florence was nominally an Imperial fief , and Siena a Spanish one . The plan was about to be approved by the powers convened at Geertruidenberg when Cosimo abruptly added that if himself and his two sons <unk> the Electress Palatine she should succeed and the republic be re @-@ instituted following her death . The proposal sank , and was ultimately put on hold following the Emperor Joseph 's death . 
 Charles VI , Holy Roman Emperor , agreed to an audience with the Electress Palatine in December 1711 . He concluded that the Electress 's succession brought no quandary , but added that he must succeed her . Cosimo and herself were abhorred by his reply . Realising how <unk> he had been , Charles wrote to Florence agreeing to the project , mentioning but one clause : the Tuscan state must not be bequeathed to the enemies of the House of Austria . At the culmination of the War of the Spanish Succession , at the Treaties of Utrecht and <unk> , Cosimo did not vie for international assurances for the Electress 's succession . An inaction he would later grow to lament . 
 The Grand Prince finally succumbed to syphilis on 30 October 1713 . Cosimo deposited a succession bill in the Senate , Tuscany 's nominal legislature , on 26 November . The bill promulgated that if Gian Gastone predeceased the Electress Palatine , she should ascend to all the states of the Grand Duchy . It was greeted with a standing ovation by the senators . Charles VI was furious . He retorted that the Grand Duchy was an Imperial fief , and that he alone had the prerogative to choose who would succeed . Elisabeth Farnese , heiress to the Duchy of Parma and the second wife of Philip V of Spain , as a great @-@ granddaughter of Margherita de ' Medici , exercised a claim to Tuscany . 
 In May 1716 , the Emperor assured the Electress and the Grand Duke that there was no insurmountable obstacle preventing her accession , but that Austria and Tuscany must soon reach an agreement regarding which royal house which was to succeed the Medici . As an incentive to accelerate Cosimo 's reply , the Emperor hinted that Tuscany would reap territorial advancements . In June 1717 Cosimo declared his wish that the House of Este should succeed . Charles VI 's promises never materialised . In 1718 he repudiated Cosimo 's decision , declaring a union between Tuscany and Modena ( the Este lands ) unacceptable . On 4 April 1718 England , France and the Dutch Republic ( and later Austria ) selected Don Carlos of Spain , the eldest child of Elisabeth Farnese and Philip V of Spain , as the Tuscan heir . By 1722 the Electress was not even acknowledged as heiress , and Cosimo was reduced to spectator at the conferences for Tuscany 's future . 
 Johann Wilhelm , Elector Palatine died in June 1717 . Anna Maria Luisa returned home in October 1717 , bringing with her vast treasures . Cosimo created his elder son 's widow , Violante of Bavaria , Governess of Siena as to clearly define her precedence . That did not stop the two ladies from quarrelling , as was his intention . Cosimo discontinued hunting following an accident in January 1717 . He accidentally shot , and killed , a man . He was so distraught , that he wished to be tried by the Knights of the Order of Saint Stephen . The state of the Grand Duchy reflected the decay of its ruler ; in a 1718 military review , the army numbered less than 3000 men , some of whom were infirm , and aged 70 . The navy composed of three galleys , and the crew 198 . In September 1721 , the Grand Duchess died ; instead of willing her possessions to her children , as prescribed by the 1674 agreement ; they went to the Princess of <unk> . 
 = = = Death and legacy = = = 
 On 22 September 1723 the Grand Duke experienced a two @-@ hour @-@ long fit of trembling . His condition steadily deteriorated . Cosimo was attended by the Papal nuncio and the Archbishop of Pisa on his death bed . The latter pronounced " that this Prince required little assistance in order to die well , for he had studied and cared for nothing else throughout the long course of his life , but to prepare himself for death . " On 25 October 1723 , six days before his death , Grand Duke Cosimo disseminated a final proclamation commanding that Tuscany shall stay independent ; Anna Maria Luisa shall succeed uninhibited to Tuscany after Gian Gastone ; the Grand Duke reserves the right to choose his successor . Alas , these stanzas were completely ignored . Six days later , on All Hallow 's Eve , he died . He was interred in the Basilica of San Lorenzo , the Medici necropolis . 
 Cosimo III left a Tuscany one of the poorest nations in Europe ; the treasury empty and the people weary of religious bigotry , the state itself was reduced to a gaming chip in European affairs . Among his enduring edicts is the establishment of the Chianti wine region . Gian Gastone repealed Cosimo 's Jewish persecution laws , and eased tariffs and customs . Cosimo 's inability to uphold Tuscany 's independence led to the succession of the House of Lorraine upon Gian Gastone 's death in 1737 . 
 = = Issue = = 
 Cosimo III had three children with Marguerite Louise d 'Orléans , a granddaughter of Henry IV of France : 
 Ferdinando de ' Medici , Grand Prince of Tuscany ( <unk> <unk> ) married Violante Beatrice of Bavaria , no issue ; 
 Anna Maria Luisa de ' Medici , Electress Palatine ( <unk> <unk> ) married Johann Wilhelm , Elector Palatine , no issue ; 
 Gian Gastone de ' Medici , Grand Duke of Tuscany ( <unk> <unk> ) married Anna Maria Franziska of Saxe @-@ Lauenburg , no issue . 
 Cosimo did not enjoy a harmonious relationship with his elder son , Ferdinando . They disagreed about Cosimo 's bigoted ideology and his monthly allowance . Cosimo married him to a Bavarian princess , Violante Beatrice . This union was exceedingly discontent , and produced no offspring . Anna Maria Luisa was the Grand Duke 's favourite child . She married Johann Wilhelm , Elector Palatine , and like her brother , had no issue . Gian Gastone , Cosimo 's eventual successor , despised his father and his court . Anna Maria Luisa arranged for him to marry Anna Maria Franziska of Saxe @-@ Lauenburg , a union that produced no children . 
 = = Titles , styles , honours and arms = = 
 = = = Titles and styles = = = 
 14 August 1642 – 23 May 1670 : His Highness The Grand Prince of Tuscany 
 23 May 1670 – 5 February 1691 : His Highness The Grand Duke of Tuscany 
 5 February 1691 – 31 October 1723 : His Royal Highness The Most Serene Grand Duke of Tuscany 
 Cosimo III 's official style was " Cosimo the Third , By the Grace of God , Grand Duke of Tuscany . " 
 = = = Honours = = = 
 23 May 1670 – 31 October 1721 : Grand Master of the Holy Military Order of St. Stephen Pope and Martyr 
 = = Ancestors = = 
 = Philip Primrose = 
 Philip Carteret Hill Primrose ( October 23 , 1864 – March 17 , 1937 ) was a Canadian police officer and the fifth Lieutenant Governor of Alberta . 
 Primrose was born in 1864 in Nova Scotia . He attended the Pictou Academy before graduating from the Royal Military College in 1885 . Upon his graduation , he took up employment with the North @-@ West Mounted Police ( NWMP ) ( later merged into the Royal Canadian Mounted Police ) . Over the 30 years he spent with the NWMP , he was stationed at many locations throughout the North @-@ West Territories , serving as Superintendent on four separate occasions before his retirement from the force in 1915 . 
 Primrose then moved to Edmonton and accepted the position of city police magistrate , a position he would hold for 20 years . Amongst other positions , during World War I he commanded the Edmonton Reserve Battalion of the Canadian Army . Although he had never actively participated in politics , in 1936 Primrose was appointed Lieutenant Governor of Alberta , a position he held for only 167 days before he died after a long illness . 
 = = Early life , education and career = = 
 Primrose was born in 1864 in Halifax , Nova Scotia , the second of three children of Alexander and Elizabeth Catherine Rebecca Primrose ( née Daly ) . He was named after a good friend of his father , Philip Carteret Hill . His father Alexander came to Nova Scotia from Rothiemay , Scotland and settled in the Pictou area around 1815 . He was a barrister and served a term on the Halifax City Council from 1853 – 1855 . He was a distant cousin to the Earls of Rosebery , including the 5th Earl , who was Prime Minister of the United Kingdom from 1894 – 1895 , A cousin , Clarence Primrose served in the Canadian Senate from 1892 until his death in 1902 . He was a descendant of the United Empire Loyalists . 
 After graduating from the Pictou Academy in 1881 , Primrose was accepted into the Royal Military College , from which he graduated in 1885 . He remained in Canada after graduation , rejecting the option of accepting a commission in the British Army . Primrose was appointed an Inspector of the North @-@ West Mounted Police on August 1 , 1885 , and was sworn in on August 31 of the same year . 
 = = Police career = = 
 = = = North @-@ West Mounted Police = = = 
 During his 13 years as Inspector , Primrose was posted to many locations in the North @-@ West Territories , including Wood Mountain in the District of Assiniboia ( today in Saskatchewan ) , Fort Macleod , and Calgary ( today , both in Alberta ) . In addition to serving as a " Mountie " , he served as Justice of the Peace while stationed at Macleod . In 1898 , at the outbreak of the Klondike Gold Rush , Primrose was assigned to the Yukon , where he was stationed at the H Division in Tagish . He became superintendent of that division in October 1899 , then was transferred to become superintendent of the B Division one month later . In 1901 , he was posted to Dawson , where he assumed responsibility for 43 Mounted Policemen and 4 other men at the Whitehorse station . During his time in the Yukon , the main role of the police was guarding people awaiting trials and prisoners serving sentences . 
 Primrose supervised the 1900 Yukon census , reporting to the Commissioner that the territory 's population was 16 @,@ 463 . On May 13 , 1900 , he <unk> 31 " members of the sporting fraternity " $ 55 each , boosting the territorial treasury . Other activities included more community @-@ oriented tasks , such as firefighting when permitted . During his time in Dawson , he befriended a lawyer currently practicing in the area , William L. Walsh . Walsh would be his predecessor to the office of Lieutenant Governor of Alberta . Primrose 's assignment to the Yukon ended in 1902 . 
 After returning from the Yukon , he assumed command of the A Division of the NWMP in Maple Creek ( today in Saskatchewan ) . After two months at Maple Creek , he took over the NWMP Macleod Department ( today in Alberta ) as Superintendent , serving there until 1913 . He became a prominent landowner during his time in Macleod , owning several lots in town , as well as a section outside . He was appointed a commissioner of police in the new province of Alberta in November 1911 . In 1913 , he was posted to the NWMP Headquarters in Regina to assist in the organization of the Criminal Investigation Branch . In August he was granted a leave of absence when he went to the Mayo Clinic at Rochester to undergo surgery to repair an undisclosed rupture and remove his appendix . After returning to Regina in 1914 , he retired at the rank of Superintendent on April 5 , 1915 . 
 In 1920 , the RNWMP and Dominion Police would be merged under a new name , the Royal Canadian Mounted Police ( RCMP ) . 
 = = = Magistrate = = = 
 Following his retirement from the NWMP , Primrose was offered the position of a police magistrate in Edmonton . Primrose accepted , as he had always wanted to retire in the city . In 1917 , he was chairman of the three @-@ person Alberta Provincial Police board of commissioners , where he was tasked with supervising the new force . Before his retirement as magistrate in July 1935 , it had been estimated that he had dealt with over 40 @,@ 000 cases . 
 During World War I , Primrose was the commanding officer of the Edmonton Reserve Battalion of the Canadian Army , with the rank of Lieutenant @-@ Colonel . He was president of the Royal Northwest Mounted Police Veterans ' Association in 1922 ; he lobbied hard for adequate pensions for veterans . 
 = = Lieutenant Governor of Alberta = = 
 Although a Liberal by family heritage and disposition , Primrose never sought public office , or ever actively participated in politics . On September 10 , 1936 , on the advice of Prime Minister William Lyon Mackenzie King , Primrose was appointed to the office of Lieutenant Governor of Alberta by Governor General John Buchan , succeeding William L. Walsh , his old friend . He was sworn in on October 1 , 1936 . During his time as Lieutenant @-@ Governor , Primrose and his wife resided in Government House , however , during this time , he was plagued by illness , therefore making him essentially unable to fulfill his duties of office , remaining in medical care from October 19 , 1937 until his death . Most of his duties were carried out by his wife , Lily , who hosted the 1937 New Year 's Day reception at Government House , and served as an honorary officer of the Royal Alexandra Hospital Women 's Auxiliary . Public functions were also attended by others family members , assisting in the absence of Primrose . On February 25 , 1937 , the Speech from the Throne was read by Horace Harvey , Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Alberta , due to Primrose 's illness . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 On January 8 , 1902 , Philip Primrose married Lily Deane ( June 3 , 1877 – March 15 , 1966 ) . She was the daughter of Superintendent Richard Burton Deane of the North @-@ West Mounted Police . Deane had served with the NWMP during the Riel Rebellion of 1885 , tasked with guarding Riel and 50 other participants of the uprising in their prison cells . The <unk> had four children : Phyllis Jessie ( 1902 – 1975 ) , Neil ( 1904 – 1904 ) , Neil Philip ( 1905 – 1991 ) , and Sybil E. ( c . 1909 – 1946 ) . His oldest son , Neil Philip was a lawyer , practicing in Vegreville and Edmonton . After being created a King 's Counsel in 1951 , Neil served as a Judge with the Supreme Court of Alberta in its Trial Division . One of his grandchildren , John Nairn Primrose won trap shooting championships at the Commonwealth Games in 1974 and 1978 respectively , and , in 1981 , was appointed as a member of the Order of Canada . 
 Primrose Lake was named after him in 1900 , while he was Inspector in charge of the Tagish branch of the NWMP . In 1927 , Primrose was made a life member of the Army , Navy , and Veterans ' Association in Edmonton . He received the RCMP Long Service Medal in 1935 . In 1970 , a subdivision in Edmonton was named in his honour . Philip Primrose was a member of the Presbyterian Church in Canada . 
 = = Death and state funeral = = 
 Philip C. H. Primrose died on March 17 , 1937 , in Edmonton , while still occupying the office of Lieutenant Governor , a post he had held for only 167 days . He was the first Lieutenant Governor of Alberta to die in office . He had suffered a heart attack , with pre @-@ existing complications from a long , undisclosed illness . On March 19 , 1937 , he lay in state for two hours in the main chamber of the Legislative Assembly of Alberta in what was described as one of the " most impressive ceremonies ever beheld in Edmonton . " His coffin , draped with the Union Flag lay on a table in the chamber in front of the speaker 's rostrum , guarded by four Royal Canadian Mounted Police constables ; members ' desks were draped in purple velvet . At his request , Primrose was dressed in the uniform of a NWMP Inspector . 
 After lying in state for two hours , his body was taken back to the funeral home , and was taken to Government House the next morning , from where it was brought to the church that afternoon . His state funeral , the first ever in Alberta , was held in Edmonton 's First Presbyterian Church . It was attended by many prominent provincial @-@ level politicians , including Premier William Aberhart , Chief Justices Horace Harvey and Charles Richmond Mitchell , University of Alberta president William A. R. Kerr , Attorney General of Alberta John Hugill , Mayor of Edmonton Joseph Clarke , and Assistant RCMP Commissioner Colonel Henry M. Newson . He was interred at the RNWMP plot at the Edmonton Cemetery . The state funeral was said to have " set the precedent for others in the future . " John C. Bowen was sworn in as Primrose 's successor to Lieutenant Governor on March 23 , 1937 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Primrose was described as " one of the most colourful , interesting and forceful characters in Edmonton 's civic life for may years . " His NWMP command was described as a " model to the Force " , while his police career had been described to have " won the confidence and respect of the public to an exceptional degree . " Donald E. Cameron , who delivered the eulogy at the funeral remarked of Primrose , " Colonel Primrose never sought for himself or for his men more than that their record of service should be allowed to speak for itself . Somewhat austerely he clung to the tradition of the service that duty faithfully discharged its own reward . " An obituary published shortly after his death described him as " courageous , outspoken and firm in dealing with his criminals . " John W. McDonald , Mayor of Macleod also stated , " Col. Primrose was one of the outstanding officers of the force . … He was a good citizen and a good police officer and a man of many admirable qualities . " On January 12 , 1970 , the Primrose subdivision in Edmonton , Alberta , North of Whitemud Drive to 100 Avenue , west of 178 Street to RDA was named in his honour , although most of this area is now better known as West Edmonton Mall . 
 = Christopher Tanev = 
 Christopher " Chris " Tanev ( born December 20 , 1989 ) is a Canadian professional ice hockey defenceman who is currently playing for the Vancouver Canucks of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . <unk> in the NHL Entry Draft , he was signed by the Canucks as a free agent after his freshman year with the Rochester Institute of Technology Tigers . In his only college season , he was named Atlantic Hockey 's Rookie of the Year , in addition to receiving All @-@ Tournament and Third All @-@ Star Team honours , while helping the Tigers to a conference championship . Prior to college , he played three seasons in the Ontario Provincial Junior Hockey League ( OPJHL ) . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Tanev was born in East York , Ontario , to Sophie Meredith and Mike Tanev . He has two brothers , Brandon and Kyle , and is of Macedonian descent . Playing minor hockey within the Greater Toronto Hockey League , he competed with the Toronto Red Wings . After being cut from seven midget @-@ level teams at age 16 due to a lack of size ( he was less than five feet and roughly 120 pounds at the time ) , Tanev resorted to playing for his high school 's team and took up roller hockey in the summer . After graduating from high school at the East York Collegiate Institute , he enrolled in the Rochester Institute of Technology as a finance major while playing college hockey . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Junior and college = = = 
 Tanev played in the Ontario Provincial Junior Hockey League ( OPJHL ) for three seasons . Starting off with the Durham Fury in 2006 – 07 , he recorded no goals and nine assists over 40 games . He split the following season between Durham , the Stouffville Spirit and the Markham Waxers , combining for 17 points ( 2 goals and 15 assists ) over 49 games between the three teams . Playing the 2008 – 09 campaign with Markham , he led all team defencemen in scoring with 41 points in 50 games , while serving as an alternate captain ; he was named the team 's top defenceman at the end of the season . 
 In 2009 – 10 , he joined the NCAA Division I ranks with the Rochester Institute of Technology ( RIT ) Tigers of the Atlantic Hockey Conference . Placed on the team 's top defensive pairing with team captain Dan Ringwald , he recorded 10 goals and 28 points over 41 games , while leading his team with a + 33 plus @-@ minus rating . After being named Atlantic Hockey Rookie of the Week on three occasions during the season , he received Rookie of the Year honours and was named to the conference 's All @-@ Rookie and Third All @-@ Star Teams . In the 2010 playoffs , Tanev helped the Tigers to a conference championship , defeating the Sacred Heart Pioneers in the final . He was named to the All @-@ Tournament Team . Advancing to the NCAA tournament , RIT was eliminated in the national semifinal by the Wisconsin Badgers . Tigers head coach Wayne Wilson described him during his freshman year as a " late bloomer " , having grown six inches in his final year of junior , while praising his offensive skills . 
 = = = Vancouver Canucks = = = 
 During the NCAA tournament , Tanev was scouted by Vancouver Canucks director of player development Dave Gagner , who was previously acquainted with Tanev as his childhood roller hockey coach . The Canucks scouting staff collectively identified him as " the smartest player on the ice " in the East Regional segment of the tournament . On May 31 , 2010 , Tanev signed as an undrafted free agent with the Canucks , foregoing his final three years of college hockey eligibility . He had received interest from at least three other teams , including the San Jose Sharks , Ottawa Senators and Columbus Blue Jackets , but ultimately chose Vancouver . 
 Beginning the 2010 – 11 season with the Canucks ' minor league affiliate , the Manitoba Moose of the American Hockey League ( AHL ) , he scored his first professional goal against the Rochester Americans on November 13 , 2010 . He received his first call @-@ up to Vancouver on January 16 , 2011 , after injuries to Canucks defencemen Andrew Alberts and Aaron Rome . Making his Canucks debut two days later against the Colorado Avalanche , he became the first RIT alumnus to play in the NHL . He later recorded his first NHL point on January 24 , a second assist on a Dan Hamhuis powerplay goal , the final Canucks tally in a 7 – 1 win against the Dallas Stars . He remained with the NHL team for an extended period as Canucks defencemen continued to suffer injuries . 
 On March 31 , 2011 , Tanev had to be helped off the ice during a game against the Los Angeles Kings after opposing forward Kyle Clifford pushed him head @-@ first into the end @-@ boards . While recovering from the upper @-@ body injury , he was returned to the Moose on April 7 , as several regular defencemen returned to the Canucks line @-@ up from injury at that time . Averaging 13 minutes of ice time per game over 29 NHL contests with one assist , Tanev was commended by Canucks head coach Alain Vigneault for being " very dependable ... making the high @-@ percentage plays . " Vigneault also added that he had a good chance of playing with the Canucks " on a regular basis down the road . " Completing the 2010 – 11 regular season with the Moose , he finished with 1 goal and 8 assists over 39 AHL games . Tanev added a goal and 2 assists in 14 playoff games as the Moose were defeated in the second round . Following Manitoba 's elimination , he was called up to the Canucks for their playoff run as a reserve . In the Canucks ' Game 3 contest against the San Jose Sharks in the third round , defencemen Christian Ehrhoff and Aaron Rome were both injured . Tanev was inserted into the line @-@ up for the following game and made his NHL playoff debut on May 22 , 2011 . As the Canucks moved on to the Stanley Cup Finals against the Boston Bruins , Ehrhoff and Rome returned to action , temporarily sending Tanev back to the sidelines . Following injuries to Dan Hamhuis and Rome 's suspension , Tanev played in the final three contests of the series , which the Canucks lost in seven games . 
 Following his professional rookie season , Tanev trained in the off @-@ season particularly to increase his strength . Entering the Canucks ' training camp with an added 10 pounds , he made the Canucks ' opening line @-@ up for the 2011 – 12 season . After dressing for three of the team 's first five games , he was reassigned to the Chicago Wolves , Vancouver 's new AHL affiliate ( the Moose were relocated to St. John 's , Newfoundland , after the Winnipeg Jets returned to the NHL ) . Vigneault explained that the organization wanted Tanev receiving more ice time than he could receive in Vancouver while competing for the " No. 5 to No. 8 spots on [ the ] team . " In his first game with the Wolves , he injured an oblique muscle after receiving a hit and was sidelined for a month . After returning , he formed a top defensive pairing on the team with Kevin Connauton . In late @-@ January 2012 , he was called up by the Canucks for one game , then again in mid @-@ February until the end of the season . In 25 NHL games , he recorded two assists , while also recording 14 assists over 34 AHL games in 2011 – 12 . Tanev also competed in all five of the Canucks ' playoff games in 2012 without registering a point . 
 His first NHL goal was scored on February 4 , 2013 , in an overtime win against Devan <unk> of the Edmonton Oilers . On March 24 , 2015 Tanev signed a 5 year contract extension with the Canucks . 
 = = International play = = 
 Tanev played a major role in the 2016 IIHF World Championships team which captured gold against Finland . He was praised for his composure and defensive play by Team Canada head coach Bill Peters , and was named the best player of the game in Canada 's 7 @-@ 1 victory over Hungary . In the tournament semifinal versus the United States , Tanev robbed a scoring chance from the Americans late in the third period , which would have resulted in the tying goal . After accidentally breaking his stick in the American zone , he raced back to the Canadian end , intercepting a pass and blocking a shot without the use of his stick . 
 Tanev 's biggest moment came in the tournament final against Finland , playing 21 : 38 in ice time , including a team @-@ high 8 : 37 in the third period as Canada defended their one goal lead . Team Canada held on to win the gold medal for a second consecutive year . 
 According to many observers , including Ray Ferraro and teammates Brendan Gallagher and Connor McDavid , Tanev was perhaps the best defenceman in the tournament in terms of his defensive play - he and his defence partner , Morgan Rielly , were not on the ice for a single goal against at even @-@ strength . Tanev also played a major role on Canada ’ s tournament @-@ best penalty kill that allowed just two goals against in 29 opportunities . He registered one assist during the tournament . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Tanev is a defenceman lauded for his " hockey sense " and puck @-@ moving ability . Upon being scouted out of college by Canucks personnel , his style of play was compared to offensive defenceman Christian Ehrhoff . Not aggressive , Tanev relies primarily on his positioning to check players . Following his performance in Game 5 of the 2011 Stanley Cup Finals , teammate Kevin Bieksa also highlighted his calm on @-@ ice demeanor , quipping that " he could have played with a cigarette in his mouth . " 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 = La Pausa = 
 La Pausa is a large detached villa in Roquebrune @-@ Cap @-@ Martin , in the Alpes @-@ Maritimes department of France . It was designed and built by the French fashion designer Coco Chanel in the early 1930s , and owned by Chanel until 1953 . La Pausa was sold by Chanel to the Hungarian publisher Emery Reves . The British Prime Minister Winston Churchill spent roughly a third year at La Pausa from 1956 to 1958 with Reves and his wife , Wendy , and wrote and edited part of his History of the English Speaking Peoples there . La Pausa was occupied by Wendy Reves until 2007 . The principal rooms of La Pausa and its significant art collection were recreated at the Dallas Museum of Art during her lifetime and under her direction . The Reves wing was opened in 1985 . 
 Situated above the village of Roquebrune , the house enjoys views toward Menton and the French border with Italy on one side , and Monaco on the other . Its name refers to the legend that Mary Magdalene " paused " near here on her journey from Jerusalem following the crucifixion of Jesus . 
 = = Coco Chanel = = 
 Chanel bought the five acre plot on which La Pausa was built for 1 @.@ 8 million French francs in February 1929 . The plot had formerly been part of the hunting grounds of the ruling family of Monaco , the Grimaldis , and contained wild olive and orange groves . The villa was built less than a year later . The final cost of the villa was 6 million francs , a large sum for the time . It is not clear whether Chanel or her lover , Hugh Grosvenor , 2nd Duke of Westminster financed the building and furnishing of La Pausa . La Pausa was built by architect Robert Streitz , who sought to build ' the ideal Mediterranean villa ' . 
 The design of the house modelled on the 12th @-@ century convent @-@ orphanage in <unk> , in the department of <unk> , which Chanel spent her childhood . A stone staircase leads up from the main entrance hall and a cloister encloses a courtyard . A design of five windows is repeated throughout the house , in tribute to Chanel 's perfume , Chanel No. 5 . Chanel ordered more than 20 @,@ 000 curved handmade tiles to be handmade for the roof , and furnished the house sparsely in shades of white and beige . Each bathroom has a servants entrance . Chanel would take Le Train Bleu from Paris every month to inspect the progress of the building . If Chanel was unable to make the trip , local craftsmen would be sent to Paris to meet her . 
 The colour scheme of the house was beige , which included a beige piano . Chanel may have been assisted in her design of the interior of La Pausa by Stéphane Boudin , the president of the interior design firm Maison Jansen . 
 The central villa is 10 @,@ 000 sq ft in size , with two smaller villas built for guests . The main house consists of seven bedrooms , with three living rooms , a dining room , two kitchens and staff quarters . Streitz had previously restored another local villa for Chanel 's friend , Count Jean de Segonzac . 
 La Pausa contains three wings that face onto a shaded courtyard , with the rooms containing large fireplaces . The rooms were filled by Chanel with 16th @-@ century English oak furniture , given to her by the Duke of Westminster ; English oak was also used for floors and panelling . The large reception rooms were lit by wrought @-@ iron chandeliers from Spain . 
 The poet Pierre Reverdy stayed at La Pausa for long periods during the 1930s , and the poet Paul <unk> , Chanel 's lover , collapsed and died while playing tennis with Chanel at La Pausa in 1935 . Guests of Chanel 's at La Pausa included Igor Stravinsky , Pablo Picasso , Salvador Dalí and Luchino Visconti . 
 La Pausa was profiled by American Vogue magazine in 1938 , with the garden described as containing " groves of orange trees , great slopes of lavender , masses of purple iris , and huge clusters of climbing roses . " Twenty olive trees from Antibes were replanted in the garden . The designer Roderick Cameron said that at La Pausa , Chanel was the first to cultivate lavender and other flora previously regarded as " poor plants " . 
 The architect of La Pausa , Robert Streitz , was a member of the French Resistance during the German occupation of France in the Second World War . Streitz hid in La Pausa 's cellars from where he transmitted covert messages . Jewish refugees were also able to utilise La Pausa , using its gardens as a staging post in their escape from France to the Italian border . During the German occupation of France , Chanel made several visits to La Pausa with her lover , the German spy Baron von <unk> . 
 The design of La Pausa also influenced Chanel 's fashion designs , with her collections evoking the pink and grey palettes of the house and landscape . In 2007 Chanel released a perfume inspired by La Pausa , 28 La Pausa , as part of their " Les <unk> " collection . It was created by Chanel 's perfumer Jacques <unk> . 
 = = Emery and Wendy Reves = = 
 Chanel sold La Pausa in 1953 to the Hungarian émigré publisher Emery Reves . Reves bought La Pausa from the proceeds of the foreign @-@ language rights to the British Prime Minister Winston Churchill 's book on the Second World War . Churchill subsequently became a guest of Reves and Reve 's wife , Wendy Russell Reves , at La Pausa , often staying for weeks at a time . Churchill found the atmosphere with the Reves 's at La Pausa relaxing , with his secretary describing him as seeming " twenty years younger " when at the house , which Churchill nicknamed " <unk> " . Guests hosted by the Reves with Churchill included Noël Coward , Somerset Maugham and Edward Molyneux . However , Churchill 's wife , Clementine , found La Pausa claustrophobic , and only stayed with Churchill for four of his eleven visits to the house . Churchill would spend a total of 54 weeks at La Pausa over the three and a half years from his first visit in 1956 , spending roughly a third of a year at the house from 1956 to 1958 . While at the house Churchill wrote and edited part of his History of the English Speaking Peoples . Churchill would occupy an entire floor when he stayed at La Pausa , his private secretary Anthony Montague Brown , had his own office and Clementine Churchill , her own suite . Churchill 's visits to La Pausa were curtailed in 1960 after Emery Reves declined to host him , with an apparent snub by Churchill and Wendy 's mental health contributory factors in his decision . 
 Other notable high society guests hosted by the Reves at La Pausa included the aristocrats Prince Rainier and Princess Grace of Monaco , the Duke and Duchess of Windsor , and the actors Greta Garbo , Errol Flynn and Clark Gable . 
 = = = Art collection , Dallas Museum of Art = = = 
 Emery and Wendy Reves created an important collection of impressionist and post @-@ impressionist art at La Pausa , with such artists as Paul Cézanne , Claude Monet , Paul Gauguin , Pierre @-@ Auguste Renoir , Vincent van Gogh and Edgar Degas represented in their collection of seventy paintings . In addition to paintings their collection at La Pausa included 300 pieces of Chinese export porcelain , more than 150 silver objects , Medieval ironwork and Arabic and Spanish carpets . 
 Following Emery Reves 's death in 1981 , the Dallas Museum of Art in the United States approached Wendy Reves knowing that there was a possibility that her art collection at La Pausa might be given to a museum . In exchange for the 1985 donation Reves insisted that the museum recreate six of the principal rooms at La Pausa , and display the collection there as she had arranged it . The collection of 1 @,@ 400 objet d 'art is displayed at the museum as the Wendy and Emery Reves Collection in a reconstruction of five rooms from La Pausa . The villa 's central courtyard and patio were reconstructed at the museum along with the villa 's dining room , library , salon , bedroom , and <unk> situated in a purpose built 16 @,@ 500 @-@ square @-@ foot wing designed by architect Edward Larrabee Barnes . 
 = = Present status = = 
 Wendy Reves continued to occupy the house until her death in 2007 . La Pausa was shut after her death , and remained unaltered several years later . In 2013 the house was described as requiring modernisation , and needing a new heating and electrical system , as well as plumbing , and a modern kitchen and bathrooms . Repairs were also required to the stone steps and road leading to the house . 
 Following Reves 's death La Pausa was put up for sale , with the sale of items from the house to benefit the Reves Foundation . In 2012 La Pausa was withdrawn from sale by Sotheby 's due to pending litigation . After the legal problems were resolved , Knight Frank put La Pausa up for sale in May 2013 for 40 million euros . In 2013 the French ambassador to Monaco , Hugues Moret , said of the sale that La Pausa was " ... part of France 's heritage , " adding that " We have to find a way to keep it in the family . " 
 La Pausa has now been acquired by the House of Chanel again , with plans to restore it to its original decor and spirit . 
 = = Works from the Wendy and Emery Reves Collection = = 
 = Khachatur Abovian = 
 Khachatur Abovian ( or <unk> Armenian : <unk> <unk> ; October 15 [ O.S. October 3 ] 1809 – April 14 [ O.S. April 2 ] 1848 ( disappeared ) ) was an Armenian writer and national public figure of the early 19th century who mysteriously vanished in 1848 and eventually presumed dead . He was an educator , poet and an advocate of modernization . Reputed as the father of modern Armenian literature , he is best remembered for his novel Wounds of Armenia . Written in 1841 and published posthumously in 1858 , it was the first novel published in the modern Armenian language using the Eastern Armenian dialect instead of Classical Armenian . 
 Abovian was far ahead of his time and virtually none of his works was published during his lifetime . Only after the establishment of the Armenian SSR was Abovian accorded the recognition and stature he merited . Abovian is regarded as one of the foremost figures not just in Armenian literature but Armenian history at large . Abovian 's influence on Western Armenian literature was not as strong as it was on Eastern Armenian , particularly in its formative years . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Abovian was born in 1809 in the village of Kanaker , then part of the Qajar Persian Empire , and now a district of Yerevan , Armenia . Abovian 's family were descendants of the <unk> melik family in Gulistan , one of five Armenian families who ruled around the current day region of Nagorno @-@ Karabakh . The Abovian family held the position of <unk> ( a hereditary lordship ) in Kanaker ; Abovian 's uncle was the last <unk> of Kanaker . His aunt was the wife of Sahak <unk> , the last melik of Yerevan at the time of the Russian annexation in 1828 . His social origins and descent imbued him at an early age with a sense of responsibility to his people . He was born six years after his parents , <unk> and <unk> , married . He had a brother , <unk> , who died at the age of three . 
 At age 10 , Abovian was taken by his father to Echmiadzin to study for the priesthood . He dropped out after five years and moved to Tiflis in 1822 to study Armenian studies and languages at the <unk> School under the guidance of Harutiun <unk> . Abovian graduated in 1826 and began preparing to move to Venice to further his education . However , the outbreak of the Russo @-@ Persian War ( 1826 – 28 ) curtailed his plans . For the following three years he taught briefly at Sanahin and then worked for Catholicos Yeprem of Armenia as his clerk and translator . While working for the Catholicos , the twenty @-@ year @-@ old Abovian met many notable foreigners , including the diplomat and playwright Alexandr Griboyedov , who was stuck in Echmiadzin en route to Tabriz in September 1828 . Griboyedov 's weekly <unk> <unk> became the first paper to publish an article on Abovian . 
 = = Conquest of Ararat = = 
 The turning point in Abovian 's life was the arrival of Friedrich Parrot in Armenia in September 1829 , a professor of natural philosophy from the University of Dorpat in Livonia ( now the University of Tartu , Estonia ) . Parrot traveled to Armenia to climb Mount Ararat to conduct geological studies and required a local guide and a translator for the expedition . The Catholicos assigned Abovian to these tasks . With Abovian 's assistance , Parrot became the first explorer in modern times to reach the summit of Mount Ararat . The project received full approval from the emperor Nicholas I , who provided the expedition with a military escort . 
 Abovian and Parrot crossed the <unk> River and headed to the Armenian village of Agori situated on the northern slope of Ararat 4 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 200 m ) above sea level . Following the advice of Harutiun <unk> of Tiflis , they set up base camp at the Monastery of Saint Jacob some 2 @,@ 400 feet ( 730 m ) higher , at an elevation of 6 @,@ 375 feet ( 1 @,@ 943 m ) . Abovian was one of the last travelers to visit Agori and the monastery before a disastrous earthquake completely buried both in May 1840 . Their first attempt to climb the mountain , using the northeast slope , failed as a result of lack of warm clothing . 
 Six days later , on the advice of Stepan <unk> , the village chief of Agori , the ascent was attempted from the northwest side . After reaching an elevation of 16 @,@ 028 feet ( 4 @,@ 885 m ) , they turned back because they did not reach the summit before sundown . They reached the summit on their third attempt at 3 : 15 p.m. on October 9 , 1829 . Abovian dug a hole in the ice and erected a wooden cross facing north . Abovian picked up a chunk of ice from the summit and carried it down with him in a bottle , considering the water holy . On November 8 , Parrot and Abovian climbed up Lesser Ararat . Years later , in 1845 , the German mineralogist Otto Wilhelm Hermann von <unk> climbed Ararat with Abovian . Abovian 's third and last ascent of Ararat was with the Englishman Henry Danby Seymour in 1846 . 
 = = The Dorpat years = = 
 Impressed with Abovian 's thirst for knowledge , Parrot arranged for a Russian state scholarship for Abovian to study at the University of Dorpat in 1830 . He entered the university directly without additional preparation and studied in the Philosophy faculty of the Philological @-@ Historical department from September 3 , 1830 until January 18 , 1836 . The years in Dorpat were very fruitful for Abovian who studied social and natural sciences , European literature and philosophy , and mastered German , Russian , French and Latin . At this time Abovian fell under the influence of German Romanticism . In addition , Abovian established numerous contacts with European intellectuals of the time . At the university he became friends with the sons of Nikolay Karamzin who studied with him . In 1834 Abovian visited his cousin Maria ( daughter of melik Sahak <unk> ) in St. Petersburg , then married to the Georgian Prince Alexander . Prior to graduation , Abovian learned his mother <unk> had died . 
 = = Return to Armenia = = 
 In 1836 he returned home anxious to embark on a mission of enlightenment . Abovian ’ s efforts were thwarted as he faced a growing and hostile reaction from the Armenian clergy as well as Tsarist officials , largely stemming from his opposition to dogmatism and formalism in the school system . Abovian was appointed as the supervisor of the Tiflis uyezd school and married a German woman named Emilia <unk> ( d . 1870 ) in 1839 . In 1840 he was approached by English traveler Anne Lister , who was visiting Tiflis . She hoped that Abovian would guide her on another expedition to Mount Ararat which ultimately did not occur . He was dismissed from the school in 1843 and was transferred to the uyezd school in Yerevan where he encountered apathy and antagonism from his colleagues and the clergy . 
 In the summer of the same year , Abovian was visited by two German travellers . A Bavarian professor , Moritz Wagner , from the University of Munich , arrived in May and toured the Lake Sevan region with Abovian and thereafter corresponded with him on a regular basis . In July Abovian also accompanied Wagner on the first recorded ascent of Mount <unk> in Armenia . 
 In August , Abovian spent several days escorting a Prussian agronomist Baron von <unk> around the province . They visited a Yazidi encampment where they met the chief Timur Aga and exchanged pleasantries with a rider from Count Paskevich 's guard . He became a trusted friend of the Yazidi community in Armenia , and when the chief returned with lavish gifts from a banquet in Tiflis organized by the viceroy of the Caucasus Mikhail Semyonovich Vorontsov in 1844 , he organized a tribal feast and Abovian was invited to attend . In 1845 he applied for a position at the <unk> of Echmiadzin but was not accepted . The following year , he became a contributor to Vorontsov 's weekly newspaper , Kavkaz , for which Abovian wrote three articles . 
 = = Disappearance = = 
 On April 14 , 1848 , Abovian left his home for an early morning walk , and was never seen again ; his disappearance remains unresolved . His wife Emilia did not report him missing for a month . Their children , Vartan ( 1840 – 1896 ) and <unk> ( later known as Adelaide ; 1843 – 1909 ) , were ages eight and five , respectively , at the time of the disappearance . 
 Numerous theories have been proposed attempting to explain his disappearance : that he committed suicide , was murdered by his Persian or Turkish enemies , or arrested and exiled to Siberia by the Special Corps of Gendarmes , among others . Given his love for his children and their young age , it is generally disregarded that Abovian committed suicide . Writer Axel <unk> put forward the theory that Abovian was in Western Europe engulfed in the Revolutions of 1848 . 
 = = Writings = = 
 Abovian wrote novels , stories , descriptions , plays , scientific and artistic compositions , verses and fables . He was the first Armenian writer to compose literature for children . 
 = = = Wounds of Armenia = = = 
 The historical novel Wounds of Armenia ( written in 1841 , first published in 1858 ) was the first Armenian secular novel dedicated to the fate of the Armenian people and its struggle for liberation in the period of Russo @-@ Persian war of 1826 – 1828 . The novel dealt with the suffering of Armenians under Persian occupation . The basic concept of the novel was the assertion of feelings of national merit , patriotism and hatred of oppressors . These themes had a profound influence over wide layers of Armenian society . The hero , Agassi , personifies the freedom @-@ loving national spirit and its will to fight against the foreign conquerors . " Give away your life , but never give away your native lands " , is his motto . The story begins with an abduction of an Armenian girl by a band of thugs sent by the Persian <unk> that triggers an uprising led by Agassi . 
 Abovian saw in strengthening of the friendship of Russian and Armenian peoples a guarantee of the national , political and cultural revival of his native lands . However ; when Abovian wrote the novel he was already disillusioned with Tsarist policies in Armenia , particularly with the implementation of <unk> ( Statute ) in 1836 which greatly reduced the political power of the Armenian Catholicos and the abolishment of the Armenian Oblast in 1840 . In the novel , elements of romanticism and realism are interlaced while the narration is supplanted by lyrical retreats . 
 = = = Other works = = = 
 Abovian 's poetry was filled with satire best expressed in The wine jug , in which he criticized Russian bureaucracy . Leisure entertainment was adapted by Abovian from notes he took in public gatherings . The work is a collection of fables in verse that chastise vice , injustice and moral degeneration . He wrote scientific and artistic non @-@ fiction works such as the Discovery of America and Book of Stories . Abovian translated to the Armenian language the works of Homer , Goethe , Friedrich Schiller , Nikolay Karamzin , I. A. Krylov and others . He continued promoting secular and comprehensive ( mental , moral , working , physical ) training , school accessibility , free education for the indigent and equal education of boys and girls . Pedagogical compositions of Abovian include the book for reading Introduction to education ( 1838 ) , a textbook of Russian grammar and an Armenian @-@ language novel History of Tigran , or a moral manual for the Armenian children ( printed in 1941 ) . He was the first Armenian to study scientific ethnography : the way of life and customs of the peasants of the native settlements around Kanaker , inhabitants of Yerevan , and gathered and studied Armenian and Kurdish folklore . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Abovian 's life is well remembered in Armenia . During the years in which Armenia was under Soviet rule , his pro @-@ Russia stance was emphasized . Schools , streets , boulevards and parks were named after him . The village of <unk> , located 10 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) northeast of Yerevan , was named after him in 1961 . Two years later , as the village 's population grew larger , <unk> was accorded with city status . His home in Kanaker was turned into a house @-@ museum in 1939 , and many of his original writings are preserved there . 
 Two prominent statues of Abovian stand in Yerevan . The concept of the first statue dates back to 1908 when a number of Armenian intellectuals in Russian Armenia decided to commemorate the 60th anniversary of Abovian 's disappearance and raise funds for a statue . These included Alexander <unk> , Hovhannes Tumanyan and Gevorg <unk> . By 1910 they had collected enough funds to order the statue . It was designed by M. Grigoryan and sculpted by Andreas Ter @-@ Manukyan in Paris between 1910 – 13 . The statue is 4 @.@ 5 metres ( 15 ft ) high and made of bronze on a granite pedestal . As a result of a misunderstanding the statue was only delivered to Yerevan in 1925 and first erected on Abovian street by the cinema Moscow in 1933 and then moved to the children 's park on the banks of the <unk> river . In 1964 , it found its permanent home by the Abovian house @-@ museum in Kanaker . The second statue of Abovian in Yerevan was erected in Abovian square in 1950 . The 9 @-@ metre ( 30 ft ) high bronze statue was designed by Gevork <unk> ( son of Alexander <unk> ) and sculpted by Suren <unk> . 
 The work Abovian accomplished in the field of education was remembered . Yerevan 's State <unk> Institute was named after him . On February 28 , 1964 , a medal was named in his honour ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ) and which was awarded to school teachers who showed exceptional abilities in teaching and education . Between 1948 – 84 , five documentary films were produced in the Armenian SSR about the life and work of Abovian . 
 = = = Portrait = = = 
 Abovian 's portrait is one of the most exceptional exhibits of the Museum of Literature and Arts after Charents . It is an oil painting with a size of 20 @.@ 5 centimetres ( 8 @.@ 1 in ) by 27 @.@ 5 centimetres ( 10 @.@ 8 in ) . In 1938 Abovian 's grandsons brought it to the museum . When Abovian 's son Vardan returned to the Caucasus , he found the painting in a badly deteriorated condition . But by Vardan 's request Armenian painter Gevorg <unk> restored the portrait . He cut worn @-@ out edges , glued it to a hard paper and then filled the cracks with corresponding colors . The painter of the portrait was Ludwig von <unk> , from Dorpat University . He painted it in the fall of 1830 , when Abovian was only 20 or 21 years old . This portrait is the only painting of Abovian made during his lifetime . 
 = = Selected bibliography = = 
 = = = Prose = = = 
 = = = Poetry = = = 
 = Alcatraz Federal Penitentiary = 
 The Alcatraz Federal Penitentiary or United States Penitentiary , Alcatraz Island ( often just referred to as Alcatraz ) was a maximum high @-@ security federal prison on Alcatraz Island , 1 @.@ 25 miles ( 2 @.@ 01 km ) off the coast of San Francisco , California , USA , which operated from 1934 to 1963 . 
 The main prison building was built in 1910 – 12 during its time as a United States Army military prison ; Alcatraz had been the site of a citadel since the 1860s . The United States Disciplinary Barracks , Pacific Branch on Alcatraz was acquired by the United States Department of Justice on October 12 , 1933 , and the island became a prison of the Federal Bureau of Prisons in August 1934 after the buildings were modernized to meet the requirements of a top @-@ notch security prison . Given this high security and the location of Alcatraz in the cold waters and strong currents of San Francisco Bay , the prison operators believed Alcatraz to be escape @-@ proof and America 's strongest prison . 
 Alcatraz was designed to hold prisoners who continuously caused trouble at other federal prisons . One of the world 's most notorious and best known prisons over the years , Alcatraz housed some 1 @,@ 576 of America 's most ruthless criminals including Al Capone , Robert Franklin Stroud ( the " Birdman of Alcatraz " ) , George " Machine Gun " Kelly , Bumpy Johnson , Rafael Cancel Miranda , Mickey Cohen , Arthur R. " Doc " Barker , and Alvin " Creepy " <unk> ( who served more time at Alcatraz than any other inmate ) . It also provided housing for the Bureau of Prisons staff and their families . A total of 36 prisoners made 14 escape attempts during the 29 years of the prison 's existence , the most notable of which were the violent escape attempt of May 1946 known as the " Battle of Alcatraz " , and the arguably successful " Escape from Alcatraz " by Frank Morris , John Anglin , and Clarence Anglin in June 1962 in one of the most intricate escapes ever devised . Faced with high maintenance costs and a poor reputation , Alcatraz closed on March 21 , 1963 . 
 The three @-@ story cellhouse included the main four blocks of the jail , A @-@ Block , B @-@ Block , C @-@ Block , and D @-@ Block , the warden 's office , visitation room , the library , and the barber shop . The prison cells typically measured 9 feet ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) by 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) and 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) high . The cells were primitive and lacked privacy , with a bed , a desk and a washbasin and toilet on the back wall , with few furnishings except a blanket . African @-@ Americans were segregated from the rest in cell designation due to racial abuse being prevalent . D @-@ Block housed the worst inmates and five cells at the end of it were designated as " The Hole " , where badly behaving prisoners would be sent for periods of punishment , often brutally so . The dining hall and kitchen lay off the main building in an extended part where both prisoners and staff would eat three meals a day together . The Alcatraz Hospital was above the dining hall . 
 Corridors of the prison were named after major American streets such as Broadway and Michigan Avenue . Working at the prison was considered a privilege for inmates and many of the better inmates were employed in the Model Industries Building and New Industries Building during the day , actively involved in providing for the military in jobs such as sewing and woodwork and performing various maintenance and laundry chores . 
 Today the penitentiary is a public museum and one of San Francisco 's major tourist attractions , attracting some 1 @.@ 5 million visitors annually . The former prison is now operated by the National Park Service 's Golden Gate National Recreation Area , and the badly eroding buildings of the former prison have been subject to restoration works in recent times and maintained . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 The main cellhouse was originally the location of the cellhouse for the military citadel and prison which existed on Alcatraz from the 1860s . A new cellhouse was built in 1910 – 12 on a budget of $ 250 @,@ 000 and upon completion , the 500 feet ( 150 m ) long concrete building was reputedly the longest concrete building in the world at the time . In 1933 – 34 this building remained , but was modernized and became the main cellhouse of the Federal Penitentiary until it was closed in 1963 . When the new concrete prison was built in 1910 – 12 , many materials were reused in its construction . Iron staircases in the interior and the cellhouse door near the barber 's shop at the end of A @-@ Block were retained from the old citadel and massive granite blocks originally used as gun mounts were reused as the wharf 's bulkheads and retaining walls . Many of the old cell bars were used to reinforce the walls , causing structural problems later due to the fact that many placed near the edge were subject to erosion from the salt air and wind over the years . 
 After the U.S. Army 's use of the island for over 80 years ( 1850 – 1933 ) , the island came under the jurisdiction of the U.S. Department of Justice for use by the Federal Bureau of Prisons . The purpose of this transfer was to punish those involved in the rampant crime which prevailed in the country in the 1920s and 1930s . The United States Disciplinary Barracks on Alcatraz was acquired by the United States Department of Justice on October 12 , 1933 , and the island became a Federal Bureau of Prisons federal prison in August 1934 . The $ 260 @,@ 000 conversion to the federal prison took place from January 1934 . Dr. George Hess of the United States Public Health Service was appointed the chief medical officer of the prison and Dr. Edward W. Twitchell became a consultant in psychiatry for Alcatraz in January 1934 . The hospital facilities were checked by three officials from the Marine Hospital of San Francisco . The Bureau of Prisons personnel arrived on Alcatraz in early February ; among them was Loring O. Mills , acting chief clerk . In April 1934 , the old material was removed from the prison , holes were cut in the concrete and 269 cell fronts were installed , built using four carloads of steel ordered from the Stewart Iron Works . A legend at the works is that a shipment of cells and iron accidentally fell into San Francisco Bay during transportation from San Francisco Dock to Alcatraz and were never recovered , thus had to be reordered . Two of four new stairways were built , as were 12 doors to the utility corridors and gratings at the top of the cells . On April 26 , an accidental small fire broke out on the roof and an electrician injured his foot by dropping a manhole cover on it . Fencing around Alcatraz was added by the Anchor Post Fence Company and emergency lighting in the morgue and switchboard operations were added by the Enterprise Electric Works . In June 1934 , the <unk> Corporation of New York began the installation of an " electro @-@ magnetic gun or metal detecting system " at Alcatraz ; detectors were added on the wharf , at the front entrance into the cellblock , and at the rear entrance gate . The correctional officers were instructed how to operate the new locking devices on July 30 , 1934 , and the new radio equipment was tested by both the United States Coast Guard and the San Francisco Police Department on the same day . Final checks and assessments were made on the first two days of August . 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 Alcatraz was designed to hold prisoners who continuously caused trouble at other federal prisons , a " last resort prison " to hold the worst of the worst criminals who had no hope of rehabilitation . At 9 : 40 am on August 11 , 1934 , the first batch of 137 prisoners arrived at Alcatraz , arriving by railroad from the United States Penitentiary in Leavenworth , Kansas at Santa Venetia , California , before being escorted to Alcatraz , handcuffed in high security coaches and guarded by some 60 FBI Special Agents , U.S. Marshals , and railway security officials . Some 32 detainees from the original military prison were reported to have been amongst the first inmates . Most of the prisoners were notorious bank robbers and counterfeiters , murderers , or sodomites . Amongst the first inmates were also 14 men from McNeil Island , Washington . On August 22 , 43 prisoners arrived from Atlanta Penitentiary and 10 from North Eastern Penitentiary , Lewisburg , Pennsylvania . On September 1 , one prisoner arrived from Washington Asylum and Jail and seven from the District of Columbia Reformatory in Virginia , and on September 4 , another batch of 103 prisoners arrived by train from Leavenworth . Prisoners continued to arrive , mainly from Leavenworth and Atlanta in 1935 and by June 30 , 1935 , the penitentiary had a population of 242 prisoners , although some prisoners such as Verrill Rapp had already been transferred from Alcatraz some months earlier . On the first anniversary as a federal penitentiary , on June 30 , 1935 , the Bureau of Prisons observed that : " The establishment of this institution not only provided a secure place for the detention of the more difficult type of criminal but has had a good effect upon discipline in our other penitentiaries also . No serious disturbance of any kind has been reported during the year . " The metal detectors initially caused a problem by overheating and often had to be turned off . After the failure of the <unk> Corporation to amend the problem , in 1937 their contract was terminated and they were charged over $ 200 for three new detectors supplied by Federal Laboratories . 
 On January 10 , 1935 , a severe storm caused a landslide on Alcatraz , causing the Model Industries Building to slide . This marked the start of a series of changes to the structures on the island . A riprap was built around it and it was strengthened and a guard tower added to the roof in June 1936 , and the same month the barracks building was remodeled into 11 new apartments and nine single rooms for bachelors ; by this time there were 52 families living on Alcatraz Island , including 126 women and children . The problems with the industries building and continuing utility problems with some of the old buildings and systems led to extensive updates in 1937 , including new tool @-@ proof grills on the ventilators on the roof of the cell house , two new boilers installed in the power house and a new pump for salt water sanitation and guardrails added to stairways . In 1939 – 40 , a $ 1 @.@ 1 million redevelopment was under swing , including construction of the New Industries Building , a complete overhaul of the power house with a new diesel engine , the building of a new water tower to solve the water storage problem , new apartment blocks for officers , improvements to the dock , and the conversion of D @-@ block into isolation cells . The changes were completed in July 1941 . The workshops of the New Industries Building became highly productive in the making of army uniforms and cargo nets and other items which were in high demand during World War II and in June 1945 it was reported that the federal penitentiaries had made 60 @,@ 000 nets . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Alcatraz gained notoriety from its inception as the toughest prison in America and considered by many to be the world 's most fearsome prison of the time , and former prisoners would frequently report acts of brutality and inhumane conditions which severely tested their sanity . Ed <unk> was the first prisoner to commit suicide in Alcatraz . <unk> <unk> chopped off his fingers after grabbing an axe from the firetruck , begging another inmate to do the same to his other hand . One writer described Alcatraz as " the great garbage can of San Francisco Bay , into which every federal prison dumped its most rotten apples . " In 1939 the new U.S. Attorney General Frank Murphy attacked the penitentiary , saying " The whole institution is conductive to psychology that builds up a sinister ambitious attitude among prisoners . " The reputation of the prison was not helped by the arrival of more of America 's most dangerous crooks including Robert Stroud , the " Birdman of Alcatraz " , in 1942 , who spent 17 years at Alcatraz . Like a songbird ’ s call , Stroud was complex . He was also a pimp , a raging psychopath and impulsive murderer whose hazard reduced only with age . He entered the prison system at age 19 , and never left . Stroud killed a guard , tangled with other inmates and spent 42 of his 54 years in prison in solitary confinement . 
 While Stroud was a “ birdman , ” his scientific inquiry all took place at Fort Leavenworth , not Alcatraz as the myth goes . Ironically , he wasn ’ t allowed to pursue avian science , or even harbor birds , at the timeless bird habitat that is Alcatraz Island . 
 However , somewhat contradicting its reputation and the fact that many former inmates named it " <unk> " based on its horrors , some prisoners reported that the living conditions in Alcatraz were much better than most other prisons in the country , especially the food , and many volunteered to come to Alcatraz . 
 On December 3 , 1940 , Henri Young murdered fellow inmate Rufus McCain by running downstairs from the Furniture Shop to the Tailor 's Shop where McCain worked and violently stabbing McCain in the neck ; McCain died five hours later . Young had been sentenced to Alcatraz for murder in 1933 and he was involved in an escape attempt at Alcatraz during which famous gangster Doc Barker was shot to death . He spent nearly twenty @-@ two months in solitary confinement as a result but later earned a right to work in the Furniture Shop . He went on trial in 1941 , which brought Alcatraz into further disrepute as Young 's attorneys claimed he could not be held responsible for his murder as he had endured a " cruel and unusual punishment " prior to it in torment by the prison guards . Young was convicted of manslaughter and his prison sentence only extended by a few years . 
 = = = Final years = = = 
 By the 1950s , the prison conditions had improved and prisoners were gradually permitted more privileges such as the playing of musical instruments , watching movies at weekends , painting , and radio use ; the strict code of silence became more relaxed and prisoners were permitted to talk quietly . However , the prison continued to be unpopular on the mainland into the 1950s ; it was by far the most expensive prison institution in the United States and continued to be perceived by many as America 's most extreme jail . In his annual report for 1952 , Director James V. Bennett called for a more centralized institution to replace Alcatraz . A 1959 report indicated that Alcatraz was more than three times more expensive to run than the average US prison ; $ 10 per prisoner per day compared to $ 3 in most other prisons . The problem of Alcatraz was exacerbated by the fact that the prison had seriously deteriorated structurally in exposure to the salt air and wind and would need $ 5 million to deal with it . Major repairs began in 1958 but by 1961 the prison was evaluated by engineers to be a lost cause and Robert F. Kennedy submitted plans for a new maximum @-@ security institution at Marion , Illinois . After the escape from Alcatraz in June 1962 , the prison was the subject of heated investigations , and with the major structural problems and ongoing expense , the prison finally closed on 21 March 1963 . The final Bureau of Prisons report said of Alcatraz Federal Penitentiary : " The institution served an important purpose in taking the strain off the older and greatly overcrowded institutions in Atlanta , Leavenworth and McNeil Island since it enabled us to move to the smaller , closely guarded institution for the escape artists , the big @-@ time racketeers , the inveterate <unk> and those who needed protection from other groups . " 
 Today the penitentiary is a museum and one of San Francisco 's major tourist attractions , attracting some 1 @.@ 5 million visitors annually . Visitors arrive by boat at the port , and are given a tour of the cellhouse and island , and are given a slide show and audio narration with anecdotes from former inmates , guards and rangers on Alcatraz . The atmosphere of the former penitentiary is still considered to be " eerie " , " ghostly " and " chilling " . Protected by the National Park Service and the National Register of Historic Places , the badly eroding buildings of the former prison have been subject to restoration works in recent times and maintained . 
 = = = Escape attempts = = = 
 According to the Correctional Officers , once a convict arrived on the Alcatraz wharf , his first thoughts were on how to leave . During its 29 years of operation , the penitentiary claimed that no prisoner successfully escaped . A total of 36 prisoners made 14 escape attempts , two men trying twice ; 23 were caught , six were shot and killed during their escape , two drowned , and five are listed as " missing and presumed drowned " . 
 The first unsuccessful attempt to escape the prison was made on April 27 , 1936 by Joseph Bowers , who was assigned the duty of burning trash at the incinerator . He tried to escape during duty hours by scaling a chain link fence at the edge of the island . When he was caught in this act and refused orders of the correctional officer located at the West road guard tower to come down he was shot . He was seriously injured in the fall from over 15 m ( 50 ft ) and consequently died . 
 The first escape attempt to shatter Alcatraz 's reputation as an " escape @-@ proof " prison was made on December 16 , 1937 by Theodore Cole and Ralph Roe . During their work assignment in one of the workshops they cut the flat iron bars of the window and climbed into the bay waters to escape . It was a stormy day and the bay water was highly turbulent . As the escapees were not found , they were declared drowned by the Prison authorities as it was conjectured that they drowned in the bay and their bodies swept out into the sea due to the turbulent bay currents . 
 = = = = Battle of Alcatraz = = = = 
 The most violent escape attempt occurred on May 2 – 4 , 1946 , when a failed attempt by six prisoners led to the Battle of Alcatraz , also known as the " Alcatraz <unk> " . It was carried out by six prisoners ; Bernard Coy , Joseph Cretzer , Sam Shockley , Clarence Carnes , Marvin Hubbard and Miran Thompson . They daringly took control of the cell house by overpowering Correctional officers and captured the weapons room and keys to the recreation yard door . Their aim was to escape by boat from the dock , but when they failed to obtain the keys to the outside door , they decided to battle it out . In the fight that ensued they managed to hold two correctional officers hostage whom they eventually killed after two days . Prompted by Shockley and Thompson , Cretzer shot the hostages at very close range . One of the guards , William Miller , succumbed to his injuries while the second guard , Harold Stites , was also killed at the cellhouse . Although Shockley , Thompson , and Carnes returned to their cells , the other three , Coy , Cretzer and Hubbard , persisted with their fight . The U.S. Marines intervened to help the correctional officers and killed the three prisoners . In this battle , apart from the guards and prisoners killed , 17 other guards and one prisoner were also injured . Shockley , Thompson , and Carnes were tried for the killing of the correctional officers . Shockley and Thompson were sentenced to death through the gas chamber , which was carried out at San Quentin in December 1948 . However , Carnes , who was only 19 years of age , was given a second life sentence . 
 = = = = " Escape from Alcatraz " = = = = 
 On June 11 , 1962 , Frank Morris , John Anglin , and Clarence Anglin carried out one of the most intricate escapes ever devised . Behind the prisoners ' cells in Cell Block B ( where the escapees were interned ) was an unguarded 3 @-@ foot ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) wide utility corridor . The prisoners chiselled away the moisture @-@ damaged concrete from around an air vent leading to this corridor , using tools such as a metal spoon soldered with silver from a dime and an electric drill improvised from a stolen vacuum cleaner motor . The noise was disguised by accordions played during music hour , and the progress was concealed by false walls which , in the dark recesses of the cells , fooled the guards . 
 The escape route led up through a fan vent ; the prisoners removed the fan and motor , replacing them with a steel grill and leaving a shaft large enough for a prisoner to enter . Stealing a carborundum abrasive cord from the prison workshop , the prisoners removed the rivets from the grill . In their beds , they placed papier @-@ mâché dummies made with human hair stolen from the barbershop . The escapees also constructed an inflatable raft over many weeks from over 50 stolen raincoats , which they prepared on the top of the cellblock , concealed from the guards by sheets which had been put up over the sides . They escaped through a vent in the roof and departed Alcatraz . 
 The official investigation by the FBI was aided by another prisoner , Allen West , who was part of the escapees ' group but was left behind . West 's false wall kept slipping so he held it in place with cement , which set . When Morris and the Anglins accelerated the schedule , West desperately chipped away at the wall , but by the time he got out , his companions were gone . Articles belonging to the prisoners , including plywood paddles and parts of the raincoat raft were discovered on nearby Angel Island . The FBI 's investigation from 1962 to December 1979 was finally treated as closed . The official report on the escape concludes that the prisoners drowned in the cold waters of the bay while trying to reach the mainland , it being unlikely that they made it the 1 @.@ 25 miles to shore due to the strong ocean currents and the cold sea water temperatures ranging between 50 and 55 degrees Fahrenheit . 
 However , The U.S. Marshals Service still list the Anglins and Morris as wanted fugitives and have Wanted Posters for each man . A 2014 study of the ocean currents by scientists at Delft University and the research institute <unk> indicates that a craft leaving Alcatraz at 11 : 30pm on June 11 , 1962 , would most likely have landed just north of the Golden Gate Bridge and indicate that debris would have washed up on Angel Island , consistent with where it was actually found . A 2015 History Channel documentary presented further circumstantial evidence gathered over the years by the Anglin brothers ' family , including Christmas cards allegedly sent by the brothers for three years after their escape . It featured an interview with family friend Fred Brizzi , who claimed to have met the brothers in Rio de Janeiro , Brazil in 1975 . To support his story , he offered a photograph of two men resembling John and Clarence Anglin , taken , he said , during the encounter . A facial recognition analyst who had examined the photo asserted that the two men were " more than likely " the Anglins . The film also presented an alternate escape theory , involving the use of an electrical cord , which was reported missing from the prison 's dock , tied to a passenger ferry that left the island just after midnight on the night of the men 's escape . 
 The 1979 film Escape from Alcatraz depicts the escape . It stars Clint Eastwood , Fred Ward , and Jack <unk> as Frank Morris , John Anglin , and Clarence Anglin , respectively . Allen West was played by Larry Hankin ; his character 's name was changed to Charley Butts . The film implied that the escape had been successful . 
 = = Administration = = 
 The prison initially had a staff of 155 , including the first warden James A. Johnston and associate warden Cecil J. Shuttleworth , both considered to be " iron men " . None of the staff were trained in rehabilitation but highly trained in security . The guards and staff of Alcatraz were subject to varying salaries . A new guard arriving in December 1948 was offered $ 3024 @.@ 96 per annum , but there was a 6 % deduction for retirement taxes a year amounting to $ 181 @.@ 50 . The guards typically worked 40 @-@ hour weeks ; five 8 @-@ hour shifts . Guards who worked between 6 pm and 6 am were given a 10 % increase and guards doing overtime had to be reported and authorized by the warden . Officers generally had to pay 25 cents for meals and were charged $ 10 to rent an apartment on the island , to include laundry service , although larger families were charged anything from $ 20 – 43 a month for larger quarters and charged additional for laundry . In 1960 , a Bureau of Prisons booklet revealed that the average prison population between 1935 and 1960 was 263 ; the highest recorded was 302 in 1937 and the lowest recorded was 222 in 1947 . 
 The main centre for administration was at the entrance to the prison , which included the warden 's office . The office contained a desk with radio and telegraph equipment , typewriter , and a telephone . The administrative office section also had the offices of the associate warden and secretary , mail desk , captain 's desk , a business office , a clerk 's office , an accounting office , a control room which was added with modern technology in 1961 , the officer 's lounge , armory and vault , and a visitation centre and restrooms . 
 The basement of Alcatraz prison contained dungeons and the showers . The main stairway to the dungeon lay along Sunrise Alley at the side of A @-@ Block , but the dungeons were also accessible by a staircase in a trapdoor along the corridor of D @-@ Block . All visits to Alcatraz required prior written approval from the warden . 
 A hospital had originally been installed at Alcatraz during its time as a military prison in the late 19th century . During its time as a Federal Penitentiary it was located above the dining hall on the second floor . Hospital staff were U.S. Public Health Service employees assigned to the Federal Prison Service at Alcatraz . Doctors often lasted fewer than several days or months at Alcatraz , due to the fact that few of them could tolerate the violent inmates who would often terrify them if they failed to be given certain drugs . Prisoners in ill health were often kept in the hospital , most famously , Stroud and Al Capone , who spent years in it . 
 = = = Security = = = 
 With the Bureau of Prisons taking over the Alcatraz Island Federal Penitentiary on January 1 , 1934 , it marked the beginning of a series of measures to strengthen the security of the prison cells to make Alcatraz an " escape @-@ proof " maximum security prison , and also improving the living conditions for the operation and maintenance staff and officers , apart from the prisoners . Modern technological innovations available at the time for enhancing security and comfort were built into the buildings . Security guard towers were built outside at four strategic locations , cells were rebuilt and fitted with " tool @-@ proof steel cell fronts and locking devices operated from control boxes " , and windows were made secure with iron grills . Electromagnetic metal detectors placed in the entrance of the dining hall and workshops , with remote controlled tear gas canisters at appropriate locations , remote controlled gun galleries with machine gun armed guards were installed to patrol along the corridors . Improvements were made to the toilet and electricity facilities , old tunnels were sealed up with concrete to avoid hiding and escape by prisoners , and substantial changes and improvements were made to the housing facilities of guards , wardens and Captain to live with their families , with quality relative to rank . Homer Cummings , U.S. Attorney General , Sanford Bates , first Director of the Bureau of Prisons , and Warden Johnston collaborated very closely to create " a legendary prison " suited to the times , which resulted in the Alcatraz Island Federal Penitentiary being nicknamed " Uncle Sam 's Devil 's Island . " 
 Despite Alcatraz being designed to house the " worst of the worst " of criminals who caused problems at other prisons , under the guidelines and regulations set by the strict prison administrators , courts could not direct a prisoner to be directly sent to Alcatraz , however notorious they were for misbehavior and attempted escape from other prisons . Prisoners entering Alcatraz would undergo vigorous research and assessments prior to their arrival . Security in the prison was very tight , with the constant checking of bars , doors , locks , electrical fixtures etc . , to ensure that security hadn 't been broken . During a standard day the prisoners would be counted 13 times , and the ratio of prisoners to guards was the lowest of any American prison of the time . The front door was made of solid steel , virtually impossible for any prisoners to escape through . The island had many guard towers , most of which have since been demolished , which were heavily guarded at various points in the day at times when security may have been breached ; for instance there were guard towers on each of the industry buildings to ensure that inmates didn 't attempt to escape during the work day shifts . The recreation yard and other parts of the prison had a 25 ft fence around it topped with barbed wire , should any inmates attempt to escape during exercise . One former employee of the jail likened his prison job to being a zoo keeper or his old farm job , due to the fact that prisoners were not to be rehabilitated or educated and treated like animals , sending them out to " plough the fields " when some of them worked during the day , and then counting them up and feeding them and so on . He referred to those 4 years of his life working in the prison as a " total waste of his life " . The corridors were regularly patrolled by the guards , with passing gates along them ; the most heavily trafficked was " Broadway " between B and C Block , due to its being the central corridor of the prison and passed not only by guards but other prison workers . 
 At the end of each 20 minute meal in the dining hall , the forks , spoons and knives were laid out on the table and carefully counted to ensure that nothing had been taken as a potential weapon . In the earlier years as a prison , prisoners were forbidden from talking while eating , but this was later relaxed , provided that the prisoners communicated quietly . 
 The gun gallery was situated in the Recreation Yard and mounted on one of the dining hall 's exterior walls . There was a metal detector outside of the dining hall for security purposes . The dining hall had tear @-@ gas canisters attached to the rafters of the ceiling which could be activated by remote control , should prisoners riot or attempt to escape . The first warden , James A. Johnston , always entered the dining hall alone and unarmed , due to heavy guarding around him . Several riots did break out in the dining hall during Alcatraz 's history . Those prisoners who were not involved in the fighting hid under the dining hall tables to escape possible gunfire . 
 = = = Wardens = = = 
 = = Prison life and the cells = = 
 An inmate register reveals that there were 1 @,@ 576 prisoners in total held at Alcatraz during its time as a Federal Penitentiary , although figures reported have varied and some have stated 1557 . The prison cells , purposefully designed so that none adjoined an outside wall , typically measured 9 feet ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) by 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) and 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) high . The cells were primitive with a bed , a desk and a washbasin and toilet on the back wall and few furnishings except a blanket . An air vent , measuring 6 inches ( 150 mm ) by 9 inches ( 230 mm ) , covered by a metal grill , lay at the back of the cells which led into the utility corridors . Prisoners had no privacy in going to the toilet and the toilets would emit a strong stench because they were flushed with salt water . Hot water faucets were not installed until the early 1960s , shortly before closure . 
 The penitentiary established a very strict regimen of rules and regulations under the title " the Rules and Regulations for the Government and Discipline of the United States Penal and Correctional Institutions " and also a " Daily Routine of Work and Counts " to be followed by the prisoners and also the guards ; copies of these were provided to the prisoners to read and follow . Inmates were basically entitled to food , clothing , shelter , and medical attention . Anything else was seen as a privilege . Inmates were given a blue shirt , grey pants ( blue and white in later years ) , cotton long underwear , socks and a blue handkerchief ; the wearing of caps was forbidden in the cellhouse . Cells were expected to be kept tidy and in good order . Any dangerous article found in the cells or on inmates such as money , narcotics , intoxicating substances or tools which had the potential to inflict injury or assist in an escape attempt was considered contraband and made the prisoners eligible for disciplinary action . It was compulsory for prisoners to shave in their cells three times a week . Attempting to bribe , intimidate , or assault prison officers was seen as a very serious offense . African @-@ Americans were segregated from the rest in cell designation due to racial abuse being prevalent . Toilet paper , matches , soap , and cleanser were issued to the cells on Tuesdays and Saturdays , and inmates could request hot water and a mop to clean their cells . The bars , windows and floors of the prison were cleaned on a daily basis . In earlier years there was a strict code of silence but by the 1950s this had relaxed and talking was permitted in the cellhouse and dining hall provided conversations were quiet and there was no shouting , loud talking , whistling or singing . 
 Prisoners would be woken at 6 : 30 am , and sent to breakfast at 6 : 55 . After returning to the cell , inmates then had to tidy their cell and place the waste basket outside . At 7 : 30 work started in the shifts for those privileged enough to do so , punctuated by a whistle , and prisoners would have to go through a metal detector during work shifts . If assigned a job , prisoners had to accept that line of work ; prisoners were not permitted to have money in their possessions but earnings went into a prisoner 's Trust Fund . Some of the prisoners were assigned duties with the guards and foremen in the Laundry , Tailor Shop , Cobblers Shop , Model Shop etc. and in gardening and labor . Smoking , a privilege , was permitted in the workplace providing there wasn 't any hazardous condition , but inmates were not permitted to smoke between the recreation yard and work . Lunch was served at 11 : 20 , followed by a 30 @-@ minute rest in the cell , before returning to work until 16 : 15 . Dinner was served at 16 : 25 and the prisoners would then retire to their cells to be locked in for the night at 16 : 50 , and lights went off at 21 : 30 . After being locked in for the night , 6 guards usually patrolled the four cell blocks . Many prisoners have compared their duration at Alcatraz to hell and would have preferred death to continued incarceration . 
 Alcatraz Library was located at the end of D @-@ Block . Upon entering Alcatraz , every inmate was given a library card and a catalog of books found in the library ; inmates could place orders by putting a slip with their card in a box at the entrance to the dining hall before breakfast , and the books would be delivered to and from their cell by a librarian . The library , which utilized a closed @-@ stack paging system , had a collection of 10 @,@ 000 to 15 @,@ 000 books , mainly left over from the army days . Inmates were permitted a maximum of three books in addition to up to 12 text books , a Bible , and a dictionary . They were permitted to subscribe to magazines but crime @-@ related pages were torn out and newspapers were prohibited . Sex , crime and violence were censored from all books and magazines , and the library was governed by a chaplain who regulated the censorship and the nature of the reading material to ensure that the material was wholesome . Failure to return books by the date given made the inmate liable to removal of privileges . The average prisoner read 75 to 100 books a year . Every evening , inmates would generally read books loaned from the library and usually an hour or 75 minutes was allocated to the practicing of musical instruments , from the guitar to the accordion . A prison band often practiced in the dining room or auditorium above it ; Al Capone famously practiced the banjo in the shower block , although most prisoners were limited to playing in their cells alone . 
 = = = Corridors = = = 
 Alcatraz cellhouse had a corridor naming system named after major American streets and landmarks . Michigan Avenue was the corridor to the side of A @-@ Block , and Broadway was the central corridor in which the inmates would assemble as they massed through Times Square ( an area with a clock on the wall ) , before entering the dining hall for their meals . Broadway separated Block @-@ B and Block @-@ C and prisoners kept along it had the least privacy in the prison . The corridor between Block @-@ C and the library was called Park Avenue . The corridor in D @-@ Block was named Sunset Strip . Gun galleries lay at the end of each block , including the West and East Gun Galleries . 
 = = = A @-@ Block = = = 
 Due to the fact that during the time as a federal penitentiary no inmates were ever permanently held here , A @-@ Block was never modernized , so retained its " flat strap @-@ iron bars , key locks and spiral staircases " from the original military prison . Several inmates , however , were held briefly in A @-@ Block before a hearing or transfer . In the later years of the state penitentiary , the A @-@ Block was mainly used for extra storage and a law library was installed here at one point and it was a place where inmates could type legal documents . A small barber 's shop was located at the end of A @-@ block where inmates would have a monthly haircut . 
 = = = B @-@ Block = = = 
 The majority of the new inmates in Alcatraz were assigned to the second tier of B @-@ Block . They had " quarantine status " for their first three months in confinement in Alcatraz , and were not permitted visitors for a minimum of 90 days . Inmates were permitted one visitor a month , although anybody likely to cause trouble such as registered criminals were barred from visiting . Letters received by inmates were checked by prison staff first , to see if they could decipher any secret messages . Frank Morris and his fellow escapees escaped Alcatraz during the June 1962 escape from Alcatraz by entering a utility corridor behind B @-@ Block . 
 = = = D @-@ Block = = = 
 D @-@ Block gained notoriety as a " Treatment block " for some of the worst inmates , with varying degrees of punishment , including Isolation , Solitary and Strip . Prisoners usually spent anything from 3 to 19 days in Solitary . Prisoners held here would be given their meals in their cells and not permitted to work and only shower twice a week . After a 1939 escape attempt in which Arthur " Doc " Barker was killed , the Bureau of Prisons tightened security in the D @-@ Block . The Birdman of Alcatraz inhabited cell 42 in D @-@ Block in solitary confinement for 6 years . 
 The worst cells for confinement as a punishment for inmates who stepped out of line were located at the end of D @-@ Block in cells 9 – 14 , known as " The Hole " . The cells were devoid of light and colder than the rest of the prison , and prisoners sent here were regularly stripped , beaten , and tortured and often starved , forced to sleep on the cold concrete floor wearing nothing but light underwear . In turn , guards were abused , and often had faeces , urine or food thrown at them or were spat at . Inmates held in the hole were limited to just one 10 @-@ minute shower and an hour of exercise in the yard a week . The five cells of " The Hole " had nothing but a sink and toilet and the very worst cell was nicknamed " The Oriental " or " Strip Cell " , the final cell of the block with nothing but a hole in the floor as a toilet , in which prisoners would often be confined naked with nothing else for two days . The guards controlled the flushing of the toilet in that cell . A hatchway in the floor on D @-@ Block also led to the dungeon in the basement which contained several cells . The worst behaved inmates would be locked inside their cells in the dungeon , chained to the walls . They were given a meager diet of bread and water each day , and one regular meal every three days , although the quantity and duration often varied relative to the extent of the punishment . Denied of proper toilet facilities , they were given a bucket as a toilet , emptied once a week , and stripped and chained to the wall standing at nights ; according to Alvin J. Esau , prisoners in solitary confinement were " placed on a starvation diet and made to stand nine hours each day with hands tied and their feet barely touching the floor . " After completing the punishment in the hole , the prisoner could then return to his cell but be tagged ; a red tag , third grade , denoted a prisoner who was restricted from leaving his cell for perhaps 3 months . At second grade the prisoners could receive letters , and if after 30 days they remained behaved , they would then be restored full prison privileges . 
 " Its size was approximately that of a regular cell @-@ 9 feet by 5 feet by about 7 feet high . I could just touch the ceiling by stretching out my arm ... You are stripped nude and pushed into the cell . Guards take your clothes and go over them minutely or what few grains of tobacco may have fallen into the cuffs or pockets . There is no soap . No tobacco . No toothbrush , The smell – well you can describe it only by the word ' stink . ' It is like stepping into a sewer . It is nauseating . After they have searched your clothing , they throw it at you . For bedding , you get two blankets , around 5 in the evening . You have no shoes , no bed , no mattress @-@ nothing but the four damp walls and two blankets . The walls are painted black . Once a day I got three slices of bread @-@ no @-@ that is an error . Some days I got four slices . I got one meal in five days , and nothing but bread in between . In the entire thirteen days I was there , I got two meals ... I have seen but one man get a bath in solitary confinement , in all the time that I have been there . That man had a bucket of cold water thrown over him . " – Henri Young testifying his experiences in " The Hole " at Alcatraz during his 1941 trial . 
 = = = Dining = = = 
 Alcatraz Dining Hall , often referred to as the Mess Hall , is the dining hall where the prisoners and staff ate their meals . It is a long wing on the west end of the Main <unk> of Alcatraz , situated in the center of the island . It is connected to the block by a corridor known as " Times Square " , as it passes beneath a large clock approaching the entrance way to the dining hall . This wing includes the dining hall and the kitchen beyond it . On the second floor was the hospital and the auditorium , which was where movies were screened to the inmates at weekends . 
 Dining hall protocol was a scripted process , including a whistle system to indicate which block and tier of men would move into and out of the hall at any given time , who sat where , where to place hands , and when to start eating . Prisoners would be awakened at 6 : 30 , and sent to breakfast at 6 : 55 . A breakfast menu is still preserved on the hallway board , dated 21 March 1963 . The breakfast menu included assorted dry cereals , steamed whole wheat , a scrambled egg , milk , stewed fruit , toast , bread , and butter . Lunch was served in the dining hall at 11 : 20 , followed by a 30 @-@ minute rest in the cell , before returning to work until 16 : 15 . Dinner was served at 16 : 25 and the prisoners would then retire to their cells at 16 : 50 to be locked in for the night . Inmates were permitted to eat as much as they liked within 20 minutes , provided they left no waste ; waste would be reported and may make the prisoner subject to removal of privileges if they made a habit of it . 
 Each dining table had benches which held up to six men , although smaller tables and chairs later replaced these which seated four . All of the prison population , including the guards and officials would dine together , thus seating over 250 people . The food served at Alcatraz was reportedly the best in the United States prison system . 
 = = = Recreation = = = 
 The Recreation Yard was the yard used by inmates of the prison between 1934 and 1963 . It is located opposite the dining hall south of the end of D @-@ Block , facing the mainland on a raised level surrounded by a high wall and fence above it . Guard Tower # 3 lay just to the west of the yard . The gun gallery was situated in the yard , mounted on one of the dining hall 's exterior walls . 
 In 1936 , the previously dirt @-@ covered yard was paved . The yard was part of the most violent escape attempt from Alcatraz in May 1946 when a group of inmates hatched a plot to obtain the key into the recreation yard , kill the tower guards , take hostages , and use them as shields to reach the dock . 
 Inmates were permitted out into the yard on Saturdays and Sundays and on holidays for a maximum of 5 hours . Inmates who worked seven days a week in the kitchen were rewarded with short yard breaks during the weekdays . Badly behaved prisoners were liable to having their yard access rights taken away from them on weekends . The prisoners of Alcatraz were permitted to play games such as baseball , softball and other sports at these times and intellectual games such as chess . Because of the small size of the yard and the diamond at the end of it , a section of the wall behind the first base had to be padded to cushion the impact of inmates overrunning it . Inmates were provided gloves , bats , and balls , but no sport uniforms . In 1938 , there were four amateur teams , the Bees , Oaks , Oilers , and Seals , named after Minor League clubs , and four league teams named after Major League clubs , the Cardinals , Cubs , Giants , and Tigers . Many of the inmates used weekends in the yards to converse with each other and discuss crime , the only real opportunities they had during the week for a durable conversation . 
 = = Other buildings = = 
 = = = Warden 's House = = = 
 The Warden 's House was the home of the penitentiary 's warden . It is located at the northeastern end of the Main <unk> , next to Alcatraz Lighthouse . The 3 @-@ floor 15 @-@ room mansion was built in 1921 according to the Golden Gate National Recreational Area signpost , although some sources say it was built in 1926 or 1929 and had 17 or 18 rooms . 
 Between 1934 and 1963 , the four wardens of Alcatraz resided here , including the first warden , James A. Johnston . A house of luxury , in stark contrast to the jail next to it , the wardens often held lavish cocktail parties here . The signpost at the spot shows a photograph of a trusted inmate doing chores at the house for the warden and that the house had a terraced garden and greenhouse . The mansion had tall windows , providing fine views of San Francisco Bay . Today , the house is a ruin , burned down by Native Americans during the Occupation of Alcatraz on June 1 , 1970 . 
 = = = Building 64 = = = 
 Building 64 Residential Apartments was the first building constructed on the island of Alcatraz , intended entirely for the purpose of accommodating the military officers and their families living on the island . Located next to the dock on the southeastern side of the island , below the Warden 's House , the three @-@ story apartment block was built in 1905 on the site of a U.S. Army barracks which had been there from the 1860s . It functioned as the Military Guard Barracks from 1906 until 1933 . One of its largest apartments in the southwest corner was known as the " Cow Palace " and a nearby alleyway was known as " Chinatown " . 
 = = = Social Hall = = = 
 The Social Hall , also known as the Officers ' Club , was a social club located on the northwestern side of the island . Located in close proximity to the Power House , water tower and Former Military Chapel ( Bachelor Quarters ) , it formerly housed the post exchange . The club was a social venue for the Federal Penitentiary workers and their families on the island to unwind after a hard week 's work dealing with America 's most hardened criminals after they 'd been locked up at 17 : 30 . It was burned down by Native Americans during the Occupation of Alcatraz in 1970 , leaving a shell which still remains . 
 The club had a small bar , library , large dining and dance floor , billiards table , ping pong table and a two @-@ lane bowling alley , and was the centre of social life on the island for the employees of the penitentiary . It regularly hosted dinners , bingo events , and from the 1940s onwards showed movies every Sunday night after they had been shown to the inmates during the day on Saturday and Sunday . The club was responsible for organizing numerous special events on the island ( held either in the hall or the Parade Grounds ) and the fundraising associated with it , anything from ice cream and watermelon feasts to Halloween fancy dress and Christmas parties . 
 = = = Power House = = = 
 The Power House is located on the northwest coast of Alcatraz Island . It was constructed in 1939 for $ 186 @,@ 000 as part of a $ 1 @.@ 1 million modernization scheme which also included the water tower , New Industries Building , officers quarters and remodeling of the D @-@ block . The white powerhouse smokestack and lighthouse were said to give an " appearance of a ship 's mast on either side of the island " . A sign reading " A Warning . Keep Off . Only Government permitted within 200 yards " lay in front of the powerhouse to deter people landing on the island at the point . 
 Between 1939 and 1963 it supplied power to the Federal Penitentiary and other buildings on the island . The powerhouse had a tower duty station which was guarded with a " 30 @-@ caliber Winchester rifle with 50 rounds of ammunition , a 1911 semiautomatic pistol with three seven @-@ round magazines , three gas grenades , and a gas mask . " 
 = = = Alcatraz Water Tower = = = 
 The Water Tower is located on the northwestern side of the island , near Tower No. 3 , beyond the Morgue and Recreation Yard . The water tank is situated on six cross @-@ braced steel legs submerged in concrete foundations . 
 As Alcatraz had no water supply of its own , it had to import it from the mainland , brought by tug and barge . During the island 's military years , there were in @-@ ground water tanks and water tanks were situated on the roof of the citadel . The water tower was built in 1940 – 41 by the Federal Bureau of Prisons , after the island received a government renovations grant to supply the majority of the island 's fresh water . 
 It is the tallest building on the island , at a height of 94 feet ( 29 m ) with a volume of 250 @,@ 000 US gallons ( 950 kL ) gallons of fresh water . It was used to store potable water for drinking , water for firefighting , and water for the island 's service laundry facility . 
 = = = Model Industries Building = = = 
 The Model Industries Building is a three / four @-@ story building on the northwest corner of Alcatraz Island . This building was originally built by the U.S. military and was used as a laundry building until the New Industries Building was built as part of a redevelopment program on Alcatraz in 1939 when it was a federal penitentiary . As part of the Alcatraz jail , it held workshops for inmates to work in . 
 On January 10 , 1935 , the building shifted to within 2 @.@ 5 feet from the edge of the cliff following a landslide caused by a severe storm . The warden at the time , James A. Johnston , proposed extend the seawall next to it and asked the Bureau for $ 6500 to fund it ; he would later claim to dislike the building because it was irregularly shaped . A smaller , cheaper riprap was completed by the end of 1935 . A guard tower and a catwalk from Hill Tower was added to the roof of the Industries Building in June 1936 and the building was made secure with bars from old cells to bar the windows and grill the roof ventilators and to prevent inmates from escaping from the roof . It ceased use as a laundry in 1939 when it was moved to the upper floor of the New Industries Building . Today the building is heavily rusted after decades of exposure to the salt air and wind , and neither the guard tower on top of the building or the Hill Tower still exist . 
 = = = New Industries Building = = = 
 The New Industries Building was constructed in 1939 for $ 186 @,@ 000 as part of a $ 1 @.@ 1 million modernization scheme which also included the water tower , power house , officers ' quarters and remodeling of the D @-@ block . 
 The ground floor of the two @-@ story 306 ft long building contained a clothing factory , dry cleaning plant , furniture plant , brush factory , and an office , where prisoners of the federal penitentiary could work for money . They earned a small wage for their labour which was put into an account , known as a Prisoner 's Trust Fund , which would be given to them upon leaving Alcatraz . They made items such as gloves , furniture mats , and army uniforms . The laundry room occupied the entire upper floor , the largest in San Francisco at the time . Each window has 9 panes and there are 17 bays on each floor on either side . 
 = = Notable inmates = = 
 = = Legends = = 
 Alcatraz has been cited as one of the most " haunted " places in America . The Native Americans mentioned the evil spirits they purportedly encountered on the island long before it became a military prison . Mark Twain visited it , found the atmosphere of the island eerie , and described it as " being as cold as winter , even in the summer months " , and The Washington Post has also claimed that Alcatraz is a place " where visitors can sense the dread of past inhabitants still trapped in the atmosphere . " The alleged haunting of the prison has been documented in numerous paranormal television series . Officials for Alcatraz have dismissed the reports of ghosts at Alcatraz as nonsense and deny their existence ; an official for Alcatraz said in 1994 , " These ridiculous ghost stories will stop tourists from visiting . And how can these people say they heard canaries ? We don 't have any birds in here . " 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 = I Am ... Yours ( Beyoncé show ) = 
 I Am ... Yours was the first residency show by American singer Beyoncé . It was held four consecutive nights in July and August 2009 in support of her third studio album , I Am ... Sasha Fierce ( 2008 ) . The concerts were held at the Encore at Wynn Las Vegas in Las Vegas , Nevada . Beyoncé performed over thirty songs backed by an orchestra and her all @-@ female band , the Suga Mamas , to an audience of 1 @,@ 500 . The show was deemed " an intimate encounter " as Beyoncé portrayed a more raw and uninhibited show versus her previous concert performances . The concept of the shows revolves around Beyoncé 's recording career . 
 I Am ... Yours received positive response from music critics who praised the intimate performances and Beyoncé 's vocals as well as the jazz , funk and orchestral arrangements of the songs . The success of I Am ... Yours has led Wynn Resorts to ask Beyoncé to return as a residency act . A double disc CD and DVD , I Am ... Yours : An Intimate Performance at Wynn Las Vegas , was released in November 2009 , featuring the performance recorded on August 2 , 2009 . It contained the full concert , a behind @-@ the @-@ scenes feature , along with an audio CD of the concert . I Am ... Yours : An Intimate Performance at Wynn Las Vegas was aired on several TV Networks as a special . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 When Beyoncé 's I Am ... Tour ( 2009 – 2010 ) , was announced in 2008 by Entertainment Weekly , the article mentioned Beyoncé would perform a week @-@ long Las Vegas showcase . As tour dates were announced , it was later revealed that Beyoncé would perform four shows in Las Vegas . The concerts were held at the Encore Theatre in Las Vegas , Nevada to a standing room @-@ only audience of 1 @,@ 500 . Tickets for the first three shows were sold out after they were made available , but the ones for the fourth night were sold slowly with Las Vegas Sun reporting that ninety percent of the tickets were sold . The prices for the tickets were from $ 250 to $ 1 @,@ 000 . According to Beyoncé , the show is an " unplugged " version of her normal concerts ; she removed all the elaborate costumes and theatrics of her latest tour and performed with her band , Suga Mama , and a small team of dancers . Regarding the concerts , she told ABC News , 
 " I 've always wanted to perform in Las Vegas , I 've always wanted to do my own show there , because a lot of the icons that I look up to had amazing shows in Las Vegas . I thought if I 'm going to have my own Las Vegas show , it has to be right and it has to have heart and soul and it has to be something memorable ... My whole objective here is for people to see what they don 't get to see . Just give me my band , give me a stage , some cool smoke and lights and you see the sweat , you see the pain , you see the love , you see the soul and it 's about music . " 
 During the documentary , " What Happens in Vegas ... " , Beyoncé stated that when the idea of a Vegas show was presented to her , she wanted the show to be a complete 180 from her current tour . Also , she did not want it to be the typical Las Vegas showcase . She wanted to remove the theatrics and " consciously show that I don 't need any of that stuff . Just give me my band , a stage and some cool smoke and lights . " Beyoncé and her production quickly organized the show in seven days , based on a script provided by filmmaker Matthew Dickens . She often rehearsed during sound checks of her 2009 tour . 
 The concept of the shows revolves around Beyoncé 's recording career , from her early childhood beginnings to the star she is today . She revealed , " In the beginning , I 'm gonna start out , sing and make it about my songwriting , my arrangements , my band and my love for music . Then , I 'm gonna tell my story . This way , I can sing all of the hit songs , the songs that people want . But , it 's a deeper meaning ... these songs meant more than just the chorus that 's catchy ... it 's my life . " Since the show was created last minute , there were many changes . Originally , the set list included , " Ego " , " At Last " , " Listen " , " Ring the Alarm " , and " Upgrade U " . These songs were later removed from the set list and a new one was added with additional instruments . The success of the show has led Wynn Resorts to ask Beyoncé to return as a residency act . 
 = = About the show = = 
 = = = Fashion and stage = = = 
 The stage contained wind machines , lasers , arena lighting , a teleprompter on the back and a retro , mood @-@ lit platform during the performances of the songs . According to Nate Chinen of The New York Times , " the stagecraft ... keeps a viewer at a worshipful remove " . During a statement before the show , Beyoncé revealed , " We have designed an elegant and beautiful stage and we will have new costumes that are being designed especially for this show . " Beyoncé is accompanied by an orchestra and her 18 @-@ member all @-@ female band on stage " whose satin interpretations pump lush over pomp " according to Mike Ragogna of The Huffington Post . She is also backed by several dancers during the performances of several songs and also appears alone during some performances . The choreography for the show was developed by Beyoncé 's collaborator Frank Jr . Gatson . The set list included performances of over thirty songs , both from Beyoncé 's solo career and as part of the girl group Destiny 's Child . During the show , one major costume change was made . Beyoncé first appeared in beaded Jean Paul Gaultier couture and then in a cape @-@ like jacket for the first half of the show . Both pieces were worn on top of a figure @-@ flaunting grey bodysuit . For the second part , Beyoncé traded the bodysuit for a black sequined , bathing suit @-@ like number . Several costumes for the stage during the show were also designed by Beyoncé 's mother Tina Knowles , who was her designer for many years . <unk> of Las Vegas Weekly praised the costumes of the show , saying that Beyoncé " sparkled from beginning to end " . She noted that the first costume " left little to the imagination " while the second one " left no curve unnoticed " . 
 = = = Show synopsis = = = 
 The show begins with a narrator introducing Beyoncé to the audience . She appears from the back of the theater performing " Hello " . She greets the audience and makes her way towards the stage as she continues to perform . At the stage , Beyoncé sings " Halo " . Next , she performs " Irreplaceable " and interacts with the audience . She later moves into an acoustic medley , performing a down @-@ tempo version of " Sweet Dreams " , " Dangerously in Love 2 " and " Sweet Love " ( originally recorded by Anita Baker ) . The medley leads into " If I Were a Boy " ( which contains excerpts from " You Oughta Know " ) and " Scared of Lonely " . The show continues with a performance of " That 's Why You 're Beautiful " , intertwined with excerpts from " The Beautiful Ones " ( originally recorded by Prince ) , " Satellites " , and " Resentment " . The first act concludes with Beyoncé performing a jazz @-@ fused " Déjà Vu " . Before the next act begins , three dancers appear and perform a tap sequence called " Bebop " . 
 Beyoncé begins the second act by telling the story of her career , starting from when she was nine years old when she auditioned for the talent show Star Search to her then @-@ latest album I Am ... Sasha Fierce ( 2008 ) . Beyoncé highlights that one of the very first songs she remembers learning was Michael Jackson 's " I Wanna Be Where You Are " . She continues with a medley of Destiny 's Child 's hits songs , including " No No No " , " Bug a Boo " , " Bills , Bills , Bills " , and " Say My Name " whilst in between the songs , she talks about the story behind them . The medley leads into " Work It Out " and " ' 03 Bonnie & Clyde " , as she now begins to talk about the start her solo career . As the set continues , Beyoncé explains how her record company felt her debut album did not have " one " hit song . She sarcastically remarks , " I guess they were kinda right ... I had five . " Beyoncé goes on to perform " Crazy in Love " ( reminiscent of " Proud Mary " by Tina Turner ) , " Naughty Girl " and " Get Me Bodied " . As the show draws to a close , Beyoncé performs " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " ; she then exits the stage after thanking the audience for their presence . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Overall , the show received a positive response from many music critics . Mike Weatherford of the Las Vegas Review @-@ Journal wrote , " The spectacle rivals Celine Dion 's ' A New Day ' as the singer transforms from fragile soul to the rock warrior alter ego of her album title , I Am ... Sasha Fierce . " Melissa <unk> of Las Vegas Weekly wrote in her review of the show , " Once Beyoncé took to the stage , she hardly left it . Appearing both on her own and with back @-@ up dancers , she worked the theater from left to right throughout the showcase . She sang , danced , and looked good while she did it ... Indeed , the mezzo @-@ soprano is as easy on the eyes as she is on the ears . " John Griffiths of Us Weekly described the concert as " lavish " . Andy Kellman from Allmusic wrote , " The show is certainly a theatrical production worthy of Vegas , with Beyoncé and her large backing band energetically rolling through the singer 's back catalog . " 
 Darryl Sterdan of the website Jam ! commented : " Only Beyonce would think an ' intimate ' theatre gig should include her massive all @-@ girl band , an orchestra , lasers , dancers , costume changes and a wind machine to keep her hair blowing majestically . And only Beyonce could pull it all together as superbly as she does in this 98 @-@ minute ... show " . A writer of The Boston Globe praised I Am ... Yours , comparing it with Sin City . He commended the jazz interlude , the acoustic rearrangements of the songs , and the " charming B [ eyoncé ] telling her life story in [ the ] song [ s ] " . Mike Ragogna of The Huffington Post compared Beyoncé with Diana Ross during the show and added : " This ' concert ' is a staged , stripped @-@ down reconfiguration by Beyoncé ... of her current touring extravaganza that covers her biggest hits ... as she whisks us through her career highlights in two tidy acts plus an ' intermission ' that is nothing of the sort ( it 's a jazz medley with a dance payoff ) . " He finished his review by saying , " Beyoncé 's I Am ... Yours is a satisfying decade @-@ and @-@ then @-@ some retrospective that reveals the artist 's interesting back story with a personal warmth " . 
 Mike Diver of BBC Online reviewed the show positively and said , " this is an entirely second @-@ guessable affair , each movement telegraphed and every realigned arrangement ( bombast turned down , jazz and funk switched up ) meeting the listener 's expectations head on . " The writer of People magazine described the show as a " magic " . Nate Chinen of The New York Times positively noted that I Am ... Yours documents a smaller show than the other ones Beyoncé usually makes . A less favorable review came from Margaret Lyons of Entertainment Weekly . She writes , " I just wish this special had the balls to call itself ' I Am … Mine ' and admit that among the many things we admire about Beyonce is that she 's not ours . In fact the opposite ’ s true . We 're hers " . 
 = = Broadcasts and recordings = = 
 A double disc CD and DVD , titled I Am ... Yours : An Intimate Performance at Wynn Las Vegas , was released in November 2009 , featuring the performance recorded on August 2 , 2009 . The collection featured the full concert ( though her cover of " The Beautiful Ones " was not present ) , a behind @-@ the @-@ scenes feature , along with an audio CD of the concert . The collection was very successful , debuting at number 1 on the US Billboard Top Music Video chart . The album was also successful on the other DVD and albums charts across the world . The live performance of " Halo " during the show , which is featured on the album , was nominated for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance at the 53rd Grammy Awards . 
 ABC Network aired a one @-@ hour Thanksgiving television special called Beyoncé – I Am ... Yours on November 26 , 2009 . A one @-@ minute trailer of the special was posted online on November 12 , 2009 ; it showed Beyoncé 's during her I Am ... Tour , behind @-@ the @-@ scenes footage including rehearsals , as well as personal videos . The special featured various songs from the show , as well as backstage footage , showing Beyoncé and her team preparing for the shows . The show was a success , drawing in nearly five million viewers . Black Entertainment Television aired the entire concert including songs that were not featured on the ABC special . In the United Kingdom , I Am ... Yours was broadcast on Channel 4 on December 25 , 2009 , ( Christmas Day morning ) , following an hour @-@ long documentary named Beyoncé : For The Record . Several videos of the live performances of " Halo " , " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " and " Scared of Lonely " were released at MTV Latin America in 2010 and 2011 . These videos were used to promote the album in Latin America and the television special " MTV World Stage : Beyoncé Live from Las Vegas " . 
 = = Set list = = 
 " Hello " 
 " Halo " 
 " Irreplaceable " 
 " Sweet Dreams " / " Dangerously in Love 2 " / " Sweet Love " 
 " If I Were a Boy " 
 " Scared of Lonely " 
 " That 's Why You 're Beautiful " / " The Beautiful Ones " 
 " Satellites " 
 " Resentment " 
 " Déjà Vu " 
 " I Wanna Be Where You Are " 
 Medley 
 " No , No , No Part 1 " 
 " No , No , No Part 2 " 
 " Bug a Boo " 
 " Bills , Bills , Bills " 
 " Say My Name " 
 " Jumpin ' , Jumpin ' " 
 " Independent Women Part I " 
 " Bootylicious " 
 " Survivor " 
 " Work It Out " 
 " ' 03 Bonnie & Clyde " 
 " Crazy in Love " 
 " Naughty Girl " 
 " Get Me Bodied " 
 " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " 
 = Topology ( electrical circuits ) = 
 The topology of an electronic circuit is the form taken by the network of interconnections of the circuit components . Different specific values or ratings of the components are regarded as being the same topology . Topology is not concerned with the physical layout of components in a circuit , nor with their positions on a circuit diagram . It is only concerned with what connections exist between the components . There may be numerous physical layouts and circuit diagrams that all amount to the same topology . 
 Strictly speaking , replacing a component with one of an entirely different type is still the same topology . In some contexts , however , these can loosely be described as different topologies . For instance , interchanging inductors and capacitors in a low @-@ pass filter results in a high @-@ pass filter . These might be described as high @-@ pass and low @-@ pass topologies even though the network topology is identical . A more correct term for these classes of object ( that is , a network where the type of component is specified but not the absolute value ) is prototype network . 
 Electronic network topology is related to mathematical topology , in particular , for networks which contain only two @-@ terminal devices , circuit topology can be viewed as an application of graph theory . In a network analysis of such a circuit from a topological point of view , the network nodes are the vertices of graph theory and the network branches are the edges of graph theory . 
 Standard graph theory can be extended to deal with active components and multi @-@ terminal devices such as integrated circuits . Graphs can also be used in the analysis of infinite networks . 
 = = Circuit diagrams = = 
 The circuit diagrams in this article follow the usual conventions in electronics ; lines represent conductors , filled small circles represent junctions of conductors , open small circles represent terminals for connection to the outside world . In most cases , impedances are represented by rectangles . A practical circuit diagram would use the specific symbols for resistors , inductors , capacitors etc . , but topology is not concerned with the type of component in the network so the symbol for a general impedance has been used instead . 
 The Graph theory section of this article gives an alternative method of representing networks . 
 = = Topology names = = 
 Many topology names relate to their appearance when drawn <unk> . Most circuits can be drawn in a variety of ways and consequently have a variety of names . For instance , the three circuits shown in figure 1 @.@ 1 all look different but have identical topologies . 
 This example also demonstrates a common convention of naming topologies after a letter of the alphabet to which they have a resemblance . Greek alphabet letters can also be used in this way , for example Π ( pi ) topology and Δ ( delta ) topology . 
 = = Series and parallel topologies = = 
 For a network with two branches , there are only two possible topologies : series and parallel . 
 Even for these simplest of topologies , there are variations in the way the circuit can be presented . 
 For a network with three branches there are four possible topologies ; 
 Note that the parallel / series topology is another representation of the Delta topology discussed later . 
 Series and parallel topologies can continue to be constructed with greater and greater numbers of branches ad infinitum . The number of unique topologies that can be obtained from n branches is 2n @-@ 1 . The total number of unique topologies that can be obtained with no more than n branches is 2n @-@ 1 . 
 = = Y and Δ topologies = = 
 Y and Δ are important topologies in linear network analysis due to these being the simplest possible three @-@ terminal networks . A Y @-@ Δ transform is available for linear circuits . This transform is important because there are some networks that cannot be analysed in terms of series and parallel combinations . 
 An example of this is the network of figure 1 @.@ 6 , consisting of a Y network connected in parallel with a Δ network . Say it is desired to calculate the impedance between two nodes of the network . In many networks this can be done by successive applications of the rules for combination of series or parallel impedances . This is not , however , possible in this case where the Y @-@ Δ transform is needed in addition to the series and parallel rules . 
 The Y topology is also called star topology . However , star topology may also refer to the more general case of many branches connected to the same node rather than just three . 
 = = Simple filter topologies = = 
 The topologies shown in figure 1 @.@ 7 are commonly used for filter and attenuator designs . The L @-@ section is identical topology to the potential divider topology . The T @-@ section is identical topology to the Y topology . The Π @-@ section is identical topology to the Δ topology . 
 All these topologies can be viewed as a short section of a ladder topology . Longer sections would normally be described as ladder topology . These kinds of circuits are commonly analysed and characterised in terms of a two @-@ port network . 
 = = Bridge topology = = 
 Bridge topology is an important topology with many uses in both linear and non @-@ linear applications , including , amongst many others , the bridge rectifier , the Wheatstone bridge and the lattice phase equaliser . There are several ways that bridge topology is rendered in circuit diagrams . The first rendering in figure 1 @.@ 8 is the traditional depiction of a bridge circuit . The second rendering clearly shows the equivalence between the bridge topology and a topology derived by series and parallel combinations . The third rendering is more commonly known as lattice topology . It is not so obvious that this is topologically equivalent . It can be seen that this is indeed so by visualising the top left node moved to the right of the top right node . 
 It is normal to call a network bridge topology only if it is being used as a two @-@ port network with the input and output ports each consisting of a pair of diagonally opposite nodes . The box topology in figure 1 @.@ 7 can be seen to be identical to bridge topology but in the case of the filter the input and output ports are each a pair of adjacent nodes . Sometimes the loading ( or null indication ) component on the output port of the bridge will be included in the bridge topology as shown in figure 1 @.@ 9 . 
 = = Bridged T and Twin @-@ T topologies = = 
 Bridged T topology is derived from bridge topology in a way explained in the Zobel network article . There are many derivative topologies also discussed in the same article . 
 There is also a twin @-@ T topology which has practical applications where it is desirable to have the input and output share a common ( ground ) terminal . This may be , for instance , because the input and output connections are made with co @-@ axial topology . Connecting together an input and output terminal is not allowable with normal bridge topology and for this reason Twin @-@ T is used where a bridge would otherwise be used for balance or null measurement applications . The topology is also used in the twin @-@ T oscillator as a sine wave generator . The lower part of figure 1 @.@ 11 shows twin @-@ T topology redrawn to emphasise the connection with bridge topology . 
 = = Infinite topologies = = 
 Ladder topology can be extended without limit and is much used in filter designs . There are many variations on ladder topology , some of which are discussed in the Electronic filter topology and Composite image filter articles . 
 The balanced form of ladder topology can be viewed as being the graph of the side of a prism of arbitrary order . The side of an anti @-@ prism forms a topology which , in this sense , is an anti @-@ ladder . Anti @-@ ladder topology finds an application in voltage multiplier circuits , in particular the Cockcroft @-@ Walton generator . There is also a full @-@ wave version of the Cockcroft @-@ Walton generator which uses a double anti @-@ ladder topology . 
 Infinite topologies can also be formed by cascading multiple sections of some other simple topology , such as lattice or bridge @-@ T sections . Such infinite chains of lattice sections occur in the theoretical analysis and artificial simulation of transmission lines , but are rarely used as a practical circuit implementation . 
 = = Components with more than two terminals = = 
 Circuits containing components with three or more terminals greatly increase the number of possible topologies . Conversely , the number of different circuits represented by a topology diminishes and in many cases the circuit is easily recognisable from the topology even when specific components are not identified . 
 With more complex circuits the description may proceed by specification of a transfer function between the ports of the network rather than the topology of the components . 
 = = Graph theory = = 
 Graph theory is the branch of mathematics dealing with graphs . In network analysis , graphs are used extensively to represent a network being analysed . The graph of a network captures only certain aspects of a network ; those aspects related to its connectivity , or , in other words , its topology . This can be a useful representation and generalisation of a network because many network equations are invariant across networks with the same topology . This includes equations derived from Kirchhoff 's laws and <unk> 's theorem . 
 = = = History = = = 
 Graph theory has been used in the network analysis of linear , passive networks almost from the moment that Kirchhoff 's laws were formulated . Gustav Kirchhoff himself , in 1847 , used graphs as an abstract representation of a network in his loop analysis of resistive circuits . This approach was later generalised to RLC circuits , replacing resistances with impedances . In 1873 James Clerk Maxwell provided the dual of this analysis with node analysis . Maxwell is also responsible for the topological theorem that the determinant of the node @-@ admittance matrix is equal to the sum of all the tree admittance products . In 1900 Henri Poincaré introduced the idea of representing a graph by its incidence matrix , hence founding the field of algebraic topology . In 1916 Oswald Veblen applied the algebraic topology of Poincaré to Kirchhoff 's analysis . Veblen is also responsible for the introduction of the spanning tree to aid choosing a compatible set of network variables . 
 Comprehensive cataloguing of network graphs as they apply to electrical circuits began with Percy MacMahon in 1891 ( with an engineer friendly article in The Electrician in 1892 ) who limited his survey to series and parallel combinations . MacMahon called these graphs yoke @-@ chains . Ronald Foster in 1932 categorised graphs by their nullity or rank and provided charts of all those with a small number of nodes . This work grew out of an earlier survey by Foster while collaborating with George Campbell in 1920 on 4 @-@ port telephone repeaters and produced 83 @,@ 539 distinct graphs . 
 For a long time topology in electrical circuit theory remained concerned only with linear passive networks . The more recent developments of semiconductor devices and circuits have required new tools in topology to deal with them . Enormous increases in circuit complexity have led to the use of combinatorics in graph theory to improve the efficiency of computer calculation . 
 = = = Graphs and circuit diagrams = = = 
 Networks are commonly classified by the kind of electrical elements making them <unk> in a circuit diagram these element @-@ kinds are specifically drawn , each with its own unique symbol . Resistive networks are one @-@ element @-@ kind networks , consisting only of R elements . Likewise capacitive or inductive networks are one @-@ element @-@ kind . The RC , RL and LC circuits are simple two @-@ element @-@ kind networks . The RLC circuit is the simplest three @-@ element @-@ kind network . The LC ladder network commonly used for low @-@ pass filters can have many elements but is another example of a two @-@ element @-@ kind network . 
 Conversely , topology is concerned only with the geometric relationship between the elements of a network , not with the kind of elements themselves . The heart of a topological representation of a network is the graph of the network . Elements are represented as the edges of the graph . An edge is drawn as a line , terminating on dots or small circles from which other edges ( elements ) may emanate . In circuit analysis , the edges of the graph are called branches . The dots are called the vertices of the graph and represent the nodes of the network . Node and vertex are terms that can be used interchangeably when discussing graphs of networks . Figure 2 @.@ 2 shows a graph representation of the circuit in figure 2 @.@ 1 . 
 Graphs used in network analysis are usually , in addition , both directed graphs , to capture the direction of current flow and voltage , and labelled graphs , to capture the uniqueness of the branches and nodes . For instance , a graph consisting of a square of branches would still be the same topological graph if two branches were interchanged unless the branches were uniquely labelled . In directed graphs , the two nodes that a branch connects to are designated the source and target nodes . Typically , these will be indicated by an arrow drawn on the branch . 
 = = = Incidence = = = 
 Incidence is one of the basic properties of a graph . An edge that is connected to a vertex is said to be incident on that vertex . The incidence of a graph can be captured in matrix format with a matrix called an incidence matrix . In fact , the incidence matrix is an alternative mathematical representation of the graph which dispenses with the need for any kind of drawing . Matrix rows correspond to nodes and matrix columns correspond to branches . The elements of the matrix are either zero , for no incidence , or one , for incidence between the node and branch . Direction in directed graphs is indicated by the sign of the element . 
 = = = Equivalence = = = 
 Graphs are equivalent if one can be transformed into the other by deformation . Deformation can include the operations of translation , rotation and reflection ; bending and stretching the branches ; and crossing or knotting the branches . Two graphs which are equivalent through deformation are said to be congruent . 
 In the field of electrical networks , there are two additional transforms that are considered to result in equivalent graphs which do not produce congruent graphs . The first of these is the interchange of series connected branches . This is the dual of interchange of parallel connected branches which can be achieved by deformation without the need for a special rule . The second is concerned with graphs divided into two or more separate parts , that is , a graph with two sets of nodes which have no branches incident to a node in each set . Two such separate parts are considered an equivalent graph to one where the parts are joined by combining a node from each into a single node . Likewise , a graph that can be split into two separate parts by splitting a node in two is also considered equivalent . 
 = = = Trees and links = = = 
 A tree is a graph in which all the nodes are connected , either directly or indirectly , by branches , but without forming any closed loops . Since there are no closed loops , there are no currents in a tree . In network analysis , we are interested in spanning trees , that is , trees that connect every node present in the graph of the network . In this article , spanning tree is meant by an unqualified tree unless otherwise stated . A given network graph can contain a number of different trees . The branches removed from a graph in order to form a tree are called links , the branches remaining in the tree are called twigs . For a graph with n nodes , the number of branches in each tree , t , must be ; 
 <formula> 
 An important relationship for circuit analysis is ; 
 <formula> 
 where b is the number of branches in the graph and l is the number of links removed to form the tree . 
 = = = Tie sets and cut sets = = = 
 The goal of circuit analysis is to determine all the branch currents and voltages in the network . These network variables are not all independent . The branch voltages are related to the branch currents by the transfer function of the elements of which they are composed . A complete solution of the network can therefore be either in terms of branch currents or branch voltages only . Nor are all the branch currents independent from each other . The minimum number of branch currents required for a complete solution is l . This is a consequence of the fact that a tree has l links removed and there can be no currents in a tree . Since the remaining branches of the tree have zero current they cannot be independent of the link currents . The branch currents chosen as a set of independent variables must be a set associated with the links of a tree : one cannot choose any l branches arbitrarily . 
 In terms of branch voltages , a complete solution of the network can be obtained with t branch voltages . This is a consequence the fact that short @-@ circuiting all the branches of a tree results in the voltage being zero everywhere . The link voltages cannot , therefore , be independent of the tree branch voltages . 
 A common analysis approach is to solve for loop currents rather than branch currents . The branch currents are then found in terms of the loop currents . Again , the set of loop currents cannot be chosen arbitrarily . To guarantee a set of independent variables the loop currents must be those associated with a certain set of loops . This set of loops consists of those loops formed by replacing a single link of a given tree of the graph of the circuit to be analysed . Since replacing a single link in a tree forms exactly one unique loop , the number of loop currents so defined is equal to l . The term loop in this context is not the same as the usual meaning of loop in graph theory . The set of branches forming a given loop is called a tie set . The set of network equations are formed by equating the loop currents to the algebraic sum of the tie set branch currents . 
 It is possible to choose a set of independent loop currents without reference to the trees and tie sets . A sufficient , but not necessary , condition for choosing a set of independent loops is to ensure that each chosen loop includes at least one branch that was not previously included by loops already chosen . A particularly straightforward choice is that used in mesh analysis in which the loops are all chosen to be meshes . Mesh analysis can only be applied if it is possible to map the graph on to a plane or a sphere without any of the branches crossing over . Such graphs are called planar graphs . Ability to map onto a plane or a sphere are equivalent conditions . Any finite graph mapped onto a plane can be shrunk until it will map onto a small region of a sphere . Conversely , a mesh of any graph mapped onto a sphere can be stretched until the space inside it occupies nearly all of the sphere . The entire graph then occupies only a small region of the sphere . This is the same as the first case , hence the graph will also map onto a plane . 
 There is an approach to choosing network variables with voltages which is analogous and dual to the loop current method . Here the voltage associated with pairs of nodes are the primary variables and the branch voltages are found in terms of them . In this method also , a particular tree of the graph must be chosen in order to ensure that all the variables are independent . The dual of the tie set is the cut set . A tie set is formed by allowing all but one of the graph links to be open circuit . A cut set is formed by allowing all but one of the tree branches to be short circuit . The cut set consists of the tree branch which was not short @-@ circuited and any of the links which are not short @-@ circuited by the other tree branches . A cut set of a graph produces two disjoint subgraphs , that is , it cuts the graph into two parts , and is the minimum set of branches needed to do so . The set of network equations are formed by equating the node pair voltages to the algebraic sum of the cut set branch voltages . The dual of the special case of mesh analysis is nodal analysis . 
 = = = <unk> and rank = = = 
 The nullity , N , of a graph with s separate parts and b branches is defined by ; 
 <formula> 
 The nullity of a graph represents the number of degrees of freedom of its set of network equations . For a planar graph , the nullity is equal to the number of meshes in the graph . 
 The rank , R of a graph is defined by ; 
 <formula> 
 Rank plays the same role in nodal analysis as nullity plays in mesh analysis . That is , it gives the number of node voltage equations required . Rank and nullity are dual concepts and are related by ; 
 <formula> 
 = = = Solving the network variables = = = 
 Once a set of geometrically independent variables have been chosen the state of the network is expressed in terms of these . The result is a set of independent linear equations which need to be solved simultaneously in order to find the values of the network variables . This set of equations can be expressed in a matrix format which leads to a characteristic parameter matrix for the network . Parameter matrices take the form of an impedance matrix if the equations have been formed on a loop @-@ analysis basis , or as an admittance matrix if the equations have been formed on a node @-@ analysis basis . 
 These equations can be solved in a number of well @-@ known ways . One method is the systematic elimination of variables . Another method involves the use of determinants . This is known as Cramer 's rule and provides a direct expression for the unknown variable in terms of determinants . This is useful in that it provides a compact expression for the solution . However , for anything more than the most trivial networks , a greater calculation effort is required for this method when working manually . 
 = = = Duality = = = 
 Two graphs are dual when the relationship between branches and node pairs in one is the same as the relationship between branches and loops in the other . The dual of a graph can be found entirely by a graphical method . 
 The dual of a graph is another graph . For a given tree in a graph , the complementary set of branches ( i.e. , the branches not in the tree ) form a tree in the dual graph . The set of current loop equations associated with the tie sets of the original graph and tree are identical to the set of voltage node @-@ pair equations associated with the cut sets of the dual graph . 
 The following table lists dual concepts in topology related to circuit theory . 
 The dual of a tree is sometimes called a maze It consists of spaces connected by links in the same way that the tree consists of nodes connected by tree branches . 
 Duals cannot be formed for every graph . Duality requires that every tie set has a dual cut set in the dual graph . This condition is met if and only if the graph is <unk> on to a sphere with no branches crossing . To see this , note that a tie set is required to " tie off " a graph into two portions and its dual , the cut set , is required to cut a graph into two portions . The graph of a finite network which will not map on to a sphere will require an n @-@ fold torus . A tie set that passes through a hole in a torus will fail to tie the graph into two parts . Consequently , the dual graph will not be cut into two parts and will not contain the required cut set . Consequently , only planar graphs have duals . 
 Duals also cannot be formed for networks containing mutual inductances since there is no corresponding capacitive element . Equivalent circuits can be developed which do have duals , but the dual cannot be formed of a mutual inductance directly . 
 = = = Node and mesh elimination = = = 
 Operations on a set of network equations have a topological meaning which can aid visualisation of what is happening . Elimination of a node voltage from a set of network equations corresponds topologically to the elimination of that node from the graph . For a node connected to three other nodes , this corresponds to the well known Y @-@ Δ transform . The transform can be extended to greater numbers of connected nodes and is then known as the star @-@ mesh transform . 
 The inverse of this transform is the Δ @-@ Y transform which analytically corresponds to the elimination of a mesh current and topologically corresponds to the elimination of a mesh . However , elimination of a mesh current whose mesh has branches in common with an arbitrary number of other meshes will not , in general , result in a realisable graph . This is because the graph of the transform of the general star is a graph which will not map on to a sphere ( it contains star polygons and hence multiple crossovers ) . The dual of such a graph cannot exist , but is the graph required to represent a generalised mesh elimination . 
 = = = Mutual coupling = = = 
 In conventional graph representation of circuits , there is no means of explicitly representing mutual inductive couplings , such as occurs in a transformer , and such components may result in a disconnected graph with more than one separate part . For convenience of analysis , a graph with multiple parts can be combined into a single graph by unifying one node in each part into a single node . This makes no difference to the theoretical behaviour of the circuit so analysis carried out on it is still valid . It would , however , make a practical difference if a circuit were to be implemented this way in that it would destroy the isolation between the parts . An example would be a transformer <unk> on both the primary and secondary side . The transformer still functions as a transformer with the same voltage ratio but can now no longer be used as an isolation transformer . 
 More recent techniques in graph theory are able to deal with active components , which are also problematic in conventional theory . These new techniques are also able to deal with mutual couplings . 
 = = = Active components = = = 
