 On February 20 , the colonists set foot on land for the first time in three months since leaving Santo Domingo . They set up a temporary camp near the site of the present @-@ day Matagorda Island Lighthouse . The chronicler of the expedition , Henri <unk> , described his first view of Texas : " The country did not seem very favorable to me . It was flat and sandy but did nevertheless produce grass . There were several salt pools . We hardly saw any wild fowl except some cranes and Canadian geese which were not expecting us . " 
 Against Beaujeu 's advice , La Salle ordered La Belle and the Aimable " to negotiate the narrow and shallow pass " to bring the supplies closer to the campsite . To lighten L 'Aimable 's load , its eight cannons and a small portion of its cargo were removed . After La Belle successfully negotiated the pass , La Salle sent her pilot to L 'Aimable to assist with the navigation , but L 'Aimable 's captain refused the help . As the Aimable set sail , a band of Karankawa approached and carried off some of the settlers . La Salle led a small group of soldiers to rescue them , leaving no one to direct the Aimable . When he returned , he found the Aimable grounded on a sandbar . Upon hearing that the captain had ordered the ship to sail forward after it had struck a sandbar , La Salle became convinced that the captain had deliberately grounded the ship . 
 For several days the men attempted to salvage the tools and provisions that had been loaded on the Aimable , but a bad storm prevented them from recovering more than food , cannons , powder , and a small amount of the merchandise . The ship sank on March 7 . The French watched the Karankawa loot the wreckage . As French soldiers approached the Native American village to retrieve their supplies , the villagers hid . On discovering the deserted village , the soldiers not only reclaimed the looted merchandise but also took animal pelts and two canoes . The angry Karankawa attacked , killing two Frenchmen and injuring others . 
 Beaujeu , having fulfilled his mission in escorting the colonists across the ocean , returned to France aboard the Joly in mid @-@ March 1685 . Many of the colonists chose to return to France with him , leaving approximately 180 . Although Beaujeu delivered a message from La Salle requesting additional supplies , French authorities , having made peace with Spain , never responded . The remaining colonists suffered from dysentery and venereal diseases , and people died daily . Those who were fit helped build crude dwellings and a temporary fort on Matagorda Island . 
 = = = Fort Saint Louis = = = 
 On March 24 , La Salle took 52 men in five canoes to find a less exposed settlement site . They found Garcitas Creek , which had fresh water and fish , with good soil along its banks . They named it Rivière aux Boeufs for the nearby buffalo herds . Fort Saint Louis was constructed on a bluff overlooking the creek , 1 @.@ 5 leagues from its mouth . Two men died , one of a rattlesnake bite and another from drowning while trying to fish . At night , the Karankawa would sometimes surround the camp and howl , but the soldiers could scare them away with a few gun shots . 
 In early June , La Salle summoned the rest of the colonists from the temporary campsite to the new settlement site . Seventy people began the 50 @-@ mile ( 80 km ) overland trek on June 12 . All of the supplies had to be hauled from the Belle , a physically draining task that was finally completed by the middle of July . The last load was accompanied by the 30 men who had remained behind to guard the ship . Although trees grew near the site , they were not suitable for building , and timber had to be transported to the building site from several miles inland . Some timbers were salvaged from the Aimable . By the end of July , over half of the settlers had died , most from a combination of scant rations and overwork . 
 The remaining settlers built a large two @-@ story structure at the center of the settlement . The ground floor was divided into three rooms : one for La Salle , one for the priests , and one for the officers of the expedition . The upper story consisted of a single room used to store supplies . Surrounding the fort were several smaller structures to provide shelter for the other members of the expedition . The eight cannons , each weighing 700 to 1 @,@ 200 pounds ( 320 to 540 kg ) , had been salvaged from L 'Aimable and were positioned around the colony for protection . 
 = = = Difficulties = = = 
 For several months after the permanent camp was built , the colonists took short trips to explore their surroundings . At the end of October 1685 , La Salle decided to undertake a longer expedition and reloaded the Belle with many of the remaining supplies . He took 50 men , plus the Belle 's crew of 27 sailors , leaving behind 34 men , women , and children . Most of the men traveled with La Salle in canoes , while the Belle followed further off the coast . After three days of travel , they learned of hostile Native Americans in the area . Twenty of the Frenchmen attacked the Native American village , where they found Spanish artifacts . Several of the men died on this expedition from eating prickly pear . The Karankawa killed a small group of the men who had camped on shore , including the captain of the Belle . 
 From January until March 1686 , La Salle and most of his men searched overland for the Mississippi River , traveling towards the Rio Grande , possibly as far west as modern @-@ day Langtry , Texas . The men questioned the local Native American tribes , asking for information on the locations of the Spaniards and the Spanish mines , offering gifts , and telling stories that portrayed the Spanish as cruel and the French as benevolent . When the group returned , they were unable to find the Belle where they had left her and were forced to walk back to the fort . 
 The following month they traveled east , hoping to locate the Mississippi and return to Canada . During their travels , the group encountered the Caddo , who gave the Frenchmen a map depicting their territory , that of their neighbors , and the location of the Mississippi River . The Caddo often made friendship pacts with neighboring peoples and extended their policy of peaceful negotiation to the French . While visiting the Caddo , the French met Jumano traders , who reported on the activities of the Spanish in New Mexico . These traders later informed Spanish officials of the Frenchmen they had seen . 
 Four of the men deserted when they reached the Neches River . La Salle and one of his nephews became very ill , forcing the group to halt for two months . While the men recovered , the group ran low on food and gunpowder . In August , the eight surviving members of the expedition returned to Fort Saint Louis , having never left East Texas . 
 While La Salle was gone , six of those who had remained on the Belle finally arrived at Fort Saint Louis . According to them , the new captain of the Belle was always drunk . Many of the sailors did not know how to sail , and they grounded the boat on Matagorda Peninsula . The survivors took a canoe to the fort , leaving the ship behind . The destruction of their last ship left the settlers stranded on the Texas coast , with no hope of gaining assistance from the French colonies in the Caribbean Sea . 
 By early January 1687 , fewer than 45 of the original 180 people remained in the colony , which was beset by internal strife . La Salle believed that their only hope of survival lay in trekking overland to request assistance from New France , and some time that month he led a final expedition to try to reach the Illinois Country . Fewer than 20 people remained at Fort Saint Louis , primarily women , children , and those deemed unfit , as well as seven soldiers and three missionaries with whom La Salle was unhappy . Seventeen men were included on the expedition , including La Salle , his brother , and two of his nephews . While camping near present @-@ day Navasota on March 18 , several of the men quarreled over the division of buffalo meat . That night , an expedition member killed one of La Salle 's nephews and two other men in their sleep . The following day La Salle was killed while approaching the camp to investigate his nephew 's disappearance . Infighting led to the deaths of two other expedition members within a short time . Two of the surviving members , including Jean L <unk> , joined the Caddo . The remaining six men , led by Henri <unk> , made their way to Illinois Country . During their journey through Illinois to Canada , the men did not tell anyone that La Salle was dead . They reached France in the summer of 1688 and informed King Louis of La Salle 's death and the horrible conditions in the colony . Louis did not send aid . 
 = = Spanish response = = 
 La Salle 's mission had remained secret until 1686 when former expedition member Denis Thomas , who had deserted in Santo Domingo , was arrested for <unk> trying to have his punishment reduced , Thomas informed his Spanish jailers of La Salle 's plan to found a colony and eventually conquer Spanish silver mines . Despite his confession , Thomas was hanged . 
 The Spanish government felt the French colony would be a threat to their mines and shipping routes , and Carlos II 's Council of War thought that " Spain needed swift action ' to remove this thorn which has been thrust into the heart of America . The greater the delay the greater the difficulty of attainment . ' " The Spanish had no idea where to find La Salle , and in 1686 they sent a sea expedition and two land expeditions to try to locate his colony . Although the expeditions were unable to find La Salle , they did narrow the search to the area between the Rio Grande and the Mississippi . Four Spanish expeditions the following year failed to find La Salle , but helped Spain to better understand the geography of the Gulf Coast region . 
 In 1688 , the Spanish sent three more expeditions , two by sea and one by land . The land expedition , led by Alonso De León , discovered Jean Gery , who had deserted the French colony and was living in Southern Texas with the Coahuiltecans . Using Gery as a translator and guide , De León finally found the French fort in late April 1689 . The fort and the five crude houses surrounding it were in ruins . Several months before , the Karankawa had attacked the settlement . They destroyed the structures and left the bodies of three people , including a woman who had been shot in the back . A Spanish priest who had accompanied De León conducted funeral services for the three victims . The chronicler of the Spanish expedition , Juan Bautista Chapa , wrote that the devastation was God 's punishment for opposing the Pope , as Pope Alexander VI had granted the Indies exclusively to the Spanish . The remains of the fort were destroyed by the Spanish , who also buried the French cannons left behind . The Spanish later built a fort on the same location . 
 In early 1689 , Spanish authorities received a plea , written in French . Jumano scouts had received these papers from the Caddo , who asked that they be delivered to the Spanish . The papers included a parchment painting of a ship , as well as a written message from Jean L <unk> . The message read : 
 I do not know what sort of people you are . We are French [ ; ] we are among the savages [ ; ] we would like much to be Among the Christians such as we are [ . ] ... we are solely grieved to be among beasts like these who believe neither in God nor in anything . Gentlemen , if you are willing to take us away , you have only to send a message . ... We will deliver ourselves up to you . 
 De León later rescued L <unk> and his companion Jacques <unk> . On interrogation , the men maintained that over 100 of the French settlers had died of smallpox , and the others had been killed by Native Americans . The only people known to have survived the final attack were the Talon children , who had been adopted by the Karankawa . According to the children , the settlement had been attacked around Christmas of 1688 , and all the remaining settlers had been killed . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Only 15 or 16 people survived the colony . Six returned to France , while nine others were captured by the Spanish , including the four children who had been spared by the Karankawa . The children were initially brought to the viceroy of New Spain , the Conde de <unk> , who treated them as servants . Two of the boys , Pierre and Jean @-@ Baptiste , later returned to France . Of the remaining Spanish captives , three became Spanish citizens and settled in New Mexico . Although the French colony had been utterly destroyed , Spain feared that another French attempt was inevitable . For the first time , the Spanish crown authorized small outposts in eastern Texas and at Pensacola . In 1722 , the Spanish built a fort , Presidio La Bahia , and Mission Nuestra Señora del Espíritu Santo de Zúñiga on the site of Fort Saint Louis . 
 France did not abandon its claims to Texas until November 3 , 1762 , when it ceded all of its territory west of the Mississippi River to Spain in the Treaty of Fontainebleau , following its defeat by Great Britain in the Seven Years ' War . It ceded New France to Britain . In 1803 , three years after Spain had returned Louisiana to France , Napoleon sold the territory to the United States . The original agreement between Spain and France had not explicitly specified the borders of Louisiana , and the descriptions in the documents were ambiguous and contradictory . The United States insisted that its purchase included all of the territory France had claimed , including all of Texas . The dispute was not resolved until the Adams @-@ Onís Treaty of 1819 , in which Spain ceded Florida to the United States in return for the United States ' relinquishing its claim on Texas . 
 The official boundary of Texas was set at the Sabine River ( the current boundary between Texas and Louisiana ) , and following the Red and Arkansas rivers to the 42nd parallel ( California 's current northern border ) . 
 = = Excavation = = 
 In 1908 , historian Herbert Eugene Bolton identified an area along Garcitas Creek , near Matagorda Bay , as the location of Fort St. Louis . Other historians , before and after Bolton , argued that the fort was located on Lavaca River in Jackson County . Five decades later , the University of Texas at Austin funded a partial excavation of Bolton 's site , a part of the <unk> ranch . Although several thousand items were recovered , archaeologists could not accurately distinguish between French and Spanish artifacts of the 17th century , and no report on the findings was ever issued . In the 1970s , the artifacts were reexamined by Kathleen Gilmore , an archaeologist at Southern Methodist University . She determined that while most of the artifacts were Spanish , some definitively matched artifacts recovered from French and French @-@ Canadian excavations of the same time period . 
 In late 1996 , <unk> ranch workers exploring with metal detectors located eight cast @-@ iron cannons buried near Garcitas Creek . After excavating the cannons , the Texas Historical Commission ( THC ) confirmed they were from Fort Saint Louis . In 2000 a THC excavation discovered the locations of three of the buildings that had housed the French colony and the three graves dug by the Spanish . 
 For decades , the THC had also been searching for the wreckage of La Belle . In 1995 , the shipwreck was discovered in Matagorda Bay . Researchers excavated a 792 @-@ pound ( 359 kg ) cast @-@ bronze cannon from the waters , as well as musket balls , bronze straight pins , and trade beads . Large sections of the wooden hull were intact , protected from the damaging effects of warm salt water by layers of muddy sediment which " essentially creat [ ed ] an oxygen @-@ free time capsule " . La Belle was the oldest French shipwreck discovered in the Western Hemisphere to that date . To enable the archaeologists to recover as many of the artifacts as possible , a cofferdam was constructed around the ship . The cofferdam held back the waters of the bay , allowing archaeologists to conduct the excavation as if it were on land . This was the first attempt in North America to excavate a shipwreck in dry conditions . Previous shipwreck excavations using cofferdams were completed in Europe , but never on a ship as large as the Belle . 
 The National Underwater and Marine Agency searched for L 'Aimable from 1997 until 1999 . Although they found a promising location , the ship was buried under more than 25 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) of sand and could not be reached . 
 = Sam & Max Hit the Road = 
 Sam & Max Hit the Road is a graphic adventure video game released by LucasArts during the company 's adventure games era . The game was originally released for MS @-@ DOS in 1993 and for Mac OS in 1995 . A 2002 re @-@ release included compatibility with Windows . The game is based on the comic characters of Sam and Max , the " Freelance Police " , an anthropomorphic dog and " hyperkinetic rabbity thing " . The characters , created by Steve Purcell , originally debuted in a 1987 comic book series . Based on the 1989 Sam & Max comic On the Road , the duo take the case of a missing bigfoot from a nearby carnival , traveling to many Americana tourist sites to solve the mystery . 
 LucasArts began development of the game in 1992 with the intention to use new settings and characters after the success of the past Maniac Mansion and Monkey Island adventure titles . Series creator Steve Purcell , then a LucasArts employee , was one of the lead designers on the project . Sam & Max Hit the Road is the ninth game to use the SCUMM adventure game engine , and also integrated the iMUSE audio system developed by Michael Land and Peter McConnell . The game was one of the first to incorporate full voice talent for its characters ; the two title characters were voiced by professional voice actors Bill Farmer and Nick Jameson . 
 The game received critical acclaim on release , and was praised for its humor , voice acting , graphics , music and gameplay . It is now regarded as a classic point @-@ and @-@ click adventure game and is often listed in publishers ' lists of top games of all time . Several attempts to produce sequels were cancelled , ultimately resulting in the franchise moving from LucasArts to Telltale Games . 
 Since October 2014 , after the acquisition of LucasArts by Disney , the game is being sold by GOG.com. 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Sam & Max Hit the Road is a 2D adventure game where the player controls the actions of Sam from a third @-@ person perspective . The player uses Sam to explore the pre @-@ rendered cartoon environments of the game and solve a series of puzzles using a simple point @-@ and @-@ click interface . The game 's puzzles have logical solutions , although a number of them have far @-@ fetched solutions due to the game 's cartoon setting . Players can set the game 's cursor in a particular mode to designate how Sam interacts with the environment : Sam can walk around an area , talk to other characters , look at objects , pick them up or otherwise try to use them . The cursor 's graphic changes when it is hovered over an in @-@ game entity that Sam can interact with . When talking to another character , the player is given a choice of subject areas to discuss , depicted in a conversation tree as icons at the base of the screen . In addition to specific topics involving the game 's plot , Sam can inject unconnected exclamations , questions and non sequiturs into a conversation . 
 The game incorporates an inventory system for items that Sam picks up during the course of the game . Items can be used on other entities in the game world , or can often be combined with other inventory items to provide a new object necessary for solving a puzzle . Although Max 's character will walk around the game 's areas by his own will , Sam can also use Max at various points by using an inventory icon of Max 's head on game objects — usually on characters where the solution to a problem involves violence . Sam and Max travel to different locations in the game using their black and white 1960 DeSoto Adventurer , which when clicked on in @-@ game will present a map of the United States with all the available locations the pair can travel to shown . As the game progresses , the number of locations on the map increases . 
 In addition to the main game , Sam & Max Hit the Road includes several minigames . Some of these , such as a carnival game based on Whac @-@ A @-@ Mole but involving live rats , must be completed in order to receive new items and further the game 's plot , while others , such as a car @-@ themed version of Battleship , are entirely optional as to whether the player uses them . As with the majority of LucasArts adventure games , Sam & Max Hit the Road is designed so that the player characters cannot die or reach a complete dead @-@ end . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Sam and Max , the Freelance Police , are two comic book characters created by Steve Purcell , who act as private detectives and vigilantes . Sam & Max Hit the Road follows the pair on a case that takes them from their office in New York City across the United States . The game starts in a similar way to many of the comic stories , with Sam and Max receiving a telephone call from an unseen and unheard Commissioner , who tells them to go to a nearby carnival . At the carnival , they are told by the owners that their star attraction , a frozen bigfoot called Bruno , has been set free and fled taking their second attraction , Trixie the Giraffe @-@ <unk> Girl . Sam and Max set off to find Bruno and Trixie and bring them back . As the duo investigate the carnival , they learn that Bruno and Trixie are in love and that Trixie freed Bruno . The Freelance Police leave the carnival to pursue leads at various tourist traps throughout the country , such as The World 's Largest Ball of Twine , a vortex controlled by giant subterranean magnets and bungee jumping facilities at Mount Rushmore . 
 The pair learn that two other bigfoots used as tourist attractions in other parts of the country have been freed by Bruno , and that Bruno has been captured by Liverpudlian country western singer Conroy Bumpus , a cruel animal abuser who wishes to use Bruno in his performances . Sam and Max travel to Bumpus ' home and rescue Bruno and Trixie , but Bruno then departs with Trixie to join a bigfoot gathering at an inn in Nevada . Following them , Sam and Max disguise themselves as a bigfoot to enter the party . Eventually the party is gatecrashed by Conroy Bumpus and his henchman Lee Harvey , who hope to capture the bigfoots . However , Sam manages to fool Bumpus and Harvey into donning their bigfoot disguise , and Max locks them in the inn 's kitchen freezer . 
 Chief Vanuatu , leader of the bigfoots , in recognition of the pair 's actions , makes the Freelance Police members of the bigfoot tribe and tells them of a spell that will make the world safe for bigfoots again , preventing their capture by humans . However , the chief requires help deciphering the spell 's four ingredients , and asks for Sam and Max 's help . Eventually , they discover that the ingredients are a vegetable resembling John Muir , hair restoration tonic , the tooth of a dinosaur , and a vortex contained within a snow globe . Combined with a live bigfoot sacrifice — which Max substitutes for frozen bigfoot @-@ clad Bumpus and Harvey — the ingredients cause large trees to spring into existence , destroying towns and cities and covering the bulk of the west United States in forest . Content that their work is done , Sam and Max take the frozen ice block containing Bumpus and Harvey to the carnival . Believing that Bruno has been returned to them , the owners give a large reward of <unk> ball tickets to the Freelance Police , who then spend the end credits shooting targets at a carnival stall with real firearms . 
 = = Development = = 
 Sam & Max Hit the Road was developed by a small team at LucasArts , many of whom had previous experience working on other LucasArts adventure games . The game was designed by Sean Clark , Michael Stemmle , Sam & Max creator Steve Purcell and his future wife Collette Michaud , all of whom had worked on Indiana Jones and the Fate of Atlantis . Sam and Max first appeared as video game characters as internal testing material for SCUMM engine programmers recently employed by LucasArts ; Steve Purcell created animated versions of the characters and an office backdrop for the programmers to practice on . Soon after , Sam & Max comic strips by Steve Purcell were published in LucasArts ' quarterly newsletter . After a positive reaction from fans to the strips and out of a wish to use new characters and settings after the success of the Monkey Island and Maniac Mansion franchises , LucasArts offered in 1992 to create a video game out of the characters . 
 The game was based on the 1989 Sam & Max comic On The Road , which featured the two on a journey across the United States . Several of the game 's tourist traps were based on real locations experienced by the developers ; Steve Purcell recollects a childhood visit to a " Frog Rock " — one of the locations featured in the game — and remembered thinking " That 's it ? It doesn 't even look like a frog ! " A chain of " <unk> 's " roadside stores and attractions was a tribute to the Stuckey 's chain which Purcell and his family often stopped at during road trips . 
 Sam & Max was one of the first games to include a full speech soundtrack and music , which for Steve Purcell was a " dream opportunity " to hear his creations speak . Steve Purcell describes casting Bill Farmer in the role of Sam as his audition tape " was very dry ; he wasn ’ t trying too hard to sell the lines " . Actor Nick Jameson was cast to voice Max . The game 's jazz score was composed by LucasArts ' Clint Bajakian , Michael Land and Peter McConnell , and was incorporated into the game using Land and McConnell 's iMUSE engine , which allowed for audio to be synchronized with the visuals . High quality versions of four of the game 's tracks were included on the CD version of the game . Sam & Max Hit the Road was released simultaneously on floppy disk and CD @-@ ROM ; only the CD version of the game contained full in @-@ game speech and music . Fans of the game have since recreated the game 's MIDI soundtrack in higher quality MP3 format . 
 As the Sam & Max comics had a more adult tone , Steve Purcell expected LucasArts to cut back " the edgier material " from the game . However , he expressed that he was pleased with how LucasArts allowed him to stay close to his original vision for the game . The game 's various minigames were included to allow players to take a break from solving the main game 's puzzles and play something " short and silly " . Sam & Max Hit the Road also signified a major change in development for games on the SCUMM engine . The user interface was entirely <unk> from that introduced in Maniac Mansion and built upon in subsequent games . Instead of selecting a verb function from a list at the bottom of the screen and clicking on an in @-@ game entity , Sam & Max Hit the Road compressed all verb functions into the mouse cursor , which players could cycle through using the right @-@ mouse button . The inventory was also moved off the main screen to a sub @-@ screen accessible by a small icon on the screen . According to Steve Purcell , this cleared space on the screen to " expand on the excellent backgrounds and also made interaction much quicker and less laborious than LucasArts ' previous adventure games " The conversation trees were also affected by this ; Michael Stemmle proposed removing the text @-@ based selection menu used in previous LucasArts ' adventure games in favor of icons representing topics of discussion as " nothing would kill a joke worse than reading it before you hear it " . Several of these innovations were retained for future LucasArts adventure games . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Sam & Max Hit the Road received a favorable reception from the gaming industry 's press , holding a rating of 84 % on the review aggregator site Game Rankings . Edge noted that " with most adventure games , its hard to feel anything for the character ( s ) you control " , but stated that Sam & Max Hit the Road broke this mold by being " genuinely funny " and players would be " experimenting more than ... normally just to see what the madcap pair will get up to next . " The reviewer praised the game 's graphics as " beautifully detailed " and the puzzles as " intricate to solve " , but noted that a number of the minigames were " dismal " . <unk> Linkola , writing for Adventure Gamers , echoed many of these comments , praising the cartoon @-@ style graphics as " appropriately cheesy " and " colorful " . On the subject of the game 's humor , Linkola noted that " there are many visual jokes , but the backbone of the game is in its witty dialogue " , and as such this gave the game a " replayability value " as players may pick up on jokes based on " verbal acrobatics , on the use of polysyllabic words , old English and other such oddities " that they missed the first time around . Linkola gave additional praise to the soundtrack and audio work , stating that the " very fitting voices ... adds to the comical duo 's wisecracking attitude " . 
 Allgame reviewer Steve Honeywell was also very positive with his comments , describing the plot as " interesting " , the graphics as " appropriately cartoonish and fun " and the locations as " well @-@ designed " , but noting that above all " what makes Sam & Max Hit the Road work is the humor " . On the game 's puzzles , Honeywell stated that " some of the puzzles are pretty simple , while others are difficult in the extreme . One nice thing is the almost complete absence of red herring items . Everything you find can be put to use somewhere " . As with other reviews , Allgame praised the audio work , noting that " the music is decent throughout the game , and the voice talent is stellar " , closing with the comment that the game takes point @-@ and @-@ click adventures to " insane new heights in terms of both fun and comedy " . <unk> praised the graphics of the game as " superb " but noted that " it 's not so friendly that it can only be played by kiddies " . Although describing sound setup as " a bit tricky " , the reviewer praised the voice acting as " very good " and the music as " top quality " . However , although the review noted that the game had " easy to use " interfaces and menus , it was critical of the fact that " at times it can be the frustrating ' hunt for the correct pixel ' syndrome " . 
 The game was one of four nominees for the 1994 Annie Award in the category Best Animated CD @-@ ROM , although the award instead went to LucasArts ' Star Wars : Rebel Assault . 
 Sam and Max Hit the Road has since come to be regarded as a classic adventure game title , and is regularly featured in listings of the top 100 games . In 1996 , Computer Gaming World ranked it as the 95th best game of all time , calling it " the adventure game that redefined ' wacky ' . " In 2004 , Adventure Gamers listed Sam & Max Hit the Road as the eighth @-@ best adventure game of all time , describing it as " the most absurd and ridiculous game ever designed " . IGN described Sam and Max Hit the Road in its 2007 top 100 games feature as " known more for its story and characters " , noting that " the unusual and interesting gameplay is typically saddled in the shotgun position in fans ' memories , but when you 're driving a Porsche , even the trunk is a smooth ride " . Writing for Adventure Classic Gaming in 2006 , David <unk> noted that the game had " undoubtedly ... become [ LucasArts ' ] most critically acclaimed adventure game of all time " , citing the game 's production values , graphical effects , challenging puzzles and story techniques as the reason for this , concluding that the game was an " enduring testament to adventure gaming ’ s finest hours " . 
 = = Sequels = = 
 The first attempts at creating a sequel took place in September 2001 with Sam & Max Plunge Through Space . The game was to be an Xbox exclusive title , developed by Infinite Machine , a small company consisting of a number of former LucasArts employees . The story of the game was developed by series creator Steve Purcell and fellow designer Chuck Jordan and involved the Freelance Police travelling the galaxy to find a stolen Statue of Liberty . However , Infinite Machine went bankrupt within a year , and the project was abandoned . 
 At the 2002 Electronic Entertainment Expo convention , nearly a decade after the release of Sam & Max Hit the Road , LucasArts announced the production of a PC sequel , entitled Sam & Max : Freelance Police . Freelance Police , like Hit the Road , was to be a point @-@ and @-@ click graphic adventure game , utilising a new 3D game engine . Development of Freelance Police was led by Michael Stemmle , one of the original designers of Sam and Max Hit the Road . Steve Purcell contributed to the project by writing the story and producing concept art . The original voice actors for Sam and Max , Bill Farmer and Nick Jameson , were also set to reprise their roles . In March 2004 , however , quite far into the game 's development , Sam & Max : Freelance Police was abruptly cancelled by LucasArts , citing " current market place realities and underlying economic considerations " in a short press release . The fan reaction to the cancellation was strong ; a petition of 32 @,@ 000 signatures stating the disappointment of fans was later presented to LucasArts . 
 After LucasArts ' license with Steve Purcell expired in 2005 , the Sam & Max franchise moved to Telltale Games , a company of former LucasArts employees who had worked on a number of LucasArts adventure games , including on the development of Freelance Police . Under Telltale Games , a new episodic series of Sam & Max video games was announced . Like both Sam & Max Hit the Road and Freelance Police , Sam & Max Save the World was in a point @-@ and @-@ click graphic adventure game format , although it lacked the original voice actors for the characters . The first season ran for six episodes , each with a self @-@ contained storyline but with an overall story arc running through the series . The first episode was released on GameTap in October 2006 , with episodes following regularly until April 2007 , and a special compilation on the Wii released in October 2008 . A second season , Sam & Max Beyond Time and Space , began in November 2007 and ended in April 2008 . This was also released as a compilation on the Wii . Originally expected to be released in 2009 , a third season , Sam & Max : The Devil 's Playhouse , began in April 2010 . 
 = Nine Inch Nails = 
 Nine Inch Nails ( abbreviated NIN ; stylized as <unk> ) is an American industrial rock band , founded in 1988 by Trent Reznor in Cleveland , Ohio . As its main producer , singer , songwriter , and instrumentalist , Reznor is the only official member of the group and remains solely responsible for its direction . Nine Inch Nails ' music straddles a wide range of genres . After recording a new album , Reznor usually assembles a live band to perform with him . The touring band features a revolving lineup that often rearranges songs to fit a live setting . On stage , Nine Inch Nails often employs visual elements to accompany performances , which frequently include light shows . 
 Underground music audiences warmly received Nine Inch Nails in its early years . Reznor produced several highly influential records in the 1990s that achieved widespread popularity : many Nine Inch Nails songs became radio hits ; and their entire catalog has reached record sales exceeding over 20 million albums worldwide , with 10 million sales certified in the United States alone . In 1997 , Reznor appeared in Time magazine 's list of the year 's most influential people , and Spin magazine described him as " the most vital artist in music . " In 2004 , Rolling Stone placed Nine Inch Nails at 94 on its list of the 100 greatest artists of all time . Despite this acclaim , the band has had several feuds with the corporate side of the recording industry . In 2007 , these corporate entanglements resulted in Reznor announcing that Nine Inch Nails would split from its label and release future material independently . 
 Since 1989 , Nine Inch Nails has released eight studio albums . After a hiatus from 2009 to 2013 , Nine Inch Nails released Hesitation Marks , through Columbia Records . Prior to this , Ghosts I – IV and The Slip were both independently released in digital form , with physical releases coming later . The digital release of the latter was made available completely free of charge , and the former , while also available for sale , can be acquired legally through means such as file @-@ sharing due to its Creative Commons license . Nine Inch Nails has been nominated for thirteen Grammy Awards and won twice for the songs " Wish " and " Happiness in Slavery " , in 1992 and 1996 respectively . In 2014 , Nine Inch Nails was named as nominees for induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame , their first year of eligibility . In 2015 , they were nominated a second time . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation ( 1988 – 1989 ) = = = 
 In 1987 , Trent Reznor played keyboard in a Cleveland band called the Exotic Birds , then managed by John Malm , Jr . Reznor and Malm became friends , and when Reznor left the Exotic Birds to work on music of his own , Malm informally became his manager . At the time , Reznor was employed as an assistant engineer and janitor at Right Track Studios , in Cleveland ; he asked studio owner Bart Koster for permission to record some demos of his own material for free during unused studio time . Koster agreed and allowed Reznor to use it whenever it was empty , commenting that it cost him " just a little wear on [ his ] tape heads " . While completing the early recordings , Reznor was unable to find a band that could articulate the material as he desired . Instead , inspired by Prince , Reznor played all the instruments except drums himself . This role remains Reznor 's on most of the band 's studio recordings , though he has occasionally involved other musicians and assistants . Nine Inch Nails debut was at the Phantasy Theater in Lakewood , Ohio on October 21 , 1988 as part of the Pretty Hate Machine Tour Series . In 1988 , after playing its first shows supporting Skinny Puppy , Reznor 's ambition for Nine Inch Nails was to release one 12 @-@ inch single on a small European label . Several labels responded favorably to the demo material and Reznor signed with TVT Records . Nine selections from the Right Track demos recorded live in November 1988 , collectively known as Purest Feeling , were later released in revised form on the band 's first full @-@ length studio release , Pretty Hate Machine ( 1989 ) . The overall sound on Purest Feeling is lighter than that of Pretty Hate Machine ; several songs feature more live drumming and guitar work throughout , as well as a heavier use of samples from films . 
 Reznor coined the name " Nine Inch Nails " because it " abbreviated easily " , rather than for " any literal meaning " . Other rumored explanations have circulated , alleging that Reznor chose to reference Jesus ' crucifixion with nine @-@ inch spikes , or Freddy Krueger 's nine @-@ inch fingernails . The English letters NIN are also noted for their resemblance to the modern Hebrew characters of the Tetragrammaton . There is also an old English music hall song with the refrain , " I don 't not know no one who don 't want no nine inch nails . " The Nine Inch Nails ' logo , which consists of the letters [ <unk> ] set inside a border , was designed by Reznor and Gary Talpas . The logo first appeared on the music video for Nine Inch Nails ' debut single , " Down in It " , and was inspired by Tibor Kalman 's typography on the Talking Heads album Remain in Light . Talpas , a native of Cleveland , would continue to design Nine Inch Nails packaging art until 1997 . 
 = = = Pretty Hate Machine ( 1989 – 1991 ) = = = 
 Written , arranged , and performed by Reznor , Nine Inch Nails ' first album Pretty Hate Machine debuted in 1989 . It marked his first collaboration with Adrian Sherwood ( who produced the lead single " Down in It " in London without meeting Reznor face @-@ to @-@ face ) and Mark " Flood " Ellis . Reznor asked Sean Beavan to mix the demos of Pretty Hate Machine , which had received multiple offers for record deals . He mixed sound during Nine Inch Nails ' live concerts for several years , eventually becoming an unofficial member of the live band and singing live backup vocals from his place at the mixing console . Flood 's production would appear on each major Nine Inch Nails release until 1994 , and Sherwood has made remixes for the band as recently as 2000 . Reznor and his co @-@ producers expanded upon the Right Track Studio demos by adding singles " Head Like a Hole " and " Sin " . Rolling Stone 's Michael Azerrad described the album as " industrial @-@ strength noise over a pop framework " and " harrowing but catchy music " ; Reznor proclaimed this combination " a sincere statement " of " what was in [ his ] head at the time " . In fact the song " Down in It " spent over two months on Billboard 's club @-@ play dance chart . After spending 113 weeks on the Billboard 200 , Pretty Hate Machine became one of the first independently released records to attain platinum certification . 
 Three music videos were created in promotion of the album . MTV aired the videos for " Down in It " and " Head Like a Hole " , but an explicit video for " Sin " was only released in partial form for Closure . The original version of the " Down in It " video ended with the implication that Reznor 's character had fallen off a building and died in the street . This footage attracted the attention of the FBI . As Reznor explains in an interview with <unk> Magazine : 
 There was a scene w [ h ] ere I was lying on the ground , appearing to be dead , in a Lodger @-@ esque pose and we had a camera with a big weather balloon filled with helium hooked up to it ... the first one we did , we started the film , I was laying on the ground and the ropes that were holding the balloon snapped , the camera just took off into the atmosphere ... the camera landed two hundred miles away in a farmer 's field somewhere . He finds it and takes it to the police , thinking that it 's a surveillance camera for marijuana , they develop the film and think that it 's some sort of snuff film of a murder , give it to the FBI and have pathologists looking at the body saying , ' yeah , he 's rotting , ' ( I had corn starch on me , right ) ' he 's been decomposing for 3 weeks . ' You could see the other members of the band walking away and they had these weird outfits on , and they thought it was some kind of gang slaying . 
 In 1989 , while doing promotion for the album , the band were asked what shows they would like to appear on . The band jokingly replied ( possibly while intoxicated ) that they would like to appear on Dance Party USA , since it was the most absurd option they could think of at the time . Much to their surprise , they were booked on the show , and made an appearance . 
 In 1990 , Nine Inch Nails began the Pretty Hate Machine Tour Series , in which they toured North America as an opening act for alternative rock artists such as Peter Murphy and The Jesus and Mary Chain . Reznor began smashing his equipment while on stage ; <unk> interviewer Mike Gitter attributed the live band 's early success in front of rock oriented audiences to this aggressive attitude . Nine Inch Nails then embarked on a world tour that continued through the first Lollapalooza festival in 1991 . 
 = = = Broken ( 1992 – 1993 ) = = = 
 After a poor European reception opening for Guns N ' Roses , the band returned to America amid pressure from TVT to produce a follow @-@ up to Pretty Hate Machine . After finding out they were hindering control of his project , Reznor criticized the labeling of Nine Inch Nails as a synthpop band and demanded his label terminate his contract , but they ignored his plea . In response , Reznor secretly began recording under various pseudonyms to avoid record company interference . Involved in a feud with TVT , he signed a record deal with Interscope Records and created Nothing Records : 
 We made it very clear we were not doing another record for TVT . But they made it pretty clear they weren 't ready to sell . So I felt like , well , I 've finally got this thing going but it 's dead . Flood and I had to record Broken under a different band name , because if TVT found out we were recording , they could confiscate all our shit and release it . Jimmy Iovine got involved with Interscope , and we kind of got slave @-@ traded . It wasn 't my doing . I didn 't know anything about Interscope . And I was real pissed off at him at first because it was going from one bad situation to potentially another one . But Interscope went into it like they really wanted to know what I wanted . It was good , after I put my raving lunatic act on . 
 In 1992 , Nine Inch Nails relocated to 10050 Cielo Drive , Benedict Canyon , Los Angeles ( renamed " Le Pig " by Reznor ) , the site of the Tate murders , when Charles Manson 's " family " murdered Sharon Tate , wife of noted film director Roman Polanski , and four of her friends . It was used for the band to record Broken , an extended play ( EP ) that was the first release distributed by Nothing Records and reached the top 10 on the Billboard 200 . In the liner notes , Reznor credited the 1991 Nine Inch Nails touring band as an influence on the EP 's sound . He characterized Broken as a guitar @-@ based " blast of destruction " , and as " a lot harder ... than Pretty Hate Machine " . The inspiration for the harder sound came from the way the live band played during concerts such as Lollapalooza . Songs from Broken earned Nine Inch Nails two Grammy Awards : a performance of the EP 's first single " Happiness in Slavery " from Woodstock ' 94 , and the second single " Wish " . In reference to receiving the Grammy Award for Best Metal Performance for " Wish " , Reznor joked his epitaph should read : " <unk> : Died . Said ' fist fuck ' , won a Grammy . " Against touring of the brand new material , Reznor began living and recording full @-@ time at Le Pig , working on a follow @-@ up free of restrictions from his record label . 
 Peter Christopherson of the bands Coil and Throbbing Gristle directed a performance video for " Wish " , but the EP 's most controversial video accompanied " Happiness in Slavery " . The video was almost universally banned for its graphic depiction of performance artist Bob Flanagan disrobed and lying on a machine that pleasures , tortures , then kills him . A third video for " Pinion " , partially incorporated into MTV 's Alternative Nation opening sequence , showed a toilet that apparently flushes into the mouth of a person in bondage . Reznor and Christopherson compiled the three clips along with footage for " Help Me I Am in Hell " and " Gave Up " into a longform music video titled Broken . It depicts the murder of a young man who is kidnapped and tortured while forced to watch the videos . This footage was never officially released , but instead appeared covertly among tape trading circles . A separate performance video for " Gave Up " featuring Richard Patrick and Marilyn Manson was filmed at Le Pig . A live recording of " Wish " was also filmed , and both videos appeared in Closure . 
 Broken was followed by its companion remix EP Fixed in late 1992 . The only track that was left off the final version of the release is Butch Vig 's remix of " Last " ( the outro of the " Last " remix is heard in " Throw This Away " , which also includes Vig 's remix of " Suck " ) . The unedited version appeared on the internet as an 8 @-@ bit mono 11 kHz file , " NIN _ <unk> " , available by FTP from <unk> in 1993 ; it has been removed from the website , but can still be found on <unk> networks ( Reznor subsequently made it available in higher quality ( <unk> / s mp3 ) at <unk> ) . Vig later spoke about his remix while answering questions on a music production forum , saying " I started recording a lot of new parts , and took it in a much different direction . When it was finished , Trent thought the front part of the mix didn 't fit the EP , so he just used the ending . I 'm glad it 's on his website . Duke and Steve worked with me on the remix , in the very early days of Garbage . " 
 = = = The Downward Spiral ( 1994 – 1997 ) = = = 
 Early ideas for The Downward Spiral were conceived after the Lollapalooza 1991 festival concerts ended in September of that year . Reznor developed a concept about the album 's themes and later used it as lyrics . He searched for and moved to 10050 Cielo Drive , renting it for $ 11 @,@ 000 per month from July 4 , 1992 , marking the beginning of the making of both Broken and The Downward Spiral . This was against his initial choice to record the album in New Orleans . 
 Nine Inch Nails ' second studio album , The Downward Spiral , entered the Billboard 200 at number two , and remains the highest @-@ selling Nine Inch Nails release in the United States for shipments of over four million copies , in addition to selling five million copies worldwide . Influenced by late @-@ 1970s works by Pink Floyd and David Bowie , The Downward Spiral features a wide range of textures and moods to illustrate the mental progress of a central character . Flood co @-@ produced several tracks on the album , which became his last collaboration with Nine Inch Nails . Alan Moulder mixed most of The Downward Spiral and subsequently took on more extensive production duties for future album releases . Reznor invited Beavan to work on The Downward Spiral . After contributing to remixes of Nine Inch Nails songs , such as " Closer " , Beavan mixed and co @-@ produced Marilyn Manson 's Antichrist Superstar in 1996 . It was recorded at Le Pig Studios , previously used for the recording process of Broken . " March of the Pigs " and " Closer " were released as singles . Two other songs from the album , " Hurt " and " Piggy " , were issued to radio without a commercial single release . 
 The music video for " Closer " was directed by Mark Romanek and received frequent rotation on MTV , though the network heavily censored the original version , which they perceived to be too graphic . The video shows events in a laboratory dealing with religion , sexuality , animal cruelty , politics , and terror ; controversial imagery included a nude bald woman with a crucifix mask , a monkey tied to a cross , a pig 's head spinning on some type of machine , a diagram of a vulva , Reznor wearing an S & M mask while swinging in shackles , and of him wearing a ball gag . A radio edit that partially mutes the song 's explicit lyrics also received extensive airtime . 
 Critical response to The Downward Spiral has generally been favorable , and retrospective reviews regard it as one of the most important albums of the 1990s . It has featured in several publications ' best album lists : in 2005 the album was ranked 25th in Spin 's list of the " 100 Greatest Albums , 1985 – 2005 " , and in 2003 Rolling Stone ranked the album number 200 on their " The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time " list . Blender named it the 80th Greatest American Album . It was ranked No. 488 in the book The Top 500 Heavy Metal Albums of All Time by Martin Popoff . In 2001 Q named The Downward Spiral as one of the 50 Heaviest Albums of All Time ; in 2010 the album was ranked No. 102 on their 250 Best Albums of Q 's Lifetime ( 1986 – 2011 ) list . After The Downward Spiral 's release , Reznor produced an accompanying remix album entitled Further Down the Spiral , the only non @-@ major Nine Inch Nails release to be certified gold in the United States and among the best @-@ selling remix albums of all time . It featured contributions from Coil with Danny Hyde , electronic musician Aphex Twin , producer Rick Rubin , and Jane 's Addiction guitarist Dave Navarro , among others . 
 After the 1994 release of The Downward Spiral , the live band embarked on the Self Destruct Tour in support of the album . The stage set @-@ up contained dirty curtains which would be pulled down and up for visuals shown during songs such as " Hurt " . The tour debuted the band 's grungy and messy image in which they would come out in ragged clothes slathered in corn starch . The concerts were violent and chaotic , with band members often injuring themselves , and they would frequently destroy their instruments at the end of concerts , attack each other , and stage @-@ dive into the crowd . The tour reached its widest mainstream audience with a mud @-@ drenched performance at Woodstock ' 94 that was broadcast on Pay @-@ Per @-@ View and seen in as many as 24 million homes . Nine Inch Nails received considerable mainstream success thereafter , performing with significantly higher production values and adding theatrical visual elements to the live show . Supporting acts for the tour included The Jim Rose Circus and Marilyn Manson . Released in 1997 , the Closure video documented highlights from the tour , including full live videos of " Eraser " , " Hurt " and a one @-@ take " March of the Pigs " clip made for MTV . Around this time , Reznor 's studio perfectionism , struggles with addiction , and bouts of writer 's block prolonged the production of The Fragile . 
 Reznor produced the soundtrack to the Oliver Stone film Natural Born Killers using a portable Pro Tools in his hotel room . The compilation featured , " Burn " , a song written exclusively for the film . Throughout early 1996 Reznor collaborated with id Software to help create the music and sound effects to the first @-@ person shooter video game Quake . In homage to him , the entire Quake series features the Nine Inch Nails band logo on ammo crates that supply ammunition for the in @-@ game nail gun weapon . In 1997 , Reznor produced the soundtrack to the David Lynch film Lost Highway . The release spawned the single " The Perfect Drug " , the music video for which was also directed by Mark Romanek . A tenth anniversary deluxe reissue of The Downward Spiral was released on November 23 , 2004 . 
 = = = The Fragile ( 1999 – 2002 ) = = = 
 Five years elapsed between The Downward Spiral and Nine Inch Nails ' next studio album , The Fragile , which arrived as a double album in September 1999 . The Fragile was conceived by making " songwriting and arranging and production and sound design ... the same thing . A song would start with a drum loop or a visual and eventually a song would emerge out of it and that was the song . " Canadian rock producer Bob Ezrin was consulted on the album 's track listing ; the liner notes state that he " provided final continuity and flow . " 
 On the heels of the band 's previous successes , media anticipation surrounded The Fragile more than a year before its release , when it was already described as " oft @-@ delayed " . The album debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 , selling 228 @,@ 000 copies in its first week and receiving generally positive reviews . Spin hailed The Fragile as the " album of the year , " whereas Pitchfork Media panned its " melodramatic " lyrics . Nine Inch Nails released three commercial singles from the album in different territories : " The Day the World Went Away " in North America ; " We 're in This Together " in the EU and Japan ( on three separate discs ) ; and " Into the Void " in Australia . Several songs from the album became regular features on alternative rock radio stations , however the album dropped to number 16 and slipped out of the Billboard Top 10 only a week after its release , resulting in the band setting a record for the biggest drop from number one , which has since been broken . Reznor funded the subsequent North American tour out of his own pocket . 
 Before the album 's release , the song " Starfuckers , Inc . " provoked media speculation about whom Reznor had intended its acerbic lyrics to satirize . <unk> critic Patricia <unk> interprets the song as a " scathing attack on the alternative music scene , " particularly Reznor 's former friend and protégé Marilyn Manson . The two artists put aside their differences when Manson appeared in the song 's music video , retitled " <unk> , Inc . " and performed on stage with Nine Inch Nails at Madison Square Garden in 2000 . 
 Reznor followed The Fragile with another remix album , Things Falling Apart , released in November 2000 to poor reviews , a few months after the 2000 Fragility tour which itself was recorded and released on CD , DVD , and VHS in 2002 as And All That Could Have Been . A deluxe edition of the live CD came with the companion disc Still , featuring stripped @-@ down versions of songs from the Nine Inch Nails catalog along with several new pieces of music . 
 In 2002 , Johnny Cash covered the Nine Inch Nails ' " Hurt " for his album , American IV : The Man Comes Around , to critical acclaim . After seeing the music video , which later won a Grammy , Reznor himself became a fan of the rendition : 
 I pop the video in , and wow ... Tears welling , silence , goose @-@ bumps ... Wow . [ I felt like ] I just lost my girlfriend , because that song isn 't mine anymore ... It really made me think about how powerful music is as a medium and art form . I wrote some words and music in my bedroom as a way of staying sane , about a bleak and desperate place I was in , totally isolated and alone . [ Somehow ] that winds up reinterpreted by a music legend from a radically different era / genre and still retains sincerity and meaning — different , but every bit as pure . 
 = = = With Teeth ( 2005 – 2006 ) = = = 
 A further six years elapsed before Nine Inch Nails ' fourth full @-@ length album , With Teeth , was released in 2005 , though it was leaked prior to its official release date . The album was written and recorded following Reznor 's battle with alcoholism and substance abuse . With Teeth debuted on top of the Billboard 200 , Nine Inch Nails ' second reign at number one with an album . The album 's package lacks typical liner notes ; instead it simply lists the names of songs and co @-@ producers , and the URL for an online PDF poster with lyrics and full credits . The entire album was made available in streaming audio on the band 's official MySpace page in advance of its release date . 
 Critical reception of the album was mostly positive : Rolling Stone 's Rob Sheffield described the album as " vintage Nine Inch Nails " . PopMatters condemned the album , claiming Reznor " ran out of ideas . " 
 A music video for the song " The Hand That Feeds " premiered on the Nine Inch Nails official website in March 2005 . Reznor released the source files for it in GarageBand format a month later , allowing fans to remix the song . He similarly released files for the album 's second single " Only " in a wider range of formats , including Pro Tools and ACID Pro . David Fincher directed a video for " Only " with primarily computer @-@ generated imagery . The planned music video for its third single , " Every Day Is Exactly the Same " , was directed by Francis Lawrence but reportedly scrapped in the post @-@ production stage . All three singles topped the Billboard Alternative Songs chart . 
 Nine Inch Nails launched a North American arena tour in Autumn 2005 , supported by Queens of the Stone Age , <unk> and Death from Above 1979 . Another opening act on the tour , hip @-@ hop artist Saul Williams , performed on stage with Nine Inch Nails at the Voodoo Music Experience festival during a headlining appearance in hurricane @-@ stricken New Orleans , Reznor 's former home . The Nine Inch Nails live band completed a tour of North American amphitheaters in the summer of 2006 , joined by Bauhaus , TV on the Radio , and Peaches . The Beside You in Time tour documentary was released in February 2007 via three formats : DVD , HD DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc . The home video release debuted at number one on both the Billboard Top Music Videos and Billboard Comprehensive Music Videos charts in the United States . 
 = = = Year Zero ( 2007 ) = = = 
 Nine Inch Nails ' fifth studio album , Year Zero , was released only two years after With Teeth , a marked change in the slow pace from the release of previous albums . With lyrics written from the perspective of multiple fictitious characters , Year Zero is a concept album criticizing the United States government 's policies and their impact on the world 15 years in the future . Critical response to the album was generally favorable , with an average rating of 76 % on Metacritic . 
 The story takes place in the United States in 2022 , which has been termed " Year 0 " , by the government , being the year America was reborn . It had suffered several major terrorist attacks , apparently by Islamic fundamentalists , including attacks on Los Angeles and Seattle , and in response , the government seized absolute control of the country . The government is a Christian fundamentalist theocracy , maintaining control of the populace through institutions like the Bureau of Morality and the First Evangelical Church of Plano . The government corporation <unk> distributes the drug <unk> through the water supply , making Americans who drink water apathetic and carefree . There are several underground rebel groups , mainly operating online , most notably Art is Resistance and Solutions Backwards Initiative . In response to the increasing oppression of the government , several corporate , government , and subversive websites were transported back in time to the present by a group of scientists working clandestinely against the authorities . The websites @-@ from @-@ the @-@ future were sent to the year 2007 to warn American people of the impending dystopian future and to prevent it from ever forming in the first place . 
 An alternate reality game emerged parallel to the Year Zero concept , expanding upon its storyline . Clues hidden on tour merchandise initially led fans to discover a network of fictitious , in @-@ game websites that describe an " Orwellian picture of the United States circa the year 2022 " . Before Year Zero 's release , unreleased songs from the album were found on USB drives hidden at Nine Inch Nails concert venues in Lisbon and Barcelona , as part of the alternate reality game . Fan participation in the alternate reality game caught the attention of media outlets such as USA Today and Billboard , who have cited fan @-@ site The NIN Hotline , forum Echoing the Sound , fan club The Spiral , and <unk> as sources for new discoveries . 
 The album 's first single , " Survivalism " , and other tracks from Year Zero were released as multitrack audio files for fans to remix . A remix album titled Year Zero Remixed was later released , featuring remixes from Year Zero by other artists . The remix album was Nine Inch Nails ' final release on a major record label for over five years , as the act had completed its contractual obligation to Interscope Records and did not renew its contract . The remix album was accompanied by an interactive remix site with multitrack downloads and the ability to post remixes . 
 Reznor planned a film adaption of the album and noted Year Zero as " part of a bigger picture of a number of things I 'm working on . Essentially , I wrote the soundtrack to a movie that doesn 't exist . " The project moved into the television medium because of high costs for Year Zero as a film , then Reznor found American film producer Lawrence Bender and met with writers . On August 10 , 2007 , Reznor announced that they would be taking the concept to television networks in an attempt to secure a deal : " We 're about to pitch it to the network , so we 're a couple of weeks away from meeting all of the main people , and we 'll see what happens . " Since first announcing his plans for a television series , progress slowed , reportedly due to the 2007 – 2008 Writer 's Guild strike , but it nevertheless continued . As of 2010 the resultant miniseries , also named Year Zero , was in development with HBO and BBC Worldwide Productions , with the screenplay and script written by Reznor and Carnivàle writer Daniel Knauf . 
 = = = Ghosts I – IV and The Slip ( 2008 ) = = = 
 In February 2008 , Reznor posted a news update on the Nine Inch Nails website entitled " 2 weeks . " On March 2 , Ghosts I – IV ( the first release on The Null Corporation label ) , a 36 @-@ track instrumental album , became available via the band 's official website . Ghosts I – IV was made available in a number of different formats and forms , ranging from a free download of the first volume , to a $ 300 Ultra @-@ Deluxe limited edition package . All 2 @,@ 500 copies of the $ 300 package sold out in three days . The album is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution Non @-@ Commercial Share Alike licence . The album was created improvisationally over a 10 @-@ week period and contributors included Atticus Ross , Alan Moulder , Alessandro Cortini , Adrian Belew , and Brian Viglione . 
 Similar to the announcement that ultimately led to the release of Ghosts I – IV , a post on the band 's website in April 2008 read " 2 weeks ! " On May 5 , Nine Inch Nails released The Slip via their website without any advertisement or promotion . The album was made available for download free of charge with a message from Reznor , " this one 's on me , " protected under the same Creative Commons licence as Ghosts , and has seen individual downloads surpassing 1 @.@ 4 million . The Slip has since been released on CD as a limited edition set of 250 @,@ 000 . 
 Since the release of Ghosts I – IV and The Slip , a 25 @-@ date tour titled Lights in the Sky , was announced in several North American cities , and was later expanded to include several more North American dates as well as dates in South America . Cortini and Freese returned as members from the previous tour , while Robin Finck rejoined the band and Justin Meldal @-@ Johnsen was added on bass guitar . Freese and Cortini left the live band , but it became a quartet with the addition of Ilan Rubin on drums . 
 On January 7 , 2009 , Reznor uploaded unedited HD @-@ quality footage from three shows as a download of over 400 GB via BitTorrent . In an immediate response , a fan organization known as This One Is On Us quickly downloaded the data and had begun to assemble the footage alongside their own video recordings to create a professional 3 @-@ part digital film , followed by a physical release created " by fans for fans " . This tour documentary became collectively known as Another Version of the Truth and was released throughout late December 2009 to February 2010 via three formats : DVD , Blu @-@ ray Disc and BitTorrent . To date , the group and the project has received significant attention from media outlets such as USA Today , Rolling Stone , Techdirt and Pitchfork TV , and holds the support of both Reznor and the fan community with theatrical screenings being held all over the world . Nine Inch Nails art director and webmaster Rob Sheridan noted on the band 's official website : 
 This is yet another example of a devoted fanbase and a policy of openness combining to fill in blanks left by old media barriers . The entire NIN camp is absolutely thrilled that treating our fans with respect and nurturing their creativity has led to such an overwhelming <unk> of incredible content , and that we now have such a high quality souvenir from our most ambitious tour ever . 
 Nine Inch Nails Revenge , an iPhone / iPod touch @-@ exclusive rhythm game developed by <unk> , was released on March 8 , 2009 ( five months after the company announced the development of the game ) . This installment in the Tap Tap video game franchise was themed after Nine Inch Nails , and included tracks from Ghosts I – IV and The Slip . Portions of the album Ghosts I @-@ IV were also used in making of the soundtrack for the documentary <unk> . 
 = = = Wave Goodbye Tour and hiatus ( 2009 – 2012 ) = = = 
 In February 2009 , Reznor posted his thoughts about the future of Nine Inch Nails on his official website , stating that " I 've been thinking for some time now it 's time to make NIN disappear for a while . " Reznor since clarified that he " isn 't done creating music under the moniker , but that Nine Inch Nails is done touring for the foreseeable future . " The " Wave Goodbye " tour concluded on September 10 , 2009 , at the Wiltern Theater in Los Angeles . Reznor subsequently released two tracks under the Nine Inch Nails moniker : the theme song for the film Tetsuo : The Bullet Man , and a cover of U2 's " Zoo Station " , included in the Achtung Baby tribute album AHK @-@ toong BAY @-@ bi Covered . 
 In 2009 Reznor married <unk> <unk> , and formed a project with <unk> and Atticus Ross dubbed How to Destroy Angels . Their first release , a six @-@ track self @-@ titled EP , was made available for free download in June 2010 . Reznor 's next collaboration with Ross was co @-@ writing and producing the official score for David Fincher 's 2010 film , The Social Network . Reznor and Ross received two awards for the score , a 2010 Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score for a Motion Picture , and a 2010 Oscar for Best Original Score . Reznor and Ross again collaborated with Fincher for the official score the American adaptation of the novel The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo , released in December 2011 , and then again on Fincher 's 2014 film Gone Girl 
 In July 2012 Reznor teamed up with video game developer Treyarch to compose the theme music for Call of Duty : Black Ops II . Later that year Reznor again worked with Atticus Ross along with Alessandro Cortini on a remix of the song " Destroyer " by <unk> . Reznor also appeared in a documentary called " Sound City " directed by Dave Grohl , in addition to co @-@ writing and performing the song " Mantra " with Grohl and Josh Homme . This led to further collaboration with Reznor and Homme on the 2013 album from Queens of the Stone Age titled ... Like Clockwork . Reznor contributed vocals and drum programing to the song " <unk> " and vocals on " Fairweather Friends " along with Elton John on piano and vocals . In October a project with Dr. Dre and Beats Electronics was announced that Reznor wrote was " probably not what you 're expecting [ from me ] " . The project was named " Daisy " ; a digital music service was announced in January 2013 . It was until January 2014 that the service was fully launched , with Reznor serving as chief creative officer . 
 = = = Return to touring , Hesitation Marks and future ( 2012 – present ) = = = 
 In an interview with BBC Radio 1 , Reznor indicated that he would be writing for the majority of 2012 with Nine Inch Nails " in mind " . Reznor eventually confirmed that he was working on new Nine Inch Nails material and might be performing live again . In February 2013 , Reznor announced the return of Nine Inch Nails and revealed the Twenty Thirteen Tour . He also revealed that the new lineup of the band would include Eric Avery of Jane 's Addiction , Adrian Belew of King Crimson , and Josh Eustis of <unk> Tel Aviv , as well as returning members Alessandro Cortini and Ilan Rubin . However , both Avery and Belew would quit the touring band before performances commenced , with former member Robin Finck returning in their place . 
 By May 28 a new Nine Inch Nails album was complete . Released September 3 , Hesitation Marks incorporated rhythms reminiscent of earlier releases , but was more expansive and theatrical . In addition to the recently departed Adrian Belew , Reznor employed bassist Pino Palladino along with Todd Rundgren and Fleetwood Mac 's Lindsey Buckingham to achieve various art @-@ rock elements . 
 The album produced three singles , all released prior to that of the album itself . " Came Back Haunted " was released on June 6 , with an accompanying music video bearing an epileptic seizure warning . The second single , " Copy of A " , was released on August 12 free of charge to US and UK Amazon.com account holders . " Everything " was the third and final single , recorded during sessions for the Nine Inch Nails greatest hits album . The sessions gave way to more songs that ended up yielding the entire album . 
 In July the Twenty Thirteen Tour was underway , beginning with a slew of festival appearances that included the Fuji Rock Festival , and the Pukkelpop , Hockenheim , Germany 's Rock <unk> and the Reading and Leeds festivals in August . The Tension 2013 North American leg of the tour ran from September to November and added Palladino , Lisa Fischer and Sharlotte Gibson to the lineup with Godspeed You ! Black Emperor and Explosions in the Sky as opening acts . This leg of the tour was documented and released in the spring as Nine Inch Nails Tension 2013 . 
 In 2014 the band extended their tour worldwide as a four piece . The new lineup included previous collaborators , Ilan Rubin , Alessandro Cortini , and Robin Finck . The band was joined by Queens of the Stone Age for the Australia and New Zealand tour , during which a nightly coin toss determined who opened . The tour closed in Europe with supporting synthpop act Cold Cave . 
 After a month @-@ long break , Nine Inch Nails again hit the road on a joint tour with Soundgarden . The 23 @-@ day journey extended throughout the continental US , with experimental hip @-@ hop group Death Grips scheduled to open most of the shows . Two weeks into the tour , Death Grips announced their break up and cancelled all subsequent live shows . Oneohtrix Point Never , The Dillinger Escape Plan and Cold Cave each replaced Death Grips separately for the remainder of the tour . 
 In 2014 , their first year of eligibility , Nine Inch Nails were nominated for induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame with 14 other candidates . While they were not inducted that year , the band placed second in the 2015 Rock and Roll Hall of Fame Nominees Fan Vote . In 2015 , Nine Inch Nails were once again nominated for the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame . 
 In June 2015 , Nine Inch Nails released instrumental versions of The Fragile and With Teeth to stream exclusively on Apple Music , a service of which Reznor is chief creative director . In an interview promoting the service , Reznor mentioned he has started " messing around with some things " in regards to a new Nine Inch Nails album , stating " It 's not a record I 'm trying to finish in a month . It 's more just feeling around in the dark and seeing what sounds interesting " . At the end of the 2015 year , Reznor reported that " Nine Inch Nails will return in 2016 . " 
 = = Musical characteristics and lyrics = = 
 AllMusic 's Steve Huey states that " Nine Inch Nails were the most popular industrial group ever and were largely responsible for bringing the music to a mass audience . " Reznor has never referred to his own work as industrial music , but admits to borrowing techniques from such early industrial bands as Throbbing Gristle and Test Dept . Despite the disparity between those artists initially operating under the term " industrial " and Nine Inch Nails , it has become common in journalistic descriptions of Reznor 's body of work to describe it as such . Reznor acknowledged in Spin magazine that " Down in It " was influenced by early Skinny Puppy , particularly their song " Dig It " ; other songs from Pretty Hate Machine were described in the same interview as synthpop . Reviewing The Fragile , critic Steve Cooper noted that the album juxtaposes widely varied genres , such as solo piano in " The Frail " and drum and bass elements in " Starfuckers , Inc . " 
 Certain techniques and styles can be found throughout Nine Inch Nails ' catalog . Songs such as " Wish " , and " The Day the World Went Away " exhibit terraced dynamics . Reznor 's singing follows a similar pattern , frequently moving from whispers to screams . He also has used software to alter his voice in several songs , as evident in " Starfuckers , Inc . " and " Burn " . The band 's music also occasionally features complex time signatures , notably in " The Collector " , from With Teeth , and concert favorite " March of the Pigs " . Reznor regularly uses noise and distortion in his song arrangements , and incorporates dissonance with chromatic melody and / or harmony . These techniques are all used in the song " Hurt " , which features a highly dissonant tritone played on guitar during the verses , a B5 # 11 , emphasized when Reznor sings the eleventh note on the word " I " every time the B / E # dyad is played . " Closer " concludes with a chromatic piano motif : The melody is debuted during the second verse of " Piggy " on organ , then reappears in power chords at drop D tuning throughout the chorus of " Heresy " , while an inverted ( ascending ) version is used throughout " A Warm Place " , and then recurs in its original state for the final time on " The Downward Spiral " . On The Fragile , Reznor revisits this technique of repeating a motif multiple times throughout different songs , either on a different musical instrument , with a transposed harmony , or in an altered tempo . Many of the songs on Year Zero feature an extended instrumental ending , which encompasses the entire second half of the three @-@ minute long " The Great Destroyer " . Allmusic 's review described the album 's laptop @-@ mixed sound : " guitars squall against glitches , beeps , pops , and blotches of blurry sonic attacks . Percussion looms large , distorted , organic , looped , screwed , <unk> and broken . " 
 Lyrical themes found in Nine Inch Nails songs are largely concerned with dark explorations of the self ranging from religion , greed , fame , lust , addiction , self @-@ deception , aging , regret , nihilism , and occasionally politics , with the latter topic often being scrutinized in Year Zero . Three of Nine Inch Nails ' recordings are concept albums : The Downward Spiral , follow @-@ up The Fragile , and the aforementioned Year Zero . With Teeth ( under the working title <unk> ) was to be a concept album about an endless dream occurring in reality , but Reznor eventually took this idea out of the record . 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 Nine Inch Nails ' earliest influences include Ministry and Skinny Puppy , which helped shape what became 1989 's Pretty Hate Machine . The album 's liner notes also paid tribute to the hip @-@ hop group Public Enemy and Prince . Another large influence on the band 's sound is Gary Numan , which is evident as Reznor has been credited with saying , " after hearing ' Cars ' I knew I wanted to make music with synthesizers . " The 2005 single " Only " exemplifies the disco @-@ style beats and synthesizers drawn from Numan 's persuasion . Other artists of significance to Nine Inch Nails encompass late 70s and 80s acts such as Queen , Devo , Joy Division , Adam Ant , and Soft Cell . 
 Reznor had been fortunate enough to tour with some of his influences , including a brief tour opening for Skinny Puppy in 1989 . In 1995 Nine Inch Nails went on tour with David Bowie , who along with Pink Floyd had been a significant influence on The Downward Spiral . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Nine Inch Nails has influenced many newer artists , which according to Reznor range from " generic imitations " dating from his initial success to younger bands echoing his style in a " truer , less imitative way " . Following the release of The Downward Spiral , mainstream artists began to take notice of Nine Inch Nails ' influence : David Bowie compared Reznor 's impact to that of The Velvet Underground . Bob Ezrin , producer for Pink Floyd , Kiss , Alice Cooper , and Peter Gabriel , described Reznor in 2007 as a " true visionary " and advised aspiring artists to take note of his no @-@ compromise attitude . Nine Inch Nails has been credited by music journalists for popularizing industrial music , despite ambivalence from Reznor . 
 The act has received four awards from 25 nominations , including two Grammy Awards for the songs " Wish " and " Happiness in Slavery " in 1993 and 1996 respectively . Nine Inch Nails have received two Kerrang ! Awards ; one of them being the Kerrang ! Icon in 2006 , honoring the band 's overall contributions since 1988 and long @-@ standing influence on rock music . The band has also received nine nominations from the MTV Video Music Awards for several of its videos , including two nominations for the " Closer " music video and five nominations for " The Perfect Drug " music video , including Video of the Year . 
 In 1997 , Reznor appeared in Time magazine 's list of the year 's most influential people , and Spin described him as " the most vital artist in music " . The Recording Industry Association of America certified sales for 10 @.@ 5 million units of the band 's albums in the United States , which accounted for roughly half of the band 's reported sales worldwide at that time . In 2003 , Rolling Stone magazine placed The Downward Spiral at No. 200 in a 2003 list of The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time , and by the following year ranked Nine Inch Nails at No. 94 in their The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time list . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Reznor is the sole official member of Nine Inch Nails . However , he has typically formed a backing group of musicians to perform the songs in a live setting . This live band , also known as Nine Inch Nails , rearranges the band 's studio catalog and creates a different sound than that of Reznor 's studio recordings . Band members have occasionally been invited to participate in the recording process , but creative control within the studio has always been exclusively with Reznor . 
 The Tapeworm project was created in 1995 as a Nine Inch Nails side @-@ project between Reznor and various live @-@ band members as a more " democratic " creative environment . The band initially included live band members Danny Lohner and Charlie Clouser , but eventually expanded to feature other frequent Nine Inch Nails contributors Josh Freese , Atticus Ross , and Alan Moulder . However , after 9 years of studio sessions , no material was ever officially released from the group , and it was confirmed to be no longer active in 2005 . 
 The lineup of the live band had a tendency to change drastically between major tours : aside from Reznor remaining on lead vocals , keyboards and guitar , no member of the live band had remained constant since its inception . Reznor cited the long gestation period between studio albums as part of the reason for these frequent personnel changes , as well as his desire for fresh interpretations of his music . 
 = = Corporate disputes = = 
 Reznor is an outspoken critic of the music industry , particularly the influence that music businesses have exerted upon his creative freedom . Nine Inch Nails has clashed with several music industry corporations , culminating in Reznor 's decision to proceed as an independent artist who does not employ the financial backing of the music industry to fund his creative output . 
 = = = TVT Records = = = 
 In the early 1990s , Nine Inch Nails was involved in a much @-@ publicized feud with TVT Records , the first record label to sign the band . Reznor objected to the label 's attempted interference with his intellectual property . Ultimately , they entered into a joint venture with Interscope Records in which Reznor forfeited a portion of his publishing rights to TVT Music in exchange for the freedom of having his own Nothing Records imprint . In 2005 , Reznor sued his former friend and manager John Malm , co @-@ founder of Nothing , for fraud , breach of contract and fiduciary duty , and other claims . Their relationship was formally severed in a New York courtroom , with damages awarded to Reznor in excess of three million US dollars . 
 At the behest of Prudential Securities bankruptcy proceedings , TVT put the rights to Reznor 's recordings for the label on auction in 2005 . This offer included the whole TVT catalog , including Pretty Hate Machine and a percentage of royalties from Reznor 's song publishing company , Leaving Hope Music / TVT Music . Rykodisc , which did not win the auction but was able to license the rights from Prudential , reissued the out @-@ of @-@ print Pretty Hate Machine CD on November 22 , 2005 . <unk> also reissued the " Head Like a Hole " CD and a vinyl edition of Pretty Hate Machine in 2006 . The label considered releasing a deluxe edition , just as Interscope had done for The Downward Spiral . They were influenced by Reznor and liked the idea , but did not want to pay him for the album and the idea was scrapped . 
 = = = Universal Music Group = = = 
 In May 2007 , Reznor made a post on the official Nine Inch Nails website skeptical of Universal Music Group ( parent company of Nine Inch Nails ' record label , Interscope Records ) for their pricing and distribution plans for Year Zero . He labeled the company 's retail pricing of Year Zero in Australia as " <unk> " , concluding that " as a reward for being a ' true fan ' you get ripped off . " Reznor went on to say that he hated Interscope , and in later years the " climate " of record labels may have an increasingly ambivalent impact on consumers who buy music . Reznor 's post , specifically his criticism of the recording industry at large , elicited considerable media attention . In September 2007 , Reznor continued his attack on UMG at a concert in Australia , urging fans there to " steal " his music online instead of purchasing it legally . Reznor went on to encourage the crowd to " steal and steal and steal some more and give it to all your friends and keep on <unk> ' . " 
 Reznor announced on October 8 , 2007 , that Nine Inch Nails had fulfilled its contractual commitments to Interscope Records and was now free to proceed as a " totally free agent , free of any recording contract with any label " . Reznor also speculated that he would release the next Nine Inch Nails album online in a similar fashion to The Inevitable Rise and Liberation of NiggyTardust ! , which he produced . Reznor later released the first nine tracks of Ghosts I – IV and the entirety of The Slip in 2008 for free download . 
 In another post on his website , Reznor again openly criticized Universal Music Group for preventing him from launching an official interactive fan remix website . Universal declined to host the site just days before its scheduled launch , citing the potential " accusation " , in Reznor 's words , " that they are sponsoring the same technical violation of copyright they are suing [ other media companies ] for " . Reznor wrote in response that he was " challenged at the last second to find a way of bringing this idea to life without getting splashed by the urine as these media companies piss all over each other 's feet " . Despite these obstacles , the remix website was launched in November 2007 . 
 = = = Other corporations = = = 
 Nine Inch Nails was scheduled to perform at the 2005 MTV Movie Awards , but withdrew from the show due to a disagreement with the network over the use of an unaltered image of George W. Bush as a backdrop to the band 's performance of " The Hand That Feeds " . Soon afterwards , Reznor wrote on his official website : " apparently , the image of our president is as offensive to MTV as it is to me . " MTV replied that it respected Reznor 's point of view , but was " uncomfortable " with the performance being " built around partisan political statements . " A performance by Foo Fighters replaced Nine Inch Nails ' time slot on the show . During the Lights in the Sky tour in 2008 , some performances of " The Hand that Feeds " had the image of Bush on a video screen behind the band . At some gigs leading up to the election , the face of Bush slowly morphed during the song into the face of John McCain . 
 In 2006 , after being alerted by a fan website , Reznor issued a cease and desist to Fox News Channel for using three songs from The Fragile on air without permission . The songs " La Mer " , " The Great Below " , and " The Mark Has Been Made " appeared in an episode of War Stories with Oliver North detailing the battle of Iwo Jima . A post appeared on Reznor 's blog , which read : " Thanks for the Fox News heads @-@ up . A cease and desist has been issued . FUCK Fox Fucking News . " 
 As part of the alternate reality game which accompanied the release of Year Zero , three tracks from the album were intentionally " leaked " prior to their official release at a number of Nine Inch Nails concerts on USB flash drives . The high @-@ quality audio files quickly circulated the internet , and owners of websites hosting the files soon received cease and desist orders from the Recording Industry Association of America , despite the fact that the viral campaign , and the use of USB drives , was sanctioned by Nine Inch Nails ' record label . The source that broke the story was quoted as saying , " These fucking idiots are going after a campaign that the label signed off on . " 
 The music of Nine Inch Nails has reportedly been used by the U.S. military as music torture to break down the resolve of detainees . Reznor objected to the use of his music in this way with the following message on the front page of the Nine Inch Nails website : " It 's difficult for me to imagine anything more profoundly insulting , demeaning and enraging than discovering music you 've put your heart and soul into creating has been used for purposes of torture . If there are any legal options that can be realistically taken they will be aggressively pursued , with any potential monetary gains donated to human rights charities . Thank GOD this country has appeared to side with reason and we can put the Bush administration 's reign of power , greed , lawlessness and madness behind us . " 
 Aside from disagreements over the usage of Nine Inch Nails material , some corporations have dismissed content due to perceived obscenity . In 2009 , Apple rejected an update to Nine Inch Nails ' iPhone application , NIN : Access , because it found The Downward Spiral to contain " offensive or obscene content " , referring to the lyrical content . Reznor criticized their decision , citing the audio was also available through the iTunes application . 
 A similar incident involving digital content distribution occurred in 2013 when Nine Inch Nails re @-@ released the original 1993 film Broken on Vimeo . Within hours of launch , the video was removed due to a terms of service violation on material that " harass , incite hatred or depict excessive violence . " 
 = = Band members = = 
 Trent Reznor – lead vocals , guitars , bass , keyboards , synthesizers , piano , programming ( 1988 – present , the only official member ) 
 Robin Finck – guitar , synthesizers , backing vocals ( 1994 – 2000 , 2008 – 2009 , 2013 – present ) 
 Alessandro Cortini – keyboards , synthesizers , guitar , backing vocals ( 2004 – 2008 , 2013 – present ) 
 Ilan Rubin – drums , percussion ( 2009 , 2013 – present ) 
 = = Discography = = 
 Pretty Hate Machine ( 1989 ) 
 Broken ( EP , 1992 ) 
 The Downward Spiral ( 1994 ) 
 The Fragile ( 1999 ) 
 With Teeth ( 2005 ) 
 Year Zero ( 2007 ) 
 Ghosts I – IV ( 2008 ) 
 The Slip ( 2008 ) 
 Hesitation Marks ( 2013 ) 
 = = Concert tours = = 
 Pretty Hate Machine Tour Series ( 1988 – 1991 ) 
 Self Destruct Tour ( 1994 – 1996 ) 
 Fragility Tour ( 1999 – 2000 ) 
 Live : With Teeth Tour ( 2005 – 2006 ) 
 Performance 2007 Tour ( 2007 ) 
 Lights in the Sky Tour ( 2008 ) 
 Wave Goodbye Tour ( 2009 ) 
 Twenty Thirteen Tour ( 2013 – 2014 ) 
 = = Awards = = 
 Nine Inch Nails has been nominated for 13 Grammy Awards and has won awards on two occasions — for " Wish " in 1992 and " Happiness in Slavery " in 1995 : 
 " Wish " – Best Metal Performance , 1992 ( recipient ) 
 The Downward Spiral – Best Alternative Music Performance , 1995 ( nomination ) 
 " Happiness in Slavery " ( from Woodstock ' 94 compilation ) – Best Metal Performance , 1995 ( recipient ) 
 " Hurt " – Best Rock Song , 1996 ( nomination ) 
 " The Perfect Drug " – Best Hard Rock Performance , 1997 ( nomination ) 
 The Fragile – Best Alternative Music Performance , 1999 ( nomination ) 
 " Starfuckers , Inc . " – Best Metal Performance , 1999 ( nomination ) 
 " Into the Void " – Best Male Rock Vocal Performance , 2000 ( nomination ) 
 " The Hand That Feeds " – Best Hard Rock Performance , 2005 ( nomination ) 
 " Every Day Is Exactly the Same " – Best Hard Rock Performance , 2006 ( nomination ) 
 " 34 Ghosts IV " – Best Rock Instrumental Performance , 2009 ( nomination ) 
 Ghosts I – IV – Best Boxed Set or Limited Edition Package , 2009 ( nomination ) 
 Hesitation Marks – Best Alternative Music Album , 2013 ( nomination ) 
 = Beyoncé = 
 Beyoncé Giselle Knowles @-@ Carter ( / <unk> / ; born September 4 , 1981 ) is an American singer , songwriter , record producer and actress . Born and raised in Houston , Texas , she performed in various singing and dancing competitions as a child and rose to fame in the late 1990s as lead singer of R & B girl @-@ group Destiny 's Child . Managed by her father , Mathew Knowles , the group became one of the world 's best @-@ selling girl groups of all time . Their hiatus saw the release of Beyoncé 's debut album , Dangerously in Love ( 2003 ) , which established her as a solo artist worldwide , earned five Grammy Awards and featured the Billboard Hot 100 number @-@ one singles " Crazy in Love " and " Baby Boy " . 
 Following the disbandment of Destiny 's Child in June 2005 , she released her second solo album , B 'Day ( 2006 ) , which contained hits " Déjà Vu " , " Irreplaceable " , and " Beautiful Liar " . Beyoncé also ventured into acting , with a Golden Globe @-@ nominated performance in Dreamgirls ( 2006 ) and starring roles in The Pink Panther ( 2006 ) and Obsessed ( 2009 ) . Her marriage to rapper Jay Z and portrayal of Etta James in Cadillac Records ( 2008 ) influenced her third album , I Am ... Sasha Fierce ( 2008 ) , which saw the birth of her alter @-@ ego Sasha Fierce and earned a record @-@ setting six Grammy Awards in 2010 , including Song of the Year for " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " . Beyoncé took a hiatus from music in 2010 and took over management of her career ; her fourth album 4 ( 2011 ) was subsequently mellower in tone , exploring 1970s funk , 1980s pop , and 1990s soul . Her critically acclaimed fifth album , Beyoncé ( 2013 ) , was distinguished from previous releases by its experimental production and exploration of darker themes . Her sixth album , Lemonade ( 2016 ) , was released in conjunction with a short film of the same name . 
 Her performances have led some critics to consider her one of the greatest entertainers in contemporary popular music . She has sold over 100 million records as a solo artist , and a further 60 million with Destiny 's Child , making her one of the best @-@ selling music artists of all time . She has won 20 Grammy Awards and is the most nominated woman in the award 's history . The Recording Industry Association of America recognized her as the Top Certified Artist in America during the 2000s ( decade ) . In 2009 , Billboard named her the Top Radio Songs Artist of the Decade , the Top Female Artist of the 2000s ( decade ) and handed their Millennium Award in 2011 . Time listed her among the 100 most influential people in the world in 2013 and 2014 . Forbes also listed her as the most powerful female in entertainment of 2015 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Beyoncé Giselle Knowles was born in Houston , Texas , to Celestine " Tina " Knowles ( née Beyincé ) , a hairdresser and salon owner , and Mathew Knowles , a Xerox sales manager . Beyoncé 's name is a tribute to her mother 's maiden name . Beyoncé 's younger sister Solange is also a singer and a former member of Destiny 's Child . Mathew is African American , while Tina is of Louisiana Creole descent ( African , Native American , and French ) . Through her mother , Beyoncé is a descendant of Acadian leader Joseph Broussard . 
 Beyoncé attended St. Mary 's Montessori School in Houston , where she enrolled in dance classes . Her singing talent was discovered when dance instructor <unk> Johnson began humming a song and she finished it , able to hit the high @-@ pitched notes . Beyoncé 's interest in music and performing continued after winning a school talent show at age seven , singing John Lennon 's " Imagine " to beat 15 / 16 @-@ year @-@ olds . In fall of 1990 , Beyoncé enrolled in Parker Elementary School , a music magnet school in Houston , where she would perform with the school 's choir . She also attended the High School for the Performing and Visual Arts and later <unk> <unk> High School . Beyoncé was also a member of the choir at St. John 's United Methodist Church as a soloist for two years . 
 When Beyoncé was eight , she and childhood friend Kelly Rowland met LaTavia Roberson while in an audition for an all @-@ girl entertainment group . They were placed into a group with three other girls as Girl 's Tyme , and rapped and danced on the talent show circuit in Houston . After seeing the group , R & B producer Arne Frager brought them to his Northern California studio and placed them in Star Search , the largest talent show on national TV at the time . Girl 's Tyme failed to win , and Beyoncé later said the song they performed was not good . 
 In 1995 Beyoncé 's father resigned from his job to manage the group . The move reduced Beyoncé 's family 's income by half , and her parents were forced to move into separated apartments . Mathew cut the original line @-@ up to four and the group continued performing as an opening act for other established R & B girl groups . The girls auditioned before record labels and were finally signed to Elektra Records , moving to Atlanta Records briefly to work on their first recording , only to be cut by the company . This put further strain on the family , and Beyoncé 's parents separated . On October 5 , 1995 , Dwayne Wiggins 's Grass Roots Entertainment signed the group . In 1996 , the girls began recording their debut album under an agreement with Sony Music , the Knowles family reunited , and shortly after , the group got a contract with Columbia Records . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = 1997 – 2001 : Destiny 's Child = = = 
 The group changed their name to Destiny 's Child in 1996 , based upon a passage in the Book of Isaiah . In 1997 , Destiny 's Child released their major label debut song " Killing Time " on the soundtrack to the 1997 film , Men in Black . The following year , the group released their self @-@ titled debut album , scoring their first major hit " No , No , No " . The album established the group as a viable act in the music industry , with moderate sales and winning the group three Soul Train Lady of Soul Awards for Best R & B / Soul Album of the Year , Best R & B / Soul or Rap New Artist , and Best R & B / Soul Single for " No , No , No " . The group released their multi @-@ platinum second album The Writing 's on the Wall in 1999 . The record features some of the group 's most widely known songs such as " Bills , Bills , Bills " , the group 's first number @-@ one single , " Jumpin ' Jumpin ' " and " Say My Name " , which became their most successful song at the time , and would remain one of their signature songs . " Say My Name " won the Best R & B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals and the Best R & B Song at the 43rd Annual Grammy Awards . The Writing 's on the Wall sold more than eight million copies worldwide . During this time , Beyoncé recorded a duet with Marc Nelson , an original member of Boyz II Men , on the song " After All Is Said and Done " for the soundtrack to the 1999 film , The Best Man . 
 LeToya Luckett and Roberson became unhappy with Mathew 's managing of the band and eventually were replaced by Farrah Franklin and Michelle Williams . Beyoncé experienced depression following the split with Luckett and Roberson after being publicly blamed by the media , critics , and blogs for its cause . Her long @-@ standing boyfriend left her at this time . The depression was so severe it lasted for a couple of years , during which she occasionally kept herself in her bedroom for days and refused to eat anything . Beyoncé stated that she struggled to speak about her depression because Destiny 's Child had just won their first Grammy Award and she feared no one would take her seriously . Beyoncé would later speak of her mother as the person who helped her fight it . Franklin was dismissed , leaving just Beyoncé , Rowland , and Williams . 
 The remaining band members recorded " Independent Women Part I " , which appeared on the soundtrack to the 2000 film Charlie 's Angels . It became their best @-@ charting single , topping the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 chart for eleven consecutive weeks . In early 2001 , while Destiny 's Child was completing their third album , Beyoncé landed a major role in the MTV made @-@ for @-@ television film , Carmen : A Hip Hopera , starring alongside American actor Mekhi Phifer . Set in Philadelphia , the film is a modern interpretation of the 19th @-@ century opera Carmen by French composer Georges Bizet . When the third album Survivor was released in May 2001 , Luckett and Roberson filed a lawsuit claiming that the songs were aimed at them . The album debuted at number one on the U.S. Billboard 200 , with first @-@ week sales of 663 @,@ 000 copies sold . The album spawned other number @-@ one hits , " Bootylicious " and the title track , " Survivor " , the latter of which earned the group a Grammy Award for Best R & B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals . After releasing their holiday album 8 Days of Christmas in October 2001 , the group announced a hiatus to further pursue solo careers . 
 = = = 2001 – 07 : Dangerously in Love , B 'Day , and Dreamgirls = = = 
 In July 2002 , Beyoncé continued her acting career playing Foxxy Cleopatra alongside Mike Myers in the comedy film Austin Powers in Goldmember , which spent its first weekend atop the US box office and grossed $ 73 million . Beyoncé released " Work It Out " as the lead single from its soundtrack album which entered the top ten in the UK , Norway , and Belgium . In 2003 , Beyoncé starred opposite Cuba Gooding , Jr . , in the musical comedy The Fighting Temptations as Lilly , a single mother with whom Gooding 's character falls in love . The film received mixed reviews from critics but grossed $ 30 million in the U.S. Beyoncé released " Fighting Temptation " as the lead single from the film 's soundtrack album , with Missy Elliott , MC Lyte , and Free which was also used to promote the film . Another of Beyoncé 's contributions to the soundtrack , " Summertime " , fared better on the US charts . 
 Beyoncé 's first solo recording was a feature on Jay Z 's " ' 03 Bonnie & Clyde " that was released in October 2002 , peaking at number four on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 chart . Her first solo album Dangerously in Love was released on June 24 , 2003 , after Michelle Williams and Kelly Rowland had released their solo efforts . The album sold 317 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , debuted atop the Billboard 200 , and has since sold 11 million copies worldwide . The album 's lead single , " Crazy in Love " , featuring Jay Z , became Beyoncé 's first number @-@ one single as a solo artist in the US . The single " Baby Boy " also reached number one , and singles , " Me , Myself and I " and " Naughty Girl " , both reached the top @-@ five . The album earned Beyoncé a then record @-@ tying five awards at the 46th Annual Grammy Awards ; Best Contemporary R & B Album , Best Female R & B Vocal Performance for " Dangerously in Love 2 " , Best R & B Song and Best Rap / Sung Collaboration for " Crazy in Love " , and Best R & B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals for " The Closer I Get to You " with Luther Vandross . 
 In November 2003 , she embarked on the Dangerously in Love Tour in Europe and later toured alongside Missy Elliott and Alicia Keys for the Verizon Ladies First Tour in North America . On February 1 , 2004 , Beyoncé performed the American national anthem at Super Bowl XXXVIII , at the Reliant Stadium in Houston , Texas . After the release of Dangerously in Love , Beyoncé had planned to produce a follow @-@ up album using several of the left @-@ over tracks . However , this was put on hold so she could concentrate on recording Destiny Fulfilled , the final studio album by Destiny 's Child . Released on November 15 , 2004 , in the US and peaking at number two on the Billboard 200 , Destiny Fulfilled included the singles " Lose My Breath " and " Soldier " , which reached the top five on the Billboard Hot 100 chart . Destiny 's Child embarked on a worldwide concert tour , Destiny Fulfilled ... and Lovin ' It and during the last stop of their European tour , in Barcelona on June 11 , 2005 , Rowland announced that Destiny 's Child would disband following the North American leg of the tour . The group released their first compilation album Number 1 's on October 25 , 2005 , in the US and accepted a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in March 2006 . 
 Beyoncé 's second solo album B 'Day was released on September 4 , 2006 , in the US , to coincide with her twenty @-@ fifth birthday . It sold 541 @,@ 000 copies in its first week and debuted atop the Billboard 200 , becoming Beyoncé 's second consecutive number @-@ one album in the United States . The album 's lead single " Déjà Vu " , featuring Jay Z , reached the top five on the Billboard Hot 100 chart . The second international single " Irreplaceable " was a commercial success worldwide , reaching number one in Australia , Hungary , Ireland , New Zealand and the United States . B 'Day also produced three other singles ; " Ring the Alarm " , " Get Me Bodied " , and " Green Light " ( released in the United Kingdom only ) . 
 Her first acting role of 2006 was in the comedy film The Pink Panther starring opposite Steve Martin , grossing $ 158 @.@ 8 million at the box office worldwide . Her second film Dreamgirls , the film version of the 1981 Broadway musical loosely based on The Supremes , received acclaim from critics and grossed $ 154 million internationally . In it , she starred opposite Jennifer Hudson , Jamie Foxx , and Eddie Murphy playing a pop singer based on Diana Ross . To promote the film , Beyoncé released " Listen " as the lead single from the soundtrack album . In April 2007 , Beyoncé embarked on The Beyoncé Experience , her first worldwide concert tour , visiting 97 venues and grossed over $ 24 million . Beyoncé conducted pre @-@ concert food donation drives during six major stops in conjunction with her pastor at St. John 's and America 's Second Harvest . At the same time , B 'Day was re @-@ released with five additional songs , including her duet with Shakira " Beautiful Liar " . 
 = = = 2008 – 10 : Marriage , I Am ... Sasha Fierce , and Cadillac Records = = = 
 On April 4 , 2008 , Beyoncé married Jay Z. She publicly revealed their marriage in a video montage at the listening party for her third studio album , I Am ... Sasha Fierce , in Manhattan 's Sony Club on October 22 , 2008 . I Am ... Sasha Fierce was released on November 18 , 2008 , in the United States . The album formally introduces Beyoncé 's alter ego Sasha Fierce , conceived during the making of her 2003 single " Crazy in Love " , selling 482 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , debuting atop the Billboard 200 , and giving Beyoncé her third consecutive number @-@ one album in the US . The album featured the number @-@ one song " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " and the top @-@ five songs " If I Were a Boy " and " Halo " . Achieving the accomplishment of becoming her longest @-@ running Hot 100 single in her career , " Halo " ' s success in the US helped Beyoncé attain more top @-@ ten singles on the list than any other woman during the 2000s . It also included the successful " Sweet Dreams " , and singles " Diva " , " Ego " , " Broken @-@ Hearted Girl " and " Video Phone " . The music video for " Single Ladies " has been parodied and imitated around the world , spawning the " first major dance craze " of the Internet age according to the Toronto Star . The video has won several awards , including Best Video at the 2009 MTV Europe Music Awards , the 2009 Scottish MOBO Awards , and the 2009 BET Awards . At the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards , the video was nominated for nine awards , ultimately winning three including Video of the Year . Its failure to win the Best Female Video category , which went to American country pop singer Taylor Swift 's " You Belong with Me " , led to Kanye West interrupting the ceremony and Beyoncé improvising a re @-@ presentation of Swift 's award during her own acceptance speech . In March 2009 , Beyoncé embarked on the I Am ... World Tour , her second headlining worldwide concert tour , consisting of 108 shows , grossing $ 119 @.@ 5 million . 
 Beyoncé further expanded her acting career , starring as blues singer Etta James in the 2008 musical biopic Cadillac Records . Her performance in the film received praise from critics , and she garnered several nominations for her portrayal of James , including a Satellite Award nomination for Best Supporting Actress , and a NAACP Image Award nomination for Outstanding Supporting Actress . Beyoncé donated her entire salary from the film to Phoenix House , an organization of rehabilitation centers for heroin addicts around the country . On January 20 , 2009 , Beyoncé performed James ' " At Last " at the First Couple 's first inaugural ball . Beyoncé starred opposite Ali Larter and Idris Elba in the thriller , Obsessed . She played Sharon Charles , a mother and wife who learns of a woman 's obsessive behavior over her husband . Although the film received negative reviews from critics , the movie did well at the US box office , grossing $ 68 million — $ 60 million more than Cadillac Records — on a budget of $ 20 million . The fight scene finale between Sharon and the character played by Ali Larter also won the 2010 MTV Movie Award for Best Fight . 
 At the 52nd Annual Grammy Awards , Beyoncé received ten nominations , including Album of the Year for I Am ... Sasha Fierce , Record of the Year for " Halo " , and Song of the Year for " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " , among others . She tied with Lauryn Hill for most Grammy nominations in a single year by a female artist . In 2010 , Beyoncé was featured on Lady Gaga 's single " Telephone " and appeared in its music video . The song topped the US Pop Songs chart , becoming the sixth number @-@ one for both Beyoncé and Gaga , tying them with Mariah Carey for most number @-@ ones since the Nielsen Top 40 airplay chart launched in 1992 . " Telephone " received a Grammy Award nomination for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals . 
 Beyoncé announced a hiatus from her music career in January 2010 , heeding her mother 's advice , " to live life , to be inspired by things again " . During the break she and her father parted ways as business partners . Beyoncé 's musical break lasted nine months and saw her visit multiple European cities , the Great Wall of China , the Egyptian pyramids , Australia , English music festivals and various museums and ballet performances . 
 = = = 2011 – 15 : 4 and Beyoncé = = = 
 On June 26 , 2011 , she became the first solo female artist to headline the main Pyramid stage at the 2011 Glastonbury Festival in over twenty years . Her fourth studio album 4 was released two days later in the US . 4 sold 310 @,@ 000 copies in its first week and debuted atop the Billboard 200 chart , giving Beyoncé her fourth consecutive number @-@ one album in the US . The album was preceded by two of its singles " Run the World ( Girls ) " and " Best Thing I Never Had " , which both attained moderate success . The fourth single " Love on Top " was a commercial success in the US . 4 also produced four other singles ; " Party " , " Countdown " , " I Care " and " End of Time " . " Eat , Play , Love " , a cover story written by Beyoncé for Essence that detailed her 2010 career break , won her a writing award from the New York Association of Black Journalists . In late 2011 , she took the stage at New York 's Roseland Ballroom for four nights of special performances : the 4 Intimate Nights with Beyoncé concerts saw the performance of her 4 album to a standing room only . 
 On January 7 , 2012 , Beyoncé gave birth to her first child , a daughter , Blue Ivy Carter , at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York . Five months later , she performed for four nights at Revel Atlantic City 's Ovation Hall to celebrate the resort 's opening , her first performances since giving birth to Blue Ivy . 
 In January 2013 , Destiny 's Child released Love Songs , a compilation album of the romance @-@ themed songs from their previous albums and a newly recorded track , " Nuclear " . Beyoncé performed the American national anthem singing along with a pre @-@ recorded track at President Obama 's second inauguration in Washington , D.C. The following month , Beyoncé performed at the Super Bowl XLVII halftime show , held at the Mercedes @-@ Benz Superdome in New Orleans . The performance stands as the second most tweeted about moment in history at 268 @,@ 000 tweets per minute . At the 55th Annual Grammy Awards , Beyoncé won for Best Traditional R & B Performance for " Love on Top " . Her feature @-@ length documentary film , Life Is But a Dream , first aired on HBO on February 16 , 2013 . 
 Beyoncé embarked on The Mrs. Carter Show World Tour on April 15 in Belgrade , Serbia ; the tour included 132 dates that ran through to March 2014 . It became the most successful tour of her career and one of the most successful tours of all time . In May , Beyoncé 's cover of Amy Winehouse 's " Back to Black " with André 3000 on The Great Gatsby soundtrack was released . Beyoncé voiced Queen Tara in the 3D CGI animated film , Epic , released by 20th Century Fox on May 24 , and recorded an original song for the film , " Rise Up " , co @-@ written with Sia . 
 On December 13 , 2013 , Beyoncé unexpectedly released her eponymous fifth studio album on the iTunes Store without any prior announcement or promotion . The album debuted atop the Billboard 200 chart , giving Beyoncé her fifth consecutive number @-@ one album in the US . This made her the first woman in the chart 's history to have her first five studio albums debut at number one . Beyoncé received critical acclaim and commercial success , selling one million digital copies worldwide in six days ; Musically an electro @-@ R & B album , it concerns darker themes previously unexplored in her work , such as " bulimia , postnatal depression [ and ] the fears and insecurities of marriage and motherhood " . The single " Drunk in Love " , featuring Jay Z , peaked at number two on the Billboard Hot 100 chart . In April 2014 , after much speculation , Beyoncé and Jay Z officially announced their On the Run Tour . It served as the couple 's first co @-@ headlining stadium tour together . On August 24 , 2014 , she received the Video Vanguard Award at the 2014 MTV Video Music Awards . Knowles also won home three competitive awards : Best Video with a Social Message and Best Cinematography for " Pretty Hurts " , as well as best collaboration for " Drunk in Love " . In November , Forbes reported that Beyoncé was the top @-@ earning woman in music for the second year in a row — earning $ 115 million in the year , more than double her earnings in 2013 . Beyoncé was reissued with new material in three forms : as an extended play , a box set , as well as a full platinum edition . 
 At the 57th Annual Grammy Awards in February 2015 , Beyoncé was nominated for six awards , ultimately winning three : Best R & B Performance and Best R & B Song for " Drunk in Love " , and Best Surround Sound Album for Beyoncé . She was nominated for Album of the Year , but the award went to Beck for his album Morning Phase . 
 = = = 2016 : Lemonade = = = 
 On February 6 , 2016 , Beyoncé released " Formation " and its accompanying music video exclusively on the music streaming platform Tidal ; the song was made available to download for free . She performed " Formation " live for the first time during the NFL Super Bowl 50 halftime show . The appearance was considered controversial as it appeared to reference the 50th anniversary of the Black Panther Party and the NFL forbids political statements in its performances . Immediately following the performance , Beyoncé announced The Formation World Tour , which highlighted stops in both North America , and Europe . 
 On April 16 , 2016 , Beyoncé released a teaser clip for a project called Lemonade . It turned out to be a one @-@ hour movie which aired on HBO exactly a week later , April 23 at 10 : 00 pm EST ; a corresponding album with the same title was released on the same day exclusively on the streaming platform Tidal . Lemonade debuted at number one on the US Billboard 200 chart , making Beyoncé the first act in Billboard history to have her first six studio albums debut atop the chart , breaking a record she previously tied with DMX in 2013 . The album is Beyoncé 's most critically acclaimed work to date , receiving universal acclaim according to Metacritic , a website collecting reviews from professional music critics . It is the 23rd album to receive a five @-@ star rating from Rolling Stone . The albums visuals were subsequently nominated for 11 MTV Video Music Awards in 2016 , the most ever received by Beyoncé in a single year . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Family = = = 
 Beyoncé is believed to have started a relationship with Jay Z after a collaboration on " ' 03 Bonnie & Clyde " , which appeared on his seventh album The Blueprint 2 : The Gift & The Curse ( 2002 ) . Beyoncé appeared as Jay Z 's girlfriend in the music video for the song , fuelling speculation about their relationship . On April 4 , 2008 , Beyoncé and Jay Z married without publicity . As of April 2014 , the couple had sold a combined 300 million records together . They are known for their private relationship , although they have appeared to become more relaxed in recent years . Beyoncé suffered a miscarriage in 2010 or 2011 , describing it as " the saddest thing " she had ever endured . She returned to the studio and wrote music in order to cope with the loss . In April 2011 , Beyoncé and Jay Z traveled to Paris in order to shoot the album cover for 4 , and unexpectedly became pregnant in Paris . 
 In August , the couple attended the 2011 MTV Video Music Awards , at which Beyoncé performed " Love on Top " and started the performance saying " Tonight I want you to stand up on your feet , I want you to feel the love that 's growing inside of me " . At the end of the performance , she dropped her microphone , unbuttoned her blazer and rubbed her stomach , confirming her pregnancy she had alluded to earlier in the evening . Her appearance helped that year 's MTV Video Music Awards become the most @-@ watched broadcast in MTV history , pulling in 12 @.@ 4 million viewers ; the announcement was listed in Guinness World Records for " most tweets per second recorded for a single event " on Twitter , receiving 8 @,@ 868 tweets per second and " Beyonce pregnant " was the most <unk> term the week of August 29 , 2011 . 
 On January 7 , 2012 , Beyoncé gave birth to a daughter , Blue Ivy Carter , at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York under heavy security . Two days later , Jay Z released " Glory " , a song dedicated to their child , on his website <unk> The song detailed the couple 's pregnancy struggles , including a miscarriage Beyoncé suffered before becoming pregnant with Blue Ivy . Blue Ivy 's cries are included at the end of the song , and she was officially credited as " <unk> " on it . At two days old , she became the youngest person ever to appear on a Billboard chart when " Glory " debuted on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . 
 In May 2016 , she reunited with her estranged father as her mother posted an instagram photo of Matthew with her on her Formation World Tour stop in Houston . 
 = = = Politics = = = 
 Beyoncé and husband Jay Z are friends with President Barack Obama and First Lady Michelle Obama . She performed " America the Beautiful " at the 2009 presidential inauguration , as well as " At Last " during the first inaugural dance at the Neighborhood Ball two days later . Beyoncé and Jay Z held a fundraiser at the latter 's 40 / 40 Club in Manhattan for Obama 's 2012 presidential campaign which raised $ 4 million . Beyoncé uploaded pictures of her paper ballot on Tumblr , confirming she had voted in support for the Democratic Party and to encourage others to do so . She also performed the American national anthem at his second inauguration , singing along with a pre @-@ recorded track . She publicly endorsed same sex marriage on March 26 , 2013 , after the Supreme Court debate on California 's Proposition 8 . 
 In an interview published by Vogue in April 2013 , Beyoncé was asked if she considers herself a feminist , to which she said , " that word can be very extreme ... But I guess I am a modern @-@ day feminist . I do believe in equality " . She would later align herself more publicly with the movement , sampling " We should all be feminists " , a speech delivered by Nigerian author Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie at a <unk> conference in April 2013 , in her song " Flawless " , released later that year . She has also contributed to the Ban Bossy campaign , which uses television and social media to encourage leadership in girls . 
 In 2015 , Beyoncé signed an open letter which the ONE Campaign had been collecting signatures for ; the letter was addressed to Angela Merkel and Nkosazana Dlamini @-@ Zuma , urging them to focus on women as they serve as the head of the G7 in Germany and the AU in South Africa respectively , which will start to set the priorities in development funding before a main UN summit in September 2015 that will establish new development goals for the generation . 
 The Washington Post reported in May 2015 , that Mrs. Knowles @-@ Carter attended a major celebrity fundraiser for presidential nominee Hillary Clinton . 
 In July 2013 , Beyoncé and Jay @-@ Z attended a rally in response to the acquittal of George Zimmerman for the shooting of Trayvon Martin . In Beyoncé 's 2016 album Lemonade , Beyoncé included the mothers of Trayvon Martin , Michael Brown and Eric Garner , holding pictures of their murdered sons in the music video for " Freedom " . During a concert in Glasgow , Beyoncé held a minutes silence and pursued to perform " Freedom " a cappella , with a list of names of victims of police brutality displayed on the stages background , following the shooting of Alton Sterling and the shooting of <unk> Castile . In a 2016 interview with Elle magazine , Beyoncé responded to the controversy surrounding her song " Formation " which was perceived to be anti @-@ police . Beyoncé stated " I am against police brutality and injustice . Those are two separate things . If celebrating my roots and culture during Black History Month made anyone uncomfortable , those feelings were there long before a video and long before me " . 
 = = = Net worth = = = 
 Forbes magazine began reporting on Beyoncé 's earnings in 2008 , calculating that the $ 80 million earned between June 2007 to June 2008 , for her music , tour , films and clothing line made her the world 's best @-@ paid music personality at the time , above Madonna and Celine Dion . They placed her fourth on the Celebrity 100 list in 2009 and ninth on the " Most Powerful Women in the World " list in 2010 . The following year , Forbes placed her eighth on the " Best @-@ Paid Celebrities Under 30 " list , having earned $ 35 million in the past year for her clothing line and endorsement deals . In 2012 , Forbes placed Beyoncé at number 16 on the Celebrity 100 list , twelve places lower than three years ago yet still having earned $ 40 million in the past year for her album 4 , clothing line and endorsement deals . In the same year , Beyoncé and Jay Z placed at number one on the " World 's Highest @-@ Paid Celebrity Couples " , for collectively earning $ 78 million . The couple made it into the previous year 's Guinness World Records as the " highest @-@ earning power couple " for collectively earning $ 122 million in 2009 . For the years 2009 to 2011 , Beyoncé earned an average of $ 70 million per year , and earned $ 40 million in 2012 . In 2013 , Beyoncé 's endorsements of Pepsi and H & M made her and Jay Z the world 's first billion dollar couple in the music industry . That year , Beyoncé was published as the fourth most @-@ powerful celebrity in the Forbes rankings . MTV estimated that by the end of 2014 , Beyoncé would become the highest @-@ paid black musician in history ; she succeeded to do so in April 2014 . In June 2014 , Beyoncé ranked at # 1 on the Forbes Celebrity 100 list , earning an estimated $ 115 million throughout June 2013 – June 2014 . This in turn was the first time she had topped the Celebrity 100 list as well as being her highest yearly earnings to date . In 2016 , Beyoncé ranked at # 34 on the Celebrity 100 list with earnings of $ <unk> . Herself and Jay Z also topped the highest paid celebrity couple list , with combined earnings of $ <unk> As of June 2016 , Forbes calculated her net worth to be $ 265 million while other sources estimate it to be as high as $ 450 million . 
 = = Artistry = = 
 = = = Voice and songwriting = = = 
 Beyoncé 's vocal range spans four octaves . Jody Rosen highlights her tone and timbre as particularly distinctive , describing her voice as " one of the most compelling instruments in popular music " . While another critic says she is a " Vocal acrobat , being able to sing long and complex melismas and vocal runs effortlessly , and in key " . Her vocal abilities mean she is identified as the centerpiece of Destiny 's Child . Jon Pareles of The New York Times commented that her voice is " velvety yet tart , with an insistent flutter and reserves of soul belting " . Rosen notes that the hip hop era highly influenced Beyoncé 's unique rhythmic vocal style , but also finds her quite traditionalist in her use of balladry , gospel and falsetto . Other critics praise her range and power , with Chris Richards of The Washington Post saying she was " capable of punctuating any beat with goose @-@ bump @-@ inducing whispers or full @-@ bore diva @-@ roars . " 
 Beyoncé 's music is generally R & B , but she also incorporates pop , soul and funk into her songs . 4 demonstrated Beyoncé 's exploration of 1990s @-@ style R & B , as well as further use of soul and hip hop than compared to previous releases . While she almost exclusively releases English songs , Beyoncé recorded several Spanish songs for Irreemplazable ( re @-@ recordings of songs from B 'Day for a Spanish @-@ language audience ) , and the re @-@ release of B 'Day . To record these , Beyoncé was coached phonetically by American record producer Rudy Perez . 
 She has received co @-@ writing credits for most of the songs recorded with Destiny 's Child and her solo efforts . Her early songs were personally driven and female @-@ empowerment themed compositions like " Independent Women " and " Survivor " , but after the start of her relationship with Jay Z , she transitioned to more man @-@ tending anthems such as " Cater 2 U " . Beyoncé has also received co @-@ producing credits for most of the records in which she has been involved , especially during her solo efforts . However , she does not formulate beats herself , but typically comes up with melodies and ideas during production , sharing them with producers . 
 In 2001 , she became the first African @-@ American woman and second woman songwriter to win the Pop Songwriter of the Year award at the American Society of Composers , Authors , and Publishers Pop Music Awards . Beyoncé was the third woman to have writing credits on three number one songs ( " Irreplaceable " , " Grillz " and " Check on It " ) in the same year , after Carole King in 1971 and Mariah Carey in 1991 . She is tied with American songwriter Diane Warren at third with nine songwriting credits on number @-@ one singles . ( The latter wrote her 9 / 11 @-@ motivated song " I Was Here " for 4 . ) In May 2011 , Billboard magazine listed Beyoncé at number 17 on their list of the " Top 20 Hot 100 Songwriters " , for having co @-@ written eight singles that hit number one on the Billboard Hot 100 chart . She was one of only three women on that list . 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 Beyoncé names Michael Jackson as her major musical influence . Aged five , Beyoncé attended her first ever concert where Jackson performed and she claims to have realized her purpose . When she presented him with a tribute award at the World Music Awards in 2006 , Beyoncé said , " if it wasn 't for Michael Jackson , I would never ever have performed . " She admires Diana Ross as an " all @-@ around entertainer " and Whitney Houston , who she said " inspired me to get up there and do what she did . " She credits Mariah Carey 's singing and her song " Vision of Love " as influencing her to begin practicing vocal runs as a child . Her other musical influences include Aaliyah , Prince , Lauryn Hill , Sade Adu , Donna Summer , Mary J. Blige , Janet Jackson , Anita Baker and Rachelle Ferrell . 
 The feminism and female empowerment themes on Beyoncé 's second solo album B 'Day were inspired by her role in Dreamgirls and by singer Josephine Baker . Beyoncé paid homage to Baker by performing " Déjà Vu " at the 2006 Fashion Rocks concert wearing Baker 's trademark mini @-@ hula skirt embellished with fake bananas . Beyoncé 's third solo album I Am ... Sasha Fierce was inspired by Jay Z and especially by Etta James , whose " boldness " inspired Beyoncé to explore other musical genres and styles . Her fourth solo album , 4 , was inspired by Fela Kuti , 1990s R & B , Earth , Wind & Fire , DeBarge , Lionel Richie , Teena Marie , The Jackson 5 , New Edition , Adele , Florence and the Machine , and Prince . 
 Beyoncé has stated that she is personally inspired by US First Lady Michelle Obama , saying " She proves you can do it all " and she has described Oprah Winfrey as " the definition of inspiration and a strong woman " . She has also discussed how Jay Z is a continuing inspiration to her , both with what she describes as his lyrical genius and in the obstacles he has overcome in his life . Beyoncé has expressed admiration for the artist Jean @-@ Michel Basquiat , posting in a letter " what I find in the work of Jean @-@ Michel Basquiat , I search for in every day in music ... he is lyrical and raw " . In February 2013 , Beyoncé said that Madonna inspired her to take control of her own career . She commented : " I think about Madonna and how she took all of the great things she achieved and started the label and developed other artists . But there are not enough of those women . " . 
 = = = Stage and alter ego = = = 
 In 2006 , Beyoncé introduced her all @-@ female tour band Suga Mama ( also the name of a song in B 'Day ) which includes bassists , drummers , guitarists , horn players , keyboardists and percussionists . Her background singers , The Mamas , consist of <unk> Cooper @-@ Donnell , Crystal Collins and Tiffany <unk> Riddick . They made their debut appearance at the 2006 BET Awards and re @-@ appeared in the music videos for " Irreplaceable " and " Green Light " . The band have supported Beyoncé in most subsequent live performances , including her 2007 concert tour The Beyoncé Experience , 2009 – 2010 I Am ... World Tour and 2013 – 2014 The Mrs. Carter Show World Tour . 
 Beyoncé has received praise for her stage presence and voice during live performances . Jarett Wieselman of the New York Post placed her at number one on her list of the Five Best Singer / Dancers . According to Barbara Ellen of The Guardian Beyoncé is the most in @-@ charge female artist she 's seen onstage , while Alice Jones of The Independent wrote she " takes her role as entertainer so seriously she 's almost too good . " The ex @-@ President of Def Jam L.A. Reid has described Beyoncé as the greatest entertainer alive . Jim Farber of the Daily News and Stephanie Classen of Star Phoenix both praised her strong voice and her stage presence . 
 Described as being " sexy , seductive and provocative " when performing on stage , Beyoncé has said that she originally created the alter ego " Sasha Fierce " to keep that stage persona separate from who she really is . She described Sasha as being " too aggressive , too strong , too sassy [ and ] too sexy " , stating , " I 'm not like her in real life at all . " Sasha was conceived during the making of " Crazy in Love " , and Beyoncé introduced her with the release of her 2008 album I Am ... Sasha Fierce . In February 2010 , she announced in an interview with Allure magazine that she was comfortable enough with herself to no longer need Sasha Fierce . However , Beyoncé announced in May 2012 that she would bring her back for her Revel Presents : Beyoncé Live shows later that month . 
 = = Public image = = 
 Beyoncé has been described as having a wide @-@ ranging sex appeal , with music journalist Touré writing that since the release of Dangerously in Love , she has " become a crossover sex symbol " . Offstage Beyoncé says that while she likes to dress sexily , her onstage dress " is absolutely for the stage . " Due to her curves and the term 's catchiness , in the 2000s ( decade ) , the media often used the term " Bootylicious " ( a portmanteau of the words booty and delicious ) to describe Beyoncé , the term popularized by Destiny 's Child 's single of the same name . In 2006 , it was added to the Oxford English Dictionary . 
 In September 2010 , Beyoncé made her runway modelling debut at Tom Ford 's Spring / Summer 2011 fashion show . She was named " World 's Most Beautiful Woman " by People and the " Hottest Female Singer of All Time " by Complex in 2012 . In January 2013 , GQ placed her on its cover , featuring her atop its " 100 Sexiest Women of the 21st Century " list . VH1 listed her at number 1 on its 100 Sexiest Artists list . Several wax figures of Beyoncé are found at Madame Tussauds Wax Museums in major cities around the world , including New York , Washington , D.C. , Amsterdam , Bangkok , Hollywood and Sydney . 
 According to Italian fashion designer Roberto Cavalli , Beyoncé uses different fashion styles to work with her music while performing . Her mother co @-@ wrote a book , published in 2002 , titled Destiny 's Style an account of how fashion had an impact on the trio 's success . The B 'Day Anthology Video Album showed many instances of fashion @-@ oriented footage , depicting classic to contemporary wardrobe styles . In 2007 , Beyoncé was featured on the cover of the Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue , becoming the second African American woman after Tyra Banks , and People magazine recognized Beyoncé as the best @-@ dressed celebrity . 
 The Bey Hive is the name given to Beyoncé 's fan base . Fans were previously titled " The <unk> " , ( a portmanteau of Beyoncé and entourage ) . The name Bey Hive derives from the word beehive , purposely misspelled to resemble her first name , and was penned by fans after petitions on the online social networking service Twitter and online news reports during competitions . 
 In 2006 , the animal rights organization People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals ( PETA ) , criticized Beyoncé for wearing and using fur in her clothing line House of Deréon . In 2011 , she appeared on the cover of French fashion magazine L 'Officiel , in blackface and tribal makeup that drew criticism from the media . A statement released from a spokesperson for the magazine said that Beyoncé 's look was " far from the glamorous Sasha Fierce " and that it was " a return to her African roots " . 
 Beyoncé 's lighter skin color and costuming has drawn criticism from some in the African @-@ American community . Emmett Price , a professor of music at Northeastern University , wrote in 2007 , that he thinks race plays a role in many of these criticisms , saying white celebrities who dress similarly do not attract as many comments . In 2008 , L 'Oréal was accused of whitening her skin in their Feria hair color advertisements , responding that " it is categorically untrue " , and in 2013 , Beyoncé herself criticized H & M for their proposed " retouching " of promotional images of her , and according to Vogue requested that only " natural pictures be used " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In The New Yorker music critic Jody Rosen described Beyoncé as " the most important and compelling popular musician of the twenty @-@ first century ..... the result , the logical end point , of a century @-@ plus of pop . " When The Guardian named her Artist of the Decade , Llewyn @-@ Smith wrote , " Why Beyoncé ? [ ... ] Because she made not one but two of the decade 's greatest singles , with Crazy in Love and Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) , not to mention her hits with Destiny 's Child ; and this was the decade when singles – particularly R & B singles – regained their status as pop 's favourite medium . [ ... ] [ She ] and not any superannuated rock star was arguably the greatest live performer of the past 10 years . " In 2013 , Beyoncé made the Time 100 list , with Baz Luhrmann writing " no one has that voice , no one moves the way she moves , no one can hold an audience the way she does ... When Beyoncé does an album , when Beyoncé sings a song , when Beyoncé does anything , it 's an event , and it 's broadly influential . Right now , she is the heir @-@ apparent diva of the USA — the reigning national voice . " In 2014 , Beyoncé was listed again on the Time 100 and also featured on the cover of the issue . 
 Beyoncé 's work has influenced numerous artists including Adele , Ariana Grande , Lady Gaga , Ellie Goulding , Bridgit Mendler , Rihanna , Kelly Rowland , Sam Smith , Meghan Trainor , Nicole Scherzinger , Rita Ora , Zendaya , Cheryl , JoJo , Alexis Jordan , Jessica Sanchez , and Azealia Banks . American indie rock band White Rabbits also cited her an inspiration for their third album Milk Famous ( 2012 ) , friend Gwyneth Paltrow studied Beyoncé at her live concerts while learning to become a musical performer for the 2010 film Country Strong . Nicki Minaj has stated that seeing Beyoncé 's Pepsi commercial influenced her decision to appear in the company 's 2012 global campaign . 
 Her debut single , " Crazy in Love " was named VH1 's " Greatest Song of the 2000s " , NME 's " Best Track of the 00s " and " Pop Song of the Century " , considered by Rolling Stone to be one of the 500 greatest songs of all time , earned two Grammy Awards and is one of the best @-@ selling singles of all time at around 8 million copies . The music video for " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " , which achieved fame for its intricate choreography and its deployment of jazz hands , was credited by the Toronto Star as having started the " first major dance craze of both the new millennium and the Internet " , triggering a number of parodies of the dance choreography and a legion of amateur imitators on YouTube . In 2013 , Drake released a single titled " Girls Love Beyoncé " , which featured an interpolation from Destiny Child 's " Say My Name " and discussed his relationship with women . In January 2012 , research scientist Bryan Lessard named <unk> <unk> , a species of horse fly found in Northern Queensland , Australia after Beyoncé due to the fly 's unique golden hairs on its abdomen . In July 2014 , a Beyoncé exhibit was introduced into the " Legends of Rock " section of the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame . The black leotard from the " Single Ladies " video and her outfit from the Super Bowl half time performance are among several pieces housed at the museum . 
 = = Honors and awards = = 
 Beyoncé has received numerous awards . As a solo artist she has sold over 16 million albums in the US , and over 100 million records worldwide ( a further 60 million additionally with Destiny 's Child ) , making her one of the best @-@ selling music artists of all time . The Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) listed Beyoncé as the top certified artist of the 2000s ( decade ) , with a total of 64 certifications . Her songs " Crazy in Love " , " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " , " Halo " , and " Irreplaceable " are some of the best @-@ selling singles of all time worldwide . In 2009 , The Observer named her the Artist of the Decade and Billboard named her the Top Female Artist and Top Radio Songs Artist of the Decade . In 2010 , Billboard named her in their " Top 50 R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Artists of the Past 25 Years " list at number 15 . In 2012 VH1 ranked her third on their list of the " 100 Greatest Women in Music " . Beyoncé was the first female artist to be honored with the International Artist Award at the American Music Awards . She has also received the Legend Award at the 2008 World Music Awards and the Billboard Millennium Award at the 2011 Billboard Music Awards . 
 Beyoncé has won 20 Grammy Awards , both as a solo artist and member of Destiny 's Child , making her the second most honored female artist by the Grammys , behind Alison Krauss and the most nominated woman in Grammy Award history with 52 nominations . " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " won Song of the Year in 2010 while " Say My Name " and " Crazy in Love " had previously won Best R & B Song . Dangerously in Love , B 'Day and I Am ... Sasha Fierce have all won Best Contemporary R & B Album . Beyoncé set the record for the most Grammy awards won by a female artist in one night in 2010 when she won six awards , breaking the tie she previously held with Alicia Keys , Norah Jones , Alison Krauss , and Amy Winehouse , with Adele equaling this in 2012 . Following her role in Dreamgirls she was nominated for Best Original Song for " Listen " and Best Actress at the Golden Globe Awards , and Outstanding Actress in a Motion Picture at the NAACP Image Awards . Beyoncé won two awards at the Broadcast Film Critics Association Awards 2006 ; Best Song for " Listen " and Best Original Soundtrack for Dreamgirls : Music from the Motion Picture . 
 = = Other ventures = = 
 = = = Endorsements = = = 
 Beyoncé has worked with Pepsi since 2002 , and in 2004 appeared in a Gladiator @-@ themed commercial with Britney Spears , Pink , and Enrique Iglesias . In 2012 , Beyoncé signed a $ 50 million deal to endorse Pepsi . The Center for Science in the Public Interest ( <unk> ) wrote Beyoncé an open letter asking her to reconsider the deal because of the <unk> of the product and to donate the proceeds to a medical organisation . Nevertheless , <unk> found that Beyoncé 's campaign was the most talked about endorsement in April 2013 , with a 70 per cent positive audience response to the commercial and print ads . 
 Beyoncé has worked with Tommy Hilfiger for the fragrances True Star ( singing a cover version of " Wishing on a Star " ) and True Star Gold ; she also promoted Emporio Armani 's Diamonds fragrance in 2007 . Beyoncé launched her first official fragrance , Heat in 2010 . The commercial , which featured the 1956 song " Fever " , was shown after the water shed in the United Kingdom as it begins with an image of Beyoncé appearing to lie naked in a room . In February 2011 , Beyoncé launched her second fragrance , Heat Rush . Beyoncé 's third fragrance , Pulse , was launched in September 2011 . In 2013 , The Mrs. Carter Show Limited Edition version of Heat was released . The six editions of Heat are the world 's best @-@ selling celebrity fragrance line , with sales of over $ 400 million . 
 The release of a video @-@ game <unk> : Beyoncé was cancelled after Beyoncé pulled out of a $ 100 million with <unk> who alleged the cancellation meant the sacking of 70 staff and millions of pounds lost in development . It was settled out of court by her lawyers in June 2013 who said that they had cancelled because <unk> had lost its financial backers . Beyoncé also has had deals with American Express , Nintendo DS and L 'Oréal since the age of 18 . 
 In October 2014 , Beyoncé partnered with British fashion retailer Topshop in a 50 / 50 split subsidiary business named Parkwood Topshop Athletic Ltd . The new division was created for Topshop to break into the activewear market . The company and collection is set to launch and hit stores in the fall of 2015 . 
 In March 2015 , Beyoncé became a co @-@ owner , with other artists , of the music streaming service Tidal . The service specializes in lossless audio and high definition music videos . Beyoncé 's husband Jay Z acquired the parent company of Tidal , <unk> , in the first quarter of 2015 . Including Beyoncé and Jay @-@ Z , sixteen artist stakeholders ( such as Kanye West , Rihanna , Madonna , Chris Martin , Nicki Minaj and more ) co @-@ own Tidal , with the majority owning a 3 % equity stake . The idea of having an all artist owned streaming service was created by those involved to adapt to the increased demand for streaming within the current music industry ; " The challenge is to get everyone to respect music again , to recognize its value " , stated Jay @-@ Z on the release of Tidal . 
 = = = Fashion lines = = = 
 Beyoncé and her mother introduced House of Deréon , a contemporary women 's fashion line , in 2005 . The concept is inspired by three generations of women in their family , the name paying tribute to Beyoncé 's grandmother , <unk> Deréon , a respected seamstress . According to Tina , the overall style of the line best reflects her and Beyoncé 's taste and style . Beyoncé and her mother founded their family 's company Beyond Productions , which provides the licensing and brand management for House of Deréon , and its junior collection , Deréon . House of Deréon pieces were exhibited in Destiny 's Child 's shows and tours , during their Destiny Fulfilled era . The collection features sportswear , denim offerings with fur , outerwear and accessories that include handbags and footwear , and are available at department and specialty stores across the US and Canada . 
 In 2005 , Beyoncé teamed up with House of Brands , a shoe company , to produce a range of footwear for House of Deréon . In January 2008 , <unk> Mobile launched Beyoncé Fashion Diva , a " high @-@ style " mobile game with a social networking component , featuring the House of Deréon collection . In July 2009 , Beyoncé and her mother launched a new junior apparel label , Sasha Fierce for Deréon , for back @-@ to @-@ school selling . The collection included sportswear , outerwear , handbags , footwear , eyewear , lingerie and jewelry . It was available at department stores including Macy 's and Dillard 's , and specialty stores Jimmy Jazz and Against All Odds . On May 27 , 2010 , Beyoncé teamed up with clothing store C & A to launch Deréon by Beyoncé at their stores in Brazil . The collection included tailored blazers with padded shoulders , little black dresses , embroidered tops and shirts and bandage dresses . 
 In October 2014 , Beyoncé signed a deal to launch an activewear line of clothing with British fashion retailer Topshop . The 50 @-@ 50 venture is called Parkwood Topshop Athletic Ltd and is scheduled to launch its first dance , fitness and sports ranges in autumn 2015 . The line will launch in April 2016 . 
 = = = Philanthropy = = = 
 After Hurricane Katrina in 2005 , Beyoncé and Rowland founded the Survivor Foundation to provide transitional housing for victims in the Houston area , to which Beyoncé contributed an initial $ 250 @,@ 000 . The foundation has since expanded to work with other charities in the city , and also provided relief following Hurricane Ike three years later . 
 Beyoncé participated in George Clooney and Wyclef Jean 's Hope for Haiti Now : A Global Benefit for Earthquake Relief telethon and was named the official face of the limited edition CFDA " Fashion For Haiti " T @-@ shirt , made by Theory which raised a total of $ 1 million . On March 5 , 2010 , Beyoncé and her mother Tina opened the Beyoncé Cosmetology Center at the Brooklyn Phoenix House , offering a seven @-@ month cosmetology training course for men and women . In April 2011 , Beyoncé joined forces with US First Lady Michelle Obama and the National Association of Broadcasters Education Foundation , to help boost the latter 's campaign against child obesity by reworking her single " Get Me Bodied " . Following the death of Osama bin Laden , Beyoncé released her cover of the Lee Greenwood song " God Bless the USA " , as a charity single to help raise funds for the New York Police and Fire Widows ' and Children 's Benefit Fund . 
 In December , Beyoncé along with a variety of other celebrities teamed up and produced a video campaign for " Demand A Plan " , a bipartisan effort by a group of 950 US mayors and others designed to influence the federal government into rethinking its gun control laws , following the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting . Beyoncé became an ambassador for the 2012 World Humanitarian Day campaign donating her song " I Was Here " and its music video , shot in the UN , to the campaign . In 2013 , it was announced that Beyoncé would work with Salma Hayek and Frida Giannini on a Gucci " Chime for Change " campaign that aims to spread female empowerment . The campaign , which aired on February 28 , was set to her new music . A concert for the cause took place on June 1 , 2013 in London and included other acts like Ellie Goulding , Florence and the Machine , and Rita Ora . In advance of the concert , she appeared in a campaign video released on May 15 , 2013 , where she , along with Cameron Diaz , John Legend and Kylie Minogue , described inspiration from their mothers , while a number of other artists celebrated personal inspiration from other women , leading to a call for submission of photos of women of viewers ' inspiration from which a selection was shown at the concert . Beyoncé said about her mother Tina Knowles that her gift was " finding the best qualities in every human being . " With help of the crowdfunding platform Catapult , visitors of the concert could choose between several projects promoting education of women and girls . Beyoncé is also taking part in " Miss a Meal " , a food @-@ donation campaign , and supporting Goodwill charity through online charity auctions at <unk> that support job creation throughout Europe and the U.S. 
 = = Discography = = 
 Dangerously in Love ( 2003 ) 
 B 'Day ( 2006 ) 
 I Am ... Sasha Fierce ( 2008 ) 
 4 ( 2011 ) 
 Beyoncé ( 2013 ) 
 Lemonade ( 2016 ) 
 = = Filmography = = 
 Carmen : A Hip Hopera ( 2001 ) 
 Austin Powers in Goldmember ( 2002 ) 
 The Fighting Temptations ( 2003 ) 
 The Pink Panther ( 2006 ) 
 Dreamgirls ( 2006 ) 
 Cadillac Records ( 2008 ) 
 Wow ! Wow ! <unk> ! : <unk> Idol ( 2009 ) 
 Obsessed ( 2009 ) 
 Life Is But a Dream ( 2013 ) 
 Epic ( 2013 ) 
 = = Tours and residency shows = = 
 Headlining tours 
 Dangerously in Love Tour ( 2003 ) 
 The Beyoncé Experience ( 2007 ) 
 I Am ... World Tour ( 2009 – 10 ) 
 The Mrs. Carter Show World Tour ( 2013 – 14 ) 
 The Formation World Tour ( 2016 ) 
 Co @-@ headlining tours 
 Verizon Ladies First Tour ( with Alicia Keys and Missy Elliott ) ( 2004 ) 
 On the Run Tour ( with Jay Z ) ( 2014 ) 
 Residency shows 
 I Am ... Yours ( 2009 ) 
 4 Intimate Nights with Beyoncé ( 2011 ) 
 Revel Presents : Beyoncé Live ( 2012 ) 
 = Secrets That I Never Want to Know = 
 " Secrets That I Never Want to Know " is the eighth @-@ season premiere episode of the American comedy @-@ drama television series Desperate Housewives , and the 158th overall episode of the series . It was originally broadcast in the United States on September 25 , 2011 , on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) . The episode focuses on the aftermath and cover @-@ up of an accidental killing . 
 The episode was written by executive producer Bob Daily and directed by David Grossman . In the episode , Bree ( Marcia Cross ) and Gabrielle ( Eva Longoria ) work together to conceal the death of Gabrielle 's stepfather ( Tony Plana ) while Susan ( Teri Hatcher ) and Carlos ( Ricardo Antonio Chavira ) struggle with their guilt over the cover @-@ up . Meanwhile , Lynette ( Felicity Huffman ) and Tom ( Doug Savant ) deal with their separation . 
 " Secrets That I Never Want to Know " received generally positive reviews from critics , most of whom agreed the episode provided a satisfactory opening to the show 's final season . According to Nielsen ratings , the episode drew 9 @.@ 93 million viewers , making it the least @-@ watched season premiere in the series ' history . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Desperate Housewives focuses on the lives of residents in the suburban neighborhood of Wisteria Lane , as narrated by their deceased neighbor , Mary Alice Young ( Brenda Strong ) , who kills herself in the pilot episode after receiving a blackmail note . In recent episodes , Bree Van de Kamp ( Marcia Cross ) begins dating a detective named Chuck Vance ( Jonathan Cake ) . Meanwhile , Lynette ( Felicity Huffman ) and Tom Scavo ( Doug Savant ) decide to separate after experiencing problems in their marriage . Carlos Solis ( Ricardo Antonio Chavira ) accidentally kills his wife Gabrielle 's ( Eva Longoria ) stepfather , Alejandro Perez ( Tony Plana ) , who raped her in her childhood and returns to inflict more harm . Gabrielle 's friends , Bree , Lynette , and Susan Delfino ( Teri Hatcher ) , agree to help cover up the killing . 
 = = = Episode = = = 
 Carlos and the women bury Alejandro 's body in the nearby woods and , at Bree and Gabrielle 's urging , make a pact to keep his death a secret . One month later , Carlos 's guilt has left him irritable and depressed . He confesses to having committed an unspecified crime to Father Dugan ( Sam McMurray ) , who tells him that he will only be forgiven if he turns himself in ; however , Carlos decides not to follow his advice in order to protect the other people involved in the cover @-@ up . 
 Meanwhile , Susan 's guilt over the cover @-@ up causes her to withdraw from her friends and family . Her husband , Mike Delfino ( James Denton ) , suspects that she is unhappy in their marriage . Susan wants to tell Mike about the cover @-@ up , but Bree and Gabrielle discourage her , warning her that Mike could be implicated if they are ever caught . 
 Lynette and Tom have decided not to tell their children about their separation . After Lynette has a nightmare about Alejandro , she seeks Tom 's company and they sleep together . The next morning , Tom assumes that they are getting back together , but Lynette tells him she still wants to separate . Meanwhile , Renee Perry ( Vanessa Williams ) attempts to seduce new neighbor Ben Faulkner ( Charles Mesure ) , but he rejects her . 
 Elsewhere , Bree struggles with dating a detective and covering up Alejandro 's death . While trying to dispose of Alejandro 's car , Bree and Gabrielle inadvertently attract Chuck 's attention and have to create a series of elaborate lies to avoid him finding out the truth . Later , Bree receives a note reading , " I know what you did . It makes me sick . I 'm going to tell . " This is the same as the letter Mary Alice received before killing herself . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Secrets That I Never Want to Know " was written by executive producer Bob Daily and directed by David Grossman . Filming for the episode began on July 11 , 2011 . The episode is only one of two season premieres Cherry did not write himself , as he took on a reduced production role for the eighth season in order to develop several new series while Daily was given more creative authority . According to Daily , the series ' ending allowed the writers more artistic freedom while developing storylines . " You get to do story lines that you wouldn 't otherwise do because you don 't have to worry about the ramifications , " he explained . " So people can move , people can die , people can have babies and you don 't have to worry about the babies growing up . " The episode introduced Bree 's blackmail storyline , which recalls the first season 's mystery storyline surrounding series narrator Mary Alice 's suicide . Daily stated that the similarity between the storylines was intentional : " We ’ re kind of just diving into the DNA of the series a little bit . Are there any unanswered questions floating around out there ? Any characters we need to check in with one more time ? " Cherry noted that the " mystery hearkens back to the first season , going back to the roots of Mary Alice [ Brenda Strong ] . This feels right for that mystery to take us out this year . " Brenda Strong commented that " It ’ s the smartest way to end the series , to finish where you began . I think it really cements it in the psyche of the audience and gives them a sense of completion . " 
 The episode further develops the relationship between Bree and Chuck , which is complicated by her involvement in the cover @-@ up . " Bree ’ s dilemma is the fact that she ’ s falling for a cop and trying to cover up this crime that she was sort of the ringleader on , " Daily explained . " So her thing is instead of balancing work and pleasure , it ’ s balancing crime and pleasure . " Cross stated , " I think we ’ ll figure out if that ’ s really a big love for her or if she ’ s able to let it go . " Jonathan Cake , who appeared as Chuck in four episodes during the seventh season , was promoted to series regular with this episode . On the relationship between Bree and Chuck , Cake stated : " As a detective , he 's sort of drawn to this woman who seems both quite proper and conservative and yet can 't seem to stop herself from being drawn into these sort of crazy , lurid scenarios . There 's a sort of wild streak in Bree somewhere that he thinks is really interesting . " To prepare for the role , Cake watched key episodes of the series focusing on Bree 's previous relationships . 
 The episode also continues the storyline of Tom and Lynette 's separation . Huffman enjoyed her character 's storyline , stating : " I 'm sure there are things that they knew the viewers want , which is for Tom and Lynette to get back together . But I do like that it 's kind of up in the air and maybe they won 't . " Doug Savant commented , " For many years on this show , we knew that Tom and Lynette were the grounding force on the street . They were the couple that most resembled most couples in America . It just got to a point after so many years when [ the writers ] really wanted to explore the things that made this relationship work by first pulling it apart . " Both actors expressed their desire for the couple to reunite by the series ' end . Charles Mesure made his debut as new neighbor Ben Faulkner , a self @-@ made contractor and Renee 's new love interest . According to Vanessa Williams , " She ’ s working hard to make it happen and it ’ s not happening easily for her . And she ’ s not used to that and that ’ s where the comedy ensues and it gives her something to pursue . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 According to Nielsen ratings , " Secrets That I Never Want to Know " was watched by 9 @.@ 93 million viewers and held a 3 @.@ 2 rating / 7 share among viewers between 18 and 49 years of age . The episode is the least @-@ watched season premiere in the series ' history , indicating a 28 percent decrease in viewership from the seventh season premiere one year earlier . The episode was outperformed by Sunday Night Football on NBC , which averaged 20 @.@ 36 million viewers and an 8 @.@ 3 rating / 21 share , and The Good Wife on CBS , which was watched by 10 @.@ 66 million viewers but held a 2 @.@ 2 rating / 5 share , 45 percent lower than Desperate Housewives . The episode was also outperformed by its lead @-@ out program , the series premiere of Pan Am . It averaged 1 @.@ 2 million viewers more than " Secrets That I Never Want to Know " , becoming the first lead @-@ out program to outperform Desperate Housewives since Grey 's Anatomy in May 2006 . The final minute of " Secrets That I Never Want to Know " drew 12 @.@ 188 million viewers and received a 7 @.@ 9 rating / 12 share overall with 4 @.@ 1 rating / 9 share in the 18 to 49 demographic . The episode gained an additional 2 million viewers and 0 @.@ 9 rating in the week following the original broadcast due to DVR recordings . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 " Secrets That I Never Want to Know " received mixed critical reviews . TV Guide 's Kate Stanhope gave a mixed review of the episode , opining that " the episode moved a little slow for what was the last season premiere . " She praised the sequence in which Bree and Gabrielle attempt to get rid of Alejandro 's car , writing , " I always love the Bree @-@ Gaby scenes because they contradict each other in such an interesting way . " She enjoyed that the Bree character was " turning back into the controlling perfectionist we grew to love rather than the carefree woman she became " in the seventh season . Stanhope was critical of the Lynette and Tom storyline , opining : " it 's annoying that their relationship has been reduced to this gimmick ... I was never on board with the whole Tom and Lynette split simply because it felt less honest and more of a last @-@ ditch effort to cause conflict . But if they 're going to go through with separating the formerly stable couple , at least go through with it all the way and show Lynette really and truly on her own . " She also believed the Renee storyline to be a waste of Vanessa Williams 's talents . Tanner Stransky of Entertainment Weekly called the episode 's overall storyline " too juicy a landmine to not have the repercussions play out deliciously on this , the show ’ s last season . " 
 TV Fanatic 's Christina Tran gave the episode a positive review , awarding it 4 out of 5 stars . She picked Susan 's hamster burial scene and the scene in which Gabrielle eases Carlos ' conscience her favorite scenes in the episode . Tran also appreciated the writers ' decision not to prolong Tom and Lynette 's attempts to hide their separation , opining : " Last season , their fights were relentless and exhausting . I was glad that this storyline wasn ’ t dragged out too much , as Tom and Lynette were both able to rip off the band @-@ aid and let their children know of their new status . " She also enjoyed the addition of the Ben character and hoped that the Renee character would receive her own storyline this season . John Griffiths of Us Weekly awarded the episode 3 @.@ 5 out of 4 stars , writing , " After last season 's silly antics , the venerable dramedy pulls itself together for a clever final round . " He opined that Carlos and Susan 's guilt helped keep the cover @-@ up storyline compelling . The Hollywood Reporter 's Jethro <unk> was positive in his review of the episode , writing : " It was a strong return , because it relied on the series ’ strength , which is the bond these women have with each other . " Jamie Heller of The A.V. Club noted that " there ’ s almost no other plot development " in the episode apart from the cover @-@ up and Lynette and Tom 's separation . 
 = Prince Albert Victor , Duke of Clarence and Avondale = 
 Prince Albert Victor , Duke of Clarence and Avondale ( Albert Victor Christian Edward ; 8 January 1864 – 14 January 1892 ) , was the eldest child of Albert Edward , Prince of Wales ( later King Edward VII ) , and the grandson of the reigning British monarch , Queen Victoria . From the time of his birth , he was second in the line of succession to the British throne , but never became king : he died before his father and his grandmother , the Queen . 
 Albert Victor was known to his family , and many later biographers , as " Eddy " . When young , he travelled the world extensively as a naval cadet , and as an adult he joined the British Army , but did not undertake any active military duties . After two unsuccessful courtships , he was engaged to be married to Princess Mary of Teck in late 1891 . A few weeks later , he died during an influenza pandemic . Mary later married his younger brother Prince George , who became King George V in 1910 . 
 Albert Victor 's intellect , sexuality and mental health have been the subject of speculation . Rumours linked him with the Cleveland Street scandal , which involved a homosexual brothel , but there is no conclusive evidence that he ever went there or was even homosexual . Some authors have argued that he was the serial killer known as Jack the Ripper , but contemporary documents show that Albert Victor could not have been in London at the time of the murders , and the claim is widely dismissed . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Albert Victor was born two months prematurely on 8 January 1864 at Frogmore House , Windsor , Berkshire . He was the first child of Albert Edward , Prince of Wales , and Alexandra , Princess of Wales ( formerly Alexandra of Denmark ) . Following his grandmother Queen Victoria 's wishes , he was named Albert Victor , after herself and her late husband Albert . As a grandchild of the reigning British monarch in the male line , and a son of the Prince of Wales , he was formally styled His Royal Highness Prince Albert Victor of Wales from birth . 
 He was christened Albert Victor Christian Edward in the private chapel of Buckingham Palace on 10 March 1864 by the Archbishop of Canterbury , Charles Longley , but was known informally as " Eddy " . His godparents were Queen Victoria ( his paternal grandmother ) , King Christian IX of Denmark ( his maternal grandfather , represented by his brother Prince John of Schleswig @-@ Holstein @-@ Sonderburg @-@ Glücksburg ) , King Leopold I of Belgium ( his great great @-@ uncle ) , the Dowager Duchess of Schleswig @-@ Holstein @-@ Sonderburg @-@ Glücksburg ( his maternal great @-@ grandmother , for whom the Duchess of Cambridge stood proxy ) , the Duchess of Saxe @-@ Coburg and Gotha ( his great @-@ aunt by marriage , for whom the Grand Duchess of Mecklenburg @-@ Strelitz stood proxy ) , the Landgrave of Hesse ( his maternal great @-@ grandfather , for whom Prince George , Duke of Cambridge , stood proxy ) , the Crown Princess of Prussia ( his paternal aunt , for whom Princess Helena , her sister , stood proxy ) and Prince Alfred ( his paternal uncle ) . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 When Albert Victor was just short of seventeen months old , his brother , Prince George of Wales , was born on 3 June 1865 . Given the closeness in age of the two royal brothers , they were educated together . In 1871 , the Queen appointed John Neale Dalton as their tutor . The two princes were given a strict programme of study , which included games and military drills as well as academic subjects . Dalton complained that Albert Victor 's mind was " abnormally dormant " . Though he learned to speak Danish , progress in other languages and subjects was slow . Sir Henry Ponsonby thought that Albert Victor might have inherited his mother 's deafness . Albert Victor never excelled intellectually . Possible physical explanations for Albert Victor 's inattention or indolence in class include absence seizures or his premature birth , which can be associated with learning difficulties , but Lady Geraldine Somerset blamed Albert Victor 's poor education on Dalton , whom she considered uninspiring . 
 Separating the brothers for the remainder of their education was considered , but Dalton advised the Prince of Wales against splitting them up as " Prince Albert Victor requires the stimulus of Prince George 's company to induce him to work at all . " In 1877 , the two boys were sent to the Royal Navy 's training ship , HMS Britannia . They began their studies there two months behind the other cadets as Albert Victor contracted typhoid fever , for which he was treated by Sir William Gull . Dalton accompanied them as chaplain to the ship . In 1879 , after a great deal of discussion between the Queen , the Prince of Wales , their households and the Government , the royal brothers were sent as naval cadets on a three @-@ year world tour aboard HMS Bacchante . Albert Victor was rated midshipman on his sixteenth birthday . They toured the British Empire , accompanied by Dalton , visiting the Americas , the Falkland Islands , South Africa , Australia , Fiji , the Far East , Singapore , Ceylon , Aden , Egypt , the Holy Land and Greece . They acquired tattoos in Japan . By the time they returned to Britain , Albert Victor was eighteen . 
 The brothers were parted in 1883 ; George continued in the navy and Albert Victor attended Trinity College , Cambridge . At Bachelor 's Cottage , Sandringham , Albert Victor was expected to cram before arriving at university in the company of Dalton , French instructor Monsieur Hua , and a newly chosen tutor / companion James Kenneth Stephen . Some biographers have said that Stephen was a misogynist , although this has recently been questioned , and he may have felt emotionally attached to Albert Victor , but whether or not his feelings were overtly homosexual is open to question . Stephen was initially optimistic about tutoring the prince , but by the time the party were to move to Cambridge had concluded , " I do not think he can possibly derive much benefit from attending lectures at Cambridge ... He hardly knows the meaning of the words to read " . 
 At the start of the new term in October , Albert Victor , Dalton , and Lieutenant Henderson from Bacchante moved to Nevile 's Court at Trinity College , which was generally reserved for accommodating dons rather than students . The prince showed little interest in the intellectual atmosphere , and he was excused from examinations , though he did become involved in undergraduate life . He was introduced to Oscar Browning , a noted don who gave parties and " made pets of those undergraduates who were handsome and attractive " , and became friendly with Dalton 's godson , Alfred Fripp , who later became his doctor and royal surgeon . It is not known whether he had any sexual experiences at Cambridge , but partners of either sex would have been available . In August 1884 , he spent some time at Heidelberg University studying German , before returning to Cambridge . Leaving Cambridge in 1885 , where he had already served as a cadet in the 2nd Cambridge University Battalion , he was gazetted as an officer in the 10th Hussars . In 1888 , he was awarded an honorary degree by the university . 
 One of Albert Victor 's instructors said he learnt by listening rather than reading or writing and had no difficulty remembering information , but Prince George , Duke of Cambridge , had a less favourable opinion of him , calling him " an inveterate and incurable <unk> " . Princess Augusta of Cambridge was also dismissive , calling him : " si peu de chose " . 
 Much of Albert Victor 's time at his post in Aldershot was spent drilling , which he disliked , though he did like to play polo . He passed his examinations , and in March 1887 , he was posted to Hounslow where he was promoted to captain . He was given more public engagements , visited Ireland and Gibraltar , and opened the Hammersmith suspension bridge . Of his private life , a childhood friend of Albert Victor later recalled that it was uneventful : " his brother officers had said that they would like to make a man of the world of him . Into that world he refused to be initiated . " However , letters dated 1885 and 1886 from Albert Victor to his doctor at Aldershot ( known only as " Roche " ) detail that he was taking medicine for ' <unk> ' ( <unk> ) , then a term for gonorrhea discharge . 
 = = Cleveland Street scandal = = 
 In July 1889 , the Metropolitan Police uncovered a male brothel operated by Charles Hammond in London 's Cleveland Street . Under police interrogation , the male prostitutes and pimps revealed the names of their clients , who included Lord Arthur Somerset , an Extra Equerry to the Prince of Wales . At the time , all homosexual acts between men were illegal , and the clients faced social ostracism , prosecution , and at worst , two years ' imprisonment with hard labour . 
 The resultant Cleveland Street scandal implicated other high @-@ ranking figures in British society , and rumours swept upper @-@ class London of the involvement of a member of the royal family , namely Prince Albert Victor . The prostitutes had not named Albert Victor , and it is suggested that Somerset 's solicitor , Arthur Newton , fabricated and spread the rumours to take the heat off his client . Letters exchanged between the Treasury Solicitor , Sir Augustus Stephenson , and his assistant , Hamilton Cuffe , make coded reference to Newton 's threats to implicate Albert Victor . 
 In December 1889 it was reported that the Prince and Princess of Wales were " daily assailed with anonymous letters of the most outrageous character " bearing upon the scandal . The Prince of Wales intervened in the investigation ; no clients were ever prosecuted and nothing against Albert Victor was proven . Sir Charles Russell was retained to watch the proceedings in the case on behalf of Albert Victor . Although there is no conclusive evidence for or against his involvement , or that he ever visited a homosexual club or brothel , the rumours and cover @-@ up have led some biographers to speculate that he did visit Cleveland Street , and that he was " possibly bisexual , probably homosexual " . This is contested by other commentators , one of whom refers to him as " ardently heterosexual " and his involvement in the rumours as " somewhat unfair " . The historian H. Montgomery Hyde wrote , " There is no evidence that he was homosexual , or even bisexual . " 
 While English newspapers suppressed mention of the Prince 's name in association with the case , Welsh @-@ language , colonial , and American newspapers were less inhibited . The New York Times ridiculed him as a " dullard " and " stupid perverse boy " , who would " never be allowed to ascend the British throne " . 
 Somerset 's sister , Lady Waterford , denied that her brother knew anything about Albert Victor . She wrote , " I am sure the boy is as straight as a line ... Arthur does not the least know how or where the boy spends his time ... he believes the boy to be perfectly innocent . " Lady Waterford , however , also believed Somerset 's protestations of his own innocence . In surviving private letters to his friend Lord Esher , Somerset denies knowing anything directly about Albert Victor , but confirms that he has heard the rumours , and hopes that they will help quash any prosecution . He wrote , " I can quite understand the Prince of Wales being much annoyed at his son 's name being coupled with the thing but that was the case before I left it ... we were both accused of going to this place but not together ... they will end by having out in open court exactly what they are all trying to keep quiet . I wonder if it is really a fact or only an invention of that arch ruffian H [ <unk> ] . " He continued , " I have never mentioned the boy 's name except to Probyn , Montagu and Knollys when they were acting for me and I thought they ought to know . Had they been wise , hearing what I knew and therefore what others knew , they ought to have hushed the matter up , instead of stirring it up as they did , with all the authorities . " 
 The rumours persisted ; sixty years later the official biographer of King George V , Harold Nicolson , was told by Lord Goddard , who was a twelve @-@ year @-@ old schoolboy at the time of the scandal , that Albert Victor " had been involved in a male brothel scene , and that a solicitor had to commit perjury to clear him . The solicitor was struck off the rolls for his offence , but was thereafter reinstated . " In fact , none of the lawyers in the case was convicted of perjury or struck off during the scandal , but Somerset 's solicitor , Arthur Newton , was convicted of obstruction of justice for helping his clients escape abroad , and was sentenced to six weeks in prison . Over twenty years later in 1910 , Newton was struck off for twelve months for professional misconduct after falsifying letters from another of his clients , the notorious murderer Dr Crippen . In 1913 , Newton was struck off indefinitely and sentenced to three years ' imprisonment for obtaining money by false pretences . 
 = = Tour of India = = 
 The foreign press suggested that Albert Victor was sent on a seven @-@ month tour of British India from October 1889 to avoid the gossip which swept London society in the wake of the scandal . This is not true ; the trip had actually been planned since the spring . Travelling via Athens , Port Said , Cairo and Aden , Albert Victor arrived in Bombay on 9 November 1889 . He was entertained sumptuously in Hyderabad by the Nizam , and elsewhere by many other <unk> . He spent Christmas at Mandalay and the New Year at Calcutta . Most of the extensive travelling was done by train , although elephants were ridden as part of ceremonies . In the style of the time , a great many animals were shot for sport . 
 During the trip , Albert Victor met Mrs. Margery Haddon , the wife of a civil engineer , Henry Haddon . After several failed marriages and Albert Victor 's death , Margery came to England and claimed the Prince was the father of her son , Clarence Haddon . There was no evidence and her claims were dismissed . She had become an alcoholic and seemed deranged . The allegations were reported to Buckingham Palace and the head of the police Special Branch investigated . Papers in The National Archives show that neither courtiers nor Margery had any proof of the allegation . In a statement to police , Albert Victor 's lawyers admitted that there had been " some relations " between him and Mrs. Haddon , but denied the claim of fatherhood . 
 In the 1920s , however , the son , Clarence , repeated the story and published a book in the United States , My Uncle George V , in which he claimed he was born in London in September 1890 , about nine months after Albert Victor 's meeting with Mrs. Haddon . In 1933 , he was charged with demanding money with menace and attempted extortion after writing to the King asking for hush money . At his trial the following January , the prosecution produced documents showing that Haddon 's enlistment papers , marriage certificate , officer 's commission , demobilisation papers and employment records all showed he was born in or before 1887 , at least two years before Albert Victor met Mrs. Haddon . Haddon was found guilty and the judge , believing Haddon to be suffering from delusions , did not jail him but bound him over for three years on the condition that he made no claim that he was Albert Victor 's son . Haddon breached the conditions and was jailed for a year . Dismissed as a crank , he died a broken man . Even if Haddon 's claim had been true , as with other royal <unk> , it would have made no difference to the royal line of succession . 
 On his return from India , Albert Victor was created Duke of Clarence and Avondale and Earl of Athlone on 24 May 1890 , Queen Victoria 's 71st birthday . 
 = = Prospective brides = = 
 Several women were lined up as possible brides for Albert Victor . The first , in 1889 , was his cousin , Princess Alix of Hesse and by Rhine , but she did not return his affection and refused his offer of engagement . She later married Tsar Nicholas II of Russia , another of Albert Victor 's cousins , in 1894 . The second , in 1890 , was a love match with Princess Hélène of Orléans , a daughter of Prince Philippe , Count of Paris , a pretender to the French throne who was living in England after being banished from France in 1886 . 
 At first , Queen Victoria opposed any engagement because Hélène was Roman Catholic . Victoria wrote to her grandson suggesting another of her grandchildren , Princess Margaret of Prussia , as a suitable alternative , but nothing came of her suggestion , and once Albert Victor and Hélène confided their love to her , the Queen relented and supported the proposed marriage . Hélène offered to convert to the Church of England , and Albert Victor offered to renounce his succession rights to marry her . To the couple 's disappointment , her father refused to countenance the marriage and was adamant she could not convert . Hélène travelled personally to intercede with Pope Leo XIII but he confirmed her father 's verdict , and the courtship ended . She later became the Duchess of Aosta . 
 In mid @-@ 1890 , Albert Victor was attended by several doctors , but in correspondence his illness is only referred to as " fever " or " gout " . Some biographers have assumed he was suffering from " a mild form of venereal disease " , perhaps gonorrhea , which he may have suffered from on an earlier occasion , but the exact nature of his illness is unknown . 
 In late 1891 , the Prince was implicated as having been involved with a former Gaiety Theatre chorus girl , Lydia Miller ( stage name Lydia Manton ) , who committed suicide by drinking carbolic acid . Although she was the nominal mistress of Lord Charles Montagu , who gave evidence at the inquest , it was alleged that he was merely a cover for the Prince who had requested she give up her theatrical career on his behalf , and that the authorities sought to suppress the case by making the inquest private and refusing access to the depositions . Similarly to the Cleveland Street scandal only overseas newspapers printed Albert Victor 's name , but regional British newspapers did quote the radical London newspaper The Star which published : " It is a fact so well known that the blind denials of it given in some quarters are childishly futile . Lydia Manton was the petite amie of a certain young prince , and that , too , quite recently . " It was labelled " a scandal of the first magnitude ... on the lips of every clubman " , and compared to the Tranby Croft affair , in which his father was called to give evidence at a trial for slander . 
 Rumours also surfaced in 1900 , after Albert Victor 's death , of his association with another former Gaiety girl , Maude Richardson ( birth name : Louisa Lancey ) , and that the royal family had attempted to pay her off . In 2002 , letters from Albert Victor to his solicitor referring to a payoff made to Richardson of £ 200 were sold at Bonhams auction house in London . Owing to discrepancies in the dates and spelling of the letters , one historian has suggested they could be forgeries . 
 In 1891 , Albert Victor wrote to Lady Sybil St Clair Erskine that he was in love once again , though he does not say with whom , but by this time another potential bride , Princess Mary of Teck , was under consideration . Mary was the daughter of Queen Victoria 's first cousin Princess Mary Adelaide , Duchess of Teck . Queen Victoria was very supportive , considering Mary ideal — charming , sensible and pretty . On 3 December 1891 Albert Victor , to Mary 's " great surprise " , proposed to her at Luton Hoo , the country residence of the Danish ambassador to Britain . The wedding was set for 27 February 1892 . 
 = = Death = = 
 Just as plans for both his marriage to Mary and his appointment as Viceroy of Ireland were under discussion , Albert Victor fell ill with influenza in the pandemic of 1889 – 92 . He developed pneumonia and died at Sandringham House in Norfolk on 14 January 1892 , less than a week after his 28th birthday . The Prince and Princess of Wales , Princesses Maud and Victoria , Prince George , Princess Mary , the Duke and Duchess of Teck , three physicians ( Alan Reeve Manby , Francis <unk> and William Broadbent ) and three nurses were present . The Prince of Wales 's chaplain , Canon Frederick Hervey , stood over Albert Victor reading prayers for the dying . 
 The nation was shocked . Shops put up their shutters . The Prince of Wales wrote to Queen Victoria , " <unk> would I have given my life for his " . Princess Mary wrote to Queen Victoria of the Princess of Wales , " the despairing look on her face was the most heart @-@ rending thing I have ever seen . " His younger brother Prince George wrote , " how deeply I did love him ; & I remember with pain nearly every hard word & little quarrel I ever had with him & I long to ask his forgiveness , but , alas , it is too late now ! " George took Albert Victor 's place in the line of succession , eventually succeeding to the throne as George V in 1910 . Drawn together during their shared period of mourning , Prince George later married Mary himself in 1893 . She became queen on George 's accession . 
 Albert Victor 's mother , Alexandra , never fully recovered from her son 's death and kept the room in which he died as a shrine . At the funeral , Mary laid her bridal wreath of orange blossom upon the coffin . James Kenneth Stephen , Albert Victor 's former tutor , refused all food from the day of Albert Victor 's death and died 20 days later ; he had suffered a head injury in 1886 which left him suffering from psychosis . The Prince is buried in the Albert Memorial Chapel close to St George 's Chapel , Windsor Castle . His tomb , by Alfred Gilbert , is " the finest single example of late 19th @-@ century sculpture in the British Isles " . A recumbent effigy of the Prince in a Hussar uniform ( almost impossible to see properly in situ ) lies above the tomb . Kneeling over him is an angel , holding a heavenly crown . The tomb is surrounded by an elaborate railing , with figures of saints . The perfectionist Gilbert spent too much on the commission , went bankrupt , and left the country . Five of the smaller figures were only completed with " a greater roughness and <unk> of texture " after his return to Britain in the 1920s . 
 One obituary , written by a journalist who claimed to have attended the majority of Albert Victor 's public appearances , stated : " He was little known personally to the English public . His absence at sea , and on travels and duty with his regiment , kept him out of the general eye ... at times , there was a <unk> of hue , which much increased the grave aspect ... not only in the metropolis , but throughout the country , somehow , it was always said , ' He will never come to the throne . ' " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 During his life , the bulk of the British press treated Albert Victor with nothing but respect and the eulogies that immediately followed his death were full of praise . The radical politician , Henry Broadhurst , who had met both Albert Victor and his brother George , noted that they had " a total absence of affectation or haughtiness " . On the day of Albert Victor 's death , the leading Liberal politician , William Ewart Gladstone , wrote in his personal private diary " a great loss to our party " . However , Queen Victoria referred to Albert Victor 's " dissipated life " in private letters to her eldest daughter , which were later published and , in the mid @-@ 20th century , the official biographers of Queen Mary and King George V , James Pope @-@ Hennessy and Harold Nicolson respectively , promoted hostile assessments of Albert Victor 's life , portraying him as lazy , ill @-@ educated and physically feeble . The exact nature of his " dissipations " is not clear , but in 1994 Theo Aronson favoured the theory on " admittedly circumstantial " evidence that the " unspecified ' dissipations ' were predominantly homosexual " . Aronson 's judgement was based on Albert Victor 's " adoration of his elegant and possessive mother ; his ' want of manliness ' ; his ' shrinking from horseplay ' ; [ and ] his ' sweet , gentle , quiet and charming ' nature " , as well as the Cleveland Street rumours and his opinion that there is " a certain amount of homosexuality in all men " . He admitted , however , that " the allegations of Prince Eddy 's homosexuality must be treated cautiously . " 
 Rumours that Prince Albert Victor may have committed , or been responsible for , the Jack the Ripper murders were first mentioned in print in 1962 . It was later alleged , amongst others by Stephen Knight in Jack the Ripper : The Final Solution , that Albert Victor fathered a child with a woman in the Whitechapel district of London , and either he or several high @-@ ranking men committed the murders in an effort to cover up his indiscretion . Though such claims have been repeated frequently , scholars have dismissed them as fantasies , and refer to indisputable proof of the Prince 's innocence . For example , on 30 September 1888 , when Elizabeth Stride and Catherine Eddowes were murdered in London , Albert Victor was over 500 miles ( over 800 km ) away at Balmoral , the royal retreat in Scotland , in the presence of Queen Victoria , other family members , visiting German royalty and a large number of staff . According to the official Court Circular , family journals and letters , newspaper reports and other sources , he could not have been near any of the murders . Other fanciful conspiracy theories are that he died of syphilis or poison , that he was pushed off a cliff on the instructions of Lord Randolph Churchill or that his death was faked to remove him from the line of succession . 
 Albert Victor 's posthumous reputation became so bad that in 1964 Philip Magnus called his death a " merciful act of providence " , supporting the theory that his death removed an unsuitable heir to the throne and replaced him with the reliable and sober George V. In 1972 , Michael Harrison was the first modern author to re @-@ assess Albert Victor and portray him in a more sympathetic light . In recent years , Andrew Cook has continued attempts to rehabilitate Albert Victor 's reputation , arguing that his lack of academic progress was partly due to the incompetence of his tutor , Dalton ; that he was a warm and charming man ; that there is no tangible evidence that he was homosexual or bisexual ; that he held liberal views , particularly on Irish Home Rule ; and that his reputation was diminished by biographers eager to improve the image of his brother , George . 
 = = = Fictional portrayals = = = 
 The conspiracy theories surrounding Albert Victor have led to his portrayal in film as somehow responsible for or involved in the Jack the Ripper murders . Bob Clark 's Sherlock Holmes mystery Murder by Decree was released in 1979 with " Duke of Clarence ( Eddy ) " played by Robin Marshall . Jack the Ripper was released in 1988 with Marc <unk> as Prince Albert Victor . Samuel West played " Prince Eddy " in The Ripper ( 1997 ) and Albert Victor as a child ( with Jerome Watts and Charles Dance playing the character at older ages ) in the TV miniseries Edward the Seventh , which starred West 's father Timothy West as the title character . The Hughes brothers ' From Hell was based on the graphic novel of the same name by Alan Moore and Eddie Campbell , and was released in 2001 . Mark Dexter portrayed both " Prince Edward " and " Albert Sickert " . The story , based largely on the same sources as Murder by Decree , is also the basis for the play Force and Hypocrisy by Doug Lucie . 
 A pair of alternative history novels King and Joker ( 1976 ) and Skeleton in Waiting ( 1990 ) , written by Peter Dickinson , are the adventures of a fictitious royal family descended from an Albert Victor who survived and reigned as King Victor I. In Gary <unk> 's parallel universe Sherlock Holmes pastiche , " The Adventure of the Missing Detective " , Albert Victor is portrayed as a tyrannical king , who rules after the deaths ( in suspicious circumstances ) of both his grandmother and father . The Prince also appears as the murder victim in the first of the Lord Francis Powerscourt crime novels Goodnight Sweet Prince , and as a murder suspect in the novel Death at Glamis Castle by Robin Paige . In both The Bloody Red Baron ( volume 2 of Anno Dracula series ) by Kim Newman and the novel I , Vampire by Michael <unk> , he has become a vampire . In the former , he is the British monarch during World War I. The DC Comics production Wonder Woman : Amazonia from the Elseworlds subseries , has " Eddy " as a minor character in a steampunk alternate history of the Jack the Ripper legend , with Wonder Woman inserted into the mix . 
 = = Titles , styles , honours and arms = = 
 = = = Titles and styles = = = 
 8 January 1864 – 24 May 1890 : His Royal Highness Prince Albert Victor of Wales 
 24 May 1890 – 14 January 1892 : His Royal Highness The Duke of Clarence and Avondale 
 The Duke of Clarence 's full style , as proclaimed at his funeral by Garter King of Arms was : " [ the ] Most High , Mighty , and Illustrious Prince Albert Victor Christian Edward , Duke of Clarence and Avondale , Earl of Athlone , Duke of Saxony , Prince of Saxe @-@ Coburg and Gotha , Knight of the Most Noble Order of the Garter , Knight of the Most Illustrious Order of Saint Patrick " . 
 = = = Honours = = = 
 British Honours 
 KG : Knight of the Garter , 3 September 1883 
 KP : Knight of St Patrick , 28 June 1887 
 ADC ( P ) : Personal Aide @-@ de @-@ Camp to the Queen , 1887 
 LLD : Doctor of Laws , University of Dublin , 1887 
 LLD : Doctor of Laws , University of Cambridge , 1888 
 Foreign Honours 
 Grand Cross , Order of the Netherlands Lion 
 Grand Cross , Order of the Tower and Sword 
 Grand Cross , Order of Charles III 
 Grand Cross , Order of Osmanieh 
 Grand Cross , Order of the Star 
 Grand Cross , Supreme Order of the Most Holy Annunciation 
 Grand Cross , Order of the Southern Cross 
 Knight , Order of the Elephant 11 October 1883 
 = = = = Military = = = = 
 1877 – 1879 : Cadet aboard training ship HMS Britannia , Dartmouth , Devon 
 1879 – 1880 : Cadet , HMS Bacchante 
 Mid , 1880 – 1883 : Promoted to Midshipman , HMS Bacchante 
 Lt , 1886 – 1887 : Appointed Lieutenant , 10th ( Prince of Wales ' Own ) Royal Hussars 
 Capt , 1887 : Promoted to Captain , 9th Queen 's Royal Lancers 
 Capt , 1887 – 1889 : Captain , 3rd King 's Royal Rifle Corps 
 Maj , 1889 – 1892 : Major , 10th ( Prince of Wales ' Own ) Royal Hussars 
 = = = = Honorary military appointments = = = = 
 British 
 Honorary Colonel , 4th Regiment , Bengal Infantry 
 Honorary Colonel , 4th Bombay Cavalry 
 Honorary Colonel , 1st Punjab Cavalry 
 Honorary Colonel , Third City of London Rifle Volunteer Corps ( 7th ( City of London ) Battalion , London Regiment ) 1890 – 92 
 = = = Arms = = = 
 With his dukedom , Albert Victor was granted a coat of arms , being the royal arms of the United Kingdom , differenced by an inescutcheon of the arms of Saxony and a label of three points argent , the centre point bearing a cross gules . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = Flop Starz = 
 " Flop Starz " is the first segment for the first official aired episode of the animated television series Phineas and Ferb . The episode was originally broadcast on Disney Channel on February 1 , 2008 . In the episode , Phineas and Ferb become one @-@ hit wonders in the matter of a morning . This is much to the disappointment of Candace , who is trying out for super stardom on a competition show titled The Next American Pop Teen Idol Star ! Meanwhile , Doofenshmirtz converts his building into a giant robot to aid him in his attempt to conquer the tri @-@ state area . 
 The episode 's storyboard was written by Sherm Cohen and Antoine <unk> , though the story itself was made by the co @-@ creators of the series . The song in the episode , " Gitchee Gitchee Goo , " was the first song the series had and caused for Disney to want one in every episode . Despite the actual pilot being " Rollercoaster , " the episode was broadcast to premiere the series , so a majority of the series ' standard humor and plot devices had yet to be established ( e.g. Perry and Doofenshmirtz have no involvement in the removal of the boys ' evidence [ mainly instigated by the boys themselves ] and Candace 's busting attempts in the A @-@ plot are limited to two ) . 
 " Flop Starz " carried several references to the music industry and several genres ( the title itself is as well a spoof of the phrase " pop stars " ) , as well as to the talent competition American Idol . The episode was well received by critics and fans alike , gaining 23 @.@ 5 million viewers in its premiere . The song featured , " Gitchee Gitchee Goo , " was as well reviewed favorably by critics . " Flop Starz " has been featured in several pieces of merchandise , including a junior novelization by Lara Bergen in 2009 . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 At breakfast , the family watches a promo for The Next Super American Pop Teen Idol Star ! , a talent competition show , which pushes Candace to go and audition at the mall . The boys are as well curious about the world of stardom and want to know about the kind of artist who only releases one song , then its all over . They are explained the concept of " one @-@ hit wonders " by their mother , who reminisces about her days as one named " Lindana " . While the boys work on becoming one by writing a " meaningless " song in their room , Candace prepares to audition , trying on various outfits to wear to the audition -including her mother 's Lindana <unk> all rejected by her friend Stacy . 
 When she does audition she becomes the " hundredth contestant " and is set to perform with the new band " PFT " – she finds out , however , the band is " Phineas and the Ferb @-@ Tones " ( PFT being an acronym thereof ) , consisting of Phineas ( as main vocals and guitarist ) , Ferb ( as drummer and keyboardist ) , and their friends , Isabella Garcia @-@ Shapiro and Fireside Girls , <unk> Sweetwater , Gretchen and Milly ( as back @-@ up singers , referred by Phineas as " the <unk> " ) , who have effectively topped the charts with their song " Gitchee Gitchee Goo " , becoming one @-@ hit wonders . Being who she is , instead of joining them , Candace goes off to try and expose them to their mother , initially failing by mistaking the shadow on @-@ stage of an anthropomorphic rabbit playing a blender as his instrument for her brothers , known as Marty the Rabbit Boy and his musical blender . 
 Meanwhile , Perry enters Dr. Doofenshmirtz 's lair ( the ' lair ' building here is different from Doofenshmirtz 's usual lair ) wearing <unk> glasses ; confusing him as a temp , Doofenshmirtz explains to him his entire plan to rain terror over the " entire Tri @-@ State Area " , which he later explains , after Perry removes his " disguise , " through the use of the entire building , which transforms into a giant robot ( the construction of which was achieved from Doofenshmirtz buying up construction toys at an alarming rate ) . 
 The boys , oblivious to Candace 's threat , continue their stardom , heading over to " Huge @-@ O @-@ Records " where they have been offered a record deal . Candace tries to show their mom the band 's poster as they are on their way ( taking with her a jacket their mother had not paid for yet . The security guard comes and takes their mother back in to pay for the jacket , regardless of him recognising her as Lindana ) , though it is on a building scheduled for demolition and is destroyed ( ironically , it would have been destroyed by Doofenshmirtz 's robot , if Perry had not changed its direction ) . When the band is at the record company , Phineas , following the steps his mother gave him , throws a diva tantrum and leaves , unaware that the CEO plans to use a videotape of the band 's performance to carry on the band 's legacy . 
 Meanwhile , Doofenshmirtz , inside his robot , traps Perry , offering him a deli platter thinking he has won ; Perry , however , has him pour a large amount of pepper onto it , blowing it and causing the robot to sneeze . The two are sent flying and crashing through the record building , Perry using the PFT tape to latch himself safely on a flag pole , while Doofenshmirtz plummets to the ground , landing on top of a mattress placed on top of a parked truck ( " Phew ! What an unbelievable stroke of luck ! " ) . Unfortunately , the truck belongs to a folding mattress company and Doofenshmirtz is then crushed by the mattress ( " I 'm okay ! I 'm still better than I ... " ) and then crushed by his own robot immediately afterwards ( a muffled " Curse you , Perry the Platypus ! " ) . 
 Candace , back at the mall ( having not further attempted to bust her brothers since the building implosion from earlier ) , is downtrodden until her crush , Jeremy , assures her to not let the boys ' fun ruin her good time and that if she got the chance to sing , she ought to , so she joins with the band singing their hit song in a reunion concert . When she thinks she has finally made it , the band announces they have finished their career and the mall closes , leaving her in the dark . 
 = = Production = = 
 Series co @-@ creators , Dan Povenmire and Swampy Marsh , wrote the story for " Flop Starz ; " Sherm Cohen and Antoine <unk> , meanwhile , constructed the storyboards . Povenmire directed the episode , which he did for the majority of the season . Povenmire and Marsh wrote the featured song , " Gitchee Gitchee Goo , " like they do with all of the music in the show . That song and Perry 's " secret agent theme " were the first pitched to Disney , who enjoyed it so much they wanted the pair to write a song for every episode . 
 The Disney company wanted to start off the series in a " big way . " Instead of premiering it with the pilot episode , " Rollercoaster , " they chose " Flop Starz " and aired it on the same day in every country in which the Disney Channel was broadcast ; over one hundred and fifty territories . This caused for the episode to air almost six months later than originally planned as different countries adapted the script and hired voice actors to rerecord lines in the selected languages . Despite the delay , the episode officially aired on 1 February 2008 , starting off the month @-@ long marathon Disney titled " Phineas and Ferb @-@ <unk> . " 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode contains several references to the talent show American Idol , as the competition Candace enters and " Phineas and the Ferb @-@ tones " perform at , The Next American Pop Teen Idol Star , is a complete parody of it . The episode as well references the craze of boy bands and the pop genre , more specifically the " bubblegum " style , including its title , a play on " pop stars . " 
 Candace , trying on outfits , goes through a sailor suit , a construction worker uniform , Native American clothing , a biker wear , and a policemen uniform ; these are referent to the clothing worn by five members of the 1970s disco group Village People . 
 Linda 's pseudonym as a one @-@ hit wonder , " Lindana , " is a spoof of the famous singer Madonna ; as well , the title of her hit single " I 'm Lindana and I Wanna Have Fun " is referent to the 1983 hit song " Girls Just Want to Have Fun " by Cyndi Lauper . Furthermore , during the end credits , the Greatest hits CD for the song is titled " The Essential Lindana : Still Fun ... " which is a general play on " The Essentials " CDs . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Flop Starz " was , as recorded by Disney , cable 's number one watched animated series premiere for the " tween " demographic . Four million viewers have been reported as viewing it in no specific demographic . This spark continued , leading to the series to be television 's top @-@ rated animated series for kids ( 6 @-@ 11 ) and tweens ( 9 @-@ 14 ) for the first quarter of the year . 
 Worldwide , the episode garnered over 23 @.@ 5 million viewers from the over one hundred and fifty territories in which it was broadcast , including the United Kingdom , Australia , and the United States . Disney Channel 's vice president of programming for the UK , Scandinavia and emerging markets , has responded to the high ratings , explaining that it was an achievement due to the effort spent with marketing and voice overs . 
 = = = " Gitchee Gitchee Goo " and merchandise = = = 
 Several critics have positively reviewed the song " Gitchee Gitchee Goo " from the episode , stating that it " could probably have gotten radio play 20 years ago . " Disney as well enjoyed it enough to ask the creators to write songs every episode . The song has since then made brief appearances in later episodes , either in " elevator music " form or as the song itself . The song was featured as an extended version on the album Disney Channel Playlist , which featured multiple songs from different Disney Channel artists . The song also was one of the twenty @-@ six songs appearing on the series official soundtrack , released on September 29 , 2009 . The episode was one of several that was featured on the first volume DVD of season one titled " The Fast and the Phineas . " In the DVD , it is paired with its production partner " Are You My Mummy ? " Lara Bergen adapted the episode , along with the fellow season one episode " Lights , Candace , Action ! " into a novella for young readers titled Runaway Hit . It was the second of a series of novelizations made from the series . 
 The extended version of " Gitchee Gitchee Goo " also appears in the Musical Cliptastic Countdown episode , having been voted as the most requested song of the show 's first season ; after the hypnotic single My Name Is <unk> is performed , and the audience members had been enslaved by Heinz Doofenshmirtz , Perry the Platypus , having been told by Major Monogram that they needed something even more catchy to neutralize the song 's effects , pulls down a curtain , therefore revealing the extended version and breaking the spell . 
 = 1980 Azores Islands earthquake = 
 Striking the Autonomous Region of Azores on 1 January , the 1980 Azores Island earthquake killed 61 people and injured over 400 , causing severe damage on the islands of Terceira and São Jorge . Measuring 7 @.@ 2 on the Richter scale , it also shook the islands of Pico and Faial , and resulted from a strike slip fracture , typical of other historical Azorean earthquakes . 
 In response to the earthquake , Portuguese president António Ramalho Eanes announced three days of national mourning , while relief efforts , initiated by agents of the local Air Force , were soon accompanied by government @-@ supported agencies . 
 = = Geology = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 In 1950 , another strong earthquake had rocked the Azores Islands region , and this was the largest earthquake since . 
 = = = Description = = = 
 Volcanic in origin , the Azores lie in a tectonically complex area on either side of the Mid @-@ Atlantic Ridge , between the European , Eurasian and African plate boundaries , forming their own microplate . The 1980 earthquake was the result of movement along the northwest to southeast trending strike @-@ slip fault . 
 After aftershocks from the quake had concluded , examination took place , producing a focal solution to the small events . Movement of these shocks was similar to that of previous earthquakes around the Azores . For these earthquakes , scientists had determined that the conjugate nodal plane was responsible , seeing shearing on the right @-@ lateral ( dextral ) side . All faulting in this area is strike @-@ slip @-@ oriented , and on a rather large scale . Because of this research , information now points towards Azores volcanism being controlled by earthquake movement . 
 = = Damage and casualties = = 
 The earthquake that struck the Azorean islands was a magnitude 7 @.@ 2 on the Richter scale . It caused considerable damage on three separate islands ( Terceira , São Jorge , and Graciosa ) , destroying several buildings . According to local reports , roughly 70 % of the houses on Terceira were completely demolished , including the historic quarter of the island capital , Angra do Heroísmo . In general , public buildings such as churches remained intact , while several buildings caved in on themselves . Public utilities such as electricity and water , were reported cut in several areas . 
 Initially , the number of fatalities was set at 52 , but it was later revised to 61 . Additionally , the injuries were set at 300 , but this was also revised to more than 400 . At least 20 @,@ 000 people were left homeless . Minor damage was recorded at Pico and Faial islands . 
 No fatalities were recorded at the Lajes Field air base , nor any major damage . 
 = = Relief efforts and response = = 
 United States Navy and Air Force troops stationed at Lajes functioned as disaster relief workers , sheltering as many as 150 families . Portuguese Air Force members brought supplies to earthquake victims , while a João Coutinho class corvette navy ship transported medical officials to the island . The Portuguese President , António Ramalho Eanes , flew in on a plane accompanied by medical personnel and supplies ( such as bedding ) . Local officials including policemen and volunteer firemen cleared roads for relief supplies and transports . Responding to the situation , these officials were also involved in looking for survivors in the rubble . Soon after , tents were erected to replace the destroyed or unsafe homes for approximately 200 families of the islands . Portable homes were constructed by the People to People International project fund , resulting in 100 shelters . 
 Three days of national mourning were declared by Eanes . Following the relief efforts , 19 <unk> stations were installed to monitor seismic activities . Eleven of these were used to monitor earthquake activity , while the other eight also record information on the island 's geothermal areas . 
 The earthquake forced hundreds of people to leave the country for the United States . It occurred during a period of several major natural disasters in which many residents of the island left ; in 1975 , 8 @,@ 000 residents left . In 1981 , however , just 2 @,@ 500 people left the island . 
 Dino Meira , a Portuguese @-@ American singer , recorded and sold a 45 single " <unk> 20 para as 4 " with the proceeds donated to the earthquake relief effort . 
 = = Analysis and current situation = = 
 Later studies of the events leading up to the tragedy found several factors contributing to the extent of the damage . A. <unk> ( 2006 ) linked five major causes to damage from these earthquakes . The buildings most damaged by the earthquake were near fault lines on top of loosely packed soil . They tended to be of poor construction and did not conform to proper building code , nor had they been adequately examined . 
 The area around the Azores remains active . Threats from earthquakes and landslides remain . 
 = Gout = 
 Gout is usually characterized by recurrent attacks of inflammatory arthritis — a red , tender , hot , and swollen joint . Pain typically comes on rapidly in less than twelve hours . The joint at the base of the big toe is affected in about half of cases . It may also result in tophi , kidney stones , or urate nephropathy . 
 The cause is a combination of diet and genetic factors . It occurs more commonly in those who eat a lot of meat , drink a lot of beer , or are overweight . The underlying mechanism involves elevated levels of uric acid in the blood . At high levels , the uric acid crystallizes and the crystals deposit in joints , tendons and surrounding tissues , an attack of gout occurs . Diagnosis may be confirmed by seeing the crystals in joint fluid or <unk> . Blood uric acid levels may be normal during an attack . 
 Treatment with nonsteroidal anti @-@ inflammatory drugs ( NSAIDs ) , steroids , or colchicine improves symptoms . Once the acute attack subsides , levels of uric acid can be lowered via lifestyle changes and in those with frequent attacks , allopurinol or probenecid provides long @-@ term prevention . Taking vitamin C and eating a diet high in low fat dairy products may be preventive . 
 Gout affects about 1 to 2 % of the Western population at some point in their lives . It has become more common in recent decades . This is believed to be due to increasing risk factors in the population , such as metabolic syndrome , longer life expectancy and changes in diet . Older males are most commonly affected . Gout was historically known as " the disease of kings " or " rich man 's disease " . It has been recognized at least since the time of the ancient Egyptians . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 Gout can present in multiple ways , although the most usual is a recurrent attack of acute inflammatory arthritis ( a red , tender , hot , swollen joint ) . The metatarsal @-@ phalangeal joint at the base of the big toe is affected most often , accounting for half of cases . Other joints , such as the heels , knees , wrists and fingers , may also be affected . Joint pain usually begins over 2 – 4 hours and during the night . This is mainly due to lower body temperature . Other symptoms may rarely occur along with the joint pain , including fatigue and a high fever . 
 Long @-@ standing elevated uric acid levels ( hyperuricemia ) may result in other symptoms , including hard , painless deposits of uric acid crystals known as tophi . Extensive tophi may lead to chronic arthritis due to bone erosion . Elevated levels of uric acid may also lead to crystals precipitating in the kidneys , resulting in stone formation and subsequent urate nephropathy . 
 = = Cause = = 
 The crystallization of uric acid , often related to relatively high levels in the blood , is the underlying cause of gout . This can occur because diet , genetic predisposition , or <unk> of urate , the salts of uric acid . <unk> of uric acid by the kidney is the primary cause of hyperuricemia in about 90 % of cases , while overproduction is the cause in less than 10 % . About 10 % of people with hyperuricemia develop gout at some point in their lifetimes . The risk , however , varies depending on the degree of hyperuricemia . When levels are between 415 and 530 μmol / l ( 7 and 8 @.@ 9 mg / dl ) , the risk is 0 @.@ 5 % per year , while in those with a level greater than 535 μmol / l ( 9 mg / dL ) , the risk is 4 @.@ 5 % per year . 
 = = = Lifestyle = = = 
 Dietary causes account for about 12 % of gout , and include a strong association with the consumption of alcohol , fructose @-@ sweetened drinks , meat and seafood . Other triggers include physical trauma and surgery . 
 Studies in the early 2000s found that other dietary factors are not relevant . Specifically , moderate consumption of purine @-@ rich vegetables ( e.g. beans , peas , lentils and spinach ) are not associated with gout . Neither is total consumption of protein . Alcohol consumption is strongly associated with an increased risk , with wine presenting somewhat less of a risk than beer and spirits . 
 The consumption of coffee , vitamin C and dairy products , as well as physical fitness , appear to decrease the risk . This is believed to be partly due to their effect in reducing insulin resistance . 
 = = = Genetics = = = 
 Gout is partly genetic , contributing to about 60 % of variability in uric acid level . The <unk> , <unk> and <unk> genes have been found to be commonly associated with gout and variations in them can approximately double the risk . Loss @-@ of @-@ function mutations in <unk> and <unk> cause hereditary <unk> by reducing urate absorption and unopposed urate secretion . The rare genetic disorders familial juvenile <unk> nephropathy , medullary cystic kidney disease , <unk> synthetase <unk> and hypoxanthine @-@ guanine <unk> deficiency as seen in Lesch @-@ Nyhan syndrome , are complicated by gout . 
 = = = Medical conditions = = = 
 Gout frequently occurs in combination with other medical problems . Metabolic syndrome , a combination of abdominal obesity , hypertension , insulin resistance and abnormal lipid levels , occurs in nearly 75 % of cases . Other conditions commonly complicated by gout include : polycythemia , lead poisoning , kidney failure , hemolytic anemia , psoriasis and solid organ transplants . A body mass index greater than or equal to 35 increases male risk of gout threefold . Chronic lead exposure and lead @-@ contaminated alcohol are risk factors for gout due to the harmful effect of lead on kidney function . Lesch @-@ Nyhan syndrome is often associated with gouty arthritis . 
 = = = Medication = = = 
 Diuretics have been associated with attacks of gout . However , a low dose of <unk> does not seem to increase risk . Other medicines that do increase the risk include niacin and aspirin ( acetylsalicylic acid ) . The immunosuppressive drugs ciclosporin and <unk> are associated with gout , the former more so when used in combination with <unk> . 
 = = Pathophysiology = = 
 Gout is a disorder of purine metabolism , and occurs when its final metabolite , uric acid , crystallizes in the form of monosodium urate , precipitating and forming deposits ( tophi ) in joints , on tendons and in the surrounding tissues . Microscopic tophi may be walled off by a ring of proteins , which blocks interaction of the crystals with cells and therefore avoids inflammation . Naked crystals may break out of walled @-@ off tophi due to minor physical trauma to the joint , medical or surgical stress , or rapid changes in uric acid levels . When they breach the tophi , they trigger a local immune @-@ mediated inflammatory reaction , with one of the key proteins in the inflammatory cascade being interleukin 1β . An evolutionary loss of urate oxidase ( uricase ) , which breaks down uric acid , in humans and higher primates has made this condition common . 
 The triggers for precipitation of uric acid are not well understood . While it may crystallize at normal levels , it is more likely to do so as levels increase . Other triggers believed to be important in acute episodes of arthritis include cool temperatures , rapid changes in uric acid levels , acidosis , articular hydration and extracellular matrix proteins , such as <unk> , <unk> and <unk> sulfate . The increased precipitation at low temperatures partly explains why the joints in the feet are most commonly affected . Rapid changes in uric acid may occur due to factors including trauma , surgery , chemotherapy , diuretics and stopping or starting allopurinol . Calcium channel blockers and <unk> are associated with a lower risk of gout compared to other medications for hypertension . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 Gout may be diagnosed and treated without further investigations in someone with hyperuricemia and the classic acute arthritis of the base of the great toe ( known as <unk> ) . <unk> fluid analysis should be done , however , if the diagnosis is in doubt . X @-@ rays , while useful for identifying chronic gout , have little utility in acute attacks . 
 = = = <unk> fluid = = = 
 A definitive diagnosis of gout is based upon the identification of monosodium urate crystals in synovial fluid or a <unk> . All synovial fluid samples obtained from undiagnosed inflamed joints by <unk> should be examined for these crystals . Under polarized light microscopy , they have a needle @-@ like morphology and strong negative birefringence . This test is difficult to perform and requires a trained observer . The fluid must be examined relatively soon after aspiration , as temperature and pH affect solubility . 
 = = = Blood tests = = = 
 Hyperuricemia is a classic feature of gout , but it occurs nearly half of the time without hyperuricemia and most people with raised uric acid levels never develop gout . Thus , the diagnostic utility of measuring uric acid level is limited . Hyperuricemia is defined as a plasma urate level greater than 420 μmol / l ( 7 @.@ 0 mg / dl ) in males and 360 μmol / l ( 6 @.@ 0 mg / dl ) in females . Other blood tests commonly performed are white blood cell count , electrolytes , kidney function and erythrocyte sedimentation rate ( ESR ) . However , both the white blood cells and ESR may be elevated due to gout in the absence of infection . A white blood cell count as high as 40 @.@ 0 × 109 / l ( 40 @,@ 000 / mm3 ) has been documented . 
 = = = Differential diagnosis = = = 
 The most important differential diagnosis in gout is septic arthritis . This should be considered in those with signs of infection or those who do not improve with treatment . To help with diagnosis , a synovial fluid Gram stain and culture may be performed . Other conditions that look similar include <unk> and rheumatoid arthritis . <unk> tophi , in particular when not located in a joint , can be mistaken for basal cell carcinoma or other neoplasms . 
 = = Prevention = = 
 Both lifestyle changes and medications can decrease uric acid levels . Dietary and lifestyle choices that are effective include reducing intake of food such as meat and seafood , consuming adequate vitamin C , limiting alcohol and fructose consumption and avoiding obesity . A low @-@ calorie diet in obese men decreased uric acid levels by 100 µmol / l ( 1 @.@ 7 mg / dl ) . Vitamin C intake of 1 @,@ 500 mg per day decreases the risk of gout by 45 % . Coffee , but not tea , consumption is associated with a lower risk of gout . Gout may be secondary to sleep apnea via the release of purines from oxygen @-@ starved cells . Treatment of apnea can lessen the occurrence of attacks . 
 = = Treatment = = 
 The initial aim of treatment is to settle the symptoms of an acute attack . Repeated attacks can be prevented by medications that reduce serum uric acid levels . Tentative evidence supports the application of ice for 20 to 30 minutes several times a day to decrease pain . Options for acute treatment include nonsteroidal anti @-@ inflammatory drugs ( NSAIDs ) , colchicine and steroids , while options for prevention include allopurinol , febuxostat and probenecid . Lowering uric acid levels can cure the disease . Treatment of associated health problems is also important . Lifestyle interventions have been poorly studied . It is unclear whether dietary supplements have an effect in people with gout . 
 = = = NSAIDs = = = 
 NSAIDs are the usual first @-@ line treatment for gout . No specific agent is significantly more or less effective than any other . Improvement may be seen within four hours and treatment is recommended for one to two weeks . They are not recommended , however , in those with certain other health problems , such as gastrointestinal bleeding , kidney failure , or heart failure . While <unk> has historically been the most commonly used NSAID , an alternative , such as ibuprofen , may be preferred due to its better side effect profile in the absence of superior effectiveness . For those at risk of gastric side effects from NSAIDs , an additional proton pump inhibitor may be given . There is some evidence that COX @-@ 2 inhibitors may work as well as nonselective NSAIDs for acute gout attack with fewer side effects . 
 = = = Colchicine = = = 
 Colchicine is an alternative for those unable to tolerate NSAIDs . At high doses , side effects ( primarily gastrointestinal upset ) limit its usage . At lower doses , which are still effective , it is well tolerated . Colchicine may interact with other commonly prescribed drugs , such as atorvastatin and erythromycin , among others . 
 = = = Steroids = = = 
 Glucocorticoids have been found to be as effective as NSAIDs and may be used if contraindications exist for NSAIDs . They also lead to improvement when injected into the joint . A joint infection must be excluded , however , as steroids worsen this condition . 
 = = = Pegloticase = = = 
 Pegloticase was approved in the USA to treat gout in 2010 . It is an option for the 3 % of people who are intolerant to other medications . Pegloticase is administered as an intravenous infusion every two weeks , and reduces uric acid levels . It is likely useful for tophi but has a high rate of side effects . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 A number of medications are useful for preventing further episodes of gout , including xanthine oxidase inhibitors ( including allopurinol and febuxostat ) and <unk> ( including probenecid and <unk> ) . They are not usually started until one to two weeks after an acute flare has resolved , due to theoretical concerns of worsening the attack . They are often used in combination with either an NSAID or colchicine for the first three to six months . They are not recommended until a person has had two attacks of gout , unless destructive joint changes , tophi , or urate nephropathy exist , because the medications have not been found to be cost @-@ effective . <unk> @-@ lowering measures should be increased until serum uric acid levels are below 300 – 360 µmol / l ( 5 @.@ 0 – 6 @.@ 0 mg / dl ) and continue indefinitely . If these medications are in chronic use at the time of an attack , discontinuation is recommended . Levels that cannot be brought below 6 @.@ 0 mg / dl while attacks continue indicates treatment failure or refractory gout . Overall , probenecid appears to be less effective than allopurinol . 
 <unk> medications are typically preferred if <unk> of uric acid , as indicated by a 24 @-@ hour collection of urine results in a uric acid amount of less than 800 mg , is found . They are , however , not recommended if a person has a history of kidney stones . A 24 @-@ hour urine excretion of more than 800 mg , which indicates overproduction , is an indication for a xanthine oxidase inhibitor . 
 <unk> oxidase inhibitors block uric acid production . Long @-@ term therapy is safe and well tolerated and can be used in people with decreased kidney function or urate stones , although allopurinol has caused hypersensitivity in a small number of individuals . In such cases febuxostat is recommended . 
 = = Prognosis = = 
 Without treatment , an acute attack of gout usually resolves in five to seven days ; however , 60 % of people have a second attack within one year . Those with gout are at increased risk of hypertension , diabetes mellitus , metabolic syndrome and kidney and cardiovascular disease and thus are at increased risk of death . This may be partly due to its association with insulin resistance and obesity , but some of the increased risk appears to be independent . 
 Without treatment , episodes of acute gout may develop into chronic gout with destruction of joint surfaces , joint deformity and painless tophi . These tophi occur in 30 % of those who are untreated for five years , often in the helix of the ear , over the olecranon processes , or on the Achilles tendons . With aggressive treatment , they may dissolve . Kidney stones also frequently complicate gout , affecting between 10 and 40 % of people and occur due to low urine pH promoting the precipitation of uric acid . Other forms of chronic kidney dysfunction may occur . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 Gout affects around 1 – 2 % of the Western population at some point in their lifetimes and is becoming more common . Some 5 @.@ 8 million people were affected in 2013 . Rates of gout approximately doubled between 1990 and 2010 . This rise is believed to be due to increasing life expectancy , changes in diet and an increase in diseases associated with gout , such as metabolic syndrome and high blood pressure . Factors that influence rates of gout , include age , race and the season of the year . In men over 30 and women over 50 , rates are 2 % . 
 In the United States , gout is twice as likely in males of African descent than those of European descent . Rates are high among Pacific Islanders and the Māori , but rare in aboriginal Australians , despite a higher mean uric acid serum concentration in the latter group . It has become common in China , Polynesia and urban sub @-@ Saharan Africa . Some studies found that attacks of gout occur more frequently in the spring . This has been attributed to seasonal changes in diet , alcohol consumption , physical activity and temperature . 
 = = History = = 
 The term " gout " was initially used by <unk> of <unk> , around 1200 AD . It is derived from the Latin word gutta , meaning " a drop " ( of liquid ) . According to the Oxford English Dictionary , this is derived from humorism and " the notion of the ' dropping ' of a morbid material from the blood in and around the joints " . 
 Gout has been known since antiquity . Historically , it was referred to as " the king of diseases and the disease of kings " or " rich man 's disease " . The first documentation of the disease is from Egypt in 2 @,@ 600 BC in a description of arthritis of the big toe . Greek physician Hippocrates around 400 BC commented on it in his Aphorisms , noting its absence in eunuchs and <unk> women . Aulus Cornelius Celsus ( 30 AD ) described the linkage with alcohol , later onset in women and associated kidney problems : 
 Again thick urine , the sediment from which is white , indicates that pain and disease are to be apprehended in the region of joints or viscera ... Joint troubles in the hands and feet are very frequent and persistent , such as occur in cases of <unk> and <unk> . These seldom attack eunuchs or boys before <unk> with a woman , or women except those in whom the menses have become suppressed ... some have obtained lifelong security by refraining from wine , mead and venery . 
 In 1683 , Thomas Sydenham , an English physician , described its occurrence in the early hours of the morning and its predilection for older males : 
 <unk> patients are , generally , either old men , or men who have so worn themselves out in youth as to have brought on a premature old age — of such dissolute habits none being more common than the premature and excessive indulgence in venery and the like exhausting passions . The victim goes to bed and sleeps in good health . About two o 'clock in the morning he is awakened by a severe pain in the great toe ; more rarely in the heel , ankle or instep . The pain is like that of a dislocation and yet parts feel as if cold water were poured over them . Then follows chills and shivers and a little fever ... The night is passed in torture , sleeplessness , turning the part affected and perpetual change of posture ; the tossing about of body being as incessant as the pain of the tortured joint and being worse as the fit comes on . 
 The Dutch scientist Antonie van Leeuwenhoek first described the microscopic appearance of urate crystals in 1679 . In 1848 , English physician Alfred Baring Garrod identified excess uric acid in the blood as the cause of gout . 
 = = Other animals = = 
 Gout is rare in most other animals due to their ability to produce uricase , which breaks down uric acid . Humans and other great apes do not have this ability , thus gout is common . Other animals with uricase include fish , amphibians and most non primate mammals . The Tyrannosaurus rex specimen known as " Sue " , however , is believed to have suffered from gout . 
 = = Research = = 
 A number of new medications are under study for treating gout , including <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . <unk> may result in better outcomes than a low dose of a steroid but costs five thousand times more . A recombinant uricase enzyme ( <unk> ) is available ; its use , however , is limited , as it triggers an autoimmune response . Less antigenic versions are in development . 
 = New Jersey Route 440 = 
 Route 440 is a state highway in New Jersey , United States . It comprises two segments , a 5 @.@ 15 @-@ mile ( 8 @.@ 29 km ) freeway in Middlesex County linking Interstate 287 and the New Jersey Turnpike ( Interstate 95 ) in Edison to the Outerbridge Crossing in Perth Amboy and a 8 @.@ 18 @-@ mile ( 13 @.@ 16 km ) four @-@ lane divided highway in Hudson County running from the Bayonne Bridge in Bayonne to U.S. Route 1 / 9 Truck in Jersey City . These two segments are connected by New York State Route 440 , which runs across Staten Island . The freeway portion in Middlesex County is six lanes wide and interchanges with the Garden State Parkway and U.S. Route 9 in Woodbridge . 
 What is now Route 440 was designated as two different routes in 1927 : the Middlesex County portion between Route 4 ( now Route 35 ) and the proposed Outerbridge Crossing was designated Route S4 ( a spur of Route 4 ) while the Hudson County portion was designated as a part of Route 1 . In 1953 , Route 440 replaced Route S4 as well as Route 1 south of Communipaw Avenue ; the number was chosen to match NY 440 . A freeway was built for the route in Middlesex County between 1967 and finished in 1972 . A freeway was also proposed for the route in Hudson County to fill in the gap between the Bayonne Bridge and 63rd Street ; however , it was never built . In 2001 , Route 440 replaced Route 169 along the Bayonne waterfront . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Middlesex County = = = 
 The Route 440 freeway begins in Edison Township at an interchange with the southern terminus of Interstate 287 and the New Jersey Turnpike ( Interstate 95 ) ; from Route 440 ’ s southern terminus , the road becomes northbound Interstate 287 . Within this interchange , Route 440 also has access to County Route 514 . It continues to the east as a six @-@ lane road through wooded surroundings and enters Woodbridge Township at the underpass of King Georges Post Road . Here , the route interchanges with County Route 656 ( Smith Street ) before intersecting the Garden State Parkway and U.S. Route 9 at a large interchange . From here , the freeway turns northeast and enters Perth Amboy at the point where it crosses under County Route 616 ( New Brunswick Avenue ) . Route 440 passes near homes before coming to the next interchange for County Route 501 and Route 184 . At this point , County Route 501 joins the Route 440 freeway for a concurrency , and the road comes to an interchange with Route 35 a short distance later . The road continues east @-@ southeast , with an exit for County Route 653 ( Amboy Avenue ) before it passes through more residential neighborhoods . The final exit on the Middlesex County portion of Route 440 serves County Route 611 ( State Street ) . Past this interchange , Route 440 becomes the Outerbridge Crossing , a four @-@ lane bridge maintained by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey . It passes over New Jersey Transit ’ s North Jersey Coast Line and State Street before crossing over the Arthur Kill onto Staten Island . At the New Jersey @-@ New York state line on the middle of the bridge , the southern segments of Route 440 and County Route 501 end and become New York State Route 440 . An extension of Route 440 also intersects with Route 35 right after the Victory Bridge crossing in Perth Amboy ( around <unk> ) 
 = = = Hudson County = = = 
 After New York State Route 440 runs 12 @.@ 73 mi ( 20 @.@ 49 km ) through Staten Island , it enters New Jersey again via the Bayonne Bridge , a four @-@ lane undivided bridge over Kill Van Kull that is also maintained by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey . Upon entering Bayonne in Hudson County , the road becomes the northern segment of Route 440 and County Route 501 and continues north into residential sections of the city . After widening into a divided highway maintained by the NJDOT , County Route 501 splits from the route by heading north on Kennedy Boulevard at an interchange . Meanwhile , Route 440 turns to the east before heading northeast and passing through industrial areas as a surface road . It heads north @-@ northeast as it passes between neighborhoods and New Jersey Transit ’ s Hudson – Bergen Light Rail to the west and port areas to the east , including the former Military Ocean Terminal . 
 The route crosses into Jersey City , where it comes to an interchange with Route 185 . Here , the mainline becomes Route 185 and Route 440 exits onto another four @-@ lane divided highway , coming to an interchange with the Newark Bay Extension of the New Jersey Turnpike ( Interstate 78 ) that provides access to the Jersey City and Hoboken waterfronts and the Holland Tunnel . From here , Route 440 continues northwest , closely paralleling the north side of Interstate 78 . The route interchanges with Avenue C before becoming an undivided road that reenters Bayonne and crossing over County Route 501 ( Kennedy Boulevard ) without an interchange . Past this intersection , Route 440 makes a sharp turn to the south and passes under the Newark Bay Bridge ( Interstate 78 ) . After making a hairpin turn back to the north , it passes under the Newark Bay Bridge another time and runs along the eastern shore of Newark Bay . The route interchanges with West 63rd Street before crossing back into Jersey City and passing residences to the east . It intersects County Route 602 ( Danforth Avenue ) as the road heads into business sectors farther to the east of Newark Bay . The road heads past industrial establishments before running through commercial areas again , passing to the east of the Hudson Mall . Route 440 ends at an intersection with U.S. Route 1 / 9 Truck and County Route 612 ( Communipaw Avenue ) , where the road continues north as part of U.S. Route 1 / 9 Truck . 
 = = History = = 
 In the 1927 New Jersey state highway renumbering , what is now Route 440 was defined as two separate routes . The Middlesex County portion from Route 4 ( now Route 35 ) to the present location of the Outerbridge Crossing was legislated as Route S4 , a spur of Route 4 . Meanwhile , the Hudson County portion of the route was legislated as a part of Route 1 , a route that was to run from Bayonne to the New York border in Rockleigh . Route S4 was eventually extended west to the Garden State Parkway . This route followed Pfeiffer Boulevard and the one @-@ way pair of Lawrence Avenue and Grove Street . Meanwhile , Route 1 only existed as a state @-@ maintained highway north of 63rd Street in Bayonne ; south of there , traffic used Hudson Boulevard to access the Bayonne Bridge . A road carrying Route 1 was proposed to be built on landfill in the Passaic River ; however , it was never constructed . In the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering , both Route S4 between the Garden State Parkway and the Outerbridge Crossing as well as Route 1 between 63rd Street and Communipaw Avenue became Route 440 in order to match New York State Route 440 . 
 In 1959 , an additional piece of Route 440 was legislated to run from the Bayonne Bridge to 63rd Street to complete the route , running over the waters of the Newark Bay ; this was never built . In the mid @-@ 1950s , a freeway alignment was proposed for Route 440 in Middlesex County . This route , to be called the Middlesex Freeway , was to connect the New Jersey Turnpike and Interstate 287 to the Outerbridge Crossing . Construction began on the freeway in 1967 and it was completed in 1974 . The old alignment of Route 440 along Pfeiffer Boulevard between the Garden State Parkway and Route 35 became Route 184 . A freeway was also proposed in the 1960s for Route 440 in Hudson County connecting the Bayonne Bridge to Interstate 78 and filling in the gap in the route . In 1976 , Route 440 was proposed along with Route 169 in a plan to redevelop the waterfront area of Bayonne . However , the NJDOT shelved the project a year later due to low traffic volumes and feared environmental impact to the Newark Bay . Route 169 was later constructed as a four @-@ lane arterial completed in 1992 . In 2001 , Route 169 was redesignated as Route 440 in order to complete the gap in the route . 
 On January 8 , 2008 , Gov. Jon Corzine announced plans for a new 35 @-@ cent toll on the Middlesex County portion of Route 440 , in addition to increases on existing toll roads , to help raise funds to reduce New Jersey 's outstanding debt . However , he dropped the idea to toll Route 440 a month later after mounting opposition to the idea . 
 In anticipation of a general increase of activity in Port of New York and New Jersey and new development on West Side and Hackensack Riverfront in Jersey City studies are being conducted to transform the roadway into a multi @-@ use urban boulevard that includes possible grade separations , medians , and a new traffic circle at its northern terminus . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 All exits are unnumbered . 
 = Final Fantasy Mystic Quest = 
 Final Fantasy Mystic Quest , released as Mystic Quest Legend in PAL regions and as Final Fantasy USA : Mystic Quest ( <unk> <unk> , Fainaru Fantajī Yū Esu <unk> <unk> Kuesuto ) in Japan , is a role @-@ playing video game for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System . The game was released as a spin @-@ off to Square 's popular Final Fantasy series of video games . Final Fantasy Mystic Quest was first released in North America in 1992 and marketed as a " simplified role @-@ playing game ... designed for the entry @-@ level player " in an attempt to broaden the genre 's appeal . The game 's presentation and battle system is broadly similar to that of the main series , but it differed in its inclusion of action @-@ adventure game elements . Final Fantasy Mystic Quest was the first Final Fantasy game to be released in Europe . 
 In the game , the player controls a youth named Benjamin in his quest to save the world . His goal is to reclaim a set of stolen crystals that determine the state of the world 's four elemental powers . The gameplay takes a departure from the main series in a variety of ways . Many series staples are eliminated , such as random battles , save points , manual equipment , and the party system . The game received middling reviews and sales in North America and Japan , citing its simplified gameplay and lack of depth in the game 's story . Over time , the game has kept the reputation for being a " beginner 's Final Fantasy " and has been praised for its music . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 = = = Exploration = = = 
 Like previous games in the series , Final Fantasy Mystic Quest is presented in a top @-@ down perspective ( or bird 's eye view ) , with players directly navigating the main character around the world to interact with objects and people . The game features a unique way of traveling the world map . Unlike past Final Fantasy games , players cannot freely roam the world map . Instead , they travel along set paths from one " icon " ( pictorial image on the world map ) to the next . Some routes are blocked off ( restriction is indicated by a gray arrow ) , but become accessible when the player succeeds in a specific task , such as completing a dungeon . Once its path is open , the player can enter an icon ; the game 's plot and action takes place within these icons , which include towns , dungeons , and battlefields . The game is characterized by featuring action @-@ adventure game elements ; besides jumping , players can use weapons outside of battle , which play an active role in exploration . Players can chop down trees with an axe , detonate bombs to open sealed doorways , or use a grappling hook to clear wide gaps . The game also has more puzzles than earlier Final Fantasy games . In the Falls Basin , for example , players must move pillars of ice across the ground level in such a fashion that they can be used as platforms to jump across on the second level . Final Fantasy Mystic Quest also does away with save points ; players can save their progress at any time during exploration . 
 = = = Battle system = = = 
 Final Fantasy Mystic Quest eliminates the system of random enemy encounters , a trademark of the main series . Instead , battles are represented in dungeons as stationary enemy sprites , and the player is given the option of approaching the enemy and engaging a battle . Once engaged in battle , the player is thrust into the battle screen , which presents a window @-@ based menu with three commands to choose from : battle , run , or control . Running from battle transports the player back to the field screen , while choosing " control " toggles between the ally 's battle mode , where the player can manually control the main character 's ally or opt for a computer @-@ controlled ally . If players choose to battle , they are presented with a <unk> of four more options : physically attack the enemy , cast a spell , use a curative item ( such as a Cure potion ) , or defend . The game 's battle system relies on conditional turn @-@ based combat , where the characters and enemies cycle through " rounds " in battling each other , with the most turns awarded to the fastest character . Character health is represented by an incremental life bar , although the player may choose to have it displayed in numerical fractions as in most role @-@ playing games . If all character life bars reach zero , the game is over , but the player is given the option of continuing and restarting the battle . If the player chooses this option , however , the main character 's attack power may suffer temporarily as a penalty . A character 's performance in battle is determined by numerical figures ( called statistics ) for vitality , attacking power , defensive capabilities , speed , magical prowess , accuracy , and evasion . Character statistics are driven by experience points ( EXP ) gained from winning battles , which accumulate until players achieve milestones known as " experience levels . " Besides awarding experience points , battling enemies also earns the player Gold Pieces ( GP ) , which can be used to buy weapons , armor , and curative items . In the absence of random enemy encounters , battlefields are scattered across the world map . Players are immediately thrust into a battle when entering a battlefield , and must win ten enemy battles to " clean out " the battlefield . Once a battlefield is cleaned out , players are awarded either a large amount of experience , a large amount of GP , a piece of armor , or a magic spell . 
 = = = Customization = = = 
 Unlike all other Final Fantasy games , players cannot manually equip characters with armor . Instead , newly acquired armor replaces the main character 's current equipment , or upgrades a current version of a weapon , e.g. obtaining the knight sword will replace the steel sword . Using the L and R buttons allows the user to cycle through the weapons that have been collected so far . Benjamin uses four types of weapons : swords , axes , bombs , and claws . Although the weapons share a similar function in battle , all have different purposes when exploring the field map . The Dragon Claw , for example , doubles as a grappling hook . The weapon arsenal in Final Fantasy Mystic Quest is considerably smaller than most role @-@ playing games . 
 Magic in Final Fantasy Mystic Quest is not learned by designated spellcasters through experience . Instead , the main character acquires magic spells through treasure chests or as a reward for clearing out battlefields . The system of spellcasting is similar to that of the original Final Fantasy ; rather than using magic points to draw upon for supplying magic , spells are used according to a set number for their type , i.e. , white magic , black magic , or wizard magic . The allotted number for each type increases as a character levels up . A spell 's effectiveness is also proportional to a character 's experience level . The higher the character 's level , the more powerful the Cure spell , for example . The spell catalog in Final Fantasy Mystic Quest is limited compared to most other Final Fantasy games . Items in the game are analogous to the spells : their potency increases as the character levels up . In addition , the Heal potion acts as a cure @-@ all for status ailments , eliminating the need for status recovery items . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 The fictional events of Final Fantasy Mystic Quest take place on a single continent of an unnamed world , which is divided into four distinct regions : Foresta , Aquaria , Fireburg , and Windia . The welfare of each region is determined by the state of one of four shining crystals : earth , water , fire , and wind , respectively . For centuries the Focus Tower had stood at the heart of the world . It had been a center for trade and knowledge , and the world 's people met there to peacefully settle their differences . But on one warm summer day , powerful monsters stormed the Tower , stole the four crystals , and then took off with the magical coins that kept the Tower 's doors unlocked . The monsters began consuming the power of the crystals ; they grew in strength while the world began to decay . An old prophecy tells that at the time the " vile four " steal the power and divide the world behind four doors , a knight will appear to vanquish the darkness . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 The game opens with an adventurous youth named Benjamin climbing the Hill of Destiny . While exploring , his village is destroyed in an earthquake . As Benjamin is climbing the Hill , he meets a mysterious old man who charges Benjamin with fulfilling the knight 's prophecy . Although initially in disbelief , Benjamin accepts the role and the Old Man shows him the Focus Tower ( supposedly the center of the World ) . After defeating a monster at the top of the hill , Benjamin follows the Old Man to the Level Forest , where he is tasked with recovering the Crystal of Earth . Proceeding to Foresta , he meets with an axe @-@ wielding girl named Kaeli , who agrees to help Benjamin if he can help her rid the Level Forest of monsters . Kaeli is ambushed and poisoned in the process , and her mother informs Benjamin of the Elixir and where it can be found . Benjamin 's search for Elixir to heal Kaeli brings him to Bone Dungeon , where he 's aided by a treasure hunter named Tristam in succeeding dual purposes : not only does Benjamin get Elixir from Tristam to heal Kaeli , but he defeats one of the four Vile Evils , <unk> Rex , to free the Crystal of Earth and in turn restore life to the dying village of Foresta . Tristam leaves and Benjamin heals Kaeli . 
 Benjamin is then told that Aquaria is in danger , and is in need of help . He is told ( by the Old Man and various others ) that he should see Spencer . He is also told that a girl named Phoebe can help him as well . After proceeding through the first stage of the Focus Tower , and arriving in the province of Aquaria , Benjamin locates Phoebe , and learns that Spencer is trapped underground by thick ice floes . Phoebe needs the " wakewater , " which is said to be able to help free Aquaria . Benjamin and Phoebe head to the ( aptly named ) <unk> Cave and defeat a monster to obtain the Libra Crest . Using this crest to enter the Libra Temple , they find that the source of the " wakewater " has dried up . Finding the Old Man in the back of the Libra Temple , they find that he holds the only bag ( water skin , actually ) of wakewater , and to use it on the plant in the center of town . Back in Aquaria , they find that the wakewater doesn 't work , and reviving the crystal is the only thing that will save the town and Spencer . They head off for the Ice Pyramid and defeat the second of the Vile Evils , the Ice Golem . The Ice Crystal is saved , and Benjamin and Phoebe head back to Aquaria . They find the town is now like Foresta ( after the crystal is revived there ) and Spencer is back and digging his tunnel to save Captain Mac ( Kaeli 's Father ) . Upon leaving , Spencer hands the Venus Key to Benjamin , and tells him to head for Fireburg . 
 Benjamin arrives in the Focus Tower to find the Old Man again , who tells him to find Reuben , and disappears . Benjamin then heads for Fireburg , and finds Reuben . Reuben joins when Benjamin promises to help free Reuben 's dad , Arion . Upon finding Tristam in the Inn ( who gives Benjamin the Multi @-@ Key ) , they find the coward who left Arion in the mine in a locked house . He teaches Benjamin how to throw the bombs and says that it will free Arion . Benjamin and Reuben then proceed to the Mine and free Arion . Arion tells some tales of how the Fire Crystal has gone berserk , and Reuben goes off with Benjamin to the Volcano to stop the Vile Evil from stealing the crystal 's power . After defeating the <unk> Hydra , Benjamin and Reuben find the Fire Crystal returning to power . They decide to head to Windia , and Reuben is ambushed by monsters and falls off the rope bridge . Tristam comes along and helps Benjamin cross the bridge , but they are stymied by a tree who won 't talk to them . Tristam says that there is a gal in Foresta who can talk to tree spirits , and the two drop in on Aquaria where Kaeli was trying to find Spencer . Benjamin and Tristam go down into the tunnel and find Spencer , who tells Tristam of a great treasure . They leave , and Phoebe plants a bomb that collapses a tunnel Spencer was building . She leaves to tell Spencer what happened , and Benjamin takes Kaeli to the Alive Forest to talk to the dormant tree spirit . He tells them that he will take them to Windia if they kill the monsters dwelling within him . They do , and he takes them to Windia . 
 Upon arriving in Windia , Benjamin and Kaeli find Otto , whose daughter was caught in Pazuzu 's Tower when the winds from nearby Mount Gale knocked out his Rainbow Road . The only way the road works is when there is no wind , so Benjamin and Kaeli proceed to Mount Gale and stop the wind by defeating a powerful monster at the top . After returning to Windia , Otto powers up the Rainbow Road and the two adventurers proceed to Pazuzu 's Tower . After giving chase , they corner Pazuzu and defeat the fourth Vile Evil and restore the Wind Crystal . Norma is reunited with Otto , and Kaeli stays to take care of her . Reuben shows up and after a series of long events Captain Mac is rescued . Reuben falls down because of the injury sustained on the Rope Bridge , and Phoebe joins Benjamin instead . 
 The Old Man tells Benjamin an ominous addendum to the prophecy : " the one behind the four is darker than the night , and rises midst the land . " It becomes known that the Dark King is the true source of evil . Benjamin thus sails to Doom Castle to confront the Dark King , who threatens to enslave Benjamin along with the rest of mankind . The Dark King claims that he wrote and spread the prophecy Benjamin had followed throughout his quest . Once the Dark King is defeated , the old man congratulates Benjamin and reveals that he is the Fifth Crystal , The Crystal of Light in the guise of a human . At the end of the game , Benjamin is seen still craving adventure , and he borrows the ship from Captain Mac as his friends gather to wish him off . While sailing , Tristam makes a surprise appearance . 
 = = Development = = 
 Although designed by one of Square 's development teams in Japan , Final Fantasy Mystic Quest was specifically geared for the U.S. market . At the time , console role @-@ playing games were not a major genre in North America ; Square thus attempted to broaden the genre 's appeal through Final Fantasy Mystic Quest . Square had already released several Final Fantasy spinoffs in North America , including the first three titles in the SaGa series as Final Fantasy Legend , and the first Mana series game as Final Fantasy Adventure , and wished to further break into the popular American consciousness . Square 's executives cited the alleged difficulty of RPGs as the reason Americans shied away from them , and eased the difficulty level by tweaking various aspects of the main series ' gameplay . The American release of Final Fantasy IV was altered to make the game simpler , for example . Mystic Quest was to take this one step further , and the Japanese developers worked with the American offices to make sure the game was accessible to children . 
 Mystic Quest was developed in a graphic and gameplay style similar to Final Fantasy Legend III ( part of the aforementioned SaGa series ) . The gameplay shares numerous similarities with that title , featuring a very similar battle system , graphical interface , and dungeon system . Even the " jump " feature from Final Fantasy Legend III has been reproduced , and almost all of the icons - from caves to the enemy sprites - are a color @-@ upgraded version of Final Fantasy Legend III 's character set . Besides allowing for computer @-@ controlled allies , the game did away with random battles , complicated storylines , and text @-@ based menus . To appeal to the perceived tastes of North American audiences , which gravitated towards fast @-@ paced games , Square included action @-@ adventure game elements ; players could now brandish weapons outside of battle , jump , use a grappling hook , and set bombs to open new paths . North American translator Ted Woolsey explained that " The action / adventure players ... are larger in numbers and the demographic is different . They tend to be younger and like the idea of jumping straight into the action with a sword in their hands ; it 's an empowerment issue - you get to go out there , start whacking things and it feels good ! With the more traditional RPGs , it takes a good 15 or 20 hours of playing before you 're finally hooked . " Woolsey stated that Mystic Quest was one of the easiest games he had to translate , due to the game 's small size . Because the game was marketed towards a younger demographic , the game sold for US $ 39 @.@ 99 . Mystic Quest also came with an Official Strategy Guide that helped inexperienced and new RPG players complete it . 
 = = = Release = = = 
 After its U.S. debut , Final Fantasy Mystic Quest was released in Japan under the title Final Fantasy USA : Mystic Quest . The European release of the game was released in English , German and French , and had the title changed to Mystic Quest Legend to avoid confusion with Final Fantasy Adventure , which had been released in Europe as Mystic Quest . Final Fantasy Mystic Quest was first unveiled in June at the 1992 Summer Consumer Electronics Show in Chicago , where it was a popular venue , and the game was later presented in more detail in the Fall 1992 issue of the <unk> Examiner . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 Final Fantasy Mystic Quest 's soundtrack was composed by Ryuji Sasai and Yasuhiro Kawakami . It was one of the first games in the Final Fantasy series not to be composed by regular series composer Nobuo Uematsu , after Final Fantasy Adventure ( known in Japan as Final Fantasy Gaiden ) and the Final Fantasy Legend games ( only called Final Fantasy games in North America ) . The album was first released on one Compact Disc by NTT Publishing on September 10 , 1993 . ROM capacity limits and hardware limitations made the composition process difficult . After the game was completed , Sasai recorded two remixes on his days off for the game 's album , and personally played the guitar parts . “ Mountain Range of Whirlwinds ” was built off of Sasai 's liking of the sound of the french horn , and its ability to go the length of the song and convey a sense of mountains . The track " Last Castle " was written in a short time , and was used to create imagery of a field , but its length left very little space for the " Battle 3 " <unk> 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to Square 's publicity department , Final Fantasy Mystic Quest sold a total of 800 @,@ 000 units , with roughly half of these sold in Japan . 
 On its original North American release , it scored a 3 @.@ 725 / 5 in the November 1992 issue of Nintendo Power , a 29 / 40 in Electronic Gaming Monthly , and 86 % in Electronic Games . The game did not generate much excitement in either America or Japan , although it is thought to have appealed to younger fans . The game ultimately failed in its bid to bring mainstream North American popularity to console RPGs ( a feat that wouldn 't be accomplished until Final Fantasy VII five years later ) , and simultaneously alienated fans of the series anticipating another epic following Final Fantasy IV . It has also been described as " Final Fantasy with an identity crisis " due to the inherent flaw of creating a game that didn 't appeal to the masses or the hard @-@ core gaming audience . 
 Years later , reviewers have not looked favorably on Mystic Quest , including Kotaku calling it the " worst Final Fantasy " , and Games Radar calling it a " franchise embarrassment for its enemies that stand still and wait for players to attack . IGN rated the Wii Virtual Console release a 6 @.@ 0 , or " Okay " , citing an extremely repetitive and simple battle system , and very little character development . 1UP.com rated the game a " Not Worth It ! " , calling " handholding " and " insubstantial " . 
 It was , however , praised for its music , including 1UP.com praising its " sweet sampled metal guitar licks " , and listed the final boss battle music as one of the must download songs for the Final Fantasy music game Theatrhythm Final Fantasy . It was also praised by Games Radar for its music , mentioning the boss battle in their " Game Music of the Day " column , and also mentioning the rest of the game music as smooth and easy listening . On April 1 , 2006 , GameSpot included Mystic Quest in an April 's Fools list entitled " Top 10 Final Fantasy Games " , which mostly consisted of spin @-@ offs from the main series and unrelated games . Mystic Quest was " praised " for being easy and having simplistic graphics and plot . In October 2010 , the game was released on Nintendo 's Virtual Console . Famitsu has also reported that Square was preparing the game for release on the Android mobile platform in 2012 . 
 The main character Benjamin and two songs appear in the rhythm game Theatrhythm Final Fantasy : Curtain Call . 
 = S & Man = 
 S & Man ( pronounced as Sandman ) is a 2006 pseudo @-@ documentary film that examines the underground subculture of horror films . It contains interviews with indie horror filmmakers and other horror experts , including Erik Marcisak , Bill Zebub , Fred Vogel , Carol J. Clover , and Debbie D. , as well as a scripted plot that comes into focus in the film 's second half . 
 The film discusses why some people enjoy underground horror films involving fetishes . Although the film is classified as a documentary , there is a fictional subplot which helps advance the film 's theme by showing what some people really think about the genre . 
 S & Man was shown at the <unk> <unk> Theater in New York City , film festivals , and released on home video . The film has received praise and criticism ; although some reviews are strongly against the nature of the film , most reviews were positive . 
 = = Summary = = 
 S & Man is about voyeurism as it relates to underground films . Interviews with horror film directors and Carol J. Clover , a writer on the horror genre , are weaved between clips from horror films . In the beginning of the film , clips show the directors and Clover commenting on a horror film that is not shown onscreen and with the title not mentioned . The film then moves on to Petty 's meetings with Eric Rost ( Erik Marcisak ) , Bill Zebub , and Fred Vogel . He interviews these men and actress Debbie D. , while clips from horror films and facts and opinions provided by Clover about the genre are interspersed . 
 The film has a fictional subplot , which questions whether or not Rost 's works are actual snuff films . Petty 's real life friendship with Marcisak takes a fictional turn in the film ; Petty gets close to discovering Rost 's secret . At this point , Petty is a performer in his own film , and tension arises between him and Rost . During filming , Petty begins to suspect that Rost 's work , in which women are " bound , gagged , tortured , and eventually butchered " shows actual snuff . 
 As Petty gets further into his investigation , Rost 's answers become more evasive . Petty suspects that Eric actually kills women for his snuff films , a suspicion further exacerbated when Rost says that he will relay Petty 's contact information to the women instead of giving their contact information to Petty . It is not clear at the film 's end whether Rost 's films are actual snuff in the fictional subplot 's context . However , it is known that he spies on them for a long period of time before asking them to participate . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 Some context is added about sexual deviancy and about the role of gender in horror films . To demonstrate the motivations of people involved with these types of films , Petty shows gory clips that Nick Schager of The Village Voice described as " repulsive " and " absorbing " . Opinions from experts in the field say that horror films are both sadistic and masochistic while discussing paraphilias ; they state that most voyeurs may seem creepy , but are not dangerous . 
 = = Cast = = 
 J. T. Petty is a film director , producer , editor , and screenwriter . His films include Soft for Digging and he wrote the books Clemency Pogue : Fairy Killer and The <unk> Patch . 
 Bill Zebub , one of the interviewees in the film , is the director of low @-@ budget fetish exploitation films such as Jesus Christ : Serial Rapist . He has directed twelve films and acted in two . Bill Zebub is shown saying , " I don 't shoot movies to make art ; I shoot movies so perverts will give me money . " 
 Fred Vogel , another interviewee , is the head of <unk> Pictures . He began his career as a special effects artist and later directed August Underground and August Underground 's <unk> . 
 Erik Marcisak plays the part of Eric Rost , one of the main characters and interviewees . In the film , Rost is the director of the fictional S & MAN video series . The actual Marcisak is an actor , comedian , game designer , writer , and producer . 
 Debbie D. is an actress who stars in low @-@ budget fetish exploitation films ; she is interviewed along with a sexologist and her husband , a forensic psychologist . 
 Carol J. Clover , the author of Men , Women , and <unk> : Gender in Modern Horror , is featured providing facts about horror filmmaking . Clover is a professor of rhetoric , film , and Scandinavian history . Her books include The People 's Plot : Film , Narrative , and the <unk> Imagination , Old Norse @-@ Icelandic Literature : A Critical Guide , and The Medieval Saga . 
 = = Production = = 
 S & Man 's director J. T. Petty originally intended the film to focus on a man who lived near his childhood home ; the man often spied on , and filmed , his neighbors . The footage led to an indictment towards " the peeper " , who recorded 191 videotapes of Petty 's childhood neighborhood . The indictment implied the footage should be viewed in court , but the people in the neighborhood opposed this owing to privacy concerns . Petty said of the 191 videotapes , " I admired the peeping tom ; he had made movies that were frightening and titillating and real . " The idea of using a camera to record his neighbor 's house for hours fascinated him so much that he decided to direct a film about it . Although he had already secured funding , Petty was left without a subject since " the peeper " wanted nothing to do with the film . Petty decided to focus on three directors , who did not direct films aimed at the general public ; they directed simulated snuff films , involving murder and sexual assault . Petty found the directors — Zebub , Vogel , and Marcisak , Petty 's friend who played the fictional director Rost — at the <unk> Convention , an underground horror event . 
 The film 's title comes from the fictional S & Man video series directed by Rost . In the videos , Rost stalks women for a long time and , after learning about them , he asks them if they want to be a part of his films . All of the videos are first person with no dialogue . The film references other films , including Peeping Tom , The Texas Chain Saw Massacre , Henry : Portrait of a Serial Killer , Kill the Scream Queen , and The <unk> . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Film festivals and theater = = = 
 S & Man premiered in the Toronto International Film Festival 's " Midnight Madness " , a section which features a variety of films from new directors , in 2006 . Although Twitch Film reported that the film 's release at the Toronto International Film Festival caused controversy both offline and online , TMZ reported that the film was popular at the film festival . It was shown again at South by Southwest in Austin , Texas , in 2006 , and <unk> in Brooklyn , New York , in 2009 . S & Man had a theatrical release at the <unk> <unk> Theater in New York City in 2010 . 
 = = = Home video = = = 
 The DVD and Blu @-@ ray of the film were released on October 12 , 2010 . The DVD and Blu @-@ ray release each include two commentary tracks , one with a conversation between J. T. Petty and Erik Marcisak and the other with Bill Zebub . There are also deleted scenes , extended scenes , The Complete S & Man – Episode 11 – a fictional film partially incorporated in S & Man – in its entirety , a clip from the underground horror film August Underground 's <unk> , and film trailers . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Jeannette Catsoulis of The New York Times called the film " a queasy glimpse into bargain @-@ basement sleaze . " DVD Talk critic Adam Tyner was indifferent about the film while watching it , but later concluded that the film is " pretty brilliant " . Gordon Sullivan of DVD Verdict thought that the film is ambitious and offers " interesting insights into the modern consumption of horror . " Joe Leydon of Variety described the film as an " uncomfortably close look at underground horror " , and speculated that it may gain a cult following . David Harley of Bloody Disgusting called S & Man a " must @-@ watch " for anyone that has been scared while watching a horror film without being able to describe why . In response to the film , Richard Corliss of Time questioned whether we can always believe what we see . 
 Allan Dart 's review of S & Man for Fangoria was mixed . Although he described the film as " thought @-@ provoking " , he did not like the focus on whether Eric Rost 's films are actual snuff . Casey Broadwater of Blu @-@ ray.com also disliked the fictional portion , but said that " S & Man delivers an occasionally insightful dialectic about the psychological nature of horror . 
 Meg <unk> from Hour Community described the film as " a doc that flails in a dark , nihilistic pool " and deemed its fans " geeky " , " twisted " , " unstable " , or " delusional " . A TMZ article stated that S & Man " <unk> asked horror genre aficionados to question just why they so enjoy watching human suffering so much . " 
 = Northrop F @-@ 20 Tigershark = 
 The Northrop F @-@ 20 Tigershark ( initially F @-@ 5G ) was a privately financed light fighter , designed and built by Northrop . Its development began in 1975 as a further evolution of Northrop 's F @-@ 5E Tiger II , featuring a new engine that greatly improved overall performance , and a modern avionics suite including a powerful and flexible radar . Compared with the F @-@ 5E , the F @-@ 20 was much faster , gained beyond @-@ visual @-@ range air @-@ to @-@ air capability , and had a full suite of air @-@ to @-@ ground modes capable of firing most U.S. weapons . With these improved capabilities , the F @-@ 20 became competitive with contemporary fighter designs such as the General Dynamics F @-@ 16 Fighting Falcon , but was much less expensive to purchase and operate . 
 Much of the F @-@ 20 's development was carried out under a US Department of Defense ( DoD ) project called " FX " . FX sought to develop fighters that would be capable in combat with the latest Soviet aircraft , but excluding sensitive front @-@ line technologies used by the United States Air Force 's own aircraft . FX was a product of the Carter administration 's military export policies , which aimed to provide foreign nations with high quality equipment without the risk of US front @-@ line technology falling into Soviet hands . Northrop had high hopes for the F @-@ 20 in the international market , but policy changes following Ronald Reagan 's election meant the F @-@ 20 had to compete for sales against aircraft like the F @-@ 16 , the USAF 's latest fighter design . The development program was abandoned in 1986 after three prototypes had been built and a fourth partially completed . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = F @-@ 5E = = = 
 When the Kennedy administration entered office in 1961 , the U.S. Department of Defense was instructed to find an inexpensive fighter aircraft that the United States could offer to its allies through the Mutual Defense Assistance Act . A number of designs were studied , including stripped @-@ down versions of the Lockheed F @-@ 104 Starfighter and Vought F @-@ 8 Crusader , and the newly designed Northrop N @-@ <unk> . On 23 April 1962 , the United States Air Force ( USAF ) informed the United States Secretary of Defense that the N @-@ <unk> had been selected , under the designation F @-@ 5 and given the name " Freedom Fighter . " 847 F @-@ 5 's of various early marks would be produced . 
 As the Mikoyan @-@ Gurevich MiG @-@ 21 became more common , the U.S. Air Force initiated the International Fighter Aircraft ( IFA ) program to provide an equivalent to allies . The USAF desired a light weight fighter with competitive performance to the MiG , inexpensive when purchased in large numbers , and with reasonable operating costs for prospective customer nations . Although numerous companies entered designs , Northrop 's existing F @-@ 5 put them in a leading position . They submitted an upgrade , the F @-@ 5E Tiger II , with the AN / APQ @-@ 153 radar and other changes to allow the AIM @-@ 9 Sidewinder missile to be fired from wing @-@ tip rails . On 20 November 1970 , Northrop 's entry was announced as the IFA winner . Northrop produced a total of 1 @,@ 399 F @-@ 5E / F Tiger IIs by the time manufacturing ended in 1986 . 
 = = = F @-@ 5G and export limitations = = = 
 In the late 1970s , the Republic of China ( Taiwan ) Air Force started looking for a fighter aircraft to match improvements made in mainland People 's Republic of China ( PRC ) ' s air force . In particular , they wanted a platform capable of firing the AIM @-@ 7 Sparrow long @-@ range missile . At the time , the US was in the process of opening up ties with the People 's Republic of China after President Nixon 's famous visit in 1972 . China considered US support of Taiwan against their interests , and the US State Department wanted to tread carefully . They blocked export of all of the AIM @-@ 7 capable aircraft , even otherwise outdated early models of the McDonnell Douglas F @-@ 4 Phantom II . The State Department suggested the Israeli IAI <unk> instead ; however , it was rejected . Taiwan was already producing the F @-@ 5E under license , so the Department of Defense asked Northrop to study adding an AIM @-@ 7 capable radar to the Tiger II as an alternative . This effort became the first of several F @-@ 5G studies . 
 In the spring of 1977 , Jimmy Carter 's administration had announced a new military export policy that limited sales of front line designs to countries within NATO , along with Australia and Japan . Carter stated at the time that the U.S. could not be " both the world 's champion of peace and the world 's leading supplier of the weapons of war . " Previously , there was no coherent export policy , fueling concerns that the US 's latest technologies might quickly end up in Soviet hands . 
 Numerous exceptions were made ; Israel and Egypt could buy advanced designs under the Camp David Agreements , Israel was even allowed to buy McDonnell Douglas F @-@ 15 Eagles , a key component in U.S. air @-@ defense technology . Iran was already receiving the Grumman F @-@ 14 Tomcat , and this demonstrated the problem with advanced exports in February 1979 when reports emerged that Iran had sold an AIM @-@ 54 Phoenix missile to the Soviets . South Korea 's F @-@ 16 order was initially blocked under this policy , but later allowed in the context of strengthening relations . Despite exceptions , the export policy was implemented , covering many potential and current customers . As the F @-@ 5G was a relatively modest upgrade to the F @-@ 5E , the F @-@ 5G appeared to be in a strong position for sales given the limitations placed on rival designs , however Carter personally blocked the sales of the F @-@ 5G to Taiwan . 
 = = = FX = = = 
 In 1979 , problems with the export policy were becoming apparent . The Soviets continued to sell newer aircraft designs to their clients , placing allies of the U.S. at a disadvantage . Denied by the U.S. , countries were turning to other vendors for modern fighters , notably France 's Dassault Mirage 2000 . Barry N. <unk> , Assistant Director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency , testified that the US reductions in foreign arms transfers had actually encouraged other nations and increased worldwide arms sales . At the same time , there was considerable pressure to provide a suitable aircraft for Taiwan . 
 The State Department argued that the U.S. needed a modern counterpart for the role the F @-@ 5E had occupied in the 1960s and 1970s . In light of Carter 's concerns , they suggested that a new aircraft be designed for the role , based on technology that would not pose a threat to the U.S. After a lengthy study , in January 1980 , President Carter allowed the development of a new export fighter : " FX . " The FX would have to outperform the F @-@ 5E ; however , it could not use any advanced avionics systems that were also used in US aircraft . Unlike the Mutual Defense Assistance Act programs that led to the F @-@ 5E , FX would be entirely privately financed . Moreover , the companies could not market the aircraft directly ; all sales would be handled by the Secretary of Defense . 
 Both Northrop and General Dynamics ( GD ) responded to the FX requirement . GD 's F @-@ 16 / 79 was a variant of the F @-@ 16A , replacing the Pratt & Whitney F100 engine with the J79 and equipping it with downgraded avionics ; Northrop responded with the F @-@ 5G . 
 = = = FX stumbles and F @-@ 20 emerges = = = 
 When Ronald Reagan 's administration took power in 1981 , the export restrictions put in place by the Carter administration were slowly relaxed . At first , the FX program continued as normal , but a number of events eroded the value of the program and limit the F @-@ 5G 's potential sales . The signing of the 1982 US @-@ PRC Joint Communiqué was a major agreement on arms sales , which continued blocking sales of the F @-@ 5G to Taiwan . By this point the Taiwanese had started their own light @-@ fighter project , the <unk> F @-@ CK @-@ 1 Ching @-@ kuo . In signing the Communiqué , the U.S. was signaling that Taiwan would not receive modern aircraft , therefore the Ching @-@ kuo became Taiwan 's primary focus . As a result , the F @-@ 5G 's sales potential remained <unk> . 
 In the summer of 1982 , Deputy Secretary of Defense Frank Carlucci sent a memorandum to the Air Force and Navy , encouraging them to seek out potential foreign customers to procure FX aircraft . However , four months later Carlucci sent a classified memo to the same services to abandon the FX , and green @-@ lighting the exporting of front @-@ line fighters overseas . In December , after prompting from the White House , Carlucci reversed his position again , and directed the Air Force to fund a small number of F @-@ 20s in the fiscal year 1984 budget . 
 The future of the FX program seemed doubtful . Following an agreement to sell F @-@ 16s to Pakistan , Northrop felt that the F @-@ 5G needed to match the performance of F @-@ 16 . This would require not only better performance from the engine , but a new and comparable avionics suite as well . Northrop saw that the F @-@ 5G was still being viewed as the " FX fighter " , a low @-@ cost option for second @-@ tier air forces . To combat this perception , Northrop requested the designation " F @-@ 20 " ; the USAF approved in late 1982 , and of the name Tigershark in March 1983 . 
 = = Design = = 
 The primary design change between the earlier F @-@ 5E and the F @-@ 5G was the use of a single General Electric F404 engine that was originally designed for the F / A @-@ 18 Hornet . The new engine provided 60 % more thrust compared to the combined output of the F @-@ 5E 's paired General Electric <unk> . This improved the aircraft 's thrust @-@ to @-@ weight ratio to 1 @.@ 13 from 1 @.@ 0 . The new engine gave speed of over Mach 2 @.@ 0 , a ceiling over 55 @,@ 000 ft ( 16 @,@ 800 m ) , an initial climb rate of 52 @,@ 800 ft per minute ( <unk> / min ) . 
 The wing profile remained the same as the F @-@ 5E , but had modified leading edge extensions ( <unk> ) , which improved the maximum lift coefficient of the wing by about 12 % with an increase in wing area of only 1 @.@ 6 % . The original aircraft was fairly sluggish in pitch , so the horizontal stabilizer was increased in size by 30 % and a new dual @-@ channel fly @-@ by @-@ wire control system was added . <unk> the aircraft in pitch and modifying the <unk> improved the instantaneous turn rate by 7 % to 20 ° / sec . Sustained turn rate at Mach 0 @.@ 8 and 15 @,@ 000 ft ( 4 @,@ 572 m ) rose to 11 @.@ 5 ° / sec , which compared well with the F @-@ 16 's 12 @.@ 8 ° / sec . Supersonic turn rates were 47 % higher than those of the F @-@ 5E . 
 The F @-@ 20 would also make greater usage of composite materials in its construction . During its development , several areas using metal were re @-@ designed to use fiberglass , and there were numerous upgrades to various mechanical parts . 
 The F @-@ 20 's avionics suite was all @-@ new and greatly improved over the earlier designs . The General Electric AN / APG @-@ 67 multi @-@ mode radar was the heart of the sensor suite , offering a wide range of air @-@ to @-@ air and air @-@ to @-@ ground modes . The F @-@ 5 's electro @-@ mechanical navigation system was replaced with an all @-@ electronic version based on a ring laser gyroscope . Time from power @-@ on to being able to launch was greatly reduced as a result , to about 22 seconds , and Northrop boasted the aircraft had the shortest scramble time of any contemporary aircraft . The cockpit of the F @-@ 5 was completely re @-@ worked with a large heads @-@ up display ( HUD ) and two monochrome multi @-@ function displays set high on the control panel , and the addition of a complete hands @-@ on @-@ throttle @-@ and @-@ stick ( HOTAS ) control system . Many of the avionics promised to have reliability beyond that of any competing aircraft then in service . 
 The F @-@ 20 would have been able to utilize most of the common weapons in U.S. ' s inventory , including the entire range of Mark 80 series bombs , the AGM @-@ 65 Maverick air @-@ to @-@ ground missile , and the AIM @-@ 9 Sidewinder and AIM @-@ 7 Sparrow air @-@ to @-@ air missiles . Like the earlier F @-@ 5s , the test F @-@ 20s were equipped with two M39 cannon mounted in the nose . Production F @-@ 20s may have substituted two Ford Aerospace Tigerclaw cannons instead of the <unk> ; while the Tigerclaw was based on the M39 , it was lighter and had a higher rate of fire than the <unk> . 
 The F @-@ 20 did , however , have several problems inherent to its small size . The low @-@ mounted wing meant that there was limited ground clearance , and the position of the landing gear meant loads had to be positioned towards the outer ends of the wings . This limited hard point weights to 1 @,@ 000 lb ( 454 kg ) . A single hard point under the fuselage could carry more , a single Mk 84 2 @,@ 000 lbs bomb or up to five Mk 82 500 lbs bombs . Additionally , although the wing profiling improved lift at higher angles of attack ( AoA ) while maneuvering , it did not improve cruise lift performance at normal AoA . This did not present a problem in the fighter role , but did severely reduce its payload / range figures compared to similar aircraft like the F @-@ 16 . 
 Offered as a low @-@ cost option , the F @-@ 20 was significantly more expensive than the F @-@ 5E , but much less expensive than other designs like the $ 30 million F @-@ 15 Eagle , or $ 15 million F @-@ 16 Fighting Falcon . The F @-@ 20 was projected to consume 53 % less fuel , require 52 % less maintenance manpower , had 63 % lower operating and maintenance costs and had four times the reliability of average front @-@ line designs of the era . The F @-@ 20 also offer the ability to fire the beyond @-@ visual @-@ range AIM @-@ 7 Sparrow missile , a capability that the F @-@ 16 lacked at that time , and did not gain until the Block 15 ADF version in February 1989 . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 = = = Testing = = = 
 On 30 August 1982 , the original engine @-@ change @-@ only F @-@ 5G ( serial 82 @-@ 0062 , c / n GG1001 , registered <unk> ) made its maiden flight piloted by Russ Scott . During the 40 @-@ minute flight , the prototype climbed to 40 @,@ 000 ft ( 12 @,@ 000 m ) and reached Mach 1 @.@ 04 . GG1001 demonstrated outstanding reliability ; by the end of April 1983 240 flights had been accumulated , including evaluation flights with 10 potential customer nations . The second prototype ( serial number 82 @-@ 0063 , registered <unk> , c / n <unk> ) , featuring the complete avionics suite , made its first flight on 26 August 1983 . The F @-@ 20 would fly a total of 1 @,@ 500 flights prior to its termination ; although these were exclusively flown in ideal conditions . Note : " ... Northrup did not take a prototype approach with the F @-@ 20 ... The First F @-@ 20 was intended to be a production quality aircraft ... " page 5 Rand Corporation report A Case Study of the F @-@ 20 Tigershark June 1987 . 
 During the test program , the F @-@ 20 fired the AIM @-@ 9 Sidewinder and , in February 1985 the AIM @-@ 7 Sparrow . In air @-@ to @-@ ground testing , it fired the AGM @-@ 65 Maverick , 2 @.@ 75 in ( 70 mm ) folding fin aerial rockets , dropped Mk . 82 bombs , and fired rounds from a 30 mm ( 1 @.@ 18 in ) gun pod ( GPU @-@ 5 / A , four @-@ barrel GAU @-@ 13 / A ) in addition to the two internal 20 mm ( .79 in ) M39 cannon . One of the F @-@ 20 's flight characteristics was the ability to fly at only 124 km / h ( 77 mph ) at 35 ° AoA ( angle of attack ) , while the F @-@ 16 was limited to 30 ° ; acceleration from Mach 0 @.@ 9 to 1 @.@ 2 in 29 seconds ( at 9 @,@ 150 m ) ; climb to 12 @,@ 200 m ( or 40 @,@ 000 ft ) in 2 @.@ 3 minutes ( including 55 sec for the start and 22 for the INS set @-@ up ) . 
 Northrop signed a Memorandum of Agreement with the Air Force in May 1983 that made the Air Force responsible for certifying the F @-@ 20 's performance , air worthiness and fixed @-@ price program . Aerospace legend Chuck Yeager , employed as a spokesperson for Northrop , touted the aircraft as " magnificent " and was featured in advertising . 
 In November 1982 , Bahrain became the first customer . South Korea also explored local production of the F @-@ 20 , and in support improvements were implemented . These included avionics upgrades , an expanded fuel tank , and the use of fibreglass composites . The changes were so extensive that a fourth prototype was built to test them . By 1983 , Northrop was involved in a number of simultaneous negotiations for the F @-@ 20 , and its prospects appeared positive . 
 On 10 October 1984 , GG1001 crashed in South Korea on a demonstration flight , killing Northrop pilot Darrell Cornell . An investigation cleared the F @-@ 20 of mechanical or design faults ; it concluded Cornell had blacked out due to excessive g @-@ forces . <unk> crashed in May 1985 at Goose Bay , Labrador , killing Northrop pilot Dave Barnes . Again the crash was blamed on G @-@ LOC ; Barnes had been practicing his aerobatic routine for the Paris Air Show . 
 = = = Battle for sales = = = 
 In December 1981 , President Reagan , reacting to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan , signed a major economic and military aid package for Pakistan that included 40 F @-@ 16As . The offer was in keeping with U.S. policy towards the Soviet Union , and the idea of " containment " within a ring of <unk> countries . The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan was initially viewed as an attempt to break out of the arranged containment system , thus the U.S. placed a priority on quickly building up a new layer of defense . However , other U.S. allies saw this as a potential break in the FX policy , and began requesting only " the very best . " 
 Such approval was increasingly granted starting in 1982 . In May , Venezuela , who had long examined the FX project , agreed to buy 18 F @-@ 16As and six F @-@ 16Bs , replacing a fleet of Mirage III interceptors and Mirage 5 ground @-@ attack aircraft . Sweden decided to develop their own design , the JAS 39 Gripen . In September 1983 , Turkey announced plans to buy 132 F @-@ <unk> and 28 F @-@ <unk> to replace their Lockheed F @-@ <unk> / S Starfighter and Northrop F @-@ 5A / B. Greece , stung by its long @-@ time rival receiving the F @-@ 16 , purchased 34 F @-@ 16C and six F @-@ <unk> in November 1984 , giving a firm pledge of secrecy . 
 Then , late in 1983 , the U.S. government made a financial commitment to help Israel develop its own new fighter , the IAI Lavi . Northrop objected to this , as the Lavi would be a potential competitor to the F @-@ 20 in the export market ; while Northrop had to privately fund the F @-@ 5G , the government was directly subsidizing a foreign competitor . Congressional support for Israel overruled Northrop 's complaints along with complaints from other branches of the government . 
 While other companies marketed directly to foreign air forces , as part of the FX program , the F @-@ 5G could only be marketed by the State Department . Under this policy umbrella , Northrop had to submit every piece of marketing material to government review , which could take months . The State Department had no interest in selling the FX , from their perspective it was one aircraft among many , leading to a lackadaisical approach , and led to complaints from Northrop that the government was not promoting the F @-@ 20 enough . 
 = = = Congressional investigation and Air Force collusion = = = 
 Starting in March 1984 , Congress chaired a series of hearings into FX . William Schneider , Jr . , the Under Secretary of State for Security Assistance , Science and Technology , testified that FX policy might not result in any sales , in spite of any government support . He stated that the sales of arms such as FX was primarily a matter of foreign policy , secondarily a commercial venture . Thomas V. Jones , Northrop 's CEO , argued that there was little point independently developing aircraft if companies were reliant on the government to sell them . He suggested the FX concept be dropped , and F @-@ 20 allowed to be sold by the vendor . Additionally , Brigadier General Thomas Baker , USAF Director of International Programs , testified that the Air Force was not actively marketing FX . He observed that over four years the US had sold 100 fighters to 29 countries , none were FX . He also compared France 's aircraft exports , showing a market for a low @-@ cost fighter existed . In the Committee 's concluding remarks , the State Department and DOD were accused of rhetoric , and lacking support , on FX . 
 In April 1984 , after the Congressional hearings , the USAF was directed to promote FX actively . Several potential customers were briefed during May and June 1984 on the performance and cost of both the F @-@ 20 and F @-@ 16 / 79 . The Air Force published an internal report on FX in late June 1984 . The F @-@ 20 was characterized as having outstanding performance against viable threats ; and seen as a candidate for the Air Force 's aggressor requirement . The report additionally stated that the F @-@ 20 had been contractor @-@ funded , totaling over $ 750 million , compared to $ 60 million on the F @-@ 16 / 79 . However , the report concluded that it had little or no market to sell to . The USAF had a vested interest to encourage F @-@ 16 sales ; larger production numbers would drive down the cost per unit . Gregg Easterbrook noted that F @-@ 20 may have cast the Air Force in a bad light , as an aircraft developed independent of their input , authors such as Donald Pattillo shared this conclusion . In contrast , the F @-@ 16 was heavily involved in the USAF hierarchy , originating from a group of officers known as the " fighter mafia " . By March 1985 , the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Secretary of State were reconsidering the policy . Despite some calls to support Northrop , FX was abandoned . 
 = = = Aggressor and ANG roles = = = 
 A possibility for a U.S. purchase opened in 1984 , for a small number of " aggressor aircraft " for dissimilar air combat training . This style of training had been introduced by the United States Navy at their TOPGUN school , using the F @-@ 5 to simulate the MiG @-@ 21 . In November 1984 , Congress directed the Navy and Air Force to study the use of a single aircraft type to fill similar aggressor roles for both services . In January 1985 the Navy announced they had selected a specially configured version of the F @-@ 16 . It was rumored that the aircraft was sold at a loss to keep Northrop 's F @-@ 20 out of the market . 
 Another chance for the F @-@ 20 was as an upgrade for the Air National Guard ( ANG ) . Northrop claimed that the F @-@ 20 's fast scramble time made it a natural fit for this role , its lower cost would allow the ANG to operate larger aircraft numbers , and that it supported the AIM @-@ 7 while the F @-@ 16 did not . Additionally , the ANG would not be competing with the Air Force for production quotas , they would be able to replace their aircraft more quickly . However , the Air Force 's requirements had priorities favoring the F @-@ 16 for the role ; if the ANG flew the F @-@ 16 , they would further lower unit costs , maintain commonality between the ANG and USAF , and better equip ANG units to perform front line combat roles . The Congressional Budget Office had also disputed Northrop 's lower cost claim in their own research . On 31 October 1986 , the Air Force announced that the F @-@ 16C had been selected , which had been upgraded to support the AIM @-@ 7 . As several nations had suggested they would accept the F @-@ 20 on the condition that it was inducted into the USAF , the selection was a heavy blow to Northrop . 
 = = = Cancellation = = = 
 After six years with no buyers , in late 1986 Northrop cancelled the $ 1 @.@ 2 billion project . Northrop was reluctant to protest perceived favoritism of the F @-@ 16 in fear of losing support for the project for the Northrop Grumman B @-@ 2 Spirit stealth bomber . Ongoing negotiations with the Royal Moroccan Air Force for 20 F @-@ 20s were canceled ; along with the small order by Bahrain . Later on , a bribery scandal would emerge from the attempts to market the F @-@ 20 to South Korea , leading to several Northrop managers resigning and the reprimanding of chief executive Thomas V. Jones , who retired in 1989 . 
 In the late 1980s , local production of the F @-@ 20 was discussed with India . A move was also made in the 1980s to market the aircraft to the Pakistan Air Force with a license production manufacture of the aircraft . It was evaluated by a Pakistani contingent in the United States , with the F @-@ 20 being flown by Abbas Mirza , a senior Pakistani air force fighter pilot . Of the components of the F @-@ 20 , the radar would end up being the most successful ; Taiwan selected it for the Ching @-@ kuo , South Korea also adopted it for the <unk> T @-@ 50 Golden Eagle trainer aircraft , and the radar was used in the multinational FMA IA 63 Pampa . As sales prospects were not apparent early on , GE sold their radar division , which was eventually acquired by Lockheed @-@ Martin . 
 Aviation author Steve Pace wrote of the F @-@ 20 as " one of the best fighters that never went into production . " While discussing military procurement , Thomas <unk> stated that competition between the F @-@ 20 and the F @-@ 16 served to lower prices and generate " massive savings " for the U.S. government . Writing prior to cancellation , Ralph Nader and William Taylor noted that the F @-@ 20 had been commonly described as " the first privately funded U.S. combat aircraft in recent history . " <unk> A. Hameed commented in 1986 that the F @-@ 20 was a " logical choice " for the Gulf States and Saudi Arabia ; however , it had " scant chance of being selected " due to political factors , as well as competition from other candidates such as the Mirage 2000 and Panavia Tornado ADV . 
 = = Aircraft disposition = = 
