 = = History = = 
 = = = 1967 – 69 : Formation , early demos , and From Genesis to Revelation = = = 
 The founding members of Genesis , singer Peter Gabriel , keyboardist Tony Banks , guitarist Anthony Phillips , bassist and guitarist Mike Rutherford , and drummer Chris Stewart , met at Charterhouse School , a private school in Godalming , Surrey . Banks and Gabriel arrived at the school in September 1963 , Rutherford in September 1964 , and Phillips in April 1965 . The five were members in one of the school 's two bands ; Phillips and Rutherford were in The Anon with singer Richard MacPhail , bassist Rivers Jobe , and drummer Rob Tyrell , while Gabriel , Banks , and Stewart made up Garden Wall . 
 In January 1967 , after both groups had split , Phillips and Rutherford continued to write together and proceeded to make a demo tape at a friend 's home @-@ made studio , inviting Banks , Gabriel , and Stewart to record with them in the process . The five recorded six songs : " Don 't Want You Back " , " Try a Little Sadness " , " She 's Beautiful " , " That 's Me " , " Listen on Five " , and " Patricia " , an instrumental . When they wished to have them professionally recorded they sought Charterhouse alumnus Jonathan King , who seemed a natural choice as their publisher and producer following the success of his 1965 UK top five single , " Everyone 's Gone to the Moon " . A group friend gave the tape to King who was immediately enthusiastic . Under King 's direction , the group , aged between 15 and 17 , signed a one @-@ year recording contract with Decca Records . 
 From August to December 1967 , the five recorded a selection of potential singles at Regent Sound Studios on Denmark Street , London where they attempted longer and more complex compositions , but King advised them to stick to more straightforward pop . In response Banks and Gabriel wrote " The Silent Sun " , a pastiche of the Bee Gees , one of King 's favourite bands , which was recorded with orchestral arrangements added by Arthur Greenslade . The group exchanged various names for the band , including King 's suggestion of Gabriel 's Angels and Champagne Meadow from Phillips , before taking King 's suggestion of Genesis , indicating the start of his production career . King chose " The Silent Sun " as their first single , with " That 's Me " on the B @-@ side , released in February 1968 . It achieved some airplay on BBC Radio One and Radio Caroline but it failed to sell . A second single , " A Winter 's Tale " / " One @-@ Eyed Hound " , followed in May 1968 which also sold little . Three months later , Stewart left the group to continue with his studies . He was replaced by fellow Charterhouse pupil John Silver . 
 King felt the group would achieve greater success with an album . The result , From Genesis to Revelation , was produced at Regent Sound in ten days during their school 's summer break in August 1968 . King assembled the tracks as a concept album which he produced , while Greenslade added further orchestral arrangements to the songs , something the band were not informed of until the album was released . Phillips was particularly upset about Greenslade 's additions . When Decca found an American band already named Genesis , King refused to change his group 's name . He reached a compromise by removing their name from the album cover , resulting in a minimalist design with the album title printed on a plain black background . When the album was released in March 1969 it became a commercial failure , because record shops put the album in the " Religious " section upon seeing the cover . Banks recalled the album " after a year or so , had sold 649 copies " . A third single , " Where the Sour Turns to Sweet " / " In Hiding " , was released in June 1969 . None of the releases were commercially successful and led to the band 's split with King and Decca . King continues to hold the rights to the album which has seen numerous reissues . In 1974 , it peaked the US chart at No. 170 . 
 When the album was recorded , the band went their separate ways for a year ; Gabriel and Phillips stayed at Charterhouse to finish exams , Banks enrolled at Sussex University , and Rutherford studied at Farnborough College of Technology . They regrouped in mid @-@ 1969 to discuss their future as their offers in further education would result in the group splitting up . Phillips and Rutherford decided to make music a full @-@ time career as they were starting to write more complex music than their earlier songs with King . After Banks and Gabriel decided to follow suit , the four returned to Regent Sound in August 1969 and recorded four more demos with Silver : " Family " ( later known as " Dusk " ) , " White Mountain " , " Going Out to Get You " , and " <unk> " . The tape was rejected by each record label that heard it . Silver then left the group to study leisure management in America . His replacement , drummer and carpenter John Mayhew , was found when Mayhew looked for work and left his phone number " with people all over London " . 
 = = = 1969 – 70 : First gigs , signing with Charisma , and Trespass = = = 
 In late 1969 , Genesis retreated to a cottage that MacPhail 's parents owned in Wotton , Surrey to write , rehearse , and develop their stage performance . They adopted a strong working ethic , playing together for as much as eleven hours a day . Their first live gig as Genesis followed in September 1969 at a teenager 's birthday . It was the start of a series of live shows in small venues across the UK which included a radio appearance on BBC 's Night Ride show , on 22 February 1970 and a spot at the Atomic Sunrise Festival held at the Roundhouse in Chalk Farm a month later . During this time , the band met with various record labels regarding contract offers . Initial discussions with Chris Blackwell of Island and Chris Wright of Chrysalis were unsuccessful . In March 1970 , during the band 's six @-@ week Tuesday night residency at Ronnie Scott 's Jazz Club in Soho , members of Rare Bird , who Genesis had supported earlier , recommended the band to producer and A & R man John Anthony of Charisma Records . Anthony attended one of their shows and enjoyed them enough to convince his boss , label owner Tony Stratton @-@ Smith , to watch their next appearance . Stratton @-@ Smith recalled , " Their potential was immediately apparent ... the material was good and their performance was good ... It was a long shot , because they needed time to find their strength ... but I was prepared to make that commitment " . Stratton @-@ Smith agreed to a record and management deal within two weeks , paying Genesis an initial sum of £ 10 a week . 
 Genesis stayed at Wotton until April 1970 , by which time they had enough new material for a second album . Recording for Trespass began in June at Trident Studios , London with Anthony as producer and David Hentschel hired as assistant engineer . The album included longer and more complex songs than their first with folk and progressive rock elements with various time signature changes , as in the nine @-@ minute song " The Knife " . Trespass is the first in a series of three Genesis album covers designed by Paul Whitehead . He had completed the cover before the band decided to include " The Knife " on the album . Feeling the cover no longer reflected the album 's overall mood , the band persuaded Whitehead to slash a knife across the canvas and have the result photographed . Released in October 1970 , Trespass reached No. 1 in Belgium in 1971 and No. 98 in the UK in 1984 . " The Knife " was released as a single in May 1971 . Rolling Stone briefly mentioned the album with a negative view following its 1974 reissue : " It 's spotty , poorly defined , at times innately boring " . 
 After Trespass was recorded , ill health and developing stage fright caused Phillips to leave Genesis . His last show with the band took place in Haywards Heath on 18 July 1970 . He felt the increased number of gigs affected the group 's creativity and that several songs he wrote were not recorded or performed live . He had contracted bronchial pneumonia and became isolated from the rest of the band , feeling that it had too many songwriters in it . Banks , Gabriel , and Rutherford saw Phillips as an important member , being the most instrumental in encouraging them to turn professional . They regarded his exit as the band 's greatest threat and the most difficult to overcome . Gabriel and Rutherford decided they would continue ; Banks agreed on the condition that they find a new drummer that was of equal stature to the rest of the group . Mayhew was therefore fired , though Phillips later thought Mayhew 's working @-@ class background clashed with the rest of the band which affected his confidence . 
 = = = 1970 – 72 : Collins and Hackett join and Nursery Cryme = = = 
 The search for a new guitarist and drummer began with advertisements placed in copies of Melody Maker . The invitation was spotted by drummer Phil Collins , formerly of Flaming Youth who already knew Stratton @-@ Smith . He recalled , " My only knowledge of Genesis was through seeing the ads for their gigs . It seemed like they were constantly working . ... I thought ' At least I 'm going to be working if I get the gig ' . " Roger Taylor , subsequently of Queen , turned down an invitation to audition . Collins went to the audition at Gabriel 's parents ' house in Chobham , Surrey with his Flaming Youth band mate , guitarist Ronnie Caryl . As they arrived early , Collins took a swim in the pool and heard what the other drummers were playing . " They put on ' Trespass ' , and my initial impression of a very soft and round music , not edgy , with vocal harmonies and I came away thinking Crosby , Stills and Nash " . Gabriel and Rutherford noticed the confident way Collins approached and sat at his drum kit and knew he would be the right replacement . Banks said , " It was a combination of things . He could make it swing a little bit ... he could also tell good jokes and make us laugh ... And he could sing , which was an advantage because Mike and I were not very good at back @-@ up vocals " . In August 1970 , Collins became the new drummer for Genesis . Caryl 's audition was unsuccessful ; Rutherford thought he was not the player the group were looking for . 
 After a short holiday , Genesis began to write and rehearse as a four piece band in Farnham , Surrey . The now empty guitar sections in their songs allowed Banks and Rutherford to expand their sound and play what Gabriel described as " interesting chords " . As they had not found a new guitarist , Genesis resumed as a live act with Rutherford adding bass pedals and Banks playing lead guitar lines on a Pianet through a distorted fuzz box amplifier in addition to his keyboard parts , something that he credits in helping him develop his technique . In November 1970 , after a second audition with Caryl fell through , Dave <unk> , owner of Friars club in Aylesbury , suggested they use Mick Barnard of The Farm , who joined the band for their gigs which included Genesis 's television debut on BBC 's Disco 2 . After two months of performances , the band found Barnard lacked in expertise and wished to try someone else . In December , Gabriel spotted a Melody Maker advert from Steve Hackett , formerly of Quiet World , who wanted to join a band of " receptive musicians , determined to drive beyond existing stagnant music forms " . Gabriel advised Hackett to become familiar with Trespass and attend their upcoming gig at the Lyceum Theatre in London . Hackett auditioned with the group in a flat in Earls Court and formed an instant rapport with Rutherford through a common interest in inversion chords . After Hackett joined in January 1971 , Stratton @-@ Smith organised a UK tour with Genesis opening for fellow Charisma acts Lindisfarne and Van der Graaf Generator . Their first overseas dates took place in March with gigs in Belgium followed by their first of three consecutive appearances at the annual Reading Festival on 26 June . 
 Rehearsals for the band 's third album , Nursery Cryme , took place at Luxford House near Crowborough , East Sussex that Stratton @-@ Smith had owned . Recording began at Trident Studios in August 1971 with Anthony and Hentschel reprising their respective roles as producer and assistant engineer . The band 's sound evolved with Hackett 's more aggressive electric guitar work and Banks adding a Mellotron to his set of keyboards that King Crimson previously owned . The opening track , " The Musical Box " , originated when Phillips and Mayhew were in the group . The band developed the piece further including the addition of new guitar parts from Hackett . The album marks the first instance of Hackett using the tapping technique which is featured on " The Musical Box " and " The Return of the Giant Hogweed " . Hackett and Collins wrote " For Absent Friends " and marks the first Genesis track with Collins on lead vocals . Whitehead depicted scenes and characters from the lyrics to " The Musical Box " and a Victorian manor house based on Gabriel 's parent 's home on the album 's cover . 
 Nursery Cryme was released in November 1971 and went on to reach No. 39 in the UK in 1974 . Though the group still had a minor cult following at home , they started to achieve commercial and critical success in mainland Europe , with the album reaching No. 4 in the Italian charts . From November 1971 to August 1972 , Genesis toured to support the album which included further visits to Belgium , and Italy for the first time where they played to enthusiastic crowds . They recorded radio sessions for BBC 's Sounds of the Seventies program in January and March and performed at the Reading Festival that was praised by numerous critics who attended . During the tour Genesis recorded " Happy the Man " , a non @-@ album single , with " Seven Stones " from Nursery Cryme on its B @-@ side . 
 = = = 1972 – 74 : Foxtrot and Selling England by the Pound = = = 
 Following rehearsals in a dance school in Shepherd 's Bush , Genesis recorded Foxtrot at Island Studios between August and September 1972 . During the initial sessions , disagreements among Charisma and Anthony contributed to the end of his association with Genesis . After two replacement engineers were tried out , the band settled with John Burns and a new producer , Dave Hitchcock . The album features the 23 @-@ minute track " Supper 's Ready " , a suite of various musical segments . The track included an opening acoustic piece , a Gabriel @-@ penned song called " Willow Farm " and a piece derived from a jam by Banks , Rutherford and Collins called " Apocalypse in 9 / 8 " . Other songs were the science @-@ fiction themed " Watcher of the Skies " and the property development @-@ themed " Get ' Em Out By Friday " . Foxtrot was released in October 1972 and reached No. 12 in the UK . It fared even better in Italy where it went to No. 1 . Foxtrot was well received from critics . Chris Welch of Melody Maker thought Foxtrot was " a milestone in the group 's career " , " an important point of development in British group music " , and that Genesis had reached " a creative peak " . Stephen Thomas Erlewine thought Foxtrot marked the first time " Genesis attacked like a rock band , playing with a visceral power " . 
 The Foxtrot tour covered Europe and North America from September 1972 to August 1973 . The show at the National Stadium in Dublin on 28 September 1972 marked the debut of Gabriel wearing a costume on stage , something that surprised the other band members as they were kept uninformed . Originally suggested by Charisma booking agent Paul Conroy , Gabriel went off stage during an instrumental section in " The Musical Box " and reappeared in his wife 's red dress and a fox 's head . The incident resulted in front cover reports in the music press , allowing the band to double their performance fee . In December 1972 , Stratton @-@ Smith organised the band 's first gigs in the US with a show at Brandeis University in Waltham , Massachusetts and Philharmonic Hall in New York City with openers String Driven Thing , in aid of the United Cerebral Palsy Fund . They were well received despite the band complaining of technical issues . Gabriel 's costumes expanded in the following months to include fluorescent face paint and a cape fitted with bat wings for " Watcher of the Skies " , several guises throughout " Supper 's Ready " , and a mask of an old man for " The Musical Box " . An album of recordings from the following UK leg , initially recorded for the American radio program King Biscuit Flower Hour , was released as Genesis Live in July 1973 . It reached No. 9 in the UK and No. 105 in the US . 
 Selling England by the Pound was recorded at Island Studios in August 1973 , the second Genesis album that Burns co @-@ produced . Much of it was written at Una Billings School of Dance and Chessington . Gabriel contributed lyrics based on the idea of commercialism and the decline of English culture and the rise in American influences . Its title refers to a UK Labour Party slogan to make it clear to music critics who may thought Genesis were beginning to " sell out " to America . The lyrics " Firth of Fifth " features an extended electric guitar solo from Hackett . The album 's cover is a modified version of a painting named The Dream by Betty Swanwick who added a lawn mower to tie the image to the lyrics of " I Know What I Like ( In Your Wardrobe ) " . 
 Selling England by the Pound was released in October 1973 to a positive critical reception , though slightly more muted than Foxtrot . The album reached No. 3 in the UK and No. 70 in the US . By this time , Genesis had made little effort to organise their finances and were £ 150 @,@ 000 in debt . They hired promoter Tony Smith as their new manager to improve their fortunes and published the band 's subsequent music though his company , Hit & Run Music Publishing . The Selling England by the Pound tour visited Europe and North America between September 1973 and May 1974 . Their six shows in three days at The Roxy in Los Angeles were well received by audiences and critics . The success of the tour earned the group the " Top Stage Band " title by readers of NME . At its conclusion , MacPhail resigned as their tour manager as he wished to pursue other interests . " I Know What I Like ( In Your Wardrobe ) " was released as a UK single with " Twilight <unk> " , a non @-@ album track recorded in 1972 , that reached No. 21 following its release in February 1974 . Its success led to an offer for Genesis to appear on BBC 's national show Top of the Pops ; they declined as the group thought it would not suit their image . 
 = = = 1974 – 75 : The Lamb Lies Down on Broadway and Gabriel 's departure = = = 
 In June 1974 , Genesis started work on their double concept album , The Lamb Lies Down on Broadway . It marked the start of Gabriel 's increasingly strained relationship on the rest of the group which contributed to his departure . The album was written at Headley Grange in East Hampshire where upon their arrival , the building was in a state left by the previous band with excrement on the floor and rat infestations . Gabriel objected to Rutherford 's idea of an album based on The Little Prince by Antoine de Saint @-@ Exupéry , thinking the idea was " too twee " . He persuaded the band with a less fantastical and more complicated story involving Rael , a Puerto Rican youth living in New York City who embarks on a spiritual quest to establish his freedom and identity while meeting several bizarre characters on the way . Gabriel wrote the story with influences from West Side Story , " a kind of punk " twist to Pilgrim 's Progress , author Carl Jung , and the film El Topo by Alejandro Jodorowsky . Most of the album 's lyrics were written by Gabriel , leaving much of its music to the rest of the group . His absence from a considerable amount of writing sessions due to difficulties with his wife 's first birth was something Rutherford and Banks " were horribly unsupportive " of . Gabriel also left the group when director William Friedkin asked him to write a screenplay , but returned after the project was shelved . In August 1974 , production moved to <unk> Manor in Carmarthenshire , Wales with Burns , as co @-@ producer , operating Island Studios ' mobile equipment . Further work and mixing took place at Island where Brian Eno contributed synthesizers and effects that the album 's sleeve credits as " <unk> " . When Gabriel asked Eno how the band could repay him , Eno said he needed a drummer for his track " Mother Whale Eyeless " . Collins said , " I got sent upstairs as payment " . Gabriel was pleased with Eno 's work but Banks was less enthusiastic . 
 The Lamb Lies Down on Broadway was released in November 1974 and reached No. 10 in the UK and No. 41 in the US . " Counting Out Time " and " The Carpet Crawlers " were released as singles in 1974 and 1975 , respectively . Its sleeve is the first of four Genesis albums designed by Storm Thorgerson and Aubrey Powell of Hipgnosis . From November 1974 to May 1975 , Genesis completed 102 dates across North America and Europe as part of The Lamb Lies Down on Broadway tour . Their set included The Lamb ... performed in its entirety with an encore , a decision that was not supported by the entire band considering most of the audience were not yet familiar with the large amount of new material . The stage show involved new , more elaborate costumes worn by Gabriel , three backdrop screens that displayed 1 @,@ 450 slides from eight projectors , and a laser lighting display . Music critics often focused their reviews on Gabriel 's theatrics and took the band 's musical performance as secondary which irritated the rest of the band . 
 During their stay in Cleveland during the tour , Gabriel told the band he would leave at its conclusion . He wrote a statement regarding his departure to the English press that was published in August 1975 titled " Out , Angels Out " , explaining he had become disillusioned with the music industry and wanted to spend extended time with his family . Banks later stated , " Pete was also getting too big for the group . He was being portrayed as if he was ' the man ' and it really wasn 't like that . It was a very difficult thing to accommodate . So it was actually a bit of a relief . " 
 = = = 1975 – 77 : Collins on lead vocals , A Trick of the Tail , Wind & Wuthering and Hackett 's departure = = = 
 Following the Lamb tour , Hackett recorded his first solo album Voyage of the Acolyte as he felt unsure that Genesis would survive following Gabriel 's departure . He reconvened with the remaining group members in London in July 1975 . Collins ' idea of continuing as an instrumental group was quickly rejected by the group as they thought it would become boring . Rehearsals for A Trick of the Tail took place in Acton where material was quickly written and with little effort ; most of " Dance on a Volcano " and " Squonk " was put together in the first three days . Recording began in October 1975 at Trident Studios with Hentschel as producer . As a replacement singer had not been found , the band decided to record the album without vocals and audition singers as they went . They placed an anonymous advertisement in Melody Maker for " a singer for a Genesis @-@ type group " which received around 400 replies . Collins proceeded to teach selected applicants the songs ; Mick Strickland was invited into the studio to sing , but the backing tracks were in a key outside of his natural range and the band decided not to work with him . Having failed to find a suitable vocalist , Collins went in the studio and attempted to sing " Squonk " . His performance was well received by the band , and they decided that he should be their new lead vocalist . Collins then sang on the remaining tracks . 
 A Trick of the Tail was released in February 1976 and was a commercial and critical success for the band . The album reached No. 3 in the UK and No. 31 in the US . The title track was released as a single , though it did not chart . In June , the album was certified Gold by the British Phonographic Institute for selling over 100 @,@ 000 copies which helped the band clear the £ 400 @,@ 000 of debt they owed when Gabriel left . For the first time in their career Genesis filmed promotional videos for their songs , including " A Trick of the Tail " and " Robbery , Assault and Battery " . Before the upcoming tour , Collins sought a drummer he felt comfortable about playing drums while he sang ; he chose Bill Bruford who offered to do the job . From March to July 1976 , Genesis performed across North America and Europe with the A Trick of the Tail tour , to enthusiastic crowds . Collins adopted a more humorous rapport with the audience , unlike Gabriel 's theatrical approach , which was successful . The shows in Glasgow and Stafford were filmed for their concert film Genesis : In Concert , released in cinemas in February 1977 as a double bill with White Rock . 
 In September 1976 , Genesis relocated to Relight Studios in <unk> , The Netherlands with Hentschel to record Wind & Wuthering . It was put together in a short amount of time and a considerable amount of material was written beforehand , of which the most suitable songs were picked for development . Rutherford spoke of the band 's conscious effort to distance themselves from songs inspired by fantasy , something that their past albums " were full of " . The band spent roughly six weeks writing the album with a basic form of each track put down in twelve days . Additional recording and production work was done at Trident Studios that October . Hackett , having already released a solo album , enjoyed the greater amount of control over the recording process that working within a group could not provide . He felt his songs , including " Please Don 't Touch " which he later released on his second album Please Don 't Touch ! , were rejected from the final track order in favour of material that Banks , in particular , had put forward . Collins spoke of the situation , " We just wanted to use what we agreed was the strongest material , irrespective of who wrote it " . Wind & Wuthering was released in December 1976 and reached No. 6 the UK and No. 26 in the US . Rutherford 's track , " Your Own Special Way " , became the its sole single and went to No. 43 in the UK . Its B @-@ Side is " It 's Yourself " , originally intended for A Trick of the Tail . 
 Prior to the 1977 tour Bruford declined an offer to return as second drummer , leaving Collins searching for a replacement . He heard American drummer Chester Thompson , of Frank Zappa 's band and Weather Report , play a drum passage on " More Trouble Every Day " from Zappa 's live album Roxy & Elsewhere . Collins said , " It floored me completely ... I had never met him . I rang him up and said , ' Hi Chester , I 've heard your stuff , would you like to play with Genesis ? ' ... He didn 't even audition ! " Genesis toured Wind & Wuthering from January to July 1977 across Europe , North America , and for the first time , Brazil . The stage show cost £ 400 @,@ 000 which featured a new PA system , lasers and smoke , and lighting supplied from two rows of Boeing 747 aircraft landing lights . Touring began on 1 January with three sold out shows at the Rainbow Theatre in London where 80 @,@ 000 applications were made for the 8 @,@ 000 available tickets . They returned to London for three nights at Earls Court , then the largest arena in Britain , supported by Richie Havens . The band 's growing popularity in North America led to television appearances and concerts organised in larger venues than previous tours , including Madison Square Garden in New York City . Their Brazilian dates were attended by over 150 @,@ 000 people and a proposed 100 @,@ 000 @-@ person gig was cancelled over rioting fears . An armed bodyguard accompanied each member throughout their stay . 
 In May 1977 Genesis released Spot the Pigeon , an extended play of three tracks left off Wind & Wuthering . It peaked at No. 14 on the UK singles chart . It was the final Genesis release before Hackett left the group . He had been writing more material on his own and found it increasingly difficult to contribute more of his ideas within a group context . He wished to embark on a solo career and " take the risk in order to find out just how good I was on my own " . News of Hackett 's departure coincided with the band 's double live album Seconds Out , recorded in Paris on the A Trick of the Tail and Wind & Wuthering tours and released in October 1977 . It reached No. 4 in the UK and No. 47 in the US . 
 = = = 1977 – 79 : ... And Then There Were Three ... and band inactivity = = = 
 By the time Seconds Out was released , Banks , Rutherford , and Collins had already recorded ... And Then There Were Three ... , the first Genesis album recorded as a trio , in September 1977 at Relight Studios with Hentschel as producer . It was then mixed at Trident Studios in London . The album is a collection of shorter songs in order to put across more musical ideas . Most of its eleven songs were written individually with Banks contributing four , Rutherford three , Collins and Banks one , and the remaining three written collectively . Their new material signalled a change in the band 's sound with songs becoming more pop @-@ oriented and commercially accessible , including the group @-@ written track " Follow You Follow Me " . Collins recalled it was the only song on the album written from scratch during rehearsals . Rutherford felt comfortable taking on lead guitar duties in addition to his usual rhythm and bass roles . Collins later saw the album as " a very vocal , solid album " that lacked more rhythmic tracks like " Los <unk> " or songs from Wind & Wuthering , as coming up with ideas on the drums while living in his flat in Ealing with his family was difficult . 
 ... And Then There Were Three ... was released in March 1978 . It received some mixed reviews from critics at the time owing to the album only containing short songs , which excited new fans but disillusioned those who had been used to the band 's previous work . Chris Welch wrote a positive review in Melody Maker , citing a " remarkably powerful " album . It was a commercial success and peaked at No. 3 in the UK and No. 14 in the US . " Follow You Follow Me " was released as its lead single and reached No. 7 in the UK and No. 23 in the US , their highest charting single in both countries since their formation . Its success introduced the band to a new audience , including a larger female interest , helped by its music video airing on Top of the Pops . Its success caused some fans to accuse the group of selling out to more commercial music . A follow up single , " Many Too Many " , was less successful as it had already appeared on the album . 
 In the search for a new touring guitarist , Rutherford tried out Alphonso Johnson of Weather Report but he was a primarily a bassist and could not play Hackett 's lead guitar parts comfortably . Johnson then suggested American guitarist Daryl Stuermer of Jean @-@ Luc Ponty 's jazz fusion group who was more comfortable with various guitar styles . During Stuermer 's rehearsal in New York City , Rutherford was satisfied with his performance after they played through " Down and Out " and " Squonk " . When Stuermer was chosen , he familiarised himself with a list of 26 songs he was asked to learn by going through five per day . The ... And Then There Were Three ... tour ran from March to December 1978 and visited North America , Europe , and for the first time , Japan . It cost an estimated £ 2 million to stage which included the sound system , light and laser displays , and additional effects from six computer controlled mirrors , all of which took eight hours to set up and five to dismantle . One of their shows featured a guest appearance from Gabriel , who sang " I Know What I Like ( In Your Wardrobe ) " . In June , Genesis headlined the year 's Knebworth Festival , their only UK show that year , which disappointed some British fans . 
 In December 1978 , Genesis began a period of inactivity as Collins 's marriage was at risk of collapse after touring had made him frequently absent from his wife and children . Following a meeting with Banks , Rutherford and Smith , Collins went to Vancouver , Canada to try and rebuild the family . He explained : " I was never going to leave the band . It was just that if I was going to be living in Vancouver then we 'd have had to organise ourselves differently . " Banks and Rutherford decided to put Genesis on an extended break and make their respective debut solo albums , A Curious Feeling and <unk> 's Day , at Polar Studios in Stockholm , Sweden . In April 1979 , Collins returned to the UK after his attempt to save his marriage failed . With time to spare before working on a new Genesis album , Collins performed with Brand X and started writing his first solo album , Face Value , at his home in Shalford , Surrey . 
 = = = 1979 – 83 : Duke , Abacab , and Three Sides Live = = = 
 In 1979 , Banks and Rutherford moved into Collins 's home in Shalford to write and rehearse material for Duke . The three found the writing process easier and less complicated than ... And Then There Were Three .... Rutherford reasoned this as they were " getting back to the basic stage of ideas being worked on jointly " . Banks put it down to their break in activity , resulting in " good ideas ... which hasn 't happened for some time " . Duke continued the band 's transition into writing shorter songs with each member contributing two songs for the group to develop . Banks put forward " <unk> " and " Cul @-@ de @-@ Sac " , Rutherford used " Man of Our Times " and " Alone Tonight " , and Collins had " Misunderstanding " and " Please Don 't Ask " . All three wrote the remaining five tracks including " Duchess " , the first Genesis song that uses a drum machine , specifically a Roland CR @-@ 78 imported from Japan . In its original form , the album was to contain a 30 @-@ minute track based on a fictional character named Albert , but the idea was cancelled to avoid comparisons to " Supper 's Ready " from Foxtrot . In November , the band recorded Duke at Polar Studios with Hentschel reprising his role as producer , and included a cover from French illustrator Lionel Koechlin , featuring the character Albert . 
 Released in March 1980 , Duke was the band 's biggest commercial success at the time of release , spending two weeks at No. 1 in the UK and peaking at No. 11 in the US . The album spawned three singles ; " Turn It On Again " went to No. 8 in the UK , " Misunderstanding " reached No. 14 in the US , and " Duchess " peaked at No. 46 in the UK . Duke was supported with a UK and North American tour from April to June 1980 which began with a 40 @-@ date tour of the UK where all 106 @,@ 000 tickets were sold within hours of going on sale . 
 In November 1980 Genesis bought Fisher Lane Farm , a farmhouse with an adjoining cowshed near <unk> , Surrey , as their new rehearsal and recording facility . The building was remodelled into a studio in four months before recording for Abacab began in March 1981 . The new environment had a productive effect on the writing process as the band wrote enough for a double album , but they discarded one hour 's worth of songs that sounded too similar to their past albums . Banks said a conscious effort was made to keep melodies as simple as possible which signalled further changes in their direction . The shift was underlined in its production when Hentschel , their producer and engineer since 1975 , was replaced by Hugh Padgham after Collins liked his production on Face Value and Gabriel 's third solo album . Production duties were solely credited the band for the first time with Padgham as their engineer . The album is formed of group written material with an individual song from each member . " No Reply at All " features the Phenix Horns , the horn section of American band Earth , Wind & Fire . 
 Abacab was released in September 1981 and reached No. 1 in the UK and No. 7 in the US . Three singles from the album entered the top forty in both countries ; " Abacab " reached No. 9 in the UK and No. 26 in the US , " No Reply at All " reached No. 29 in the US , and " Keep It Dark " , a European only single , went to No. 33 in the UK . Abacab was supported with a tour of Europe and North America from September to December 1981 , ending with shows at Wembley Arena and the NEC Birmingham . The tour marked the band 's first use of the Vari @-@ Lite , a computer controlled intelligent lighting system . Following a demonstration at The Farm , the band and Smith showed an immediate interest in the technology and became shareholders of the company . In May 1982 , three tracks recorded during the Abacab sessions – " <unk> " , " You Might Recall " , and " Me and Virgil " – were released as an extended play in Europe titled 3 × 3 which peaked at No. 10 in the UK . Its cover is a homage to the Twist and Shout EP by The Beatles with sleeve notes written by their former publicist Tony Barrow . 
 In June 1982 , Genesis released the double live album Three Sides Live in two different versions . The North American edition contains three sides of live recordings with the fourth comprising the 3 × 3 tracks and two from the Duke sessions . The European release contains a fourth side of extra live tracks . The album coincided with the home video release of the Three Sides Live concert film recorded in 1981 . A tour of North America and Europe followed that ran from August to September 1982 , featuring guest appearances from Bill Bruford and the Phenix Horns . On 2 October , Genesis headlined a one @-@ off concert with Gabriel at the Milton Keynes Bowl under the name Six of the Best . The concert was organised to raise money for Gabriel 's World of Music , Arts and Dance project which was , by that point , in considerable debt . Hackett , who flew in from abroad , arrived in time to perform the last two songs . 
 = = = 1983 – 96 : Genesis , Invisible Touch , We Can 't Dance , and Collins 's departure = = = 
 Work on the twelfth Genesis album , Genesis , began in March 1983 with Padgham returning as engineer . It is the first album written , recorded , and mixed at the remodelled studio at The Farm . Banks remembered the band were scarce for new musical ideas which " felt at times as though we were stretching the material as far as we could " . " Mama " concerns a man 's obsession with a prostitute at a Cuban brothel . It originated from a beat Rutherford came up with on a LinnDrum machine that was fed through his guitar amplifier and an echo gate . Collins 's laugh on the track originated from " The Message " by Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five . Released in October 1983 , Genesis went to No. 1 in the UK and peaked at No. 9 in the US , where it reached Platinum by December that year and went on to sell over four million copies . Three tracks were released as singles ; " Mama " reached No. 4 in the UK , their highest charting UK single to date , and " That 's All " reached No. 6 in the U.S. The Mama Tour ran from late 1983 through to 1984 , covering North America and five UK shows in Birmingham . The latter shows were filmed and released as Genesis Live – The Mama Tour . 
 In February 1984 , Genesis took a break in activity to allow each member to continue with their solo careers . Rutherford formed his group Mike + The Mechanics , Banks worked on his solo album Soundtracks , and Collins released No Jacket Required which achieved worldwide success and increased his popularity as a result . The music press took note that Collins ' success as a solo artist made him more popular than Genesis . Before the release of No Jacket Required , Collins insisted that he would not leave the band . " The next one to leave the band will finish it , " Collins told Rolling Stone magazine in May 1985 . " I feel happier with what we 're doing now , because I feel it 's closer to me . I won 't be the one . " Collins added , " Poor old Genesis does get in the way sometimes . I still won 't leave the group , but I imagine it will end by mutual consent . " In June , Collins spoke of the band 's intention to start work on a new album that year , ending rumours to a false announcement that aired on BBC Radio 1 suggesting Genesis had split . 
 Genesis reconvened at The Farm in October 1985 to start work on Invisible Touch which lasted for six months . They continued their method of song writing used on Genesis by developing material from group improvisations . Banks remembered the time as a strong period creatively for the band , with ideas " flowing out of us " . " Invisible Touch " was developed in such a way , when the group were working on " The Last Domino " , the second part of " Domino " . During the session , Rutherford began to play an improvised guitar riff to which Collins replied with an off @-@ the @-@ cuff lyric – " She seems to have an invisible touch " – which became the song 's chorus hook . 
 Following its release in June 1986 , the album spent three weeks at No. 1 in the UK and reached No. 3 in the US . Despite the mixed reviews , Invisible Touch was a commercial success , becoming the best selling Genesis album in the US , selling over 6 million copies there . The album 's five singles – " Invisible Touch " , " Throwing It All Away " , " Land of Confusion " , " In Too Deep " , and " Tonight , Tonight , Tonight " – entered the top five on the US singles chart between 1986 and 1987 with " Invisible Touch " topping the chart for one week . Genesis became the first group and foreign act to achieve this feat , equalling the five singles record set by Michael Jackson , Janet Jackson , and Madonna . Genesis commissioned the creators of the satirical British television show Spitting Image , Peter <unk> and Roger Law , to make puppets of them in the style of the show for the video of " Land of Confusion " . 
 The Invisible Touch Tour was the band 's largest world tour in its history which included 112 dates from September 1986 to July 1987 . Genesis received some criticism in their decision to have <unk> beer as a sponsor . The tour concluded with four consecutive sold out shows at Wembley Stadium in London . The shows were released in 1988 as The Invisible Touch Tour . When the tour ended , Genesis took a five @-@ year break while each member committed to their solo projects . They performed twice during this time ; on 14 May 1988 , they performed a 20 @-@ minute set at the Atlantic Records 40th Anniversary concert at Madison Square Garden . This was followed by a set at a charity gig at the 1990 Knebworth Festival in June , headlined by Pink Floyd . 
 In 1991 Genesis recorded their fourteenth album , We Can 't Dance , from March to September with their new engineer and co @-@ producer , Nick Davis . The band took advantage of the increased capacity the CD offered and released over 71 minutes of new music across 12 tracks . Collins wrote the lyrics to " Since I Lost You " for his friend Eric Clapton following the death of Clapton 's four @-@ year @-@ old son Conor . Following the release of We Can 't Dance in November 1991 , the album went to No. 1 in the UK for one week and No. 4 in the US , where it went on to sell over 4 million copies . The album spawned several hit singles ; " No Son of Mine " went to No. 6 in the UK and " I Can 't Dance " reached No. 7 in the UK and the US . In 1993 , We Can 't Dance was nominated for a Brit Award for Best British Album . 
 The We Can 't Dance tour visited North America and Europe from May to November 1992 with each concert attended by an average of 56 @,@ 000 people . The tour spawned two live albums ; The Way We Walk , Volume One : The Shorts reached No. 3 in the UK and The Way We Walk , Volume Two : The <unk> went to No. 1 in the UK . Following the tour , the band took a break in activity . Banks , Rutherford , and Collins performed at Cowdray Castle , Midhurst in September 1993 for a money raising event with Pink Floyd touring guitarist Tim Renwick and drummer Gary Wallis and Queen drummer Roger Taylor . Rutherford also played bass on Pink Floyd 's set at the same concert . 
 In March 1996 , Collins announced his departure from Genesis . He " felt it time to change direction in my musical life . For me now , it will be music for movies , some jazz projects , and of course my solo career . " 
 = = = 1996 – 2006 : Wilson on lead vocals , Calling All Stations , and hiatus = = = 
 Shortly after Banks and Rutherford decided to continue Genesis in 1996 , they went to The Farm to start writing Calling All Stations . Rutherford initially found the sessions difficult as he saw Collins as " the guy in the middle " who made Banks and himself work better . Their best ideas developed in this period were put forward while they auditioned new singers , including Francis <unk> and Nick Van <unk> . The two main contenders , David Longdon and Scottish singer Ray Wilson of <unk> , auditioned throughout 1996 which involved singing along to Genesis tracks with the lead vocals removed . Wilson was announced as the new Genesis singer in June 1997 . Though much of the album was already written by the time he joined , Banks was pleased with his contributions to album which included writing the lyrics to " Small Talk " and riffs on " Not About Us " and " There Must Be Some Other Way " . Banks and Rutherford opted for two drummers on Calling All Stations – Israeli session musician Nir <unk> and Nick D <unk> of Spock 's Beard . 
 Calling All Stations was released in September 1997 . It was a success in Europe , where it reached No. 2 in the UK , but the album peaked at No. 54 in the US , their lowest charting album there since Selling England by the Pound . A single from the album , " Congo " reached the top 30 in the UK and Genesis completed a European tour from January to May 1998 , adding <unk> on drums and Irish guitarist Anthony Drennan . A North American tour was planned but was cancelled following its poor commercial response and lack of ticket sales , which led to Banks and Rutherford announcing in 2000 that the group would no longer be recording and touring . 
 In 1998 , Banks , Collins , Gabriel , Hackett , Phillips , Rutherford , and Silver gathered for a photo session and dinner to celebrate the release of the four @-@ disc box set , Genesis Archive 1967 – 75 . The set features " Supper 's Ready " and " It " with new overdubs by Gabriel and Hackett . In 1999 , Banks , Collins , Rutherford , Hackett , and Gabriel released a new version of " The Carpet Crawlers " for the compilation album Turn It On Again : The Hits . On 21 September 2000 , Collins , Banks , Rutherford reunited at the Music Managers Forum , in honour of their manager Tony Smith . Gabriel attended the ceremony but chose not to perform . In 2004 , Genesis released Platinum Collection , a three @-@ disc box set of songs covering the band 's career that reached No. 21 in the UK . 
 = = = 2006 – present : 2007 tour , reunion speculations , and BBC documentary = = = 
 In a press conference held in London in November 2006 , Banks , Rutherford , and Collins announced their reunion for the Turn It On Again Tour , their first with Collins in fifteen years . They revealed the initial plan of touring The Lamb Lies Down on Broadway with Gabriel and Hackett . The five met in Glasgow in November 2004 to discuss the idea further , but it never developed further as Gabriel was unable to commit due to other projects . Instead , Banks , Rutherford and Collins decided to proceed with Thompson and Stuermer returning on drums and guitar , respectively . In March 2007 , a press conference was held in New York City to announce the North American leg . 
 The Turn It On Again Tour featured a stage designed by architect Mark Fisher with a lighting display by Patrick Woodroffe , included a 55 @-@ metre long LED backdrop formed of 9 million LED lights . The European leg saw close to 400 @,@ 000 tickets sold in 40 minutes for shows in Germany and the Netherlands . On 7 July , the band played at the Live Earth concert in London at Wembley Stadium . The European leg ended with a free concert on 14 July at the Circus Maximus in Rome in front of around half a million people . It was filmed for DVD that was released the following year as When in Rome 2007 . A live album formed of recordings from various European dates was released in 2007 as Live over Europe 2007 . 
 In 2007 , the band 's studio albums from Trespass to Calling All Stations were digitally remastered by Nick Davis across three box sets : Genesis 1976 – 1982 , Genesis 1983 – 1998 , and Genesis 1970 – 1975 . Each album is presented as a two @-@ disc set containing a CD / Super Audio CD of a new stereo mix and a DVD with a 5 @.@ 1 surround sound mix and bonus features including previously unreleased live performances , interviews , and concert programs . Two DVD box sets followed , Genesis Live 1973 – 2007 and Genesis Movie Box 1981 – 2007 , in 2009 . 
 Since 2011 , Genesis have expressed mixed opinions about a reunion . Collins retired from the music industry as an active musician that year in favour of family commitments and has stated he can no longer play the drums due to medical issues . Hackett has said " I would say it 's possible , but highly improbable . I 've always been open to it . I 'm not the guy who says no . " Gabriel addressed the possibility of a reunion : " I never say never . It really didn 't happen last time . I think there 's a small chance , but I don 't think it 's very high . " In 2014 , Collins reiterated , " Have people thought it through ? It ’ s not as if you ’ re going to get Peter as the singer , me as the drummer . I can ’ t play any more , so it ’ s never going to happen , " adding it would not be likely for Gabriel to perform songs Collins originally sang lead on . Collins subsequently announced an end to his retirement , and speculated a reunion with Banks and Rutherford would be possible , which Banks endorsed . 
 In 2014 Gabriel , Banks , Rutherford , Collins and Hackett reunited for Genesis : Together and Apart , a BBC documentary about the band 's history and the various solo albums the members have released . Although he participated in the documentary and promoted it , Hackett was critical following its broadcast , claiming that it was biased and did not give him editorial involvement , adding that it ignored his solo work despite him speaking at length about it . The documentary does not feature Wilson 's time in Genesis . Hackett remains cynical about a Genesis reunion , saying : " Look at the documentary and you 'll get an idea of the priorities that come across . " 
 = = Musical style = = 
 Genesis identify first and foremost as songwriters . Any instruments featured on any of the recordings were used because they helped serve the song . Rutherford later said " We 're much more concerned with feel . " Though styles changed dramatically over the group 's career , they were always built on musical contrasts and the willingness to experiment . 
 Members of the original line @-@ up were exposed to classical and church music as well as rock artists of the 1960s , particularly the Beatles . Gabriel 's vocal style was influenced by Otis Redding and other Stax artists . In their early years , Genesis ' music combined elements of the pop , folk , and psychedelic genres . Several songs developed during Phillips ' time in the band originated on 12 @-@ string guitars , often with unconventional tunings . By the 1970s , the group began to include fantasy and surreal elements in their lyrics , such as the " The Musical Box " . Nursery Cryme marks the first time electric instruments were used more extensively . A Trick of the Tail marked a return to the band 's roots with acoustic passages and songs inspired by fantasy . 
 Early lyrics drew from psychedelia , fantasy , mythological figures , and fairytale themes . Gabriel emerged as one of the band 's main lyricists who often incorporated puns and double entendres in his lines and track titles and addressed various themes including social commentary . Selling England by the Pound contains references to English culture of the time including " Aisle of Plenty " , where four British supermarket chains are referenced to reflect the album 's theme of commercialism . Literary sources are used as inspiration for many Genesis tracks ; " The Cinema Show " is based on T. S. Eliot 's poem The Waste Land , and Arthur C. Clarke 's novel Childhood 's End inspired the lyrics to " Watcher of the Skies " . 
 By the time the group had slimmed down to the trio of Banks , Rutherford and Collins , they had decided to change lyrical styles , dealing more with everyday matters which connected with female fans . Collins ' songs , in particular , were personal in nature . However , the group still featured humour in songs such as " Illegal Alien " , and dealt with serious themes such as politics on " Land of Confusion " and commercialisation on " I Can 't Dance " . 
 Banks has said that a common way of developing songs throughout the band 's career was for Collins to play the rhythm , Rutherford to set up a groove and riffs , and for him to add the harmonies and melodies on top . He cites the " Apocalypse in 9 / 8 " section of " Supper 's Ready " , " The Cinema Show " and " Domino " as examples of this , and says the restrictions it gave him allowed the group to produce straightforward pop songs such as " Invisible Touch " and " Land of Confusion " in later years . 
 Banks used a number of keyboards during Genesis ' career , continually trying out new models , though he used the piano regularly throughout the group 's lifetime . In the 1970s , he frequently used the Hammond organ , Hohner Pianet , Mellotron , RMI Electronic Piano and ARP Pro Soloist . In the 1980s , he used the Sequential Circuits Prophet 5 and Prophet 10 , the ARP Quadra and various Korg synthesizers . For the Turn It On Again tour in 2007 , his main board was a Korg <unk> . As both a guitarist and bassist , Rutherford regularly swapped between the two roles , and his trademark instrument with Genesis , particularly through the 1970s , was a double neck guitar . In the 1980s and beyond , he favoured the Eric Clapton Stratocaster . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Genesis have been estimated to have sold between 100 – 130 million worldwide . Their total certified album sales include 21 @.@ 5 million in the US , 7 @.@ 2 million in the UK , 5 @.@ 6 million in Germany , and 3 @.@ 4 million in France . Genesis have been awarded with eleven Gold and four Multi @-@ Platinum albums in the UK , while in the US they have seven Gold , two Platinum , and four Multi @-@ Platinum albums . 
 In March 2010 , Genesis were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame by Phish guitarist Trey Anastasio . The band 's awards include a Silver Clef Award for outstanding contributions to British music at its second annual ceremony in 1977 . In 1988 , the band received one of the only two Grammy Awards issued for the short @-@ lived Best Concept Music Video category for " Land of Confusion " . In September 2012 , a Lifetime Achievement Award was given to the band at the inaugural Progressive Music Awards . In 2004 , Q ranked Genesis as the seventeenth @-@ biggest band in a list compiled based on album sales , time spent on the UK charts , and largest audience for a headlining show . Genesis were honoured at the second VH1 Rock Honors in May 2007 , which featured Banks , Rutherford and Collins . In 2008 , the band received a Lifetime Achievement Award at the MOJO Awards in 2008 . 
 Genesis were targets for criticism throughout the 1970s from those who disliked progressive rock . Influential BBC DJ John Peel championed the band in their early years and they performed three sessions for him between 1970 and 1972 , but he " grew disillusioned with their later excesses " . Some regarded the group as overtly middle class , paying particular attention to the founding members ' private education , and claimed rock music was being taken away from the working class , whom they regarded as its core audience . Likening his background to that of the punk artist Joe Strummer , who had become a " people 's hero " musician , Gabriel stated in 2013 , " To this day , we 've never outgrown the snotty rich @-@ kid thing ... we were always very straight about where we came from , and we were middle @-@ class , not aristocratic " . Gabriel 's theatrics were unpalatable to some of the mainstream rock audience , resulting in a cult following rather than that of a mainstream rock band . 
 At their commercial peak in the 1980s , the music of Genesis faced the accusation of being " <unk> insignificant " by leading American music critic Robert Hilburn , and it has been described as " barely distinguishable " from Collins 's solo work . According to Rolling Stone 's Erik Hedegaard , Collins in particular was blamed by those who accused the band of selling out . Retrospectively , The New Rolling Stone Album Guide critic J. D. Considine documented how the band had been " largely ignored " by the music press and public in their earliest years , before being " derided as middlebrow throwbacks still in thrall to the pomposities of art rock " in the late 1970s and then dismissed as " easy @-@ listening lightweights " in the 1980s . He argued this was unfair , as the band had made their " share of mediocre albums " but no bad ones . Q reviewer Andy Fyfe wrote in 2007 that " little of the band 's output has aged well " and " transcends in the way real classics do " , suggesting they would " remain perennial whipping boys for decades to come . " However , The Daily Telegraph chief rock music critic Neil McCormick has said that Genesis were " a daring and groundbreaking band ( certainly in their early career ) " , described Collins as " an outstanding drummer " and stated that " after Gabriel left , he stepped up to prove himself a charismatic frontman with a very distinctive vocal character " . 
 Journalists have reported that fans preferring one era of the band strongly dislike others . Rock author Colin McGuire has described the arguments from fans of the Gabriel era as " they sold out and became too corporate when Collins stepped into the spotlight " , while fans of the Collins era argue " the Gabriel years were boring and hard to stomach " . He concluded both eras of the band should be judged on their own merits . The band themselves have been aware of these divides ; press interviews for Abacab explicitly stated that fans of Foxtrot might not like the album , but should keep an open mind . 
 = = = Influence = = = 
 Genesis have been cited as a principal influence on the neo @-@ progressive rock subgenre that emerged in the 1980s , featuring bands including Marillion , and Pallas . Steve Hackett 's work in Genesis influenced guitarists such as Brian May of Queen , Alex Lifeson of Rush , and Eddie Van Halen of Van Halen . Genesis were also an influence on post @-@ punk artists such as Simple Minds and Will Sergeant , guitarist of Echo & the Bunnymen , as well as the electronic new wave band The Human League . Trey Anastasio of Phish said " It 's impossible to overstate what impact this band and musical philosophy had on me as a young musician . I 'm forever in their debt . " Mostly Autumn " fuse the music of Genesis and Pink Floyd " in their sound . The alternative rock band Elbow acknowledge Genesis as an influence , such as on their breakthrough song " Newborn " . 
 There are a number of Genesis tribute bands , including <unk> who focus on the group 's 1970s repertoire , and Mama , who cover all eras of the band . The most successful act has been the Canadian @-@ French band The Musical Box that have been officially endorsed by the band and had Hackett and Collins perform as guests with them . Gabriel has taken his children to see the Musical Box , so " they could see what their father did back then " , while Hackett has said " They not only manage to sound , but look virtually identical " . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 From Genesis to Revelation ( 1969 ) 
 Trespass ( 1970 ) 
 Nursery Cryme ( 1971 ) 
 Foxtrot ( 1972 ) 
 Selling England by the Pound ( 1973 ) 
 The Lamb Lies Down on Broadway ( 1974 ) 
 A Trick of the Tail ( 1976 ) 
 Wind & Wuthering ( 1976 ) 
 ... And Then There Were Three ... ( 1978 ) 
 Duke ( 1980 ) 
 Abacab ( 1981 ) 
 Genesis ( 1983 ) 
 Invisible Touch ( 1986 ) 
 We Can 't Dance ( 1991 ) 
 Calling All Stations ( 1997 ) 
 = Love Sex Magic = 
 " Love Sex Magic " is a song recorded by American singer Ciara for her third studio album , Fantasy Ride ( 2009 ) . Featuring fellow American recording artist Justin Timberlake , the song was written by Timberlake and his production team The Y 's and Mike Elizondo . The Y 's and Elizondo also produced the track . The song was released from Fantasy Ride as the lead single internationally , and was the second single from that album released in the United States . 
 The song reveals a complete departure from Ciara 's previous style , neither a sensual ballad nor incorporating Crunk & B influences . It embraces a dance @-@ pop sound , while including R & B and funk via a retro 1970s @-@ style guitar which is present in the piece . Many critics noted the similarities between the song and music on Timberlake 's album FutureSex / LoveSounds ( 2006 ) . Critics gave the song mixed reviews , complimenting the song 's funk and retro feel and the chemistry present between Ciara and Timberlake . The song would later go on to be nominated for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals at the 52nd Grammy Awards . 
 " Love Sex Magic " peaked at number ten on the Billboard Hot 100 , becoming Ciara 's fifth top ten hit as a lead artist , her eighth including features , and her first since " Get Up " in 2006 . Internationally , the song peaked within the top ten of the charts in Australia , Canada , France Germany , New Zealand , the Republic of Ireland , Sweden , Switzerland and the United Kingdom . The music video also exhibits a retro feel inspired by the Crazy Horse cabaret show , and features Timberlake , Ciara , and several different kinds of foreplay , as well as Ciara dancing . For its routines it was nominated for Best Choreography at the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards . Ciara has performed the song on television a number of times , including on The Ellen DeGeneres Show and with Timberlake on Saturday Night Live . 
 = = Background = = 
 A song entitled " Magic , " performed by Justin Timberlake , leaked online in November 2008 . In February 2009 , Rap @-@ Up reported that Ciara and Timberlake had recorded a new duet for her then @-@ upcoming album , Fantasy Ride . The final version of the song , initially titled " Love and Sex and Magic , " featured Timberlake <unk> with Ciara . Eventually known as " Love Sex Magic , " the song was written by Timberlake , Mike Elizondo , and Timberlake 's production team The Y 's — James Fauntleroy II , Timberlake , and Robin Tadross . Timberlake wanted to create a song that both genders could relate to . The Y 's and Elizondo produced the song . Ciara said that her collaboration with Timberlake was one of the best of her career , because they actually collaborated in the studio , rather than him being added as a guest feature after the initial recording . She explained , " I actually went into the studio to make the record from scratch , or he had the record there for me , but us being together was a very rare case I 've had over the years . " Ciara enjoyed her time with Timberlake , and valued the opportunity to work with him as an " artist and producer . " She also noted how passionate Timberlake was about his work , and mentioned his humbleness and positive attitude . 
 = = Composition = = 
 With " Love Sex Magic , " Ciara moved in a more pop direction than her past music . Jordan Sargent of PopMatters noted that while a pop fan might see the singer " back in her mind creatively , " a Ciara fan would see the song as " signal [ ing ] the end of the singer 's career as it once was . " Sargent stated that the song " sounds nothing like the chrome @-@ plated crunk & b nor the moonlit balladry that Ciara has staked her name on . " Musically , the song is a dance @-@ pop @-@ R & B number which makes use of electro and funk music , as well as displaying disco and soul influences . The song has a minimalistic dance beat , with a " funky , retro 70s style R & B guitar " as the backdrop . Lauren Carter of the Boston Herald said that the song is influenced by Timberlake 's disco @-@ funk work on FutureSex / LoveSounds , stating that " it sounds like a reworked version of his bass @-@ heavy dance number " Sexy Ladies . " Carter commented that Timberlake was " ushering Ciara away from her typically crunk @-@ laced stylings in favor of JT ’ s electro @-@ slide . " Ann Powers of The Los Angeles Times said that the song was " Madonna @-@ esque . " Both Ciara and Timberlake provide verses , accompanied by vocal whims and falsetto . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Dan Gennoe of Yahoo ! Music UK said that with the track , Ciara " lucked into the sexiest thing to happen to pop since Timberlake 's own FutureSex / LoveSounds , " calling the song one of the " biggest anthems of the year . " Gennoe went on to call the song the " highlight " and " saving grace " of Fantasy Ride . Nick Levine of Digital Spy said that " the track itself is nearly as sexy as the promo clip " , commenting " Ciara purrs , and Timberlake , if you 'll pardon the pun , more than rises to the occasion . All in all , ' Love Sex Magic ' is pretty much spot on . " Lauren Carter of the Boston Herald said " It ’ s not quite magic , but it grows on you . " Jeremy Medina of Entertainment Weekly said , " Hooking up with Timberlake essentially guarantees a one @-@ way ticket back to chart supremacy , so nice work there , Ciara . " Medina went on to call the song an early candidate for " song of the summer . " 
 Jon Caramanica welcomed the " female aggression " presented by Ciara on the track . Caramanica called it an unexpected twist , calling Ciara " still curiously anonymous " . He noted that Timberlake , not a " vocal powerhouse " himself , out @-@ sings Ciara on the track . Tom Breihan of Pitchfork Media said that the song was not bad and complimented the song 's disco feel . He said that it gained Ciara a " radio foothold that had been hers to lose a couple of years ago " , and commented that it seemed like " a bargain @-@ basement Justin Timberlake track , the sort of thing he could 've had lying around in a closet somewhere nearly three years after FutureSex / LoveSounds . " Breihan pointed out that " Timberlake 's nerdy swagger really highlights Ciara 's total lack of presence . " Jordan Sargent of PopMatters criticized the song for being generic , calling it " a formulaic FutureSex / LoveSounds disco retread " , commenting " The song probably could ’ ve been given to any struggling female singer and become a hit , and the fact that Ciara had to use it as her parachute is as puzzling as it is unfortunate . " Andy Kellman of Allmusic called the song a " hobbling flop " and said that it was " easily forgettable . " 
 At the 52nd Grammy Awards , " Love Sex Magic " was nominated for the award for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals . It lost to Jason Mraz and Colbie Caillat 's " Lucky . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 The song debuted at number eighty @-@ six on the Billboard Hot 100 , and the next week jumped to number twenty @-@ seven . In its third week , the song rose to number ten , becoming Ciara 's fifth top ten single . It was her first top ten entry since " Get Up " in 2006 . It was her highest @-@ charting song on the Hot 100 since " Like a Boy " in 2007 . " Love Sex Magic " appeared on multiple Billboard component charts , reaching number fourteen on the Pop Songs chart , number eighteen Hot Dance Club Songs chart , and eighty @-@ three on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . On the Canadian Hot 100 , the song debuted at number nine , and would later peak at number six . 
 Although the single did not rank among Ciara 's most successful singles in the United States , it performed well overall in international markets . In Australia , the song debuted at number six on the Australian ARIA Singles Chart , peaking at number five the next week . It spent fourteen weeks on the chart , and was eventually certified Platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , for shipments totalling 70 @,@ 000 copies . In New Zealand , the song debuted at number fourteen on the New Zealand Singles Chart . It remained stagnant the next week until it peaked at six on the chart the following week . Having spent thirteen weeks on the chart , the song was certified Gold by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) , for shipments totalling 7 @,@ 500 copies . 
 Across Europe , the single charted in the top ten of seven charts , and the top twenty of four others . Due to its numerous chartings in Europe , the song peaked at number six on the European Hot 100 chart . In the United Kingdom , " Love Sex Magic " debuted at number six on the UK Singles Chart , peaking at number five the following week . The song spent seventeen non @-@ consecutive weeks on the chart , as well as topping the UK R & B Chart for two weeks . In the Republic of Ireland , the song peaked at number four on the Irish Singles Chart , climbing from number seven the previous week . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The Diane Martel @-@ directed music video for " Love Sex Magic " premiered on March 22 , 2009 . In an interview with MTV News , Ciara said : " It 's all about showing another side of me with this video . I 'm basically giving you a show you 'd see in Vegas — and it 's my love , sex and magic show . He 's the voyeur and I play with him a little bit . I got my inspiration from the Crazy Horse show and just from the shows [ in Vegas ] , period . It 's giving you the elements of love and sex and magic . " In a later interview about the video , Ciara stated that she had to lick Timberlake 's ear , and at one point , he was licking her neck and they were " freestyling . " Martel wanted them to do something " edgy , " so they found a " cool way to do it . " Ciara noted the different pauses in cuts in between the tapings , commenting " so it 's licking on the neck , again , then his biting on my neck , again . It was really funny . " The singer would later elaborate on the Crazy Horse show reference in an interview with Blues & Soul , explaining that she had so much respect for the show that it became her reference . On working with Timberlake , she said , " Justin is one of the most easy @-@ going , down @-@ to @-@ earth , hard @-@ working and passionate artists you could ever work with . And , with both me and him , our goal was just to make the best video we could possibly make together , and to give the fans something a little fun and a little unexpected . " 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The video opens with Ciara and Timberlake face to face , caressing seductively . The camera cuts to Ciara who appears almost impervious to gravity . Dressed in lingerie , she maneuvers around a horizontal dance pole ; background dancers are veiled in vibrant color schemes and alternating strobe lights . The video then cuts to Ciara in a leotard , posing in abstract and flexible poses . Ciara is then seen dressed in a tiger @-@ striped catsuit performing solo dance moves on a stage . Timberlake performs his verse seated onstage while Ciara performs intricate tricks , such as snaking under his legs . Then the two begin to lightly move to the track before Ciara forms her body as an armrest as he leans on her . Ciara and the dancers perform choreography and cabaret @-@ style moves on the pole . The bridge of the song puts Timberlake on the ground and Ciara , standing over him , turns and performs her signature " Matrix " over him as he guides her body toward his with his right hand . The two perform and as Ciara gets up , Timberlake smacks her side as she pops to the beat . The video then cuts to a scene with Ciara in the catsuit portraying a tiger in a cage . In the final scene , Ciara and the dancers perform , dressed in 1970s @-@ inspired tuxedos and colored afros . The video ends with clips of Ciara 's multiple performance scenes from throughout the video . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Nick Levine of Digital Spy gave the video a positive review : " The video that accompanies this track is one of the year 's best so far — and certainly the sexiest : Ciara licks Justin 's ear , Justin reciprocates by slapping her bum , and , well , Ciara 's flexibility would put many a <unk> to shame . Quite frankly , the whole thing could make a nun have impure thoughts . " At the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards , the video was nominated for " Best Choreography ; " it lost to Beyoncé 's " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) . " The video ranked at number thirty @-@ nine on BET 's Notarized : Top 100 Videos of 2009 countdown . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 On May 9 , 2009 , Ciara performed the song on Saturday Night Live with Timberlake , that night 's host . Accompanied by live instruments , Ciara performed choreography with backup dancers , while Timberlake played the keyboard . Timberlake and Ciara danced provocatively after he came from behind the keyboard to perform his verse . During the set , Ciara also performed " Never Ever . " A writer for BET 's Sound Off Blog said , " aside from the fact that her grunts were live and her stage humps were unreal , Ciara ’ s set was pretty decent . Not that I expected any less from the A @-@ Town princess , but that was a pretty tasty performance . " The writer pointed out that Timberlake was not even noted on the set until he began his verse . In an interview with MTV News , Ciara went into detail about the setup of the performance , stating : 
 " I just kind of felt cool , ' cause Justin can play [ piano ] real well and he really gets into the music and it was , like , ' Hey , let 's make you part of the band . ' Having Justin in the background for the live performance was very different from the music video for the song , where the two dance quite provocatively with one another . [ We wanted to ] do something different and make it fun . It was awesome to see him pick up the keys . " 
 On May 13 , 2009 , Ciara performed the song on The Ellen DeGeneres Show , accompanied by background dancers . Ciara and the dancers performed choreography similar to that of the video and wore the 1970s @-@ inspired suits and afros . The same day , she performed the song with " Never Ever " on Jimmy Kimmel Live ! Ciara performed the song at the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards Japan on May 30 , 2009 . 
 = = Track listing and versions = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Ciara Harris – vocals 
 Justin Timberlake – vocals , producer , writer , instruments , music programming 
 James Fauntleroy – producer , writer , music programming 
 Robin Tadross – producer , writer , instruments , music programming 
 Mike Elizondo – producer , writer , instruments 
 Spike Stent – audio mixing 
 Henson Recording Studios in Los Angeles , CA - recording studio 
 Source 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Radio and release history = = 
 = A New Day Has Come = 
 A New Day Has Come is the seventh English @-@ language studio album by Canadian singer Celine Dion , released by Sony Music Entertainment on March 22 , 2002 . It was her first new studio album since 1997 's Let 's Talk About Love . Dion returned to the music scene after a two @-@ year hiatus when she gave birth to her first child . She collaborated on A New Day Has Come with various producers , including Anders Bagge and Peer Åström for the first time . Dion 's long @-@ time producer and friend , David Foster , did not appear on this album . A New Day Has Come garnered mostly positive reviews from the music critics , who noticed that Dion explores a " broader , more adventurous " range of pop music and " dips its toe " into modern music , particularly dance ( " Sorry for Love " ) . However , the album also contains the usual adult contemporary songs , including power ballads like " I Surrender " and " Have You Ever Been in Love , " or the title track . Critics also praised " Ten Days , " " Goodbye 's ( The Saddest Word ) , " " I 'm Alive , " " When the Wrong One Loves You Right , " " The Greatest Reward , " and two covers : " Nature Boy " and " At Last . " 
 A New Day Has Come became a commercial success throughout the world and entered number one in more than seventeen countries . It has sold 3 @.@ 3 million units in the United States and was certified three @-@ times Platinum by the RIAA . In Canada , after shipping 600 @,@ 000 copies , the album was certified six @-@ times Platinum . The IFPI certified it three @-@ times Platinum for selling three million units in Europe . Overall , A New Day Has Come has sold twelve million copies worldwide . The first single , " A New Day Has Come " was released in March 2002 and peaked inside the top ten in Canada and Europe . In the United States , it reached number twenty @-@ two on the Billboard Hot 100 and broke the record for most weeks at number one on the Hot Adult Contemporary Tracks chart , staying on top for twenty @-@ one weeks . The next single , " I 'm Alive " was issued in August 2002 and also peaked inside the top ten in numerous European countries . The last commercial single , " Goodbye 's ( The Saddest Word ) " was released in November 2002 and performed moderately on the charts , reaching the top forty in Europe . 
 = = Background = = 
 After the farewell millennium concert on December 31 , 1999 in Montreal , Dion decided to take a break from the public scene for two years to focus on her family . On January 25 , 2001 , she gave birth to René @-@ Charles <unk> , her first son . Since then , she had performed publicly only a handful of times , including September 21 , 2001 , when she sang a live rendition of " God Bless America " at the America : A Tribute to Heroes telethon honoring victims of the September 11 attacks , and September 28 for Montreal 's companion fund @-@ raiser , A Show for Life , singing " L 'amour <unk> encore . " 
 According to Dion , the album 's title , A New Day Has Come , acknowledged a new chapter in her life and career . However , she was also deeply affected by the events of September 11 and wanted the words to serve as a reminder of the tragedy . " It represents my child , because I gave life , " Dion said . " Obviously , it also marks my return with a new album . But a new day has also come in the lives of other people because something bad has happened , because we 've lost lives , because there 's a scar on our world now . " Dion struggled over an appropriate image for the cover of the album , feeling that a portrait reflecting her good fortune was in poor taste . She suggested to Sony Music Entertainment that the album cover not include her picture . However , after much discussion , the photo shoot for A New Day Has Come took place in Montreal in late December 2001 with well @-@ renowned photographer Melvin Sokolsky . On January 30 and 31 , 2002 an additional photo session for the album took place in Florida , on a beach near Dion 's home by the French photographer Patrick Demarchelier . The album cover for A New Day Has Come by Demarchelier was released on February 28 , 2002 . 
 René Angélil , Dion , and the Sony family began selecting prospective songs at the beginning of 2001 , and on August 28 , 2001 she started recording vocal tracks for nearly two dozen songs at Montreal 's Piccolo Studios . Because of Dion 's unwillingness to leave her seven @-@ month @-@ old baby , the album 's collaborators traveled to Montreal . " I didn 't feel the pressure to try and outdo anything , " Dion said of her time in the studio . " I proved myself before , so now I can enjoy . I was relaxed , I just let go . It was such a pleasure . " The album was scheduled for release internationally on March 25 , 2002 and in North America on March 26 , 2002 . However , it was first released in Australia , on March 22 , 2002 . 
 = = Content = = 
 Most of the producers of the album had worked with Dion before : Walter Afanasieff , Kristian Lundin , Andreas Carlsson , Christopher Neil , Guy Roche , Robert John " Mutt " Lange , Ric Wake , Aldo Nova , Simon Franglen and Humberto Gatica . The new ones included Swedish musicians Anders Bagge , Peer Åström and Arnthor Birgisson , French singer Gérald de Palmas and the US producer Steve Morales . A New Day Has Come showcases Dion 's traditional themes of love and hope . She sings ballads alongside several uptempo pop tracks and a pair of standards . The album contains sixteen tracks on the North American version and seventeen on the international editions , including " Super Love . " 
 It features " A New Day Has Come , " the title track , which for Dion represents the birth of her child but " it can mean different things for anyone who has to find strength again ; " I 'm Alive " , " fun " and " fresh " song from the team that wrote " That 's the Way It Is ; " " I Surrender , " the album 's " bombastic , heart @-@ pounding " ballad which has become a popular song choice for contestants on reality television singing competitions like American Idol ; " Sorry for Love , " a dance number written and produced by the Swedish team , co @-@ written by Kara DioGuardi ; " Have You Ever Been in Love , " a power ballad also written and produced by Bagge and Åström ; " Goodbye 's ( The Saddest Word ) , " an emotional ballad about the death of one 's mother which Dion first heard three years prior but turned it down at that time ; " Nature Boy , " a 1947 song made popular by Nat King Cole that features Dion accompanied only by piano as originally foreseen symphonic orchestration was not added ; " At Last , " a gospel @-@ tinged number first recorded by Glenn Miller in 1941 ; " Ten Days , " a rock @-@ oriented adaptation of " Tomber " ( 2000 ) by Gérald de Palmas which was recorded at the last minute after Dion heard the original French version ; " The Greatest Reward , " an adaptation of " L <unk> d 'aimer " ( 2000 ) from the French musical Les Dix <unk> , performed originally by Daniel Lévi ; and " Aun Existe Amor , " a Spanish @-@ language version of Dion 's French song " L 'amour <unk> encore . " 
 = = = Special editions = = = 
 On November 11 , 2002 in Europe and November 19 , 2002 in North America , Sony Music Entertainment released a Limited Edition of A New Day Has Come , which includes the original album , as well as a bonus DVD featuring the " I 'm Alive " video , a preview of Dion 's Las Vegas show A New Day ... as well as two previously unreleased tracks , " <unk> <unk> Shoulda " and " All Because of You . " The North American Limited Edition includes longer version of " The Greatest Reward " lasting 4 : 04 , instead of original 3 : 28 . On January 29 , 2008 , Legacy Recordings released a Collector 's Edition of A New Day Has Come with bonus DVD . The CD contains sixteen tracks from the North American version of the album , including extended version of " The Greatest Reward , " and the DVD features four music videos , and behind the scenes footage from making of the album and the " A New Day Has Come " video . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 Dion actively promoted the album , including various television show appearances and concerts . Her A New Day Has Come television special was taped on March 3 , 2002 at the Kodak Theatre in Los Angeles and aired on CBS on April 7 , 2002 . During the show Dion performed " A New Day Has Come , " " I 'm Alive , " " At Last , " " Have You Ever Been in Love , " " Nature Boy " and a movie medley with the songs " Because You Loved Me " , " " Beauty and the Beast " " in duet with Brian McKnight and " My Heart Will Go On . " She also sang " Aun Existe Amor " and " Goodbye 's ( The Saddest Word ) , " but both songs were not broadcast . Destiny 's Child joined her to perform together the " Emotion / When the Wrong One Loves You Right " medley . On March 17 , 2002 Dion taped La spéciale Céline Dion in Paris , France to promote the album in Francophone countries . This television special was broadcast on March 30 , 2002 on TF1 . During the show she performed " A New Day Has Come , " " Pour que tu m 'aimes encore " in duet with Jean @-@ Jacques Goldman , " Sous le vent " in duet with Garou , " Au bout de mes <unk> " with Garou , Pascal Obispo , Gérald de Palmas and Jean @-@ Jacques Goldman , " Ten Days " in duet with Gérald de Palmas , " I 'm Alive , " " On ne change pas " and " The Greatest Reward . " 
 Dion along with Cher , Mary J. Blige , Shakira and the Dixie Chicks headlined the VH1 Divas Las Vegas , which was hosted by Ellen DeGeneres and held in the MGM Grand Las Vegas . The concert was broadcast live on VH1 on May 23 , 2002 to benefit the VH1 Save The Music Foundation , a non @-@ profit organization dedicated to promoting music and education programs in schools . Other special guest performers included : Anastacia , Stevie Nicks , Cyndi Lauper and Whitney Houston . Dion opened the show performing the AC / DC 's hit " You Shook Me All Night Long " in duet with Anastacia . Later , she sang " A New Day Has Come " and " I 'm Alive . " For the finale , the divas performed a special Elvis Presley medley which included " Can 't Help Falling in Love " sung by Dion . The concert was released on CD and DVD in October 2002 . 
 On September 14 , 2002 Dion performed at the charity Concert for World Children 's Day , which took place at the Arie Crown Theater in Chicago and was under the supervision of David Foster . It was broadcast on ABC on November 14 , 2002 . She sang " That 's the Way It Is , " " My Heart Will Go On , " " The Prayer " in duet with Josh Groban and " Goodbye 's ( The Saddest Word ) . " For the finale , Dion joined other artists to perform with them " Aren 't They All Our Children . " The concert was released on DVD in December 2002 . On October 10 , 2002 , Dion taped in Paris her second television special for Francophone viewers , entitled Céline Dion à tout prix . She performed " I 'm Alive , " " Pour que tu m 'aimes encore , " " L <unk> d 'aimer " in duet with Daniel Lévi and " Ten Days / Tomber " medley with Gérald de Palmas . Dion also performed " Woman in Love " in duet with Natasha St @-@ Pier and joined <unk> to sing Stayin ' Alive . " The special was broadcast on November 22 , 2002 on M6 . 
 = = Singles = = 
 The first single , " A New Day Has Come " premiered on the radio on February 6 , 2002 . The music video was shot in mid @-@ February 2002 in West Palm Beach , Florida and directed by Dave Meyers . It premiered on March 13 , 2002 and the CD single was released outside the United States at the same time . " A New Day Has Come " became a top ten hit in Canada and Europe , including number seven in the United Kingdom . In the United States , it was released as an airplay @-@ only track , which led to its peak position on the Billboard Hot 100 at number twenty @-@ two . However , on the U.S. Hot Adult Contemporary Tracks , the song broke the record for most weeks at number one , staying on top for twenty @-@ one weeks . Also directed by Meyers , the music video for next single , " I 'm Alive " was filmed in late May 2002 in Los Angeles and the song was serviced to radio stations on June 7 , 2002 . At the same time , two remixes of " I 'm Alive " premiered : Humberto Gatica Mix and The Wake Up Mix . The music video debuted on June 27 , 2002 . " I 'm Alive " was also featured in the soundtrack for the movie Stuart Little 2 and the CD single was released in early August 2002 in Europe , Australia and Canada . The song peaked inside the top ten in various European countries which led to its number two position on the European Hot 100 Singles . In the United States , it reached number six on the Hot Adult Contemporary Tracks . The third and last commercial single , " Goodbye 's ( The Saddest Word ) " was released to radio on October 10 , 2002 . The music video was filmed in the Château d <unk> castle in France in mid @-@ October 2002 and directed by Chris Applebaum . It premiered on November 21 , 2002 and the CD single was released at the same time in Europe , reaching the top forty in various countries . On the U.S. Hot Adult Contemporary Tracks , " Goodbye 's ( The Saddest Word ) " peaked at number twenty @-@ seven . 
 Sony Music Entertainment released also two promotional singles in the United States : " Aun Existe Amor " and " At Last . " The first one was issued after Dion performed the song at the Billboard Latin Music Awards in May 2002 where she was honoured with a special award for " My Heart Will Go On , " which was the first English @-@ language song to top Billboard 's Hot Latin Tracks chart . " At Last " was sent to the adult contemporary radio stations in December 2002 and peaked at number sixteen on the Hot Adult Contemporary Tracks . Although not changed , " Have You Ever Been in Love " was also included on Dion 's next album , One Heart and released as a single in April 2003 . The song spent fourteen weeks at number two on the Hot Adult Contemporary Tracks in the United States . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The album garnered generally positive reviews from music critics . Chuck Taylor from Billboard gave it a favorable review , saying that Dion explores a " broader , more adventurous " range of pop music . Among the highlights , he mentioned " Sorry for Love " where Dion " dishes out her first all @-@ out dance anthem " and holds a twelve second " authentic note that puts the " d " in diva , " " I 'm Alive " and " When the Wrong One Loves You Right , " which he described as " <unk> uptempo gems , " the rock @-@ leaning " Ten Days , " and a Spanish track , " Aun Existe Amor . " According to Taylor , Dion does not disappoint with ballads like the " rafter @-@ shaking " " I Surrender " where she sings of " forbidden love amid a firestorm of utterly volcanic instrumentation " and " The Greatest Reward , " and two standards – the " diamond @-@ dipped " " Nature Boy " and gospel " At Last . " He called the album the most " versatile and gratifying " Dion 's recording yet . Larry Flick , also from Billboard wrote about another song , " Have You Ever Been in Love " that " at a time when music is frightfully aggressive and the world at large is fraught with turmoil , a classic Dion power ballad is a warm source of comfort . " The track " builds from a gentle , piano @-@ laced opening into a deliciously theatrical , string @-@ framed climax . " All along , Dion offers an " appealing palette of vocal colors that range from delicate and breathy to full @-@ bodied and appropriately dramatic . " 
 Chuck Taylor also reviewed all three singles from the album . He wrote that the life @-@ affirming " A New Day Has Come " " comes off like a gentle exhale against the world 's ills . " The Ric Wake Radio Remix of " A New Day Has Come " opens with an " Enya @-@ inspired whisper before a shuffle skips in and lifts the song upward like a dove gracefully taking flight . " The Album Edit " comes sans the beat , allowing Dion 's performance alone to fully color the message . " According to him , on both versions Dion " embraces a particularly restrained performance – dramatic enough to steer the track 's emotion , but still delicate to offer comfort . " " I 'm Alive " demonstrates a stylistic " left turn , with its throbbing tribal rhythms and a loose , sky @-@ grazing vocal from Dion . " The " percolating " Humberto Gatica Mix " adds juice " to the Album Version , while the uptempo Wake Up Mix , with assistance from Ric Wake and Richie Jones , is Dion 's most " inspired and festive " remix to date , with Blondie 's " Heart of Glass " woven into the beat to " splendid effect . " Taylor criticized the choice of the third single , " Goodbye 's ( The Saddest Word ) , " a ballad relegated solely to adult contemporary radio stations . He noticed that the song is " devastatingly beautiful , " offering a loving tribute to one 's mother at death 's door and that Dion " delivers it with a heaving helping of passion , emotionally drawing one 's attention to the devotional message . " Although he felt that many will connect to the loss of a parent , on a commercial level , this was a disappointing decision . According to Taylor , songs like " Sorry for Love " and " When the Wrong One Loves You Right " were primed for radio airplay and dancefloor remixes and were ideal candidates for release . 
 Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic gave the album three and a half out of five stars saying that its construction is " as perfect as it could be . " It doesn 't " deviate " from Dion 's mainstream audience , yet it " dips its toe " into modern music , particularly dance , while " keeping hip " ( " Nature Boy " ) . Although Erlewine described " Rain , Tax ( It 's Inevitable ) " as " bizarre , " he wrote that " there 's really nothing to fault it on , actually , " the album is " more ambitious than it needs to be , covers more stylistic territory than any other Dion record , while never abandoning the middle @-@ of @-@ the @-@ road ; it 's a balancing act that nobody since Barbra Streisand has been able to pull off . " According to Erlewine , the songs aren 't " that particularly memorable , " " the mood shifts effortlessly , it never seems to stay in one place , " but it " never catches hold , either . " Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine gave A New Day Has Come three out of five stars . According to him , Dion is great at what she does and " if she ever tried anything too edgy she 'd probably just sound foolish . " Cinquemani disliked " Rain , Tax ( It 's Inevitable ) " but praised " Sorry for Love " on which Dion " gets the Cher treatment , " an unexpected " change of pace that actually works . " Among other highlights he mentioned two covers , a " soulful " rendition of " At Last " and a " simple and moving " arrangement of " Nature Boy . " He also noticed that the album is " packed " with the usual adult contemporary songs : " I Surrender , " a power ballad " only a singer with Dion 's voice could pull off , " " Ten Days , " the guitar @-@ driven " catchy pop @-@ rocker with a surprisingly edgy vocal , " " Goodbye 's ( The Saddest Word ) , " a track featuring Shania Twain on backing vocals that " will leave you nauseous or in tears , " " I 'm Alive , " the " uplifting " midtempo number and " A New Day Has Come , the " stirring " title track . 
 Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly gave the album B − . He felt that A New Day Has Come was " over @-@ arranged " by producers , which works " against Dion 's enthusiasm for the wonders of babies and innocence . " Nevertheless , he praised the " jaunty disco " of " Sorry for Love , " and " Have You Ever Been in Love " which " builds in intensity to sound like " a James Bond movie theme as delivered by Barbra Streisand . " Tucker described " Rain , Tax ( It 's Inevitable ) " as the most " idiosyncratic " and " idiomatic " song that Dion has ever recorded . According to the positive review from Mike Ross of Jam ! , A New Day Has Come " picks up where Falling into You left off . " Dion 's album is a full of " bombast , melodrama and soaring love ballads indistinguishable from anything she 's ever done . " Attempts at modernity are " spotty , " though " welcome . " Ross noticed that ballads are the strongest tracks on the album and praised " Goodbye 's ( The Saddest Word ) , " with " two soaring key changes " in the same song , which is then launched into a " high Earth orbit of melodrama by an orchestra that would make John Williams blush with envy . " Barnes & Noble also gave the album favorable review and wrote that the new songs reveal a more " spiritual " and " edgier " Dion . They praised the " uplifting " title track , " heartfelt , country @-@ tinged " " Goodbye 's ( The Saddest Word ) , " " anthemic , gospel choir @-@ accented ballad " " Prayer , " " bluesy , honky @-@ tonk rocker " " Ten Days , " " soaring ballad " " Have You Ever Been in Love , " and " solid renditions " of " Nature Boy " and " At Last . " 
 = = Commercial reception = = 
 Dion earned two career achievements with the debut of A New Day Has Come in the United States . It became her first album to open at number @-@ one on the Billboard 200 – her fourth number @-@ one overall – and it set a personal best for first @-@ week sales ( 558 @,@ 000 units ) . Previously , 1997 's Let 's Talk About Love sold 334 @,@ 000 in its first week , while 1999 's All the Way ... A Decade of Song opened with 303 @,@ 000 . The 558 @,@ 000 tally became Dion 's third largest one @-@ week total , following 640 @,@ 000 units of All the Way ... A Decade of Song and 624 @,@ 000 copies of Let 's Talk About Love , both during Christmas periods . In the second week , A New Day Has Come fell to number two selling 263 @,@ 000 copies . It stayed there for another week with sales of 226 @,@ 000 units . For the next two weeks , A New Day Has Come occupied the number three position and sold 163 @,@ 000 and 114 @,@ 000 copies respectively . In the sixth week , it fell to number six selling 101 @,@ 000 units and in the seventh week it climbed to number two with 143 @,@ 000 copies sold . A New Day Has Come spent ten weeks inside the top ten on the Billboard 200 . On the list of best selling albums of 2002 in the United States , it reached number 12 with sales of 2 @,@ 645 @,@ 000 units . In January 2003 , it was certified three @-@ times Platinum by the RIAA and as of December 5 , 2010 , it has sold 3 @,@ 307 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . 
 In Canada , A New Day Has Come debuted at number @-@ one , selling 151 @,@ 600 copies — more than ten times her nearest competition , Shakira 's Laundry Service ( 12 @,@ 200 ) . It stayed at number @-@ one for seven straight weeks marking Dion 's longest run at number @-@ one , beating the six @-@ week reign of The Colour of My Love . It was certified six @-@ times Platinum by the CRIA . A New Day Has Come topped the charts in most European countries and was certified Multi @-@ Platinum , Platinum and Gold . After selling three million copies in Europe and spending seven weeks at number @-@ one on the European Top 100 Albums , it was certified three @-@ times Platinum by the IFPI . A New Day Has Come also peaked at number @-@ one in Australia and New Zealand and was certified two @-@ times Platinum in both countries . 
 The album entered number one in more than seventeen countries , becoming the biggest debut of 2002 . The commercial success of A New Day Has Come led to its fifth position on the list of best selling albums of 2002 , according to the IFPI . It has sold twelve million copies worldwide . 
 = = Awards = = 
 In 2003 , Dion won the American Music Award for Favorite Adult Contemporary Artist and was nominated for Favorite Pop / Rock Female Artist . She also won Billboard Music Award for Hot Adult Contemporary Artist and was nominated for Top Pop Catalog Artist and Hot Adult Contemporary Track ( " A New Day Has Come " ) . Dion also won the following awards : Félix Award for Artist of the Year Achieving the Most Success in a Language Other Than French , IFPI Hong Kong Top Sales Music Award for Best Selling Foreign Release ( A New Day Has Come ) , Arion Music Award for Best Selling International Album ( A New Day Has Come ) and Dragon Award for International Female Artist of the Year . " A New Day Has Come " also won ASCAP Pop Award and BMI Pop Award for Most Performed Song , and three SOCAN Awards in categories : Pop Music , International Achievement and Classic Songs . Dion was also nominated for four Juno Awards of 2003 , including : Artist of the Year , Fan Choice Award , Album of the Year ( A New Day Has Come ) and Single of the Year ( " A New Day Has Come " ) . Nominations for other awards include : People 's Choice Award for Favourite Female Musical Performer , Echo Award for International Female Artist of the Year and MuchMoreMusic Award for " A New Day Has Come " music video . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications and sales = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits taken from AllMusic . 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Amundsen 's South Pole expedition = 
 The first expedition to reach the geographic South Pole was led by the Norwegian explorer Roald Amundsen . He and four others arrived at the pole on 14 December 1911 , five weeks ahead of a British party led by Robert Falcon Scott as part of the Terra Nova Expedition . Amundsen and his team returned safely to their base , and later learned that Scott and his four companions had died on their return journey . 
 Amundsen 's initial plans had focused on the Arctic and the conquest of the North Pole by means of an extended drift in an icebound ship . He obtained the use of Fridtjof Nansen 's polar exploration ship Fram , and undertook extensive fundraising . Preparations for this expedition were disrupted when , in 1909 , the rival American explorers Frederick Cook and Robert E. Peary each claimed to have reached the North Pole . Amundsen then changed his plan and began to prepare for a conquest of the South Pole ; uncertain of the extent to which the public and his backers would support him , he kept this revised objective secret . When he set out in June 1910 , he led even his crew to believe they were embarking on an Arctic drift , and revealed their true Antarctic destination only when Fram was leaving their last port of call , Madeira . 
 Amundsen made his Antarctic base , which he named " Framheim " , in the Bay of Whales on the Great Ice Barrier . After months of preparation , depot @-@ laying and a false start that ended in near @-@ disaster , he and his party set out for the pole in October 1911 . In the course of their journey they discovered the Axel Heiberg Glacier , which provided their route to the polar plateau and ultimately to the South Pole . The party 's mastery of the use of skis and their expertise with sledge dogs ensured rapid and relatively trouble @-@ free travel . Other achievements of the expedition included the first exploration of King Edward VII Land and an extensive oceanographic cruise . 
 The expedition 's success was widely applauded . The story of Scott 's heroic failure overshadowed its achievement in the United Kingdom , unable to accept that a Norwegian had been the first person to set foot in the South Pole , but not in the rest of the world . Amundsen 's decision to keep his true plans secret until the last moment was criticised by some . Recent polar historians have more fully recognised the skill and courage of Amundsen 's party ; the permanent scientific base at the pole bears his name , together with that of Scott . 
 = = Background = = 
 Amundsen was born in Fredrikstad ( around 80 km from Christiania ( now Oslo ) ) , Norway , in 1872 , the son of a ship @-@ owner . In 1893 , he abandoned his medical studies at Christiania University and signed up as a seaman aboard the sealer Magdalena for a voyage to the Arctic . After several further voyages he qualified as a second mate ; when not at sea , he developed his skills as a cross @-@ country skier in the harsh environment of Norway 's Hardangervidda plateau . In 1896 , inspired by the polar exploits of his countryman Fridtjof Nansen , Amundsen joined the Belgian Antarctic Expedition as mate , aboard Belgica under Adrien de Gerlache . Early in 1898 the ship became trapped by pack ice in the <unk> Sea , and was held fast for almost a year . The expedition thus became , involuntarily , the first to spend a complete winter in Antarctic waters , a period marked by depression , near @-@ starvation , insanity , and scurvy among the crew . Amundsen remained dispassionate , recording everything and using the experience as an education in all aspects of polar exploration techniques , particularly aids , clothing and diet . 
 Belgica 's voyage marked the beginning of what became known as the Heroic Age of Antarctic Exploration , and was rapidly followed by expeditions from the United Kingdom , Sweden , Germany and France . However , on his return to Norway in 1899 , Amundsen turned his attention northwards . Confident in his abilities to lead an expedition , he planned a traversal of the Northwest Passage , the then @-@ uncharted sea route from the Atlantic to the Pacific through the labyrinth of north Canadian islands . Having earned his master 's ticket , Amundsen acquired a small sloop , Gjøa , which he adapted for Arctic travel . He secured the patronage of King Oscar of Sweden and Norway , the support of Nansen , and sufficient financial backing to set out in June 1903 with a crew of six . The voyage lasted until 1906 and was wholly successful ; the Northwest Passage , which defeated mariners for centuries , was finally conquered . At the age of 34 Amundsen became a national hero , in the first rank of polar explorers . 
 In November 1906 the American Robert Peary returned from his latest unsuccessful quest for the North Pole , claiming a new Farthest North of 87 ° 6 ′ — a record disputed by later historians . He immediately began raising funds for a further attempt . In July 1907 Dr Frederick Cook , a former shipmate of Amundsen 's from Belgica , set off northwards on what was ostensibly a hunting trip but was rumoured to be an attempt on the North Pole . A month later Ernest Shackleton 's Nimrod Expedition sailed for Antarctica , while Robert Falcon Scott was preparing a further expedition should Shackleton fail . Amundsen saw no reason to concede priority in the south to the British , and spoke publicly about the prospects of leading an Antarctic expedition — although his preferred goal remained the North Pole . 
 = = Preparation = = 
 = = = Nansen and Fram = = = 
 In 1893 Nansen had driven his ship Fram into the Arctic pack ice off the northern Siberian coast and allowed it to drift in the ice towards Greenland , hoping that this route would cross the North Pole . In the event , the drift did not approach the pole , and an attempt by Nansen and Hjalmar Johansen to reach it on foot was likewise unsuccessful . Nevertheless , Nansen 's strategy became the basis of Amundsen 's own Arctic plans . He reasoned that if he entered the Arctic Ocean via the Bering Strait , well to the east of Nansen 's starting point , his ship would achieve a more northerly drift and pass near or through the pole . 
 Amundsen consulted Nansen , who insisted that Fram was the only vessel fit for such an undertaking . Fram had been designed and built in 1891 – 93 by Colin Archer , Norway 's leading shipbuilder and naval architect , in accordance with Nansen 's exacting specifications , as a vessel that would withstand prolonged exposure to the harshest of Arctic conditions . The ship 's most distinctive feature was its rounded hull which , according to Nansen , enabled the vessel to " slip like an eel out of the embraces of the ice " . For extra strength the hull was sheathed in South American <unk> , the hardest timber available , and crossbeams and braces were fitted throughout its length . The ship 's wide beam of 36 feet ( 11 m ) in relation to its overall length of 128 feet ( 39 m ) gave it a markedly stubby appearance . This shape improved its strength in the ice but affected its performance in the open sea , where it moved sluggishly and was inclined to roll most uncomfortably . However , its looks , speed , and sailing qualities were secondary to the provision of a secure and warm shelter for the crew during a voyage that might extend over several years . 
 Fram had emerged virtually unscathed from Nansen 's expedition after nearly three years in the polar ice . On its return it had been refitted , before spending four years under the command of Otto Sverdrup , charting and exploring 100 @,@ 000 square miles ( 260 @,@ 000 km2 ) of uninhabited territory in the northern Canadian islands . After Sverdrup 's voyage ended in 1902 Fram was laid up in Christiania . Although the ship was technically the property of the state , it was tacitly acknowledged that Nansen had first call on it . After his return from the Arctic in 1896 he had aspired to take Fram on an expedition to Antarctica , but by 1907 such hopes had faded . Late in September of that year , Amundsen was summoned to Nansen 's home and told he could have the ship . 
 = = = Initial steps = = = 
 Amundsen made his plans public on 10 November 1908 , at a meeting of the Norwegian Geographical Society . He would take Fram round Cape Horn to the Pacific Ocean ; after provisioning in San Francisco the ship would continue northwards , through the Bering Strait to Point Barrow . From here he would set a course directly into the ice to begin a drift that would extend over four or five years . Science would be as important as geographical exploration ; continuous observations would , Amundsen hoped , help to explain a number of unresolved problems . The plan was received enthusiastically , and the next day King Haakon opened a subscription list with a gift of 20 @,@ 000 kroner . On 6 February 1909 the Norwegian Parliament approved a grant of 75 @,@ 000 kroner to refit the ship . The general fundraising and business management of the expedition was placed in the hands of Amundsen 's brother Leon so that the explorer could concentrate on the more practical aspects of organisation . 
 In March 1909 it was announced that Shackleton had reached a southern latitude of 88 ° 23 ′ — 97 nautical miles ( 180 km ) from the South Pole — before turning back ; thus , as Amundsen observed , in the south " a little corner remained " . He was unreserved in his praise for Shackleton 's achievement , writing that Shackleton was the south 's equivalent of Nansen in the north . Following this near miss , Scott immediately confirmed his intention to lead an expedition ( what became the Terra Nova Expedition ) that would encompass the " little corner " and claim the prize for the British Empire . 
 = = = Personnel = = = 
 Amundsen chose three naval lieutenants as his expedition 's officers : Thorvald Nilsen , a navigator who would be second @-@ in @-@ command ; Hjalmar Fredrik Gjertsen , and Kristian Prestrud . Gjertsen , despite lacking a medical background , was made expedition doctor , and was sent on a " lightning course " in surgery and dentistry . A naval gunner , Oscar Wisting , was accepted on Prestrud 's recommendation because he could turn his hand to most tasks . Although he had little previous experience of sledge dogs , Amundsen wrote that Wisting developed " a way of his own " with them , and became a useful amateur veterinarian . 
 An early choice for the party was Olav Bjaaland , a champion skier who was a skilled carpenter and ski @-@ maker . Bjaaland was from <unk> in the Telemark province of Norway , a region renowned for the prowess of its skiers and as the home of the pioneer of modern techniques , Sondre Norheim . Amundsen shared Nansen 's belief that skis and sledge dogs provided by far the most efficient method of Arctic transport , and was determined to recruit the most skilful dog drivers . Helmer Hanssen , who had proved his worth on the Gjøa expedition , agreed to travel with Amundsen again . He was joined later by Sverre Hassel , an expert on dogs , and veteran of Sverdrup 's 1898 – 1902 Fram voyage , who intended only to travel with Amundsen as far as San Francisco . Mindful of the value of a competent cook , Amundsen secured the services of Adolf Lindstrøm , another Sverdrup veteran who had been cook aboard Gjøa . 
 From his experiences on board Belgica and Gjøa , Amundsen had learned the importance on long voyages of stable and compatible companions , and with these experienced personnel he felt he had the core of his expedition . He continued to recruit through 1909 ; the Fram party would eventually total 19 . All of these except one were Amundsen 's personal choices ; the exception was Hjalmar Johansen , who was taken on at the request of Nansen . Since his epic march with Nansen , Johansen had been unable to settle down . Despite the efforts of Nansen and others to help him , his life became a spiral of drink and indebtedness . Nansen wished to give his former comrade a final chance to show that he was still a capable worker in the field ; feeling that he could not refuse Nansen 's wishes , Amundsen reluctantly accepted Johansen . The party contained two foreigners : a young Russian oceanographer Alexander <unk> ( or <unk> ) , who was a pupil of Bjorn Helland @-@ Hansen , and a Swedish engineer , Knut <unk> . 
 = = = Change of plan = = = 
 In September 1909 newspapers carried reports that Cook and Peary had each reached the North Pole , Cook in April 1908 and Peary a year later . Asked to comment , Amundsen avoided an outright endorsement of either explorer , but surmised that " probably something will be left to be done " . While he avoided the controversy over the rival claims , he saw immediately that his own plans would be seriously affected . Without the allure of capturing the pole , he would struggle to maintain public interest or funding . " If the expedition was to be saved ... there was nothing left for me but to try and solve the last great problem — the South Pole " . Thus Amundsen decided to go south ; the Arctic drift could wait " for a year or two " until the South Pole had been conquered . 
 Amundsen did not publicise his change of plan . As Scott 's biographer David Crane points out , the expedition 's public and private funding was earmarked for scientific work in the Arctic ; there was no guarantee that the backers would understand or agree to the proposed volte @-@ face . Furthermore , the altered objective might cause Nansen to revoke the use of Fram , or parliament to halt the expedition for fear of undermining Scott and offending the British . Amundsen concealed his intentions from everyone except his brother Leon and his second @-@ in @-@ command , Nilsen . This secrecy led to awkwardness ; Scott had sent Amundsen instruments to enable their two expeditions , at opposite ends of the earth , to make comparative readings . When Scott , in Norway to test his motor sledges , telephoned Amundsen 's home to discuss cooperation , the Norwegian would not take the call . 
 The privately revised expedition schedule required Fram to leave Norway in August 1910 and sail to Madeira in the Atlantic , its only port of call . From there the ship would proceed directly to the Ross Sea in Antarctica , heading for the Bay of Whales , an inlet on the Ross Ice Shelf ( then known as the " Great Ice Barrier " ) where Amundsen intended to make his base camp . The Bay of Whales was the southernmost point in the Ross Sea to which a ship could penetrate , 60 nautical miles ( 110 km ) closer to the Pole than Scott 's intended base at McMurdo Sound . In 1907 – 09 Shackleton had considered the ice in the Bay of Whales to be unstable , but from his studies of Shackleton 's records Amundsen decided that the Barrier here was grounded on shoals or skerries , and would support a safe and secure base . After landing the shore party , Fram was to carry out oceanographic work in the Atlantic before picking up the shore party early in the following year . 
 = = = Transport , equipment and supplies = = = 
 Amundsen did not understand the apparent aversion of British explorers to dogs : " Can it be that the dog has not understood its master ? Or is it the master who has not understood the dog ? " he later wrote . Following his decision to go south he ordered 100 North Greenland sledge dogs — the best and strongest available . Besides their durability as pack animals , dogs could be fed to other dogs and could provide fresh meat for the men in the polar party . 
 The party 's ski boots , specially designed by Amundsen , were the product of two years ' testing and modification in search of perfection . The party 's polar clothing included suits of sealskin from Northern Greenland , and clothes fashioned after the style of the <unk> Inuit from reindeer skins , wolf skin , Burberry cloth and gabardine . The sledges were constructed from Norwegian ash with steel @-@ shod runners made from American hickory . Skis , also fashioned from hickory , were extra long to reduce the likelihood of slipping into crevasses . The tents — " the strongest and most practical that have ever been used " — had built @-@ in floors and required a single pole . For cooking on the march , Amundsen chose the Swedish Primus stove rather than the special cooker devised by Nansen , because he felt the latter took up too much space . 
 From his experiences on Belgica , Amundsen was aware of the dangers of scurvy . Although the true cause of the disease , vitamin C deficiency , was not understood at the time , it was generally known that the disease could be countered by eating fresh meat . To neutralise the danger , Amundsen planned to supplement sledging rations with regular helpings of seal meat . He also ordered a special kind of pemmican which included vegetables and oatmeal : " a more stimulating , nourishing and appetising food it would be impossible to find " . The expedition was well supplied with wines and spirits , for use as medicine and on festive or social occasions . Mindful of the loss of morale on Belgica , Amundsen provided for leisure time with a library of around 3 @,@ 000 books , a gramophone , a large quantity of records and a range of musical instruments . 
 = = = Departure = = = 
 In the months before departure , funds for the expedition became harder to acquire . Because of limited public interest , newspaper deals were cancelled and parliament refused a request for a further 25 @,@ 000 kroner . Amundsen mortgaged his house to keep the expedition afloat ; heavily in debt , he was now wholly dependent on the expedition 's success to avoid personal financial ruin . 
 After a month 's trial cruise in the northern Atlantic , Fram sailed to Kristiansand in late July 1910 to take the dogs on board and to make final preparations for departure . While at Kristiansand , Amundsen received an offer of help from Peter " Don Pedro " Christophersen , a Norwegian expatriate whose brother was Norway 's Minister in Buenos Aires . Christophersen would provide fuel and other provisions to Fram at either Montevideo or Buenos Aires , an offer which Amundsen gratefully accepted . Just before Fram sailed on 9 August , Amundsen revealed the expedition 's true destination to the two junior officers , Prestrud and Gjertsen . On the four @-@ week voyage to Funchal in Madeira , a mood of uncertainty developed among the crew , who could not make sense of some of the preparations and whose questions were met with evasive answers from their officers . This , says Amundsen 's biographer Roland Huntford , was " enough to generate suspicion and low spirits " . 
 Fram reached Funchal on 6 September . Three days later Amundsen informed the crew of the revised plan . He told them he intended to make " a detour " to the South Pole on the way to the North Pole , which was still his ultimate destination , but would have to wait for a while . After Amundsen outlined his new proposals , each man was asked whether he was willing to go on , and all responded positively . Amundsen wrote a lengthy letter of explanation to Nansen , stressing how the North Pole claims of Cook and Peary had dealt a " death blow " to his original plans . He felt he had been forced into this action by necessity , asked for forgiveness and expressed the hope that his achievements would ultimately atone for any offence . 
 Before leaving Funchal on 9 September Amundsen sent a cable to Scott , to inform him of the change of plan . Scott 's ship Terra Nova had left Cardiff amid much publicity on 15 June , and was due to arrive in Australia early in October . It was to Melbourne that Amundsen sent his telegram , containing the bare information that he was proceeding southwards . No indication was given of the Norwegian 's plans or his destination in Antarctica ; Scott wrote to the Royal Geographical Society ( RGS ) secretary , John Scott Keltie : " We shall know in due course I suppose " . News of Amundsen 's revised plans reached Norway early in October and provoked a generally hostile response . Although Nansen gave his blessing and warm approval , Amundsen 's actions were with few exceptions condemned by press and public , and funding dried up almost completely . Reactions in Britain were predictably adverse ; an initial disbelief expressed by Keltie soon turned to anger and scorn . " I have sent full details of Amundsen 's underhand conduct to Scott ... If I was Scott I would not let them land " , wrote Sir Clements Markham , the influential former RGS president . Unaware of the world 's reactions , Fram sailed south for four months . The first icebergs were sighted on New Year 's Day 1911 ; the Barrier itself came into view on 11 January , and on 14 January Fram was in the Bay of Whales . 
 = = First season , 1910 – 11 = = 
 = = = Framheim = = = 
 After Fram was anchored to ice in an inlet in the south @-@ eastern corner of the Bay , Amundsen selected a site for the expedition 's main hut , 2 @.@ 2 nautical miles ( 4 @.@ 1 km ) from the ship . Six teams of dogs were used to move supplies to the site , as work on erecting the hut began . Bjaaland and Stubberud laid the foundations deep into the ice , levelling the sloping ground . Because the prevailing winds came from the east , the hut was erected on an east @-@ west axis , with the door facing west ; in this way the wind caught only the shorter eastern wall . The roof was in place by 21 January , and six days later the hut was complete . By then a large supply of meat — including 200 seals — had been brought to the base , for use by the shore party and to be laid in depots before the journey to the pole . The base was dubbed Framheim , " the home of Fram " . 
 Early on the morning of 3 February , Terra Nova arrived unexpectedly in the Bay of Whales . She had sailed from New Zealand on 29 November 1910 and had arrived in McMurdo Sound early in January . After landing Scott and his main party there , Terra Nova had taken a party of six men , led by Victor Campbell , eastward to King Edward VII Land . This group intended to explore this then @-@ unknown territory , but had been prevented by sea ice from approaching the shore . The ship was sailing westward along the Barrier edge in search of a possible landing place when it encountered Fram . Scott had previously speculated that Amundsen might make his base in the Weddell Sea area , on the opposite side of the continent ; this proof that the Norwegians would be starting the race for the pole with a 60 nautical mile advantage was an alarming prospect for the British . The two groups behaved civilly towards each other ; Campbell and his officers Harry Pennell and George Murray Levick breakfasted aboard Fram , and reciprocated with lunch on the Terra Nova . Amundsen was relieved to learn that Terra Nova had no wireless radio , since that might have imperilled his strategy to be first with the news of a polar victory . He was worried , however , by a remark of Campbell 's that implied that Scott 's motorised sledges were working well . Nevertheless , he offered the British party a site alongside Framheim as a base for the exploration of King Edward VII Land . Campbell turned the offer down , and sailed for McMurdo Sound to inform Scott of Amundsen 's whereabouts . 
 = = = Depot journeys = = = 
 In early February Amundsen began organising the depot @-@ laying journeys across the Barrier , in preparation for the following summer 's assault on the pole . Supply depots laid in advance at regular intervals on the projected route would limit the amount of food and fuel that the South Pole party would have to carry . The depot journeys would be the first true tests of equipment , dogs and men . For the first journey , to begin on 10 February , Amundsen chose Prestrud , Helmer Hanssen and Johansen to accompany him ; 18 dogs would pull three sledges . Before leaving , Amundsen left instructions with Nilsen regarding Fram . The ship was to sail to Buenos Aires for reprovisioning , before undertaking a programme of oceanographic work in the Southern Ocean and then returning to the Barrier as early as possible in 1912 . 
 When the four men began their journey south , their only knowledge of the Barrier was from books previous explorers had published , and they anticipated difficult travelling conditions . They were surprised to find the Barrier surface was much like that of a conventional glacier ; they covered 15 nautical miles ( 28 km ) on the first day . Amundsen noted how well his dogs were performing in these conditions , and wondered at the English aversion to the use of dogs on the Barrier . The party reached 80 ° S on 14 February , and after laying the depot turned for home , reaching Framheim on 16 February . 
 The second depot @-@ laying party left Framheim on 22 February , with eight men , seven sledges and forty @-@ two dogs . Conditions on the Barrier had deteriorated sharply ; average temperatures had dropped by 9 ° C ( 16 ° F ) , and rough snow had drifted across the previously smooth ice surface . In temperatures sometimes as low as − 40 ° C ( − 40 ° F ) , on 3 March the party reached 81 ° S , where they established a second depot . Amundsen , Helmer Hanssen , Prestrud , Johansen and Wisting then continued with the strongest dogs , hoping to reach 83 ° S , but in difficult conditions they halted at 82 ° S on 8 March . Amundsen could see that the dogs were exhausted ; the party turned for home , and with light sledges travelled swiftly to reach Framheim on 22 March . Amundsen wanted more supplies taken south before the impending polar night made travel impossible , and on 31 March a party of seven men led by Johansen left Framheim for the 80 ° S depot with six slaughtered seals — 2 @,@ 400 pounds ( 1 @,@ 100 kg ) of meat . The party returned on 11 April — three days later than expected — after they strayed into a field of crevasses . 
 Overall , the depot @-@ laying journeys established three depots containing 7 @,@ 500 pounds ( 3 @,@ 400 kg ) of supplies , which included 3 @,@ 000 pounds ( 1 @,@ 400 kg ) of seal meat and 40 imperial gallons ( 180 L ) of paraffin oil . Amundsen learned much from the journeys , especially on the second , when the dogs struggled with sledges that were too heavy . He decided to increase the number of dogs for the polar journey , if necessary at the expense of the number of men . The journeys revealed some disunity among the men , particularly between Johansen and Amundsen . During the second depot journey , Johansen openly complained about the unsatisfactory nature of the equipment ; Amundsen believed that his authority had been challenged . 
 = = = Winter = = = 
 The sun set over Framheim on 21 April , not to reappear for four months . Amundsen was mindful of the boredom and loss of morale that had blighted the Belgica expedition 's winter in the ice , and although there was no possibility of sledging he ensured that the shore party kept busy . One urgent task was to improve the sledges , which had not worked well during the depot journeys . In addition to those chosen specifically for the expedition , Amundsen had brought along several sledges from Sverdrup 's 1898 – 1902 Fram expedition , which he now thought would be better suited to the task ahead . Bjaaland reduced the weight of these older sledges by almost a third by planing down the timber , and also constructed three sledges of his own from some spare hickory wood . The adapted sledges were to be used to cross the Barrier , while Bjaaland 's new set would be used in the final stages of the journey , across the polar plateau itself . Johansen prepared the sledging rations ( 42 @,@ 000 biscuits , 1 @,@ 320 tins of pemmican and about 220 pounds ( 100 kg ) of chocolate ) , while other men worked on improving the boots , cooking equipment , goggles , skis and tents . To combat the dangers of scurvy , twice a day the men ate seal meat that had been collected and frozen in quantities before the onset of winter . The cook , Lindstrøm , supplemented the vitamin C intake with bottled <unk> and blueberries , and provided <unk> bread made with fresh yeast , rich in B vitamins . 
 While Amundsen was confident in his men and equipment , he was , Hassel recorded , tormented by thoughts of Scott 's motor sledges and the fear that these would carry the British party to success . With this in mind Amundsen planned to begin the polar journey as soon as the sun rose in late August , though Johansen warned that it would be too cold on the Barrier so early in the season . Amundsen overruled him , and at sunrise on 24 August seven sledges were made ready . Johansen 's concerns seemed justified , as harsh conditions for the next two weeks — temperatures as low as − 58 ° C ( − 72 ° F ) — prevented the men from leaving . On 8 September 1911 , when the temperature rose to − 27 ° C ( − 17 ° F ) , Amundsen decided he could wait no longer , and the party of eight set off ; Lindstrøm remained alone at Framheim . 
 = = Second season , 1911 – 12 = = 
 = = = False start = = = 
 The party made good initial progress , travelling around 15 nautical miles ( 28 km ) each day . The dogs ran so hard that several from the strongest teams were detached from the traces and secured onto the sledges to act as ballast . In their wolf @-@ skin and reindeer @-@ skin clothing the men could cope with the freezing temperatures while they kept moving , but when they stopped they suffered , and barely slept at night . The dogs ' paws became frostbitten . On 12 September , with temperatures down to − 56 ° C ( − 69 ° F ) , the party halted after only 4 nautical miles ( 7 @.@ 4 km ) and built igloos for shelter . Amundsen now recognised that they had started the march too early in the season , and decided they should return to Framheim . He would not risk the lives of men and dogs for reasons of stubbornness . Johansen , in his diary , wrote of the foolishness of starting prematurely on such a long and historic journey , and of the dangers of an obsession with beating the English . 
 On 14 September , on their way back to Framheim , they left most of their equipment at the 80 ° S depot , to lighten the sledges . Next day , in freezing temperatures with a strong headwind , several dogs froze to death while others , too weak to continue , were placed upon the sledges . On 16 September , 40 nautical miles ( 74 km ) from Framheim , Amundsen ordered his men to push for home as quickly as possible . Not having a sledge of his own , he leapt onto Wisting 's , and with Helmer Hanssen and his team raced away , leaving the rest behind . The three arrived back at Framheim after nine hours , followed by Stubberud and Bjaaland two hours later and Hassel shortly after . Johansen and Prestrud were still out on the ice , without food or fuel ; Prestrud 's dogs had failed , and his heels were badly frostbitten . They reached Framheim after midnight , more than seventeen hours after they had turned for home . 
 Next day , Amundsen asked Johansen why he and Prestrud had been so late . Johansen answered angrily that he felt they had been abandoned , and castigated the leader for leaving his men behind . Amundsen would later inform Nansen that Johansen had been " violently insubordinate " ; as a result , he was excluded from the polar party , which Amundsen now reduced to five . Johansen was placed under the command of Prestrud , much his junior as an explorer , in a party that would explore King Edward VII Land . Stubberud was persuaded to join them , leaving Amundsen , Helmer Hanssen , Bjaaland , Hassel and Wisting as the revised South Pole party . 
 = = = South Pole journey = = = 
 = = = = Barrier and mountains = = = = 
 Despite his eagerness to start out again , Amundsen waited until mid @-@ October and the first hints of spring . He was ready to leave on 15 October , but was held up by the weather for a few more days . On 19 October 1911 the five men , with four sledges and fifty @-@ two dogs , began their journey . The weather quickly worsened , and in heavy fog the party strayed into the field of crevasses that Johansen 's depot party had discovered the previous autumn . Wisting later recalled how his sledge , with Amundsen aboard , nearly disappeared down a crevasse when the snow bridge broke underneath it . 
 Despite this near mishap they were covering more than 15 nautical miles ( 28 km ) a day , and reached their 82 ° S depot on 5 November . They marked their route by a line of cairns , built of snow blocks , at three @-@ mile intervals . On 17 November they reached the edge of the Barrier and faced the Transantarctic Mountains . Unlike Scott , who would be following the Beardmore Glacier route pioneered by Shackleton , Amundsen had to find his own route through the mountains . After probing the foothills for several days and climbing to around 1 @,@ 500 feet ( 460 m ) , the party found what appeared to be a clear route , a steep glacier 30 nautical miles ( 56 km ) long leading upwards to the plateau . Amundsen named this the Axel Heiberg Glacier , after one of his chief financial backers . It was a harder ascent than the team had anticipated , made much longer by the need to take detours , and by the deep , soft snow . After three days of difficult climbing the party reached the glacier summit . Amundsen was full of praise for his dogs , and scorned the idea that they could not work in such conditions ; on 21 November the party travelled 17 miles and climbed 5 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 500 m ) . 
 = = = = March to the pole = = = = 
 Upon reaching 10 @,@ 600 feet ( 3 @,@ 200 m ) at the summit of the glacier , at 85 ° 36 ′ S , Amundsen prepared for the final stage of the journey . Of the 45 dogs who had made the ascent ( 7 had perished during the Barrier stage ) , only 18 would go forward ; the remainder were to be killed for food . Each of the sledge @-@ drivers killed dogs from his own team , skinned them , and divided the meat between dogs and men . " We called the place the Butchers ' Shop " , Amundsen recalled . " [ T ] here was depression and sadness in the air ; we had grown so fond of our dogs " . Regrets did not prevent the team from enjoying the plentiful food ; Wisting proved particularly skilful in his preparation and presentation of the meat . 
 The party loaded up three sledges with supplies for a march of up to 60 days , leaving the remaining provisions and dog carcasses in a depot . Bad weather prevented their departure until 25 November , when they set off cautiously over the unknown ground in persistent fog . They were travelling over an icy surface broken by frequent crevasses , which together with the poor visibility slowed their progress . Amundsen called this area the " Devil 's Glacier " . On 4 December they came to an area where the crevasses were concealed under layers of snow and ice with a space between , which gave what Amundsen called an " unpleasantly hollow " sound as the party passed over it . He christened this area " The Devil 's Ballroom . " When later that day they emerged on to more solid ground , they had reached 87 ° S. 
 On 8 December the Norwegians passed Shackleton 's Farthest South record of 88 ° 23 ′ . As they neared the pole , they looked for any break in the landscape that might indicate another expedition had got there ahead of them . While camped on 12 December they were momentarily alarmed by a black object that appeared on the horizon , but this proved to be their own dogs ' droppings off in the distance , magnified by mirage . Next day they camped at 89 ° 45 ′ S , 15 nautical miles ( 28 km ) from the pole . On the following day , 14 December 1911 , with the concurrence of his comrades Amundsen travelled in front of the sledges , and at around 3 pm the party reached the vicinity of the South Pole . They planted the Norwegian flag and named the polar plateau " King Haakon VII 's Plateau " . Amundsen later reflected on the irony of his achievement : " Never has a man achieved a goal so diametrically opposed to his wishes . The area around the North Pole — devil take it — had fascinated me since childhood , and now here I was at the South Pole . Could anything be more crazy ? " 
 For the next three days the men worked to fix the exact position of the pole ; after the conflicting and disputed claims of Cook and Peary in the north , Amundsen wanted to leave unmistakable markers for Scott . After taking several sextant readings at different times of day , Bjaaland , Wisting and Hassel skied out in different directions to " box " the pole ; Amundsen reasoned that at least one of them would cross the exact point . Finally the party pitched a tent , which they called <unk> , as near as possible to the actual pole as they could calculate by their observations . In the tent Amundsen left equipment for Scott , and a letter addressed to King Haakon which he requested Scott to deliver . 
 = = = = Return to Framheim = = = = 
 On 18 December , the party began the journey back to Framheim . Amundsen was determined to return to civilisation before Scott , and be first with the news . Nevertheless , he limited their daily distances to 15 nautical miles ( 28 km ) , to preserve the strength of dogs and men . In the 24 @-@ hour daylight the party travelled during the notional night , to keep the sun at their backs and thus reduce the danger of snow @-@ blindness . Guided by the snow cairns built on their outward journey , they reached the Butchers ' Shop on 4 January 1912 , and began the descent to the Barrier . The men on skis " went whizzing down " , but for the sledge drivers — Helmer Hanssen and Wisting — the descent was precarious ; the sledges were hard to manoeuvre , and brakes were added to the runners to enable rapid stops when crevasses were encountered . 
 On 7 January , the party reached the first of their depots on the Barrier . Amundsen now felt their pace could be increased , and the men adopted a routine of travelling 15 nautical miles ( 28 km ) , stopping for six hours , then resuming the march . Under this regime they covered around 30 nautical miles ( 56 km ) a day , and on 25 January , at 4 am , they reached Framheim . Of the 52 dogs that had started in October , 11 had survived , pulling 2 sledges . The journey to the pole and back had taken 99 days — 10 fewer than scheduled — and they had covered about 1 @,@ 860 nautical miles ( 3 @,@ 440 km ) . 
 = = = = Informing the world = = = = 
 On his return to Framheim , Amundsen lost no time in winding up the expedition . After a farewell dinner in the hut , the party loaded the surviving dogs and the more valuable equipment aboard Fram , which departed the Bay of Whales late on 30 January 1912 . The destination was Hobart in Tasmania . During the five @-@ week voyage Amundsen prepared his telegrams and drafted the first report that he would give to the press . On 7 March , Fram reached Hobart , where Amundsen quickly learned there was as yet no news from Scott . He immediately sent telegrams to his brother Leon , to Nansen and to King Haakon , briefly informing them of his success . The next day he cabled the first full account of the story to London 's Daily Chronicle , to which he had sold exclusive rights . Fram remained in Hobart for two weeks ; while there she was joined by Douglas Mawson 's ship Aurora , which was in service with the Australasian Antarctic Expedition . Amundsen presented them with a gift of his 11 surviving dogs . 
 = = = Other expedition achievements = = = 
 = = = = Eastern party = = = = 
 On 8 November 1911 , Prestrud , Stubberud and Johansen had departed for King Edward VII Land . The search for the point at which the solid ice of the Barrier became ice @-@ covered land proved difficult . On 1 December the party had their first sighting of what was indubitably dry land , a nunatak which had been recorded by Scott during the Discovery expedition in 1902 . After reaching this point they collected geological specimens and samples of mosses , and briefly explored their surroundings before returning to Framheim on 16 December . They were the first men to set foot on King Edward VII Land . 
 = = = = Fram and Kainan Maru = = = = 
 After leaving the Bay of Whales on 15 February 1911 , Fram sailed for Buenos Aires where she arrived on 17 April . Here , Nilsen learned that the expedition 's funds were exhausted ; a sum supposedly set aside for the ship 's needs had not materialised . Fortunately , Amundsen 's friend Don Pedro Christopherson was at hand to fulfil his earlier promises to provide supplies and fuel . Fram departed in June for an oceanographic cruise between South America and Africa , which occupied the next three months . The ship returned to Buenos Aires in September for final refitting and re @-@ provisioning , before sailing south on 5 October . Strong winds and stormy seas prolonged the voyage , but the ship arrived at the Bay of Whales on 9 January 1912 . On 17 January the men in Framheim were surprised by the appearance of a second ship ; it was Kainan Maru , carrying the Japanese Antarctic Expedition led by Nobu <unk> . Communication between the two expeditions was limited by language difficulties , though the Norwegians gathered that the Japanese were heading for King Edward VII Land . Kainan Maru departed the next day , and on 26 January she landed a party on King Edward VII Land . This was the first landing on this shore from the sea ; attempts by Discovery ( 1902 ) , Nimrod ( 1908 ) and Terra Nova ( 1911 ) had all failed . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Contemporary reactions = = = 
 In Hobart , Amundsen received congratulatory telegrams from , among others , former US President Theodore Roosevelt and King George V of England . The king expressed particular pleasure that Amundsen 's first port of call on his return had been on soil of the British Empire . In Norway , which only six years earlier had become a free country after 500 years of Danish and Swedish supremacy , the news was proclaimed in banner headlines , and the national flag was flown throughout the country . All the expedition 's participants received the Norwegian South Pole medal ( <unk> ) , established by King Haakon to commemorate the expedition . However , Amundsen 's biographer Roland Huntford refers to " the chill underneath the cheers " ; there remained a residue of unease over Amundsen 's tactics . One Norwegian newspaper expressed relief that Amundsen had found a new route , and had not intruded on Scott 's path from McMurdo Sound . 
 In Britain , press reaction to Amundsen 's victory was restrained but generally positive . Apart from the enthusiastic reports in the Daily Chronicle and the Illustrated London News — which each had a financial stake in Amundsen 's success — the Manchester Guardian remarked that any cause for reproach was wiped out by the Norwegians ' courage and determination . Readers of Young England were exhorted not to grudge " the brave Norseman " the honour he had earned , and The Boy 's Own Paper suggested that every British boy should read Amundsen 's expedition account . The Times correspondent offered a mild rebuke to Amundsen for his failure to inform Scott until it was too late for the latter to respond , " all the more unnecessary , for no one would have welcomed co @-@ operation in the work of South Polar exploration more than Captain Scott ... Still , no one who knows Captain Amundsen can have any doubt of his integrity , and since he states he has reached the Pole we are bound to believe him " . 
 Senior figures at the RGS expressed more hostile sentiments , at least privately . To them , Amundsen 's feat was the result of " a dirty trick " . Markham hinted that Amundsen 's claim might be fraudulent : " We must wait for the truth until the return of the Terra Nova " . When later in 1912 Amundsen addressed the RGS he felt slighted after Lord Curzon , the Society 's president , jocularly called for " three cheers for the dogs " . Shackleton did not join in denigrating Amundsen 's victory , and called him " perhaps the greatest polar explorer of today " . Before she heard the news of her husband 's death , Kathleen Scott conceded that Amundsen 's journey " was a very fine feat ... in spite of one 's irritation one has to admire it " . 
 = = = Scott tragedy = = = 
 Amundsen left Hobart to undertake a lecture tour of Australia and New Zealand . He then went to Buenos Aires where he finished writing his expedition account . Back in Norway he supervised the publication of the book , then visited Britain before embarking on a long lecture tour of the United States . In February 1913 , while in Madison , Wisconsin , he received the news that Scott and four comrades had reached the pole on 17 January 1912 , but had all perished by 29 March , during their return journey . The bodies of Scott , Wilson and Bowers had been discovered in November 1912 , after the end of the Antarctic winter . In his initial response , Amundsen called the news " Horrible , horrible " . His more formal tribute followed : " Captain Scott left a record , for honesty , for sincerity , for bravery , for everything that makes a man " . 
 According to Huntford , the news of Scott 's death meant that " Amundsen the victor was eclipsed ... by Scott the martyr " . In the United Kingdom a myth quickly developed in which Scott was portrayed as one who had behaved nobly and played the game fairly . He had been defeated because , by contrast , Amundsen was a mere glory @-@ seeker who had concealed his true intentions , had used dogs rather than relying on honest man @-@ hauling and had slaughtered these same dogs for food . Furthermore , he was considered a " professional " which , in the mindset of upper @-@ class Britain of that time , diminished anything he might have accomplished . The myth was heavily reinforced with the publication of Scott 's journals and his " Message to the Public " . Huntford points out that " [ Scott 's ] literary talent was his trump . It was as if he had reached out from his buried tent and taken revenge . " Even so , among explorers Amundsen 's name continued to be respected . In his account of the Terra Nova expedition written a few years later , Scott 's comrade Apsley Cherry @-@ Garrard wrote that the primary reason for Amundsen 's success was " the very remarkable qualities of the man " , specifically his courage in choosing to discover a new route rather than follow the known path . 
 = = = Historical perspective = = = 
 The outbreak of the First World War in 1914 delayed the start of Amundsen 's northern polar drift — to which the South Pole expedition had been intended as a preliminary — until July 1918 . He then set off in a specially @-@ constructed vessel , Maud , which remained in Arctic waters for the next seven years . The ship did not drift over the North Pole , although in the course of the expedition it became the second ship to traverse the North @-@ East Passage . Amundsen left the expedition in 1923 ; the remaining years of his life were largely devoted to polar exploration by air . On 12 May 1926 , aboard the airship Norge with Lincoln Ellsworth and Umberto Nobile , Amundsen flew over the North Pole . He and Wisting , also on the airship , were the first men to see both poles . In 1928 , while attempting to rescue a later Nobile expedition , Amundsen disappeared with his aircraft in the seas between Norway and Spitsbergen . 
 The four men who had stood at the pole with Amundsen were all asked to accompany their leader on the Maud drift . Bjaaland and Hassel declined ; neither participated in any further polar ventures . Helmer Hanssen and Wisting both joined Maud ; the latter took over the leadership when Amundsen left the expedition . In 1936 Wisting captained Fram on the ship 's final voyage to Oslo , where it became a museum . Johansen , who had been unable to settle back into normal life on his return from Antarctica , became withdrawn and uncommunicative . He refused to discuss his experiences or his dispute with Amundsen , and retreated into a life of depression and poverty . On 4 January 1913 he shot himself in his Oslo lodgings . 
 The Scott myth lasted until the final quarter of the 20th century , when it was replaced by one that characterised him as a " heroic bungler " whose failure was largely the result of his own mistakes . This portrayal , the cultural historian Stephanie Barczewski asserts , is as fallacious as the earlier one in which he was considered beyond criticism . In the early 21st century , writers have suggested more reasoned explanations for the Scott tragedy than his incompetence , and his reputation has to some extent been rescued . The renewed spotlight on Scott has also highlighted Amundsen 's achievements : Barczewski writes that " Amundsen and his men reached the pole due to a combination of superb planning , long experience with sledge @-@ dogs and skis and impressive physical stamina " . In her account of Scott 's expedition , Diana Preston is equally specific in identifying the basis of Amundsen 's success . He was focused on the single goal of reaching the pole , whereas Scott had to reconcile the competing claims of geographical exploration and scientific knowledge . " A practical and experienced professional , [ Amundsen ] planned carefully and applied all the lessons he had learned in the Arctic ... [ H ] e relied exclusively on the well @-@ tried means of transport and unsentimentally exploited their food potential . He was similarly efficient and unsentimental in his management of his men " . The United States ' scientific base at the South Pole , founded in 1957 , is named the Amundsen – Scott South Pole Station , to honour the memories of both polar pioneers . 
 = = = Modern research = = = 
 In a paper published 100 years after the Amundsen expedition , researchers claimed that the tent and flags are buried under 17 m ( 56 ft ) of ice and about a minute north of the South Pole . Scott 's party was the last to see the tent , which found it on January 18 , 1912 . Henry Robertson Bowers took a photo of the tent , but died returning from the Pole . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Amundsen , Roald ; Nilsen , Thorvald ; Prestrud , Kristian ( 1976 ) [ 1912 ] . The South Pole : An Account of the Norwegian expedition in the Fram , 1910 – 12 ( Volumes I and II ) . Translated by Chater , A.G. London : C. Hurst & Company . ISBN 0 @-@ 903983 @-@ 47 @-@ 8 . First published in 1912 by John Murray , London . 
 Barczewski , Stephanie ( 2007 ) . Antarctic Destinies : Scott , Shackleton and the Changing Face of Heroism . London and New York : Hambledon Continuum . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 192 @-@ 3 . 
 Cherry @-@ Garrard , Apsley ( 1970 ) [ 1922 ] . The Worst Journey in the World . London : Penguin Books . ISBN 0 @-@ 14 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . First published in 1922 by Chatto and Windus , London . 
 Crane , David ( 2005 ) . Scott of the Antarctic . London : HarperCollins . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 00 @-@ 715068 @-@ 7 . 
 Fairley , T.C. ( 1959 ) . Sverdrup 's Arctic Adventures . London : Longmans . OCLC <unk> . 
 Fleming , Fergus ( 2002 ) . Ninety Degrees North . London : Granta Books . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 535 @-@ 2 . 
 Hamre , Ivar ( November 1933 ) . " The Japanese South Polar Expedition of 1911 – 1912 : A Little @-@ Known Episode in Antarctic Exploration " . The Geographical Journal 82 ( 5 ) : 411 – 423 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 2307 / <unk> . JSTOR <unk> . ( subscription required ) 
 Herbert , Wally ( 1989 ) . The Noose of Laurels . London : Hodder & Stoughton . ISBN 0 @-@ 340 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 Huntford , Roland ( 1979 ) . Scott and Amundsen . London : Hodder and Stoughton . ISBN 0 @-@ 340 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 Huntford , Roland ( 1985 ) . The Last Place on Earth . London and Sydney : Pan Books . ISBN 0 @-@ 330 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 Huntford , Roland ( 1985 ) . Shackleton . London : Hodder & Stoughton . ISBN 0 @-@ 340 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 Huntford , Roland ( 2001 ) . Nansen . London : Abacus . ISBN 0 @-@ 349 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 Jones , Max ( 2003 ) . The Last Great Quest . Oxford ( UK ) : Oxford University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ 280483 @-@ 9 . 
 Langner , Rainer @-@ K. ( 2007 ) . Scott and Amundsen : Duel in the Ice . Translated by Beech , Timothy . London : Haus Publishing . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 08 @-@ 8 . 
 MacPhee , Ross ( 2010 ) . Race to the end : Amundsen , Scott , and the attainment of the South Pole . New York and London : Sterling Innovation . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 4027 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 Maxtone @-@ Graham , John ( 2000 ) . Safe Return Doubtful : The Heroic Age of Polar Exploration . London : Constable . ISBN 0 @-@ 09 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 Nansen , Fridtjof ( 1897 ) . Farthest North , Volume I. London : Archibald Constable & Co . OCLC <unk> . 
 Preston , Diana ( 1999 ) . A First Rate Tragedy . London : Constable . ISBN 0 @-@ 09 @-@ 479530 @-@ 4 . 
 Riffenburgh , Beau ( 2005 ) . " Nimrod " : the Extraordinary Story of Shackleton 's First Expedition . London : Bloomsbury Publishing . ISBN 0 @-@ 7475 @-@ 7253 @-@ 4 . 
 Scott , J.M. ( 1971 ) . Fridtjof Nansen . Sheridan , Oregon : Heron Books . OCLC <unk> . 
 Solomon , Susan ( 2001 ) . The Coldest March : Scott 's Fatal Antarctic Expedition . New Haven , Connecticut : Yale University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 300 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 Turley , Charles ( 1935 ) . Roald Amundsen , explorer . London : Methuen . OCLC <unk> . 
 = = = Online = = = 
 " Amundsen Would Compare " . The New York Times . 8 September 1909 . Retrieved 15 October 2011 . 
 " Amundsen @-@ Scott South Pole Station " . Office of Polar Programs . National Science Foundation . 27 April 2009 . Retrieved 16 October 2011 . 
 Barr , William ( 1985 ) . " Aleksandr Stepanovich <unk> : The Russian who went South with Amundsen " . Polar Record ( Cambridge University Press ) 22 ( 139 ) : 401 – 412 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1017 / <unk> . 
 " Captain Amundsen 's Achievement . Work Of Previous Explorers " . The Times ( London ) . 9 March 1912 @.@ p . 5 . ( subscription required ) 
 Rees , Jasper ( 19 December 2004 ) . " Ice in our Hearts " . The Daily Telegraph ( London ) . Retrieved 14 October 2011 . 
 " The Polar Ship Fram " . The Fram Museum . Retrieved 16 October 2011 . 
 " Sverre Helge Hassel " . The Fram Museum . Retrieved 11 November 2011 . ( in Norwegian ) 
 " Oscar Wisting " . The Fram Museum . Retrieved 11 November 2011 . ( in Norwegian ) 
 Weinstock , John . " Sondre Norheim : Folk Hero to Immigrant " . The Norwegian @-@ American Historical Association . Retrieved 16 October 2011 . 
 " <unk> " . Store Norske <unk> . Retrieved 11 November 2011 . ( in Norwegian ) 
 = Battletoads ( video game ) = 
 Battletoads is a platform video game developed by Rare and published by Tradewest . It is the first installment of the Battletoads series and was originally released on 1 June 1991 for the Nintendo Entertainment System . It was subsequently ported to numerous other platforms , including the Mega Drive , Amiga , Game Boy and Game Gear . In the game , two space mutant warriors known as the Battletoads , Rash and Zitz , embark on a mission to defeat the evil Dark Queen on her planet and to rescue their kidnapped friends ; Pimple and Princess Angelica . 
 The game was developed in response to the interest in the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles franchise . A Master System port of the game was developed but never released . It has received mostly positive reviews upon release , with critics praising the graphics and variations of gameplay , however many critics were divided over the difficulty . It won six awards from the 1991 Nintendo Power Awards , and has since been renowned as one of the most difficult video games ever created . It was later included in Rare 's 2015 Xbox One retrospective compilation , Rare Replay . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The game is a platform scrolling beat ' em up video game with varying elements of racing , climbing and vehicular @-@ based combat . Players start with three lives each time the game is started , and get replenished every time the player continues after players get defeated . The game contains no saving system or password features . While the levels of Battletoads vary greatly in gameplay style , the game is generally presented as " beat @-@ em @-@ up " in which players progress by defeating enemies while avoiding the hazards in the environment . The players can finish off enemies in different ways , such as punching or kicking with an enlarged fist or boot , head @-@ butting with huge ram horns , or by transforming into a wrecking ball . 
 Side @-@ scrolling stages are generally presented as having an isometric perspective , while platforming stages that feature vertical progression are presented isometrically , which allows the player @-@ characters to crouch . Several levels in the game feature sections in the form of an obstacle course , where the players must dodge a series of obstacles with speed increasing as the level progresses . Other types of level include two " tower climb " levels , a descent to a chasm while hanging from a rope , an underwater level , a maze chase riding a unicycle @-@ based vehicle , a climbing and jumping " snake maze " , and a race level in which the players has to fall as quickly as possible through countless platforms to reach the bottom of a tower before an opponent does . Hidden in four of the levels are " mega warp " points , which , when found , allow the players to automatically advance by two levels . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Professor T. Bird and the three Battletoads , Rash , Zitz , and Pimple , are escorting Princess Angelica to her home planet using their spacecraft , the Vulture . Pimple and Angelica decide to take a leisurely trip on Pimple 's flying car . They are ambushed and captured by the Dark Queen 's ship , the Gargantua . Pimple sends out a distress signal to the Vulture , alerting Professor T. Bird , Rash , and Zitz that himself and Angelica had been captured . Learning that the Gargantua is hidden beneath the surface of a nearby planet called Ragnarok 's World , Professor T. Bird flies Rash and Zitz there in the Vulture to rescue them . 
 Between levels , the toads receive briefing comments from Professor T. Bird , along with teasing from the Dark Queen . During the game 's 13 levels , the Battletoads are faced with Dark Queen 's minions Big <unk> , Robo Manus and Major Slaughter as bosses , ultimately facing the Dark Queen herself at the top of the Dark Tower , the game 's final level . Once the Queen is defeated , she claims it will not be the last they would see from her , later turning into some sort of tornado and flying into space , " retreating into the shadowy margins of the galaxy to recoup her losses " . With Pimple and Princess Angelica rescued , the four are brought back into the Vulture and the game ends . 
 = = Development = = 
 The game was developed by Rare and published by Tradewest . Rare founders Tim and Chris Stamper created the series in response to the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles craze of the early 1990s . To create a contrast to the popular media franchise and other " beat ' em ups " of the time , Rare added extra mechanics in the game to help separate it from these genres , such as racing stages and climbing courses . According to Rare artist Kev Bayliss , the characters of Battletoads were conceived in order to " produce merchandise " on a mass scale , in similar vein Tim Burton 's Batman reboot . The game underwent changes through early stages of development , and at one point was originally titled <unk> . Bayliss originally designed Battletoads as a Disney @-@ themed video game , however as the game gradually became more graphic , Bayliss took extra liberties to " tone down " violence and restrict all usage of weapons in the game , whilst creating a sense of uniqueness for the characters . 
 = = Release = = 
 Battletoads has been ported for various consoles upon its original June 1991 release for the Nintendo Entertainment System ( NES ) . The original game was localised for Japan a few months after the first North American release , with several gameplay tweaks resulting in a marginally easier experience . It was ported by Mindscape to the Amiga home computers in 1992 , by Arc System Works to the Sega Mega Drive and Sega Game Gear both on 13 July 1993 , by Rare to the Game Boy later in 1993 , and by Mindscape to the Amiga CD32 in 1994 . Ports for PC DOS and the Atari ST were planned by Mindscape but never released . 
 European CEO of Virgin Interactive , Tim Chaney , purchased rights for Battletoads from Tradewest after the game found popularity in the United States , and planned a Master System release for in 1993 , however it never materialised . Due to the extreme nature of the original NES Battletoads difficulty , almost all future ports went to measures to tone it down to varying degrees , seeking to make the game more accessible to casual players . The Mega Drive version of Battletoads features " toned down " difficulty , as well as providing higher definition and more colourful graphics as opposed to the NES version . 
 The Game Gear port features <unk> graphics , with the removal of three levels and the two @-@ player mode . Despite the original Game Boy version having the same box art and title as the NES release , Battletoads for the Game Boy is a standalone game of the series and features different levels and mechanics from the original . 
 During E3 2015 it was announced that the NES version of Battletoads would be coming to the Xbox One as part of Rare Replay , a retrospective collection of 30 emulated classic games from Rare . Rare Replay was released on 4 August 2015 . Several bugs featured in the original release were fixed in the updated Rare Replay version . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game received mostly positive reviews from critics upon release . The Mega Drive version received an aggregate score of 73 % from GameRankings . Reviewers of Mean Machines praised the graphics , with one reviewer stating that the cartoon @-@ style cutscenes adds to the " greatness " of the game 's presentation . Another reviewer summarised that the graphics were colourful and well @-@ animated , although he considered the sprites to be " too small " . Frank O 'Connor of Computer and Video Games ( CVG ) thought the graphics were the best aspect of the game , heralding them as " packed " with colour , smooth scrolling and " humorous " animation . Paul Rand , another reviewer of CVG similarly praised the graphics and presentation , asserting them both of " excellent " quality . Bryan Lajoie of Quebec Gamer praised the graphics , stating them to be among the most graphically advanced NES games , in particular the animation . In a retrospective review for the Mega Drive version , Shawn Sackenheim of AllGame stated that Battletoads was a " graphical leap " for the NES , although he considered it " dated " for the technically superior Mega Drive . 
 O 'Connor praised the overall gameplay , stating that while it borrowed " style and ideas " from other games , the combination of various styles " works a treat " and proved challenging . Rand heralded the gameplay as addictive . Reviewers of Mean Machines were divided over gameplay ; one reviewer was initially sceptical over the prospect of " another NES platformer " , although he praised the emphasis on beat ' em up action over conventional platforming . Another reviewer of Mean Machines praised the gameplay as fast , addictive and challenging , summarising that the wide variety of levels are enough to prevent the player from " getting bored easily " . Lajoie was mixed over the gameplay , admitting that whilst accepting it as a difficult game , the overall experience required " a lot of patience " and determination in order to progress . In a negative retrospective review , Spike ranked the game 's ending as the sixth biggest letdown in video game history . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Battletoads was nominated for the 1991 Nintendo Power Awards in nine categories , winning the first place in the categories : Graphics and Sound ( NES ) , Theme and Fun ( NES ) , Best Play Control ( NES ) and Best Multi @-@ Player or Simultaneous ( NES ) , it was also given the title of the Overall Best Game for NES of 1990 . In 1997 , Nintendo Power ranked the NES version as the 89th best game on any Nintendo platform . In 2010 , UGO included it on their " Top 25 games that need sequels " also featuring the Arctic Cavern levels on the list of " coolest ice levels " . Topless Robot ranked Battletoads as the number one " least terrible Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles rip @-@ off " in 2008 , also naming it as one of ten best beat- ' em @-@ ups of all time in 2010 and as one of ten video games that should have gotten toys in 2011 . In 2012 , it was also listed among ten " classic videos games that deserve an HD remake " by Yahoo ! News . GamesRadar ranked it the 18th best NES game ever made , stating that " it was a fun game but its most notable element was its difficulty " . Jeremy Dunham of IGN listed Battletoads as the 40th best NES game of all time . 
 = = = Difficulty = = = 
 Battletoads has been noted by critics for its extreme difficulty . The game has even been included on numerous occasions among the hardest games ever made , including the number one spot as determined by GameTrailers . A reviewer of Destructoid stated that despite the game 's " brutal and unbalanced " difficulty , it was often remembered as one of the most " beloved titles " of the eight @-@ bit generation . In 2012 , Yahoo ! Games stated that that the game was still widely recognised as one of the most difficult games ever made , particularly noting the ability for players to accidentally harm their partner in two @-@ player mode . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 The game 's initial success led to Rare developing various sequels which would later become part of the Battletoads franchise . A spin @-@ off for the Game Boy , titled Battletoads , was first released in November 1991 . Two direct sequels , Battletoads in <unk> and Battletoads & Double Dragon , were both released for various consoles in 1993 , with the latter being placed number 76 on IGN 's " Top 100 NES Games of All Time " list . Battletoads Arcade was released in 1994 to mediocre sales , and was the last instalment of the series . A TV pilot was also produced by Canadian DIC Entertainment , that originally aired in syndication in the United States on the weekend of Thanksgiving , 1992 . The TV series , titled Battletoads , was conceived as an attempt to capitalise on the popularity of the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles , however it was never picked up as a full series . 
 = Agaricus deserticola = 
 Agaricus deserticola , commonly known as the gasteroid agaricus , is a species of fungus in the Agaricaceae family . Found only in southwestern and western North America , A. deserticola is adapted for growth in dry or semi @-@ arid habitats . The fruit bodies are secotioid , meaning the spores are not forcibly discharged , and the cap does not fully expand . Unlike other Agaricus species , A. deserticola does not develop true gills , but rather a convoluted and networked system of spore @-@ producing tissue called a gleba . When the partial veil breaks or pulls away from the stem or the cap splits radially , the blackish @-@ brown gleba is exposed , which allows the spores to be dispersed . 
 The fruit bodies can reach heights of 18 cm ( 7 @.@ 1 in ) tall with caps that are up to 7 @.@ 5 cm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) wide . The tough woody stems are 1 – 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 0 @.@ 8 in ) wide , thickening towards the base . Fruit bodies grow singly or scattered on the ground in fields , grasslands , or arid ecosystems . Other mushrooms with which A. deserticola might be confused include the desert fungus species Podaxis pistillaris and Montagnea arenaria . The edibility of Agaricus deserticola mushrooms is not known definitively . 
 Formerly named Longula texensis ( among several other synonyms ) , the fungus was transferred to the genus Agaricus in 2004 after molecular analysis showed it to be evolutionary related to species in that genus . In 2010 , its specific epithet was changed to deserticola after it was discovered that the name Agaricus texensis was illegitimate , having been previously published for a different species . 
 = = Taxonomic history = = 
 The species was first described scientifically as Secotium texense by Miles Joseph Berkeley and Moses Ashley Curtis in 1873 , based on specimens sent to them from western Texas . George Edward Massee transferred it to the genus Gyrophragmium in 1891 , because of its resemblance to the species Gyrophragmium <unk> , and because he felt that the structure of the volva as well as the internal morphology of the gleba excluded it from Secotium . In 1916 , William Murrill listed the species in Gymnopus , but did not explain the reason for the generic transfer . In a 1943 publication , Sanford Zeller compared a number of similar secotioid genera : <unk> , Gyrophragmium and Montagnea . He concluded that the species did not fit in the limits set for the genus Gyrophragmium and so created the new genus Longia with Longia texensis as the type species . The generic name was to honor William Henry Long , an American mycologist noted for his work in describing Gasteromycetes . Zeller also mentioned two additional synonyms : Secotium decipiens ( Peck , 1895 ) , and <unk> <unk> ( Copeland , 1904 ) . 
 Two years later in 1945 , Zeller pointed out that the use of the name Longia was untenable , as it had already been used for a genus of rusts described by Hans Sydow in 1921 , so he proposed the name Longula and introduced the new combination Longula texensis in addition to L. texensis var. major . The species was known by this name for about 60 years , until a 2004 phylogenetic study revealed the taxon 's close evolutionary relationship with Agaricus , a possibility insinuated by Curtis Gates Lloyd a century before . This resulted in a new name in that genus , but it soon came to light that the name Agaricus texensis had already been used , ironically enough , by Berkeley and Curtis themselves in 1853 , for a taxon now treated as a synonym of Flammulina velutipes . Since this made the new Agaricus texensis an unusable homonym , Gabriel Moreno and colleagues published the new name Agaricus deserticola in 2010 . The mushroom is commonly known as the gasteroid Agaricus . 
 = = Classification and phylogeny = = 
 The classification of Agaricus deserticola has been under debate since the taxon was first described . It was thought by some mycologists to be a member of the Gasteromycetes , a grouping of fungi in the <unk> that do not actively discharge their spores . The Gasteromycetes are now known to be an artificial assemblage of morphologically similar fungi without any unifying evolutionary relationship . When the species was known as a Gyrophragmium , Fischer thought it to be close to <unk> , a genus he considered a member of the Agaricaceae family . Conrad suggested a relationship with Secotium , which he believed to be close to Agaricus . Curtis Gates Lloyd said of Gyrophragmium : " [ it ] has no place in the Gasteromycetes . Its relations are more close to the <unk> . It is the connecting link between the two passing on one hand through Secotium to the true Gasteromycetes . " Morse believed that Gyrophragmium and the secotioid genus <unk> formed a transition between the Gasteromycetes and the <unk> ( the gilled fungi ) . 
 The species is now thought to have evolved from an Agaricus ancestor , and adapted for survival in dry habitats . These adaptations include : a cap that does not expand ( thus conserving moisture ) ; dark @-@ colored gills that do not forcibly eject spores ( a mechanism known to depend on turgor pressure achievable only in sufficiently hydrated environments ) ; and a partial veil that remains on the fruit body long after it has matured . This form of growth is called secotioid development , and is typical of other desert @-@ dwelling fungi like Battarrea phalloides , Podaxis pistillaris , and Montagnea arenaria . Molecular analysis based on the sequences of the partial large subunit of ribosomal DNA and of the internal transcribed spacers shows that A. deserticola is closely related to but distinct from A. <unk> . A separate analysis showed A. deserticola to be closely related to A. arvensis and A. abruptibulbus . 
 = = Description = = 
 The fruit body of Agaricus deserticola can grow up to 5 to 18 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 to 7 @.@ 1 in ) in height . Fresh specimens are usually white , but will age to a pale tan ; dried fruit bodies are light gray or tan mixed with some yellow . The cap is 4 to 7 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 to 3 @.@ 0 in ) in diameter , initially conic , later becoming convex to broadly convex as it matures . The cap is composed of three distinct tissue layers : an outer volval layer , a middle cuticular layer ( cutis ) , and an inner ( tramal ) layer which supports the gleba . The surface of the cap is white with yellow @-@ brown to brown @-@ tipped raised small scales ; these scales result from the breakup of the volva and the cutis . 
 Initially , the caps are covered by a peridium — an outer covering layer of tissue . After the fruit body matures and begins to dry out , the lower part of the peridium begin to rip , usually starting from small longitudinal slits near where the peridium attaches to the top of the stem . However , the pattern of tearing is variable ; in some instances the slits may appear higher up on the peridium , in others the peridium rips more irregularly . The peridium may also rip in such a way that it appears as if there is a ring at the top of the stem . The torn peridium exposes the internal gleba . The gleba is divided into wavy plates or lamellae , some of which are fused together to form irregular chambers . The gleba is a drab brown to blackish @-@ brown color , and it becomes tough and brittle as it dries out . The flesh is firm when young , white , and will stain light to bright yellow when it is bruised . 
 The stem is cylindrical , 4 to 15 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 to 5 @.@ 9 in ) long and 1 to 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 to 0 @.@ 8 in ) thick . It is shaped like a narrow club , and the base may reach widths up to 4 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) . It is typically white , staining yellow to orange @-@ yellow or pink when bruised , and becomes woody with age . Mature specimens develop longitudinal grooves in maturity . Numerous white rhizoids are present at the base of the stem ; these root @-@ like outgrowths of fungal mycelium help the mushroom attach to its substrate . The apex of the stem extends into the gleba to form a columella that reaches the top of the cap . The internal gills are free from attachment to the stem , but are attached full @-@ length to the inside of the cap . The partial veil is thick , white , and often sloughs off as the cap expands . 
 A larger variety of the mushroom has been described by Zeller , A. deserticola var. major ( originally Longula texensis var. major ) , whose range overlaps that of the typical variety . Its caps are <unk> than the typical variety , and range from 6 to 12 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 to 4 @.@ 7 in ) or more in diameter , with a stem 10 to 25 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 to 9 @.@ 8 in ) and up to 4 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) thick . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 In deposit , such as with a spore print , the spores appear almost black , tinged with purple . The spores are spherical in shape or nearly so , smooth , thick @-@ walled , and lack a germ pore . They are nonamyloid ( not absorbing iodine when stained with Melzer 's reagent ) , black @-@ brown , and have dimensions of 4 @.@ 5 – 7 @.@ 5 by 5 @.@ 5 – 6 @.@ 5 µm . There is a prominent scar where the spore was once attached to the basidium ( the spore @-@ bearing cell ) through the sterigma . The basidia are broadly club @-@ shaped , and mostly four @-@ spored , with long , slender sterigmata . Unlike other Agaricus species , the spores of A. deserticola are not shot off , but are instead dispersed when they sift out of the dried , mature fruit bodies after the peridium breaks open . 
 Schaeffer 's chemical test is often used to help identify and differentiate Agaricus species . In this test , aniline plus nitric acid are applied to the surface of the fruit body , and if positive , a red or orange color forms . Agaricus deserticola has a positive Schaeffer 's reaction , similar to species in section <unk> in the genus Agaricus . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Species that resemble A. deserticola include the desert fungi Montagnea arenaria and Podaxis pistillaris . Montagnea arenaria is a whitish stalked puffball with a hollow , woody stalk and a loose sac @-@ like volva at the base of the stem . It is topped by a thin disc @-@ like cap with blackish gill plates suspended around the margin . Podaxis pistillaris has a cylindrical to oval white to brownish cap with a paper @-@ thin wall atop a slender stem . When mature , the cap contains powdery , dark brown spores . 
 = = = Edibility = = = 
 The edibility of the fruit bodies of Agaricus deserticola is not known definitively , and there are conflicting opinions in the literature . One popular field guide to North American mushrooms suggests they are edible when they are young , and have a pleasant odor and mild taste . However , other sources claim that the edibility is unknown , and consumption should be avoided . 
 = = Fruit body development = = 
 In one early study of the mushroom 's development , the fruit bodies appeared above the surface of the ground two or three days after rainfall or an irrigation , and required between five and eight days to mature . Slender and fragile rhizomorphs — dense masses of hyphae that form root @-@ like structures — grow horizontally 2 @.@ 5 to 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 0 to 2 @.@ 0 in ) below the soil surface . Fruit bodies start as enlarged tips on the rhizomorphs , and manifest as numerous small , almost @-@ spherical protuberances just beneath the surface of the soil . When the fruit bodies reach a diameter of about 4 to 6 mm ( 0 @.@ 16 to 0 @.@ 24 in ) , the stem and peridial regions begin to be distinguishable ; the peridial region first appears as a small swelling at the apex of the much larger stem regions . 
 The fruit bodies push upward through the soil when they are about 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) tall . As growth progresses , the stem elongates and the peridium becomes more rounded , increasing in size until maturity . At about the time the peridium reaches 1 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 in ) or slightly more in diameter , the columella exerts an upward tension on the tissue of the partial veil , and it begins to pull away from the stem . Typically , the veil tissue is weakest near the attachment to the stem , rather than to the attachment at the edge of the peridium , and the veil separates from the stem . The lower edge of the peridium is further stretched as it is pulled upward and outward . Usually , the arid environment causes the gleba to dry out rapidly . If the veil tissue at the base of the stem is stronger than that attached to the edge of the peridium , the veil can rip so it remains attached to the stem as a ring . Scales begin to appear on the surface of the peridium of some specimens at about this time . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Like other Agaricus species , A. deserticola is saprobic — feeding off dead or decaying organic matter . The fruit bodies are found growing singly to sometimes more numerous , at low elevations , and typically in sandy soil . Its usual habitats include dry lands , coastal sage scrub , and desert ecosystems . It also grows in lawns and fields . The range of the fungus is restricted to southwestern and western North America , where it fruits throughout the year , typically during or following cool , wet weather . Zeller gives a range that includes as its eastern border central Texas , and extends westward to San Diego County , California and north to Josephine County , Oregon . The mushroom used to be common in the San Francisco Bay area before land development reduced its preferred habitats . A. deserticola has been collected in several states in northwestern Mexico , including Sonora , Chihuahua , and Baja California . 
 = Angkor I = 
 Angkor I is an outdoor stainless steel sculpture by Lee Kelly , located at Millennium Plaza Park in Lake Oswego , Oregon , in the United States . The 1994 sculpture stands 14 feet ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) tall and weighs 1 @,@ 000 pounds ( 450 kg ) , and was influenced by his visit to Southeast Asia one year prior . In 2010 , Angkor I appeared in an exhibition of Kelly 's work at the Portland Art Museum . In 2011 , it was installed at Millennium Plaza Park on loan from the Portland @-@ based Elizabeth Leach Gallery . The Arts Council of Lake Oswego began soliciting donations in 2013 in an attempt to keep the sculpture as part of the city 's permanent public art collection , Gallery Without Walls . The fundraising campaign was successful ; donations from more than 40 patrons , including major contributions from the Ford Family Foundation and the Oregon Arts Commission , made purchase of the sculpture possible . Angkor I has been called a " recognizable icon " and a " gateway " to the park 's lake . 
 = = Description and history = = 
 Angkor I was designed by Lee Kelly , an Idaho @-@ born Oregon sculptor whose works are influenced by modernism and abstract impressionism . Created in 1994 , Angkor I is a large @-@ scale stainless steel sculpture with a surface that is " gesturally and roughly finished " . It stands 14 feet ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) tall and weighs 1 @,@ 000 pounds ( 450 kg ) . In Living in Sculpture : The Studio Work of Lee Kelly , Paul <unk> writes that Angkor I , along with Angkor II and Phi Mai , were influenced by Kelly 's 1993 visit to Cambodia , Indonesia and Thailand . His visit to the temple complex Angkor Wat inspired the sculpture , as evidenced by its plaque . 
 In October 2010 , Kelly moved the sculpture to the Portland Art Museum for his summation exhibit , which was open through January 2011 . Later that year , the sculpture was installed at Millennium Plaza Park in Lake Oswego , on loan from Elizabeth Leach Gallery , the Portland @-@ based company which represents Kelly . A board member for the Arts Council of Lake Oswego had initiated the loan proposal to Kelly and the gallery for this public display . According to Nancy Nye , executive director of the council , the sculpture is prominent in the park and " provides a gateway to the lake " . 
 = = = Permanent installation = = = 
 In October 2013 , Nye began soliciting donations for the purchase of Angkor I , which was scheduled to return to the gallery unless $ 55 @,@ 000 could be raised by 5pm on November 1 , 2013 . Two weeks prior to this deadline , the council had raised $ 31 @,@ 750 , more than $ 20 @,@ 000 short of the asking price . In an interview published by The Oregonian , Nye said , " Lee Kelly is a living legend and the pride of Oregon 's artistic community . And his studio is right here in Clackamas County . He 's a local treasure . " She also wrote in a press release , " It would be a terrible loss to the community to have this sculpture removed , but it 's fast becoming a reality " . The council 's board chair , Shari Newman , also stressed the urgent need for financial assistance , saying " We ’ re more than halfway there , but what we really need is a handful of lead donors to step forward and make this important work a permanent part of the City ’ s collection . And we need them now . " During the final two weeks of the fundraising campaign , the council draped a black parachute over the sculpture and posted signs requesting financial assistance , such as " Unless someone like you cares a whole awful lot , this sculpture is leaving ... Let 's hope it 's not . " 
 On November 1 , The Oregonian reported that the council 's director was certain enough money had been raised to keep Angkor I in Lake Oswego permanently , as part of its Gallery Without Walls public art program , though the exact amount of funds raised was uncertain . The Arts Council of Lake Oswego confirmed the purchase via social media on November 5 . Kelly and the Elizabeth Leach Gallery each donated $ 5 @,@ 000 , and the Ford Family Foundation and the Oregon Arts Commission had awarded a $ 10 @,@ 000 matching grant in May 2013 . All funding was provided by private businesses , foundations and individuals ; none came from city or state funds . Portland Tribune and The Oregonian both published comments from Nye , in which she expressed delight about the addition to Lake Oswego 's public art collection and providing access to the " fine " and " magnificent " work for future generations . The council planned a commemoration ceremony at the sculpture 's permanent location ; expected attendees were Kelly , Mayor Kent Studebaker , and members of the Ford Family Foundation and the Oregon Arts Commission . On November 7 , sister publications Lake Oswego Review and Portland Tribune published a " reader 's letter " written by Nye , in which she thanked the more than 40 funders who helped purchase Angkor I. 
 = = Reception = = 
 art <unk> magazine said Angkor I 's " reflective surfaces , ground in sweeping gestures , are as important as its form . " According to Nye , the sculpture " has become a recognizable icon " . In her press release , which was published during her fundraising campaign , she wrote : " People often comment that its placement creates a gateway , or window to the lake . If Angkor I is removed , it will leave a real void in the landscape . " 
 = The Crepes of Wrath = 
 " The Crepes of Wrath " is the eleventh episode of The Simpsons ' first season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on April 15 , 1990 . The episode was written by George Meyer , Sam Simon , John Swartzwelder and Jon Vitti , and was directed by Wes Archer and Milton Gray . In the episode , Bart is sent to France on a student exchange trip , where his hosts treat him as a slave . Meanwhile , an Albanian student takes Bart 's place in the Simpsons family , and shows great interest in Homer 's work at the nuclear power plant . 
 The episode received generally positive reviews from critics , and in 1997 , David Bauder from TV Guide named this episode the greatest episode of The Simpsons , and the 17th greatest episode of any television show of all time . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Homer trips over Bart 's skateboard and falls down the stairs , hurting his back , and is confined to the couch for several days . Marge sends Bart to clean his room and while doing so , he discovers an old cherry bomb among his things . At school the next day , he decides to flush it down the toilet in the boys ' restroom with friends , Milhouse , Richard and Lewis . On the same day , Principal Skinner 's mother is visiting the school and Bart ends up pulling his prank the same time Principal Skinner 's mother is using the facilities in an adjacent girls ' restroom . The resulting explosion blows her off of her seat and enrages Skinner . In order to punish him , Skinner proposes deportation to Homer and Marge , by having Bart participate in a foreign exchange program . They decide to send Bart to France , while the Simpsons host a student from the Socialist People 's Republic of Albania , named Adil Hoxha . Bart is shown a picture of a lovely château in the heart of France and he immediately agrees to go , much to Homer and Skinner 's delight . 
 In France , Bart arrives at " Château Maison " , which is actually a dilapidated farmhouse on a run @-@ down vineyard . He is greeted by two unscrupulous , abusive winemakers , César and his nephew Ugolin , who proceed to treat him like a slave . Bart is starved while being made to carry buckets of water , collect and crush grapes , sleep on the floor , and test wine contaminated with antifreeze . 
 Meanwhile , in Springfield , Adil arrives and turns out to be very friendly , helping out Marge with the family chores . Homer immediately takes a shine to him , and it is noticeable that he is a better son and role model than Bart ever was . However , Marge challenges Homer that while she appreciates Adil 's good behavior , part of being good parents is that they have the same respect for their natural children , in that is Homer being concerned for Bart while he is abroad . Unbeknown to the family , Adil is actually a spy sent by his government to obtain blueprints of the Springfield nuclear plant 's reactor . Homer unwittingly takes him on a tour of the power plant and thinks nothing of the many photographs Adil takes , which Adil sends home by a secret fax machine in Bart 's tree house . 
 When Bart is sent by his captors into town to buy a case of antifreeze , he sees a gendarme and tries to ask for help , but the gendarme does not understand English and only gives Bart a piece of candy . Bart walks away , despairing over his own stupidity , then suddenly begins speaking French to himself . Realizing he has become fluent in the language , he runs back to the gendarme and tells him about the winemakers . The winemakers are swiftly arrested and Bart finishes his stay in France being hailed as a hero . He is awarded a medal for his bravery and he is kissed by a French beauty queen . Back in Springfield , Adil is caught by the FBI , forcing him to be sent back to Albania in exchange for their own child spy . Bart returns to his family , bringing them gifts from France . Back at home trying out the gifts , Homer has difficulty opening a wine bottle , but is pleased to hear Bart speak French , oblivious that Bart has just called him a buffoon . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Crepes of Wrath " was the first episode of The Simpsons for which George Meyer was credited as a writer , and he wrote it together with Sam Simon , John Swartzwelder and Jon Vitti . The episode was inspired by the French movie Manon of the Spring . The writers were trying to figure out which country the foreign exchange student should come from when they came up with Albania . They had not seen many uses of the country on television and decided to make the episode a tribute to actor John Belushi , who has Albanian roots . The writers did not know much about the country and could not think of a good name for the boy so they gave him the surname Hoxha after the former leader of Albania , Enver Hoxha . They used real Albanian in the scene where Adil says goodbye to his family , and they tried to get the actual language right at Sam Simon 's instigation . They also used real French in the scenes of Bart in France . The writers did some research on a certain airport in France for the shots of Bart at the airport in Paris . Principal Skinner 's mother , Agnes Skinner , made her first appearance on The Simpsons in this episode , although her voice was a bit different from what the viewers are used to in the later episodes of the show . 
 César and Ugolin are named after the peasants from the 1986 French films Jean de Florette and Manon des Sources . Bart 's French gift to Maggie is a reference to Le Ballon Rouge , a short French children 's film . On the way to the chateau , Bart and Ugolin cycle past scenes depicted in several famous paintings , notably Bassin aux <unk> by Claude Monet , Champ de <unk> aux <unk> by Vincent van Gogh , Le rêve by Henri Rousseau and Déjeuner sur l 'herbe by Édouard Manet . The choice of antifreeze as an adulterant is a nod to the 1985 diethylene glycol wine scandal . The episode 's title in an obvious reference to John Steinbeck 's novel , The Grapes of Wrath . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " The Crepes of Wrath " finished 29th place in the weekly ratings for the week of April 9 – 15 , 1990 with a Nielsen rating of 15 @.@ 9 . It was the second highest rated show on the Fox Network that week . 
 " The Crepes of Wrath " received generally positive reviews from critics . Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , the authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , said the episode was a " Tour de Force " and that this was " perhaps the first episode to make the viewer 's jaw drop at the audacity and invention of the series ' makers " . In a DVD review of the first season , David B. Grelck gave the episode a rating of 2 @.@ 5 / 5 , adding : " While the laughs are a bit dry in this episode , the over the top plot is indicative of zaniness to come . " Colin Jacobson at DVD Movie Guide said in a review that " it ’ s clear that the writers had started to find their groove by the time this episode was produced . From start to finish , ' Crepes ' offered a solid experience , as the show began to feature more style and subtlety . " Scott Collura at Hollywood Video praised the episode in a review , saying " it is one of the best of the first season . " In 1997 , David Bauder from TV Guide named this episode the greatest episode of The Simpsons , and the 17th greatest episode of any television show of all time . In 2006 , IGN listed " The Crepes of Wrath " as the best episode of the first season , saying it " features a strong central storyline , with Bart being shipped off to France as an exchange student and being forced to work for two unscrupulous winemakers that mix antifreeze in their wine . " The episode 's reference to Le Ballon Rouge was named the third greatest film reference in the history of the show by Nathan Ditum of Total Film . 
 In Planet Simpson , author Chris Turner notes that many of the episode 's French characters and settings are derived largely from American stereotypes of France , writing " [ Caeser and Ugolin ] are perfect embodiments of the stereotypical Frenchman so loathed in the United States . " The episode has become study material for sociology courses at University of California Berkeley , where it is used to " examine issues of the production and reception of cultural objects , in this case , a satirical cartoon show " , and to figure out what it is " trying to tell audiences about aspects primarily of American society , and , to a lesser extent , about other societies . " 
 = Oryzomys couesi = 
 Oryzomys couesi , also known as Coues ' rice rat , is a semiaquatic rodent in the family Cricetidae occurring from southernmost Texas through Mexico and Central America into northwestern Colombia . It is usually found in wet habitats , such as marshes , but also lives in drier forests and shrublands . Weighing about 43 to 82 g ( 1 @.@ 5 to 2 @.@ 9 oz ) , O. couesi is a medium @-@ sized to large rat . The coarse fur is buff to reddish above and white to buff below . The hindfeet show some specializations for life in the water , such as reduced ungual tufts of hair around the digits . It has 56 chromosomes . There is much geographic variation in size , proportions , color , and skull features . Oryzomys couesi is active during the night and builds nests of vegetation that are suspended among reeds about 1 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) above the ground . It is an excellent swimmer and dives well , but can also climb in vegetation . An omnivore , it eats both plant and animal food , including seeds and insects . It breeds throughout the year ; females give birth to about four young after a pregnancy of 21 to 28 days . The species may be infected by several different parasites and by two hantaviruses . 
 The species was first described in 1877 , the first of many related species from the region described until the 1910s . In 1918 , Edward Alphonso Goldman consolidated most into the single species Oryzomys couesi and in 1960 Raymond Hall united this taxon with its United States relative , the marsh rice rat ( O. palustris ) , into a single widespread species ; subsequently , many related , localized species retained by Goldman were also included in this taxon . After studies of the contact zone in Texas , where O. couesi and the marsh rice rat meet , were published in 1979 and underscored the distinctness of the two , they were again regarded as separate . Since then , some of the peripheral forms of the group , such as Oryzomys antillarum from Jamaica and Oryzomys peninsulae from the Baja California Peninsula , have been reinstated as species . Nevertheless , O. couesi as currently constituted is likely a composite of several species ; a 2010 study , using DNA sequence data , found evidence to recognize separate species from the Pacific and eastern sides of the distribution of O. couesi and two additional species from Panama and Costa Rica . Generally , Oryzomys couesi is common and of no conservation concern , and it is even considered a plague species in places , but some populations are threatened . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Oryzomys couesi and at least six more narrowly distributed species with peripheral distributions together form the O. couesi group within the genus Oryzomys . The eighth species of the genus , the marsh rice rat ( O. palustris ) is the only member of its own group ( unless western populations are classified as a separate species , O. texensis ) . Oryzomys previously included many other species , which were reclassified in various studies culminating in contributions by Marcelo Weksler and coworkers in 2006 that removed more than forty species from the genus . All are placed in the tribe Oryzomyini ( " rice rats " ) , a diverse assemblage of over a hundred species , and on higher taxonomic levels in the subfamily Sigmodontinae of the family Cricetidae , along with hundreds of other species of mainly small rodents . 
 = = = History = = = 
 Edward Alston first described Oryzomys couesi in 1877 , using three specimens from Mexico and Guatemala . He named the animal Hesperomys couesi , placing it in the now @-@ defunct genus Hesperomys , and noted similarities to the marsh rice rat ( then called Hesperomys palustris ) and two species now placed in <unk> . The specific name , couesi , honors American naturalist Elliott Coues , who had done much work on North American rodents . In 1893 , Oldfield Thomas wrote that the species , by then placed in the genus Oryzomys as Oryzomys couesi , had caused much confusion about its identity , because the three specimens ( one from Cobán , Guatemala , and two from Mexico ) used by Alston in fact belonged to two or three different species . He restricted the name couesi to the animal from Guatemala , and introduced the new name Oryzomys fulgens for one of the Mexican animals . Several other related species were described from the early 1890s onwards and in 1901 Clinton Hart Merriam united many of those into a palustris @-@ mexicanus group of species , which also included the marsh rice rat . 
 Edward Alphonso Goldman revised North American Oryzomys in 1918 and consolidated many forms into a single species Oryzomys couesi , with ten subspecies distributed from southern Texas and western Mexico south to Costa Rica . He placed it in an Oryzomys palustris group with the marsh rice rat and several species with more limited distributions , which he regarded as related to O. couesi but distinctive enough to be classified as separate species . In the 1930s , a few more forms related to O. couesi were described . As then recognized , the ranges of the marsh rice rat , a United States species , and Oryzomys couesi meet in southern Texas . In 1960 , Raymond Hall reviewed specimens from this contact zone and found no grounds on which to separate the two species ; thus , he reduced O. couesi to a subspecies of the marsh rice rat . Other workers continued this lumping and by 1971 all other species Goldman had placed in the O. palustris group were classified under the marsh rice rat , together with Oryzomys azuerensis from Panama , described as a species in 1937 . 
 Additional studies of the palustris – couesi contact zone in Texas published in 1979 , using more specimens and characters , indicated that the two species are in fact easily distinguishable there ; therefore , O. couesi has since been regarded as a species distinct from the marsh rice rat . Afterward , some of the other forms synonymized under O. couesi or O. palustris were resurrected as separate species — Oryzomys nelsoni from the Marías Islands , western Mexico , and Oryzomys antillarum from Jamaica . In 2009 , Michael Carleton and Joaquin Arroyo @-@ Cabrales reviewed western Mexican Oryzomys , reaffirmed the distinctness of O. nelsoni , and reinstated O. peninsulae from the tip of the Baja California Peninsula and O. albiventer from interior Mexico as species . Still , O. couesi included 22 synonyms , and Carleton and Arroyo @-@ Cabrales wrote that further research on O. couesi and related species would certainly result in the recognition of additional species . 
 A 2010 study by Delton Hanson and colleagues used DNA sequence data from the mitochondrial gene cytochrome b ( Cytb ) and two nuclear markers , exon 1 of the interphotoreceptor retinoid @-@ binding protein gene ( Rbp3 ) and intron 2 of alcohol dehydrogenase gene 1 ( Adh1 @-@ I2 ) to study relationships among populations of the marsh rice rat and O. couesi . The Cytb data placed all studied specimens of O. couesi in a clade sister to the marsh rice rat ; the mean genetic distance between the two groups was 11 @.@ 30 % , much larger than the distance between sister species in the related genera Melanomys and Nectomys ( 7 @.@ 48 % and 7 @.@ 52 % , respectively ) . Within the O. couesi clade , two populations from Panama and Costa Rica were successively basal to the other specimens , which fell into two large subclades — one containing animals from the Pacific seaboard from western Mexico to El Salvador and the other containing rats from the eastern seaboard from Texas to Nicaragua . The Panamanian and Costa Rican populations differed by 6 @.@ 53 % to 11 @.@ 93 % from the others and the western and eastern subclades differed by 4 @.@ 41 % on average . Data from both of the slower @-@ evolving nuclear markers Rbp3 and Adh1 @-@ I2 also placed examples of Oryzomys in two main clades , but did not recover the western and eastern groups of O. couesi as separate clades . In addition , Adh1 @-@ I2 placed the Costa Rican population within the marsh rice rat clade and placed some western O. couesi specimens closer to the marsh rice rat than to the O. couesi group . The combined dataset supported the western and eastern clades within O. couesi and placed the Costa Rican population marginally closer to the marsh rice rat than to O. couesi . Using the genetic species concept , the authors suggested that the four groups they found within O. couesi should be recognized as distinct species . If this suggestion is followed , the eastern subclade would retain the name Oryzomys couesi , the western group would be named Oryzomys mexicanus , and the appropriate names for the Panamanian and Costa Rican species remain unclear . 
 = = = Western Mexico to El Salvador = = = 
 Populations of Oryzomys couesi from Jalisco , western Mexico , east to El Salvador form a single Cytb clade , which Hanson and colleagues proposed to recognize as the species Oryzomys mexicanus . These animals differ by 4 @.@ 4 % from Oryzomys couesi in the strict sense , which occurs to the north and east , are separated by mountain ranges from the latter , harbor different species of hantavirus , and according to Merriam ( 1901 ) have more robust skulls , with larger molars , stronger zygomatic arches ( cheekbones ) , and better developed ridges along the margins of the interorbital region of the skull ( between the eyes ) . Within the " Oryzomys mexicanus " clade , Cytb sequence differences average 2 @.@ 06 % and western ( Jalisco to Oaxaca ) and eastern ( Chiapas and El Salvador ) groups form distinct subclades ; Hanson and colleagues recognized these as different subspecies , mexicanus in the west and zygomaticus in the east . 
 As defined by Carleton and Arroyo @-@ Cabrales in 2009 , the subspecies Oryzomys couesi mexicanus occurs along the Pacific coast from central Sonora to southeastern Oaxaca and inland along rivers into central Michoacán , southern Morelos , southern Puebla , and northwestern Oaxaca . It usually lives below 1 @,@ 000 m ( 3 @,@ 300 ft ) altitude , but has been found at 1 @,@ 525 m ( 5 @,@ 003 ft ) in Jalisco . This distributional pattern is similar to that of other western Mexican rodents such as Sigmodon mascotensis , <unk> alleni , Peromyscus <unk> , and <unk> <unk> and has been recognized as a distinct biogeographic zone in some reviews . O. c. mexicanus occurs close to three other Oryzomys species — O. albiventer , O. peninsulae , and O. nelsoni — which are larger and different in some proportions and details of coloration . 
 Joel Asaph Allen first described Oryzomys mexicanus as a full species in 1897 from specimens from Jalisco . In the same publication , he also described Oryzomys bulleri from nearby Nayarit , but he did not compare the two with each other . Merriam added a second species from Nayarit , Oryzomys rufus , in 1901 , noting that it was smaller and more reddish than mexicanus . Goldman synonymized the three as O. couesi mexicanus in 1918 and in 2009 Carleton and Arroyo @-@ Cabrales concurred , arguing that the differences between rufus and mexicanus were age @-@ related and within the normal range of variation of the animal . Another subspecies , Oryzomys couesi <unk> , was described by Burt in 1934 from central coastal Sonora , which extended the range of the species by 400 mi ( 640 km ) at the time . This form is dark gray @-@ brown , much darker than mexicanus , and has a shorter tail and weaker jugals . Carleton and Arroyo @-@ Cabrales wrote that it is similar to mexicanus , but that further research is needed to determine whether it should be recognized as a subspecies . Large O. couesi from northern Sinaloa may also belong to this form . Goldman wrote that mexicanus was very similar to nominate couesi , but usually with paler fur ; the upperparts are more buffy than in couesi and the underparts are usually white , but may be buffy , the normal color in couesi . 
 Oryzomys zygomaticus was first described by Merriam in 1901 as a separate species similar to mexicanus , but with the zygomatic arches broadly spreading and curved downward . Goldman , who reduced it to a subspecies of couesi , recorded it from southwestern Guatemala and nearby Chiapas and described it as slightly paler than O. c. couesi but darker than O. c. mexicanus . Three specimens from central El Salvador have Cytb sequences similar to those of zygomaticus , but in The Mammals of El Salvador ( 1961 ) , Burt and <unk> recorded only the subspecies couesi from the country , while noting that specimens from some localities were slightly paler than others . 
 = = = Interior Mexico = = = 
 Goldman grouped four subspecies of couesi from the interior plateaus of central Mexico together — albiventer , crinitus , aztecus , and regillus . Three of those ( albiventer from Jalisco , crinitus from the Distrito Federal , and aztecus from Morelos ) were described by Merriam in 1901 , and Goldman had himself described regillus from Michoacán in 1915 . According to Goldman , aztecus is pale and large @-@ toothed , crinitus is large , dark and large @-@ toothed , regillus is large and dark , and albiventer is large and relatively pale . 
 In their 2009 review of western Mexican Oryzomys , Carleton and Arroyo @-@ Cabrales classified Oryzomys albiventer as a separate species from lowland mexicanus on the basis of clear morphometric differentiation and offered some comments on the status of crinitus , regillus , and aztecus , including the holotypes of the three forms in their morphometric analyses . The holotypes of regillus and aztecus were at the upper end of the range of variation in their large series of mexicanus from the western lowlands , and crinitus clustered with specimens of O. peninsulae from the tip of the Baja California Peninsula . They suggested that regillus and aztecus may represent no more than robust upland populations of mexicanus , but could not exclude the possibility that they represent a different species . That crinitus , which occurs at over 2 @,@ 000 m ( 6 @,@ 600 ft ) altitude in the Valley of Mexico , was the same species as peninsulae from the lowlands of the Baja California Peninsula they could not accept and they recommended further research to determine the relationships of crinitus . A specimen from inland Michoacán has Cytb data characteristic of mexicanus , but Hanson and colleagues did not have data for other interior Mexican Oryzomys . 
 The holotype of the species Oryzomys fulgens , which Thomas had described in 1893 , has no more precise locality than " Mexico " , but the Valley of Mexico has been suggested as its origin . It is a large , coarse @-@ furred , bright reddish , long @-@ tailed species with a broad skull with widely spreading zygomatic arches . Goldman wrote that it was similar to crinitus , but more intensely colored , and differed in the form of the interorbital region ; he retained it as a separate species pending further investigations . Carleton and Arroyo @-@ Cabrales noted that archival research may yet uncover the precise origin of O. fulgens , which could establish it as an older name for one of the other central Mexican Oryzomys . 
 = = = Texas to Nicaragua = = = 
 Oryzomys populations from Texas to Nicaragua form a single Cytb clade , within which the average sequence divergence is 1 @.@ 28 % , and Hanson and colleagues proposed that the name Oryzomys couesi be restricted to this clade . These populations correspond to two subspecies recognized by Goldman ( O. c. aquaticus and O. c. couesi ) and an island form he retained as a species ( O. cozumelae ) . Two other subspecies Goldman recognized , O. c. richmondi and O. c. <unk> , and a third , O. c. pinicola , that was described after Goldman 's paper occur in the same region , but have not been studied genetically . 
 The northernmost populations of Oryzomys couesi , those in southernmost Texas and nearby Tamaulipas , Mexico , are classified as the subspecies aquaticus , which was described as a separate species , Oryzomys aquaticus , in 1891 . Here the range of O. couesi meets that of the marsh rice rat ; in parts of Kenedy , Willacy and Cameron counties , Texas , and in far northeastern Tamaulipas , the two are sympatric ( occur in the same places ) . In the contact zone , couesi occurs further inland , while the marsh rice rat lives along the coast . In experimental conditions , the two fail to interbreed and genetic analysis yields no evidence of gene flow or hybridization in the wild . Compared to populations further to the south , aquaticus is larger and paler and has a more robust skull . Specimens from Tamaulipas are slightly darker than those from Texas . The Cytb sequences of specimens of aquaticus form a separate group , but cluster among specimens of O. c. couesi from further south . 
 The form <unk> is known from further south in Mexico , in the Río Verde basin of San Luis Potosi , the state of Hidalgo , and far northern Veracruz . Late Pleistocene fossils of this form have been found in Cueva de Abre , Tamaulipas . According to Goldman , it is intermediate in color between O. c. aquaticus and O. c. couesi , but has a skull similar to that of aquaticus . 
 Goldman united populations ranging from northern Veracruz through eastern Mexico , Guatemala , Honduras , and Nicaragua south to far northwestern Costa Rica in the nominate subspecies , Oryzomys couesi couesi . He placed six other names as full synonyms of this form , which has its type locality in Guatemala — Oryzomys jalapae Allen and Chapman , 1897 , from Veracruz ; Oryzomys jalapae <unk> Merriam , 1901 , from Veracruz ; Oryzomys <unk> Merriam , 1901 , from Tabasco ; Oryzomys <unk> Merriam , 1901 , from Veracruz ; Oryzomys jalapae <unk> Eliot , 1904 , from Veracruz ; and Oryzomys richardsoni Allen , 1910 , from Nicaragua . According to Goldman , individual variation within the subspecies is large , which has led to the large number of published synonyms , but populations from all parts of its range are essentially similar . 
 The subspecies Oryzomys couesi pinicola was described in 1932 from a pine ridge in western British Honduras ( now Belize ) ; it is smaller and darker than nominate couesi , which also occurs in Belize , and has a more delicate skull . In 1901 , Merriam described the Oryzomys of the island of Cozumel as a separate species , Oryzomys cozumelae , and Goldman kept it as such because of its large size , dark fur , and long tail . In 1965 , however , Knox Jones and Timothy Lawlor judged the differences between cozumelae and mainland couesi trivial and found that cozumelae was inside the range of variation of mainland Oryzomys populations ; accordingly , they demoted the island form to a subspecies . Mark Engstrom and colleagues , writing in 1989 , reaffirmed this conclusion . For an island form , this population is highly genetically variable . In its Cytb sequence data , it falls among populations of nominate couesi . Oryzomys couesi is also found on Turneffe Atoll off the coast of Belize and Roatán off Honduras . 
 The Oryzomys of the eastern lowlands of Nicaragua was described as a separate species , Oryzomys richmondi , by Merriam in 1901 , and Goldman retained it as a subspecies of O. couesi on the basis of its distinctly dark fur . In reviewing Nicaraguan Oryzomys in 1986 , Jones and Engstrom did not keep richmondi as separate , because they thought the difference in color too small for the recognition of subspecies . Oryzomys dimidiatus , a small , dark Oryzomys with gray underparts , occurs with O. couesi in southeastern Nicaragua . According to Jones and Engstrom , rice rats from the island of <unk> in Lake Nicaragua are distinctive in their large skull and small external measurements , with an especially short tail , soft fur that is orange @-@ brown above and buffish below , and lack of sphenopalatine vacuities ( openings in the roof of the mesopterygoid fossa , the gap behind the end of the bony palate ) . They considered that this population probably represented a separate subspecies , but declined to propose a new name because they had only one adult specimen . In Nicaragua , O. couesi occurs up to an altitude of 1 @,@ 250 m ( 4 @,@ 100 ft ) . 
 = = = Costa Rica , Panama , and Colombia = = = 
 Oryzomys from Costa Rica have historically been referred to O. c. couesi , but Hanson and colleagues found that two specimens from Refugio Nacional de Vida Silvestre <unk> <unk> , northeastern Costa Rica , differed as much from other O. couesi ( 11 @.@ 93 % Cytb sequence divergence ) as O. couesi differed from the marsh rice rat ( 11 @.@ 30 % ) . They suggested that these animals represented a species distinct from O. couesi , but were unable to resolve the correct name for the species because they could not examine samples of dimidiatus or richmondi . 
 Oryzomys is rare in Panama . Panamanian Oryzomys were first described by Goldman in 1912 , who introduced the name Oryzomys gatunensis for a specimen from <unk> in the Canal Zone . In 1918 , Goldman kept the animal as a separate species , remarking that it was similar to richmondi , but distinctive in the well @-@ developed ridges along the margins of the interorbital region , the short interparietal bone ( part of the roof of the braincase ) , and the long nasal bones . In 1937 , Bole described another species of Panamanian Oryzomys , Oryzomys azuerensis from <unk> , Veraguas Province . It is a brown form , lacking the reddish tones of nearby populations , and has a broad skull with a short rostrum ( front part ) and ridges on the interorbital region like those of gatunensis . Although Goldman recommended to him that gatunensis and azuerensis both be treated as subspecies of couesi , Bole described azuerensis as a species because it did not seem intermediate between the geographically closest forms , gatunensis and couesi , and was separated by a large gap from the nearest known populations of O. couesi in northwestern Costa Rica and southeastern Nicaragua . In a 1966 review of Panamanian mammals , Charles Handley reduced both gatunensis and azuerensis to subspecies of the marsh rice rat ( in which O. couesi was included at the time ) , and when O. couesi was reinstated as a separate species these forms went with it . Specimens from near the type locality of azuerensis differ by about 7 % in their Cytb sequences from other O. couesi , which suggests that they may represent a separate species . However , Hanson and colleagues did not reinstate azuerensis as a species , because they could not examine samples of gatunensis . 
 Oryzomys couesi was first reported from Colombia in 1987 , when Philip Hershkovitz reported on its occurrence at <unk> in Córdoba Department , northwestern Colombia . The Colombian specimen is ochraceous in color throughout and according to Hershkovitz almost identical to specimens from Guatemala , but distinctive in that the upper lip is white . He suggested that O. couesi may also be discovered in the Pacific lowlands of the Chocó in western Colombia . 
 = = = Common names = = = 
 Several common names have been proposed for Oryzomys couesi and the synonyms currently associated with it . Eliot in 1905 and Goldman in 1918 gave separate common names for each of the species and subspecies they recognized . Many authors have used " Coues ' Rice Rat " or some variation thereof for O. couesi , but " Coues ' Oryzomys " has also been used . 
 = = Description = = 
 Oryzomys couesi is a medium @-@ sized to large rat with coarse fur that is buff to reddish above , becoming paler towards the sides and cheeks and darker on the rump and face . The underparts are white to buff . The fur is shorter , brighter , and more intense in color than in the marsh rice rat . The snout ends bluntly and the moderately large eyes show reddish eyeshine . The small ears are black on the outside and the inside is covered with short , gray to buff or red hairs . The long tail is dark brown above and white to light brown below . The feet are long and stout . On the forefeet , the ungual tufts ( tufts of hair on the digits ) are present . Many of the pads on the hindfeet are reduced , as are the ungual tufts , and small interdigital webs may be present in at least some specimens . Some of these traits are common adaptations to life in the water in oryzomyines . As in most other oryzomyines , females have eight mammae . Head and body length is 98 to 142 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 to 5 @.@ 6 in ) , tail length is 107 to 152 mm ( 4 @.@ 2 to 6 @.@ 0 in ) , hindfoot length is 27 to 33 mm ( 1 @.@ 1 to 1 @.@ 3 in ) , ear length is 13 to 18 mm ( 0 @.@ 51 to 0 @.@ 71 in ) , and body mass is 43 to 82 g ( 1 @.@ 5 to 2 @.@ 9 oz ) . Studies in Texas and El Salvador found that males are slightly larger than females . 
 The stomach has the characteristic pattern of sigmodontines ( unilocular @-@ hemiglandular ) : it is not split in two chambers by an incisura angularis and the front part ( antrum ) is covered by a glandular epithelium . The gall bladder is absent , a synapomorphy ( shared @-@ derived character ) of Oryzomyini . The karyotype includes 56 chromosomes and a fundamental number of 56 autosomal arms ( 2n 
 = 56 , <unk> = 
 56 ) . The autosomes include 26 pairs of acrocentric chromosomes , with a long and a very short arm , and one medium @-@ sized submetacentric pair , with one arm shorter than the other . The X chromosome is either acrocentric , with a long and a short arm , or subtelocentric , with a long and a vestigial arm . The form of the sex chromosomes has been used to distinguish the marsh rice rat from Oryzomys couesi , but there are no consistent differences between the two . 
 As is characteristic of Sigmodontinae , Oryzomys couesi has a complex penis , with the baculum ( penis bone ) ending in three cartilaginous digits at its tip . The outer surface of the penis is mostly covered by small spines , but there is a broad band of nonspinous tissue . The papilla ( nipple @-@ like projection ) on the dorsal ( upper ) side of the penis is covered with small spines , a character Oryzomys couesi shares only with Oligoryzomys and the marsh rice rat among oryzomyines examined . On the urethral process , located in the crater at the end of the penis , a fleshy process ( the subapical lobule ) is present ; it is absent in all other oryzomyines with studied penes except the marsh rice rat and Holochilus brasiliensis . 
 = = = Skull = = = 
 The nasal and premaxillary bones do not extend back beyond the point where the lacrimal , frontal , and maxillary bones meet . The zygomatic plate , the flattened front part of the zygomatic arch , is broad and develops a notch at its front end . The plate 's back margin is located before the first upper molar . The jugal bone , part of the zygomatic arch , is reduced , as usual in oryzomyines . The sphenopalatine foramen , a foramen ( opening ) at the side of the skull above the molars , is small ; it is much larger in the marsh rice rat . The narrowest part of the interorbital region is towards the front and the edges are lined by prominent shelves . The parietal bones extend to the sides of the braincase . The interparietal bone is narrow and wedge @-@ shaped , so that the parietal and squamosal bones meet extensively . 
 The incisive foramina , openings in the front part of the palate , reach backward between the molars . The palate is long , extending substantially beyond the third molars , the usual condition in oryzomyines . The back part , near the third molars , is usually perforated by prominent posterolateral palatal pits , which are recessed into fossae ( depressions ) . <unk> vacuities are usually absent , but have been reported in some populations . There is no alisphenoid strut , an extension of the alisphenoid bone that in some oryzomyines separates two foramina in the skull . The condition of the arteries in the head is highly derived . The subsquamosal fenestra , an opening in the back part of the skull determined by the shape of the squamosal bone , is present . The squamosal lacks a suspensory process that contacts the tegmen tympani , the roof of the tympanic cavity , a defining character of oryzomyines . There are some openings in the mastoid bone . 
 In the mandible ( lower jaw ) , the mental foramen , an opening just before the first molar , opens sidewards , not upwards as in a few other oryzomyines . The upper and lower masseteric ridges , which anchor some of the chewing muscles , join at a point below the first molar and do not extend forward beyond that point . The capsular process , a raising of the bone of the back of the mandible that houses the back end of the incisor , is large . 
 = = = Teeth = = = 
 The dental formula is 1 @.@ 0 @.@ 0 @.@ 31 @.@ 0 @.@ 0 @.@ 3 × 2 = 16 ( one upper and one lower incisor and three upper and three lower molars on each side of the jaws ) , as usual in muroid rodents . The upper incisors are opisthodont , with the chewing edge located behind the vertical plane of the teeth . The molars are bunodont , with the cusps higher than the connecting crests , and brachydont , low @-@ crowned , as in most other oryzomyines . Many accessory crests , including the mesoloph on the upper molars and the mesolophid on the lower molars , are present , another trait O. couesi shares with most but not all other oryzomyines . The flexi and <unk> ( valleys between the cusps and crests ) at the labial ( outer ) side of the molars are closed by cingula ( ridges ) . 
 On the first and second upper molars , the flexi do not extend to the midline of the molars . The anterocone , the front cusp of the upper first molar , is not divided in two by an indentation at its front ( anteromedian flexus ) . A crest , the anteroloph , is present behind the labial cuspule . As in most oryzomyines , the upper molars all have one root on the inner ( lingual ) side and two on the outer ( labial ) side ; in addition , the first upper molar usually has another small labial root . 
 On the first lower molar , the labial and lingual conules of the anteroconid , the frontmost cusp , are separated by an anteromedian fossette . The second lower molar bears a crest , the anterolophid , before the two cusps , the protoconid and metaconid , that form the front edge of the molar in some other oryzomyines . There is a distinct ridge ( anterolabial cingulum ) at the outer front ( anterolabial ) edge of the molar , before the protoconid . The third lower molar also bears an anterolophid and an anterolabial cingulum . The first lower molar has large roots at the front and back of the tooth and two smaller ones in between , at the labial and lingual side . The second and third lowers molars have two large roots , one at the front and one at the back . 
 = = = Postcranial skeleton = = = 
 As usual in oryzomyines , there are twelve ribs . The first rib articulates with both the last cervical ( neck ) and first thoracic ( chest ) vertebrae , a synapomorphy of the Sigmodontinae . <unk> , processes at the back of a vertebra , are absent from the fifth lumbar . Between the second and third caudal vertebrae , hemal arches ( small bones ) are present with a spinous back border . The entepicondylar foramen is absent , as in all members of the Sigmodontinae ; if present , as in some other rodents , this foramen perforates the distal ( far ) end of the humerus ( upper arm bone ) . 
 = = Ecology and behavior = = 
 The distribution of Oryzomys couesi extends from southern Texas and central Sonora , but not the central plateau of Mexico , through Central America south and east to northwestern Colombia ; see under " Taxonomy " for details . The species has also been found in late Pleistocene cave deposits in Mexico and Honduras . It is common in watery habitats , such as marshes and small streams , but also occurs in forests and shrublands with sufficient cover . In addition , it is found in sugarcane and rice fields . In Texas , it occurs in marsh vegetation along <unk> ( oxbow lakes ) and in Veracruz , it has even been found on the dry coastal plain among shrubs . It occurs from 2 @,@ 300 m ( 7 @,@ 500 ft ) altitude down to sea level . On Cozumel , the proportion of juveniles and females is higher near roads that function as habitat edges . Cozumel rice rats rarely cross roads , which may isolate subpopulations on the island . 
 Oryzomys couesi lives on the ground and is semiaquatic , spending much time in the water , as Alston in his original description already recognized , but is also a good climber . A study in Costa Rica found that O. couesi is an excellent swimmer , diving well and using its tail to propel itself . It is probably able to forage underwater , which may help differentiate its niche from that of the ecologically similar cotton rat Sigmodon hirsutus , which also swims well , but does not dive . When disturbed , O. couesi will enter the water and swim away . It is primarily active during the night . Oryzomys couesi builds globular nests of woven vegetation suspended among reeds , about 1 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) above the water or the ground ; in Texas , larger individuals make larger nests . It does not usually make its own runways in vegetation , but may use those of other rodents , such as cotton rats . 
 Population densities range from 5 to 30 per ha ( 2 to 12 per acre ) . On Cozumel , density is around 14 @.@ 5 to 16 @.@ 5 per ha ( 5 @.@ 9 to 6 @.@ 7 per acre ) , but shows large seasonal variation . In western Mexico , one study found densities of 3 per ha ( 1 @.@ 2 per acre ) in cloud forest and 1 per ha ( 0 @.@ 4 per acre ) in a disturbed area . In 24 hours , male Texas O. couesi move up to 153 m ( 502 ft ) and females up to 126 m ( 413 ft ) . The diet includes both plant material , including seeds and green parts , and animals , including small fish , crustaceans , snails , insects like ants and beetles , and other invertebrates . It probably breeds around the year and after a pregnancy of 21 to 28 days , the female produces litters of two to seven young , with an average of 3 @.@ 8 , according to Reid 's Mammals of Central America & Southeast Mexico . In 28 pregnant females from Nicaragua , litter size varied from one to eight , averaging 4 @.@ 4 . The young become reproductively active when seven weeks old and the life cycle is short . 
 The introduced snake Boa constrictor preys on O. couesi on Cozumel . Parasites recorded on O. couesi in Veracruz include unidentified ticks , mites , fleas , and fly larvae . The flea Polygenis <unk> was found on an Oryzomys couesi from Cozumel . Out of ten O. couesi in San Luis Potosí , five each were infected by the nematode worms <unk> <unk> and H. <unk> , with about 25 worms per rat , and two were infected by one or two cestodes of the genus <unk> . The mites <unk> <unk> and Gigantolaelaps <unk> have been found on Oryzomys couesi in Oaxaca , the sucking louse Hoplopleura oryzomydis in Nicaragua , the mites Laelaps oryzomydis , Echinonyssus <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> frontalis , and <unk> bakeri in Colima , and the <unk> Eimeria <unk> in Mexico . The species is infected by two hantaviruses — Catacamas virus in Honduras and Playa de Oro virus in western Mexico — which are related to the Bayou virus infecting the marsh rice rat , a common cause of hantavirus infections in the United States . No hantavirus infections in humans have been linked to O. couesi hantaviruses , however . Chiapas O. couesi easily survive experimental infection with several arboviruses , including the Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus , suggesting that the species may serve as a reservoir for that virus . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 The IUCN lists Oryzomys couesi as " Least Concern " , because it is a widely distributed , common species with broad habitat tolerance that occurs in many protected areas . Habitat destruction , such as drainage of wetlands , may threaten some populations . In many areas , it is so common that it is considered a plague species . Populations even persist in the Valley of Mexico , as evidenced by a photograph published in 2006 . However , it is listed as threatened in Texas , where its distribution is very limited , because of habitat loss . In 1979 , Benson and Gehlbach estimated the size of the Texas population to be about 15 @,@ 000 . A 2001 study predicted that climate change would drive the Texas population to extinction , because no suitable habitats would continue to exist . The Cozumel population has declined substantially since the mid @-@ 1980s , perhaps due to habitat disturbance and predation by introduced species . 
 = 2013 Cotton Bowl Classic = 
 The 2013 AT & T Cotton Bowl Classic was a post @-@ season American college football bowl game held on January 4 , 2013 at Cowboys Stadium in Arlington , Texas in the United States . The 77th edition of the Cotton Bowl Classic began at 7 : 00 p.m. CST and aired on Fox Sports . It featured the Texas A & M Aggies from the Southeastern Conference ( SEC ) against the Big 12 Conference co @-@ champion Oklahoma Sooners and was the final game of the 2012 NCAA Division I FBS football season for both teams . Both the Aggies and the Sooners accepted their invitations after finishing the regular season 10 – 2 . 
 The pre @-@ game buildup was primarily focused on the two high @-@ powered offenses , both of whom were led by strong passing attacks led by quarterbacks Johnny Manziel and Landry Jones respectively . Both teams also had several quality wide receivers , but both were average to below average defensively . Experts were split in their prognostications , but most predicted a high @-@ scoring game . 
 Texas A & M defeated Oklahoma 41 – 13 to win the Cotton Bowl Classic and to finish the season with an 11 – 2 record . Manziel rushed for 229 yards during the game , a bowl record , rushing for two touchdowns and throwing for two more . Though the halftime score was 14 – 13 Texas A & M , the Aggies went on to score 27 unanswered second half points to win the game . 
 = = Teams = = 
 = = = Oklahoma = = = 
 With an 8 – 1 conference record , the Sooners once again won a share of the Big 12 Championship ; however , their loss to the Kansas State Wildcats prevented them from reaching the 2013 Fiesta Bowl spot . In addition , the non @-@ AQ Northern Illinois Huskies completed the qualifications to go to the 2013 Orange Bowl , leaving the Sooners out of the Bowl Championship Series ( BCS ) . 
 This was the Sooners ' second Cotton Bowl ; they had won the 2002 game , defeating the Arkansas Razorbacks by a score of 10 – 3 . The Sooners were the first team since Florida in 1993 to play against the teams with the top 3 Heisman vote @-@ getters for that season ( having played against 3rd @-@ place finisher Collin Klein from Kansas State , runner @-@ up Manti Te 'o from Notre Dame , and Heisman winner Manziel from Texas A & M ) ; they lost to all three . 
 = = = Texas A & M = = = 
 The Aggies ' first season as members of the SEC was led by freshman quarterback and 2012 Heisman Trophy winner Manziel , the Aggies posted a 6 – 2 conference record ( 10 – 2 overall ) , good for a second @-@ place tie in the SEC West Division ( tied with the LSU Tigers ) . In perhaps their biggest game of the season , the Aggies defeated defending national champions and 2013 BCS National Championship Game participants the Alabama Crimson Tide in Tuscaloosa , 29 – 24 . 
 This was the Aggies ' thirteenth Cotton Bowl appearance ; with the win they hold a 5 – 8 record in the game . With the appearance the Aggies became the first program to participate in the Cotton Bowl as members of three different conferences with automatic Cotton Bowl tie @-@ ins ( the Southwest Conference , the Big 12 , and the SEC ) . 
 = = Pre @-@ game buildup = = 
 Coming into the game , much of the buildup surrounded the matchup of two top @-@ flight quarterbacks , senior Landry Jones for Oklahoma and Heisman Trophy winner freshman Johnny Manziel for Texas A & M , both of whom ranked in the top @-@ 15 nationally in passing yards . In the all @-@ time series between the two schools , Oklahoma had won 19 games to Texas A & M 's 11 . This was the teams ' first meeting since Texas A & M left the Big 12 for the SEC . Aggies coach Kevin Sumlin had been an assistant under Bob Stoops ; coming into the game Stoops was 13 – 4 against his former assistants . 
 = = = Oklahoma = = = 
 Oklahoma compiled a 10 win , 2 loss record during the regular season and was left out of the BCS for the second consecutive year . 
 = = = = Offense = = = = 
 Oklahoma 's offense was led by their senior quarterback Jones who was primarily responsible for the Sooners ' 224 passing first downs , which was best in the country , and their 52 @.@ 2 third down conversion success rate , which was fourth @-@ best in the country . Jones , a senior who was ranked by ESPN as the number five quarterback prospect for the 2013 NFL Draft , completed 66 % of his 555 passes totaling <unk> yards , which was second @-@ best in the country , and 30 touchdowns . Jones threw primarily to a trio of upperclassmen wide receivers each of whom ended the season with more than 800 receiving yards , junior Kenny Stills , junior Jalen Saunders , who transferred in the offseason from Fresno State , and senior Justin Brown , who transferred to the Sooners in the offseason amid sanctions from the NCAA in wake of the Penn State child sex abuse scandal . Oklahoma 's rushing attack , which was second @-@ worst in the Big 12 in terms of total yards , was led by juniors Damien Williams and Brennan Clay , who amassed 946 yards and 11 touchdowns and 555 yards and 6 touchdowns respectively . 
 = = = = Defense = = = = 
 Oklahoma 's defense improved after head coach Bob Stoops ' brother , former Sooners co @-@ defensive coordinator and defensive backs coach Mike Stoops , returned to Oklahoma as the defensive coordinator after having served the previous seven and a half seasons as head coach of the Arizona Wildcats where he totaled 41 wins and 50 losses and was fired mid way through the 2011 season . Oklahoma 's defense was led in tackles by safety Tony Jefferson , who recorded 113 becoming just the sixth Sooner defensive back ever to amass more than 100 . In addition to Jefferson , Oklahoma was represented by defensive back Aaron Colvin on the All @-@ Big 12 first team and defensive lineman David King and defensive back Demontre Hurst on the second team . 
 = = = Texas A & M = = = 
 It was announced on December 12 , 2012 that Texas A & M 's offensive coordinator Kliff Kingsbury had left the university for the head coaching position at his alma mater , Texas Tech . Consequently , coach Kevin Sumlin announced that running backs coach and recruiting coordinator Clarence McKinney would call plays during the bowl . 
 = = = = Offense = = = = 
 The Aggies ' offense averaged 44 @.@ 8 points per game , third in the Football Bowl Subdivision ( FBS ) . A & M 's offense was led in both passing and rushing by Heisman Trophy winning quarterback Johnny Manziel . Manziel threw primarily to two receivers , fellow redshirt freshman Mike Evans , who totaled 82 receptions for 1105 yards and 5 touchdowns , and senior Ryan Swope , who totaled 72 receptions for 913 yards and 8 touchdowns . Together , the duo combined for 45 percent of the Aggies ' targets , catching 139 of 199 passes for 1 @,@ 845 yards and 12 touchdowns . Aside from Manziel , junior Ben Malena amassed 808 rushing yards and 8 touchdowns , while senior Christine Michael scored 8 rushing touchdowns to go along with 417 rushing yards . The Aggies also had two projected first @-@ round draft picks on their offensive line , junior tackles Luke <unk> and Jake Matthews . 
 = = = = Defense = = = = 
 The Aggies ' defense was led by first @-@ year defensive coordinator Mark Snyder , who had been a head coach at Marshall and defensive coordinator for Ohio State . Their leading tackler was junior defensive lineman <unk> Moore , who achieved first @-@ team All @-@ SEC accolades during the regular season and declared early to enter the 2013 NFL Draft , where he is considered one of the top prospects , and was the second overall pick in Todd McShay 's initial mock draft . 
 = = Game summary = = 
 = = = First quarter = = = 
 Texas A & M got the ball to start the game and marched down the field on an 8 @-@ play , 75 @-@ yard drive that culminated in the first of Manziel 's two rushing touchdowns , the first of which went for 23 yards . Oklahoma took over at their own 25 yardline after a touchback on the kickoff . Jones was 6 / 8 for 43 yards passing on the drive . The Sooners got as far as second and goal at the one yardline prior to two failed plays and a false start penalty that set up a 23 @-@ yard field goal to make the score 7 – 3 Texas A & M. The drive totaled 16 plays and 69 yards in 5 : 43 . On the ensuing drive , Texas A & M was forced to punt after achieving only one first down . 
 = = = Second quarter = = = 
 Oklahoma 's next drive ran 18 plays and 87 yards taking up 7 : 26 . Once again , the Sooners stalled in the red zone and were again forced to settle for a field goal , this time a 24 @-@ yarder by Michael Hunnicutt . The next two drives by Texas A & M and Oklahoma both ended in interceptions thrown by Manziel and Jones respectively . Texas A & M took over at the Oklahoma 48 yardline following Jones ' interception . A trick play to start the drive resulted in senior wide receiver <unk> McNeal throwing a 20 @-@ yard pass to Mike Evans . On the next play , running back Ben Malena running the ball 23 yards to the five yardline . Manziel ran for a 5 @-@ yard touchdown on the next play to make the score 14 – 6 . Oklahoma 's next drive lasted 13 plays and 83 yards that culminated in a 6 @-@ yard touchdown pass from Jones to Justin Brown . 
 = = = Third quarter = = = 
 Oklahoma 's first second @-@ half drive resulted in a quick three @-@ and @-@ out . After a 58 @-@ yard punt by Tress Way which was downed at the Texas A & M 9 @-@ yard line . Despite the poor field position , the Aggies put together a 7 @-@ play , 91 @-@ yard drive highlighted by a 35 @-@ yard pass from Manziel to Uzoma <unk> and finished with a 7 @-@ yard touchdown run by Malena . Oklahoma had another three @-@ and @-@ out on their next drive . Texas A & M subsequently established a 7 @-@ play , 89 @-@ yard drive that featured three consecutive completed passes from Manziel to Malcome Kennedy and concluded with a 30 @-@ yard rushing touchdown by Trey Williams . Oklahoma 's next drive was their third consecutive three @-@ and @-@ out . Texas A & M then scored their third consecutive touchdown , this time on a 33 @-@ yard pass from Manziel to Ryan Swope making the score 34 – 13 . Oklahoma then ran a 7 @-@ play , 31 @-@ yard drive before punting to end the quarter . 
 = = = Fourth quarter = = = 
 Texas A & M had their first three @-@ and @-@ out of the game to begin the fourth quarter . Oklahoma achieved one first down on their subsequent drive before turning the ball over on downs . Texas A & M scored for the final time of the game on their ensuing drive via a 34 @-@ yard touchdown pass from Manziel to <unk> to make the score 41 – 13 . Oklahoma and Texas A & M then exchanged punts before the final drive of the game by Oklahoma which lasted four plays prior to time running out . 
 = = Scoring summary = = 
 = = = Statistics = = = 
 = = = = Team statistics = = = = 
 = = = = Individual statistics = = = = 
 = = = = = Passing = = = = = 
 = = = = = Rushing = = = = = 
 Manziel 's 229 @-@ yard performance set an FBS record for most rushing yards in a bowl game . 
 = = = = = Receiving = = = = = 
 = New York State Route 187 = 
 New York State Route 187 ( NY 187 ) is a short state highway located entirely in Erie County , New York , in the United States . It serves as the southern end of the busy Transit Road in the town of Elma . Its southern terminus is at Quaker Road ( U.S. Route 20A or US 20A ) and its northern terminus at US 20 where that highway becomes Transit Road . Unlike much of the rest of Transit , which is mostly designated as part of NY 78 , the NY 187 portion is lightly trafficked , two @-@ lane and largely undeveloped . NY 187 was assigned in the early 1940s and was previously part of NY 78 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 187 begins at an intersection with US 20A ( Quaker Road ) as a continuation of County Route 553 ( CR 553 ) . It takes on CR 553 's name , Transit Road , and progresses northward as a two @-@ lane road . The highway serves the nearby Bob @-@ O @-@ Link Golf Course prior to entering a stretch of fields in Orchard Park , where it intersects with CR 460 ( <unk> Road ) , the eastward continuation of NY 179 . The route continues on , loosely paralleling Cazenovia Creek and intersecting Michael and <unk> roads ( CR 365 and CR 377 , respectively ) before passing the Harvest Hill Golf Course in Elma . NY 187 soon intersects with Reserve Road , an east – west connection from US 20 eastbound , before turning to the northwest and terminating at its own junction with US 20 . The Transit Road designation continues north onto US 20 . 
 = = History = = 
 When NY 78 was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , it initially bypassed the southeastern Buffalo suburbs on a routing that passed through the village of East Aurora , the hamlet of Elma , and the village of Lancaster . It was rerouted c . 1932 to head west from East Aurora instead by way of an overlap with US 20 ( now US 20A ) , then head north on Transit Road to rejoin its former routing in Depew . NY 78 was realigned again c . 1939 to overlap NY 16 northwest from East Aurora , bypassing the southernmost portion of Transit Road . The former routing of NY 78 between US 20A and US 20 was redesignated as NY 187 in the early 1940s . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Erie County . 
 = My Kind of Christmas = 
 My Kind of Christmas is the third studio album and first Christmas album by American singer Christina Aguilera . It was released on October 24 , 2000 , by RCA Records . The album was recorded from late @-@ 1999 to late @-@ 2000 , while Aguilera was touring to promote her first two studio albums : Christina Aguilera ( 1999 ) and Mi Reflejo ( 2000 ) . My Kind of Christmas contains cover versions of Christmas standards , such as " Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas " and " Angels We Have Heard on High " , as well as several original recordings , which incorporate dance @-@ pop elements . The album was produced by Ron Fair , The Matrix , Robbie Buchanan , Barry Harris and Chris Cox . 
 My Kind of Christmas received generally mixed to negative reviews from music critics , who criticized its musical style , as well as Aguilera 's vocal delivery . The album peaked at number 28 on the U.S. Billboard 200 and was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , having sold 1 @,@ 015 @,@ 000 copies there . Aguilera appeared on several television shows , such as The Early Show and The David Letterman Show , to promote the album , and also performed a special concert for ABC , which was released on DVD in June 2001 , as My Reflection . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 Aguilera achieved her early success following the release of the two first studio albums , Christina Aguilera in 1999 and Mi Reflejo in mid @-@ 2000 , both of which were certified multi @-@ platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . My Kind of Christmas was recorded from late @-@ 1999 to mid @-@ 2000 , when Aguilera was touring to support her two debut recordings . Originally , Aguilera 's idol Etta James was planned to be included as a featured performer on the track " Merry Christmas , Baby " . However the idea was later canceled , and Dr. John was chosen as her replacement afterwards . It is a Christmas and dance @-@ pop album , which contains mainly cover versions of Christmas standards and several new tracks , including " Christmas Time " , " This Year " and " Xtina 's Xmas " . " Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas " and " Merry Christmas , Baby " are the two " soulful " ballads from the album , backed by a 70 @-@ piece orchestra . " Christmas Time " and a cover of Celine Dion 's " These Are the Special Times " , meanwhile , are the two " painful " tracks . " Christmas Time " and " This Year " are the two " hip hop influenced " pop tracks . " The Christmas Song ( Holiday Remix ) " was remade as a dance @-@ styled number , which is set to " a kicking dance beat " . " The Christmas Song ( Chestnut Roasting on an Open Fire ) " released as a single in late @-@ 1999 was included in the album . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 The album was released on October 24 , 2000 , by RCA Records as Aguilera 's third studio album in the United States , following her two first albums Christina Aguilera ( 1999 ) and Mi Reflejo ( 2000 ) . It was released as two formats : CD and cassette . In order to promote the album , Aguilera promoted the album on a number of shows , including The Rosie O 'Donnell Show , The Early Show , and David Letterman Show . On December 10 , 2000 , Aguilera performed " The Christmas Song " , " Genie in a Bottle " and " What a Girl Wants " during a concert at Franklin High in Milwaukee , being watched by 1 @,@ 300 students . She also performed during an ABC special concert later in December ; the set list included songs from her three first studio albums , including a song from My Kind of Christmas , " Have Yourself A Little Merry Christmas " . There , she performed the track with Brian McKnight . The concert was filmed and released as a DVD entitled My Reflection ( 2001 ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The album garnered mixed to negative reviews from music critics , some of them criticized her vocals . AllMusic editor Stephen Thomas Erlewine wrote that " none of the new songs are knockouts " but " it does suggest that she may not be a mere one @-@ album wonder " . Chris Willman from Entertainment Weekly thought that " Aguilera <unk> so wildly that there wouldn 't have been enough oxygen in the booth to sustain another life form " . Jaan Uhelszki from Rolling Stone criticized the album as being " chilly , forced and overdone " , while The Atlanta Journal @-@ Constitution was not impressed toward Aguilera 's vocal ability on the album , giving it a mixed review . 
 My Kind of Christmas debuted at number 38 on the Billboard 200 , and later climbed to number 28 , its peak . It eventually peaked atop the Billboard Holiday Albums . Due to its chart success , the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) certified the album platinum , having sold more than 1 @,@ 015 @,@ 000 copies in the country . " The Christmas Song " became Aguilera 's third top @-@ twenty hit on the Billboard Hot 100 , peaking at number 18 on the chart . It also charted at number 22 in Canada . By the end of 2000 , My Kind of Christmas was the second best selling holiday album of the year , making Aguilera one of the four female artists to have the second best selling holiday album of a calendar year , among Amy Grant ( 1992 ) , Mariah Carey ( 1994 ) , and Jackie Evancho ( 2010 ) . In November 2013 , the album entered the International Albums chart in South Korea at number 37 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of My Kind of Christmas . 
 Recording places 
 Recorded at <unk> Studios ; Ocean Way Nashville and Signet Sound Studios 
 Personnel 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Oregon Route 120 = 
 Oregon Route 120 ( OR 120 ) is a 2 @.@ 71 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 4 @.@ 36 km ) unsigned state highway in the U.S. state of Oregon . The highway is internally known by the Oregon Department of Transportation ( ODOT ) as Swift Highway No. 120 . OR 120 runs from a Union Pacific railroad crossing near North Columbia Boulevard to an interchange with Interstate 5 ( I @-@ 5 ) and OR 99E . The Swift Highway No. 120 was created in 1931 , while the OR 120 designation was created in 2002 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 OR 120 begins at a Union Pacific railroad crossing north of an interchange with North Columbia Boulevard . The road continues northeast as North Portland Road and follows BNSF Railway tracks . About half of a mile ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) from where the highway begins , OR 120 crosses the Columbia Slough Bridge . OR 120 continues to follow BNSF Railway tracks and passes through wetlands before having a T @-@ intersection with North Marine Drive . The road continues southeast as North Marine Drive , following the Columbia River shoreline . After the highway turns southeast , the road goes under the Oregon Slough Railroad Bridge . The highway ends at an intersection with OR 99E and the ramps for exit 307 on I @-@ 5 . The Portland Expo Center is located near this interchange . The highway is entirely within the city limits of Portland . OR 120 is unsigned for its entire length . 
 OR 120 is internally known by ODOT as Swift Highway No. 120 . The entire length of OR 120 is part of the National Highway System , a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 The Swift Highway No. 120 was established as a secondary highway by the Oregon State Highway Commission on December 3 , 1931 . On November 22 , 1966 , a section of the Swift Highway between North Columbia Boulevard and an Oregon – Washington Railroad and Navigation Company railroad crossing was truncated . During the Oregon Transportation Commission meeting in July 24 , 2002 , the commission approved the OR 120 designation to be placed on the Swift Highway . On July 22 , 2008 , maintenance for portions of the highway were transferred from ODOT to the city of Portland . The sections that were transferred are from the highway 's western terminus to the southeastern end of the Columbia Slough bridge , and the northeastern end of the Columbia Slough Bridge to the end of concrete pavement near the Portland Expo Center . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Portland , Multnomah County . 
 = Battle of the Malta Convoy ( 1800 ) = 
 The Battle of the Malta Convoy was a naval engagement of the French Revolutionary Wars fought on 18 February 1800 during the Siege of Malta . The French garrison at the city of Valletta in Malta had been under siege for eighteen months , blockaded on the landward side by a combined force of British , Portuguese and irregular Maltese forces and from the sea by a Royal Navy squadron under the overall command of Lord Nelson from his base at Palermo on Sicily . In February 1800 , the Neapolitan government replaced the Portuguese troops with their own forces and the soldiers were convoyed to Malta by Nelson and Lord Keith , arriving on the 17 February . The French garrison was by early 1800 suffering from severe food shortages , and in a desperate effort to retain the garrison 's effectiveness a convoy was arranged at Toulon , carrying food , armaments and reinforcements for Valletta under Contre @-@ amiral Jean @-@ Baptiste Perrée . On 17 February , the French convoy approached Malta from the southeast , hoping to pass along the shoreline and evade the British blockade squadron . 
 On 18 February 1800 lookouts on the British ship HMS Alexander sighted the French and gave chase , followed by the rest of Nelson 's squadron while Keith remained off Valletta . Although most of the French ships outdistanced the British pursuit , one transport was overhauled and forced to surrender , while Perrée 's flagship Généreux was intercepted by the much smaller frigate HMS Success . In the opening exchange of fire , Success was badly damaged but Perrée was mortally wounded . The delay caused by the engagement allowed the main body of the British squadron to catch up the French ship and , badly outnumbered , Généreux surrendered . Perrée died shortly after receiving his wound , and none of the supplies reached Malta , which held out for another seven months against increasing odds before surrendering on 4 September 1800 . 
 = = Background = = 
 In May 1798 , during the French Revolutionary Wars , a French expeditionary force sailed from Toulon under General Napoleon Bonaparte . Crossing the Mediterranean , the force captured Malta in early June and continued southeastwards , making landfall in Egypt on 31 June . Landing near Alexandria , Bonaparte captured the city and advanced inland , completing the first stage of a projected campaign in Asia . The French fleet , under the command of Vice @-@ Admiral François @-@ Paul Brueys D 'Aigalliers was directed to anchor in Aboukir Bay , 20 mi ( 32 km ) northeast of Alexandria and support the army ashore . On 1 August 1798 , the anchored fleet was surprised and attacked by a British fleet under Rear @-@ Admiral Sir Horatio Nelson . In the ensuing Battle of the Nile , eleven of the thirteen French ships of the line , and two of the four frigates were captured or destroyed . Brueys was killed , and the survivors of the French fleet struggled out of the bay on 2 August , splitting up near Crete . Généreux sailed north to Corfu , encountering and capturing the British fourth rate ship HMS Leander on route . The other ships , Guillaume Tell and two frigates under Contre @-@ <unk> Pierre @-@ Charles Villeneuve and Denis Decrès , sailed westwards to Malta , arriving just as the island came under siege . 
 On Malta , the dissolution of the Roman Catholic Church under French rule had been extremely unpopular among the native Maltese population . During an auction of church property on 2 September 1798 , an armed uprising had begun that had forced the French garrison , commanded by General Claude @-@ Henri Belgrand de Vaubois , to retreat into the capital Valletta by the end of the month . The garrison , which numbered approximately 3 @,@ 000 men , had limited food stocks , and efforts to bring supplies in by sea were restricted by a squadron of British and Portuguese ships stationed off the harbour . The blockade was under the command of Nelson , now Lord Nelson , based in Palermo on Sicily , and directly managed by Captain Alexander Ball on the ship of the line HMS Alexander . During 1799 a number of factors , including inadequate food production on Malta , lack of resources and troops caused by commitments elsewhere in the Mediterranean and the appearance of a French fleet under Admiral Etienne Eustache Bruix in the Western Mediterranean all contributed to lapses in the blockade . However , despite the trickle of supplies that reached the garrison , Vaubois ' troops were beginning to suffer the effects of starvation and disease . Late in the year Ball went ashore assist the Maltese troops conducting the siege and was replaced in command of Alexander by his first lieutenant , William Harrington . 
 In January 1800 , recognising that Valletta was in danger of surrendering if it could not be resupplied , the French Navy prepared a convoy at Toulon , consisting of Généreux , under Captain Cyprien Renaudin , the 20 @-@ gun corvettes Badine , Fauvette and 16 @-@ gun Sans <unk> and two or three transport ships . The force was under the command of Contre @-@ amiral Jean @-@ Baptiste Perrée , recently exchanged under parole after being captured off Acre the previous year , and was instructed to approach Valletta along the Maltese coast from the southwest with the intention of passing between the blockade squadron and the shore and entering Malta before the British could discover and intercept them . The convoy sailed on 7 February . In addition to the supplies , the convoy carried nearly 3 @,@ 000 French soldiers to reinforce the garrison , an unnecessary measure that would completely counteract the replenishment of the garrison 's food stocks . 
 While the French planned their reinforcement , the Royal Navy was preparing to replace the 500 Portuguese marines stationed on Malta with 1 @,@ 200 Neapolitan troops supplied by King Ferdinand . Nelson , who had recently been neglecting his blockade duties in favour of the politics of the Neapolitan court and in particular Emma , Lady Hamilton , the wife of the British ambassador Sir William Hamilton , was instructed to accompany the Neapolitan convoy . The reinforcement effort was led by Vice @-@ Admiral Lord Keith , Nelson 's superior and overall Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief in the Mediterranean , in his flagship HMS Queen Charlotte . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Keith 's convoy arrived off Malta in the first week of February 1800 and disembarked the Neapolitan troops at Marsa Sirocco . While stationed off Valletta on 17 February , Keith received word from the frigate HMS Success that a French convoy was approaching the island from the direction of Sicily . Success , commanded by Captain Shuldham Peard , had been ordered to watch the waters off Trapani . After discovering the French ships , which were Perrée 's convoy from Toulon , Peard shadowed their approach to Malta . On receiving the message , Keith issued rapid orders for HMS Lion to cover the channel between Malta and the offshore island of Gozo while Nelson 's flagship HMS Foudroyant , HMS Audacious and HMS Northumberland joined Alexander off the southeastern coast of Malta . Keith himself remained off Valletta in Queen Charlotte , observing the squadron in the harbour . 
 At daylight on 18 February , lookouts on Alexander sighted the French convoy sailing along the Maltese coast towards Valletta and gave chase , with Nelson 's three ships visible to seawards . At 08 : 00 the transport Ville de Marseille was overhauled , and surrendered to Lieutenant Harrington 's ship , but the other smaller vessels hauled up at 13 : 30 and made out to sea , led by Badine . Généreux was unable to follow as to do so would bring the French ship into action with Alexander , and instead bore up , holding position . This station prevented Alexander from easily coming into action , but gave Captain Peard on Success an opportunity to close with the French ship , bringing his small vessel across the ship of the line 's bow and opening a heavy fire . Peard was able to get off several broadsides against Perrée 's ship before the French officers managed to turn their vessel to fire on the frigate , inflicting severe damage to Peard 's rigging and masts . By this stage however , Perrée was no longer in command : a shot from the first broadside had thrown splinters into his left eye , temporarily blinding him . Remaining on deck , he called to his crew " Ce n 'est rien , mes <unk> , <unk> notre <unk> " ( " It is nothing , my friends , continue with your work " ) and gave orders for the ship to be turned , when a cannonball from the second broadside from Success tore his right leg off at the thigh . Perrée collapsed <unk> on the deck . 
 Although Success was badly damaged and drifting , the delay had allowed Nelson 's flagship Foudroyant under Captain Sir Edward Berry and Northumberland under Captain George Martin to come up to Généreux by 16 : 30 . Foudroyant fired two shots at the French warship , at which point the demoralised French officers fired a single broadside at the approaching British ships and then surrendered , at 5 : 30 . The remaining French ships had escaped seawards and eventually reached Toulon , while the British squadron consolidated their prizes and returned to Keith off Toulon . British losses in the engagement were one man killed and nine wounded , all on Success , while French losses were confined to Perrée alone , who died of his wounds in the evening . Perrée 's death was met by a mixed response in the British squadron : some regretted his death as " a gallant and capable man " , while others considered him " lucky to have redeemed his honour " for violating his parole after being captured the previous year . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The French surrender was taken by Sir Edward Berry , who had last been aboard the ship as a prisoner of war following the capture of Leander in 1798 . Nelson in particular was pleased with the capture of Généreux , one of the two French ships of the line to have escaped the Battle of the Nile two years earlier . The French ship was only lightly damaged , and was sent to Minorca for repairs under Lieutenant Lord Cochrane and his brother Midshipman Archibald Cochrane from Queen Charlotte . During the passage , the ship was caught in a severe storm , and it was only though the leadership and personal example set by the brothers that the ship survived to reach Port Mahon . The ship was taken into British service shortly afterwards as HMS Genereux . Nelson was credited with the victory by Keith , although Nelson himself praised Harrington and Peard for their efforts in discovering the French convoy and bringing it to battle . The presence of the British squadron off Malta at the time of the arrival of the French convoy was largely due to luck , a factor that Ball attributed to Nelson in a letter written to Emma Hamilton shortly after the battle : 
 " We may truly call him a heaven @-@ born Admiral , upon whom fortune smiles wherever he goes . We have been carrying on the blockade of Malta sixteen months , during which time the enemy never attempted to throw in <unk> until this month . His Lordship arrived here the day they were within a few leagues of the island , captured the principal ships , so that not one has reached the port . " 
 Although pleased with the result of the engagement , Lord Keith issued strict instructions that Nelson was to remain in active command of the blockade and on no account to return to Palermo . If he had to go to port in Sicily , then he was to use Syracuse instead . Keith then sailed to Livorno , where his flagship was destroyed in a sudden fire that killed over 700 of the crew , although Keith himself was not on board at the time . By early March , Nelson had tired of the blockade and in defiance of Keith 's instructions returned to Palermo again , leaving Captain Thomas Troubridge of HMS Culloden in command of the blockade squadron . In March , while Nelson was absent at Palermo , the ship of the line Guillaume Tell , the last survivor of the Nile , attempted to break out of Malta but was chased down and defeated by a British squadron led by Berry in Foudroyant . Although Nelson briefly returned in April , both of the Hamiltons were aboard his ship and most of his time was spent at Marsa Sirocco in the company of Emma , with whom he was now romantically attached . 
 Captain Renaudin , of Généreux , and Joseph Allemand , of Ville de Marseille , were both honourably acquitted during the automatic court @-@ martial for the loss of their ships . The French Navy made no further efforts to reach Malta , and all subsequent efforts by French warships to break out the port were met by the blockade , only one frigate breaking through and reaching France . Without the supplies carried on Perrée 's convoy , starvation and disease spread throughout the garrison and by the end of August 1800 , French soldiers were dying at a rate of 100 a day . On 4 September , Vaubois finally capitulated , turning the island over to the British , who retained it for the next 164 years . 
 = Fredonian Rebellion = 
 The Fredonian Rebellion ( December 21 , 1826 – January 23 , 1827 ) was the first attempt by Anglo settlers in Texas to secede from Mexico . The settlers , led by <unk> Haden Edwards , declared independence from Mexican Texas and created the Republic of Fredonia near Nacogdoches . The short @-@ lived republic encompassed the land the Mexican government had granted to Edwards in 1825 and included areas that had been previously settled . Edwards 's actions soon alienated these established residents , and the increasing hostilities between them and settlers recruited by Edwards led Victor Blanco of the Mexican government to revoke Edwards 's contract . 
 In late December 1826 , a group of Edwards 's supporters took control of the region by arresting and removing from office several municipality officials affiliated with the established residents . Supporters declared their independence from Mexico . Although the nearby Cherokee tribe initially signed a treaty to support the new republic because a prior agreement with the Mexican government negotiated by Chief Richard Fields was ignored , overtures from Mexican authorities and respected <unk> Stephen F. Austin convinced tribal leaders to repudiate the rebellion . On January 31 , 1827 , a force of over 100 Mexican soldiers and 250 militiamen from Austin 's colony marched into Nacogdoches to restore order . Haden Edwards and his brother Benjamin fled to the United States . Chief Richard Fields was killed by his own tribe . A local merchant was arrested and sentenced to death , but later paroled . 
 The rebellion led Mexican President Guadalupe Victoria to increase the military presence in the area . As a result , several hostile tribes in the area halted their raids on settlements and agreed to a peace treaty . The Comanche abided by this treaty for many years . Fearing that through the rebellion the United States hoped to gain control of Texas , the Mexican government severely curtailed immigration to the region from the US . This new immigration law was bitterly opposed by colonists and caused increasing dissatisfaction with Mexican rule . Some historians consider the Fredonian Rebellion to be the beginning of the Texas Revolution . In the words of one historian , the rebellion was " premature , but it sparked the powder for later success . " 
 = = Background = = 
 After winning independence in 1821 , several of Spain 's colonies in the New World joined together to create a new country , Mexico . The country divided itself into several states , and the area known as Mexican Texas became part of the border state Coahuila y Tejas . To assist in governing the large area , the state created several departments ; all of Texas was included in the Department of Béxar . This department was further subdivided into municipalities , which were governed by alcalde , similar to a modern @-@ day mayor . A large portion of East Texas , ranging from the Sabine to the Trinity Rivers and from the Gulf Coast to the Red River , became part of the municipality of Nacogdoches . Most residents of the municipality were Spanish @-@ speaking families who had occupied their land for generations . An increasing number were English @-@ speaking residents who had immigrated illegally during the Mexican War of Independence . Many of the immigrants were adventurers who had arrived as part of various military filibustering groups which had attempted to create independent republics within Texas during Spanish rule . 
 To better control the sparsely populated border region , in 1824 the Mexican federal government passed the General Colonization Law to allow legal immigration into Texas . Under the law , each state would set its own requirements for immigration . After some debate , on March 24 , 1825 , Coahuila y Tejas authorized a system granting land to empresario , who would recruit settlers for their particular colony . During the state government 's deliberations , many would @-@ be empresarios congregated in Mexico to lobby for land grants . Among these was Haden Edwards , an American land speculator known for his quick temper and aggressiveness . Despite his abrasiveness , Edwards was granted a colonization contract on April 14 allowing him to settle 800 families in East Texas . The contract contained standard language requiring Edwards to recognize all pre @-@ existing Spanish and Mexican land titles in his grant area , to raise a militia to protect the settlers in the area , and to allow the state land commissioner to certify all deeds awarded . 
 Edwards 's colony encompassed the land from the Navasota River to 20 leagues west of the Sabine River , and from 20 leagues north of the Gulf of Mexico to 15 leagues north of the town of Nacogdoches . To the west and north of the colony were lands controlled by several native tribes which had recently been driven out of the United States . The southern boundary was a colony overseen by Stephen F. Austin , the son of the first empresario in Texas . East of Edwards 's grant was the former Sabine Free State , a neutral zone which had been essentially lawless for several decades . The boundaries of the new colony and the municipality of Nacogdoches partially overlapped , leading to uncertainty over who had jurisdiction over which function . The majority of the established settlers lived outside the eastern boundary of the Edwards colony . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 Edwards arrived in Nacogdoches in August 1825 . Mistakenly believing that he had the authority to determine the validity of existing land claims , Edwards , in September , demanded written proof of ownership , or their land would be forfeited and sold at auction . His action was at least partially driven by prejudice ; Edwards scorned those who were poorer or of a different race than himself . By removing less @-@ prosperous settlers , he could assign their lands to wealthy planters , like himself , from the southern United States . 
 Very few of the English @-@ speaking residents had valid titles . Those who had not arrived as filibusters had been duped by fraudulent land speculators . Most of the Spanish @-@ speaking landowners lived on grants made to their families 70 or more years previously and were unable to produce any paperwork . Anticipating the potential conflict between the new empresario and the long @-@ time residents of the area , the acting alcalde of the municipality , Luis <unk> , and the municipality clerk , Jose Antonio Sepulveda , began validating old Spanish and Mexican land titles , a function legally assigned to the state land commissioner . In response , Edwards accused the men of forging deeds , further angering the residents . 
 By December 1825 , Edwards had recruited 50 families to emigrate from the United States . As required under his contract , Edwards organized a local militia open to his colonists and established residents . When militia members elected Sepulveda as their captain , Edwards nullified the results and proclaimed himself head of the militia . Following this debacle , Edwards , acting outside his authority , called for elections for a new alcalde . Two men were nominated for the position — Edwards 's son @-@ in @-@ law , Chichester Chaplin , seen as the representative for the newly arrived immigrants , and Samuel Norris , an American who had married the daughter of a long @-@ time resident and was sympathetic to the more established residents . After Chaplin 's victory , many settlers alleged vote @-@ stacking in an appeal to Juan Antonio Saucedo , the political chief of the Department of Bexar . In March , Saucedo overturned the election results and proclaimed Norris the winner . Edwards refused to recognize Norris 's authority . 
 Shortly after Saucedo 's ruling , Edwards left to recruit more settlers from the United States , leaving his younger brother Benjamin in charge of the colony . Benjamin could not maintain stability in the colony , and the situation deteriorated rapidly . A vigilante group of earlier settlers harassed many newcomers , and Benjamin Edwards made several complaints to state authorities . Unhappy with Benjamin 's tone and the increasing tension , Mexican authorities revoked the land grant in October and instructed the Edwards brothers to leave Mexico . Rumors that Haden Edwards had returned to the United States to raise an army and not just to recruit settlers likely influenced the government action . Unwilling to abandon his $ 50 @,@ 000 ( about $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 as of 2016 ) investment in the colony , Haden Edwards rejoined his brother in <unk> in late October , continuing their business affairs despite the cancellation of his colonization contract . 
 = = Conflict = = 
 In October , Norris ruled that Edwards had improperly taken land from an existing settler to give to a new immigrant . Norris evicted the immigrant , angering many of the colonists . Later that month , another new immigrant was arrested and ordered to leave the country after refusing to purchase a merchant license before trading with the Indian tribes . On November 22 , 1826 , local militia colonel Martin Parmer and 39 other Edwards colonists entered Nacogdoches and arrested Norris , Sepulveda , and the commander of the small Mexican garrison , charging them with oppression and corruption . Haden Edwards was also arrested for violating his expulsion order but was immediately paroled , possibly as a ploy to disguise his own involvement in the plot . A kangaroo court found the other men guilty , removed them from their positions , and banned them from ever holding another public office . The court disbanded after appointing a temporary alcalde . These actions benefitted Parmer personally ; several weeks before , after Parmer killed a man in a dispute , Norris had issued a warrant for Parmer 's arrest . With Norris removed from office , the arrest warrant was voided . 
 Throughout the fall , Benjamin Edwards had tried to gather support from the Edwards colonists for a potential armed revolt against Mexican authority . Largely unsuccessful , he approached the nearby Cherokee tribe for assistance . Several years previously , the tribe had applied for title to the lands they occupied in northern East Texas . They were promised but never given a deed from the Mexican authorities . Benjamin Edwards offered the tribe clear title to all of Texas north of Nacogdoches in exchange for armed support for his plans . 
 On December 16 , the Edwards brothers invaded Nacogdoches with only 30 settlers , seizing one building in town , the Old Stone Fort . On December 21 , they declared the former Edwards colony to be a new republic named Fredonia . Within hours of the announcement , the <unk> signed a peace treaty with the Cherokee , represented by Chief Richard Fields and John Dunn Hunter . Fields and Hunter claimed to represent an additional 23 other tribes and promised to provide 400 warriors . In recognition of the agreement , above the Old Stone Fort flew a new flag containing two stripes – one red , one white – representing the two races . Inscribed on the banner was the motto , " Independence , Liberty , and Justice " . Haden Edwards also sent messengers to Louisiana to request aid from the United States military , which refused to intervene . Another emissary sent to invite Austin and his colonists to join the rebellion garnered the rebuke , " You are deluding yourselves and this delusion will ruin you . " 
 Edwards 's actions disturbed many of his colonists due to either their loyalty to their adopted country or fear of his alliance with the Cherokee . Mexican authorities were also concerned with the Cherokee alliance , and both Peter Ellis Bean , the Mexican Indian agent , and Saucedo , the political chief , began negotiations with Fields . They explained to the Cherokee that the tribe had not followed proper procedures to attain a land grant and promised that if they reapplied through official channels the Mexican government would honor their land request . These arguments and a planned Mexican military response convinced many Cherokee to repudiate the treaty with Edwards . 
 On news of the November arrest of the alcalde , the Mexican government began preparing to retaliate . On December 11 , Lieutenant Colonel Mateo Ahumada , the military commander in Texas , marched from San Antonio de Béxar with 110 infantry , and initially stopped in Austin 's colony to assess the loyalty of his settlers . On January 1 , Austin announced to his colonists that " infatuated madmen at Nacogdoches have declared independence . " Much of his colony immediately volunteered to assist in quelling the rebellion . When the Mexican army left for Nacogdoches on January 22 , they were joined by 250 militiamen from Austin 's colony . 
 Impatient with the army response time , Norris led 80 men to retake the Old Stone Fort . Although Parmer had fewer than 20 supporters with him , his men routed Norris 's force in less than ten minutes . On January 31 , Bean , accompanied by 70 militiamen from Austin 's colony , rode into Nacogdoches . By this time , Parmer and Edwards had learned that the Cherokee had abandoned any intention of waging war against Mexico . When not a single Cherokee warrior had appeared to reinforce the revolt , Edwards and his supporters fled . Bean pursued them to the Sabine River , but most , including both Edwards brothers , safely crossed into the United States . Ahumada and his soldiers , accompanied by political chief Saucedo , entered Nacogdoches on February 8 to restore order . 
 Although the Cherokee had not raised arms against Mexico , their treaty with the Fredonian revolutionaries caused Mexican authorities to question the tribe 's loyalty . To demonstrate their loyalty to Mexico , the Cherokee council ordered both Fields and Hunter to be executed . Under tribal law , certain offenses such as aiding an enemy of the tribe were punishable by death . By sentencing Fields and Hunter to death for this reason , the Cherokee affirmed that Edwards and his cohorts were their enemies . Both men fled , but were soon captured and executed . When the executions were reported to Mexican authorities on February 28 , the commandant general of the Eastern Interior Provinces , Anastasio Bustamante , praised the Cherokee for their prompt action . 
 Bustamante ultimately offered a general amnesty for all who participated in the conflict except for Haden and Benjamin Edwards , Martin Parmer , and Adolphus Sterne , a local merchant who had provided supplies to the rebel force . Like the Edwards brothers , Parmer escaped into Louisiana . Sterne remained and was sentenced to death for treason but was paroled on the condition that he swear allegiance to Mexico and never again take up arms against the Mexican government . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The rebellion changed the dynamic between settlers and local tribes . Although the Cherokee repudiated the rebellion , their initial support caused many settlers to distrust the tribe . The rebellion , and subsequent Mexican army response , also changed the settlers ' relationships with other tribes . In preceding years , the Tawakoni and Waco tribes , allied with various Comanche bands , had regularly raided Texas settlements . Fearing that these tribes , like the Cherokee , could ally with other groups against Mexican control , Bustamante began preparations to attack and weaken all hostile tribes in East Texas . On learning of the imminent invasion , in April 1827 the Towakoni and Waco sued for peace . In June , the two tribes signed a peace treaty with Mexico , promising to halt all raids against Mexican settlers . The Towakoni then assisted their allies , the <unk> Comanche , in reaching a treaty with Mexico . When Bustamante 's troops left Texas later that year , the Towakoni and Waco resumed their raiding . The Comanche tribe upheld their treaty for many years and often assisted Mexican soldiers in recovering livestock stolen by the other tribes . 
 The failed rebellion also affected Mexican relations with the United States . Even before the revolt , many Mexican officials had worried that the United States was plotting to gain control of Texas . Once the rebellion came to light , officials suspected that Edwards had been an agent of the United States . To help protect the region , a new , larger , garrison was established in Nacogdoches , to be commanded by Colonel Jose de las Piedras . As a direct result of Edwards 's actions , the Mexican government authorized an extensive expedition , conducted by General Manuel de Mier y Terán , to inspect the Texas settlements and recommend a future course of action . Mier y Teran 's reports led to the Law of April 6 , 1830 , which severely restricted immigration into Texas . Within Texas , the laws were widely denounced by both recent immigrants and native @-@ born Mexicans and led to further armed conflict between Mexican soldiers and Texas residents . 
 Some historians regard the Fredonian Rebellion as the beginning of the Texas Revolution . Historian W.B. Bates remarked that the revolt was " premature , but it sparked the powder for later success " . The people of Nacogdoches played instrumental roles in other rebellions in Texas over the next few years ; in 1832 they expelled Piedras and his troops from Nacogdoches , and many Nacogdoches residents participated in the Texas Revolution . 
 = Right whale = 
 Right whales are three species of large baleen whales of the genus Eubalaena : the North Atlantic right whale ( E. glacialis ) , the North Pacific right whale ( E. japonica ) and the Southern right whale ( E. australis ) . They are classified in the family Balaenidae with the bowhead whale . Right whales have rotund bodies with arching rostrums , V @-@ shaped blowholes and dark gray or black skin . The most distinguishing feature of a right whale is the rough patches of skin on its head which appear white due to parasitism by whale lice . Right whales can grow up to more than 18 m ( 59 ft ) long with the maximum record of 19 @.@ 8 m ( 65 ft ) and weigh up to 100 short tons ( 91 t ; 89 long tons ) or more ; 20 @.@ 7 m ( 68 ft ) with 135 @,@ 000 kg ( 298 @,@ 000 lb ) or 21 @.@ 3 m ( 70 ft ) with uncertainty , being significantly larger than other coastal species such as humpbacks , grays , or eden 's and <unk> 's , but smaller than blues . Right whales were named by whalers who identified them as the " right " whale to kill on a hunt due to the plentiful oil and baleen they could provide . 
 All three species are migratory , moving seasonally to feed or give birth . The warm equatorial waters form a barrier that isolates the northern and southern species from one another . In the Northern Hemisphere , Right whales tend to avoid open waters and stay close to peninsulas and bays and on continental shelves , as these areas offer greater shelter and an abundance of their preferred foods . In the Southern Hemisphere , right whales feed far offshore in summer , but a large portion of the population occur in near shore waters in winter . Right whales feed mainly on copepods but also consume krill and pteropods . They may forage the surface , underwater or even on the ocean bottom . During courtship , males gather into large groups to compete for a single female , suggesting that sperm competition appears to be an important factor in mating behavior . Although the blue whale is the largest animal on the planet , the testes of the right whale are actually ten times larger than those of the blue whale – with each weighing up to 525 kilograms ( 1 @,@ 157 lb ) , they are by far the largest of any animal on Earth . Gestation tends to last a year , and calves are born at 1 short ton ( 0 @.@ 91 t ; 0 @.@ 89 long tons ) in weight and 4 – 6 m ( 13 – 20 ft ) in length . Weaning occurs after eight months . 
 Right whales were a preferred target for whalers because of their docile nature , their slow surface @-@ skimming feeding behaviors , their tendencies to stay close to the coast , and their high blubber content ( which makes them float when they are killed , and which produced high yields of whale oil ) . Today , the North Atlantic and North Pacific right whales are among the most endangered whales in the world , and both species are protected in the United States by the Endangered Species Act . The western populations of both are currently endangered , with their total populations numbering in the hundreds . The eastern North Pacific population , on the other hand , with fewer than 50 individuals remaining , is critically endangered – further still , the eastern North Atlantic population , which numbers in the low teens at best , may already be functionally extinct . Although no longer facing a threat from whaling , mankind remains by far the greatest threat to these species : the two leading causes of death are from being struck by ships and from entanglement in fishing gear . Regarding the North Atlantic right whale , for example , these two anthropogenic factors alone account for 48 % of all known right whale deaths since 1970 . 
 = = Naming = = 
 A popular explanation for the name " right whales " is that they were the " right " ones to hunt , as they float when killed and often swim within sight of shore . They are quite docile , and do not tend to shy away from approaching boats . As such , they were hunted nearly to extinction during the active years of the whaling industry . This origin is apocryphal . In his history of American whaling , Eric Jay Dolin writes : 
 Despite this highly plausible rationale , nobody actually knows how the right whale got its name . The earliest references to the right whale offer no indication why it was called that , and some who have studied the issue point out that the word " right " in this context might just as likely be intended " to connote ' true ' or ' proper , ' meaning typical of the group . " 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The right whales were first classified in the genus Balaena in 1758 by Carl Linnaeus , who at the time considered all of the right whales ( including the bowhead ) as a single species . Through the 1800s and 1900s , in fact , the family Balaenidae has been the subject of great <unk> debate . Authorities have repeatedly recategorized the three populations of right whale plus the bowhead whale , as one , two , three or four species , either in a single genus or in two separate genera . In the early whaling days , they were all thought to be a single species , Balaena mysticetus . Eventually , it was recognized that bowheads and right whales were in fact different , and John Edward Gray proposed the genus Eubalaena for the right whale in 1864 . Later , morphological factors such as differences in the skull shape of northern and southern right whales indicated at least two species of right whale — one in the Northern Hemisphere , the other in the Southern Ocean . As recently as 1998 , Rice , in his comprehensive and otherwise authoritative classification , Marine mammals of the world : systematics and distribution , listed just two species : Balaena glacialis ( the right whales ) and Balaena mysticetus ( the bowheads ) . 
 In 2000 , two studies of DNA samples from each of the whale populations concluded the northern and southern populations of right whale should be considered separate species . What some scientists found more surprising was the discovery that the North Pacific and North Atlantic populations are also distinct , and that the North Pacific species is more closely related to the southern right whale than to the North Atlantic right whale . The authors of one of these studies concluded that these species have not interbred for between 3 million and 12 million years . 
 In 2001 , Brownell et al. reevaluated the conservation status of the North Pacific right whale as a distinct species , and in 2002 , the Scientific Committee of the International Whaling Commission ( IWC ) accepted Rosenbaum 's findings , and recommended that the Eubalaena nomenclature be retained for this genus . A 2007 study by Churchill provided further evidence to conclude the three living right whale species do comprise a phylogenetic lineage , distinct from the bowhead , and are rightly classified into two separate genera . 
 The cladogram is a tool for visualizing and comparing the evolutionary relationships between taxa ; the point where each node branches is analogous to an evolutionary branching – the diagram can be read left @-@ to @-@ right , much like a timeline . The following cladogram of the family Balaenidae serves to illustrate the current scientific consensus as to the relationships between the three right whales and the bowhead whale . 
 Whale lice , parasitic <unk> crustaceans that live off skin debris , offer further information through their own genetics . Because these lice reproduce much more quickly than whales , their genetic diversity is greater . Marine biologists at the University of Utah examined these louse genes and determined their hosts split into three species 5 – 6 million years ago , and these species were all equally abundant before whaling began in the 11th century . The communities first split because of the joining of North and South America . The rising temperatures of the equator then created a second split , into northern and southern groups , preventing them from interbreeding . " This puts an end to the long debate about whether there are three [ Eubalaena ] species of right whale . They really are separate beyond a doubt " , Jon Seger , the project 's leader , told BBC News . 
 = = = Others = = = 
 The pygmy right whale ( Caperea marginata ) , a much smaller whale of the Southern Hemisphere , was until recently considered a member of the Family Balaenidae . However , they are not right whales at all , and their taxonomy is presently in doubt . Most recent authors place this species into the monotypic Family Neobalaenidae , but a 2012 study suggests that it is instead the last living member of the Family Cetotheriidae , a family previously considered extinct . 
 Yet another species of right whale was proposed by Emanuel Swedenborg in the 18th century - the so @-@ called Swedenborg whale . The description of this species was based on a collection of fossil bones unearthed at Norra <unk> , Sweden , in 1705 and believed to be those of giants . The bones were examined by Swedenborg , who realized they belong to a species of whale . The existence of this species has been debated , and further evidence for this species was discovered during the construction of a motorway in Strömstad , Sweden in 2009 . To date , however , scientific consensus still considers Hunterius <unk> to be a North Atlantic right whale . According to a DNA analysis conducted by scientists , it was later confirmed that the fossil bones are actually from a bowhead whale . 
 = = = Synonyms and common names = = = 
 Due to their familiarity to whalers over a number of centuries , the right whales have had many names . These names were used throughout the world , reflecting the fact that only one species was recognized at the time . In his novel Moby @-@ Dick , Herman Melville writes : 
 " Among the fishermen , the whale regularly hunted for oil is indiscriminately designated by all the following titles : The Whale ; the Greenland whale ; the black whale ; the great whale ; the true whale ; the right whale . There is a deal of obscurity concerning the identity of the species thus <unk> baptised . ... Some pretend to see a difference between the Greenland whale of the English and the Right whale of the Americans . " 
 In fact , there was indeed a difference between the two – Melville 's " Greenland whale " , or " Greenland right whale " , was in fact the modern @-@ day bowhead whale , Balaena mysticetus . 
 The following are junior synonyms for the genus Eubalaena : 
 <unk> <unk> , 1989 
 <unk> Gray , 1873 
 Hunterius Gray , 1866 
 <unk> Gray , 1864 
 <unk> Marschall , 1873 
 Macleayius Gray , 1865 
 Although the right whale is now officially in the Eubalaena genus , the type species for a genus remains as it was first described – in the case of Eubalaena the type species is Balaena australis Desmoulins , 1822 . 
 Some of the species @-@ level synonyms are : 
 For E. australis : B. antarctica Lesson , 1828 
 B. mysticetus antarctica Schlegel , 1841 
 B. <unk> Gray , 1843 
 B. glacialis Mueller , 1776 
 B. glacialis australis Scheffer & Rice , 1963 
 E. capensis Gray , 1866 
 E. glacialis australis Tomilin , 1962 
 <unk> <unk> Gray , 1873 
 <unk> <unk> Gray , 1864 
 Macleayius australiensis Gray , 1865 
 For E. glacialis : B. <unk> <unk> , 1860 
 B. glacialis glacialis Scheffer & Rice , 1963 
 B. mysticetus <unk> Kerr , 1792 
 B. <unk> Lacépède , 1804 
 <unk> glacialis <unk> , 1989 
 E. glacialis glacialis Tomilin , 1957 
 Hunterius <unk> <unk> , 1867 
 Macleayius <unk> Gray , 1870 
 For E. japonica : B. japonica Lacépède , 1804 ( basionym ) 
 B. <unk> Gray , 1864 
 Balaenoptera antarctica Temminck , 1841 ( lapsus for Balaena ) 
 E. glacialis japonica Imaizumi , 1958 
 E. <unk> Gray , 1868 
 = = Description = = 
 Unlike other whales , a right whale has distinctive callosities ( roughened patches of skin ) on its head , along with a broad back without a dorsal fin , occasionally with white belly patches , and a long , arching rostrum , or upper jaw , that begins above the eye . The callosities appear white due to large colonies of <unk> ( whale lice ) . Each individual has a unique callosities pattern . In 2016 , a competitive effort resulted in the use of facial recognition software to derive a process to uniquely identify right whales with about 87 % accuracy based on their callosities . The primary role of callosities has been considered to be protection against predators . Right whale declines might have also reduced barnacles . Right whales are very large , robust whales that can grow up to more than 18 m ( 59 ft ) long and weigh up to 100 short tons ( 91 t ; 89 long tons ) , almost as big as bowhead whales and much larger than other species with high dependencies on shallow waters . An unusually large 40 % of their body weight is blubber , which is of relatively low density . Consequently , unlike many other species of whale , dead right whales tend to float . Right whales swim slowly , reaching only 5 kn ( 9 @.@ 3 km / h ) at top speed . However , they are highly acrobatic and frequently breach ( jump clear of the sea surface ) , tail @-@ slap and <unk> . 
 = = = Anatomy = = = 
 Adults may be between 11 – 18 m ( 36 – 59 ft ) in length and typically weigh 60 – 80 short tons ( 54 – 73 t ; 54 – 71 long tons ) . The most typical lengths are 13 – 16 m ( 43 – 52 ft ) . The body is extremely thick with girth as much as 60 % of total body length in some cases . The tail fluke is broad ( up to 40 % of body length ) . The North Pacific species is on average the largest of the three species . The largest specimens may weigh 100 short tons ( 91 t ; 89 long tons ) . Right whales have a distinctive wide V @-@ shaped blow , caused by the widely spaced blowholes on the top of the head . The blow rises 5 m ( 16 ft ) above the surface . Right whales have between 200 and 300 baleen plates on each side of their mouths . These are narrow and approximately 2 m ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) long , and are covered in very thin hairs . The plates enable the whale to filter feed . 
 The penis on a right whale can be up to 2 @.@ 7 m ( 8 @.@ 9 ft ) – the testes , at up to 2 m ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) in length , 78 cm ( 2 @.@ 56 ft ) in diameter , and weighing up to 525 kg ( 1157 lbs ) , are also by far the largest of any animal on Earth . The blue whale may be the largest animal on the planet , yet the testicles of the right whale are ten times the size of those of the blue whale . They also exceed predictions in terms of relative size , as well – they are six times larger than would be expected on the basis of body mass . Together , the testicles make up nearly 1 % of the right whale 's total body weight . This strongly suggests sperm competition is important in mating , which correlates to the fact that right whales are highly promiscuous . 
 Many of southern right whales are seen with rolls on fats behind blowholes that northern species often lack , and these are regarded as a sign of better health condition due to sufficient nutrition supply , and could have contributed in vast differences in recovery status between right whales in southern and northern hemisphere , other than direct impacts by mankind . 
 = = Life history and ecology = = 
 = = = Courtship and reproduction = = = 
 During the mating season , which can occur at any time in the North Atlantic , right whales gather into " surface @-@ active groups " made up of as many as 20 males consorting a single female . The female has her belly to the surface while the males stroke her with their flippers or keep her underwater . The males do not compete as aggressively against each other as male humpbacks . The female may not become pregnant but she is still able to assess the condition of potential mates . The mean age of first parturition in North Atlantic right whales is estimated at between 7 @.@ 5 and 9 years . Females breed every 3 – 5 years . Both reproduction and calving take place during the winter months . Calves are approximately 1 short ton ( 0 @.@ 91 t ; 0 @.@ 89 long tons ) in weight and 4 – 6 m ( 13 – 20 ft ) in length at birth following a gestation period of 1 year . The right whale grows rapidly in its first year , typically doubling in length . Weaning occurs after eight months to one year and the growth rate in later years is not well understood — it may be highly dependent on whether a calf stays with its mother for a second year . 
 = = = Lifespan = = = 
 Very little is known about the life span of right whales . One of the few well @-@ documented cases is of a female North Atlantic right whale that was photographed with a baby in 1935 , then photographed again in 1959 , 1980 , 1985 , and 1992 . Consistent <unk> patterns ensured it was the same animal . She was last photographed in 1995 with a seemingly fatal head wound , presumably from a ship strike . By conservative estimates ( e.g. she was a new mother who had just reached sexual maturity in 1935 ) , she was nearly 70 years of age , if not older . Research on the closely related bowhead whale suggests this lifespan is not uncommon and may even be exceeded . 
 = = = Diet and predation = = = 
 The right whales ' diets consist primarily of zooplankton , primarily the tiny crustaceans called copepods , as well as krill , and pteropods , although they are occasionally opportunistic feeders . As with other <unk> , they feed by filtering prey from the water . They swim with an open mouth , filling it with water and prey . The whale then expels the water , using its baleen plates to retain the prey . Prey must occur in sufficient numbers to trigger the whale 's interest , be large enough that the baleen plates can filter it , and be slow enough that it cannot escape . The " skimming " may take place on the surface , underwater , or even at the ocean 's bottom , indicated by mud occasionally observed on right whales ' bodies . 
 The right whales ' three known predators are humans , orcas , and sharks . When danger lurks , a group of right whales may cluster into a circle , and thrash their outwards @-@ pointing tails . They may also head for shallow water , which sometimes proves to be an ineffective defense . The sheer size of this animal is its best defense , although young calves are the most vulnerable to orca and shark attacks . 
 = = = Range and habitat = = = 
 The three Eubalaena species inhabit three distinct areas of the globe : the North Atlantic in the western Atlantic Ocean , the North Pacific in a band from Japan to Alaska and all areas of the Southern Ocean . The whales can only cope with the moderate temperatures found between 20 and 60 degrees in latitude . The warm equatorial waters form a barrier that prevents mixing between the northern and southern groups . Although the southern species in particular must travel across open ocean to reach its feeding grounds , the species is not considered to be pelagic . In general , they prefer to stay close to peninsulas and bays and on continental shelves , as these areas offer greater shelter and an abundance of their preferred foods . 
 Because the oceans are so large , it is very difficult to accurately gauge whale population sizes . Approximate figures : 
 400 North Atlantic right whales ( Eubalaena glacialis ) live in the North Atlantic ; 
 23 North Pacific right whales have been identified in the eastern North Pacific ( Eubalaena japonica ) and 
 15 @,@ 000 southern right whales ( Eubalaena australis ) are spread throughout the southern part of the Southern Hemisphere . 
 = = = = North Atlantic right whale = = = = 
 Almost all of the 400 North Atlantic right whales live in the western North Atlantic Ocean . In northern spring , summer and autumn , they feed in areas off the Canadian and northeast U.S. coasts in a range stretching from New York to Newfoundland . Particularly popular feeding areas are the Bay of Fundy and Cape Cod Bay . In winter , they head south towards Georgia and Florida to give birth . There have been a smattering of sightings further east over the past few decades ; several sightings were made close to Iceland in 2003 . These are possibly the remains of a virtually extinct eastern Atlantic stock , but examination of old whalers ' records suggests they are more likely to be strays . However , a few sightings are regular between Norway , Ireland , Spain , Portugal , the Canary Islands and even Italy and Sicily ; at least the Norway individuals come from the Western stock . 
 = = = = North Pacific right whale = = = = 
 The North Pacific right whale appears to occur in two populations . The population in the eastern North Pacific / Bering Sea is extremely low , numbering about 30 individuals . A larger western population of 100 – 200 appears to be surviving in the Sea of Okhotsk , but very little is known about this population . Thus , the two northern right whale species are the most endangered of all large whales and two of the most endangered animal species in the world . Based on current population density trends , both species are predicted to become extinct within 200 years . The Pacific species was historically found in summer from the Sea of Okhotsk in the west to the Gulf of Alaska in the east , generally north of 50 ° N. Today , sightings are very rare and generally occur in the mouth of the Sea of Okhotsk and in the eastern Bering Sea . Although this species is very likely to be migratory like the other two species , its movement patterns are not known . 
 = = = = Southern right whale = = = = 
 The last major population review of southern right whales by the International Whaling Commission was in 1998 . Researchers used data about adult female populations from three surveys ( one in each of Argentina , South Africa and Australia ) and extrapolated to include unsurveyed areas and estimated counts of males and calves ( using available male : female and adult : calf ratios ) , giving an estimated 1997 population of 7 @,@ 500 animals . More recent data from 2007 indicate those survey areas have shown evidence of strong recovery , with a population approaching twice that of a decade earlier . However , other breeding populations are still very small , and data are insufficient to determine whether they , too , are recovering . 
 The southern right whale spends the summer months in the far Southern Ocean feeding , probably close to Antarctica . It migrates north in winter for breeding , and can be seen around the coasts of Argentina , Australia , Brazil , Chile , Mozambique , New Zealand and South Africa . Since hunting of the southern right whale ceased , stocks are estimated to have grown by 7 % a year . The South American , South African and Australasian groups apparently intermix very little , if at all , because of the strong fidelity of mothers to their feeding and calving grounds . The mother passes these instincts to her calves . 
 = = = Vocalization and hearing = = = 
 Vocalizations made by right whales are not elaborate compared to those made by other whale species . The whales make groans , pops and belches typically at frequencies around 500 Hz . The purpose of the sounds is not known but may be a form of communication between whales within the same group . Northern right whales responded to sounds similar to police sirens — sounds of much higher frequency than their own . On hearing the sounds , they moved rapidly to the surface . The research was of particular interest because northern rights ignore most sounds , including those of approaching boats . Researchers speculate this information may be useful in attempts to reduce the number of ship @-@ whale collisions or to encourage the whales to surface for ease of harvesting . 
 = = Relationship to humans = = 
 = = = Whaling = = = 
