 In the early centuries of shore @-@ based whaling before 1712 , right whales were virtually the only catchable large whales , for three reasons : 
 They often swam close to shore where they could be spotted by beach lookouts , and hunted from beach @-@ based whaleboats . 
 They are relatively slow swimmers , allowing whalers to catch up to them in their whaleboats . 
 Once killed by harpoons , they were more likely to float , and thus could be retrieved . However , some did sink when killed ( 10 – 30 % in the North Pacific ) and were lost unless they later stranded or surfaced . 
 Basque people were the first to hunt right whales commercially , beginning as early as the 11th century in the Bay of Biscay . They initially sought oil , but as meat preservation technology improved , the animal was also used for food . Basque whalers reached eastern Canada by 1530 and the shores of Todos os Santos Bay ( in Bahia , Brazil ) by 1602 . The last Basque voyages were made before the Seven Years ' War ( 1756 – 1763 ) . All attempts to revive the trade after the war failed . Basque shore whaling continued sporadically into the 19th century . 
 " Yankee whalers " from the new American colonies replaced the Basques . Setting out from Nantucket , Massachusetts and Long Island , New York , they took up to 100 animals in good years . By 1750 , the commercial hunt of the North Atlantic right whale was basically over . The Yankee whalers moved into the South Atlantic before the end of the 18th century . The southernmost Brazilian whaling station was established in 1796 , in Imbituba . Over the next hundred years , Yankee whaling spread into the Southern and Pacific Oceans , where the Americans were joined by fleets from several European nations . The beginning of the 20th century saw much greater industrialization of whaling , and the harvest grew rapidly . By 1937 , there had been , according to whalers ' records , 38 @,@ 000 takes in the South Atlantic , 39 @,@ 000 in the South Pacific , 1 @,@ 300 in the Indian Ocean , and 15 @,@ 000 in the North Pacific . The incompleteness of these records means the actual take was somewhat higher . 
 As it became clear the stocks were nearly depleted , the world banned right whaling in 1937 . The ban was largely successful , although violations continued for several decades . Madeira took its last two right whales in 1968 . Japan took 23 Pacific right whales in the 1940s and more under scientific permit in the 1960s . Illegal whaling continued off the coast of Brazil for many years and the Imbituba land station processed right whales until 1973 . The Soviet Union illegally took at least 3 @,@ 212 southern right whales during the 1950s and ' 60s , although it reported taking only four . 
 = = = Whale watching = = = 
 The southern right whale has made Hermanus , South Africa one of the world centers for whale watching . During the winter months ( July – October ) , southern right whales come so close to the shoreline , visitors can watch whales from strategically placed hotels . The town employs a " whale crier " ( cf. town crier ) to walk through the town announcing where whales have been seen . Southern right whales can also be watched at other winter breeding grounds . 
 In Brazil , Imbituba in Santa Catarina has been recognized as the National Right Whale Capital and holds annual Right Whale Week celebrations in September when mothers and calves are more often seen . The old whaling station there has been converted to a museum dedicated to the whales . In winter in Argentina , <unk> Valdés in Patagonia hosts the largest breeding population of the species , with more than 2 @,@ 000 animals catalogued by the Whale Conservation Institute and Ocean Alliance . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 Both the North Atlantic and North Pacific species are listed as a " species threatened with extinction which [ is ] or may be affected by trade " ( Appendix I ) by CITES , and as " endangered " by the IUCN Red List . In the United States , the National Marine Fisheries Service ( NMFS ) , a <unk> of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ( NOAA ) has classified all three species as " endangered " under the Endangered Species Act . Under the Marine Mammal Protection Act , they are listed as " depleted " . 
 The southern right whale is listed as " endangered " under the Australian Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act , as " nationally endangered " under the New Zealand Threat Classification System , as a " natural monument " by the Argentine National Congress , and as a " State Natural Monument " under the Brazilian National Endangered Species List . 
 The US and Brazil added new protections for right whales in the 2000s to address the two primary hazards . While environmental campaigners were , as reported in 2001 , pleased about the plan 's positive effects , they attempted to force the US government to do more . In particular , they advocated 12 knots ( 22 km / h ) speed limits for ships within 40 km ( 25 mi ) of US ports in times of high right whale presence . Citing concerns about excessive trade disruption , it did not institute greater protections . The Defenders of Wildlife , the Humane Society of the United States and the Ocean Conservancy sued the NMFS in September 2005 for " failing to protect the critically endangered North Atlantic Right Whale , which the agency acknowledges is ' the rarest of all large whale species ' and which federal agencies are required to protect by both the Marine Mammal Protection Act and the Endangered Species Act " , demanding emergency protection measures . According to NOAA researchers , about 83 % of right whale sightings in the mid @-@ Atlantic region occur within 20 nautical miles ( 37 km ) of shore . 
 The southern right whale , listed as " endangered " by CITES and " lower risk - conservation dependent " by the IUCN , is protected in the jurisdictional waters of all countries with known breeding populations ( Argentina , Australia , Brazil , Chile , New Zealand , South Africa and Uruguay ) . In Brazil , a federal Environmental Protection Area encompassing some 1 @,@ 560 km2 ( 600 sq mi ) and 130 km ( 81 mi ) of coastline in Santa Catarina State was established in 2000 to protect the species ' main breeding grounds in Brazil and promote whale watching . 
 On February 6 , 2006 , NOAA proposed its Strategy to Reduce Ship Strikes to North Atlantic Right Whales . The proposal , opposed by some shipping interests , limited ship speeds during calving season . The proposal was made official when on December 8 , 2008 , NOAA issued a press release that included the following : 
 Effective January 2009 , ships 65 feet ( 20 m ) or longer are limited to 10 knots ( 19 km / h ) in waters off New England when whales begin gathering in this area as part of their annual migration . The restriction extends to 20 nautical miles ( 37 km ) around major mid @-@ Atlantic ports . 
 The speed restriction applies in waters off New England and the southeastern US , where whales gather seasonally : 
 Southeastern US from St. Augustine , Florida to Brunswick , Georgia from Nov 15 to April 15 
 Mid @-@ Atlantic U.S. areas from Rhode Island to Georgia from Nov 1 to April 30 . 
 Cape Cod Bay from Jan 1 to May 15 
 Off Race Point at the northern end of Cape Cod from March 1 to April 30 
 Great South Channel of New England from April 1 to July 31 
 Temporary voluntary speed limits in other areas or times when a group of three or more right whales is confirmed 
 Scientists will assess the rule 's effectiveness before the rule expires in 2013 . 
 The <unk> Bank area has implemented an <unk> program to acoustically detect right whales in the Boston Approaches and notify mariners via the Right Whale Listening Network website . 
 = = = Threats = = = 
 The leading cause of death among the North Atlantic right whale , which migrates through some of the world 's busiest shipping lanes while journeying off the east coast of the United States and Canada , is being struck by ships . At least 16 ship @-@ strike deaths were reported between 1970 and 1999 , and probably more remain unreported . According to NOAA , 25 of the 71 right whale deaths reported since 1970 resulted from ship strikes . 
 A second major cause of morbidity and mortality in the North Atlantic right whale is entanglement in fishing gear . Right whales ingest plankton with wide @-@ open mouths , risking entanglement in any rope or net fixed in the water column . Rope wraps around their upper jaws , flippers and tails . Some are able to escape , but others remain tangled . Whales can be successfully disentangled , if observed and aided . In July 1997 , the U.S. NOAA introduced the Atlantic Large Whale Take Reduction Plan , which seeks to minimize whale entanglement in fishing gear and record large whale sightings in an attempt to estimate numbers and distribution . 
 In 2012 , the U.S. Navy proposed to create a new undersea naval training range immediately adjacent to northern right whale calving grounds in shallow waters off the Florida / Georgia border . Legal challenges by leading environmental groups including the Natural Resources Defense Council were denied in federal court , allowing the Navy to proceed . These rulings were made despite the extremely low numbers ( as low as 313 by some estimates ) of right whales in existence at this time , and a very poor calving season . 
 = International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes = 
 The International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes ( ICSID ) is an international arbitration institution established in 1965 for legal dispute resolution and conciliation between international investors . The ICSID is part of and funded by the World Bank Group , headquartered in Washington , D.C. , in the United States . It is an autonomous , multilateral specialized institution to encourage international flow of investment and mitigate non @-@ commercial risks by a treaty drafted by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 's executive directors and signed by member countries . As of May 2016 , there were 153 contracting member states agree to enforce and uphold arbitral awards in accordance with the ICSID Convention . The center performs advisory activities and maintains several publications . 
 = = History = = 
 In the 1950s and 1960s , the Organization for European Economic Cooperation ( now the Organisation for Economic Co @-@ operation and Development ) had made several attempts to create a framework for protecting international investments , but its efforts revealed conflicting views on how to provide compensation for the expropriation of foreign direct investment . In 1961 , then @-@ General Counsel of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development ( IBRD ) Aron <unk> developed the idea for a multilateral agreement on a process for resolving individual investment disputes on a case by case basis as opposed to imposing outcomes based on standards . <unk> held conferences to consult legal experts from all parts of the world , including Europe , Africa , and Asia , to discuss and compose a preliminary agreement . The IBRD staff wrote an official draft of the agreement and consulted with legal representatives of the IBRD 's board of directors to finalize the draft and have it approved . The board of directors approved the final draft of the agreement , titled Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States , and the Bank president disseminated the convention to its member states for signature on 18 March 1965 . Twenty states immediately ratified the convention . The convention establishing the ICSID entered into force on 14 October 1966 . 
 Bilateral investment treaties ( <unk> ) proliferated during the first decade of the 21st century , reaching more than 2 @,@ 500 by 2007 . Many such treaties contain text that refers present and future investment disputes to the ICSID . 
 = = Statistical details of cases = = 
 From its launch to 30 June 2012 , the ICSID has registered 390 dispute cases . The ICSID 's caseload consisted of 88 % convention arbitration cases , 2 % convention conciliation cases , as well as 9 % additional facility arbitration cases , and 1 % additional facility conciliation cases . 
 As of 30 June 2012 , the ICSID 's registered cases were distributed across the following economic sectors : oil , gas , and mining ( 25 % ) , electricity and other energy ( 13 % ) , other industries ( 12 % ) , transportation industry ( 11 % ) , construction industry ( 7 % ) , financial industry ( 7 % ) , information industry and communication industry ( 6 % ) , water industry , sanitation , and food protection ( 6 % ) , agriculture , fishing , and forestry ( 5 % ) , services and trade ( 4 % ) , and tourism industry ( 4 % ) . 
 As of 27 July 2012 , 246 of 390 registered arbitration cases were <unk> as of 30 June 2012 , the ICSID 's tribunal had resolved nearly two thirds ( 62 % ) of disputes while the remainder ( 38 % ) were settled or discontinued . As of 14 May 2016 , 362 of 574 ( 62 % ) registered arbitration cases were concluded . 
 Conciliation commission reports were issued for 67 % of the conciliation proceedings , while 33 % of proceedings were discontinued . In 75 % of the conciliation reports , parties failed to reach agreement , and only 25 % recorded agreement among parties . 
 As of <unk> S.p.A was the claimant which had filed the most applications . The following law firms had served the most times in ICSID cases in alpha order : Arnold & Porter LLP , Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP , King & Spalding LLP , Latham & Watkins LLP , Shearman & Sterling LLP , Sidley Austin LLP and White & Case LLP . 
 As of 2012 only two governments , Gabon and Romania , had ever filed an ICSID case against an investor . States appearing most often as a respondent were in descending order : Argentina 49 , Venezuela 36 , Egypt 17 , Ecuador 12 , Congo 12 , Peru 11 and Ukraine 10 times . Between 2009 and 2012 legal representation cost between US $ 1 and 7 @.@ 6 million . The approximate duration of a case was 3 @.@ 6 years . 
 = = Governance = = 
 The ICSID is governed by its Administrative Council which meets annually and elects the center 's Secretary @-@ General and Deputy Secretary @-@ General , approves rules and regulations , conducts the center 's case proceedings , and approves the center 's budget and annual report . The council consists of one representative from each of the center 's contracting member states and is chaired by the President of the World Bank Group , although the president may not vote . The ICSID 's normal operations are carried out by its Secretariat which comprises 40 employees and is led by the Secretary @-@ General of the ICSID . The Secretariat provides support to the Administrative Council in conducting the center 's proceedings . It also manages the center 's Panel of <unk> and Panel of <unk> . Each contracting member state may appoint four persons to each panel . In addition to serving as the center 's principal , the Secretary @-@ General is responsible for legally representing the ICSID and serving as the registrar of its proceedings . As of 2012 , Meg Kinnear serves as the center 's Secretary @-@ General . 
 = = Membership = = 
 ICSID 's 161 member states which have signed the center 's convention include 160 United Nations member states plus Kosovo . Of these member states , only 153 are " contracting member states " , that is they have ratified the contract . Former members are Bolivia , Ecuador ( withdrew 2009 ) , and Venezuela , which withdrew in 2012 . All ICSID contracting member states , whether or not they are parties to a given dispute , are required by the ICSID Convention to recognize and enforce ICSID arbitral awards . 
 = = = Non @-@ contracting signatories = = = 
 The following member states have signed the ICSID convention ( date in parentheses ) , but have not ratified it . 
 Belize ( 1986 ) 
 Dominican Republic ( 2000 ) 
 Ethiopia ( 1965 ) 
 Guinea @-@ Bissau ( 1991 ) 
 Kyrgyzstan ( 1995 ) 
 Namibia ( 1998 ) 
 Russia ( 1992 ) 
 Thailand ( 1985 ) 
 = = = Non members = = = 
 Brazil , Mexico , India and South Africa are countries with large economies that have never been ICSID members . 
 = = Activities = = 
 The ICSID does not conduct arbitration or conciliation proceedings itself , but offers institutional and procedural support to conciliation commissions , tribunals , and other committees which conduct such matters . The center has two sets of rules that determine how cases will be initiated and conducted , either under the ICSID 's Convention , Regulations and Rules or the ICSID 's Additional Facility Rules . To be processed in accordance with the ICSID Convention , a legal dispute has to exist between one of the center 's contracting member states and a national of another contracting member state . It must also be of a legal nature and relate directly to an investment . A case can be processed under the ICSID Additional Facility Rules if one of the parties to the dispute is either not a contracting member state or a national of a contracting member state . However , most cases are arbitrated under the ICSID Convention . <unk> to ICSID conciliation and arbitration is entirely voluntary . However , once the parties have consented to arbitration under the ICSID Convention , neither party can unilaterally withdraw its consent . 
 The ICSID Secretariat may also administer dispute resolution proceedings under other treaties and regularly assists tribunals or disputing parties in arbitrations among investors and states under the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law ( <unk> ) ' s arbitration regulations . The center provides administrative and technical support for a number of international dispute resolution proceedings through alternative facilities such as the Permanent Court of Arbitration in The Hague , Netherlands , the London Court of International Arbitration , and the International Chamber of Commerce in Paris , France . 
 The ICSID also conducts advisory activities and research and publishes Investment Laws of the World and of Investment Treaties . Since April 1986 , the center has published a semi @-@ annual law journal entitled ICSID Review : Foreign Investment Law Journal . 
 Although the ICSID 's proceedings generally take place in Washington , D.C. , parties may agree that proceedings be held at one of a number of possible alternative locations , including the Permanent Court of Arbitration , the Regional Arbitration Centres of the Asian @-@ African Legal Consultative Committee in Cairo , in Kuala Lumpur , or in Lagos , the Australian Centre for International Commercial Arbitration in Melbourne , the Australian Commercial Disputes Centre in Sydney , the Singapore International Arbitration Centre , the Gulf Cooperation Council Commercial Arbitration Centre in Bahrain , the German Institution of Arbitration , the Maxwell Chambers in Singapore , the Hong Kong International Arbitration Centre , and the Centre for Arbitration and Conciliation at the Chamber of Commerce of Bogota . 
 = = Case studies = = 
 The Indonesian government was sued in June 2012 by a London @-@ based mining company Churchill Mining after the local government revoked the concession rights held by a local company in which the firm had invested . The government is countering the Churchill case , claiming that Churchill did not have the correct type of mining licenses . 
 In October 2012 , an ICSID tribunal awarded a judgment of $ 1 @.@ 8 billion for Occidental Petroleum against the government of Ecuador . Additionally , Ecuador had to pay $ 589 million in backdated compound interest and half of the costs of the tribunal , making its total penalty around $ 2 @.@ 4 billion . The South American country annulled a contract with the oil firm on the grounds that it violated a clause that the company would not sell its rights to another firm without permission . The tribunal agreed the violation took place but judged that the annulment was not fair and equitable treatment to the company . 
 Irish oil firm <unk> Oil took the Ugandan government to court in November 2012 after value @-@ added tax ( VAT ) was placed on goods and services the firm purchased for its operations in the country . The Ugandan government responded that the company had no right to claim tax on such goods prior to commencement of drilling . 
 Tobacco major Philip Morris sued Uruguay for alleged breaches to the Uruguay @-@ Swiss <unk> for requiring cigarette packs to display graphic health warnings and sued Australia under the Australia @-@ Hong Kong <unk> for requiring plain packaging for its cigarettes . The company claimed that the packaging requirements in both countries violate its investment . 
 In the context of Nuclear power phase @-@ out in Germany , Swedish Energy company Vattenfall sought compensation from the German government for the premature shut @-@ down of nuclear plants . 
 = James Franco = 
 James Edward Franco ( born April 19 , 1978 ) is an American actor and filmmaker . His first prominent acting role was the lead character Daniel <unk> on the short @-@ lived cult hit television program Freaks and Geeks . He later played the title character in the TV biographical film James Dean ( 2001 ) , for which he won a Golden Globe Award . For his role in 127 Hours ( 2010 ) , Franco was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Actor . He is also known for his roles in Spider @-@ Man , Pineapple Express ( 2008 ) , Rise of the Planet of the Apes ( 2011 ) , and Oz the Great and Powerful ( 2013 ) and other films , as well as TV roles in General Hospital and 11 @.@ 22 @.@ 63 . In 2014 , he made his Broadway debut in Of Mice and Men . 
 Franco volunteers for the Art of Elysium charity , and has also taught film classes at New York University , the University of Southern California , UCLA , and Palo Alto High School . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 Franco was born in Palo Alto , California . His mother , Betsy Lou ( née Verne ) , is a writer and occasional actress , and his father , Douglas Eugene " Doug " Franco ( d . 2011 ) , ran a Silicon Valley business . The two met as students at Stanford University . Franco 's father was of Portuguese ( Madeiran ) and Swedish descent . Franco 's mother is Jewish ; her family were Russian Jewish immigrants , and her father , Daniel , had changed the family surname from " <unk> " to " Verne " some time after 1940 . Franco 's paternal grandmother , Marjorie ( Peterson ) Franco , is a published author of young adult books . Franco 's maternal grandmother , <unk> ( Levine ) Verne , owned the Verne Art Gallery , a prominent art gallery in Cleveland , and was an active member in the National Council of Jewish Women . 
 Franco 's family upbringing was " academic , liberal , and largely secular " . He grew up in California with his two brothers , Tom and Dave ( " Davy " , also an actor ) . A " math whiz " , Franco interned at Lockheed Martin . He was often encouraged by his father to get good grades and did well on his SATs . He graduated from Palo Alto High School in 1996 , where he acted in plays . This led to him attending <unk> in 1998 for theatre . In his high school years , Franco was arrested for underage drinking , graffiti , and for being a part of a group that stole designer fragrances from department stores and sold them to classmates . These arrests led to his briefly becoming a ward of the state . Facing the possibility of juvenile hall , Franco was given a second chance by the judge . " It was teen angst . I was uncomfortable in my own skin . I was shy . I changed my ways just in time to get good grades , " he recalled of his troubles with the law . 
 Although the idea of becoming a marine zoologist interested him , Franco had always secretly wanted to become an actor but feared being rejected . He enrolled at the University of California , Los Angeles ( UCLA ) as an English major , but dropped out after his first year against his parents ' wishes to pursue a career as an actor , since he would have had to wait two years to audition for their acting program . Franco instead chose to take acting lessons with Robert Carnegie at the Playhouse West . Around this time , Franco took up a late @-@ night job at McDonald 's to support himself since his parents refused to do so . He was a vegetarian until working there . While working at the establishment , he would practice accents on customers , an experience he remembered nostalgically in a 2015 Washington Post editorial ( " McDonald ’ s was there for me when no one else was " ) . 
 = = Acting career = = 
 = = = 1997 – 2001 = = = 
 After 15 months of training , he began auditioning in Los Angeles . His first paid role was a television commercial for Pizza Hut , featuring a dancing Elvis Presley ( who died 20 years prior . ) . He found guest roles on television shows but his first break came in 1999 , after he was cast in a leading role on the short @-@ lived but well @-@ reviewed NBC television series Freaks and Geeks , which ran for 18 episodes and was canceled due to low viewership . Later , the show became a cult hit among audiences . He has since described the series as " one of the most fun " work experiences that he has had . In another interview , Franco said : " When we were doing Freaks and Geeks , I didn ’ t quite understand how movies and TV worked , and I would improvise even if the camera wasn ’ t on me ... So I was improvising a little bit back then , but not in a productive way " . After his film debut Never Been Kissed , he played a popular jock Chris in Whatever It Takes ( 2000 ) , a modern @-@ day remake of the 1897 play Cyrano de Bergerac . 
 He was subsequently cast as the title role in director Mark Rydell 's 2001 TV biographical film James Dean . To immerse himself in the role , Franco went from being a non @-@ smoker to smoking two packs of cigarettes a day , bleached his dark brown hair blond , and learned to ride a motorcycle as well as play guitar and the bongos . To have a greater understanding of Dean , Franco spent hours with two of Dean 's associates . Other research included reading books on Dean and studying his movies . While filming James Dean , the actor , to get into character , cut off communication with his family and friends , as well as his then @-@ girlfriend . " It was a very lonely existence , " he notes . " If I wasn 't on a set , I was watching James Dean . That was my whole thinking . James Dean . James Dean " . Despite already being a fan of Dean , Franco feared he might be typecast if he 'd captured the actor too convincingly . Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly wrote : " Franco could have walked through the role and done a passable Dean , but instead gets under the skin of this insecure , rootless young man " . He received a Golden Globe Award and nominations for an Emmy Award and a Screen Actors Guild Award ( SAG ) . 
 = = = 2002 – 2007 = = = 
 Franco achieved worldwide fame and attention in the 2002 superhero film Spider @-@ Man , when he played Harry Osborn , the son of the villainous Green Goblin ( Willem Dafoe ) and best friend of the Spider @-@ Man ( Tobey Maguire ) . Originally , Franco was considered for the lead role of Spider @-@ Man / Peter Parker in the film , though the lead went to Maguire . Todd McCarthy of Variety noted that there are " good moments " between Maguire and Franco in the film . Spider @-@ Man was a commercial and critical success . The movie grossed $ 114 million during its opening weekend in North America and went on to earn $ 822 million worldwide . 
 He next starred in Sonny , a 2002 release in which he was directed by fellow actor Nicolas Cage , whose involvement had attracted Franco to the film . Set in 1980s New Orleans , Sonny follows the titular character ( Franco ) returning home after just being discharged from the Army . To prepare for his role , he met with sex workers or people who had previously been prostitutes . The movie was panned by critics , with the New York Post 's Lou Lumenick calling it an " instant candidate for worst movie of the year " . Franco was cast as a homeless drug addict in the drama City by the Sea ( 2002 ) after co @-@ star Robert De Niro saw a snippet of his work in James Dean . He lived on the streets for several days to better understand the subject matter as well as talk to former or still @-@ using drug addicts . He also co @-@ starred with Neve Campbell in Robert Altman 's ballet movie The Company ( 2003 ) . The success of the first Spider @-@ Man film led Franco to reprise the role in the 2004 sequel , Spider @-@ Man 2 . The movie was well received by critics , and it proved to be a big financial success , setting a new opening weekend box office record for North America . With revenue of $ 783 million worldwide , it became the second highest @-@ grossing film in 2004 . The following year he made and starred in the black comedy The Ape and the 2005 war film The Great Raid , in which he portrayed Robert Prince , a captain in the United States Army 's elite Sixth Ranger Battalion . In 2006 , Franco co @-@ starred with Tyrese Gibson in Annapolis and played legendary hero Tristan in Tristan & Isolde , a period piece dramatization of the Tristan and Iseult story also starring British actress Sophia Myles . For the former , he did eight months of boxing training and for the latter , he practiced horseback riding and sword fighting . He then completed training for his Private Pilot Licence in preparation for his role in Flyboys , which was released in September 2006 ; the same month , Franco appeared briefly in The Wicker Man , the remake of the seminal horror film . Also in 2006 , he made a cameo appearance in the romantic comedy The Holiday . 
 He again played Harry Osborn in Spider @-@ Man 3 ( 2007 ) . In contrast to the previous two films ' positive reviews , Spider @-@ Man 3 was met with a mixed reception by critics . Nonetheless , with a total worldwide gross of $ 891 million , it stands as the most successful film in the series , and Franco 's highest @-@ grossing film to date . In this same year , Franco made a cameo appearance as himself in the Apatow @-@ directed comedy Knocked Up , which starred Freaks and Geeks alumni Seth Rogen , Jason Segel and Martin Starr . Franco co @-@ starred with Sienna Miller in the low @-@ budget independent film Camille , a dark fantasy dramedy about a young newlywed couple and Interview , where he appears in a voice only role , both 2007 movies that were ignored by audiences and critics alike . Among his other 2007 projects were Good Time Max , which Franco wrote , directed and starred in . The movie premiered at the 2007 Tribeca Film Festival and centers around two talented brothers who take very diverse paths in life , one going on to become a doctor whilst the other sibling ( Franco ) experiences unemployment and uses drugs . The actor chose to cast himself in that role because , " It was really just a process of elimination . I was better suited for this role than the responsible surgeon " . 
 = = = 2008 – 2010 = = = 
 He next starred in Pineapple Express ( 2008 ) , a stoner comedy co @-@ starring and co @-@ written by Seth Rogen and produced by Judd Apatow . Of Franco 's character , Apatow said , " You tell him , ' Okay , you 're going to play a pot dealer ' , and he comes back with a three @-@ dimensional character you totally believe exists . He takes it very seriously , even when it 's comedy " . In her New York Times review , critic Manohla Dargis wrote : " He 's delightful as Saul , <unk> @-@ <unk> and goofy yet irrepressibly sexy , despite that greasy curtain of hair and a crash pad with a zero <unk> ( Woman Acceptance Factor ) . It 's an unshowy , generous performance and it greatly humanizes a movie that , as it shifts genre gears and cranks up the noise , becomes disappointingly sober and self @-@ serious " . His performance earned him a second Golden Globe nomination , for Best Actor in a Musical or Comedy . He has stated in some interviews that he no longer uses cannabis ( although he has occasionally alluded to smoking it , most notably during an extended segment on The Colbert Report ) . He was awarded High Times magazine 's Stoner of the Year Award for his work in Pineapple Express . In 2008 he also appeared in two films by American artist Carter , exhibited at the Yvon Lambert gallery in Paris . On September 20 , 2008 , he hosted the sketch comedy show Saturday Night Live ( SNL ) , and a second time on December 19 , 2009 . 
 Franco starred opposite Sean Penn , Josh Brolin , and Emile Hirsch in Gus Van Sant 's Milk ( 2008 ) . In the film he plays Scott Smith , the boyfriend of Harvey Milk ( Penn ) . Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times , in review of the film , wrote : " Franco is a nice match for him [ Penn ] as the lover who finally has enough of political life " . For his performance in the film , Franco won the Independent Spirit Award in the category for Best Supporting Actor . In late 2009 he joined the cast of the daytime soap opera General Hospital on a recurring basis . He plays Franco , a multimedia artist much like himself , who comes to Port Charles with unfinished business with mob enforcer Jason Morgan ( Steve Burton ) . Franco has called his General Hospital role performance art . 
 Franco began 2010 by making an appearance on the sitcom 30 Rock where he played himself and carried on a fake romance with Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) in a scheme concocted by their respective agents . After appearing in the commercial successes Date Night , an action comedy , and Eat Pray Love , an adaption of a novel , Franco played poet Allen Ginsberg in the drama Howl , released on September 24 . The latter , about his most known poem and the trial about the work , premiered at the Berlin Film Festival and earned modest reviews . 
 In his next project , 127 Hours , directed by Danny Boyle , Franco portrayed real @-@ life mountain climber Aron Ralston . It was given a limited release starting on November 5 , 2010 . 127 Hours centered on Ralston trying to free his hand after it became trapped under a boulder in a ravine while <unk> alone in Utah and resorting to desperate measures in order to survive , eventually amputating his arm . During the five @-@ week , 12 @-@ hours @-@ per @-@ day shoot , Franco would only leave the gully set to use the lavatory and would read books such as academic textbooks to keep busy . Franco later called making 127 Hours a once in a lifetime experience . To date , 127 Hours is one of his most well @-@ reviewed movies and was also a commercial success , earning $ 60 @.@ 7 million against an $ 18 million budget . His performance earned him universal acclaim from critics . Subsequently , he was nominated for an Academy Award , Golden Globe and SAG award , as well as winning an Independent Spirit Award . 
 " I didn 't have many actors to act opposite with , so the crew and the director and the writer , they all became my co @-@ stars in a way and we all had this one character to share in . I , it was my body but we were all kinda jammed in there [ the gully ] . 
 = = = 2011 – present = = = 
 On February 23 , 2011 , Franco made a cameo appearance on NBC 's Minute to Win It where the real @-@ life Ralston was participating as a contestant playing for charity . After having an uncredited cameo in the opening scene of The Green Hornet ( 2011 ) , he starred opposite Natalie Portman and Danny McBride in the Medieval fantasy comedy Your Highness . In the film , he plays <unk> , a prince who teams up with his brother ( McBride ) to rescue the soon to be bride of <unk> ( played by Zooey Deschanel ) . In May 2010 , he was cast to star in Rupert Wyatt 's $ 93 million budgeted Rise of the Planet of the Apes , a reboot of the Planet of the Apes series which was released on August 5 . Franco starred alongside Winona Ryder in The Letter , originally entitled The Stare , directed by Jay <unk> . He was cast as a drug @-@ addicted lawyer in About Cherry , also starring Heather Graham , which started shooting the following month in California . He dropped out of the indie film While We 're Young to star in Oz the Great and Powerful , a Disney prequel to L. Frank Baum 's The Wonderful Wizard of Oz ( 1900 ) . Filming began in July 2011 , and the film was released on March 8 , 2013 . He has signed to do a sequel to it . 
 At the end of September 2010 , the actor acquired the rights to Stephen Elliott 's The Adderall Diaries , with the intention to adapt , direct , and star in the film . It was announced in January 2011 that the actor has planned to , not only star in , but direct himself in The Night Stalker , a film version of author Philip Carlo 's book about the 1980s serial killer , Richard Ramirez . Co @-@ screenwriter of the screenplay , Nicholas Constantine , was initially unconvinced that Franco would be right for the movie , until he learned of Franco 's desire to be a director and later watched three of his short films , one of which featured a serial killer , ultimately confirming to the writer that the actor had a darker side . The actor also has plans to direct a film version of William Faulkner 's As I Lay Dying . The film was screened in the Un Certain Regard section at the 2013 Cannes Film Festival . In late 2013 Franco starred in This is the End as a fictionalized version of himself stuck in a house with Seth Rogen , Jay Baruchel , Craig Robinson , Jonah Hill , and Danny McBride , also fictionalized versions of themselves , when the Apocalypse happens . 
 In February 2012 , Franco began shooting a film version of Cormac McCarthy 's 1973 novella Child of God , which stars Scott Haze as Lester Ballard . The film chronicles the depraved and violent impulses of the young Tennessee backwoodsman after he is dispossessed of his ancestral land . Child of God was selected in official competition at the 70th Venice Film Festival , an official selection to the 2013 Toronto International Film Festival and an official selection to the prestigious 51st New York Film Festival . In 2013 , Franco starred as the gangster " Alien " in Harmony Korine 's Spring Breakers , with Vanessa Hudgens , Selena Gomez , Ashley Benson , Gucci Mane and Rachel Korine . A24 films began a campaign in September 2013 in support of a Best Supporting Actor Oscar nomination for Franco 's performance . 
 In March 2013 , it was announced that Franco was set to make his 2014 Broadway stage debut in the role of George in a revival of John Steinbeck 's Of Mice and Men . In October 2013 , Franco appeared in the music video for " City of Angels " by Thirty Seconds to Mars . 
 In February 2014 , Franco was announced as the director and co @-@ producer for The Masterpiece , the film adaptation of actor Greg <unk> 's non @-@ fiction book , The Disaster Artist , which talks about the making of the film The Room . In April of the same year , Franco directed and appeared in " Techno Color <unk> " , which promoted Gucci 's eyewear collection . In December , Franco starred in the controversial Sony comedy thriller , The Interview , a film which played a central role in the real world diplomatic relations between the United States and North Korea as they related to the 2014 Sony hacking incident . In April 2015 , two of his projects , titled I Am Michael and True Story , were shown at the 2015 Sundance Film Festival . In I Am Michael , Franco plays a gay activist who rejects his homosexuality and becomes a conservative Christian pastor with a girlfriend . In True Story , based on a true story , Franco played Christian Longo , a man who was on the FBI 's most wanted list for murdering his wife and three children in Oregon , and who had also been hiding under the identity of Michael Finkel , a journalist played by Jonah Hill . 
 In 2015 , Franco was cast in the lead role for the Hulu limited series 11 @.@ 22 @.@ 63 which is based on the novel of the same name by Stephen King . The eight @-@ episode series premiered on February 15 , 2016 . 
 = = Other projects = = 
 Franco produced and directed a documentary titled Saturday Night documenting a week in the production of an episode of SNL . The film began as a short for an NYU class but grew due to his two episodes as host , while short stories he wrote for other classes appeared in Esquire and McSweeney 's . In summer 2010 , the fictional Franco from General Hospital held an exhibit at the Museum of Contemporary Art in Los Angeles , while the real Franco held an exhibit at the museum based on his experiences on the soap opera . 
 In 2008 , Franco was named as the face of Gucci 's men 's fragrance line . His short films as director The Feast of Stephen and Herbert White were both presented within Maryland Film Festival in May 2010 . Another of his short movies , The Clerk 's Tale , was screened in competition at the Hamptons Film Festival at the end of 2010 . In June 2010 , James Franco presented his first solo exhibition , " The Dangerous Book Four Boys " , presented at The Clocktower Gallery in New York City . <unk> by Alanna Heiss , the show featured video , drawings , sculptures and installation . 
 On October 19 , 2010 , Scribner published a collection of short stories , Palo Alto , by Franco . The book is named after the California city where Franco grew up and is dedicated to many of the writers he worked with at Brooklyn College . Inspired by some of Franco 's own teenage memories Palo Alto , and memories written and submitted by high school students at Palo Alto Senior High School , consists of life in Palo Alto as experienced by a series of teenagers who spend most of their time indulging in driving drunk , smoking weed and taking part in unplanned acts of violence . Each passage is told by a young narrator . The book has received mixed reviews ; Los Angeles Times called it " the work of an ambitious young man who clearly loves to read , who has a good eye for detail , but who has spent way too much time on style and virtually none on substance " . The Guardian said that Franco 's " foray into the literary world may be met with cynicism in some quarters , but this is a promising debut from a most unlikely source " . Writing in the New York Times , reviewer and fellow author Joshua Mohr praised Franco for how , in the story " American History " , he juxtaposed historical parts with a present @-@ day social commentary that " makes the we wonder how much we 've actually evolved in post @-@ bellum America " . At least one editor of a literary journal testified he would not publish Franco 's stories , claiming he has been published due to his star power , not literary talent . Publishers Weekly reviewed the collection , stating " The author fails to find anything remotely insightful to say in these 11 amazingly underwhelming stories " . 
 In January 2011 , the actor screened his multimedia project entitled Three 's Company The Drama , in which he merges video and art to update the former sitcom , at the 2011 Sundance Film Festival . Franco reunited with Milk director Van Sant to make Unfinished , a project that features two movies : Endless Idaho and My Own Private River . Endless Idaho showcases edited outtakes , deleted scenes and behind @-@ the @-@ scenes footage from the 1991 movie My Own Private Idaho , while My Own Private River focuses on the late actor River Phoenix . The idea for the exhibition was conceived after Van Sant introduced unused footage from the 1991 film to Franco , inspiring him to turn it into something more . Unfinished opened from February 26 to April 9 at the Gagosian Gallery in Beverly Hills . 
 On February 27 , 2011 , he and Anne Hathaway hosted the 83rd Academy Awards . The two were selected to help the awards show achieve its goal of attracting a younger audience . Franco had previously said that he accepted the job for the experience and because it was a once in a lifetime opportunity . Numerous media viewers criticized Franco for his discontent and lack of energy on stage and the show was widely panned , with some reviewers dubbing it the worst telecast in its history . The actor later spoke about his hosting in an interview on the Late Show with David Letterman . He explained that when accepting the job he never had high hopes , adding " It was never on my list of things to do . It doesn 't mean I didn 't care and it doesn 't mean I didn 't try , right ? ” Regarding allegations that he was under the influence of marijuana while hosting , Franco commented " I think the Tasmanian Devil would look stoned standing next to Anne Hathaway . She has a lot of energy ! " He concluded that he tried his best and could have had " low energy " during the telecast . 
 A few months later , he continued talking about the hosting gig at an interview for Playboy . There he said he told a producer , " I don 't know why you hired me , because you haven 't given me anything . I just don 't think this stuff 's going to be good " . He also said he felt " kind of trapped in that material " and that there was " no way out " . He also admitted to a post @-@ ceremony fight on Twitter with longtime Oscars writer Bruce Vilanch . When Vilanch intimated that the busy actor appeared less than fully committed to the job , Franco posted a photo of the two of them together graffiti @-@ ed saying " James Fucked up the <unk> . Trust me , I KNOW comedy . I mean , come on , I write for Bette Midler " . Franco explained to Playboy that " I personally do not do my best thinking when I 'm angry . Before Twitter , I always had that buffer period when I could actually think and decide , Is this worth it ? ... For me Twitter is a dangerous thing " . 
 In May , Franco made his dance @-@ theater directorial debut at New York 's Stella Adler studios , where he narrated all the performances . Entitled " Collage " and described as a " mixed @-@ media piece " , the show featured live dance , theater , music , and poetry . Tickets were free but were distributed on a first @-@ come , first @-@ served basis . The actor also directed two short films for songs ( " Blue " and " That Someone Is You " ) by R.E.M. from their album Collapse into Now ( 2011 ) . Franco continued his career as a filmmaker with The Broken Tower , a 90 @-@ minute docudrama shot in black and white about poet Hart Crane , who committed suicide by jumping off the steamship SS Orizaba . It originally started out as his masters thesis . It was screened at 2011 's Los Angeles Film Festival – among more than 200 feature films , short projects , and music videos from more than 30 countries . It was released on DVD in 2012 . 
 Since 2012 , Franco has served as a lecturer at UCLA teaching classes in the School of Theater , Film and Television . In September 2012 , Franco announced the release of his band Daddy 's first single Love in the Old Days and their first EP MotorCity . On March 8 , 2013 , Franco received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame , located at <unk> Hollywood Boulevard . On July 9 , 2013 , Franco announced that he would be the featured <unk> on the next Comedy Central Roast . The roast aired on September 2 , 2013 . 
 In February 2014 , Franco wrote an article in The New York Times in support of the <unk> performance art of Shia LaBeouf , describing LaBeouf 's project as one " in which a young man in a very public profession tries to reclaim his public persona " . In April 2014 , the literary publisher <unk> Press issued Franco 's first collection of poetry , Directing Herbert White . The title alludes to a poem ( made by Franco into a 2010 short film ) by Frank Bidart , who has served as friend and mentor to Franco . 
 In September 2015 , Franco announced he would be teaching an eight @-@ part film class to high school students at Palo Alto High School . The class began on September 13 , 2015 . 
 = = In the media = = 
 Viewed as a sex symbol , Franco was named the Sexiest Man Living in 2009 by Salon.com. There has often been frequent media coverage of Franco , particularly regarding his interest in going to colleges . In addition to that , Franco has also claimed to have been strongly misquoted by reports in the media and news outlets reporting erroneous information about him . This led to the actor being parodied in an episode of SNL 's Weekend Update segment , which an Entertainment Weekly writer deemed " clever " . In a 2011 interview , he stated : 
 " I ’ ve been perceived as this guy yelling , ' Hey , look at me . I want attention ' . I ’ m not going to school to get articles written about me . I ’ m just going to school . But the fact that I ’ m going to school or that someone takes a picture of me sleeping is like , ' We ’ re gonna jump on that and criticize him for his antics ' . What antics ? I write . I make movies . I ’ m going to school . I hosted the Oscars . I take these projects seriously " . 
 Franco has deliberately garnered a reputation for publishing " selfies " ( self @-@ shot photos of oneself , alone or with others ) and wrote an explanatory article for the New York Times in December 2013 . Franco writes : 
 " But a well @-@ stocked collection of selfies seems to get attention . And attention seems to be the name of the game when it comes to social networking . In this age of too much information at a click of a button , the power to attract viewers amid the sea of things to read and watch is power indeed . It ’ s what the movie studios want for their products , it ’ s what professional writers want for their work , it ’ s what newspapers want — hell , it ’ s what everyone wants : attention . Attention is power " 
 In April 2012 , Shalom Life ranked Franco and his brother , Dave , together as number two on its list of 50 talented and attractive Jewish men . In 2013 , Franco was featured as the cover model and featured focus in the men 's magazine Man of the World . 
 In other forms of media , a Chicago @-@ based theater company , Under the Gun Theater , developed a show inspired by and titled after Franco . The 2015 production of Dear James Franco used , parodied and deconstructed letters penned to or by celebrities . The performances used improvisation to satirize their subject matter . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Franco has described himself as Jewish ; regarding his secular upbringing , he told The Guardian that he feels as if he has " missed out on the Jewish experience " , but has been told not to worry about that by his Jewish friends and said in the same interview that he likes " the idea of religion as a source of community " . When asked if he was a " believer , " he responded " In God ? I don 't know . Yes . To a certain extent . It 's a complicated question " . In 2015 , Franco had an official Bar Mitzvah ceremony , presided over by a rabbi . 
 Due to his support for the LGBT community , and his portrayal of gay characters in his projects , Franco 's sexuality has been a subject of discussion in media sources , relentlessly questioning if he himself is gay . In response to questions regarding his sexuality , he insists he finds plenty more dimensions to the characters than their bedroom proclivities . " Or , you know what , " he quipped , " maybe I ’ m just gay " . In a March 2015 interview with Four Two Nine magazine , Franco again opened up about his sexuality , commenting that it is not who you have sex with that defines your sexuality , but instead how you act . " In the twenties and thirties , they used to define homosexuality by how you acted and not by whom you slept with . Sailors would fuck guys all the time , but as long as they behaved in masculine ways , they weren ’ t considered gay " . Franco added , " Well , I like to think that I ’ m gay in my art and straight in my life " . 
 The rumors concerning his sexuality led to a Gawker article linking him to a New York Post Page Six blind item about a closeted gay actor , nicknamed " the Gay Rapist " . Despite the victim of the alleged attack denying that it was Franco , two magazines then contacted Franco 's lawyer to alert them that they might run stories suggesting his involvement , but were unable to , as at least part of their stories were fabricated . However , Gawker refused to take their article down as they were simply reporting what another outlet published and instead offered him a chance to make a comment about the speculation on its website . He declined , hoping it would die down . The actor later called the episode very offensive because he has friends who have been raped . In July 2015 , a former Gawker employee admitted on his Twitter account — in now deleted posts — that he was pressured to write a series of articles about " the Gay Rapist " , and lead readers into believing the man was Franco . 
 After meeting on the set of Whatever It Takes , Franco dated co @-@ star Marla Sokoloff for five years . He was later in a relationship with actress <unk> O 'Reilly , until 2011 . He confirmed their separation in an interview for Playboy magazine 's August 2011 issue , saying that his interest in education got between them . He received unwelcome attention in April 2014 for trying to set a date with a 17 @-@ year @-@ old girl from Scotland in New York ( age of consent in New York is 17 ) via social media . Although the age of consent in New York is 17 , Franco 's interactions with the girl were still illegal on the grounds that the girl was a foreign citizen and the interactions took place over the Internet , both of which are circumstances invoking Federal United States law ( 18 ) rather than lesser state @-@ by @-@ state age limits . The woman filmed the conversation they had and released it to the public . Franco acknowledged flirting with her . 
 = = Education = = 
 Franco , dissatisfied with his career 's direction , <unk> at UCLA in autumn 2006 as an English major with a creative writing concentration . He received permission to take as many as 62 course credits per quarter compared to the normal limit of 19 , while still continuing to act ; receiving many of his credits from independent study for his involvement on the set of Spider @-@ Man 3 . He received his undergraduate degree in June 2008 with a GPA of 3 @.@ 5 / 4 @.@ 0 . For his degree , Franco prepared his departmental honors thesis as a novel under the supervision of Mona Simpson . While at the university , the actor studied French , the Holocaust , philosophy of science , and American literature among other things . To continue acting , he would study on film sets . 
 He was selected as the commencement speaker at his alma mater , UCLA , and was to speak at the ceremony on June 12 , 2009 . Several months before commencement , an editorial in the student newspaper questioned his " caliber " and a student created a Facebook page protesting the choice . On June 3 , Franco withdrew , citing a date conflict with location pre @-@ production on a film . On January 26 , 2011 , Franco and the Harvard Lampoon released a satirical video on prominent comedy website Funny or Die mocking his last @-@ minute cancellation . 
 He moved to New York to simultaneously attend graduate school at Columbia University 's MFA writing program , New York University 's Tisch School of the Arts for filmmaking , and Brooklyn College for fiction writing , while also attending the low @-@ residency MFA Program for Writers at North Carolina 's Warren Wilson College for poetry . He received his MFA from Columbia in 2010 . Franco is a PhD student in English at Yale University and also attended the Rhode Island School of Design . 
 The actor opted against watching the 2011 Academy Award nominees ' being announced ( where he was a top contender ) in favor of attending class . " I 'm not gonna miss class to go and presume that I 'm going to be nominated , but if you want to bring out a camera crew to Yale and wait and see if I get nominated , I 'd be happy to step out of class and say I 'm very grateful " , he commented . 
 It was announced in March 2011 that Franco will teach a fall semester course on modifying poetry into short films to ten to twelve third @-@ year graduate film students at NYU . The course will focus mainly on production , meaning that the students will be in charge of creating their own film based on poetry . 
 When asked about his education , Franco said that he loves school and that it keeps him focused as well as grounded . " I go to school because I love being around people who are interested in what I 'm interested in and I 'm having a great experience ... I 'm studying things that I love so it 's not like it 's a chore " , he told the Washington Post , according to a New York Magazine article . Franco has also credited his education for helping him " take acting seriously " when his parents did not see it as a successful post @-@ college career . 
 Franco developed an aptitude for art — painting in particular — during his high school years while attending the California State Summer School for the Arts ( <unk> ) . Franco has said painting was the " outlet " he needed in high school , and he " has actually been painting longer than he has been acting " . His paintings were displayed publicly for the first time at the <unk> Gallery in Los Angeles , from January 7 , through February 11 , 2006 . He launched his first European art exhibition in 2011 at Peres Projects in Berlin . He enjoys reading on the set of his films . Pineapple Express producer Judd Apatow has said of him : " He 's a very education @-@ minded person . We used to laugh because in between takes he 'd be reading The Iliad on set . We still haven 't read The Iliad . It was a very difficult book . With him , it was always James Joyce or something " . 
 In an interview with Showbiz411 , on September 23 , 2010 , Franco made the erroneous public announcement that he received a " D " grade in " Acting " class at the NYU Graduate Film School . It was in fact a " Directing the Actor " class . Franco admitted to missing most of his classes that semester . A professor at New York University , José Angel Santana , alleged that Franco did not earn his grades while attending that school , stating that Franco missed over 80 % of his classes and only received high marks and a degree because of his celebrity status as an actor . In September 2012 , Santana filed a lawsuit against Franco for defamation seeking unspecified damages . In September 2013 , James Franco and Santana settled the defamation lawsuit . " The matter has been resolved to the mutual satisfaction of the parties ” , said Santana 's attorney Matthew <unk> . 
 Franco defended himself when he was on the Howard Stern Show , stating that he missed the classes to film 127 Hours . Franco has taught at USC , UCLA , CalArts and NYU in Film and English departments . For his students ' film projects , he has helped to attach actors including Seth MacFarlane , Kate Mara , Natalie Portman , Chloe Sevigny , Kristen Wiig and Olivia Wilde . In March 2013 , Franco was featured in half @-@ page print advertisements for his alma mater UCLA , which celebrated the university 's famous alumnus as a " prolific academic " , and carried the tagline : " Some A @-@ <unk> Actually Get A 's " . 
 = = Charitable work = = 
 Franco has said " aiding others is the key to life , the key to happiness and , as an actor , you can get wrapped up in yourself and your career ... A little secret is one of the greatest ways to break that is to stop thinking about yourself for a second " . When Franco was at a point in his life where he wanted to give back but was unsure how , he asked his Spider @-@ Man co @-@ star Kirsten Dunst for advice . At the suggestion of Dunst , he started volunteering at the charity Art of Elysium , where she also volunteers , which helps children with serious medical conditions . He said the experience helped save his life . In January 2011 , at the Art of Elysium Heaven Gala in Los Angeles , Franco was honored for his work at the hospital , receiving the Spirit of Elysium accolade . 
 On March 31 , 2011 , the actor took part in " An Evening with James Franco " , a Washington D.C. dinner benefit for <unk> , a non @-@ profit foundation created to help neighborhood students reach their goals , as well as provide after @-@ school literature programs and workshops that encourage them to improve their writing skills . Franco became involved with Dave Eggers ' 826 National after Eggers asked him to do a conceptual idea for the program , and he directed a documentary for them and has since been a supporter of them . At the event , he spoke about how he thought schools needed to be more original with their literature programs . " Writing can do things that video cannot " , he added . In April 2011 , Franco autographed a T @-@ shirt that would be auctioned off through the Yoshiki Foundation , with the proceeds being donated for Japanese tsunami relief . On June 14 , he was honored by amfAR , the foundation for AIDS research , at the Museum of Modern Art . Franco received the Piaget Award of Inspiration for his humanitarian work and contributions to men 's style . 
 In April 2013 , Franco received the Ally Award at the 15th annual Miami Gay & Lesbian Film Festival . The award was presented to him in recognition of his unwavering support of the LGBT community . 
 In April 2014 , Franco presented at Broadway Cares / Equity Fights AIDS Easter Bonnet Competition with Leighton Meester and Chris O 'Dowd , after raising donations at his Broadway show Of Mice and Men . In June 2014 , Franco performed in the BC / EFA benefit Broadway <unk> 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = = Selected works = = 
 Franco , James . " A Star , a Soap and the Meaning of Art " . The Wall Street Journal , December 4 , 2009 . 
 Franco , James . " Just Before the Black " . Esquire , March 24 , 2010 . 
 Franco , Betsy ( 2009 ) . Metamorphosis : Junior Year [ With <unk> ] . Candlewick Press . ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 @-@ 3765 @-@ 1 . 
 Franco , James ( 2010 ) . Palo Alto : Stories . Scribner . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 4391 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 Hoffman , Alice ( 2011 ) . <unk> Winter 2011 – 2012 . ISBN 978 @-@ 1933 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 Mattson , Joseph ( 2011 ) . The Speed Chronicles . Akashic Books . ISBN 978 @-@ 1617 @-@ 7 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 1 , n + ( 2012 ) . n + 1 Issue 13 : Machine <unk> n + 1 . ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 La Force , Thessaly ( 2012 ) . My Ideal Bookshelf . Little , Brown and Company . ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 Franco , James ( 2012 ) . Dangerous Book Four Boys . Rizzoli International Publications . ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 Franco , James ( 2012 ) . 113 Crickets : Volume 2 . <unk> . ISBN 978 @-@ 1937 @-@ 9 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 Factory , The Coffin ( 2012 ) . The Coffin Factory ( Issue 3 ) . The Coffin Factory . 
 Franco , James ( 2012 ) . Strongest of the Litter : ( The Hollyridge Press <unk> Series ) . Hollyridge Press . ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 @-@ 1005 @-@ 0 . 
 Franco , James ( 2013 ) . A California Childhood . Insight Editions . ISBN 978 @-@ 1608 @-@ 8 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 Franco , James ( 2013 ) . Actors Anonymous . Little A / New Harvest . ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 @-@ 1453 @-@ 1 . 
 Franco , James ( 2014 ) . Directing Herbert White : Poems . <unk> Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 1555 @-@ 9 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 Franco , James ( 2014 ) . Hollywood Dreaming . Insight Editions . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 343 @-@ 2 . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Albums = = = 
 2011 : Turn It Up EP – collaboration with <unk> <unk> 
 2012 : MotorCity EP – with Tim O 'Keefe , as the duo " Daddy " 
 = = = Music on other albums = = = 
 2013 : " Hanging with Da <unk> " – featuring <unk> from album Spring Breakers : Music from the Motion Picture 
 2013 : " I Love You " – featuring <unk> <unk> from album Romantic <unk> 
 2015 : " 11 / 22 / 63 " 
 = Old @-@ fashioned doughnut = 
 The old @-@ fashioned doughnut is a variety of cake doughnut prepared in the shape of a ring with tapered edges around it . Primary ingredients include flour , sugar , eggs , sour cream or buttermilk and <unk> . It is typically deep fried , may have a crunchier or crisper texture compared to other styles of cake doughnuts , and have cracks and pores on its surface . After being fried , it may be glazed , dusted with sugar , or served plain . Commercially prepared old @-@ fashioned doughnuts may be prepared using a batter mix that is made with the addition of water . Such mixes are used by some doughnut shops . Some variations are prepared using unique ingredients , and some are produced as doughnut holes . 
 = = Preparation = = 
 Primary ingredients in an old @-@ fashioned doughnut include flour , sugar , eggs , sour cream or buttermilk , and leavening agents such as baking powder or baking soda . Additional ingredients may include milk , butter , vanilla extract and salt . The use of buttermilk or sour cream may impart a rich flavor to the doughnut . It is typically deep @-@ fried , and may be deep fried at a lower temperature compared to other doughnut styles , having a crunchier texture compared to other cake doughnut styles . Frying at a lower temperature contributes to its rough , cracked texture . Being turned several times while cooking in the oil also contributes to its texture . It may be prepared with toppings such as sugar , chocolate or maple glazes , dusted with granulated sugar or cinnamon @-@ sugar , or served plain without any topping . The shape of the doughnut can lend to the retention of a greater amount of glaze or other toppings compared to other doughnut styles . The old @-@ fashioned doughnut may have a similar texture to that of a buttermilk doughnut , and may be crisp in texture , with cracks and pores on its surface . 
 = = Commercial preparation = = 
 Commercially prepared old @-@ fashioned doughnut mixes are manufactured in the United States , which may be prepared by simply adding cold water to the mix . Prepared mixes are used by some doughnut shops . Doughnut shops may prepare old @-@ fashioned doughnuts by loading the batter into the hopper of a doughnut maker , which upon turning a hand crank , drops a formed doughnut into a deep fryer . Doughnut makers are also used for other doughnut varieties , such as cake doughnuts , yeast doughnuts , cream filled , and jelly filled doughnuts . 
 = = Nutrition information = = 
 One glazed old @-@ fashioned doughnut contains approximately 420 calories , 21 grams of fat , 10 grams of saturated fat , 260 milligrams of sodium , 57 grams of carbohydrate , 34 grams of sugar , 4 grams of protein and less than one gram of dietary fiber . 
 = = Variations = = 
 Starbucks purveys an old @-@ fashioned doughnut that is prepared using batter infused with chocolate . The U.S. company Trader Joe 's purveys a product named " Old @-@ Fashioned Doughnut O 's " , which are miniature @-@ sized old @-@ fashioned doughnuts . The restaurant <unk> in San Francisco has prepared a dessert using doughnut holes along with Asian pears , crème <unk> , pear butter and <unk> liqueur . The doughnuts are prepared using a sour cream base . Do @-@ Rite Donuts in New York has created limited @-@ edition custom doughnuts in collaboration with various celebrities , which included an old @-@ fashioned doughnut with maple glaze garnished with candied Fresno chili peppers . Top Pot Doughnuts in Seattle prepares both vanilla and chocolate based old- fashioned doughnuts . Each flavor can be dipped in glaze , raspberry glaze , chocolate icing , maple icing , or sugared pumpkin ( in season ) . Glazed and Infused in Chicago , Illinois serves customers the traditional glazed old @-@ fashioned as well as a unique twist on the doughnut they like to call the lemon poppy seed old @-@ fashioned doughnut . The doughnut is covered with lemon flavored glaze , and topped with poppy seeds and lemon zest . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Bart Gets Famous = 
 " Bart Gets Famous " is the twelfth episode of The Simpsons ' fifth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on February 3 , 1994 . In the episode , Bart gets a job as Krusty the Clown 's production assistant . However , he soon becomes sick of the job and comes close to quitting . During one of his shows , Krusty says he needs to use Bart in a sketch . Bart becomes an accidental star when he says , " I didn 't do it " during the botched sketch . He becomes famous for his catchphrase but soon becomes tired of being known for one line . 
 The episode was written by John Swartzwelder and was the first episode of the series to be directed by Susie Dietter . Many characters from the show have catchphrases , and the episode mocks the use of catchphrase @-@ based humor . The writers chose the phrase " I didn 't do it " because they wanted a " lousy " phrase " to point out how really crummy things can become really popular " . Conan O 'Brien , a writer for The Simpsons during the fourth and early part of the fifth season , guest stars as himself . The writers decided to include him in the episode after he received an audition from NBC to replace David Letterman as the host of Late Night . In its original broadcast , " Bart Gets Famous " finished 40th in ratings with a Nielsen rating of 11 @.@ 7 , and was viewed in 10 @.@ 74 million households . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Bart goes on a class field trip to a box factory . He gets bored with the tour and escapes from the class to go to the Channel 6 TV studio nearby , where he encounters Krusty the Clown . Krusty is angry that his assistant has failed to get him a Danish , as Bart had eaten it , and fires his assistant on the spot . Bart steals a Danish from Kent Brockman and gives it to Krusty , who becomes grateful and asks him to become his new assistant . Bart soon gets disillusioned with being Krusty 's assistant because the cast members do not treat him well and he does not receive any credit for his work . However , before Bart decides to quit , Krusty offers to let him say one line in a sketch when Sideshow Mel is unavailable thanks to Bart giving him a sandwich with cheese which triggers his lactose intolerance . Bart messes up his lines and stumbles , accidentally destroying all of the props on the stage . With the crowd and cameras focused on him , he exclaims " I didn 't do it " , which causes the audience to erupt with laughter . Seeing Bart 's popularity , Krusty uses him and his " I didn 't do it " catchphrase in later sketches , and eventually creates a franchise out of it . 
 Bart and his catchphrase continue to be popular , while Krusty creates a wide array of merchandise featuring Bart 's likeness . Bart becomes sick of his fame and begins to fear that the fad will wear off , so he tries to expand his act and personality during an interview on Conan O 'Brien 's late @-@ night talk show , to no avail . Bart decides to stop performing , but Marge convinces him that he should continue because he makes people happy . Bart arrives at Krusty 's show and enthusiastically delivers his line , but the audience is bored with the line and does not react . With fans no longer interested in Bart , Krusty ditches him . 
 Marge gives Bart a box of items she kept during his stint as a celebrity to help him remember this time of his life . Lisa says that she is glad that " Bart can go back to just being himself , instead of a one @-@ dimensional character with a silly catchphrase . " The Simpson family — along with Barney Gumble , Mr. Burns , Ned Flanders , and Nelson Muntz — then recite their respective catchphrases , prompting an unamused Lisa to go to her room . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Bart Gets Famous " was written by John Swartzwelder . The episode mocks the use of catchphrase @-@ based humor . Many characters from The Simpsons have catchphrases , including Homer ( " D 'oh ! " ) , Bart ( " Eat My Shorts " , " ¡ Ay , caramba ! " and " Don 't have a cow , man ! " ) , Marge ( her worried " <unk> " ) and Maggie ( her pacifier suck ) . The writers chose the phrase " I didn 't do it " because they wanted a " lousy " phrase " to point out how really crummy things can become really popular " . It was also an intentional call back to the first season episode " Krusty Gets Busted " where it was a catchphrase of Krusty the Clown . The episode ends with a self @-@ referential scene in which several characters say their catchphrases , including the Simpsons , Ned Flanders , Nelson Muntz , Mr. Burns and Barney Gumble . All of the characters gather around Lisa and stare at her with an anticipating look , and Lisa , displeased , finishes the episode by muttering " If anyone wants me I 'll be in my room " , to which Homer says " what kind of a catchphrase is that ? " 
 In the episode , Bart appears on the talk show Late Night with Conan O 'Brien . Conan O 'Brien was a writer for The Simpsons during the fourth and early part of the fifth seasons . During the production of the episode , he received an audition to replace David Letterman as the host of Late Night on NBC , after Letterman defected to CBS . The writers decided that since the episode featured Bart getting famous , it would give them an opportunity to work in O 'Brien 's show . The part was written just after O 'Brien 's audition for Late Night , but before he knew he was going to be the host . O 'Brien recorded his part shortly after Late Night with Conan O 'Brien premiered , but he believed NBC would have fired him before the episode aired . He described being a guest star on the show as " really delightful " , adding that " it 's like being frozen in amber . I know people will be watching The Simpsons long after I 'm dead . " 
 " Bart Gets Famous " was the first episode of the series to be directed by Susie Dietter . The design of the insides of the box factory featured in this episode was discussed at great length by Dietter and executive creative consultant Brad Bird . Bird wanted the design to be more lively but Dietter wanted it to be more boring to go with the story . Dietter 's design was used in the finished episode . The box factory manager 's voice , performed by Dan Castellaneta , was based on Wally Ballou , a character portrayed by Bob Elliott of the comedy duo Bob and Ray . Mayor Quimby 's wife Martha makes her first appearance in this episode . Her outfit ( a pink dress and a pillbox hat ) is similar to the clothing worn by Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis on the day of the Kennedy assassination . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 At the beginning of the episode , Bart can be heard whistling The Simpsons ' theme song and Marge tells him " not to whistle that annoying tune " . Bart imagines himself appearing on Match Game in 2034 alongside Billy Crystal , Farrah Fawcett Majors O 'Neal , Loni Anderson , Spike Lee and Kitty Carlisle 's head in a jar . Bart records an " I Didn 't Do It " rap with the backing track from MC Hammer 's " U Can 't Touch This " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Bart Gets Famous " aired during the week of January 31 @-@ February 6 , 1994 , the first week of February sweeps . It finished 40th in ratings with a Nielsen rating of 11 @.@ 7 , and was viewed in 10 @.@ 74 million households . It was the highest rated show on Fox that week . 
 The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , wrote , " even without that final sequence , this would still be one of the best episodes , with Bart at his very best . The scenes in the box factory are superb , as is Martin and Skinner 's joyful singing and , once again , Edna and Bart 's enforced team @-@ up . " DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson wrote " lots of great moments pop up in this excellent program . Bart ’ s rise to fame sparkles via its deft parody of instant — and fleeting — fame , and many wacky bits show up along the way such as Homer ’ s fear that Bart got turned into a box . [ ... ] This might be Season Five ’ s best show . " Patrick Bromley of DVD Verdict gave the episode a grade of A- and Bill Gibron of DVD Talk gave the episode a score of 4 out of 5 . 
 = Mr.Mr. ( song ) = 
 " Mr.Mr. " is a Korean song recorded by South Korean girl group Girls ' Generation for their fourth Korean titular extended play ( 2014 ) . The song was released on February 25 , 2014 , as a single from the EP . The song was composed by American production team The Underdogs , who had previously worked with Western artists including Britney Spears , Beyoncé , and Justin Timberlake . A music video for the song was initially planned to be released on February 19 but was postponed to February 28 due to the accidental deletion of some of the original files . 
 " Mr.Mr. " was described as an electropop and pop @-@ R & B song that incorporates a hip hop beat and EDM @-@ influenced buildups . The song received generally positive reviews from music critics , who praised its musical styles , which were deemed a departure from the group 's signature bubblegum pop sound . The single ranked number 18 on Billboard magazine 's list of 20 Best K @-@ pop Songs of 2014 and was included on Time 's list of 25 Best Songs of 2014 ( So Far ) in June 2014 . 
 To promote the song and the EP , Girls ' Generation appeared on several music programs including M Countdown , Music Bank , Show ! Music Core , and Inkigayo around February and March 2014 . The single was a commercial success in the group 's native country South Korea , peaking atop the Gaon Digital Chart and selling over 900 @,@ 000 digital units in 2014 . It also charted at number three on the Korea K @-@ Pop Hot 100 and number four on the Billboard World Digital Songs . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Mr.Mr. " was composed by American production team The Underdogs ( Harvey Mason Jr . , Damon Thomas , Andrew Hey , Mike Daley , Britt Burton , and <unk> " <unk> " Bell ) , with Korean lyrics by Cho Yoon @-@ <unk> and Kim Hee @-@ <unk> of Jam Factory ) , who have written lyrics for Girls ' Generation for eight years . The Underdogs had previously worked with Western artists including Britney Spears , Beyoncé , and Justin Timberlake . The song was released to South Korean KBS Radio Station on February 25 , 2014 as a single from the EP of the same name ( 2014 ) . A Japanese version of " Mr.Mr. " was included on the group 's 2014 Japanese greatest hits album The Best . 
 Musically , " Mr.Mr. " was described by Billboard magazine 's Jeff Benjamin as an electropop and pop @-@ R & B song . An editor from Yonhap characterized it as an " electropop dance " song featuring elements of R & B , and Heather Phares , writing for AllMusic , noted that it " mixed a hip hop beat and EDM @-@ inspired buildups " in its composition . Lyrically , " Mr.Mr. " has a more proactive theme with lyrics prompting a reluctant man to be more courageous towards girls , a departure from the group 's familiar themes . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 The music video for " Mr.Mr. " was initially planned to be released on February 19 , 2014 , in conjunction with the release of the EP . However , the release date was postponed to February 28 due to the accidental deletion of some of the original shots , which necessitated re @-@ filming the affected scenes . As a result , the group 's comeback performances on South Korean music programs were also delayed for two weeks . 
 The music video was choreographed by Jillian Meyer ( who had previously collaborated with artists including Janet Jackson and Kylie Minogue ) and two members of <unk> – Shim Jae @-@ won and Greg Hwang . It tells the story of a man who is diagnosed with heart disease but can not confess it to the girl he likes . He then decides to undergo a surgery , which is handled by the group 's members who act as doctors . Group member Sooyoung argued that that " Our new music video has the concept of encouraging and boosting the confidence of those men who have lost courage " . The visual received positive reviews from media outlets ; Fuse labelled it " cinematic " and praised its " sophisticated " class , and Popdust 's Jacques Peterson hailed the video as " the hottest episode of Grey 's Anatomy ever " . It was the second most watched K @-@ pop music video of the first half of 2014 , trailing only Psy 's music video for " Hangover " . 
 To promote " Mr.Mr. " and the EP , Girls ' Generation made several appearances on South Korean music programs around February and March 2014 . They performed the song for the first time on Mnet 's M Countdown on March 6 , 2014 as part of their comeback stage . The following three days , the group appeared on Music Bank , where they also performed " Back Hug " , Show ! Music Core , where they also performed " Wait a Minute " , and Inkigayo . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Mr.Mr. " received generally positive reviews from music critics . Jeff Benjamin from Billboard magazine hailed the single as " super @-@ strong , super @-@ sweet " and labelled it a welcome change compared to the group 's previous " stupid @-@ catchy " releases . He named it the 18th best K @-@ pop song on his list of 20 Best K @-@ pop Songs of 2014 . 
 AllMusic 's reviewer Heather Phares said the track helped " [ expand ] their [ Girls ' Generation 's ] musical reach " . John Walker from MTV News commented that the single 's musical styles were more similar to " The Boys " ( 2011 ) rather than their usual styles as on " Gee " ( 2009 ) , and labelled it a hybrid of " 70 's @-@ throwback " and " Get Me Bodied " . Time magazine 's Lily Rothman included " Mr.Mr. " on the publication 's list of 25 Best Songs of 2014 ( So Far ) in June . She wrote that " Fans [ ... ] won ’ t be disappointed by their latest dance @-@ friendly single " and added that " the addition of a scratchy electronic bass line and a hint of darkness " should attract listeners who were not used to their signature bubblegum pop sound . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 " Mr.Mr. " peaked atop the South Korean Gaon Digital Chart in the tenth week of 2014 . It was the 46th best @-@ selling song of 2014 in South Korea , selling over 906 @,@ 962 digital units . Overall , it became the 54th best @-@ performing song on the Gaon Digital Chart , based on additional streaming and instrumental track downloads . " Mr.Mr. " also charted at number three on the Korea K @-@ Pop Hot 100 , and number four on the Billboard World Digital Songs . 
 = = Credits = = 
 Credits adapted from Mr.Mr. liner notes 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Splitting of the moon = 
 The splitting of the moon ( Arabic : <unk> <unk> ) was a miracle attributed to the Islamic prophet Muhammad , derived from the Quranic verses 54 : 1 @-@ 2 , and mentioned by Muslim traditions such as the <unk> al @-@ <unk> ( context of revelation ) . Most Muslim commentators interpret the event as a literal split in the moon , while some others identify it as an event that will happen at judgement day or an optical illusion . 
 Early traditions supporting a literal interpretation are transmitted on the authority of companions of Muhammad such as Ibn Abbas , Anas bin Malik , Abdullah bin Masud and others . According to the Indian Muslim scholar Abdullah Yusuf Ali , the moon will split again when the day of judgment approaches . He says that the verses may also have an allegorical meaning , i.e. the matter has become clear as the moon . The Qur 'anic verses 54 : 1 @-@ 2 was part of the debate between medieval Muslim theologians and Muslim philosophers over the issue of the inviolability of heavenly bodies . In 2010 a NASA Lunar Science Institute ( <unk> ) staff scientist , named Brad Bailey , said " No current scientific evidence reports that the Moon was split into two ( or more ) parts and then reassembled at any point in the past . " 
 The narrative was used by some later Muslims to convince others of the prophethood of Muhammad . It has also inspired many Muslim poets , especially in India . 
 = = The Qur 'an and Islamic tradition = = 
 Verses 54 : 1 @-@ 2 of the Quran reads : 
 The Hour ( of Judgment ) is nigh , and the moon is cleft asunder . But if they see a Sign , they turn away , and say , " This is ( but ) transient magic . 
 Early traditions and stories explain this verse as a miracle performed by Muhammad , following requests of some members of the Quraysh . Most Muslim commentators accept the authenticity of those traditions . The following verse 54 : 2 , " But if they see a Sign , they turn away , and say , ' This is ( but ) transient magic ' " is taken in the support of this view . The classical commentator Ibn Kathir provides a list of the early traditions mentioning the incident : A tradition transmitted on the authority of Anas bin Malik states that Muhammad split the moon after the pagan Meccans asked for a miracle . Another tradition from Malik transmitted through other chains of narrations , mentions that the mount Nur was visible between the two parts of the moon ( Mount Nur is located in Hijaz . Muslims believe that Muhammad received his first revelations from God in a cave on this mountain , Cave Hira ' ) . A tradition narrated on the authority of Jubayr ibn Mut 'im with a single chain of transmission says that the two parts of the moon stood on two mountains . This tradition further states that the Meccan responded by saying " Muhammad has taken us by his magic ... If he was able to take us by magic , he will not be able to do so with all people . " Traditions transmitted on the authority of Ibn Abbas briefly mention the incident and do not provide much details . Traditions transmitted on the authority of Abdullah bin Masud describe the incident as follows : 
 We were along with God 's Messenger at Mina , that moon was split up into two . One of its parts was behind the mountain and the other one was on this side of the mountain . God 's Messenger said to us : Bear witness to this 039 : <unk> 
 The narrative was used by some later Muslims to convince others of the prophethood of Muhammad . Annemarie Schimmel for example quotes the following from Muslim scholar Qadi Iyad who worked in the 12th century : 
 It has not been said of any people on the earth that the moon was observed that night such that it could be stated that it was not split . Even if this had been reported from many different places , so that one would have to exclude the possibility that all agreed upon a lie , yet , we would not accept this as proof to the contrary , for the moon is not seen in the same way by different people ... An eclipse is visible in one country but not in the other one ; in one place it is total , in the other one only partial . 
 = = Other perspectives = = 
 Al @-@ <unk> , a famous commentator of the Qur 'an , acknowledged the splitting of the moon as one of Muhammad 's miracles . But he also suggested that the splitting might take place only on the day of judgment . The Muslim scholar Yusuf Ali provides three different interpretations of the verse . He holds that perhaps all three are applicable to the verse : Moon once appeared cleft asunder at the time of Muhammad in order to convince the unbelievers . It will split again when the day of judgment approaches ( here the prophetic past tense is taken to indicate the future ) . Yusuf Ali connects this incident with the disruption of the solar system mentioned in 75 : 8 @-@ 9 . Lastly , he says that the verses can be metaphorical , meaning that the matter has become clear as the moon . 
 Some dissenting commentators who do not accept the miracle narration believe that the verse only refers to the splitting of the moon at the day of judgment . Likewise , M. A. S. Abdel <unk> writes : 
 The Arabic uses the past tense , as if that Day were already here , to help the reader / listener imagine how it will be . Some traditional commentators hold the view that this describes an actual event at the time of the Prophet , but it clearly refers to the end of the world . 
 Some Muslim scholars postulate and believe that a ( now known ) Astronomical event must have happened at that time , which made it appear to the observers as if the moon had been split in two , because the phenomenon was seen at least in India as well . One of the possible lunar events could be a large asteroid hitting the moon , and the plume and debris from the strike blocking enough lunar view to make it appear as if the Moon had split in two . A second possibility could be a celestial body passing between Earth and the Moon and blocking some part of lunar surface for short time . Moreover , in the light of the verse that was revealed at that time , the word " <unk> 'at " also means spiritual revolution , so the event also symbolized the end of the Pagan Arab culture and religions which used Moon as their symbol or worshipped moon gods . 
 Western historians such as A.J. <unk> and Denis <unk> , reject the historicity of the miracle arguing that the Qur 'an itself denies miracles , in their traditional sense , in connection with Muhammad . 
 = = Debate over the inviolability of heavenly bodies = = 
 Quran 54 : 1 @-@ 2 was part of the debate between medieval Muslim theologians and Muslims philosophers over the issue of the inviolability of heavenly bodies . The philosophers held that nature was composed of four fundamental elements : earth , air , fire , and water . These philosophers however held that the composition of heavenly bodies were different . This belief was based on the observation that the motion of heavenly bodies , unlike that of terrestrial bodies , was circular and without any beginnings or ends . This appearance of eternity in the heavenly bodies , led the philosophers to conclude that the heavens were inviolable . Theologians on the other hand proposed their own conception of the terrestrial matter : the nature was composed of uniform atoms that were re @-@ created at every instant by God ( the latter idea was added to defend God 's omnipotence against the encroachment of the independent secondary causes ) . According to this conception , the heavenly bodies were essentially the same as the terrestrial bodies , and thus could be pierced . 
 In order to deal with implication of the traditional understanding of the Quranic verse 54 : 1 @-@ 2 , some philosophers argued that the verse should be interpreted metaphorically ( e.g. the verse could have referred to a partial lunar eclipse in which then earth obscured part of the moon ) . 
 = = Literature = = 
 This tradition has inspired many Muslim poets , especially in India . In poetical language Muhammad is sometimes equated with the sun or the morning light . As such , part of a poem from Sana 'i , a renowned early twelfth century Persian Sufi poet , reads : " the sun should split the moon in two " . Jalal ad @-@ Din Rumi , a renowned Persian @-@ writing poet and mystic , in one of his poems conveys the idea that to be split by the Muhammad 's finger is the greatest bliss the lowly moon can hope for and a devoted believer splits the moon with Muhammad 's finger . Elaborating on this idea , Abd ar @-@ Rahman Jami , one of the classical poets and mystics of Persia , plays with the shapes and numerical values of Arabic letters in a complicated way : The full moon , Jami says , resembles the Arabic letter for a circular m with the numerical value 40 . When Muhammad split the moon , it became like two crescent @-@ shaped n 's ( the Arabic letter for " n " ) whose numerical value is 50 each . This would mean that , thanks for the miracle , the value of moon had increased . 
 In another place Rumi , according to Schimmel , alludes to two miracles attributed to Muhammad in tradition , i.e. the splitting of the moon ( which shows the futility of man 's scientific approach to nature ) , and the other that Muhammad was illiterate . 
 = = NASA photograph = = 
 Apollo mission photographs of the Rima <unk> revealed a 300 km @-@ long rift line on the surface of the moon . On being asked in 2010 about Internet suggestions that this was proof of the Quranic story , NASA scientist Brad Bailey said , " My recommendation is to not believe everything you read on the internet . Peer @-@ reviewed papers are the only scientifically valid sources of information out there . No current scientific evidence reports that the Moon was split into two ( or more ) parts and then reassembled at any point in the past . " 
 = North Coast Hiawatha = 
 The North Coast Hiawatha was a streamlined passenger train operated by Amtrak between Chicago , Illinois , and Seattle , Washington , in the United States . It operated from 1971 to 1979 . The train was a successor to the Northern Pacific Railway 's North Coast Limited and <unk> , although it used the route of the Chicago , Milwaukee , St. Paul and Pacific Railroad ( " Milwaukee Road " ) east of Minneapolis – Saint Paul . The train 's name combined the North Coast Limited with the Milwaukee Road 's famed <unk> . Created at the behest of the United States Congress , the North Coast Hiawatha enjoyed an uncertain existence before being discontinued in 1979 . Since then there have been several attempts to restore the service , without success . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The flagship train on the Northern Pacific Railway ( " NP " ) main line was the North Coast Limited , which had begun running in 1900 . Its running mate since 1952 was the <unk> , which operated on a slower schedule with fewer amenities . The Northern Pacific main line mirrored that of its great rival , the Great Northern Railway ( " GN " ) , running through southern Montana and North Dakota . Even after the merger of the NP , GN , and Chicago , Burlington , and Quincy Railroad ( " CB & Q " ) into the Burlington Northern Railroad in 1970 , service continued on both the ex @-@ Northern Pacific and ex @-@ Great Northern . Amtrak chose the Great Northern 's Empire Builder as its Chicago – Pacific Northwest route . Amtrak based this decision on several factors , including the overall higher speed of the ex @-@ Great Northern route and better availability of alternative transportation options along the ex @-@ Northern Pacific . 
 = = = Operation = = = 
 Amtrak 's decision to discontinue the NP trains caused consternation in Montana . Mike Mansfield ( D @-@ Montana ) , then Senate Majority Leader , pointed out that the Empire Builder bypassed Montana 's major population centers , and had no difficulty in making his displeasure felt . The new company reacted to the pressure and announced a resumption of service over the ex @-@ Northern Pacific , to begin on June 14 . This service took the form of an unnamed section of the Empire Builder running separately between Minneapolis and Spokane , Washington . Mansfield 's intervention earned the train the nickname “ Mike Mansfield Limited ” . The Northern Pacific route , which included the Yellowstone River , Homestake Pass and Bitterroot Mountains , was praised for its scenery . Amtrak considered the route one of the company 's six most beautiful . The train also provided a convenient connection to Yellowstone National Park at Livingston , Montana . 
 On November 14 , 1971 , Amtrak formally named this service the North Coast Hiawatha , with a tri @-@ weekly schedule between Chicago and Spokane independent of the Empire Builder . In Spokane it combined with the Empire Builder for the trip to Seattle . On the other four days of the week the train terminated in Minneapolis . Amtrak initially named the Minneapolis train Hiawatha , but adopted the Twin Cities Hiawatha name on January 16 , 1972 . Amtrak reverted to Hiawatha on October 29 , and this name remained until the North Coast Hiawatha went daily for the first time on May 19 , 1974 . 
 This joint operation ended on June 11 , 1973 , when Amtrak extended the North Coast Hiawatha to Seattle over the Great Northern 's route , which included Stevens Pass and Cascade Tunnel . This new routing served the northern Washington communities of Wenatchee and Everett , which had previously been without service . The train remained on a tri @-@ weekly schedule west of Minneapolis . For the summer of 1974 Amtrak added a second train , the Expo ' 74 ( named for the " Expo ' 74 " then being held in Spokane ) , to the Seattle – Spokane segment . 
 The schedule fluctuated over the next three years , with the train operating daily between Chicago and Seattle in the summers and reverting to tri @-@ weekly west of Minneapolis the rest of the year . Amtrak would also run a daily service during the holiday season ( as in 1975 , when the train operated daily December 12 – January 12 ) , but the train never operated a daily schedule for a full calendar year . In early 1976 the North Coast Hiawatha was threatened with discontinuance , along with the Pacific International and the three daily Portland , Oregon — Seattle trains , after the Ford Administration proposed budget cuts . Several members of Congress protested the proposed cuts , including Representative Max Baucus ( D @-@ Montana ) , and Senators Warren Magnuson ( D @-@ Washington ) and Bob Packwood ( R @-@ Oregon ) . In the end Congress approved a budget for Amtrak $ 62 million above the administration 's request , saving all three services . 
 Amtrak announced in October 1976 that the North Coast Hiawatha would be the second train , after the Empire Builder , to receive the new bi @-@ level <unk> coaches , then on order from Pullman Standard . In the end the train was cancelled before the Superliners entered long @-@ distance service . In the spring of 1977 Amtrak added seven hours to the schedule , increasing it to 52 hours 30 minutes . The change was prompted by new speed restrictions on Amtrak trains after a rash of derailments involving the new EMD SDP40F diesel locomotives . In September Amtrak eliminated the off @-@ day Chicago — St. Paul service , leaving the North Coast Hiawatha with three trips a week . Amtrak reduced the Empire Builder to quad @-@ weekly service as well . The Twin Cities Hiawatha returned as a daytime service between Chicago and Minneapolis . 
 In November Amtrak reduced the running time to 46 hours 40 minutes , after the replacement of the <unk> permitted an easing of speed restrictions . Even as this improved service began , the train was threatened with cancellation . Facing a budget deficit of $ 60 million , Amtrak identified a half dozen routes which it considered " financially troubled . " Amtrak proposed merging the North Coast Hiawatha and the Empire Builder , or even cancelling both . Throughout 1978 no decision was taken , and the two trains continued to provide between them daily service between Chicago and Seattle . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 In January 1979 Secretary of Transportation Brock Adams announced plans to cut 12 @,@ 000 miles ( 19 @,@ 000 km ) from Amtrak 's network . The North Coast Hiawatha was one of many routes scheduled for elimination . The train had faced cancellation before , but after eight years of federal subsidies members of Congress favored retrenchment . Once @-@ vocal supporters such as Senator Magnuson expressed regret but made no public commitment . Adams noted that the service recovered only $ 6 million against expenses of $ 24 million , and that the per @-@ passenger cost was $ 178 . 
 In July an attempt by Representative ( and future Vice President ) Al Gore ( D @-@ Tennessee ) to impose a one @-@ year moratorium on the proposed system @-@ wide cuts failed 214 @-@ 197 . In the end the Senate approved a smaller cutback , citing a 24 % spike in Amtrak ridership after an oil shock during the summer , but the North Coast Hiawatha remained on the chopping block . In late September the Railway Labor Executives ' Association , along with Senator John Melcher ( D @-@ Montana ) and Representative Pat Williams ( D @-@ Montana ) , sued the U.S. Department of Transportation to prevent the discontinuance of the service , then scheduled for October 1 . A federal judge temporarily restrained Amtrak from ending the service , but the last North Coast <unk> ran on October 6 , 1979 , arriving in Chicago on the 7th and Seattle on the 8th . 
 = = = Proposed return = = = 
 Over the years there have been periodic attempts to restore service in southern Montana and North Dakota . A proposed plan from 1982 – 1983 would have involved North Dakota and Montana paying 45 % of costs in the first year and 65 % thereafter of a new section of the Empire Builder operating tri @-@ weekly between Fargo and Sandpoint . This proposal went nowhere as neither state voted funds . Another proposal mooted in 1991 would have required an additional yearly federal appropriation of $ 12 – 15 million plus new equipment . In this scenario the Portland section would operate over the old route . Again , nothing came of it . 
 In 2008 Congress directed Amtrak to study resumption of service , which rekindled hope of restoration . Amtrak published a feasibility study in October 2009 , which proposed restoring the North Coast Hiawatha to its 1979 route where possible with a daily schedule . Amtrak projected a yearly ridership of 359 @,@ 800 , some of whom would be drawn from the Empire Builder . Amtrak estimated that $ 1 billion in funds would be necessary to relaunch the service , including over $ 300 million for new locomotives and rolling stock . The corporation estimated it would take four to five years to reintroduce the service if a decision was made to move forward . 
 = = Equipment = = 
 The North Coast Hiawatha saw a variety of motive power and rolling stock during its eight years , as Amtrak disposed of its inherited equipment as best it could and gradually replaced the older equipment with its own stock . In the early 1970s a typical train might feature as many as four dome cars pulled by ex @-@ Milwaukee Road EMD <unk> . In the summer of 1972 the train maxed out at 18 cars , including five dome coaches , an ex @-@ California Zephyr dome lounge , and a dome @-@ sleeper @-@ lounge . The 1970 Burlington / Great Northern merger notwithstanding , cars carried both the " Big Sky Blue " livery characteristic of late Great Northern passenger trains and the " Cascade Green " of the Burlington Northern Railroad . 
 The train was one of many routes to receive the new EMD SDP40F , which worked the route between 1974 – 1977 , although older EMD E8 and EMD <unk> continued to be used . A series of derailments involving the SDP40F prompted their replacement , and by late 1977 Amtrak had introduced the EMD <unk> . These sometimes ran with an E9 " B " unit as well . 
 = Jack Chesbro = 
 John Dwight Chesbro ( June 5 , 1874 – November 6 , 1931 ) was a Major League Baseball ( MLB ) pitcher . Nicknamed " Happy Jack " , Chesbro played for the Pittsburgh Pirates ( 1899 – 1902 ) , the New York Highlanders ( 1903 – 1909 ) , and the Boston Red Sox ( 1909 ) . Chesbro finished his career with a win @-@ loss record of 198 @-@ 132 , an earned run average of 2 @.@ 68 , and 1 @,@ 265 strikeouts . His 41 wins during the 1904 season remains an American League record . Though some pitchers have won more games in some seasons prior to 1901 , historians demarcating 1901 as the beginning of ' modern @-@ era ' major league baseball refer to and credit Jack Chesbro and his 1904 win @-@ total as the modern era major league record and its holder . Some view Chesbro 's 41 wins in a season as an unbreakable record . 
 Chesbro 's 1904 pitching totals of 51 games started and 48 complete games also fall into the same historical category as his 1904 wins total , as they are all @-@ time American League single @-@ season records . These 1904 single @-@ season totals for games started and complete games , as the wins total , are also the most recorded by a pitcher in either the American or National League , since the beginning of the twentieth century and the co @-@ existence of the American and National Leagues as major leagues . If one demarcates 1901 as the beginning of major league baseball 's modern era , Jack Chesbro holds the modern era major league historical single @-@ season records for wins by a pitcher ( 41 ) , games started by a pitcher ( 51 ) , and complete games pitched ( 48 ) . 
 Chesbro was elected to the National Baseball Hall of Fame in 1946 by the Veterans Committee , though he had received little consideration from the Baseball Writers ' Association of America ( BBWAA ) . Some baseball historians consider the 1946 election a mistake , and believe that Chesbro was elected solely on the basis of his 1904 season . 
 = = Early life = = 
 He was born John D. Chesbro on June 5 , 1874 in <unk> , a village in North Adams , Massachusetts . He was the fourth of five children of Chad Brown <unk> , a shoemaker , and Martha Jane <unk> . 
 In 1892 , Chesbro began playing for a sandlot ball team in <unk> . He worked in 1894 as an attendant at the Middletown State Homeopathic Hospital in Middletown , New York in order to play for the Asylums , the team representing the mental hospital . There , an inmate gave Chesbro the nickname " Happy Jack " , due to his pleasant demeanor . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Minor leagues ( 1895 – 1899 ) = = = 
 Chesbro began his professional career in minor league baseball in 1895 . That year , he pitched for the Albany Senators of the New York State League until they folded , at which point he joined the Johnstown <unk> . When the league disbanded during the season , he joined the Springfield Maroons of the Eastern League . In 1896 , Chesbro pitched for the Roanoke Magicians of the Virginia League , until it disbanded . He pitched the remainder of the 1896 season in Cooperstown , New York for the Cooperstown Athletics . There , the local newspaper shortened his last name to " Chesbro " so that it would fit in the box score . 
 Chesbro pitched for the Richmond Bluebirds of the Atlantic League from 1897 through 1899 . After the 1898 season , he was drafted by Ned Hanlon of the Baltimore Orioles . However , Hanlon took a job with the Brooklyn Superbas and the Orioles were nearly contracted , resulting in Chesbro not signing with Baltimore , as Hanlon allowed the option to lapse . He returned to Richmond for the 1899 season . 
 = = = Major League Baseball ( 1899 – 1909 ) = = = 
 Chesbro was sold by Richmond to the Pittsburgh Pirates on July 7 , 1899 for $ 1 @,@ 500 ( $ 42 @,@ 666 in current dollar terms ) . He made his Major League Baseball ( MLB ) debut with the Pirates on July 12 , 1899 . He recorded a 6 – 9 win – loss record for the 1899 Pirates . After the season , on December 8 , 1899 , Chesbro was traded with George Fox , Art Madison , John O 'Brien , and $ 25 @,@ 000 ( $ 711 @,@ 100 in current dollar terms ) to the Louisville Colonels for Honus Wagner , Fred Clarke , Bert Cunningham , Mike Kelley , Tacks Latimer , Tommy Leach , Tom <unk> , Deacon Phillippe , Claude Ritchey , Rube Waddell , Jack Wadsworth , and Chief Zimmer . The Louisville club dissolved that offseason , and Chesbro , Fox , Madison and O 'Brien were assigned to Pittsburgh in March as the National League ( NL ) reduced from 12 to eight teams . 
 After going 15 – 13 for the 1900 Pirates , Chesbro won 21 games for the 1901 Pirates , while leading the NL with six shutouts . He went 28 – 6 with a 2 @.@ 17 earned run average ( ERA ) for the 1902 Pirates , leading the NL in wins and shutouts . The Pirates won the National League pennant in 1901 and 1902 . 
 At the end of the 1902 season , the upstart American League ( AL ) began to entice NL stars to join their league by offering competitive salaries . Chesbro agreed to sign with a new AL franchise , the New York Highlanders ( presently known as the New York Yankees ) , for the 1903 season , for a $ 1 @,@ 000 bonus ( $ 27 @,@ 350 in current dollar terms ) to join the AL . The news broke when Jesse Tannehill , who also agreed to join the Highlanders , told Pirates owner Barney Dreyfuss about the planned defection while under the influence of pain medication . When he refused to participate in a postseason series , Dreyfuss released Chesbro from the Pirates . 
 Chesbro pitched the Highlanders ' first game . He finished the 1903 season with a 21 – 15 record . Chesbro began throwing a spitball in the 1904 season , which he learned from Elmer Stricklett , the inventor of the spitball . Chesbro also began working on a " slow ball " . That year , he started 51 games and finished 48 while posting a 1 @.@ 82 ERA , striking out 239 batters , and recording 41 wins and 48 complete games over 454 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched , setting MLB records for wins , complete games , and innings pitched in a season . That year , no other pitcher in the league won more than 26 . Chesbro won 14 straight games from May 14 through July 4 , a New York franchise record that stood until Roger Clemens broke it in 2001 . His 239 strikeouts remained a team record until Ron Guidry struck out 248 in 1978 . On the last day of the season , in a game against the Boston Americans ( now known as the Boston Red Sox ) , he threw a wild pitch in the top of the ninth inning , allowing the winning run to score from third base and causing the Highlanders to lose the pennant to Boston . The ruling on this play was controversial . Even after Chesbro 's death in 1931 , his widow , with the support of former Highlanders manager Clark Griffith , continued to claim that the pitch was a passed ball , and blamed the winning run on catcher Red Kleinow . 
 Before the 1905 season , Chesbro announced that he had created a pitch he called the " jump ball " . He struggled in the 1905 season , registering a 19 @-@ 15 record . During the 1905 season , Chesbro was involved in the first squeeze play in baseball . At third base , Chesbro mistakenly thought he had received a steal sign from manager Clark Griffith , while Willie Keeler bunted for a hit . As Chesbro scored , Griffith made a note of the play and taught it in spring training the following season . 
 Many baseball observers expected Chesbro to return to form in 1906 . That season , Chesbro registered a 23 – 17 record while leading the AL in earned runs allowed . He was removed from his starts sixteen times , the most in the AL . 
 Chesbro announced he would work on keeping his weight down prior to the 1907 season , but announced his intentions to retire in February 1907 . In March 1907 , he announced he would return , but not at a pay cut . He signed a new contract two weeks into the 1907 season , in which he went 10 – 10 . 
 After the 1907 season , Chesbro announced that he was giving up the experimental spitball , intending to return to the " old style of pitching " in 1908 . He finished the 1908 season with a 14 – 20 record . 
 Prior to the 1909 season , Chesbro was assigned to the Indianapolis Indians of the American Association , a minor league affiliate of the Highlanders . However , Chesbro threatened to retire if transferred there , and did not report to the Highlanders at first . Chesbro made nine appearances for the Highlanders in 1909 , before he was waived and claimed by the Boston Red Sox in September 1909 . Chesbro pitched one game for the Red Sox , the season finale against the Yankees . The Red Sox returned Chesbro to the Highlanders prior to the 1910 season , but he was placed on the ineligible list after he refused to report to the minor leagues . 
 = = Post @-@ MLB career = = 
 Chesbro returned to Massachusetts during the 1910 Major League Baseball season , where he worked on a farm in Conway , Massachusetts that he purchased a decade prior . He pitched for a semi @-@ professional baseball team in nearby <unk> , Massachusetts , leading them to a championship . Chesbro coached for Massachusetts Agricultural College ( presently known as the University of Massachusetts Amherst ) in 1911 and continued to pitch for semipro clubs in Massachusetts . 
 Chesbro met with Highlanders owner Frank J. Farrell and new manager Harry Wolverton in February 1912 about attempting a comeback . Wolverton agreed to give Chesbro a chance at pitching for the Highlanders . However , before leaving for camp he reconsidered and released Chesbro . Chesbro 's request for reinstatement as a free agent was granted in March , while the Highlanders granted him his unconditional release . Chesbro decided to travel to Hot Springs , Arkansas , where teams participated in spring training , in an attempt to find a team willing to give him a chance at a comeback . He worked out with Brooklyn and Pittsburgh , but both teams passed on him . 
 Chesbro appeared in an old @-@ timers game at Braves Field , sponsored by The Boston Post to benefit Boston Children 's Hospital , on September 11 , 1922 . He served as a Washington Senators coach in 1924 , which were managed by his former Highlanders manager , Clark Griffith . However , he and Ben Egan were let go when the Senators hired Al Schacht on June 1 . In 1927 , he managed a minor league team in South Deerfield , Massachusetts , pitching for the team on occasion . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Chesbro was inducted into the National Baseball Hall of Fame in 1946 balloting by the Veterans Committee , which considers individuals who are eligible for the Hall of Fame , but no longer eligible to be elected by the Baseball Writers ' Association of America ( BBWAA ) . That year , the Veterans Committee elected eleven players : Chesbro , Jesse Burkett , Frank Chance , Johnny Evers , Clark Griffith , Tommy McCarthy , Joe McGinnity , Eddie Plank , Joe Tinker , Rube Waddell , and Ed Walsh . During years where Chesbro was eligible on the BBWAA ballot , Chesbro received zero votes in the 1936 balloting , one vote in the 1937 balloting , two votes in the 1938 balloting , and six votes in the 1939 balloting , zero votes in the 1942 balloting , and zero votes in the 1945 balloting . 
 Chesbro 's 1904 record for games won in a season ( 41 wins ) has stood for over a century — one of the oldest major records in baseball , or in any other sport . Under current playing practices , his record is unbreakable . Chesbro started 51 games that season ( plus 4 relief appearances ) and pitched 48 complete games , for a record of 41 – 12 . Today , it is uncommon for a pitcher to start even 35 games in a season and complete games are a rarity . The only other 40 @-@ win season since 1900 was 40 by Ed Walsh in 1908 , and only three other pitchers in the modern era have won as many as <unk> Mathewson ( 37 in 1908 ) , Walter Johnson ( 36 in 1913 ) and Joe McGinnity ( 35 in 1904 ) . Since the pitcher 's mound was lowered to its current height of 10 inches in 1969 , no pitcher has won more than 27 games in a season . 
 Tinker considered Chesbro one of the six toughest pitchers he faced in MLB . Dan Holmes , who runs the Hall of Fame 's website , called Chesbro " one of the best pitchers in the game at that time . " 
 However , Chesbro 's induction is considered dubious , as his overall career was overshadowed by his 1904 season . Baseball historian Bill James considers Chesbro to be undeserving of induction to the Hall of Fame . In particular , James compared Chesbro 's statistics to those of former Pittsburgh Pirate teammates Deacon Phillippe ( 189 – 109 , 2 @.@ 59 ) , Sam <unk> ( 194 – 100 , 2 @.@ 47 ) , and Jesse Tannehill ( 197 – 117 , 2 @.@ 80 ) , none of whom are in the Hall of Fame . In his book The Politics of Glory , James charged that the induction of undeserving players created a " second tier " in the Hall of Fame . James claimed that Chesbro was inducted into the Hall of Fame solely on the basis of his 1904 season , even though other pitchers who did not make the Hall of Fame have similar career statistics . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Chesbro married Mabel <unk> of Conway , Massachusetts , in 1896 . After his retirement , Chesbro farmed and raised poultry in Conway , where he died on November 6 , 1931 of a myocardial infarction ; he was buried at Howland Cemetery in Conway . Mabel died in 1940 . 
 = Peggy Rockman Napaljarri = 
 Peggy Rockman Napaljarri ( also known as Peggy <unk> Rockman Napaljarri ) ( born c . 1940 ) is a Warlpiri @-@ speaking Indigenous artist from Australia 's Western Desert region . Born on what is now Tanami Downs pastoral station , she learned English when working as a child with a white mining family ; Peggy Rockman and her family were subsequently relocated by government authorities to Lajamanu , a new community west of Tennant Creek , Northern Territory . Peggy Rockman is one of the traditional owners of Tanami Downs . 
 Since first learning painting through an adult education course in 1986 , Peggy Rockman has painted particular ' dreamings ' , including <unk> ( <unk> ) , Warna ( snake ) , <unk> and <unk> . Her work is in the collection of the National Gallery of Victoria and the Art Gallery of New South Wales . She has co @-@ written <unk> : Warlpiri Dreamings and Histories , a collection of texts in the Warlpiri language with English translations . 
 = = Life = = 
 Peggy Rockman was born around 1940 . The ambiguity around the year of birth is in part because Indigenous Australians operate using a different conception of time , often estimating dates through comparisons with the occurrence of other events . Some sources give only " Lima " as a location ; a more detailed account suggests she was born at <unk> , on Tanami Downs ( formerly Mongrel Downs ) , a pastoral station in Australia 's Northern Territory . 
 Her name given at birth was <unk> : Peggy Rockman was a name subsequently given to her by white administrators . ' Napaljarri ' ( in Warlpiri ) or ' Napaltjarri ' ( in Western Desert dialects ) is a skin name , one of sixteen used to denote the subsections or subgroups in the kinship system of central Australian Indigenous people . These names define kinship relationships that influence preferred marriage partners and may be associated with particular totems . Although they may be used as terms of address , they are not surnames in the sense used by Europeans . Thus ' Peggy Rockman ' is the element of the artist 's name that is specifically hers . 
 Peggy Rockman had three older sisters , all of whom married <unk> <unk> , to whom Peggy herself would also later be married . Her family first settled alongside white Australians — a couple mining gold in the Tanami Desert — when she was aged between six and eight . While still a child herself , she worked caring for the mining family 's children , during which time she became a proficient English speaker . After the mine was abandoned , Peggy Rockman 's family returned to a nomadic existence in the region , before settling for a time at a pastoral station called Gordon Downs . Around 1952 , the family was taken by the government 's Native Affairs Branch to a new settlement called Lajamanu , in the central desert west of Tennant Creek , Northern Territory . There , Peggy Rockman was required to work full @-@ time in the settlement 's kitchens , being paid with meals , and occasionally also with rations . At the settlement , she had three children with <unk> <unk> . 
 Peggy Rockman was one of six children of <unk> <unk> , and her siblings include artists Biddy Rockman Napaljarri and Mona Rockman Napaljarri . Peggy Rockman is one of the traditional owners recognised in the Tanami Downs land claim , under the Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976 . Biographies published in 1994 and 2003 both indicated that she was living in the Lajamanu area , but by 2010 she had settled in Katherine , Northern Territory . 
 = = Art = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Contemporary Indigenous art of the western desert began when Indigenous men at Papunya began painting in 1971 , assisted by teacher Geoffrey Bardon . Their work , which used acrylic paints to create designs representing body painting and ground sculptures , rapidly spread across Indigenous communities of central Australia , particularly following the commencement of a government @-@ sanctioned art program in central Australia in 1983 . By the 1980s and 1990s , such work was being exhibited internationally . The first artists , including all of the founders of the Papunya Tula artists ' company , had been men , and there was resistance amongst the Pintupi men of central Australia to women painting . However , there was also a desire amongst many of the women to participate , and in the 1990s large numbers of them began to create paintings . In the western desert communities such as Kintore , Yuendumu , Balgo , and on the outstations , people were beginning to create art works expressly for exhibition and sale . 
 = = = Career = = = 
 Peggy Rockman was one of a number of artists who first learned painting through a course run in 1986 at Lajamanu by an adult education officer , John Quinn , associated with the local Technical and Further Education unit . The course , initially attended only by men , eventually enrolled over a hundred community members . Others who began their painting careers through that course include Mona Rockman Napaljarri and Louisa Napaljarri . Western Desert artists such as Peggy Rockman will frequently paint particular ' dreamings ' , or stories , for which they have personal responsibility or rights , which in Peggy 's case include <unk> ( <unk> ) , Warna ( snake ) , <unk> and <unk> . 
 Peggy Rockman , together with linguist Lee <unk> , wrote <unk> : Warlpiri Dreamings and Histories , a work sponsored by the Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies , and published in 1994 . It is a 200 @-@ page collection of oral texts , collected in Warlpiri and provided with English translations , for which Peggy Rockman was a source as well as editor . A senior dancer amongst her people , Peggy Rockman helped choose the site for , and participated in , a major ceremony for a 1993 Australian Broadcasting Corporation documentary film , Milli Milli . The ceremony , called <unk> Kutjarra ( Two men ) Dreaming , was performed with others including fellow artist Susie Bootja Bootja Napaltjarri . 
 Peggy Rockman 's paintings have been hung in both public and commercial gallery exhibitions , including at the Araluen Centre for Arts and Entertainment and the National Gallery of Victoria 's Indigenous art exhibition " Paint Up Big " . Commercial galleries showing her work have included William Mora Galleries in Melbourne . A work by Peggy Rockman , <unk> — bush plum , was included in the 2007 National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Art Award . Her paintings are held by the Art Gallery of New Wales , and the National Gallery of Victoria . 
 = = Collections = = 
 Art Gallery of New South Wales 
 National Gallery of Victoria 
 = Hurricane Octave ( 1989 ) = 
 Hurricane Octave was a Category 4 hurricane which existed during the above @-@ average 1989 Pacific hurricane season . The remnants of Atlantic Tropical Depression Nine tracked westward across the Caribbean Sea , entering the Pacific Ocean on September 3 . It slowly developed , and organized into a tropical depression on September 8 . It strengthened into a tropical storm on September 10 , thus earning the name Octave . After strengthening into a hurricane the next day , Octave started to steadily intensify en route to a peak as a Category 4 hurricane of the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale . After reaching peak winds of 135 mph ( 215 km / h ) on September 13 , Octave moved into a region of cooler waters . The hurricane weakened into a tropical storm on September 14 , and degenerated further into a tropical depression the next day , before dissipating on September 16 . The remnants of the storm brought moderate rainfall to parts of California and Arizona , as well as three F0 tornadoes . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Hurricane Octave originated from a tropical wave that left west coast of Africa on August 21 , 1989 . Moving westward , the wave became better organized and developed into Atlantic Tropical Depression Nine on August 27 . However , strong wind shear inhibited further development of the system , leading to it degenerating to a tropical wave . Upon weakening to wave , the system was situated roughly 400 miles ( 640 km ) east of the Lesser Antilles . Continuing westward , the system moved through the Caribbean Sea without significant development before crossing Central America and entering the Pacific Ocean on September 3 . After remaining stationary for several days , the system was upgraded to a tropical depression on September 8 about 400 miles ( 640 km ) south of the Mexican coastline . Upon becoming a tropical cyclone , the convection became well @-@ organized . Octave took a general northwestward track as it intensified , becoming Tropical Storm Octave later that day . 
 Upon being named , Octave had developed a good outflow and shear was decreasing , leading to forecasters at the National Hurricane Center anticipating the storm to become a hurricane . The storm slowly strengthened over the following two days , becoming a strong tropical storm early on September 11 . Octave later reached hurricane intensity late on September 11 @.@ as it developed an eye . Meanwhile , Octave was being steered by an anticyclone over Mexico and a trough to the west allowed the hurricane to continue northwest . Continuing to intensify , it was soon upgraded to Category 2 status on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale . During the afternoon of September 13 , Octave intensified into a major hurricane , a storm with sustained winds of at least 111 mph ( 178 km / h ) . Early the next day , the hurricane attained peak intensity as Category 4 hurricane , based on the Dvorak technique , a tool used to estimate tropical cyclone intensity . At this time , maximum winds were estimated at 135 mph ( 215 km / h ) along with a barometric pressure of 94 @.@ 8 kPa ( 27 @.@ 99 inHg ) . 
 Shortly after its peak , the storm moved over cooler waters , with sea surface temperatures estimated to be as low as 26 ° C ( 79 ° F ) . By the end of the September 13 , the eye of Octave had become less defined as the hurricane weakened . Steady weakening took place as the storm continued a northwesterly track due to a trough . By September 14 , Octave was downgraded into a tropical storm as winds dropped below 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) The system began to weaken rapidly as it turned towards the west , and it was downgraded to a tropical depression late on September 15 . After turning back towards the east , Octave rapidly dissipated on September 16 as steering current diminished . The remnant low dissipated on September 16 while located 150 mi ( 240 km ) off the Baja California coastline . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Prior to the arrival of Octave , the NHC issued public advisories . The advisories noted that 1 to 2 in ( 25 to 51 mm ) was possible in the higher elevations . The possibility of a dissipating prior to landfall was also noted . Octave came within 200 mi ( 320 km ) of Socorro Island . As a result , the weather station there reported winds of 35 mph ( 56 km / h ) and a pressure of 100 @.@ 36 kPa ( 29 @.@ 64 inHg ) . In addition , its remnants did move into California . In the Sacramento Valley , the city of Redding recorded 2 @.@ 21 in ( 56 mm ) of rain in a 12 @-@ hour span and 3 @.@ 15 in ( 80 mm ) in 24 hours . Sacramento also recorded 1 @.@ 56 in ( 40 mm ) in 6 hours . Light rainfall was reported throughout southern California , with enough falling in Los Angeles to make streets slippery . Moisture associated with Octave produced isolated showers in thunderstorms in parts of southern Arizona on September 16 . The unusually heavy rainfall in California was the delayed results of a cloud @-@ seeding operation in southern California and Arizona using the <unk> Icarus . The operation was launched on September 1 but the effects took more than a week to show ; the heavy rains were the most seen in California since 1987 . In addition , a power outage in Lodi , California affected 7 @,@ 000 customers . Octave also produced minor damage to the grape and raisin crops . 
 = Daniel Sedin = 
 Daniel Sedin ( born 26 September 1980 ) is a Swedish professional ice hockey winger and an alternate captain for the Vancouver Canucks of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . His identical twin brother Henrik also plays for the Canucks , and is the team captain . Born and raised in Örnsköldsvik , Sweden , they have played together throughout their careers ; the pair are renowned for playing off one another . Daniel is known as a goal @-@ scorer , while Henrik is known as a playmaker . 
 Daniel began his professional career in the Swedish Elite League with Modo Hockey in 1997 and was co @-@ recipient , with Henrik , of the 1999 Golden Puck as Swedish player of the year . He played four seasons with Modo ( including a return in 2004 – 05 due to the NHL lockout ) , helping the club to two consecutive appearances in the Le Mat Trophy Finals , in 1999 and 2000 , where they lost both times . Selected second overall by the Canucks in the 1999 NHL Entry Draft , Daniel moved to the NHL in the 2000 – 01 season . He has spent his entire NHL career in Vancouver , and in 2016 became the club 's all @-@ time top goalscorer . After emerging as a top player in the club during the 2005 – 06 season , Daniel has since recorded six consecutive campaigns of at least 20 goals and 70 points . In 2011 , he won the Art Ross Trophy as the League 's leading point @-@ scorer and the Ted Lindsay Award as the best player in the League , as voted by fellow players . Daniel was also nominated for the Hart Memorial Trophy as the League 's most valuable player . In Sweden , he and Henrik were awarded the Victoria Scholarship as the country 's athletes of the year . 
 Internationally , Daniel has competed for the Swedish national team . In addition to being a three @-@ time Winter Olympian , he has appeared in two European Junior Championships , two World Junior Championships and four World Championships . He won gold medals at the 2006 Winter Olympics in Turin and 2013 IIHF World Championship in Stockholm . Daniel also got a silver at the 2014 Olympics in Sochi and two World Championship bronze medals , at the 1999 and 2001 editions . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Daniel was born on 26 September 1980 , in Örnsköldsvik , Sweden , six minutes after his identical twin brother , Henrik . The pair have two older brothers , Stefan and Peter . Their father , Tommy , is a school vice @-@ principal and also played for Modo Hockey in the 1960s , while his mother , Tora , is a nurse . Daniel began playing organized hockey with Henrik when they were eight . They did not regularly play on the same line until Daniel switched from centre to wing at 14 . Daniel and Henrik both attended high school at the <unk> Gymnasium in Sweden while playing professionally for Modo . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Modo Hockey ( 1997 – 2000 ) = = = 
 Aged 16 , Daniel and Henrik began their professional careers in 1997 – 98 with Modo Hockey of the Swedish Elite League . Daniel recorded 12 points over 45 games during his rookie season . In his second professional year , he led Modo in scoring with 42 points in 50 games , helping the club to its second regular season title in team history . Daniel then added 12 points in 13 playoff games as Modo advanced to the Le Mat Trophy Finals , where they lost to Brynäs IF . At the end of the campaign , Daniel and Henrik were named co @-@ recipients of the Golden Puck , the Swedish player of the year award . 
 The Sedins were considered top prospects for the 1999 NHL Entry Draft . Rated as the top draft @-@ eligible players from Europe , they were expected to be top five selections and expressed a desire to play for the same team . As they were unlikely to be picked by the same team , their agent , Mike Barnett , president of international talent agency IMG , presented them with two options to circumvent the usual NHL draft process , allowing them to play together . The first option was for the pair to enter the 1999 Draft and not sign with their respective NHL clubs for two years , allowing them to become unrestricted free agents . This option required that they play junior hockey in North America , which was not their intention . Barnett also suggested either Henrik or Daniel opt out of the 1999 Draft , hoping that the team that selected the first twin would select the other the following year . On the possibility of the Sedins ' playing for separate teams , Vancouver Canucks Scout Thomas Gradin commented , " They 're good enough to play with anyone , but separately their capacity might decrease by 10 or 15 percent . " Nevertheless , Henrik and Daniel both entered the 1999 Draft expecting to be selected by separate teams . However , then @-@ Canucks General Manager Brian Burke already possessed the third overall pick and through a series of transactions he obtained the second overall pick . He used these second and third overall picks to select Daniel and Henrik , respectively . Gradin notified them of the Canucks ' intentions five minutes before the Draft . Although Tampa Bay Lightning General Manager Rick Dudley was ready to make Daniel his first overall choice before opening negotiations , he was convinced by Burke and Barnett that Daniel would not sign unless his brother was on the same team . 
 On 27 July 1999 , a month following the Draft , Daniel and Henrik signed identical three @-@ year , US $ 1 million contracts with the Canucks . As the contract did not require them to begin playing in Vancouver immediately , they announced on 12 August they would return to Sweden to play one more season with Modo . During the 1999 – 2000 season , Daniel finished second in team scoring with 45 points in 50 games , two points behind Henrik . The two brothers played on a line during the season with New York Islanders prospect Mattias Weinhandl . In the 2000 playoffs , Daniel added a team @-@ leading eight goals and 14 points . He recorded two goals and two assists in the deciding game of the semifinals against Brynäs IF , a 6 – 3 win for Modo . Modo made their second straight finals appearance , where they lost the playoff championship to Djurgårdens IF in three @-@ straight games . 
 = = = Vancouver Canucks ( from 2000 ) = = = 
 = = = = 2000 – 06 = = = = 
 The 2000 – 01 NHL season was Daniel 's first season with the Canucks . His debut was the team 's first game of the campaign on 5 October 2000 , a 6 – 3 loss to the Philadelphia Flyers . Daniel and Henrik became the fourth pair of twins to have played in the NHL . Three days later , Daniel scored his first career NHL goal against goaltender Dan Cloutier of the Tampa Bay Lightning . Assisted by Henrik , the goal tied the game at 4 – 4 with 1 : 13 minutes left to go in a 5 – 4 regulation win . On 30 November 2000 , he suffered a shoulder injury , sidelining him for four games . During his recovery , he was reprimanded by Canucks Head Coach Marc Crawford , who told him that playing through pain is part of being in the NHL . Later in the season , he missed an additional three games due to a back injury , shortening his rookie season to 75 games . He became the first rookie in 2000 – 01 to reach 20 goals when he scored on 21 March 2001 , in a 1 – 1 tie against the Columbus Blue Jackets . Finishing the campaign with that goal total , he tied for second among League rookies in scoring with Shane Willis , behind Brad Richards . He also had 14 assists for 34 points in total . Making his Stanley Cup playoff debut against the Colorado Avalanche , Daniel recorded an assist in the opening game of the first @-@ round series , a 5 – 4 loss for the Canucks . He added his first NHL playoff goal later in the series as the Canucks were eliminated in four @-@ straight games . He and Henrik played primarily on the Canucks ' third line . Daniel received one third @-@ place vote from the Professional Hockey Writers ' Association for the Calder Memorial Trophy as NHL rookie of the year , finishing eighth in award balloting overall . 
 During the off @-@ season in May 2001 , Daniel underwent surgery for a herniated disc in his lower back , from which he suffered during the 2001 World Championships in Germany . In his second NHL season , Daniel struggled with the lowest goals total of his career , with nine . The campaign included a 25 @-@ game stretch without a goal between mid @-@ October and the end of November 2001 . With 23 assists , he had 32 points overall . Vancouver finished with the eighth seed in the Western Conference for the second consecutive year . Facing the Detroit Red Wings in the first round , they were eliminated in six games . The following season , in 2002 – 03 , Daniel continued his point @-@ scoring pace of the previous two campaigns with 14 goals and 17 assists . Vancouver finished the regular season fourth overall in the West and advanced to the second round for the first time in Daniel 's career . He appeared in a career @-@ high 14 playoff games and recorded six points , as the Canucks were defeated in seven games by the Minnesota Wild . Daniel and Henrik were re @-@ signed in the off @-@ season to one @-@ year , US $ 1 @.@ 125 million contracts on 29 July 2003 . 
 The Sedins began the 2003 – 04 season on a line with first @-@ year player Jason King . The trio were dubbed the " Mattress Line " ( two twins and a King ) and formed the Canucks ' second scoring line until King was reassigned to the team 's minor league affiliate midway through the season . Daniel was awarded his first penalty shot on 17 January 2004 , in a game against the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim . He was stopped by goaltender Jean @-@ Sébastien Giguère as Anaheim went on to win the game 2 – 1 . On 24 February 2004 , Daniel recorded his first NHL career hat @-@ trick with a four @-@ goal effort in a 4 – 2 win over the Detroit Red Wings . Over 82 games , Daniel increased his production to 18 goals and 54 points . The Canucks won the Northwest Division title in the regular season , before losing to the Calgary Flames in the first round of the playoffs . Daniel recorded a goal and two assists in the seven @-@ game series . 
 During the off @-@ season , Daniel and Henrik were re @-@ signed to one @-@ year , US $ 1 @.@ 25 million contracts on 10 September 2004 . However , due to the 2004 – 05 lockout , Daniel returned to Sweden to play for Modo , along with Henrik and their Canucks teammate Markus Näslund . He finished the season with 33 points in 49 games , fourth in team scoring behind Peter Forsberg , Mattias Weinhandl and Henrik . 
 When NHL play resumed in 2005 – 06 , Daniel returned to the Canucks and scored 71 points . He tied for third in team point @-@ scoring with Todd Bertuzzi , behind Henrik and Näslund . His scoring success that season was influenced , in part , by the signing of winger Anson Carter , who played on the Sedins ' line and led the team in goal @-@ scoring . The trio matched the scoring pace of the Canucks ' top line of Näslund , Bertuzzi and Brendan Morrison . Vancouver 's head coach at the time , Marc Crawford , recalled that season as marking the Sedins ' ascent to leaders on the team , stating that " by the end of that year , they definitely were our top guys . They had surpassed Näslund and Bertuzzi . " Despite the brothers ' individual achievements , the Canucks missed the playoffs for the first time in their careers . During the off @-@ season , Daniel and Henrik re @-@ signed with the Canucks to identical three @-@ year , $ 10 @.@ 75 million contracts on 30 June 2006 . Despite the Sedins ' success with Carter , the Canucks did not re @-@ sign him ; he joined the Columbus Blue Jackets the following season . 
 = = = = from 2006 = = = = 
 In the 2006 – 07 season , Daniel established himself as the Canucks ' top scorer . He led the team with 36 goals and 84 points to lead the Canucks in scoring . He also tied a League record with four goals in overtime over the course of the season . Daniel notched his second career NHL hat @-@ trick on 6 February 2007 , scoring two goals against goaltender Dwayne Roloson and one into an empty net . He later took the second penalty shot of his career on 8 March 2007 , against the Phoenix Coyotes . However , he was stopped once again by Curtis Joseph ; Vancouver went on to win the game 4 – 2 . Winger Taylor Pyatt , acquired in a trade from the Buffalo Sabres during the off @-@ season , replaced Carter as the Sedins ' linemate and went on to score a career @-@ high 23 goals . In the opening game of the 2007 playoffs against the Dallas Stars , Daniel assisted on Henrik 's quadruple @-@ overtime goal to end the longest @-@ ever Canucks playoff game and the sixth longest in NHL history at 138 minutes and six seconds of play . Daniel struggled to produce offensively in the playoffs , however , managing five points over 12 games as the Canucks were eliminated by the Anaheim Ducks in the second round . 
 Daniel recorded 74 points in 2007 – 08 , as the Canucks missed the playoffs for the second time in three years . He finished second in team point @-@ scoring to Henrik and first in goals with 29 . The Sedins saw some time with Näslund on their top line during the season to form an all @-@ Swedish forward unit . The following season , Daniel recorded 31 goals and 82 points , tying Henrik for the team lead in points . He opened the campaign being named the NHL 's First Star of the Week on 13 October 2008 , with a five @-@ point effort over two games . Steve Bernier had been acquired in the 2008 off @-@ season in another trade with the Sabres , and began the season on the top line with the Sedins . Bernier was later removed ; on 12 February 2009 , Head Coach Alain Vigneault moved Alexandre Burrows up from the third line during a game against the Phoenix Coyotes . Late in the campaign , Daniel was named the NHL 's Second Star of the Week on 30 March 2009 , after recording four goals and four assists in four games , including a game @-@ winning goal . He added ten points over ten games in the 2009 playoffs , helping the Canucks advance to the second round , where they were defeated in six games by the Chicago Blackhawks . 
 Set to become unrestricted free agents on 1 July 2009 , Daniel and Henrik began negotiating with the Canucks in the off @-@ season and were reported to have asked for 12 @-@ year , $ 63 million contracts in mid @-@ June . With free agency looming , Canucks General Manager Mike Gillis visited the Sedins in Sweden , where they agreed on identical five @-@ year , $ 30 @.@ 5 million contracts on 1 July . 
 Four games into the 2009 – 10 season , Daniel suffered the first major injury of his career , breaking his foot in a game against the Montreal Canadiens . He suffered the injury after being hit by a slapshot from teammate Alexander Edler . Although Daniel finished the game and recorded three assists , x @-@ rays several days later revealed a fracture . He was sidelined for 18 games , returning to the ice on 22 November against the Chicago Blackhawks . Soon after his return , he notched his third career NHL hat @-@ trick in a 4 – 2 win against the Atlanta Thrashers on 10 December . Four days later , he was named the NHL 's Second Star of the Week with seven points over the course of the week . In the final game of the regular season , on 10 April 2010 , against the Calgary Flames , Daniel scored his fourth career NHL hat @-@ trick in a 7 – 3 win . All three goals were assisted by his brother , helping Henrik pass Alexander Ovechkin for the Art Ross Trophy as the NHL 's leading point @-@ scorer . The last goal was chosen by TSN in a fan @-@ voted poll as the NHL 's play of the year ; Daniel received a between @-@ the @-@ legs tip pass from Henrik near the corner boards before beating goaltender <unk> Kiprusoff with a between @-@ the @-@ legs deke . Daniel finished the season with a career @-@ high 56 assists and 85 points despite playing an injury @-@ shortened 63 @-@ game campaign . His 1 @.@ 35 points per game rate was third in the League behind Henrik and Ovechkin . In the subsequent 2010 playoffs , Daniel recorded ten points in the opening round against the Los Angeles Kings , including the series @-@ winning goal in the late stages of Game 6 . Against Chicago the following round , his production decreased to four points as the Canucks were eliminated in six games . In the off @-@ season , Daniel was named to the NHL Second All @-@ Star Team . It marked the first time since 1973 – 74 that two brothers were named post @-@ season NHL All @-@ Stars , as Henrik had been named to the First Team . They were also chosen to appear together on the cover of EA Sports ' European version of the NHL 11 video game . 
 On 9 October 2010 , Daniel was named an alternate captain for the Canucks , who named Henrik captain during a pre @-@ game ceremony to celebrate the team 's 40th anniversary . He was joined by Ryan Kesler , Kevin Bieksa and Manny Malhotra as alternates . Daniel wears the " A " during Canucks home games , along with Kesler . On 10 January 2011 , Daniel was named the NHL 's First Star of the Week after scoring five goals and seven points in four games . During that span , he scored the 10,000th goal in Canucks franchise history in a 3 – 1 win against the Calgary Flames on 5 January . Later in the month , Daniel competed in his first career NHL All @-@ Star Game . Drafted onto Team Staal , he played with Canucks teammate Ryan Kesler opposite Henrik on Team Lidstrom . In the Skills Competition , Daniel won the shooting accuracy segment by first beating Martin <unk> to all four targets in 7 @.@ 3 seconds , then defeating Patrick Kane in the final in 8 @.@ 9 seconds . The following day , Daniel recorded one assist as Team Staal lost the game 11 – 10 . Towards the end of the 2010 – 11 season , Daniel compiled three goals and five assists in three games to be named the NHL 's Second Star of the Week on 14 March 2011 . During that month , he totalled nine goals and 12 assists in 15 games , earning him NHL Second Star of the Month honours . With a goal and an assist against the Los Angeles Kings on 31 March , Daniel became the fifth player in team history to reach the 100 @-@ point mark in one season ( after Pavel Bure , Alexander Mogilny , Markus Näslund and Henrik Sedin ) . 
 Prior to the Canucks ' final home game of the season a week later , Sedin was awarded the Cyclone Taylor Award as the team 's most valuable player ( MVP ) and his third Cyrus H. McLean Award as the team 's leading point @-@ scorer . Finishing the campaign with a career @-@ high 41 goals , 63 assists and 104 points , he won the Art Ross Trophy as the NHL 's leading point @-@ scorer . It marked the first time in NHL history that brothers led the League in scoring in back @-@ to @-@ back seasons , as Henrik had won the previous year . Chicago Blackhawks forwards Doug and Max Bentley also won separate scoring titles , but had achieved the feat three years apart in 1943 and 1946 , respectively . He also received the Viking Award as the NHL 's best Swedish player , following after Henrik who received it the year before . 
 Daniel 's efforts helped the Canucks win the Presidents ' Trophy as the team with the NHL 's best regular season record for the first in franchise history . Entering the 2011 playoffs with the top seed in the West , the Canucks beat the Chicago Blackhawks , Nashville Predators and San Jose Sharks in the first three rounds to advance to the Stanley Cup Finals for the first time in 17 years . Playing against the Boston Bruins , the Sedins struggled to score in the Finals ; through the series ' seven games , Daniel recorded a goal and three assists . Consequently , the Canucks managed just eight goals in that same span . After losing Game 6 by a 5 – 2 score in Boston , Daniel told Vancouver Sun reporters , " We 're going to win Game 7 . " They went on to lose the deciding contest 4 – 0 . With nine goals and 20 points over 25 games , Daniel ranked fourth in playoff scoring behind Boston 's David Krejčí , Henrik Sedin and Tampa Bay 's Martin St. Louis . His 99 shots on goal marked the fifth @-@ highest single playoffs total in NHL history . 
 A week after the Canucks ' loss , Daniel was in attendance for the NHL Awards show in Las Vegas , having been nominated for the Hart Memorial Trophy as the NHL 's most valuable player , the Ted Lindsay Award as the NHL 's most outstanding player and the NHL Foundation Player Award for his and Henrik 's work in the Vancouver community . Daniel won the Lindsay Award over forwards Martin St. Louis of the Tampa Bay Lightning and Corey Perry of the Anaheim Ducks . In Hart Trophy voting , he finished as the first runner @-@ up to Perry with 51 first @-@ place ballots and 960 voting points total ( 16 and 83 fewer than Perry , respectively ) . Daniel and Henrik also lost the NHL Foundation Award to Los Angeles Kings captain Dustin Brown . After being named to the NHL 's Second All @-@ Star Team the previous year , Daniel received First Team honours with Henrik for the 2010 – 11 season . Returning to Sweden in the off @-@ season , Daniel and Henrik were co @-@ recipients of the Victoria Scholarship , as the country 's athletes of the year . They became the third and fourth ice hockey players to receive the award , after Stefan Persson in 1980 and Peter Forsberg in 1994 . Henrik and Daniel were presented the award , commemorated with glass plates , on 14 July 2011 , in the city of <unk> . 
 At the midway point the following season , Daniel was named to his second consecutive NHL All @-@ Star Game in January 2012 . He was one of four players representing the Canucks , including Henrik , Alexander Edler and Cody Hodgson . Chosen to Team Alfredsson in the All @-@ Star Fantasy Draft , he recorded a goal and an assist in a 12 – 9 loss to Team Chara . 
 Later in the season , Daniel sustained a concussion after receiving a hit from Blackhawks defenceman Duncan Keith during a game on 21 March 2012 . With Daniel in the neutral zone and without possession of the puck , Keith hit him in the head with his elbow . After being helped off the ice by a trainer , Daniel remained in the game for a shift before leaving the contest entirely . Two days later , Keith was suspended five games for his hit by the League . Sidelined for the remainder of the regular season , Daniel finished 2011 – 12 with 30 goals and 67 points over 72 games , a drop off from his League @-@ leading total from the previous season . 
 Despite Daniel 's injury late in the season , the Canucks won their second consecutive Presidents ' Trophy . He remained out of the lineup for the first three games of the 2012 playoffs , all of which the Canucks lost against the eighth @-@ seeded Los Angeles Kings . Returning for Game 4 , Daniel helped the Canucks stave off elimination before they were defeated the following contest . In his two games played in the series , he recorded two assists . 
 Due to another lockout , the 2012 – 13 season was delayed until January 2013 . The Sedins this time remained in Canada , as they decided that would return to Modo only if again the entire season wound up cancelled . In the second month of the season , Henrik recorded his <unk> point , surpassing Markus Näslund as the Canucks ' all @-@ time leading scorer . Two months later , Daniel also passed Näslund , scoring a goal and an assist in a 3 – 1 win against the Chicago Blackhawks , ranking the Sedins first and second in team history . 
 Playing in just 47 games due to the lockout @-@ shortened season , Daniel recorded 12 goals and 40 points . He ranked second in team scoring behind Henrik 's 45 points . In the playoffs , he added three assists in a four @-@ game defeat to the San Jose Sharks . The series ended on a shorthanded goal due to a penalty assessed to Daniel in overtime . In pursuit of a loose puck in the defensive zone , Daniel bodychecked Sharks forward Tommy Wingels into the boards , resulting in a boarding penalty . The call would later be the subject of controversy as it was believed by many in the media , such as National Post journalist Cam Cole , as well as teammates , such as Henrik , that Daniel had made contact with Wingels shoulder @-@ to @-@ shoulder , which according to NHL rules , should not result in a boarding penalty . At the beginning of the 2013 – 14 season , the Sedins signed matching four @-@ year , $ 28 million contract extensions with the Canucks . On 23 November 2014 , Sedin played his 1,000th game as a Canuck , joining his brother Henrik and Trevor Linden as the only players in franchise history to reach that milestone . On 7 February 2015 , Daniel scored his 115th power play goal as a member of the Canucks in the third period of a 5 – 0 victory over the visiting Pittsburgh Penguins , giving him the franchise record for power play tallies , surpassing his former teammate and linemate Markus Näslund , while simultaneously putting him level with Trevor Linden for second place in goals as a Canuck with 318 . 
 On 21 November 2015 , Daniel scored his 900th point with an assist against the Chicago Blackhawks , a game in which he scored a hat @-@ trick and an assist in a 6 @-@ 3 win . Daniel became the highest @-@ scoring Canucks player on January 22 , 2016 , with his 347th goal being the score opener of a 2 @-@ 1 victory against the Boston Bruins . 
 = = International play = = 
 Daniel made his North American debut competing for Sweden in the 1997 World U17 Hockey Challenge , held in Alberta . Leading the tournament in scoring with 26 points ( nine goals and 17 assists ) over six games , he helped Sweden to a silver medal . After going undefeated in five contests , they were defeated in the gold medal game by Team Ontario , 6 – 2 . 
 Back in Europe , Daniel competed at the 1997 European Junior Championships , recording two goals and six points over six games . The following year , at the 1998 European Junior Championships , Sweden 's final game required them to beat Russia by four goals to surpass Finland in goal differential and win the gold medal . Daniel recorded two assists as Sweden won 5 – 1 . 
 In his NHL draft year , Daniel competed for Sweden at the 1999 World Junior Championships in Winnipeg , Manitoba . He recorded ten points in six games , and tied for second in tournament scoring with Daniel <unk> of Canada and Scott Gomez of the United States , behind Brian Gionta of the United States . Sweden failed to medal , losing the bronze medal game against Slovakia by a score of 5 – 4 . Later that year , Daniel made his debut for the Swedish men 's team at the 1999 World Championships in Norway . He notched one assist over nine games as Sweden won the bronze medal . 
 In 2000 , Daniel once again competed in both the World Junior and Men 's Championships . At the junior tournament in Sweden , Daniel matched his previous year 's output with 10 points . He was the third highest point @-@ scorer in the tournament , behind Henrik and Milan Kraft of the Czech Republic . Again , Sweden failed to earn a medal , finishing in fifth place . At the Men 's World Championships , Daniel and Henrik both recorded five points ; they were the youngest players on the squad . Sweden did not achieve a medal , however , losing to Finland in the tournament quarterfinal . 
 Following his rookie season with the Canucks , Daniel made his third World Championships appearance , in 2001 in Germany . He was injured midway through the tournament and had to return to Vancouver for surgery on a herniated disc in his lower back . Sweden defeated the United States 3 – 2 to win its second bronze medal in three years . He made a fourth tournament appearance at the 2005 World Championships in Austria . Sweden missed out on the bronze medal , losing to Russia , 6 – 3 . Daniel had an assist in a losing effort during the bronze medal game . He finished with nine points in nine games , which tied for fourth in tournament @-@ scoring . 
 On 22 December 2005 , Daniel was named to the Swedish Olympic team for the 2006 Winter Olympics in Turin . He joined Henrik , Markus Näslund and Mattias Öhlund as one of four Canucks on the squad . Competing in his first Olympics , he contributed four points as Sweden won a gold medal , defeating Finland 3 – 2 in the final . Four years later , he was once again named to the Swedish Olympic team for the 2010 Winter Games in Vancouver . Despite going into the tournament as one of Sweden 's key players ( in the corresponding NHL season , he was third among Swedish players in points despite missing 19 games ) , he ranked seventh among team forwards in total ice time . Sweden failed to defend their gold medal from Turin , losing to Slovakia in the quarterfinal . Daniel had a goal and two assists in four games . 
 Daniel represented Sweden at the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi , while his brother sit out due to health concerns . He played in all six of Sweden 's games , recording one goal and four assists as the Swedes ultimately lost to Canada in the gold medal game . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Throughout his career , Daniel has been known as a goal @-@ scorer , usually finishing plays initiated by his brother , Henrik . However , Daniel is also a proficient playmaker and generates many sequences with Henrik off the cycle . Daniel 's familiarity with Henrik 's play enhances his effectiveness ; the pair are known for their ability to find each other intuitively with passes , often without looking . 
 With offensive skill marking the prime component of his game , Daniel is known to avoid initiating contact with opposing players . Early in their careers , he and Henrik were knocked off the puck easily . As a result , players have often taken advantage of their lack of physicality by playing aggressively against them . This once led Canucks General Manager Brian Burke to publicly complain , commenting during a 2002 playoff series against the Detroit Red Wings , " ' Sedin ' is not Swedish for ' punch me or headlock me in a scrum . ' " As their careers progressed , the Sedins have worked on their strength , improving their puck possession , allowing them to play more effectively and with increased physicality . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Daniel met his wife Marinette in his hometown Örnsköldsvik around 1998 . She came with him to Vancouver upon the start of Daniel 's NHL career in 2000 , and the two married in 2005 . After earning a bachelor 's degree in psychology at the University of British Columbia Marinette became involved with the Canucks Family Education Centre , helping female immigrants transition to the English language . Together , they have two daughters , <unk> ( born in 2006 ) and Anna ( born in March 2011 ) , and a son , Erik ( born in 2008 ) . They live in the Vancouver neighbourhood of Shaughnessy during the NHL season , returning to Sweden every summer . 
 In March 2010 , Daniel and Marinette made a joint $ 1 @.@ 5 million donation with Henrik and his wife Johanna to the BC Children 's Hospital 's $ 200 million project for a new building . The two families requested that it be put towards a pediatric intensive @-@ care unit and a diagnostic imaging area . 
 Daniel and Henrik Sedin are devoted harness racing fans and race horse owners . Their most successful trotter so far is the 2013 <unk> winner Nahar . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 Bolded numbers indicate season leader . 
 = = = International = = = 
 * All statistics taken from NHL.com 
 = = = NHL All @-@ Star Games = = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 = = Transactions = = 
 26 June 1999 – Drafted by the Vancouver Canucks in the first round , second overall , in the 1999 NHL Entry Draft 
 27 July 1999 – Signed with the Canucks to a three @-@ year US $ 1 million contract 
 29 July 2003 – Re @-@ signed with the Canucks to a one @-@ year , US $ 1 @.@ 125 million contract 
 10 September 2004 – Re @-@ signed with the Canucks to a one @-@ year , US $ 1 @.@ 25 million contract 
 30 June 2006 – Re @-@ signed with the Canucks to a three @-@ year , US $ 10 @.@ 75 million contract 
 1 July 2009 – Re @-@ signed with the Canucks to a five @-@ year , US $ 30 @.@ 5 million contract 
 1 November 2013 – Re @-@ signed with the Canucks to a four @-@ year , US $ 28 million contract 
 = Jump the Shark ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Jump the Shark " is the 15th episode of the ninth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . The episode first aired in the United States on April 21 , 2002 on the Fox network . It was written by executive producers Vince Gilligan , John Shiban and Frank Spotnitz , and directed by Cliff Bole . The episode is a " monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week " episode — unconnected to the series ' wider mythology — and was created to give closure for The Lone Gunmen television series , which was a spin off of The X @-@ Files . The episode earned a Nielsen rating of 5 @.@ 1 and was viewed by 8 @.@ 6 million viewers . The episode received mixed to negative reviews from television critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files ; this season focuses on the investigations of John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) , Monica Reyes ( Annabeth Gish ) , and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) . In this episode , Doggett and Reyes attempt to locate a female friend of The Lone Gunmen after former Area 51 Man @-@ in @-@ Black Morris Fletcher appears and claims that she is actually a super @-@ soldier . What Doggett and Reyes soon discover is a bizarre plot to unleash a biological weapon via the use of grafted shark organs . 
 " Jump the Shark " features the death of The Lone Gunmen — popular recurring characters who first appeared in the first season episode " E.B.E. " , although this plot was later retconned in the comic book series The X @-@ Files Season 10 . The episode proved difficult to make because , after the cancellation of The Lone Gunmen television series , Fox was adamant that the characters not have a featured role back on The X @-@ Files . ( The characters did appear in four previous season 9 episodes , but always very briefly . ) The choice to kill off the trio was controversial . Writers Spotnitz and Gilligan later revealed some regret with the way the episode was handled . However , actors Bruce Harwood and Dean Haglund were happy with the way the episode ended . The episode title is a humorous reference to the phrase " jumping the shark " , which is used to describe shows that are in decline to try a gimmick to get attention . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Events = = = 
 The episode begins with Morris Fletcher ( Michael McKean ) on a boat in the Bahamas , where he is accosted by armed men and his vessel is blown up . When he is rescued and detained , he approaches FBI agents Monica Reyes ( Annabeth Gish ) and John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) with information related to the super @-@ soldiers in exchange for his release . Doggett and Reyes turn to The Lone Gunmen when Fletcher provides an alleged photo of the super soldier , which The Lone Gunmen recognize as being Yves Adele Harlow ( Zuleikha Robinson ) , a fellow hacker who went missing a year ago . The Gunmen refuse to believe the evidence , especially when they find that Fletcher provided it , although the agents continue to pursue the trail . 
 Meanwhile , Harlow murders a biology professor , cuts out an organ and disposes of it in a furnace . After the Gunmen capture her , she reveals that he had been experimenting with the immune system of sharks and had been grafting pieces of shark onto his body in order to become a living host to a biological weapon . His research had been funded by Yves 's arms dealing father , who had commissioned Fletcher to find her and prevent her from stopping his biological terrorism plot . She further informs them that there is another host , whom she is trying to identify and locate before he can unleash his deadly payload . 
 Once Fletcher realizes that he has been used by Harlow 's father , he teams with the Gunmen to help Harlow find the second bioterrorist . After a few false starts and chases , the Lone Gunmen corner the bioterrorist with only a few minutes before his virus is due to be released . They realize that they lack the time to destroy his virus @-@ filled organ and therefore pull a fire alarm , causing large emergency doors to seal shut , simultaneously containing the virus and entrapping them with it . Their sacrifice earns them a final resting place in Arlington National Cemetery , where Fletcher , Doggett , Reyes , Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) , Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) , Harlow and Jimmy Bond ( Stephen Snedden ) pay their respects to them . 
 = = = Retcon = = = 
 In the comic book adaptation of the series The X @-@ Files Season 10 — which takes place after the events of The X @-@ Files : I Want to Believe — it is revealed that the Lone Gunmen are alive and well , having faked their deaths during the events of " Jump the Shark " . The group was aided by the FBI and have since been working underground , aiding the US government ; for instance , Langly mentions that he was responsible for the Stuxnet virus in 2010 . 
 Mulder later makes reference to The Lone Gunmen 's survival in the tenth season episode , " Babylon " . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Jump the Shark " was written by Vince Gilligan , John Shiban , and Frank Spotnitz ; it was directed by Cliff Bole . The episode proved difficult to make . After the cancellation of The Lone Gunmen television series , which aired in 2001 , Fox reportedly " hated [ the ] characters " . Executive producer and co @-@ writer Frank Spotnitz had to fight to get the episode made ; the studio informed Spotnitz that they did not want to bring the characters back in any capacity in the ninth season . Actor Bruce Harwood later explained that " I think if the studio objected to anything , it was wasting time on our characters long enough to kill us off . " Co @-@ writer Gilligan later recalled " The Lone Gunmen was still kind of an open wound for me . " Thus , the episode was crafted as a way to wrap up the series . Due to the nature of the episode — which effectively works as a tie @-@ in — various long @-@ term characters from both The X @-@ Files and The Lone Gunmen make cameo appearances . 
 The episode title is a humorous reference to the phrase " jumping the shark " , coined when Fonzie did a water ski jump of a shark pen on Happy Days , which is used to describe shows that have reached their peak and started to decline in quality . Executive producer Chris Carter said that the title was tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek , and further stated that it was their " way of lowering the boom on anybody who thought that it did " . He further stated that the series was " good " until the end , even after the departure of David Duchovny as Fox Mulder . According to IGN , the episode 's title was a homage to the popular website Jump the Shark . In fact , during the commentary for " Jump the Shark " , Vince Gilligan makes a direct reference to the website . 
 Various plotlines leaked before the episode 's release , the most notable being the death of the Lone Gunmen . The choice to kill off the trio was controversial ; Gilligan himself later admitted that " I still think we made the wrong choice on that one . " Spotnitz later said , " I can 't say I regret killing them off , as you know , no one really dies in The X @-@ Files [ ... ] But I do feel tonally it was a mistake to end the episode on such a somber note . I wish we 'd ended it on a laugh or smile . " The actors who played The Lone Gunmen complimented the script . Harwood admitted that the episode would have either featured the trio 's death or would have featured them " walk [ ing ] off into the sunset without hobo bags over our shoulders . " Ultimately , he concluded that " I was glad we were killed off in the end " . Dean Haglund said that he " liked the way we were sent off " , and called the ending " cool " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Jump the Shark " first aired on the Fox network in the United States on April 21 , 2002 . The episode later aired in the United Kingdom on Sky One and later on BBC One on 23 February 2003 . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 5 @.@ 1 , meaning that it was seen by 5 @.@ 1 % of the nation 's estimated households and was viewed by 5 @.@ 38 million households , and 8 @.@ 6 million viewers . " Jump the Shark " was the 58th most watched episode of television that aired during the week ending April 21 . 
 The episode received mixed to negative reviews from television critics . Aaron Kinney from Salon magazine said that the episode title showed that the creators at least still had a sense of humor , but that the episode demonstrated some of the flaws that caused the series to jump the shark in the first place : " cheesy melodrama , deathly slow pacing , and a lack of coherence " . John Keegan from Critical Myth was also negative about the episode and awarded it a 4 out of 10 . He called it " one of the worst episodes of the season " , and hoped that it was no indication of what the series finale was going to be like . Furthermore , Keegan criticized the fact that David Duchovny did not make a cameo appearance " either full frame or in the distance " , given his history with the Lone Gunmen . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode one star out of five , and noted that " there 's nothing celebratory " about the entry . The two were highly critical of the episode 's conclusion , calling it " such a bland way of dying that for a moment , you feel you must have missed the point " . Shearman and Pearson , furthermore , argued that " The Lone Gunmen deserved better . No , worse than that — we deserved better . " M.A. Crang , in his book Denying the Truth : Revisiting The X @-@ Files after 9 / 11 , criticized the " goofy tone " of the episode , saying it felt " very out of place " within the context of the series . 
 = Gene Amondson = 
 Gene C. Amondson ( October 15 , 1943 – July 20 , 2009 ) was a painter , woodcarver , Christian minister and prohibition activist , who was the 2004 US presidential nominee for one faction of the Prohibition Party and the nominee of the unified party in 2008 . 
 The son of a logger , Amondson was born into a Pacific Northwest lumberjack culture laden with alcoholism . He became interested in the temperance movement while attending Divinity School . After establishing himself as a preacher and artist in the community of Vashon Island , Washington , Amondson began touring the nation reenacting Billy Sunday sermons and attending events dressed as the Grim Reaper to protest alcohol corporations . 
 Amondson 's activism attracted notice from the Prohibition Party , which had been divided into two factions in 2003 . In 2004 , Amondson received the presidential nomination of the larger faction . On Election Day , he tallied over a thousand votes and finished in third place in several Louisiana parishes . With the death of the other faction leader in 2007 , the party reunified . In 2008 , Amondson again received the party 's presidential nomination , but fell short of his 2004 vote total . He died in 2009 after suffering a stroke . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Gene Amondson was born to Owen and Ruby Amondson in Morton , Washington near the city of Centralia . His mother was a German American homemaker , originally from Nebraska and his father , who was nicknamed " Red " , was a Norwegian American logger , an industry then rampant with alcoholism . As a child , neither of Gene 's parents drank , but he saw drunken logger fights and attended school with children neglected by alcoholic parents . In addition , he remembered witnessing a drunk logger molest a five @-@ year @-@ old child . 
 Gene was also exposed to politics . His uncle , Orville " Porky " Amondson was elected and served as sheriff in Lewis County , and his brother Neil served in the Washington State Senate as a Republican . 
 Amondson attended Warner Pacific College in Portland , Oregon , and graduated with a Bachelor of Science degree in zoology . In college , he occasionally drank wine . His anti @-@ alcohol views did not take root until he attended Asbury Theological Seminary in Kentucky in 1966 , and learned about temperance leader and preacher Billy Sunday . Amondson estimated that after divinity school , he drank beer about twice a year . In the 1970s , he moved to the liberal community of Vashon Island , Washington , where he began preaching at Cove Road Church . 
 = = Activism = = 
 After moving to Vashon Island , Amondson grew closer to the temperance movement . He started touring the nation reenacting the Billy Sunday sermons Get on the Water Wagon , <unk> and The Sermon Against Alcohol . He visited churches , prisons , schools , and Alcoholics Anonymous meetings to spread the message of temperance . In addition , he traveled to New Zealand on a Women 's Christian Temperance Union @-@ financed trip , and toured Africa . 
 In protest of alcohol , Amondson often stood outside liquor establishments dressed as the Grim Reaper . He once stood outside a courtroom as the figure after a couple sued Jim Beam claiming its product caused their son to be born mentally retarded . During a 1989 interview , Amondson explained that he did not protest the individuals that drank , but the large corporations that distributed liquor . In 2005 , he led a movement to stop the Washington legislature from allowing alcohol to be sold on Sundays , but was unsuccessful . Because of the passage , Amondson predicted " a lot more alcohol will be sold , [ and ] a few more children will suffer . " 
 On Vashon Island , Amondson provided low rent housing for people with low income . He appeared in court a few times for zoning difficulties relating to the housing complexes but received legal aid from the Interfaith Council on Homelessness . Amondson was known to drive around Vashon Island in a Honda Civic accessorized with a fake elk head on the front and a license plate that read " Vote Dry . " The car was also decorated with homemade bumper stickers that read " Dumb People Drink " and " Your Kids Need You Sober . " While driving past taverns , he regularly honked the car horn twice in protest . In 2008 , the car was installed with a hydrogen conversion kit that allowed it to be fueled by gasoline and water using electrolysis , significantly improving gas mileage . Amondson 's car was one of the first in the nation to be fitted with such a kit . 
 = = Presidential campaigns = = 
 = = = 2004 = = = 
 In 2003 , Amondson was approached by Thompson Township , Pennsylvania tax assessor James Hedges , the Prohibition Party 's only elected official . He convinced Amondson to seek the nomination of his faction of the Prohibition Party , which split over perennial presidential nominee Earl Dodge 's leadership of the party . Hedges ' faction felt Dodge was more concerned with his campaign button business than advancing the party 's goals . Dodge had run as the party 's nominee in every election since 1984 , but received only 208 votes in the 2000 election , down approximately 1 @,@ 000 from the 1996 election . Amondson commenced his first presidential campaign with the nomination of Hedges ' faction . Dodge received the other faction 's nomination . According to Dodge , Amondson had previously contacted him about the vice presidential nomination , but it had already been filled . Dodge reasoned Amondson was " probably a very nice man ... [ but ] he may not have known exactly what he was getting into . " Conversely , Amondson referred to Dodge as a " good man " with whom he shared the same message , but argued , " Dodge is just not getting the job done . He 's too old . We need to send it to an earlier generation . " 
 While speaking with the media during his campaign , Amondson voiced his anti @-@ alcohol message and attempted to address concerns that prohibition increases crime . In an AP interview , he explained that during Prohibition , " the budget was balanced , prisons were emptied , mental institutions emptied and cirrhosis of the liver declined . " He concluded , " I 'd rather have 100 Al <unk> in every city than alcohol sold in every grocery store . " Amondson made an appearance on The Daily Show with comedian Jon Stewart . He spoke with correspondent Ed Helms who joked with the candidate . During the segment , Amondson remarked , " alcohol cuts the supply of oxygen to the brain and puts you in a kind of retarded state . " A short clip followed that showed Amondson in his Grim Reaper attire . Earl Dodge also appeared on the show in a separate interview with Helms . 
 The race between Amondson and Dodge was viewed as a way to determine which faction would lead the party in the future . Amondson achieved ballot access in Louisiana as the nominee of the Prohibition Party and in Colorado as the nominee of the Concerns of People Party . Dodge achieved ballot access only in Colorado , where he was listed as the nominee of the Prohibition Party . Overall , Amondson won the contest , collecting 1 @,@ 896 ( 1 @,@ 512 of those were from Louisiana ) votes compared to Dodge 's 140 . As expected , Amondson placed well behind both major candidates ( George W. Bush received 1 @.@ 1 million votes , and John Kerry received over 1 million votes ) . He placed eighth in a slate of 12 candidates on Colorado 's ballot ( Dodge placed last , even though it was his home state ) . Amondson 's third @-@ place finish in four Louisiana parishes was the first time since 1960 that the Prohibition Party nominee for President out polled @-@ all other third party candidates for president in any county . 
 = = = 2008 = = = 
 Amondson was nominated for President at the 2008 Prohibition Party National Convention in Indianapolis . About 10 to 15 people attended the event . Earl Dodge died late in 2007 , which reunified the split party . Similar to 2004 , Amondson 's based his campaign on media interviews . He spoke with Wikinews in June 2008 , admitting that third party candidates such as himself have no chance of winning elections . Instead , he remarked , they " say wise things . " When given a choice , Amondson favored the election of a Republican over a Democrat because of the policies on Israel and the ideological difference in justices nominated to the Supreme Court . Amondson wanted former Speaker of the House Newt Gingrich as his running mate , but the designation went to activist Leroy <unk> . 
 During the summer , Amondson campaigned in Louisiana and walked Bourbon Street dressed as the Grim Reaper in protest of alcohol . While in New Orleans , he filmed a documentary with his three sons . In interviews , Amondson took stands on issues other than alcohol . He declared support for the War in Iraq and tougher immigration laws , and advocated limits on divorce , an increased role of religion in schools and a decrease in government welfare programs . In an August interview with Weekend America , he explained his platform , " [ w ] e want to have protected borders and keep our gun rights and a lot of conservative things , but the main thing is help America realize that 95 percent of violent crime is connected with alcohol . " 
 After John McCain selected Alaska Governor Sarah Palin to be his running mate , Amondson complimented the Republican for picking a " beautiful woman . " Despite his own campaign , Amondson effectively endorsed McCain , revealing he would probably vote for McCain . Amondson attained ballot access in Colorado , Louisiana and Florida by Election Day , and received a total of 653 votes overall . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Amondson described himself as a " red @-@ neck , Bible @-@ thumbing preacher . " He was married for 23 years and had four sons and one daughter , before divorcing . One of his sons died in infancy , and his remaining four children became involved in the motion picture industry upon adulthood . 
 Amondson appeared as a guest on The Oprah Winfrey Show in 1993 after writing a letter to the show expressing his interest in the 40 @,@ 000 single women who entered a contest hoping to win a date with five widowers from Seattle . In the letter , which left Oprah staffers " quite interested " and " surprised , " Amondson explained he was lonely and wanted someone " willing to work to help pay the taxes ... and my child support . " On the show , he discussed his artwork , and was later invited for a second appearance . According to Amondson , following the appearance , he received hundreds of letters . 
 In his later years , Amondson split his time between Vashon Island and Alaska , where he hunted and found landscapes to paint . He cited painters John Singer Sargent and Joaquín <unk> as his artistic influences . In addition , Amondson took an interest in woodcarving . His life @-@ sized works can be found throughout Vashon Island . Along with painting and woodcarving , Amondson was an avid pie baker and published a book compiling his mother 's pie recipes . 
 = = Death = = 
 On July 18 , 2009 , Amondson , who had previously been diagnosed with hypertension , suffered a brain aneurism which caused him to fall into a coma . He died on July 20 , 2009 at Harborview Medical Center . His death came two days after marrying a couple and attending a local strawberry festival . He was survived by his mother , his two brothers , his sister and four children . His funeral took place July 25 at the Bethel Evangelical Free Church in Vashon Island . 
 = Andrew Garfield = 
 Andrew Russell Garfield ( born 20 August 1983 ) is a British @-@ American actor . Born in Los Angeles , California and raised in Epsom , Surrey , Garfield began his career on the UK stage and in television productions . He made his feature @-@ film debut in the 2007 ensemble drama Lions for Lambs . Garfield first came to international attention in 2010 with supporting roles in the drama films The Social Network , for which he received Golden Globe and BAFTA nominations , and Never Let Me Go , for which he received a Saturn Award and another BAFTA nomination . 
 Garfield subsequently received praise for his performance as the title character in the 2012 superhero film The Amazing Spider @-@ Man . He has also performed on stage , and played Biff in the 2012 Broadway revival of Arthur Miller 's Death of a Salesman , co @-@ starring Philip Seymour Hoffman . Garfield 's performance earned him a Tony Award nomination for Best Featured Actor in a Play . In 2014 , he co @-@ produced and starred in the thriller 99 Homes . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Garfield was born in Los Angeles County , California . His mother , Lynn ( née Hillman ) , is from Essex , England , and his father , Richard Garfield , is from California . Garfield 's paternal grandparents were also from the United Kingdom . His parents moved the family from Los Angeles to Britain when he was three years old , and Garfield was raised in Epsom , Surrey , in a middle @-@ class home . Garfield is Jewish . His paternal grandparents were from Jewish immigrant families who had moved to London from Central and Eastern Europe ( Poland , Russia , and Romania ) , and the family surname was originally " Garfinkel " . 
 Garfield 's parents ran a small interior design business ; his mother is a teaching assistant at a nursery school , and his father became head coach of the Guildford Swimming Club . He has an older brother who is a doctor . Garfield was a gymnast and a swimmer during his early years . He had originally intended to study business but became interested in acting at the age of sixteen . Garfield attended Priory Preparatory School in <unk> and later City of London Freemen 's School in nearby Ashtead , before training at the Central School of Speech and Drama , University of London , from which he graduated in 2004 . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = 2005 – 09 : Early work = = = 
 Garfield began taking acting classes in Silchar , Surrey , when he was 9 , and appeared in a youth theatre production of Bugsy Malone . He also joined a small youth theatre workshop group in Epsom , and began working primarily in stage acting . In 2004 he won a Manchester Evening News Theatre Award for Best Newcomer for his performance in Kes at Manchester 's Royal Exchange Theatre ( where he also played Romeo the year after ) , and won the Outstanding Newcomer Award at the 2006 Evening Standard Theatre Awards . Garfield made his British television debut in 2005 appearing in the Channel 4 teen drama Sugar Rush . In 2007 he garnered public attention when he appeared in the series 3 of the BBC 's Doctor Who , in the episodes " Daleks in Manhattan " and " Evolution of the Daleks " . Garfield commented that it was " an honour " to be a part of Doctor Who . In October 2007 , he was named one of Variety 's " 10 Actors to Watch " . He made his American film debut in November 2007 , playing an American university student in the ensemble drama Lions for Lambs , with co @-@ stars Tom Cruise , Meryl Streep and Robert Redford . " I 'm just lucky to be there working on the same project as them , although I don 't really expect to be recognised later by audiences , " Garfield told Variety in 2007 . In his review for The Boston Globe , Wesley Morris considered Garfield 's work " a willing punching bag for the movie 's jabs and low blows " . 
 In the Channel 4 drama Boy A , released in November 2007 , he portrayed a notorious killer trying to find new life after prison . The role garnered him the 2008 British Academy Television Award for Best Actor . Amy Biancolli of the Houston Chronicle wrote that " there is no doubt about the intelligence and sensitivity " of Garfield 's portrayal . Minneapolis Star Tribune 's Christy <unk> echoed Biancolli 's sentiment , citing his " detailed expressions " as an example . Writing in The Seattle Times , John Hartl noted that Garfield demonstrated range in the role , and concluded : " Garfield always manages to capture his passion " . Joe Morgenstern , the critic for The Wall Street Journal , dubbed Garfield 's performance " phenomenal " , assessing that he " makes room for the many and various pieces of Jack 's personality " . In 2008 , he had a minor role in the film The Other Boleyn Girl , and was named one of the shooting stars at the Berlin International Film Festival . In 2009 , Garfield held supporting roles in the Terry Gilliam film The Imaginarium of Doctor Parnassus and the Red Riding television trilogy . Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times thought that Garfield gave a stand out performance in the latter . 
 = = = 2010 – 11 : Breakthrough = = = 
 In 2010 , Garfield co @-@ starred opposite Carey Mulligan and Keira Knightley in Mark Romanek 's dystopian science fiction drama Never Let Me Go , an adaptation of Kazuo Ishiguro 's 2005 novel of the same name . He said of his character , Tommy D. , " There 's a sense of anxiety that runs through these kids , especially Tommy , because he 's so sensory and feeling and animalistic , that 's my perspective of him . " Garfield was attracted to the film based on the existential questions the story expresses . He called the experience of being a part of Never Let Me Go a " dream to come true " . He further remarked that the scenes in which his character — unable to contain his frustration — erupts with a wail , were " intense " for him . " I think those screams are inside all of us , I just got a chance to let mine out " . For his portrayal of a well @-@ meaning , but dim young man caught in a love triangle , he won the 2010 Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actor . Cleveland Magazine 's Clint O 'Connor lauded his performance , commenting that Garfield delivered " a terrifically anguished performance " in the film . Writing for Entertainment Weekly , Owen Gleiberman praised the performances of the lead cast , reflecting that " these three all act with a spooky , haunted innocence that gets under your skin . " Tom Preston , a critic from The Guardian , further described Garfield 's acting as solid and " at times deeply moving " . In comparison to Mulligan and Knightley , Scott Bowles , writing for USA Today , deemed Garfield " the real find " of Never Let Me Go . 
 The same year , Garfield co @-@ starred opposite Jesse Eisenberg in The Social Network , a drama based on the founders of Facebook . On his character , Garfield remarked that " No one knows who Eduardo <unk> is , and I don 't either . Of course , the fact he 's a real @-@ life human being , breathing on this Earth somewhere , creates a whole new dimension to my approach because you feel a greater sense of responsibility " . Initially , the film 's director , David Fincher , had met Garfield under the auspices of him playing Mark Zuckerberg , having been referred to him by Mark Romanek . However , Fincher did not like Garfield for the part as he found Garfield 's " incredible emotional access to his kind of core humanity " better tailored for the role of <unk> . Garfield 's performance was very well received ; he earned wider recognition and numerous nominations , including BAFTA nominations for Best Actor in a Supporting Role and Rising Star , as well as a Golden Globe nomination for Best Performance in a Supporting Role . Mark Kermode of the BBC expressed his surprise that Garfield had been overlooked for an Academy Award nomination , opining that " everyone knows he 's one of the very best things about the Social Network " . Writing in The Wall Street Journal , Joe Morgenstern thought the role was portrayed with " great subtlety and rueful charm " . Rolling Stone said Garfield delivered " a vulnerability that raises the emotional stakes in a movie " , and proclaimed : " Keep your eyes on Garfield — he 's shatteringly good , the soul of a film that might otherwise be without one . " He received similar plaudits of the Los Angeles Times , Entertainment Weekly , and The New Yorker . 
 = = = 2012 – present : The Amazing Spider @-@ Man and other roles = = = 
 In 2010 , Garfield was cast as Spider @-@ Man / Peter Parker , opposite Emma Stone as his love interest Gwen Stacy , in Marc Webb 's The Amazing Spider @-@ Man , a reboot of the Spider @-@ Man film series . Garfield saw his casting as a " massive challenge in many ways " , having to make the character " authentic " and " live and breathe in a new way " . Garfield described Peter as someone he can relate to and stated that the character had been an important influence on him since he was a child . For the role , Garfield studied the movements of athletes and spiders and tried to incorporate them , did yoga and pilates in order to be as flexible as possible , and drew from his life experiences as inspiration . Garfield admitted to shedding tears and trying to imagine " a better actor in the suit " upon first wearing his costume . When filming , Garfield explained that he had four months of training and described his physical roles on stunts as challenging and exhausting . Released in July 2012 , The Amazing Spider @-@ Man earned a worldwide total of $ 752 @,@ 216 @,@ 557 . Garfield 's performance was generally well received . The Guardian 's Peter Bradshaw acclaimed his portrayal as the " definitive Spider @-@ Man " , Tom Charity of CNN commended his " combination of fresh @-@ faced innocence , nervous agitation and wry humor " , and Peter Travers , writing in Rolling Stone , said Garfield gave a stellar performance . Associated Press ' Christy Lemire elaborated that Garfield 's Spider @-@ Man gave the film a " restless , reckless energy and a welcome sense of danger . " Garfield reprised his role in The Amazing Spider @-@ Man 2 ( 2014 ) . 
 In March 2012 , Garfield made his Broadway theatre debut as Biff Loman in the revival of Death of a Salesman . Garfield was nominated for a Tony Award for Best Featured Actor in a Play for his performance in the role . According to The New York Times 's David Rooney , Garfield " exposed the raw ache of Biff 's solitude " . In May 2014 , Garfield hosted Saturday Night Live and appeared in a music video for the song " We Exist " by Arcade Fire , playing a trans woman . In February 2015 , Sony and Marvel Studios secured a deal which would integrate the Spider @-@ Man character into the Marvel Cinematic Universe . Sequels to The Amazing Spider @-@ Man 2 were scrapped and the franchise was closed . The role of Spider @-@ Man has now been taken over by Tom Holland . In late 2015 , arachnologists Yuri M. <unk> and Alireza Zamani honored Garfield 's portrayal of the role by naming a new species of crevice weaver spider after him , namely <unk> <unk> . 
 Garfield co @-@ produced and starred in the 2014 independent drama 99 Homes . He is also scheduled to headline Martin Scorsese 's film , Silence , based on <unk> Endō 's 1966 novel of the same name . Production began in 2014 with Garfield set to play Father Rodrigues , a Portuguese Jesuit priest in the seventeenth century who travels to Japan . By November 2014 , it was also confirmed that Garfield would join the cast of Hacksaw Ridge , a war drama about the first conscientious objector in US history to be awarded the Medal of Honor . Mel Gibson is set to direct and Vince Vaughn and Sam Worthington are scheduled to co @-@ star . 
 In 2016 it was announced that Garfield will play the role of Prior Walter in Tony Kushner 's two @-@ part play Angels in America at the National Theatre , London in the Lyttelton Theatre from April 2017 . It will be directed by Marianne Elliott and co @-@ starring Russell Tovey and Denise Gough . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Garfield has dual citizenship in the United States and the United Kingdom . In 2009 , he told the Sunday Herald that he " feels equally at home " in both the United States and the United Kingdom and " enjoys having a varied cultural existence " . Garfield customarily gives interviews about his work , but does not publicly discuss details of his private life . 
 In 2011 , Garfield began dating his The Amazing Spider @-@ Man co @-@ star Emma Stone sometime during production of the film . After Stone was cast in The Amazing Spider @-@ Man , which was confirmed in October 2010 , Marc Webb , the film 's director , noted that the chemistry between Garfield and Stone made her the clear choice . 
 In 2011 , Garfield became the Ambassador of Sport for the Worldwide Orphans Foundation ( <unk> ) . 
 In April 2013 , Garfield publicly expressed his support for the legalisation of same @-@ sex marriage . Garfield , who was reflecting on starring in the gay marriage @-@ themed play Beautiful Thing ( 2006 ) , commented : " There is no argument against equality . How can anyone argue against compassion and understanding ? " 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = Stage = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = Jeita Grotto = 
 The Jeita Grotto ( Arabic : <unk> <unk> ) is a system of two separate , but interconnected , karstic limestone caves spanning an overall length of nearly 9 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 6 mi ) . The caves are situated in the Nahr al @-@ Kalb valley within the locality of Jeita , 18 kilometres ( 11 mi ) north of the Lebanese capital Beirut . Though inhabited in prehistoric times , the lower cave was not rediscovered until 1836 by Reverend William Thomson ; it can only be visited by boat since it channels an underground river that provides fresh drinking water to more than a million Lebanese . 
 In 1958 , Lebanese speleologists discovered the upper galleries 60 metres ( 200 ft ) above the lower cave which have been accommodated with an access tunnel and a series of walkways to enable tourists safe access without disturbing the natural landscape . The upper galleries house the world 's largest known stalactite . The galleries are composed of a series of chambers the largest of which peaks at a height of 120 metres ( 390 ft ) . 
 Aside from being a Lebanese national symbol and a top tourist destination , the Jeita grotto plays an important social , economic and cultural role in the country . It was one of top 14 finalists in the New 7 Wonders of Nature competition . 
 = = Location = = 
 The Jeita cave is situated at the center of the western flanks of the Lebanon mountains , more specifically in the Nahr al @-@ Kalb valley , its natural entrance is about 100 metres ( 330 ft ) above sea level . It 's located 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) east of the Mediterranean coastline and 18 kilometres ( 11 mi ) north of Beirut within the confines of the municipality of Jeita , in the <unk> of Keserwan . 
 = = History = = 
 Ancient vestiges of a foundry were found in a smaller cave near the Nahr al @-@ Kalb river , suggesting that the cave was used in antiquity to produce swords . 
 The modern discovery of the underground river of Jeita in 1836 is credited to Reverend William Thomson ( an American missionary ) who ventured some 50 metres ( 160 ft ) into the cave . Reaching the underground river , he fired a shot from his gun and the resulting echoes convinced him that he had found a cavern of major importance . 
 In 1873 W.J. Maxwell and H.G. Huxley , engineers with the Beirut Water Company , and their friend Reverend Daniel Bliss , president of the Syrian Protestant College ( later the American University of Beirut ) explored these caverns . In two expeditions carried out in 1873 and 1874 they penetrated 1 @,@ 060 metres ( 3 @,@ 480 ft ) into the grotto which is the principal source of the Nahr al @-@ Kalb that supplies Beirut with water . They were impeded by " Hell 's Rapids " torrents which break onto razor sharp rocks . Dr. Bliss , Mr. Maxwell and the other engineers recorded their names and the year on " Maxwell 's Column " , a great limestone pillar some 625 metres ( 2 @,@ 051 ft ) from the entrance . About 200 metres ( 660 ft ) further on , in the so @-@ called " Pantheon " , they wrote their names and details of the expedition on paper , sealed it in a bottle and placed it on top of a stalagmite . The lime @-@ impregnated water has since covered the bottle with a thin white film , permanently fixing it to the stone . 
 Between 1892 and 1940 further expeditions were carried out by English , American and French explorers . Their expeditions brought them to a depth of 1 @,@ 750 metres ( 5 @,@ 740 ft ) . 
 Since the 1940s , Lebanese explorers , notably the members of the <unk> Club du Liban ( Lebanese Caving Club ) founded in 1951 by the first Lebanese <unk> Lionel <unk> _ have pushed even deeper into the Jeita grotto . Their expeditions revealed a great underground system which is now known to an overall length of nearly 9 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 6 mi ) . 
 In 1958 the lower caverns were opened to the public , meanwhile exploration was still underway mainly by the Lebanese Caving Club . This exploration led to the discovery of the elevated dry branch of the grotto later referred to as the upper galleries . 
 In 1962 , the <unk> Club contributed to a study of the upper galleries aiming to provide an access tunnel which was to be dug for touristic development purposes . Work on the access tunnel was begun in 1968 . Its opening was followed by the installation of a series of walkways which permitted tourists safe access to the upper galleries without disturbing the natural landscape . 
 In 1969 , a concert with electronic music by the French composer Francois Bayle was held in the cave to celebrate the inauguration of the upper galleries . This event was organized by the Lebanese artist and sculptor Ghassan Klink . Other cultural events have taken place in this unusual surrounding , including a concert by the world acknowledged German composer Karlheinz Stockhausen in November 1969 , and more recently , in 2008 a classical music concert by Lebanese @-@ Armenian composer and pianist Guy <unk> 
 The caverns closed to the public due to the Lebanese civil war in 1978 both tunnels leading to the lower and upper galleries were used to store munitions , the outside buildings for military purposes . The caves reopened in 1995 and remain one of the country ’ s key natural attractions . 
 = = Archaeology = = 
 Jeita I ( sometimes referred to as Nahr @-@ el @-@ Kelb ) is a dry cave , 56 metres deep to the east of the source cave from where the river flows and connected to it by narrow channels . It was first noted in 1833 by Botta and excavated by Godefroy <unk> in two positions in 1898 , 1900 , 1908 and 1910 . It was later excavated by Auguste <unk> with materials from both excavations now with the Museum of Lebanese Prehistory , the Archaeological Museum of the American University of Beirut and the private collection of Dr. <unk> . Henri Fleisch noticed an Upper Paleolithic level with further finds including polished Neolithic pieces , primitive potsherds , burned bones and end scrapers . Jacques Cauvin noted similarities in these finds to the <unk> <unk> period of Byblos . Evidence of later occupation included a Chalcolithic tripod pot found by Father Fleisch and a combed @-@ ware sherd suggested to date to the Early Bronze Age levels at Byblos . 
 Jeita II ( <unk> el @-@ <unk> ) is a rock shelter situated on a platform , above and equidistant between the dry cave of Jeita I and the entrance to the grotto at Jeita III . Excavations were made by the Duc de <unk> and <unk> in 1864 , by <unk> in 1900 and 1908 and by <unk> in 1930 . A large number of flint tools , bones and hearths were found that were accredited to the Aurignacian . Further excavations were made in 1964 by Francis Hours which revealed much more extensive , deeper and richer deposits than had previously been suspected . Father Hours permitted Lorraine Copeland to disclose that the upper material appeared to display late Upper Paleolithic or early Mesolithic characteristics , probably including <unk> . Excavation was to be continued but the area was fenced off and owned by the government . 
 Jeita III ( The Caverns ) was a deposit of brown soil that fell from a location suggested to be at the east end of Jeita II , just inside the entrance to the grotto where the tourists are conducted by boat . It was found in 1963 by the <unk> Club and excavated by Father Hours . Flint tools found in the deposit were geometric in design and suggested to be a form of Natufian or later Mesolithic than discovered at Jeita II , from where it may have been displaced . Forms of these flints included rectangles with straight or oblique truncation , borers of the " crochet " type , micro @-@ burins , end scrapers , <unk> cores , two transverse arrowheads , crescents and short triangles . Some of the crescents had ridged backs and resembled those found at Nahal Oren . Material is stored with the Museum of Lebanese Prehistory . 
 Jeita IV ( <unk> @-@ el @-@ Mal ) is a rock shelter in the cliff upstream from the grotto . It once contained a large quantity of Paleolithic material which has been looted and was deemed unfit for excavation by Sami <unk> , Director of the Caverns in 1965 . Study of the lithic remains at this shelter were hoped to shed further light on the Paleolithic or Mesolithic communities that inhabited the different sites at different times . 
 = = Geology = = 
 The Jeita grotto is located within the Lower @-@ Middle Jurassic strata of Keserouane which has a stratigraphic thickness of 1 @,@ 000 metres ( 3 @,@ 300 ft ) and consists of dolostone and <unk> limestone . The Keserouane formation was exposed to air by a local uplift during the Late Jurassic @-@ Early Cretaceous . The Keserouane strata became <unk> after its aerial exposure and then was buried during the Cretaceous . In the Neogene , upon the final uplift of Mount Lebanon , this early karstification phase was reactivated . 
 At the Nahr al @-@ Kalb valley , the impervious Upper Jurassic volcanic rocks and Lower Cretaceous sand slant almost vertically forming a <unk> barrier and forcing the outlet of the Jeita underground river to the surface . This barrier could be the reason for the westernmost , large cave chambers with heights exceeding 60 metres ( 200 ft ) . Karstification of the Keserouane limestone was further intensified by the steep topography of the area and the volume of precipitation over the Lebanon ( more than <unk> ) . 
 A ratio of total slope gradient of 1 / 100 is calculated between the entrance of the cave and its inland extremity . This shows its smooth flat course even though it is sometimes interrupted by several small cascades and rapids . From the west , the Jeita cave starts with large halls and meanders . Through some rapids , the dimension becomes narrower . Going forth , it is spacious with the Thompson ’ s cavern ( 250 metres ( 820 ft ) long and 60 metres ( 200 ft ) wide ) , Grand Chaos ( 500 metres ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) long ) and <unk> ’ s Hall ( 200 metres ( 660 ft ) long and 50 metres ( 160 ft ) wide ) . The latter two are floored with collapsed blocks . The cave ends with a Y @-@ shaped pattern , where , each branch ends with a siphon . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Jeita caves are solutional karst caves which have formed over millions of years due to the dissolution of limestone . The limestone is dissolved by carbonic acid charged rain water and groundwater ; when the limestone , which is originally waterproof , contains cracks produced by tectonic forces the water oozes into the rock and starts to widen the cracks and solute caves inside the layers . Jeita is the longest cave complex in the Middle East ; , it sits at 300 metres ( 980 ft ) above sea level and has a height difference of 305 metres ( 1 @,@ 001 ft ) . Geologically , the caves provide a tunnel or escape route for the underground river , which is the principal source of Nahr al @-@ Kalb . 
 The Jeita grotto is the longest explored cave in Lebanon . After many years of exploration , speleologists have penetrated about 6 @,@ 200 metres ( 20 @,@ 300 ft ) from the entry point of the lower grotto to the far end of the underground river and about 2 @,@ 130 metres ( 6 @,@ 990 ft ) of the upper galleries . 
 = = = Upper cave = = = 
 The Jeita upper cave has an overall length of 2 @,@ 130 metres ( 6 @,@ 990 ft ) of which only 750 metres ( 2 @,@ 460 ft ) are accessible to visitors via a specially conceived walkway ; access to the remainder of the cave was restricted to prevent ecological damage which may occur due to the flocking tourists . The upper cave contains a great concentration of a variety of crystallized formations such as stalactites , stalagmites , columns , mushrooms , ponds , curtains and draperies . The upper gallery is famous for its formations , lit by an effective lighting system . It is entered through a 117 metres ( 384 ft ) long concrete tunnel . The part accessible by visitors has three huge chambers . The first is called White Chamber , the second Red Chamber , due to the color of the formations . White <unk> are pure calcite without defilement , the red color is given by iron oxide ( rust ) in small amounts . In Lebanon iron oxide has a red color instead of the brown beige color which is common in northern countries . The reason is a different chemical reaction caused by the high temperature which produces a different kind of iron oxide . The White Chamber is medium @-@ sized , but has the most impressive formations of the cave . The Red Chamber is up to 106 metres ( 348 ft ) high , and 30 metres ( 98 ft ) to 50 metres ( 160 ft ) wide . The third chamber is the biggest of all three chambers and has a height of more than 120 metres ( 390 ft ) . The longest stalactite in the world is located in Jeita 's White Chamber ; it measures 8 @.@ 2 metres ( 27 ft ) long . 
 = = = Lower cave = = = 
 The lower gallery which has an overall length of 6 @,@ 200 metres ( 20 @,@ 300 ft ) is located 60 metres ( 200 ft ) below the upper gallery . It is traversed by a smooth underwater river and a lake ( the " Dark Lake " ) . The river is broken up by several small cataracts and rapids . The lower cave 's " Thompson 's Cavern " , is a massive hall with impressive speleothems such as the Eagle Obelisk stalagmite . Other halls in the lower gallery include the Pantheon , Grand Chaos and Shangri @-@ la . Visitors are transported in the lower gallery by electric boats for a distance of 500 metres ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) . In winter the lower level is closed , when the water level is too high . 
 = = Economic and social importance = = 
 Today , the Jeita Grotto is a popular recreational show cave and a major tourist attraction . It hosts approximately 280 @,@ 000 visitors per year . 
 The Jeita grotto contributes heavily to the public life of the region . MAPAS , the firm which runs the grotto , is an important employer and provides full @-@ time jobs for around 115 local residents of Jeita ( 30 % of which are female ) . In addition to employment , the Jeita caves contribute 5 % of ticket fees to the local municipality , between 10 and 20 % of general revenue to the Lebanese ministry of tourism , and an additional 10 % of ticket fees along with the 10 % VAT to the Lebanese ministry of Finance . 
 Moreover , the Jeita cave emits a spring with a flow ranging from 1 – 2 m3 / s , providing fresh drinking water for one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half million inhabitants of the capital , Beirut . However , water pollution , due to domestic and agricultural runoff , remains a serious concern as recent analysis detected an increasing presence of coliform bacteria . 
 = = Awards = = 
 In 2002 , then French President Jacques Chirac , the United Nations World Tourism Organization and the World Bank accorded the top Sustainable Development in Tourism prize to MAPAS ( the company that manages the site ) at a summit dubbed “ New Ties between Tourism and Culture ” in Geneva . 
 In December 2003 , on behalf of the Beirut @-@ based private company MAPAS , Jeita received a prestigious award from the fifth Tourism Summits in Chamonix , France . " Les <unk> du <unk> " recognized MAPAS ’ efforts in restoring Lebanon ’ s important touristic sites . 
 The Jeita Grotto was a candidate for the New 7 Wonders of Nature competition . It was selected as one of 28 finalists and is the only cave to be selected among the nominees . The New7Wonders Foundation announced the new wonders of nature in 2011 . Jeita was not on the list . 
 Other awards and certificates include : 
 2000 Certificate of Recognition from " <unk> " <unk> for its sorting and recycling campaign . 
 2000 Appreciation from the Arab Musical Association " . 
 1998 " Best Tourism Project " from the Lebanese Ministry of Tourism . 
 1997 International Environmental Award from the German Travel Association ( DRV ) . 
 = = Other names = = 
 The name of the cave changed several times since its discovery . Initially referred to as the Grottoes of Nahr al @-@ Kalb , it was subsequently known as <unk> , <unk> , and finally Jeita . Nahr al @-@ Kalb is the name of the river that runs through the grottoes , while Jeita , meaning " roaring water " in Aramaic , is the town in which the cave 's entrance is located . The transition from Grottoes of Nahr al @-@ Kalb to Jeita Grottoes occurred in 1927 as newspapers widely used the latter name . 
 = = Numismatics and philately = = 
 In 1961 , Jeita became a national symbol when Lebanese authorities issued a stamp featuring the lower cavern to promote national tourism . Mr. <unk> Hajj , the oarsman shown on the stamp , still leads boat tours forty years after the stamp was issued . The Jeita Grotto is also featured on the 1964 one Lira ( Lebanese pound ) verso . 
 = Ricky Banderas = 
 Gilbert Cosme ( born May 25 , 1975 ) is a Puerto Rican professional wrestler , better known by his ring names El Mesías and Ricky Banderas . He began his career in the International Wrestling Association based on Puerto Rico . While performing in the company , he won the IWA World Heavyweight Championship on five instances and held minor championships on fifteen separate occasions , before leaving the company in 2006 . On March 12 , 2006 , he debuted in Asistencia Asesoría y Administración , a promotion based in Mexico , as a character named Muerte Cibernetica and was involved in an angle where this character was " killed " . In November 2006 , Cosme was involved in the tapings of the Wrestling Society X television series , where he was the second and last wrestler to win the WSX Championship . 
 Following a month of performing in the International Wrestling Association , Cosme returned to Asistencia Asesoría y Administración in a special event presented by the company , this time under the ring name of El Mesías . In September 2007 , the company organized a unification tournament where all of the champions and first contenders participated . Over the course of the tournament , he won the GPCW Super @-@ X Monster Championship and IWC World Heavyweight Championship , and on the tournament 's finale , he became the first wrestler to win the AAA Mega Championship . While working in Mexico , Cosme signed a contract with Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) where he debuted as Judas Mesias on September 13 , 2007 . In March 2008 his association with TNA came to an end and he focused most of his time on AAA . In 2010 Cosme debuted for Puerto Rican World Wrestling Council , where he won the Universal Heavyweight Championship . He also wrestles in Lucha Underground under the ring name Mil Muertes . 
 Outside of his work within these promotions , Cosme has represented Puerto Rico as a member of Team Rest of the World in the 2015 Lucha Libre World Cup and as the captain of Team International in the 2013 World Cup of Wrestling . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 = = = International Wrestling Association ( 1999 – 2009 ) = = = 
 Cosme began wrestling training in 1996 , when he was instructed by a former wrestler . During this time he was enrolled in the Interamerican University of Puerto Rico located in Bayamón , his major concentration was in computer technology , after completing two years of study , he decided to begin wrestling as a profession after meeting Victor Quiñones in the gym . In 1997 , after working in the independent circuit he moved to Mexico and performed there , and became involved in a project to develop Hispanic talent organized by the World Wrestling Federation . 
 Cosme subsequently debuted in the International Wrestling Association ( IWA ) in 1999 . He was given the gimmick of " El Patriota " Ricky Banderas , a name that , according to Cosme , was created by fusing the artistic names of Latin musician Ricky Martín and actor Antonio Banderas . He debuted in Extreme Championship Wrestling on that year , where he worked in a televised match . Following a period of teaming with Los Boricuas , his character was teamed with Germán Figueroa who wrestled as Gran Apolo , and formed a tag team dubbed La Nueva <unk> , which won the IWA Tag Team Championship three times . On August 21 , 2000 , in a show in Levittown , Puerto Rico , Cosme 's character turned on Gran Apolo . Following this , he joined the company 's dominant heel stable , Los <unk> , along with Miguel Pérez and Jesús Castillo . After the stable 's dissolution , he was involved in another stable named Starr Corporation , where after Cosme 's insistence his character became darker and was renamed " El Mesías " Ricky Banderas . Following this , he was teamed up with Shane Sewell in a stable known as Los Hermanos en Dolor . In 2001 , Cosme performed in a tryout match for the World Wrestling Federation and in a pay per view event on Frontier Martial @-@ Arts Wrestling . He won the IWA heavyweight title for a third time on June 15 , 2002 , and remained champion until Ray González debuted with the company as " Rey Fénix " , in a match that he describes as the best match he had wrestled at the moment . 
 Cosme 's gimmick underwent another change when it joined then @-@ dominant heel stable " La Compania " led by Savio Vega ( Juan Rivera ) . This was followed by his fourth title run after he defeated Gran Apolo on January 6 , 2003 . He was booked as a heel until October 9 , 2003 , when Vega 's group turned on him . Following this , he feuded with Christopher Kindred under his " Slash Venom " gimmick , which peaked when Vampiro ( Ian Richard Hodgkinson ) was brought by the company to form a stable which feuded with Gran Apolo and Venom . In 2004 , he feuded with Hangman Hughes ( Mike Hughes ) , Kasey James ( Kurt Sellers ) , El Diamante ( Julio César Cruz ) , and Bison . In 2005 , he turned heel again , this time leading a stable known as La Cruz del Diablo which feuded with other groups led by Savio Vega and Ray Gonzalez . Following an angle where he feuded over a number one contender spot , Cosme departed from the company and signed a contract to wrestle in Mexico . Subsequently , he continued making sporadic appearances for the company , including a brief stay in 2007 . On July 19 , 2009 , Cosme was booked to defeat Dennis Rivera in the promotion 's tenth anniversary event . 
 = = = Asistencia Asesoría y Administración ( 2006 – present ) = = = 
 Following the culmination of his contract with the International Wrestling Association , Cosme signed a contract with Asistencia Asesoría y Administración ( AAA ) . He debuted on March 12 , 2006 , as " Muerte <unk> " a rudo ( villainous ) enforcer supposedly brought to the company by Cibernético to feud with " La Parka " . This gimmick consisted of Cosme wearing a traditional Mexican wrestling mask , often a modified version of the one used by La Parka . This character was placed in a feud with La Parka , which lasted several months . This angle came to a conclusion at Triplemania XIV , where Cosme 's character was booked to lose a Mask vs. Mask match . 
 Following a legitimate injury suffered by Cibernético , Cosme 's gimmick was slightly changed , launching into an angle where he pursued the leadership of Cibernético 's stable , which then went by the name of La Secta Cibernetica . The character was booked to be the leader of the stable after supposedly convincing several members of the group to join him changing the name of the group to La Secta <unk> . The events of the angle were used to hype an eventual feud between López and Cosme 's characters that took place in December 2006 . In the angle , Cosme won the first encounter between the two with help of his stable . The angle culminated in a Casket match between the two characters . Cibernético was booked to win the match and subsequently " kill " his opponent by throwing him into an active volcano . This was used to explain Cosme 's absence when he departed from the company to wrestle in the International Wrestling Association . During this time he also wrestled for Panama Wrestling Crew in Panama and in Ecuador . 
 Following a month of performing in Puerto Rico , Cosme returned to Asistencia Asesoría y Administración in an annual event entitled Rey de Reyes under a new gimmick , changing his name to El Mesías . From then on , he started to get a bigger push as a main event heel , feuding with Cibernético and his stable " Los Hell Brothers " . During the feud , Cosme was both leader of La Secta del Mesías and member of La Legión Extranjera . Later , Cosme took both the IWC heavyweight championship from Cibernético and the GPCW <unk> @-@ X Monster Title from La Parka in the preliminary rounds of the AAA Mega Championship tournament . As Mesías , he became the first wrestler to win the AAA Mega Championship in AAA 's pay @-@ per @-@ view event Verano de Escandalo after defeating Chessman ( Kevin <unk> Zamora ) by disqualification . On November 29 , 2007 , he successfully defended the company 's championship in a triple threat match at a pay @-@ per @-@ view titled Guerra de Titanes . In March 2008 , he returned to AAA after several months of inactivity . On March 16 , 2008 , Cosme dropped the championship to Cibernético . He was <unk> involved in an angle with Vampiro , <unk> to a match at Triplemania XVI , which concluded as a time @-@ limit draw . On October 24 , 2008 , Cosme won the Copa Antonio Peña , defeating six other wrestlers in the process . Joaquín Roldán , was responsible for presenting the relevant trophy . On December 6 , 2008 , at Guerra de Titanes , Cosme won the AAA Heavyweight Championship for a second time , defeating El Zorro ( Jesús Martínez ) . He also made a full técnico ( fan favorite ) turn , asking the fans for forgiveness for what he 's done while in AAA . On March 15 , 2009 at the Rey de Reyes ( 2009 ) After successfully defending the AAA Mega Championship against Chessman , Dr. Wagner , Jr. challenged him directly after the match . On June 13 , 2009 , he was booked to lose the title to Wagner at Triplemania XVII . 
 The feud continued for several months , until he regained the title on December 11 , 2009 , at the main event of Guerra de Titanes . Cosme 's third reign as AAA Mega Champion ended on March 12 , 2010 , at the 2010 Rey de Reyes event . He was not booked to lose , but Electroshock ( Edgar Luna <unk> ) submitted Mr. Anderson ( Ken Anderson ) , the third wrestler in the match , to win the championship . Afterwards , El Mesías began feuding with invaders from Los Perros del Mal , the group 's leader El Hijo del Perro Aguayo in particular . On August 14 at Verano de Escandalo Aguayo , Damián 666 and L.A. Park defeated El Mesías , Cibernético and La Parka in a six @-@ man tag team match , when Aguayo pinned Mesías after hitting him with a chair . On October 1 at Héroes Inmortales IV El Mesías gained a measure of revenge on Aguayo by defeating him in a singles match . On November 1 El Mesías entered the 2010 Lucha Libre Premier tournament . The first two rounds of the tournament were wrestled in a <unk> <unk> format , with El Mesías teaming with Electroshock . The two would defeat the teams of Extreme Tiger and L.A. Park and <unk> and Hernandez to make it to the semifinal four – way match , where El Mesías and El Zorro , defeated Electroshock and Dr. Wagner , Jr. to advance to the finals . On November 28 El Mesías defeated El Zorro in the finals of the tournament to win the 2010 Lucha Libre Premier . Afterwards Mesías entered a feud with La Sociedad member L.A. Park , who defeated him on December 5 at Guerra de Titanes , after using a chair on him . On March 18 , 2011 , at Rey de Reyes , El Mesías and Park were both eliminated from the finals of the 2011 Rey de Reyes tournament , after brawling to a double countout . On May 18 , El Mesías challenged , and Park accepted , for the two to end their feud at Triplemanía XIX in a Mask vs. Hair match . On June 18 at <unk> XIX , Park defeated El Mesías , forcing him to have his head shaved . El Mesías returned to AAA a month later at Verano de Escándalo , saving Dr. Wagner , Jr. from La Sociedad . On October 9 at Héroes Inmortales , El Mesías wrestled TNA performer Sting to a no contest in what was billed as a " dream match " by AAA , following interference from La Sociedad . The match had been put together by AAA Mega Champion Jeff Jarrett in an attempt to stop El Mesías from chasing his title . On December 16 at Guerra de Titanes , El Mesías defeated TNA performers A.J. Styles and Rob Terry in back @-@ to @-@ back matches to become the number one contender to Jarrett 's title . On March 18 , 2012 , at Rey de Reyes , El Mesías defeated Jeff Jarrett to win the AAA Mega Championship for the fourth time . On April 23 , El Mesías underwent surgery on his arm ; as a result , he was sidelined from in @-@ ring action for three months . In storyline , El Hijo del Perro Aguayo was credited with causing the injury . El Mesías returned on July 13 , attacking Aguayo and his Perros del Mal stable . On August 5 at Triplemanía XX , El Mesías successfully defended the AAA Mega Championship against Aguayo . He then went on to lose the title to El Texano , Jr. on December 2 at Guerra de Titanes . On March 17 , 2013 , El Mesías defeated Canek and L.A. Park in the finals to win the 2013 Rey de Reyes tournament . In October , El Mesías came together with two former rivals , Cibernético and El Hijo del Perro Aguayo , to battle the Secta stable , after its members had turned on Cibernético . The partnership was ended on December 8 at Guerra de Titanes , when Aguayo turned rudo , leading to the reformation of La Sociedad . On August 17 , 2014 , at Triplemanía XXII , El Mesías won fellow técnico Electroshock 's hair in a six @-@ way steel cage Lucha de Apuestas . 
 On March 6 , 2015 , El Mesías turned on Blue Demon Jr. and La Parka , completing his return to the rudo side . Shortly afterwards , he joined La Sociedad . 
 = = = Wrestling Society X ( 2006 ) = = = 
 Cosme participated as Banderas in the Wrestling Society X television series ( taped in Los Angeles , California ) , with the gimmick of a disgruntled and kayfabe disfigured man pursuing a feud with Vampiro . The booking of the feud commenced after Banderas threw a fireball at Vampiro 's face , which resulted in MTV pulling the episode from its original airdate , with concerns that viewers would try it at home . 
 The reason behind the pursuit was explained in the following episode in a promo , where he claimed that Vampiro rigged a casket with explosives during a match , with the explosion resulting in the damage done to his face . On the eighth episode ( which was taped on November 15 , 2006 ) of the series , Banderas won the WSX Championship in his debut match for the promotion . Beforehand , he was involved in a series of brawls with Youth Suicide ( Andre Verdun ) , as well as an allusion to a partnership with 6 @-@ Pac ( Sean Waltman ) . 
 = = = Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( 2007 – 2008 , 2013 ) = = = 
 As noted on the " TNA Mobile " service , Cosme signed a contract with Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) . Cosme was billed as James Mitchell 's kayfabe son and thus Abyss ' brother . Beginning on July 1 , 2007 , vignettes began to air for this " monster @-@ like " character . His name was eventually billed as Judas Mesias . At No Surrender , he pulled Abyss under the ring by cutting a hole through it with a knife and pulling him underneath . On the September 13 , 2007 episode of Impact ! , during a submission match between Abyss and Kurt Angle in the Six Sides of Steel , Mesias made his official debut , climbing up from underneath the ring and subsequently attacking Abyss . On the September 20 episode of Impact ! , Mesias defeated Eric Young in his debut match in TNA . 
 On September 21 , 2007 , it was reported that Cosme was suffering from sciatica and that the condition 's treatment required several weeks of rest , followed by physical therapy to recover . This injury was the result of a fall from a ladder during a championship match at AAA 's Verano de Escandalo pay @-@ per @-@ view , which also knocked him out . 
 Mesias returned on the December 13 , 2007 , episode of Impact ! where he attacked Abyss by strangling him with a piece of barbed wire , which he also used to cut his forehead open . He then repeatedly hit Abyss in the head with a chair . He finished his assault by delivering his finisher , Straight to Hell to Abyss on the same chair . In his TNA pay @-@ per @-@ view debut , Mesias defeated Abyss at Final Resolution after hitting Abyss with his finisher onto a barbed wire steel chair . This feud continued at Against All Odds , organized on February 10 , 2008 . In this event he competed in a stipulation match called " Barbed Wire Massacre " , where the ring was surrounded by barbed wire , which Abyss won by using his finisher , the Black Hole Slam . In March , Cosme was released from his contract with the company . 
 On March 18 , 2013 , Cosme made a one night return to TNA to take part in the tapings of the TNA World Cup of Wrestling One Night Only pay @-@ per @-@ view . Working as <unk> , he represented Team International in a singles match , where he was defeated by Team United States ' James Storm . At the tapings of the following day 's Hardcore Justice 2 pay @-@ per @-@ view , Mesias , once again managed by James Mitchell , was defeated by Joseph Park in a Monster 's Ball match . 
 = = = World Wrestling Council ( 2009 – 2012 ) = = = 
 An agreement between Cosme and the World Wrestling Council was first rumored on November 26 , 2009 . The promotion made the official announcement two days later , including highlights of his career in a compilation video displayed during a special event titled Crossfire . His debut was scheduled for January 16 , 2010 , being booked as Ricky Banderas in a contest against Carly Colón . Ray González was subsequently included , winning a three @-@ way @-@ contest where the WWC 's first winner of the " Wrestler of the Decade Cup " was to be decided . The following week , both were booked in a rematch , with Banderas winning the cup . On July 11 , 2010 , Banderas was booked to act as special referee at Aniversario 2010 , but was subsequently included in a stipulation match against Colón . His character made a heel turn in this event , attacking both Colón and Hugo Savinovich . On January 8 , 2011 , Banderas defeated Colón , with help from an interfering Shane Sewell , to win the WWC Universal Heavyweight Championship for the first time . Cosme was stripped of the title upon returning to the IWA , headlining an angle that revisited the promotion 's first decade . His sole match took place on April 2 , 2011 , where he defeated González , who had since returned to his masked " Rey Fénix " persona , in the main event of the evening . Following this match Cosme 's involvement in the IWA concluded , remaining inactive in Puerto Rico until January 7 , 2012 , when he reappeared in WWC programming asking for an opportunity to challenge Carly Colón for the Universal Heavyweight Championship . The challenge was accepted and took place at Euphoria 2012 , but was inconclusive after Savio Vega interrupted by <unk> Colón , which drained what was left of the <unk> time . 
 = = = Lucha Underground ( 2014 – present ) = = = 
 In September 2014 , Cosme began working for Lucha Underground under a mask and the ring name Mil Muertes . In storyline , Muertes ' real name was Pasqual Mendoza , whose entire family died in an earthquake in Mexico City , when he was seven years old . He debuted on the episode , which aired on November 6 , 2014 , accompanied by Catrina as his valet . He was then involved in a major rivalry with Fénix ( punctuated by Catrina 's turning on him and aligning herself with Fénix ) , which concluded when Fénix defeated him in a " Grave Consequences " casket match that aired on March 18 , 2015 . After being " resurrected " by Catrina , Muertes returned and on April 19 , 2015 , at Ultima Lucha , Lucha Underground 's season one finale , defeated Prince Puma to win the Lucha Underground Championship . 
 During the season two premiere on January 27 , 2016 , Muertes successfully defended the Lucha Underground Championship against Ivelisse . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 Mil Muertes 
 <unk> ( Reverse STO ) 
 Dagger in the Heart / The Reaper 's Trident ( Spear ) 
 As Ricky Banderas 
 Double leg slam 
 Frog splash 
 La Patriota ( Sharpshooter ) 
 As El Mesías / Judas Mesias 
 Jumping reverse STO ( AAA ) / Straight to Hell ( TNA ) 
 Sharpshooter – AAA 
 Signature moves 
 Cradle piledriver 
 Flowing DDT 
 Powerbomb facebuster 
 Reverse figure @-@ four leglock 
 Samoan drop 
 <unk> 
 Managers 
 James Mitchell 
 Catrina 
 Entrance themes 
 " Carmina Burana " by Carl Orff 
 " Seek & Destroy " by Metallica 
 " Birth of Venus <unk> " by Therion 
 " Ave Vampire " by Dale Oliver ( TNA ) 
 " Lux <unk> " by Kronos Quartet 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Asistencia Asesoría y Administración 
 AAA Mega Championship ( 4 times ) 
 AAA Trident Championship ( 1 time ) 
 GPCW Super @-@ X Monster Championship ( 1 time ) 
 IWC World Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Copa Antonio Peña ( 2008 ) 
 Lucha Libre Premier ( 2010 ) 
 Rey de Reyes ( 2013 ) 
 Victoria Cup ( 2016 ) – with Apolo and Rockstar Spud 
 International Wrestling Association 
 IWA World Heavyweight Championship ( 6 times ) 
 IWA Intercontinental Championship ( 3 times ) 
 IWA World Tag Team Championship ( 6 times ) – with Gran Apolo ( 3 ) , Miguel Perez , Jr . , Huracan Castillo , Fidel Sierra , Pain ( 1 ) , Glamour Boy Shane ( 1 ) and <unk> ( 1 ) 
 IWA Hardcore Championship ( 10 times ) 
 Pro Wrestling Illustrated 
 PWI ranked him # 26 of the 500 best singles wrestlers in the PWI 500 in 2008 and 2015 
 Lucha Underground 
 Lucha Underground Championship ( 1 time ) 
 World Wrestling Council 
 WWC Universal Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Copa Luchador de la <unk> ( 2010 ) 
 Wrestling Society X 
 WSX Championship ( 1 time ) 
 = = = Luchas de Apuestas record = = = 
 = Elmwood ( Cambridge , Massachusetts ) = 
 Elmwood , also known as the Oliver @-@ Gerry @-@ Lowell House , is a historic house and centerpiece of a National Historic Landmark District in Cambridge , Massachusetts . It is known for several prominent former residents , including : Thomas Oliver ( 1734 – 1815 ) , royal Lieutenant Governor of Massachusetts ; Elbridge Gerry ( 1744 – 1814 ) , signer of the US Declaration of Independence , Vice President of the United States and eponym of the term " gerrymandering " ; and James Russell Lowell ( 1819 – 1891 ) , noted American writer , poet , and foreign diplomat . 
 The house , originally on a 100 @-@ acre estate , was built in the Georgian style about 1767 by Thomas Oliver , scion of a wealthy merchant family in the Province of Massachusetts Bay . Abandoned by the Loyalist Oliver at the outset of the American Revolutionary War , the property was confiscated by the state of Massachusetts . It was purchased by Elbridge Gerry , who used it as his family residence until his death in 1814 . The house was sold by his heirs to the Lowell family , and was the birthplace and residence of James Russell Lowell for most of his life . During Lowell 's ownership significant portions of the original estate were sold off , and his heirs sold the house to Arthur Kingsley Porter , a Harvard University professor . He bequeathed the property to the university , which now uses it as the official residence of its President . 
 Architecturally the house has retained most of its Georgian character , and has had only modest exterior additions and modifications . Although it was decorated in a Victorian style by the Lowells , Harvard restored the interior to a more traditional Georgian style when it took over the property . The house is not open to the public . In addition to the property owned by Harvard , the National Historic Landmark District encompasses the adjacent Lowell Park , a state @-@ owned park which was once part of the original Oliver estate . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Oliver , Revolution , and Gerry = = = 
 The house now known as Elmwood was built about 1767 by Thomas Oliver , appointed Lieutenant @-@ Governor of Massachusetts in the spring of 1774 . The estate , located on the western edge of Cambridge , Massachusetts , at that time consisted of about 100 acres ( 40 ha ) of rolling fields with a commanding view of the Charles River . Oliver 's property extended from Fresh Pond in the north across the Charles River to what is now the Boston neighborhood of Brighton to the south , then part of Cambridge . It was not far from the 1759 mansion built by his brother @-@ in @-@ law John Vassall , now the Longfellow House – Washington 's Headquarters National Historic Site . 
 On September 1 , 1774 , pursuant to orders given by Governor Thomas Gage , British Army troops removed provincial gunpowder from a magazine in what is today Somerville . This activity caused a spontaneous rising of militia throughout the province amid rumors of actual violence that is known as the Powder Alarm . The next day Oliver was able to dissipate a crowd that formed in Cambridge ( near present @-@ day Harvard Square ) by going to Boston , conferring with Gage , and reporting that no further military movements were planned . However , the crowd followed him home and compelled him to resign his office , which he did under protest . Oliver and his family shortly thereafter fled to Boston . 
 Early in the Siege of Boston that began after the Battles of Lexington and Concord in April 1775 , the house was occupied by troops that eventually became part of the Continental Army ; one of the building 's notable occupants during this time was Benedict Arnold , then in the Connecticut militia . After the Battle of Bunker Hill it was used as a hospital . When the British military evacuated Boston in March 1776 , the Olivers , like many other Loyalists , traveled with them to Nova Scotia . Oliver eventually settled in Bristol , England , where he died in 1815 . 
 The Massachusetts government confiscated Oliver 's property during the American Revolutionary War , and sold it in 1779 to Andrew Cabot . In 1787 Elbridge Gerry purchased the Cambridge estate , which became his home . In the aftermath of the XYZ Affair , for which Gerry was unjustly criticized , Elmwood was the scene of protests in which Gerry was burned in effigy . Gerry served as Governor of Massachusetts in 1810 and 1811 ; redistricting of the state in 1812 prompted the coining of the term " gerrymandering " to describe the practice of shaping legislative districts in partisan ways . In March 1813 Gerry took the oath of office as Vice President of the United States in the house ; he died in 1814 in Washington , D. C. Gerry rented out large parts of the estate to tenant farmers . He sold and later repurchased land near the Charles River from a relative , who operated a landing and storehouse ; the area ( located near the present @-@ day Eliot Bridge ) became known as Gerry 's Landing . 
 = = = Lowell family = = = 
 Ten acres , including the house , were purchased from the Gerry family in 1818 by Charles Russell Lowell , Sr. of the Lowell family . It was in this home that James Russell Lowell was born on February 22 , 1819 . 
 In the 1850s , Lowell dealt with many personal tragedies , including the sudden death of his mother and his third daughter , Rose . His personal troubles as well as the Compromise of 1850 convinced him to spend a winter in Italy after coaxing from William Wetmore Story . The trip was financed by the sale of land around Elmwood , and Lowell intended to sell off even further . Ultimately , 25 of the original 30 acres ( 120 @,@ 000 m2 ) were sold to supplement Lowell 's income . His personal troubles continued : his son Walter died while overseas , his wife Maria White Lowell died in October 1853 , his father became deaf , and his sister Rebecca was deteriorating mentally such that she often went without speaking for weeks . He had difficulty coping and became a recluse at Elmwood for a time until an invitation to speak at the Lowell Institute resulted in a job offer at Harvard College . He accepted the job , with the request he be allowed to study abroad for a year first . 
 Lowell returned to the United States and began his duties at Harvard in the summer of 1856 . Still grieving the loss of his wife , however , he avoided Elmwood , lodging instead in an area known as Professors ' Row on Kirkland Street in Cambridge along with his daughter Mabel and her governess Frances Dunlap . Lowell and Dunlap married in 1857 . After the death of Lowell 's father in January 1861 due to a heart attack , he moved back to Elmwood with his family . Despite avoiding the home for so long , he was pleased to be back . He wrote to his friend Charles Frederick Briggs : " I am back again to the place I love best . I am sitting in my old garret , at my old desk , smoking my old pipe ... I begin to feel more like my old self than I have these ten years " . However , Elmwood 's expenses drained him , with taxes at $ 1 @,@ 000 a year . As early as 1867 , he considered renting out Elmwood and moving into a smaller home elsewhere but never did . Instead , to ease his financial plight , he began to sell off land in 1870 until only two and a half acres remained . 
 Lowell remained at Elmwood for the remainder of his life , except during the period between 1877 and 1885 when he served as Minister to Spain and Great Britain . At Elmwood , he wrote some of his best @-@ known works , including The Vision of Sir <unk> , The Biglow Papers , and A Fable for Critics , all published in 1848 . It was Lowell who named the house " Elmwood " . He mentions the home in some of his poetry : 
 Lowell 's friend and fellow poet Henry Wadsworth Longfellow also wrote a poem about the house called " The Herons of Elmwood " . 
 In the summer of 1872 , when Lowell traveled to Europe , he rented the house to Thomas Bailey Aldrich . Years later , in 1877 , when Lowell was appointed Ambassador to Spain , he rented the home to the violinist Ole Bull . Shortly after Bull 's death in 1880 , the Norwegian poet , playwright , and novelist Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson was the guest of Bull 's widow at Elmwood for three months . Upon Lowell 's return to the United States in 1885 , he stayed at Elmwood until his death . He died in the home on August 12 , 1891 . 
 = = = 20th century to present = = = 
 After the death of James Russel Lowell the house was inherited and used seasonally first by his daughter Mabel the wife of Edward Burnett then by their children . Arthur Kingsley Porter purchased Elmwood and the remaining lands from the Lowell heirs in 1920 . Porter , a Harvard professor , used the house as a private residence , but also taught some of his classes there and allowed students to use his extensive library . Under the terms of his will , the property was bequeathed to Harvard upon his death in 1933 , although his wife was granted lifetime occupancy . She died in 1962 , at which time Harvard took full control of the property . 
 After major renovations Elmwood was occupied by Franklin L. Ford , who served as Harvard 's Dean of the Faculty of Arts and Sciences for most of the 1960s . Acting President Derek Bok moved his family to its bucolic grounds in 1971 amid security concerns originating in student protest activity near the then @-@ president 's residence on Quincy Street . The house has been the official residence of Harvard presidents since . It still houses portions of the Lowell library . 
 The Harvard @-@ owned property and the adjacent state @-@ owned Lowell Park were declared a National Historic Landmark District in 1966 . Lowell Park was established in 1899 as a memorial to James Russell Lowell . It was paid for in part by private subscription and also with some public funds , and donated to the state in 1898 . It was at first administered by the Metropolitan District Commission as part of the Charles River Reservation ; the MDC 's successor , the Massachusetts Department of Conservation and Recreation , is now responsible for the park . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Although parts of Elmwood 's interior have been altered , its exterior has not changed greatly over the years . It is a large , square , clapboarded structure in Georgian style with brick @-@ lined walls and two chimneys . The floor plans on each floor are the same : two rooms on either side of a central hall housing a staircase . The windows on the first and second floors have decorative cornices , and a 19th @-@ century balustrade surrounds the roof . The exterior entranceway is flanked by Tuscan pilasters supporting a classic entablature decorated with a frieze . Above the entablature is a large window with Ionic pilasters on either side , topped by a triangular pediment . 
 The building has had some modifications and additions , made principally during the Lowell ownership period . Additions housing more modern services and a library were added to the west side of the house , and first @-@ floor windows in the front parlor and dining room were replaced with French doors . A one @-@ story porch with balustraded roof deck was added on the north side of the house , and a terrace was installed on the south side . The Lowells decorated the house in a Victorian style ; Harvard restored the building interior to an 18th @-@ century style when it took over the property . 
 = Worst Episode Ever = 
 " Worst Episode Ever " is the eleventh episode of The Simpsons ' twelfth season . It first aired on the Fox network in the United States on February 4 , 2001 . In the episode , Bart and Milhouse are banned from The Android 's Dungeon after stopping Comic Book Guy from buying a box of priceless Star Wars memorabilia for $ 5 . However , when Comic Book Guy suffers a massive heart attack after Tom Savini 's show , he hires Bart and Milhouse as his replacements while he leaves his job to make friends . 
 " Worst Episode Ever " was written by Larry Doyle and directed by Matthew Nastuk . The series ' staff found it hard to make Comic Book Guy seem likable , since he is usually portrayed as sarcastic and unfriendly . The episode features actor and makeup artist Tom Savini as himself . In its original broadcast , the episode was seen by approximately 10 million viewers , finishing in 27th place in the ratings the week it aired . Since its broadcast , the episode received positive reviews from critics , and Hank Azaria won a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Voice @-@ Over Performance for his performance as Comic Book Guy in the episode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Bart and Milhouse go out to spend $ 50 that Bart won when he bet Homer that he could not eat a spoonful of rotten baking soda that Lisa dug out of the back of the refrigerator . But they get into trouble at the The Android 's Dungeon when , after talking Martin Prince 's mom out of selling Martin 's rare and invaluable Star Wars items to Comic Book Guy for only five dollars , they are banned for life from Comic Book Guy 's store . 
 When they hear that special effects artist Tom Savini is to appear at The Android 's Dungeon , they plot to sneak in , but are rebuked at the door . During the interview , Savini repeatedly plays tricks on Comic Book Guy , which causes him to get irate , and as he rages at Savini and everyone else in the comic book store , he suffers a heart attack . Dr. Hibbert tells Comic Book Guy that he needs to take a break from running the store and to leave it in the care of friends . Since he actually doesn 't have any friends , Comic Book Guy leaves the store in Bart and Milhouse 's care . The store becomes wildly successful under the management of the two boys , only to lose much of its newfound prosperity after Milhouse goes overboard in ordering a shipment of two thousand comics depicting " Biclops " , a superhero with thick glasses , which flops spectacularly . 
 After arguing , the boys unintentionally discover a secret stash of illegal video clips . Bart and Milhouse charge admission for viewing such clips as a " good version " of The Godfather Part III , a clip of Mr. Rogers drunkenly yelling at the director of his show , a secret government plan to use Springfield as a testing zone for nuclear missiles , and Ned Flanders ' alerting the police that Homer released a radioactive ape in his house . The scheme works until Chief Wiggum conducts a raid on the store . Despite this , the boys manage to keep the profits from their time managing the store . Meanwhile , Homer has been helping a recovering Comic Book Guy look for a friend , but his attempts fail until he meets Agnes Skinner . Comic Book Guy and Agnes become romantically involved . However one night while they are kissing in bed , Chief Wiggum charges Comic Book Guy for his pirated videotapes . Bart and Milhouse , freed from running the Android 's Dungeon , decide that they had fun , but it was time to go back to school . The episode ends with a radioactive ape ordering Ned around . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Worst Episode Ever " was written by Larry Doyle and directed by Matthew Nastuk . It was first broadcast on the Fox network in the United States on February 4 , 2001 . The episode was originally called " The Fiver " , a reference to a scene in the episode that was eventually removed . The episode title was then changed to " Worst Episode Ever " , a title which the staff were amused by . According to Doyle , " Worst Episode Ever " is the first episode in which Comic Book Guy has a major role . Because Comic Book Guy is usually sarcastic and unfriendly , the series ' staff found it hard to make the character seem likable . For example , Hank Azaria , who plays Comic Book Guy among other characters in the series , had a difficult time trying to make the character sound sincere . " Comic Book Guy only ever pronounces things sarcastically " , Azaria said in the DVD commentary for the episode . " It was hard to find a way to sound believable and have him say sincere things . It took a lot of different takes . " Executive producer and former showrunner Mike Scully said , " It 's tough when you take a character like Comic Book Guy or Krusty or Moe , to make them suddenly sympathetic and vulnerable . You have to cheat the character a little bit to open them up emotionally a little more . " 
 In a scene in the episode , Ralph is seen entering the adult section of The Android 's Dungeon . When he is off screen , Ralph can be heard saying " Everybody 's hugging " . In the DVD commentary for the episode , Azaria stated that the line is one of his favorite jokes in the series . Originally , Ralph 's line would be " She 's hungry " , but it was eventually removed from the episode . The episode features American actor and makeup artist Tom Savini as himself . Savini accepted the role because he is friends with Dana Gould , a former staff writer on The Simpsons . In the DVD commentary for the episode , Doyle said that Savini was " really fun " when he visited to record his lines . In a scene in the episode , a crow is seen tearing apart an issue of " Biclops " . The voice of the crow was recorded from a real crow , even though the staff usually use main cast members Dan Castellaneta and Nancy Cartwright to imitate animal noises . The general officer in the government film called " Secret Nuclear Defense Plan " was voiced by Azaria . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 In order to demonstrate the durability of Radioactive Man # 1000 , Comic Book Guy pours soda on it , which bounces off and instead damages a batch of " lesser " comics . On top of the batch is an issue of Bongo Comics , a comic book written by Matt Groening , creator of The Simpsons . The comedian Gallagher is shown doing his routine with a watermelon during a flashback . While in The Android 's Dungeon , Nelson examines a comic book called The Death of Sad Sack , a reference to both the American comic strip The Sad Sack and the " Death of Superman " story arc . When Homer and Comic Book Guy enter Moe 's Tavern , Moe says " Get out and take your Sacagawea dollars with you " to one of his customers . A Sacagawea dollar is a United States dollar coin which has been minted since 2000 . After he is thrown out of Moe 's Tavern , Comic Book Guy says the word " loneliness " in Klingon , a language used by the fictional Klingons in the Star Trek universe . While arguing with Agnes , Comic Book Guy says " Now I know what ever happened to Baby Jane . " The line is a reference to the 1960 suspense novel What Ever Happened to Baby Jane ? . Martin 's mother tries to sell Comic Book Guy several items relating to the Star Wars film series including Carrie Fisher 's " anti @-@ jiggle breast tape " , George Lucas ' handwritten original script of Star Wars Episode IV : A New Hope and a film of a supposed alternate ending for the series where it is revealed that " Luke 's father is Chewbacca . " 
 A representative of " Plan Nine Comics " sells two thousand issues of Biclops to Milhouse . This is a reference to Plan 9 from Outer Space , widely considered one of the worst films ever made . 
 While fighting Milhouse , Bart picks up a robotic toy which unfolds into an axe . Milhouse picks up a similar toy , but it instead unfolds into a watering can . The toys are based on the franchise Transformers . While fighting , Milhouse and Bart fall through a poster that hides a room in The Android 's Dungeon . While the poster depicts American actress Rita Hayworth as the Marvel Comics superheroine She @-@ Hulk , the scene is a reference to the 1994 drama film The Shawshank Redemption , in which the main character escapes a prison by digging a tunnel in his wall behind a poster . One of the tapes that Bart and Milhouse watch shows Fred Rogers intoxicated . Executive producer and current showrunner Al Jean later met Rogers ' wife at a hall of fame , and said that he was " really embarrassed " when he found out that she had seen the episode . 
 During Homer 's antacid trip after eating the baking soda , the quotes that play out are Johnnie Cochran 's closing argument of " If it doesn 't fit , then you must acquit " during the O.J. Simpson murder trial , part of Richard Nixon 's 1974 resignation speech from the Oval Office following the Watergate scandal with the quote " Therefore I shall resign the presidency ... " , and Neil Armstrong 's " That 's one small step for man ; one giant leap for mankind " during the 1969 Apollo 11 moon walk . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast on February 4 , 2001 , " Worst Episode Ever " received a 9 @.@ 8 rating , according to Nielsen Media Research , translating to approximately 10 million viewers . The episode finished in 27th place in the ratings for the week of January 29 @-@ February 4 , 2001 . Later that year , Azaria won the 53rd Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Voice @-@ Over Performance for his role as Comic Book Guy in the episode . When participating in the ceremony , the actors are only allowed to submit one episode each , and that year , Azaria stated that " Worst Episode Ever " was an " obvious " choice for him . It was not the first time Azaria won the award for Outstanding Voice @-@ Over Performance ; in 1998 , he won it for his portrayal of Apu Nahasapeemapetilon in the series . On August 18 , 2009 , the episode was released as part of a DVD set called The Simpsons : The Complete Twelfth Season . Mike Scully , Al Jean , Tom Gammill , Max Pross , Matt Selman , Hank Azaria , Larry Doyle and Chris Kirkpatrick participated in the audio commentary for the episode . 
 Following its broadcast , " Worst Episode Ever " received mostly positive reviews from critics . Casey Burchby of DVD Talk enjoyed the episode and wrote that it has some " great stuff " in it , including the comic book " Biclops " that Milhouse over @-@ orders . Jason Bailey , another reviewer for DVD talk , applauded the writers for making an episode around a supporting character , and wrote that it is " far from [ the series ' worst episode ] " . Cindy White of IGN described the episode as a " classic " , and in 2006 , Kimberley Potts of AOL put the episode in twelfth place in a list of the series ' 20 best episodes . The episode was also well received by the series ' staff ; in the introduction of The Simpsons Beyond Forever ! : A Complete Guide to Our Favorite Family ... Still Continued , Matt Groening wrote that he particularly enjoyed the episode and that it had a " very special story " . In the DVD commentary for the episode , Doyle said that Milhouse 's line " I 'm a human boy , just like you " is the best line he has ever written . On the other hand , Mac MacEntire of DVD Verdict gave the episode a mixed review . Although he praised the episode 's premise , he argued that the episode was " ill @-@ balanced " and that the subplot took up too much time in the episode . DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson criticized the writers for making an episode based around a supporting character , and argued that Comic Book Guy was not featured enough in the episode . " ' Ever ' spends at least as much time with Bart and Milhouse as it does with CBG and Agnes " , he wrote . He concluded that , aside from having a few " good moments " , the episode is overall " pretty meh " . 
 = Vida ( Ricky Martin song ) = 
 " Vida " ( English : " Life " ) is a song recorded by Puerto Rican singer Ricky Martin for the One Love , One Rhythm – The 2014 FIFA World Cup Official Album ( 2014 ) . It was written by Martin , Salaam Remi , Elijah King , <unk> Verde , Roxana Amed and produced by Remi . The song was chosen in a musical contest organized by FIFA and Sony Music which King won , and it was subsequently arranged for Martin to record the track . It was digitally released as the second single from the compilation album on April 22 , 2014 . " Vida " is a Latin pop song that features guitar , ukulele , percussion , horn and " exotic sounds with a Caribbean feel " . 
 The song received generally positive reviews from music critics who praised the liveliness of the track and noted the consistency with other songs performed by Martin . It peaked at number five on the US Hot Latin Songs and became Martin 's 23rd top @-@ ten single on the chart . An accompanying music video , directed by <unk> Lund and Lívia Gama of Bossa Nova Films , was shot in Rio de Janeiro . It features Martin singing and dancing on the beach accompanied by around 100 other people . Martin performed the song on several occasions including at the 2014 Latin Billboard Music Awards and on season eighteen of the Dancing with the Stars US series . 
 = = Production and release = = 
 In December 2013 FIFA and Sony Music Entertainment launched a worldwide music contest inviting aspiring musicians and football fans to submit original song proposals . The organizers received over 1600 compositions from musicians and fans originating from 29 countries . In February 2014 it was announced that Elijah King and his track " Vida " had won the contest ; it was chosen by Martin , a judging panel , and by public vote . The song was co @-@ written by Ricky Martin , King and Salaam Remi with additional writing from <unk> Verde and Roxana Amed for the Spanish and Portuguese version of the song . It was produced by Remi under his production name <unk> Subsequently , the song was set to be recorded by Martin himself and included on the One Love , One Rhythm – The 2014 FIFA World Cup Official Album ( 2014 ) . The singer previously recorded and sang " La Copa de la Vida ( The Cup of Life ) " , which served as the official song of the 1998 FIFA World Cup . 
 Following the announcement , King traveled to Miami where he worked with Martin and Remi to finish the track . Gleyder " Gee " Disla recorded the song at the Instrument Zoo and Hit Factory Criteria in Miami and Louder than Life Labs in New York City . Enrique <unk> provided the vocal engineering and editing , while David Cabrera served as an additional vocal producer . Disla mixed " Vida " at Instrument Zoo , while Ari Blitz and Larry Ryckman served as the mastering engineers . Martin , King and Domingo Ramos sang the background vocals . Vincent Henry and Dan Warner played the guitar , the latter also provided the ukulele , Hal <unk> played the horn and Robert <unk> was responsible for the percussion . 
 The Spanglish version of the song was released as the second official single from One Love , One Rhythm – The 2014 FIFA World Cup Official Album . On April 22 , 2014 it was digitally launched in Austria , Germany , Switzerland the United Kingdom , and the United States . An extended play consisting of Spanish , Portuguese , and Spanglish versions together with a remix from David Cabrera Bahía was released on May 6 in France and Italy . Additionally , the EP was released in the United Kingdom and the United States among other countries on the same date . Apart of that material , the Spanish extended play release also contains the <unk> Remix , Brian Cross Extended Club Remix and Brian Cross Remix of " Vida " . On June 10 , a <unk> <unk> Remix of " Vida " was released worldwide including in Austria , Germany , Spain , United Kingdom and the United States . The Afrojack remix of the song was launched on July 1 . 
 = = Controversy = = 
 On April 25 , 2014 it was announced that Hundred Proof Club , Think Famous Productions , Akela Family and <unk> Entertainment were suing Sony Music and King for fraud in the Sony and FIFA 's SuperSong competition . The lawsuit claimed that the competition was rigged and that King , who co @-@ wrote " Vida " was always going to win , cheating the other entrants out of their chance of winning the competition . Although the contest was open to applicants worldwide , King had a contractual agreement and Sony apparently asked King to enter the song " Vida " : Sony allegedly pressured the plaintiffs to release King from his contract so that he would be eligible to win , in return for compensation . 
 The lawsuit alleges that Sony induced King ’ s release from his publishing contract and refused to pay compensation . The attorney Alicia Roman told The Huffington Post , " [ We ’ re looking to ] annul the release due to the fraud they committed . When it ’ s annulled , all of the rights to Elijah ’ s songs are returned to my client , particularly the song ' Vida ' that Ricky Martin sang . " Martin has not made any comment on the lawsuit . Additionally , Luis Adrian Cortes Ramos , a finalist from the first season of Idol Puerto Rico filled a $ 10 million lawsuit towards Martin . He sued the singer for releasing " Vida " despite claims that he submitted his version of the track as part of SuperSong contest , a version that was never recognized . Ramos ' lawyer released a statement saying " Ramos was surprised , disillusioned and suffered mental anguish because the song was almost identical to the one he composed . Until that moment , Martin was an idol for Ramos . " However , Martin 's representative never commented on the lawsuit . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Vida " is a Latin pop song that lasts for three minutes and twenty @-@ five seconds . It features guitar , ukulele , percussion , guitar and " exotic sounds , with a Caribbean feel " . Carolina Moreno of The Huffington Post described the song as upbeat and energetic . Lyrically , the single is about the ability of the football tournament to bring people from different parts of the world together to celebrate and enjoy ' the good life ' . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical = = = 
 Melissa Redman of Renowned for Sound gave the song three and half stars out of five and wrote that " the track is everything you would expect from Ricky Martin and a single for a global sports event . " She also stated that although the song is not " groundbreaking " it is " a lively and exuberant track that people are bound to bop away to " . Redman concluded that it is better than Pitbull 's " We Are One ( Ole Ola ) " , which serves as the official song of the tournament . Mike Wass of website Idolator wrote , " there 's something to be said for consistency and Ricky sure knows how to knock out a summery smash with generic Spanglish lyrics that probably sound pretty inspiring after a couple of <unk> . " " Vida " received nomination for a Start @-@ Party song at the 2014 Premios Tu Mundo held on August 21 , 2014 . 
 = = = Commercial = = = 
 Following Martin 's performance of the song at the 2014 Latin Billboard Music Awards " Vida " entered at number four on the US Latin Digital Songs chart after selling 6000 copies in its first week . Subsequently , the single debuted at number 10 on the US Hot Latin Songs ; it became Martin 's 23rd top 10 single on the chart . It peaked at number five on the latter chart . It was more successful on the US Latin Pop Songs chart where it peaked at number four . " Vida " debuted at number 20 on the Spanish Singles Chart . In its fourth week the single reached its peak of number five . Additionally , it peaked at number 12 in the Dominican Republic and number 16 in Mexico , a pop charts part of Monitor Latino . It was less successful in Australia and South Korea where it peaked at number 75 and 146 respectively . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Vida " was filmed in Rio de Janeiro and was directed by <unk> Lund and Lívia Gama of Bossa Nova Films . According to Lund , " The lyrics and the emotion that are reflected in the video for " Vida " inspire a celebration of life , in a way that is pure and simple : the sun , coming together and the energy . " She said that the visual is about life in which differences are celebrated and appreciated easily and with happiness and claimed that was the reason Martin " just wanted it to be natural " and to differ from what he had done before with choreography , big sets and directed scenes . Martin also commented the shooting process , " It 's an incredible feeling to have had the opportunity to participate in a global initiative like SuperSong . I 'm very excited to finally be able to sing ' Vida ' and share this special song with the world . " On April 21 , Martin released a teaser from the video on his official social networks , while the full video premiered on his Vevo channel on YouTube the next day . It features the singer relaxing in shorts and a tank @-@ top while he sings on the beaches of Rio de Janeiro . The video also contains around 100 extras including kids , samba dancers , models and others intended to represent the diversity of the Brazilian nation . Wass of Idolator praised the video , writing that Martin " looks great " in it and mentioned the Brazilian scenery was " pretty awesome " . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Martin performed " Vida " for first time at the 2014 Chinese Music Awards on April 23 , 2014 where he also sang his 2013 single " Come with Me " . He performed the song again on April 24 at the 2014 Billboard Latin Music Awards . A writer from Billboard described it as a " vibrant , colorful performance " . On April 28 , the singer performed " Vida " on a season eighteen episode of the American dance show competition Dancing with the Stars ; he was accompanied by the show 's Pro Dancers . Martin performed the single on The Ellen DeGeneres Show on May 2 while three days later , on May 5 , he performed the song on The Queen Latifah Show . He also performed the song on May 18 , at the 2014 Billboard Music Awards . On November 14 it was part of Martin 's performance at the opening ceremony of the 22nd Central American and Caribbean Games . 
 = = Formats and track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded at Instrument Zoo , Hit Factory Criteria ( Miami ) ; Louder than Life Labs ( New York City ) ; Sony Music Studios ( Sydney ) 
 Mixed at Instrument Zoo 
 Personnel 
