 Credits adapted from the liner notes of One Love , One Rhythm – The 2014 FIFA World Cup Official Album , RCA Records . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Tom Hawkins ( footballer ) = 
 Thomas Jack Hawkins ( born 21 July 1988 ) is an Australian rules footballer for the Geelong Football Club in the Australian Football League ( AFL ) . The eldest son of former Geelong champion Jack Hawkins , he was drafted by Geelong under the father @-@ son draft rule and wears the number 26 jumper . He plays as a center half @-@ forward or a full @-@ forward . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Hawkins was born in Finley , New South Wales to Jack and Jenny Hawkins . He grew up in the New South Wales region of Finley as the middle child among three other siblings . He attended Finley High School and played for the Finley Football Club before making the move south of the border to begin boarding at Melbourne Grammar School . Hawkins ' footballing ability was recognised early on when he was selected to play 1st XVIII football for the school whilst still in Year 10 , when many of his teammates were completing their final year of schooling at Year 12 . Hawkins kicked four goals on debut for the school and his performances up forward soon received attention from AFL recruiting teams . By the time he had reached his final school year he was rewarded with joint captaincy of the football team alongside Hawthorn draftee Xavier Ellis . He was also selected in the Associated Public Schools ( APS ) team to play the Associated Grammar School ( AGS ) selected football team in the traditional annual clash of schools , where he won best on ground honours for his performance . 
 Having gained permission to join local U / 18 club the Sandringham Dragons for numerous games during the season , Hawkins impressed in his limited appearances within the elite TAC Cup competition , highlighted by a 22 disposal , 9 mark , and 5 goal effort in just his third game . In 2006 , he was awarded an AIS / AFL Academy Scholarship as part of the 9th intake . The scholarship , awarded to outstanding young athletes entering the last year of their junior football development , saw Hawkins participate in several training camps , capped off with representation for Australia in the U / 18 International Rules Series , before completing his summer training with the Geelong Football Club . 
 In the mid @-@ year of 2006 , Hawkins was selected to play in the 2006 Under 18 's National Championships , lining up at full forward for Vic Metro . A best on ground performance which yielded 12 marks and 6 goals in the opening match against South Australia began a wave of unprecedented hype and attention , with Hawkins drawing comparisons to Brisbane Lion Jonathan Brown and leading Vic Metro coach David Dickson to declare the young forward as " the best footballer I 've seen ... since Chris Judd " . Hawkins was awarded the <unk> Medal as the MVP within Division 1 and named as the tournament 's All @-@ Australian full @-@ forward , just falling short of the all @-@ time contested marking record held by Justin <unk> . 
 Hawkins has established a reputation as one of the brightest young key forward prospects in the game , where his man @-@ boy physique and unusual combination of size , strength , and footballing ability have impressed many . Former Carlton coach Dennis Pagan was famously moved to compare him to legendary Swans full @-@ forward Tony Lockett after his debut game . 
 = = AFL career = = 
 Hawkins was officially selected by Geelong in the 2006 AFL Draft under the father @-@ son rule . Whilst many pundits lauded him as the best key position prospect within the draft , and felt Hawkins ' junior performances warranted possible selection with the top overall pick , the father @-@ son rules at the time only required the Cats to use a middle @-@ tier 3rd round pick to draft him . The subsequent controversy over what was widely acknowledged as a bargain gain for the Cats led to the AFL amending the father @-@ son ruling for future use . 
 With a reputation as one of the finest young tall forwards in the land , Hawkins was immediately billed as the successor to the legendary Gary Ablett , whose retirement 10 years earlier had left a gaping hole in the Cats ' forward line . A stress reaction injury to his right leg , however , halted Hawkins ' pre @-@ season , forcing his much @-@ awaited debut in Geelong colours to take place in the VFL side . 
 Hawkins made his highly anticipated debut for the Geelong seniors in Round 2 of the 2007 season against Carlton . Opposed to Carlton Captain Lance Whitnall , Hawkins impressed with 3 goals and several strong marks in the Cats ' 78 @-@ point victory , prompting Carlton coach Denis Pagan to label him the next Tony Lockett . Other revered media figures , such as Gerard Healy and David Parkin , were moved enough to describe the debut as the best first @-@ up performance in recent memory . Uncommonly for AFL debutants , he followed up with an even more impressive performance in his second game , kicking 4 first half goals to help set up a victory against Melbourne at the MCG , earning the AFL Rising Star nomination for Round 3 in the process . 
 Question marks , however , were raised over his fitness and ability to run out entire games , and after 9 games in his debut season , which saw him boot 12 goals , Hawkins saw out the rest of the year with the clubs ' VFL side . There , Hawkins helped the Cats ' reach the VFL Grand Final for the second successive year , booting 3 goals as the Cats defeated the Coburg Tigers to claim their first VFL Premiership since 2002 . 
 Hawkins participated in the 2009 AFL Grand Final alongside other father / son selections Gary Ablett , Matthew Scarlett and Mark Blake . Hawkins scored 2 goals in the game to help Geelong defeat St Kilda by 12 points and capture the 2009 AFL premiership . ( One of those goals was notably controversial , as it was ruled as such after it had bounced off a goal post ; under the rules of Australian football , such a kick should have been ruled a behind . ) 
 Hawkins played in the 2011 AFL Grand Final , finishing the day with 19 disposals , 9 marks and three goals to win his second premiership medallion . Hawkins played a prominent role in Geelong 's victory and was awarded five votes for the Norm Smith Medal , coming third behind Jimmy Bartel ( 13 votes ) and Joel Selwood ( 9 votes ) . 
 In 2012 , Hawkins had a break out year , kicking 62 goals to finish equal second in the Coleman Medal , and became perhaps Geelong 's most valuable player . Undoubtedly the highlight of his year was a match in Round 19 when he kicked a goal after the siren ( one of six for the night ) to deliver the Cats a memorable two @-@ point win over their rivals , Hawthorn . The win was Geelong 's ninth straight victory over the Hawks since losing to them in the 2008 AFL Grand Final . His emergence was rewarded with selection in the 2012 All @-@ Australian side , and the 2012 Carji Greeves Medal for being Geelong 's " best and fairest " player over the 2012 season . 
 In 2013 , a back injury hampered Hawkins ' start to the year , forcing him to miss one match and limiting his usually dominant form in others . However , he still managed to regularly kick goals , accumulating 15 by the end of Round 7 . 
 = = Statistics = = 
 Statistics are correct to the end of the 2015 season 
 = = Personal life = = 
 As well as his father , Hawkins ' uncles , Michael Hawkins and Robb Hawkins , and his maternal grandfather , Fred Le Deux , all played football for Geelong . 
 = = = Nickname = = = 
 Hawkins ' famous nickname ' Tomahawk ' , is a play on his first name and surname , with references to a tomahawk axe or tomahawk missile , and has proven a popular calling card within the league . 
 = Emmy Noether = 
 Amalie Emmy Noether ( German : [ <unk> ] ; 23 March 1882 – 14 April 1935 ) was a German Jewish mathematician known for her landmark contributions to abstract algebra and theoretical physics . 
 She was described by Pavel Alexandrov , Albert Einstein , Jean Dieudonné , Hermann Weyl , and Norbert Wiener as the most important woman in the history of mathematics . As one of the leading mathematicians of her time , she developed the theories of rings , fields , and algebras . In physics , Noether 's theorem explains the connection between symmetry and conservation laws . 
 = = Introduction = = 
 Noether was born to a Jewish family in the Franconian town of Erlangen ; her father was a mathematician , Max Noether . She originally planned to teach French and English after passing the required examinations , but instead studied mathematics at the University of Erlangen , where her father lectured . After completing her dissertation in 1907 under the supervision of Paul Gordan , she worked at the Mathematical Institute of Erlangen without pay for seven years . At the time , women were largely excluded from academic positions . In 1915 , she was invited by David Hilbert and Felix Klein to join the mathematics department at the University of Göttingen , a world @-@ renowned center of mathematical research . The philosophical faculty objected , however , and she spent four years lecturing under Hilbert 's name . Her habilitation was approved in 1919 , allowing her to obtain the rank of Privatdozent . 
 Noether remained a leading member of the Göttingen mathematics department until 1933 ; her students were sometimes called the " Noether boys " . In 1924 , Dutch mathematician B. L. van der Waerden joined her circle and soon became the leading expositor of Noether 's ideas : her work was the foundation for the second volume of his influential 1931 textbook , Moderne Algebra . By the time of her plenary address at the 1932 International Congress of Mathematicians in Zürich , her algebraic acumen was recognized around the world . The following year , Germany 's Nazi government dismissed Jews from university positions , and Noether moved to the United States to take up a position at Bryn Mawr College in Pennsylvania . In 1935 she underwent surgery for an ovarian cyst and , despite signs of a recovery , died four days later at the age of 53 . 
 Noether 's mathematical work has been divided into three " epochs " . In the first ( 1908 – 19 ) , she made contributions to the theories of algebraic invariants and number fields . Her work on differential invariants in the calculus of variations , Noether 's theorem , has been called " one of the most important mathematical theorems ever proved in guiding the development of modern physics " . In the second epoch ( 1920 – 26 ) , she began work that " changed the face of [ abstract ] algebra " . In her classic paper Idealtheorie in Ringbereichen ( Theory of Ideals in Ring Domains , 1921 ) Noether developed the theory of ideals in commutative rings into a tool with wide @-@ ranging applications . She made elegant use of the ascending chain condition , and objects satisfying it are named Noetherian in her honor . In the third epoch ( 1927 – 35 ) , she published works on noncommutative algebras and hypercomplex numbers and united the representation theory of groups with the theory of modules and ideals . In addition to her own publications , Noether was generous with her ideas and is credited with several lines of research published by other mathematicians , even in fields far removed from her main work , such as algebraic topology . 
 = = Private life = = 
 Emmy 's father , Max Noether , was descended from a family of wholesale traders in Germany . At 14 , he had been paralyzed by polio . He regained mobility , but one leg remained affected . Largely self @-@ taught , he was awarded a doctorate from the University of Heidelberg in 1868 . After teaching there for seven years , he took a position in the Bavarian city of Erlangen , where he met and married Ida Amalia Kaufmann , the daughter of a prosperous merchant . Max Noether 's mathematical contributions were to algebraic geometry mainly , following in the footsteps of Alfred <unk> . His best known results are the Brill – Noether theorem and the residue , or AF + BG theorem ; several other theorems are associated with him ; See Max Noether 's theorem . 
 Emmy Noether was born on 23 March 1882 , the first of four children . Her first name was " Amalie " , after her mother and paternal grandmother , but she began using her middle name at a young age . As a girl , Noether was well liked . She did not stand out academically although she was known for being clever and friendly . She was near @-@ sighted and talked with a minor lisp during childhood . A family friend recounted a story years later about young Noether quickly solving a brain teaser at a children 's party , showing logical acumen at that early age . She was taught to cook and clean , as were most girls of the time , and she took piano lessons . She pursued none of these activities with passion , although she loved to dance . 
 She had three younger brothers . The eldest , Alfred , was born in 1883 , was awarded a doctorate in chemistry from Erlangen in 1909 , but died nine years later . Fritz Noether , born in 1884 , is remembered for his academic accomplishments : after studying in Munich he made a reputation for himself in applied mathematics . The youngest , Gustav Robert , was born in 1889 . Very little is known about his life ; he suffered from chronic illness and died in 1928 . 
 = = Teaching = = 
 = = = University of Erlangen = = = 
 Noether showed early proficiency in French and English . In the spring of 1900 she took the examination for teachers of these languages and received an overall score of sehr gut ( very good ) . Her performance qualified her to teach languages at schools reserved for girls , but she chose instead to continue her studies at the University of Erlangen . 
 This was an unconventional decision ; two years earlier , the Academic Senate of the university had declared that allowing mixed @-@ sex education would " overthrow all academic order " . One of only two women students in a university of 986 , Noether was only allowed to audit classes rather than participate fully , and required the permission of individual professors whose lectures she wished to attend . Despite these obstacles , on 14 July 1903 she passed the graduation exam at a Realgymnasium in Nuremberg . 
 During the 1903 – 04 winter semester , she studied at the University of Göttingen , attending lectures given by astronomer Karl Schwarzschild and mathematicians Hermann Minkowski , Otto Blumenthal , Felix Klein , and David Hilbert . Soon thereafter , restrictions on women 's participation in that university were rescinded . 
 Noether returned to Erlangen . She officially reentered the university on 24 October 1904 , and declared her intention to focus solely on mathematics . Under the supervision of Paul Gordan she wrote her dissertation , Über die Bildung des <unk> der <unk> <unk> Form ( On Complete Systems of Invariants for Ternary <unk> Forms , 1907 ) . Although it had been well received , Noether later described her thesis as " crap " . 
 For the next seven years ( 1908 – 15 ) she taught at the University of Erlangen 's Mathematical Institute without pay , occasionally substituting for her father when he was too ill to lecture . In 1910 and 1911 she published an extension of her thesis work from three variables to n variables . 
 Gordan retired in the spring of 1910 , but continued to teach occasionally with his successor , Erhard Schmidt , who left shortly afterward for a position in Breslau . Gordan retired from teaching altogether in 1911 with the arrival of Schmidt 's successor Ernst Fischer , and died in December 1912 . 
 According to Hermann Weyl , Fischer was an important influence on Noether , in particular by introducing her to the work of David Hilbert . From 1913 to 1916 Noether published several papers extending and applying Hilbert 's methods to mathematical objects such as fields of rational functions and the invariants of finite groups . This phase marks the beginning of her engagement with abstract algebra , the field of mathematics to which she would make groundbreaking contributions . 
 Noether and Fischer shared lively enjoyment of mathematics and would often discuss lectures long after they were over ; Noether is known to have sent postcards to Fischer continuing her train of mathematical thoughts . 
 = = = University of Göttingen = = = 
 In the spring of 1915 , Noether was invited to return to the University of Göttingen by David Hilbert and Felix Klein . Their effort to recruit her , however , was blocked by the philologists and historians among the philosophical faculty : women , they insisted , should not become privatdozent . One faculty member protested : " What will our soldiers think when they return to the university and find that they are required to learn at the feet of a woman ? " Hilbert responded with indignation , stating , " I do not see that the sex of the candidate is an argument against her admission as privatdozent . After all , we are a university , not a bath house . " 
 Noether left for Göttingen in late April ; two weeks later her mother died suddenly in Erlangen . She had previously received medical care for an eye condition , but its nature and impact on her death is unknown . At about the same time Noether 's father retired and her brother joined the German Army to serve in World War I. She returned to Erlangen for several weeks , mostly to care for her aging father . 
 During her first years teaching at Göttingen she did not have an official position and was not paid ; her family paid for her room and board and supported her academic work . Her lectures often were advertised under Hilbert 's name , and Noether would provide " assistance " . 
 Soon after arriving at Göttingen , however , she demonstrated her capabilities by proving the theorem now known as Noether 's theorem , which shows that a conservation law is associated with any differentiable symmetry of a physical system . American physicists Leon M. Lederman and Christopher T. Hill argue in their book Symmetry and the Beautiful Universe that Noether 's theorem is " certainly one of the most important mathematical theorems ever proved in guiding the development of modern physics , possibly on a par with the Pythagorean theorem " . 
 When World War I ended , the German Revolution of 1918 – 19 brought a significant change in social attitudes , including more rights for women . In 1919 the University of Göttingen allowed Noether to proceed with her habilitation ( eligibility for tenure ) . Her oral examination was held in late May , and she successfully delivered her habilitation lecture in June . 
 Three years later she received a letter from the Prussian Minister for Science , Art , and Public Education , in which he conferred on her the title of nicht <unk> <unk> Professor ( an untenured professor with limited internal administrative rights and functions ) . This was an unpaid " extraordinary " professorship , not the higher " ordinary " professorship , which was a civil @-@ service position . Although it recognized the importance of her work , the position still provided no salary . Noether was not paid for her lectures until she was appointed to the special position of <unk> für Algebra a year later . 
 = = = Seminal work in abstract algebra = = = 
 Although Noether 's theorem had a profound effect upon physics , among mathematicians she is best remembered for her seminal contributions to abstract algebra . In his Introduction to Noether 's Collected Papers , Nathan Jacobson wrote that " The development of abstract algebra , which is one of the most distinctive innovations of twentieth century mathematics , is largely due to her – in published papers , in lectures , and in personal influence on her contemporaries . " 
 Noether 's groundbreaking work in algebra began in 1920 . In collaboration with W. <unk> , she then published a paper about the theory of ideals in which they defined left and right ideals in a ring . The following year she published a landmark paper called Idealtheorie in Ringbereichen , analyzing ascending chain conditions with regard to ( mathematical ) ideals . Noted algebraist Irving <unk> called this work " revolutionary " ; the publication gave rise to the term " Noetherian ring " and the naming of several other mathematical objects as Noetherian . 
 In 1924 a young Dutch mathematician , B. L. van der Waerden , arrived at the University of Göttingen . He immediately began working with Noether , who provided invaluable methods of abstract conceptualization . Van der Waerden later said that her originality was " absolute beyond comparison " . In 1931 he published Moderne Algebra , a central text in the field ; its second volume borrowed heavily from Noether 's work . Although Noether did not seek recognition , he included as a note in the seventh edition " based in part on lectures by E. Artin and E. Noether " . She sometimes allowed her colleagues and students to receive credit for her ideas , helping them develop their careers at the expense of her own . 
 Van der Waerden 's visit was part of a convergence of mathematicians from all over the world to Göttingen , which became a major hub of mathematical and physical research . From 1926 to 1930 Russian topologist Pavel Alexandrov lectured at the university , and he and Noether quickly became good friends . He began referring to her as der Noether , using the masculine German article as a term of endearment to show his respect . She tried to arrange for him to obtain a position at Göttingen as a regular professor , but was only able to help him secure a scholarship from the Rockefeller Foundation . They met regularly and enjoyed discussions about the intersections of algebra and topology . In his 1935 memorial address , Alexandrov named Emmy Noether " the greatest woman mathematician of all time " . 
 = = = Lecturing and students = = = 
 In Göttingen , Noether supervised more than a dozen doctoral students ; her first was Grete Hermann , who defended her dissertation in February 1925 . She later spoke reverently of her " dissertation @-@ mother " . Noether also supervised Max <unk> , who distinguished himself as an undergraduate and went on to contribute significantly to the field of arithmetic geometry ; Hans Fitting , remembered for Fitting 's theorem and the Fitting lemma ; and Zeng <unk> ( also rendered " <unk> C. Tsen " in English ) , who proved Tsen 's theorem . She also worked closely with Wolfgang Krull , who greatly advanced commutative algebra with his <unk> and his dimension theory for commutative rings . 
 In addition to her mathematical insight , Noether was respected for her consideration of others . Although she sometimes acted rudely toward those who disagreed with her , she nevertheless gained a reputation for constant helpfulness and patient guidance of new students . Her loyalty to mathematical precision caused one colleague to name her " a severe critic " , but she combined this demand for accuracy with a nurturing attitude . A colleague later described her this way : " Completely <unk> and free of vanity , she never claimed anything for herself , but promoted the works of her students above all . " 
 Her frugal lifestyle at first was due to being denied pay for her work ; however , even after the university began paying her a small salary in 1923 , she continued to live a simple and modest life . She was paid more generously later in her life , but saved half of her salary to bequeath to her nephew , Gottfried E. Noether . 
 Mostly unconcerned about appearance and manners , biographers suggest she focused on her studies . A distinguished algebraist Olga Taussky @-@ Todd described a luncheon , during which Noether , wholly engrossed in a discussion of mathematics , " <unk> wildly " as she ate and " spilled her food constantly and wiped it off from her dress , completely unperturbed " . Appearance @-@ conscious students cringed as she retrieved the handkerchief from her blouse and ignored the increasing disarray of her hair during a lecture . Two female students once approached her during a break in a two @-@ hour class to express their concern , but they were unable to break through the energetic mathematics discussion she was having with other students . 
 According to van der Waerden 's obituary of Emmy Noether , she did not follow a lesson plan for her lectures , which frustrated some students . Instead , she used her lectures as a spontaneous discussion time with her students , to think through and clarify important cutting @-@ edge problems in mathematics . Some of her most important results were developed in these lectures , and the lecture notes of her students formed the basis for several important textbooks , such as those of van der Waerden and <unk> . 
 Several of her colleagues attended her lectures , and she allowed some of her ideas , such as the crossed product ( <unk> Produkt in German ) of associative algebras , to be published by others . Noether was recorded as having given at least five semester @-@ long courses at Göttingen : 
 Winter 1924 / 25 : Gruppentheorie und <unk> Zahlen ( Group Theory and Hypercomplex Numbers ) 
 Winter 1927 / 28 : <unk> <unk> und <unk> ( Hypercomplex Quantities and Representation Theory ) 
 Summer 1928 : Nichtkommutative Algebra ( Noncommutative Algebra ) 
 Summer 1929 : Nichtkommutative <unk> ( Noncommutative Arithmetic ) 
 Winter 1929 / 30 : Algebra der <unk> <unk> ( Algebra of Hypercomplex Quantities ) . 
 These courses often preceded major publications in these areas . 
 Noether spoke quickly — reflecting the speed of her thoughts , many said — and demanded great concentration from her students . Students who disliked her style often felt alienated . Some pupils felt that she relied too much on spontaneous discussions . Her most dedicated students , however , relished the enthusiasm with which she approached mathematics , especially since her lectures often built on earlier work they had done together . 
 She developed a close circle of colleagues and students who thought along similar lines and tended to exclude those who did not . " Outsiders " who occasionally visited Noether 's lectures usually spent only 30 minutes in the room before leaving in frustration or confusion . A regular student said of one such instance : " The enemy has been defeated ; he has cleared out . " 
 Noether showed a devotion to her subject and her students that extended beyond the academic day . Once , when the building was closed for a state holiday , she gathered the class on the steps outside , led them through the woods , and lectured at a local coffee house . Later , after she had been dismissed by the Third Reich , she invited students into her home to discuss their plans for the future and mathematical concepts . 
 = = = Moscow = = = 
 In the winter of 1928 – 29 Noether accepted an invitation to Moscow State University , where she continued working with P. S. Alexandrov . In addition to carrying on with her research , she taught classes in abstract algebra and algebraic geometry . She worked with the <unk> , Lev Pontryagin and Nikolai <unk> , who later praised her contributions to the development of Galois theory . 
 Although politics was not central to her life , Noether took a keen interest in political matters and , according to Alexandrov , showed considerable support for the Russian Revolution ( 1917 ) . She was especially happy to see Soviet advancements in the fields of science and mathematics , which she considered indicative of new opportunities made possible by the Bolshevik project . This attitude caused her problems in Germany , culminating in her eviction from a pension lodging building , after student leaders complained of living with " a Marxist @-@ leaning Jewess " . 
 Noether planned to return to Moscow , an effort for which she received support from Alexandrov . After she left Germany in 1933 he tried to help her gain a chair at Moscow State University through the Soviet Education Ministry . Although this effort proved unsuccessful , they corresponded frequently during the 1930s , and in 1935 she made plans for a return to the Soviet Union . Meanwhile , her brother , Fritz accepted a position at the Research Institute for Mathematics and Mechanics in Tomsk , in the Siberian Federal District of Russia , after losing his job in Germany . 
 = = = Recognition = = = 
 In 1932 Emmy Noether and Emil Artin received the Ackermann – <unk> Memorial Award for their contributions to mathematics . The prize carried a monetary reward of 500 Reichsmarks and was seen as a long @-@ overdue official recognition of her considerable work in the field . Nevertheless , her colleagues expressed frustration at the fact that she was not elected to the Göttingen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften ( academy of sciences ) and was never promoted to the position of <unk> Professor ( full professor ) . 
 Noether 's colleagues celebrated her fiftieth birthday in 1932 , in typical mathematicians ' style . Helmut Hasse dedicated an article to her in the Mathematische Annalen , wherein he confirmed her suspicion that some aspects of noncommutative algebra are simpler than those of commutative algebra , by proving a noncommutative reciprocity law . This pleased her immensely . He also sent her a mathematical riddle , the " <unk> @-@ riddle of syllables " , which she solved immediately ; the riddle has been lost . 
 In November of the same year , Noether delivered a plenary address ( großer <unk> ) on " Hyper @-@ complex systems in their relations to commutative algebra and to number theory " at the International Congress of Mathematicians in Zürich . The congress was attended by 800 people , including Noether 's colleagues Hermann Weyl , Edmund Landau , and Wolfgang Krull . There were 420 official participants and twenty @-@ one plenary addresses presented . Apparently , Noether 's prominent speaking position was a recognition of the importance of her contributions to mathematics . The 1932 congress is sometimes described as the high point of her career . 
 = = = Expulsion from Göttingen = = = 
 When Adolf Hitler became the German Reichskanzler in January 1933 , Nazi activity around the country increased dramatically . At the University of Göttingen the German Student Association led the attack on the " un @-@ German spirit " attributed to Jews and was aided by a privatdozent named Werner Weber , a former student of Noether . Antisemitic attitudes created a climate hostile to Jewish professors . One young protester reportedly demanded : " Aryan students want Aryan mathematics and not Jewish mathematics . " 
 One of the first actions of Hitler 's administration was the Law for the Restoration of the Professional Civil Service which removed Jews and politically suspect government employees ( including university professors ) from their jobs unless they had " demonstrated their loyalty to Germany " by serving in World War I. In April 1933 Noether received a notice from the Prussian Ministry for Sciences , Art , and Public Education which read : " On the basis of paragraph 3 of the Civil Service Code of 7 April 1933 , I hereby withdraw from you the right to teach at the University of Göttingen . " Several of Noether 's colleagues , including Max Born and Richard Courant , also had their positions revoked . Noether accepted the decision calmly , providing support for others during this difficult time . Hermann Weyl later wrote that " Emmy Noether — her courage , her frankness , her unconcern about her own fate , her conciliatory spirit — was in the midst of all the hatred and meanness , despair and sorrow surrounding us , a moral solace . " Typically , Noether remained focused on mathematics , gathering students in her apartment to discuss class field theory . When one of her students appeared in the uniform of the Nazi paramilitary organization Sturmabteilung ( SA ) , she showed no sign of agitation and , reportedly , even laughed about it later . 
 = = = Bryn Mawr = = = 
 As dozens of newly unemployed professors began searching for positions outside of Germany , their colleagues in the United States sought to provide assistance and job opportunities for them . Albert Einstein and Hermann Weyl were appointed by the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton , while others worked to find a sponsor required for legal immigration . Noether was contacted by representatives of two educational institutions , Bryn Mawr College in the United States and Somerville College at the University of Oxford in England . After a series of negotiations with the Rockefeller Foundation , a grant to Bryn Mawr was approved for Noether and she took a position there , starting in late 1933 . 
 At Bryn Mawr , Noether met and befriended Anna Wheeler , who had studied at Göttingen just before Noether arrived there . Another source of support at the college was the Bryn Mawr president , Marion Edwards Park , who enthusiastically invited mathematicians in the area to " see Dr. Noether in action ! " Noether and a small team of students worked quickly through van der Waerden 's 1930 book Moderne Algebra I and parts of Erich Hecke 's Theorie der algebraischen Zahlen ( Theory of algebraic numbers ) . 
 In 1934 , Noether began lecturing at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton upon the invitation of Abraham Flexner and Oswald Veblen . She also worked with and supervised Abraham Albert and Harry Vandiver . However , she remarked about Princeton University that she was not welcome at the " men 's university , where nothing female is admitted " . 
 Her time in the United States was pleasant , surrounded as she was by supportive colleagues and absorbed in her favorite subjects . In the summer of 1934 she briefly returned to Germany to see Emil Artin and her brother Fritz before he left for Tomsk . Although many of her former colleagues had been forced out of the universities , she was able to use the library as a " foreign scholar " . 
 = = Death = = 
 In April 1935 doctors discovered a tumor in Noether 's pelvis . Worried about complications from surgery , they ordered two days of bed rest first . During the operation they discovered an ovarian cyst " the size of a large cantaloupe " . Two smaller tumors in her uterus appeared to be benign and were not removed , to avoid prolonging surgery . For three days she appeared to convalesce normally , and she recovered quickly from a circulatory collapse on the fourth . On 14 April she fell unconscious , her temperature soared to 109 ° F ( 42 @.@ 8 ° C ) , and she died . " [ I ] t is not easy to say what had occurred in Dr. Noether " , one of the physicians wrote . " It is possible that there was some form of unusual and virulent infection , which struck the base of the brain where the heat centers are supposed to be located . " 
 A few days after Noether 's death her friends and associates at Bryn Mawr held a small memorial service at College President Park 's house . Hermann Weyl and Richard Brauer traveled from Princeton and spoke with Wheeler and Taussky about their departed colleague . In the months that followed , written tributes began to appear around the globe : Albert Einstein joined van der Waerden , Weyl , and Pavel Alexandrov in paying their respects . Her body was cremated and the ashes interred under the walkway around the cloisters of the M. Carey Thomas Library at Bryn Mawr . 
 = = Contributions to mathematics and physics = = 
 Noether 's work in abstract algebra and topology was influential in mathematics , while in physics , Noether 's theorem has far @-@ ranging consequences for theoretical physics and dynamic systems . She showed an acute propensity for abstract thought , which allowed her to approach problems of mathematics in fresh and original ways . Her friend and colleague Hermann Weyl described her scholarly output in three epochs : 
 Emmy Noether 's scientific production fell into three clearly distinct epochs : 
 ( 1 ) the period of relative dependence , 1907 – 1919 ; 
 ( 2 ) the investigations grouped around the general theory of ideals 1920 – 1926 ; 
 ( 3 ) the study of the non @-@ commutative algebras , their representations by linear transformations , and their application to the study of commutative number fields and their arithmetics . 
 In the first epoch ( 1907 – 19 ) , Noether dealt primarily with differential and algebraic invariants , beginning with her dissertation under Paul Gordan . Her mathematical horizons broadened , and her work became more general and abstract , as she became acquainted with the work of David Hilbert , through close interactions with a successor to Gordan , Ernst Sigismund Fischer . After moving to Göttingen in 1915 , she produced her seminal work for physics , the two Noether 's theorems . 
 In the second epoch ( 1920 – 26 ) , Noether devoted herself to developing the theory of mathematical rings . 
 In the third epoch ( 1927 – 35 ) , Noether focused on noncommutative algebra , linear transformations , and commutative number fields . 
 = = = Historical context = = = 
 In the century from 1832 to Noether 's death in 1935 , the field of mathematics — specifically algebra — underwent a profound revolution , whose reverberations are still being felt . Mathematicians of previous centuries had worked on practical methods for solving specific types of equations , e.g. , cubic , quartic , and quintic equations , as well as on the related problem of constructing regular polygons using compass and straightedge . Beginning with Carl Friedrich Gauss 's 1832 proof that prime numbers such as five can be factored in Gaussian integers , Évariste Galois 's introduction of permutation groups in 1832 ( although , because of his death , his papers were only published in 1846 by Liouville ) , William Rowan Hamilton 's discovery of quaternions in 1843 , and Arthur Cayley 's more modern definition of groups in 1854 , research turned to determining the properties of ever @-@ more @-@ abstract systems defined by ever @-@ more @-@ universal rules . Noether 's most important contributions to mathematics were to the development of this new field , abstract algebra . 
 = = = = Abstract algebra and <unk> Mathematik ( conceptual mathematics ) = = = = 
 Two of the most basic objects in abstract algebra are groups and rings . 
 A group consists of a set of elements and a single operation which combines a first and a second element and returns a third . The operation must satisfy certain constraints for it to determine a group : It must be closed ( when applied to any pair of elements of the associated set , the generated element must also be a member of that set ) , it must be associative , there must be an identity element ( an element which , when combined with another element using the operation , results in the original element , such as adding zero to a number or multiplying it by one ) , and for every element there must be an inverse element . 
 A ring likewise , has a set of elements , but now has two operations . The first operation must make the set a group , and the second operation is associative and distributive with respect to the first operation . It may or may not be commutative ; this means that the result of applying the operation to a first and a second element is the same as to the second and first — the order of the elements does not matter . If every non @-@ zero element has a multiplicative inverse ( an element x such that ax 
 = <unk> = 
 1 ) , the ring is called a division ring . A field is defined as a commutative division ring . 
 Groups are frequently studied through group representations . In their most general form , these consist of a choice of group , a set , and an action of the group on the set , that is , an operation which takes an element of the group and an element of the set and returns an element of the set . Most often , the set is a vector space , and the group represents symmetries of the vector space . For example , there is a group which represents the rigid rotations of space . This is a type of symmetry of space , because space itself does not change when it is rotated even though the positions of objects in it do . Noether used these sorts of symmetries in her work on invariants in physics . 
 A powerful way of studying rings is through their modules . A module consists of a choice of ring , another set , usually distinct from the underlying set of the ring and called the underlying set of the module , an operation on pairs of elements of the underlying set of the module , and an operation which takes an element of the ring and an element of the module and returns an element of the module . The underlying set of the module and its operation must form a group . A module is a ring @-@ theoretic version of a group representation : Ignoring the second ring operation and the operation on pairs of module elements determines a group representation . The real utility of modules is that the kinds of modules that exist and their interactions , reveal the structure of the ring in ways that are not apparent from the ring itself . An important special case of this is an algebra . ( The word algebra means both a subject within mathematics as well as an object studied in the subject of algebra . ) An algebra consists of a choice of two rings and an operation which takes an element from each ring and returns an element of the second ring . This operation makes the second ring into a module over the first . Often the first ring is a field . 
 Words such as " element " and " combining operation " are very general , and can be applied to many real @-@ world and abstract situations . Any set of things that obeys all the rules for one ( or two ) operation ( s ) is , by definition , a group ( or ring ) , and obeys all theorems about groups ( or rings ) . Integer numbers , and the operations of addition and multiplication , are just one example . For example , the elements might be computer data words , where the first combining operation is exclusive or and the second is logical conjunction . Theorems of abstract algebra are powerful because they are general ; they govern many systems . It might be imagined that little could be concluded about objects defined with so few properties , but precisely therein lay Noether 's gift : to discover the maximum that could be concluded from a given set of properties , or conversely , to identify the minimum set , the essential properties responsible for a particular observation . Unlike most mathematicians , she did not make abstractions by generalizing from known examples ; rather , she worked directly with the abstractions . As van der Waerden recalled in his obituary of her , 
 The maxim by which Emmy Noether was guided throughout her work might be formulated as follows : " Any relationships between numbers , functions , and operations become transparent , generally applicable , and fully productive only after they have been isolated from their particular objects and been formulated as universally valid concepts . " 
 This is the <unk> Mathematik ( purely conceptual mathematics ) that was characteristic of Noether . This style of mathematics was consequently adopted by other mathematicians , especially in the ( then new ) field of abstract algebra . 
 = = = = = Integers as an example of a ring = = = = = 
 The integers form a commutative ring whose elements are the integers , and the combining operations are addition and multiplication . Any pair of integers can be added or multiplied , always resulting in another integer , and the first operation , addition , is commutative , i.e. , for any elements a and b in the ring , a + b 
 = b + a . The second operation , multiplication , also is commutative , but that need not be true for other rings , meaning that a combined with b might be different from b combined with a . Examples of noncommutative rings include matrices and quaternions . The integers do not form a division ring , because the second operation cannot always be inverted ; there is no integer a such that 3 × a = 
 1 . 
 The integers have additional properties which do not generalize to all commutative rings . An important example is the fundamental theorem of arithmetic , which says that every positive integer can be factored uniquely into prime numbers . Unique factorizations do not always exist in other rings , but Noether found a unique factorization theorem , now called the Lasker – Noether theorem , for the ideals of many rings . Much of Noether 's work lay in determining what properties do hold for all rings , in devising novel analogs of the old integer theorems , and in determining the minimal set of assumptions required to yield certain properties of rings . 
 = = = First epoch ( 1908 – 19 ) = = = 
 = = = = Algebraic invariant theory = = = = 
 Much of Noether 's work in the first epoch of her career was associated with invariant theory , principally algebraic invariant theory . Invariant theory is concerned with expressions that remain constant ( invariant ) under a group of transformations . As an everyday example , if a rigid yardstick is rotated , the coordinates ( x1 , y1 , z1 ) and ( x2 , y2 , z2 ) of its endpoints change , but its length L given by the formula L2 
 = <unk> + <unk> + <unk> remains the same . Invariant theory was an active area of research in the later nineteenth century , prompted in part by Felix Klein 's Erlangen program , according to which different types of geometry should be characterized by their invariants under transformations , e.g. , the cross @-@ ratio of projective geometry . The archetypal example of an invariant is the discriminant B2 − <unk> of a binary quadratic form <unk> + <unk> + <unk> . This is called an invariant because it is unchanged by linear substitutions x → ax + by , y → cx + dy with determinant ad − bc = 
 1 . These substitutions form the special linear group SL2 . ( There are no invariants under the general linear group of all invertible linear transformations because these transformations can be multiplication by a scaling factor . To remedy this , classical invariant theory also considered relative invariants , which were forms invariant up to a scale factor . ) One can ask for all polynomials in A , B , and C that are unchanged by the action of SL2 ; these are called the invariants of binary quadratic forms , and turn out to be the polynomials in the discriminant . More generally , one can ask for the invariants of homogeneous polynomials <unk> + ... + <unk> of higher degree , which will be certain polynomials in the coefficients A0 , ... , Ar , and more generally still , one can ask the similar question for homogeneous polynomials in more than two variables . 
 One of the main goals of invariant theory was to solve the " finite basis problem " . The sum or product of any two invariants is invariant , and the finite basis problem asked whether it was possible to get all the invariants by starting with a finite list of invariants , called generators , and then , adding or multiplying the generators together . For example , the discriminant gives a finite basis ( with one element ) for the invariants of binary quadratic forms . Noether 's advisor , Paul Gordan , was known as the " king of invariant theory " , and his chief contribution to mathematics was his 1870 solution of the finite basis problem for invariants of homogeneous polynomials in two variables . He proved this by giving a constructive method for finding all of the invariants and their generators , but was not able to carry out this constructive approach for invariants in three or more variables . In 1890 , David Hilbert proved a similar statement for the invariants of homogeneous polynomials in any number of variables . Furthermore , his method worked , not only for the special linear group , but also for some of its subgroups such as the special orthogonal group . His first proof caused some controversy because it did not give a method for constructing the generators , although in later work he made his method constructive . For her thesis , Noether extended Gordan 's computational proof to homogeneous polynomials in three variables . Noether 's constructive approach made it possible to study the relationships among the invariants . Later , after she had turned to more abstract methods , Noether called her thesis Mist ( crap ) and <unk> ( a jungle of equations ) . 
 = = = = Galois theory = = = = 
 Galois theory concerns transformations of number fields that <unk> the roots of an equation . Consider a polynomial equation of a variable x of degree n , in which the coefficients are drawn from some ground field , which might be , for example , the field of real numbers , rational numbers , or the integers modulo 7 . There may or may not be choices of x , which make this polynomial evaluate to zero . Such choices , if they exist , are called roots . If the polynomial is x2 + 1 and the field is the real numbers , then the polynomial has no roots , because any choice of x makes the polynomial greater than or equal to one . If the field is extended , however , then the polynomial may gain roots , and if it is extended enough , then it always has a number of roots equal to its degree . Continuing the previous example , if the field is enlarged to the complex numbers , then the polynomial gains two roots , i and − i , where i is the imaginary unit , that is , i 2 
 = − 1 . More generally , the extension field in which a polynomial can be factored into its roots is known as the splitting field of the polynomial . 
 The Galois group of a polynomial is the set of all ways of transforming the splitting field , while preserving the ground field and the roots of the polynomial . ( In mathematical jargon , these transformations are called <unk> . ) The Galois group of x2 + 1 consists of two elements : The identity transformation , which sends every complex number to itself , and complex conjugation , which sends i to − i . Since the Galois group does not change the ground field , it leaves the coefficients of the polynomial unchanged , so it must leave the set of all roots unchanged . Each root can move to another root , however , so transformation determines a permutation of the n roots among themselves . The significance of the Galois group derives from the fundamental theorem of Galois theory , which proves that the fields lying between the ground field and the splitting field are in one @-@ to @-@ one correspondence with the subgroups of the Galois group . 
 In 1918 , Noether published a seminal paper on the inverse Galois problem . Instead of determining the Galois group of transformations of a given field and its extension , Noether asked whether , given a field and a group , it always is possible to find an extension of the field that has the given group as its Galois group . She reduced this to " Noether 's problem " , which asks whether the fixed field of a subgroup G of the permutation group Sn acting on the field k ( x1 , ... , xn ) always is a pure transcendental extension of the field k . ( She first mentioned this problem in a 1913 paper , where she attributed the problem to her colleague Fischer . ) She showed this was true for n = 
 2 , 3 , or 4 . In 1969 , R. G. Swan found a counter @-@ example to Noether 's problem , with n = 47 and G a cyclic group of order 47 ( although this group can be realized as a Galois group over the rationals in other ways ) . The inverse Galois problem remains unsolved . 
 = = = = Physics = = = = 
 Noether was brought to Göttingen in 1915 by David Hilbert and Felix Klein , who wanted her expertise in invariant theory to help them in understanding general relativity , a geometrical theory of gravitation developed mainly by Albert Einstein . Hilbert had observed that the conservation of energy seemed to be violated in general relativity , because gravitational energy could itself gravitate . Noether provided the resolution of this paradox , and a fundamental tool of modern theoretical physics , with Noether 's first theorem , which she proved in 1915 , but did not publish until 1918 . She not only solved the problem for general relativity , but also determined the conserved quantities for every system of physical laws that possesses some continuous symmetry . 
 Upon receiving her work , Einstein wrote to Hilbert : " Yesterday I received from Miss Noether a very interesting paper on invariants . I 'm impressed that such things can be understood in such a general way . The old guard at Göttingen should take some lessons from Miss Noether ! She seems to know her stuff . " 
 For illustration , if a physical system behaves the same , regardless of how it is oriented in space , the physical laws that govern it are rotationally symmetric ; from this symmetry , Noether 's theorem shows the angular momentum of the system must be conserved . The physical system itself need not be symmetric ; a jagged asteroid tumbling in space conserves angular momentum despite its asymmetry . Rather , the symmetry of the physical laws governing the system is responsible for the conservation law . As another example , if a physical experiment has the same outcome at any place and at any time , then its laws are symmetric under continuous translations in space and time ; by Noether 's theorem , these symmetries account for the conservation laws of linear momentum and energy within this system , respectively . 
 Noether 's theorem has become a fundamental tool of modern theoretical physics , both because of the insight it gives into conservation laws , and also , as a practical calculation tool . Her theorem allows researchers to determine the conserved quantities from the observed symmetries of a physical system . Conversely , it facilitates the description of a physical system based on classes of hypothetical physical laws . For illustration , suppose that a new physical phenomenon is discovered . Noether 's theorem provides a test for theoretical models of the phenomenon : if the theory has a continuous symmetry , then Noether 's theorem guarantees that the theory has a conserved quantity , and for the theory to be correct , this conservation must be observable in experiments . 
 = = = Second epoch ( 1920 – 26 ) = = = 
 Although the results of Noether 's first epoch were impressive and useful , her fame as a mathematician rests more on the groundbreaking work she did in her second and third epochs , as noted by Hermann Weyl and B. L. van der Waerden in their obituaries of her . 
 In these epochs , she was not merely applying ideas and methods of earlier mathematicians ; rather , she was crafting new systems of mathematical definitions that would be used by future mathematicians . In particular , she developed a completely new theory of ideals in rings , generalizing earlier work of Richard Dedekind . She is also renowned for developing ascending chain conditions , a simple finiteness condition that yielded powerful results in her hands . Such conditions and the theory of ideals enabled Noether to generalize many older results and to treat old problems from a new perspective , such as elimination theory and the algebraic varieties that had been studied by her father . 
 = = = = Ascending and descending chain conditions = = = = 
 In this epoch , Noether became famous for her deft use of ascending ( <unk> ) or descending ( <unk> ) chain conditions . A sequence of non @-@ empty subsets A1 , A2 , A3 , etc. of a set S is usually said to be ascending , if each is a subset of the next 
 <formula> 
 Conversely , a sequence of subsets of S is called descending if each contains the next subset : 
 <formula> 
 A chain becomes constant after a finite number of steps if there is an n such that <formula> for all m ≥ n . A collection of subsets of a given set satisfies the ascending chain condition if any ascending sequence becomes constant after a finite number of steps . It satisfies the descending chain condition if any descending sequence becomes constant after a finite number of steps . 
 Ascending and descending chain conditions are general , meaning that they can be applied to many types of mathematical objects — and , on the surface , they might not seem very powerful . Noether showed how to exploit such conditions , however , to maximum advantage : for example , how to use them to show that every set of sub @-@ objects has a maximal / minimal element or that a complex object can be generated by a smaller number of elements . These conclusions often are crucial steps in a proof . 
 Many types of objects in abstract algebra can satisfy chain conditions , and usually if they satisfy an ascending chain condition , they are called Noetherian in her honor . By definition , a Noetherian ring satisfies an ascending chain condition on its left and right ideals , whereas a Noetherian group is defined as a group in which every strictly ascending chain of subgroups is finite . A Noetherian module is a module in which every strictly ascending chain of <unk> becomes constant after a finite number of steps . A Noetherian space is a topological space in which every strictly ascending chain of open subspaces becomes constant after a finite number of steps ; this definition makes the spectrum of a Noetherian ring a Noetherian topological space . 
 The chain condition often is " inherited " by sub @-@ objects . For example , all subspaces of a Noetherian space , are Noetherian themselves ; all subgroups and quotient groups of a Noetherian group are likewise , Noetherian ; and , mutatis mutandis , the same holds for <unk> and quotient modules of a Noetherian module . All quotient rings of a Noetherian ring are Noetherian , but that does not necessarily hold for its <unk> . The chain condition also may be inherited by combinations or extensions of a Noetherian object . For example , finite direct sums of Noetherian rings are Noetherian , as is the ring of formal power series over a Noetherian ring . 
 Another application of such chain conditions is in Noetherian induction — also known as well @-@ founded induction — which is a generalization of mathematical induction . It frequently is used to reduce general statements about collections of objects to statements about specific objects in that collection . Suppose that S is a partially ordered set . One way of proving a statement about the objects of S is to assume the existence of a counterexample and deduce a contradiction , thereby proving the <unk> of the original statement . The basic premise of Noetherian induction is that every non @-@ empty subset of S contains a minimal element . In particular , the set of all counterexamples contains a minimal element , the minimal counterexample . In order to prove the original statement , therefore , it suffices to prove something seemingly much weaker : For any counterexample , there is a smaller counterexample . 
 = = = = Commutative rings , ideals , and modules = = = = 
 Noether 's paper , Idealtheorie in Ringbereichen ( Theory of Ideals in Ring Domains , 1921 ) , is the foundation of general commutative ring theory , and gives one of the first general definitions of a commutative ring . Before her paper , most results in commutative algebra were restricted to special examples of commutative rings , such as polynomial rings over fields or rings of algebraic integers . Noether proved that in a ring which satisfies the ascending chain condition on ideals , every ideal is finitely generated . In 1943 , French mathematician Claude <unk> coined the term , Noetherian ring , to describe this property . A major result in Noether 's 1921 paper is the Lasker – Noether theorem , which extends Lasker 's theorem on the primary decomposition of ideals of polynomial rings to all Noetherian rings . The Lasker – Noether theorem can be viewed as a generalization of the fundamental theorem of arithmetic which states that any positive integer can be expressed as a product of prime numbers , and that this decomposition is unique . 
 Noether 's work <unk> Aufbau der Idealtheorie in algebraischen <unk> und <unk> ( Abstract Structure of the Theory of Ideals in Algebraic Number and Function Fields , 1927 ) characterized the rings in which the ideals have unique factorization into prime ideals as the Dedekind domains : integral domains that are Noetherian , 0 or 1 @-@ dimensional , and integrally closed in their quotient fields . This paper also contains what now are called the isomorphism theorems , which describe some fundamental natural isomorphisms , and some other basic results on Noetherian and <unk> modules . 
 = = = = Elimination theory = = = = 
 In 1923 – 24 , Noether applied her ideal theory to elimination theory — in a formulation that she attributed to her student , Kurt <unk> — showing that fundamental theorems about the factorization of polynomials could be carried over directly . Traditionally , elimination theory is concerned with eliminating one or more variables from a system of polynomial equations , usually by the method of <unk> . For illustration , a system of equations often can be written in the form of a matrix M ( missing the variable x ) times a vector v ( having only different powers of x ) equaling the zero vector , M • v = 0 . Hence , the determinant of the matrix M must be zero , providing a new equation in which the variable x has been eliminated . 
 = = = = Invariant theory of finite groups = = = = 
 Techniques such as Hilbert 's original non @-@ constructive solution to the finite basis problem could not be used to get quantitative information about the invariants of a group action , and furthermore , they did not apply to all group actions . In her 1915 paper , Noether found a solution to the finite basis problem for a finite group of transformations G acting on a finite @-@ dimensional vector space over a field of characteristic zero . Her solution shows that the ring of invariants is generated by homogeneous invariants whose degree is less than , or equal to , the order of the finite group ; this is called Noether 's bound . Her paper gave two proofs of Noether 's bound , both of which also work when the characteristic of the field is coprime to | G | ! , the factorial of the order | G | of the group G. The degrees of generators need not satisfy Noether 's bound when the characteristic of the field divides the | G | , but Noether was not able to determine whether this bound was correct when the characteristic of the field divides | G | ! but not | G | . For many years , determining the truth or falsehood of this bound for this particular case was an open problem , called " Noether 's gap " . It was finally solved independently by Fleischmann in 2000 and Fogarty in 2001 , who both showed that the bound remains true . 
 In her 1926 paper , Noether extended Hilbert 's theorem to representations of a finite group over any field ; the new case that did not follow from Hilbert 's work is when the characteristic of the field divides the order of the group . Noether 's result was later extended by William Haboush to all reductive groups by his proof of the Mumford conjecture . In this paper Noether also introduced the Noether normalization lemma , showing that a finitely generated domain A over a field k has a set x1 , ... , xn of algebraically independent elements such that A is integral over k [ x1 , ... , xn ] . 
 = = = = Contributions to topology = = = = 
 As noted by Pavel Alexandrov and Hermann Weyl in their obituaries , Noether 's contributions to topology illustrate her generosity with ideas and how her insights could transform entire fields of mathematics . In topology , mathematicians study the properties of objects that remain invariant even under deformation , properties such as their connectedness . A common joke is that a topologist cannot distinguish a donut from a coffee mug , since they can be continuously deformed into one another . 
 Noether is credited with fundamental ideas that led to the development of algebraic topology from the earlier combinatorial topology , specifically , the idea of homology groups . According to the account of Alexandrov , Noether attended lectures given by Heinz Hopf and by him in the summers of 1926 and 1927 , where " she continually made observations which were often deep and subtle " and he continues that , 
 When ... she first became acquainted with a systematic construction of combinatorial topology , she immediately observed that it would be worthwhile to study directly the groups of algebraic complexes and cycles of a given polyhedron and the subgroup of the cycle group consisting of cycles homologous to zero ; instead of the usual definition of Betti numbers , she suggested immediately defining the Betti group as the complementary ( quotient ) group of the group of all cycles by the subgroup of cycles homologous to zero . This observation now seems self @-@ evident . But in those years ( 1925 – 28 ) this was a completely new point of view . 
 Noether 's suggestion that topology be studied algebraically was adopted immediately by Hopf , Alexandrov , and others , and it became a frequent topic of discussion among the mathematicians of Göttingen . Noether observed that her idea of a Betti group makes the Euler – Poincaré formula simpler to understand , and Hopf 's own work on this subject " bears the imprint of these remarks of Emmy Noether " . Noether mentions her own topology ideas only as an aside in a 1926 publication , where she cites it as an application of group theory . 
 This algebraic approach to topology was also developed independently in Austria . In a 1926 – 27 course given in Vienna , Leopold Vietoris defined a homology group , which was developed by Walther Mayer , into an axiomatic definition in 1928 . 
 = = = Third epoch ( 1927 – 35 ) = = = 
 = = = = Hypercomplex numbers and representation theory = = = = 
 Much work on hypercomplex numbers and group representations was carried out in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries , but remained disparate . Noether united these results and gave the first general representation theory of groups and algebras . Briefly , Noether subsumed the structure theory of associative algebras and the representation theory of groups into a single arithmetic theory of modules and ideals in rings satisfying ascending chain conditions . This single work by Noether was of fundamental importance for the development of modern algebra . 
 = = = = Noncommutative algebra = = = = 
 Noether also was responsible for a number of other advancements in the field of algebra . With Emil Artin , Richard Brauer , and Helmut Hasse , she founded the theory of central simple algebras . 
 A seminal paper by Noether , Helmut Hasse , and Richard Brauer pertains to division algebras , which are algebraic systems in which division is possible . They proved two important theorems : a local @-@ global theorem stating that if a finite @-@ dimensional central division algebra over a number field splits locally everywhere then it splits globally ( so is trivial ) , and from this , deduced their <unk> ( " main theorem " ) : every finite dimensional central division algebra over an algebraic number field F splits over a cyclic cyclotomic extension . These theorems allow one to classify all finite @-@ dimensional central division algebras over a given number field . A subsequent paper by Noether showed , as a special case of a more general theorem , that all maximal subfields of a division algebra D are splitting fields . This paper also contains the Skolem – Noether theorem which states that any two embeddings of an extension of a field k into a finite @-@ dimensional central simple algebra over k , are conjugate . The Brauer – Noether theorem gives a characterization of the splitting fields of a central division algebra over a field . 
 = = Assessment , recognition , and memorials = = 
 Noether 's work continues to be relevant for the development of theoretical physics and mathematics and she is consistently ranked as one of the greatest mathematicians of the twentieth century . In his obituary , fellow algebraist BL van der Waerden says that her mathematical originality was " absolute beyond comparison " , and Hermann Weyl said that Noether " changed the face of algebra by her work " . During her lifetime and even until today , Noether has been characterized as the greatest woman mathematician in recorded history by mathematicians such as Pavel Alexandrov , Hermann Weyl , and Jean Dieudonné . 
 In a letter to The New York Times , Albert Einstein wrote : 
 In the judgment of the most competent living mathematicians , Fräulein Noether was the most significant creative mathematical genius thus far produced since the higher education of women began . In the realm of algebra , in which the most gifted mathematicians have been busy for centuries , she discovered methods which have proved of enormous importance in the development of the present @-@ day younger generation of mathematicians . 
 On 2 January 1935 , a few months before her death , mathematician Norbert Wiener wrote that 
 Miss Noether is ... the greatest woman mathematician who has ever lived ; and the greatest woman scientist of any sort now living , and a scholar at least on the plane of Madame Curie . 
 At an exhibition at the 1964 World 's Fair devoted to Modern Mathematicians , Noether was the only woman represented among the notable mathematicians of the modern world . 
 Noether has been honored in several memorials , 
 The Association for Women in Mathematics holds a Noether Lecture to honor women in mathematics every year ; in its 2005 pamphlet for the event , the Association characterizes Noether as " one of the great mathematicians of her time , someone who worked and struggled for what she loved and believed in . Her life and work remain a tremendous inspiration " . 
 Consistent with her dedication to her students , the University of Siegen houses its mathematics and physics departments in buildings on the Emmy Noether Campus . 
 The German Research Foundation ( Deutsche <unk> ) operates the Emmy Noether Programme , providing funding to early @-@ career researchers to rapidly qualify for a leading position in science and research by leading an independent junior research group . 
 A street in her hometown , Erlangen , has been named after Emmy Noether and her father , Max Noether . 
 The successor to the secondary school she attended in Erlangen has been renamed as the Emmy Noether School . 
 A series of high school workshops and competitions are held in her honor in May of each year since 2001 , originally hosted by a subsequent woman mathematics Privatdozent of the University of Göttingen . 
 Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics annually awards Emmy Noether Visiting Fellowships to outstanding female theoretical physicists . Perimeter Institute is also home to the Emmy Noether Council , a group of volunteers made up of international community , corporate and philanthropic leaders work together to increase the number of women in physics and mathematical physics at Perimeter Institute . 
 The Emmy Noether Mathematics Institute in Algebra , Geometry and Function Theory in the Department of Mathematics and Computer Science , Bar @-@ Ilan University , Ramat Gan , Israel was jointly founded in 1992 by the university , the German government and the Minerva Foundation with the aim to stimulate research in the above fields and to encourage collaborations with Germany . Its main topics are Algebraic Geometry , Group theory and Complex Function Theory . Its activities includes local research projects , conferences , short @-@ term visitors , post @-@ doc fellowships , and the Emmy Noether lectures ( an annual series of distinguished lectures ) . ENI is a member of <unk> : " European Research Centers of Mathematics " . 
 In fiction , Emmy Nutter , the physics professor in " The God Patent " by Ransom Stephens , is based on Emmy Noether . 
 Farther from home , 
 The crater <unk> on the far side of the Moon is named after her . 
 The <unk> Noether asteroid also is named for Emmy Noether . 
 Google put a memorial doodle on Google 's homepage in many countries on 23 March 2015 to celebrate Emmy Noether 's 133rd birthday . 
 = = List of doctoral students = = 
 = = Eponymous mathematical topics = = 
 = = = Selected works by Emmy Noether ( in German ) = = = 
 Noether , Emmy ( 1908 ) , " Über die Bildung des <unk> der <unk> <unk> Form " [ On Complete Systems of Invariants for Ternary <unk> Forms ] , Journal für die reine und <unk> Mathematik ( in German ) ( DE : Uni Göttingen ) 134 : 23 – 90 and two tables , doi : 10 @.@ 1515 / <unk> . 
 — — — ( 1913 ) , " Rationale <unk> " [ Rational Function Fields ] , J. Ber . D. DMV ( in German ) ( DE : Uni Göttingen ) 22 : 316 – 19 . 
 — — — ( 1915 ) , " Der <unk> der <unk> <unk> Gruppen " [ The Finiteness Theorem for Invariants of Finite Groups ] ( PDF ) , Mathematische Annalen ( in German ) ( DE : Digizeitschriften ) 77 : 89 – 92 , doi : 10 @.@ 1007 / <unk> 
 — — — ( 1918 ) , " <unk> mit <unk> Gruppe " [ Equations with Prescribed Group ] , Mathematische Annalen ( in German ) 78 : 221 – 29 , doi : 10 @.@ 1007 / <unk> . 
 — — — ( <unk> ) , " <unk> <unk> " [ Invariant Variation Problems ] , <unk> . D. König . <unk> . D. Wiss . ( in German ) ( Göttingen : Math @-@ <unk> . Klasse ) 1918 : 235 – 257 . English translation by M. A. <unk> ( 1918 ) , arXiv : physics / <unk> . 
 — — — ( 1921 ) , " Idealtheorie in Ringbereichen " [ The Theory of Ideals in Ring Domains ] ( PDF ) , Mathematische Annalen ( in German ) ( <unk> ) 83 ( 1 ) , doi : 10 @.@ 1007 / <unk> , ISSN 0025 @-@ <unk> . 
 — — — ( 1923 ) , " Zur Theorie der <unk> und <unk> " ( PDF ) , Mathematische Annalen ( in German ) ( DE : Digizeitschriften ) 88 : 53 – 79 , doi : 10 @.@ 1007 / <unk> . 
 — — — ( <unk> ) , " <unk> und <unk> Idealtheorie " ( PDF ) , Mathematische Annalen ( in German ) ( DE : Digizeitschriften ) 90 ( 3 – 4 ) : 229 – 61 , doi : 10 @.@ 1007 / <unk> . 
 — — — ( 1924 ) , " <unk> und Idealtheorie " , <unk> der Deutschen Mathematiker @-@ Vereinigung ( in German ) ( DE : Uni Göttingen ) 33 : 116 – 20 . 
 — — — ( 1926 ) , " Der <unk> der <unk> <unk> <unk> Gruppen der <unk> p " [ Proof of the Finiteness of the Invariants of Finite Linear Groups of Characteristic p ] , <unk> . <unk> . Wiss ( in German ) ( DE : Uni Göttingen ) : 28 – 35 . 
 — — — ( <unk> ) , " <unk> der <unk> aus der Gruppentheorie " [ Derivation of the Theory of Elementary <unk> from Group Theory ] , <unk> der Deutschen Mathematiker @-@ Vereinigung ( in German ) ( DE : Digizeitschriften ) , 34 ( Abt . 2 ) : 104 . 
 — — — ( 1927 ) , " <unk> Aufbau der Idealtheorie in algebraischen <unk> und <unk> " [ Abstract Structure of the Theory of Ideals in Algebraic Number Fields ] ( PDF ) , Mathematische Annalen ( in German ) 96 ( 1 ) : 26 – 61 , doi : 10 @.@ 1007 / <unk> . 
 Brauer , Richard ; Noether , Emmy ( 1927 ) , " Über <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> " [ On the Minimum Splitting Fields of Irreducible Representations ] , <unk> . Ber . D. Preuss . <unk> . D. Wiss . ( in German ) : 221 – 28 . 
 Noether , Emmy ( 1929 ) , " <unk> <unk> und <unk> " [ Hypercomplex Quantities and the Theory of Representations ] , Mathematische Annalen ( in German ) 30 : 641 – 92 , doi : 10 @.@ 1007 / <unk> . 
 Brauer , Richard ; Hasse , Helmut ; Noether , Emmy ( 1932 ) , " <unk> eines <unk> in der Theorie der <unk> " [ Proof of a Main Theorem in the Theory of Algebras ] , Journal für Math . ( in German ) ( DE : Uni Göttingen ) 167 : 399 – 404 . 
 Noether , Emmy ( 1933 ) , " Nichtkommutative <unk> " [ Noncommutative Algebras ] , Mathematische Zeitschrift ( in German ) 37 : 514 – 41 , doi : 10 @.@ 1007 / <unk> . 
 — — — ( 1983 ) , Jacobson , Nathan , ed . , Gesammelte Abhandlungen [ Collected papers ] ( in German ) , Berlin , New York : Springer @-@ Verlag , pp. viii , 777 , ISBN 3 @-@ 540 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 , MR <unk> . 
 = = = Additional sources = = = 
 Phillips , Lee ( May 2015 ) , The female mathematician who changed the course of physics — but couldn ’ t get a job , Ars Technica . 
 Alexandrov , Pavel S. ( 1981 ) , " In Memory of Emmy Noether " , in Brewer , James W ; Smith , Martha K , Emmy Noether : A Tribute to Her Life and Work , New York : Marcel Dekker , pp. 99 – 111 , ISBN 0 @-@ 8247 @-@ 1550 @-@ 0 . 
 Blue , Meredith ( 2001 ) , Galois Theory and Noether 's Problem ( PDF ) , Thirty @-@ Fourth Annual Meeting : Florida Section of The Mathematical Association of America . 
 Byers , Nina ( December 1996 ) , " E. Noether 's Discovery of the Deep Connection Between Symmetries and Conservation Laws " , Proceedings of a Symposium on the Heritage of Emmy Noether , IL : Bar @-@ Ilan University , arXiv : physics / <unk> . 
 Byers , Nina ( 2006 ) , " Emmy Noether " , in Byers , Nina ; Williams , Gary , Out of the Shadows : Contributions of 20th Century Women to Physics , Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , ISBN 0 @-@ 521 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 Dick , Auguste ( 1981 ) , Emmy Noether : 1882 – 1935 , Boston : Birkhäuser , ISBN 3 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . Trans . H. I. Blocher . 
 Fleischmann , Peter ( 2000 ) , " The Noether bound in invariant theory of finite groups " , Advances in Mathematics 156 ( 1 ) : 23 – 32 , doi : 10 @.@ 1006 / <unk> , MR <unk> . 
 Fogarty , John ( 2001 ) , " On Noether 's bound for polynomial invariants of a finite group " , Electronic Research Announcements of the American Mathematical Society 7 ( 2 ) : 5 – 7 , doi : 10 @.@ 1090 / <unk> @-@ 6762 @-@ 01 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 , MR <unk> , retrieved 16 June 2008 
 Gilmer , Robert ( 1981 ) , " Commutative Ring Theory " , in Brewer , James W ; Smith , Martha K , Emmy Noether : A Tribute to Her Life and Work , New York : Marcel Dekker , pp. 131 – 43 , ISBN 0 @-@ 8247 @-@ 1550 @-@ 0 . 
 Gordan , Paul ( 1870 ) , " Die <unk> Systeme <unk> Formen " , Mathematische Annalen ( in German ) 2 ( 2 ) : 227 – 280 , doi : 10 @.@ 1007 / <unk> . 
 Haboush , WJ ( 1975 ) , " <unk> groups are geometrically reductive " , Ann . Math . ( The Annals of Mathematics , Vol . 102 , No. 1 ) 102 ( 1 ) : 67 – 83 , doi : 10 @.@ 2307 / <unk> , JSTOR <unk> . 
 Hasse , Helmut ( 1933 ) , " Die <unk> der R. <unk> <unk> über einem algebraischen <unk> " , Mathematische Annalen ( in German ) 107 : 731 – 760 , doi : 10 @.@ 1007 / <unk> . 
 Hilbert , David ( December 1890 ) , " Ueber die Theorie der algebraischen Formen " , Mathematische Annalen ( in German ) 36 ( 4 ) : 473 – 534 , doi : 10 @.@ 1007 / <unk> . 
 Hilton , Peter ( 1988 ) , " A Brief , Subjective History of Homology and Homotopy Theory in This Century " , Mathematics Magazine 60 ( 5 ) : 282 – 91 , JSTOR <unk> ? 
 Hopf , Heinz ( 1928 ) , " Eine <unk> der Euler @-@ <unk> <unk> " , Nachrichten von der Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Göttingen . <unk> @-@ Physikalische Klasse ( in German ) 2 : 127 – 36 . 
 James , Ioan ( 2002 ) , Remarkable Mathematicians from Euler to von Neumann , Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , ISBN 0 @-@ 521 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 <unk> , Clark ( 1981 ) , " Emmy Noether and Her Influence " , in Brewer , James W ; Smith , Martha K , Emmy Noether : A Tribute to Her Life and Work , New York : Marcel Dekker , pp. 3 – 61 , ISBN 0 @-@ 8247 @-@ 1550 @-@ 0 . 
 Lam , <unk> Yuen ( 1981 ) , " Representation Theory " , in Brewer , James W ; Smith , Martha K , Emmy Noether : A Tribute to Her Life and Work , New York : Marcel Dekker , pp. 145 – 56 , ISBN 0 @-@ 8247 @-@ 1550 @-@ 0 . 
 Lederman , Leon M. ; Hill , Christopher T ( 2004 ) , Symmetry and the Beautiful Universe , Amherst : Prometheus Books , ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 242 @-@ 8 . 
 Mac Lane , Saunders ( 1981 ) , " Mathematics at the University of Göttingen 1831 – 1933 " , in Brewer , James W ; Smith , Martha K , Emmy Noether : A Tribute to Her Life and Work , New York : Marcel Dekker , pp. 65 – 78 , ISBN 0 @-@ 8247 @-@ 1550 @-@ 0 . 
 Malle , Gunter ; <unk> , Bernd Heinrich ( 1999 ) , Inverse Galois theory , Springer Monographs in Mathematics , Berlin , New York : Springer @-@ Verlag , ISBN 978 @-@ 3 @-@ 540 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 , MR <unk> . 
 Noether , Gottfried E ( 1987 ) , <unk> , LS ; Campbell , PJ , eds . , Women of Mathematics , New York : Greenwood press , ISBN 0 @-@ 313 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 Noether , Max ( 1914 ) , " Paul Gordan " , Mathematische Annalen 75 ( 1 ) : 1 – 41 , doi : 10 @.@ 1007 / <unk> . 
 <unk> , Lynn M. ( 1974 ) , " Emmy ( Amalie ) Noether " , Women in Mathematics , MIT Press , pp. 141 – 52 , ISBN 0 @-@ 262 @-@ <unk> @-@ X . 
 <unk> , Lutz D ( 2003 ) , Dictionary of Minor Planet Names ( 5th revised and enlarged ed . ) , Berlin : Springer @-@ Verlag , ISBN 3 @-@ 540 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 Swan , Richard G ( 1969 ) , " Invariant rational functions and a problem of Steenrod " , <unk> Mathematicae 7 ( 2 ) : 148 – 158 , doi : 10 @.@ 1007 / <unk> . 
 Taussky , Olga ( 1981 ) , " My Personal Recollections of Emmy Noether " , in Brewer , James W ; Smith , Martha K , Emmy Noether : A Tribute to Her Life and Work , New York : Marcel Dekker , pp. 79 – 92 , ISBN 0 @-@ 8247 @-@ 1550 @-@ 0 . 
 <unk> , M. ( ed . ) ( 1999 ) , The Heritage of Emmy Noether , Israel Mathematical Conference Proceedings , Bar @-@ Ilan University , American Mathematical Society , Oxford University Press , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 , OCLC <unk> 
 van der Waerden , B.L. ( 1935 ) , " <unk> auf Emmy Noether " [ obituary of Emmy Noether ] , Mathematische Annalen ( in German ) 111 : 469 – 74 , doi : 10 @.@ 1007 / <unk> . Reprinted in Dick 1981 . 
 — — — ( 1985 ) , A History of Algebra : from al @-@ Khwārizmī to Emmy Noether , Berlin : Springer @-@ Verlag , ISBN 0 @-@ 387 @-@ <unk> @-@ X . 
 Weyl , Hermann ( 1935 ) , " Emmy Noether " , <unk> Mathematica 3 ( 3 ) : 201 – 220 , reprinted as an appendix to Dick ( 1981 ) . 
 Weyl , Hermann ( 1944 ) , " David Hilbert and his mathematical work " , Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 50 ( 9 ) : 612 – 654 , doi : 10 @.@ 1090 / <unk> @-@ 9904 @-@ 1944 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 , MR <unk> . 
 = W. R. van Hoëvell = 
 Wolter Robert van Hoëvell ( 14 July 1812 – 10 February 1879 ) was a Dutch minister , politician , reformer , and writer . Born into nobility and trained in the Dutch Reformed Church , he worked for eleven years as a minister in the Dutch East Indies . He led a Malay @-@ speaking congregation , engaged in scholarly research and cultural activities , and became an outspoken critic of Dutch colonialism . His activism culminated when he acted as one of the leaders of a short @-@ lived protest in 1848 . During the event , a multi @-@ ethnic group of Batavian inhabitants presented their grievances to the local government . As a result of his leadership in the protest , van Hoëvell was forced to resign his position in the Indies . 
 After his return to the Netherlands , he served as a member of parliament for the Dutch Liberal party from 1849 to 1862 , and from 1862 until his death he was a member of the State Council . He used his political position to continue critiquing the Dutch colonial system ; nicknamed " chief of the colonial opposition " , he was the first Dutch politician to do so eloquently and <unk> , and inspired writers such as Multatuli . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Youth = = = 
 Van Hoëvell was born in Deventer to one of the last of the old noble families in the Netherlands . His parents were Gerrit Willem Wolter Carel , Baron van <unk> ( born Deventer , 21 April 1778 ) , and Emerentia <unk> Isabella , Baroness van der <unk> ( born Haarlem , 31 August 1787 ) ; he grew up with six brothers and sisters . While van Hoëvell was still young , the family moved to Groningen where he attended Latin school . Van Hoëvell enrolled in the University of Groningen in 1829 and studied theology . In 1830 , he saw military action in Belgium during the abortive attempt by the North @-@ Netherlands to maintain the unity of the United Kingdom of the Netherlands . He returned from the war gravely ill , but recovered and then returned to the university . He graduated summa cum laude with a dissertation on Irenaeus in 1836 , and in that same year married <unk> Johanna Trip , with whom he would have two daughters and four sons ; one daughter and one son died young . 
 = = = Ministry and activism in Dutch East Indies = = = 
 Van Hoëvell left the Netherlands to become a minister in Batavia in the Dutch East Indies , where he led a Malay and Dutch @-@ speaking congregation . In 1838 , he received an additional appointment , as historian for the local government , and began traveling throughout the area . He worked in the East Indies until 1848 , when he received an official reprimand from the Dutch government for publicizing his views critical of colonialism ; consequently he was forced to resign . 
 = = = = 1848 protest = = = = 
 Van Hoëvell played an important part in the short @-@ lived protest in Batavia that has been called the " 1848 Batavian Revolution " . Partly inspired by the February 1848 uprising in Paris , Batavian citizens began to challenge the authorities ; one of their grievances was an 1842 decree that dictated that positions in the upper echelons of the Dutch administration could be held only by those who had received the appropriate certificate from the Royal Academy in Delft . The measure discriminated against both " Dutch @-@ born and creole Dutch " who could not or did not want to send their children to the Netherlands for a decade of education . The measure also discriminated against the class referred to as Indo @-@ Europeans , who were thus barred from promotion above the level of " the lowliest civil service jobs . " As a consequence of this discrimination across racial barriers , the May 1848 protest could draw a mixed group of citizens , " identified as ' Europeans , ' ' creoles , ' and ' colored ' " by the authorities . 
 Van Hoëvell emerged as one of the " principal organizers " in the protest and called a meeting , with official approval , to discuss " better access to government jobs for locally born colonizers through expanded educational offerings " . Starting on 17 May , van Hoëvell and others met many times with Governor @-@ General Jan Jacob Rochussen to discuss what kind of meeting was to be held and what demands would be made . During this time , van Hoëvell was able to move the proposed meeting place from a private residence to the central hall of De Harmonie , the club house of the Batavian citizen 's society , and he organized transportation for whoever wished to come , including his own congregation . 
 The organizers received permission from Rochussen for their meeting since they had argued that their grievances were social matters , not " matters of state , " and that they did not form a political threat to the government . However , on 20 May van Hoëvell printed the kind of anti @-@ government rhetoric he had been asked to refrain from in a journal he published . There were also signals at other public events of growing unease among the locally born Dutch population as well as the large Indo @-@ European population , who had held protests of their own and delivered a petition to Rochussen . Taking all these developments in consideration , Rochussen concluded that the meeting in De Harmonie should be considered subversive and a danger to the state ; he let it be known that armed troops were ready to take control of the situation if need be . At 6 PM on 22 May , people were flocking to the club house , and by 7 PM it was packed . Van Hoëvell was quickly proclaimed to be president of the assembly . Soon after , though , the meeting became unruly and the shouts of a few led to a riot . In an increasingly unruly atmosphere , the protestors ousted van Hoëvell from his presidency as quickly as they had raised him to the position , after which he and others left the building . The protest fizzled out soon afterward . 
 = = = = Resignation = = = = 
 By mid @-@ 1848 , van Hoëvell had become too controversial and perhaps too important to those who disagreed with the local government , and under pressure from the Governor @-@ General he resigned his post on 19 July 1848 . After a packed final service in the <unk> in August , he was sent off by " half the population of Batavia " ; his final sermon , based on Epistle to the Hebrews 13 : 18 – 19 , suggested that he hoped to return to the Indies . Later , he characterized the Governor @-@ General as more powerful than the Dutch king : " he is the sun , at which all eyes are aimed ; when he laughs , everyone laughs ; if he looks serious , then the entire multitude frowns its face . " 
 = = = = Scholarship and other activities in the Indies = = = = 
 In Batavia , he was an active scholar , publishing on linguistics , language , and history . In 1838 he founded a journal , Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsch @-@ Indië ( " Journal for the Dutch East Indies " ) , which he edited until 1862 , and he edited and translated a fourteenth @-@ century romantic poem written in the Jawi alphabet , the Syair <unk> . He was chairman of the Batavian Society of Arts and Sciences and its president after 1845 , and published a book on the colony 's arts and sciences and one on the colony 's history . Van Hoëvell traveled widely , studied languages and artifacts , and visited local Muslim rulers ; he judged the threat of Islam to be much less insidious than the restrictions from the Dutch government or the danger posed by domestic Catholics . He was awarded with knighthood in the Order of the Netherlands Lion in 1847 . 
 He became a friend and correspondent of Eduard <unk> Dekker , who under the pseudonym Multatuli published Max Havelaar , the 1860 satire that exposed colonial corruption in Java ; Dekker was one of the first subscribers to Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsch @-@ Indië . Another acquaintance was W. Bosch , chief of the public health services in the colony , who had written critically on the effects of the colonial system on the health of the population , arguing to his superiors that they should help combat poverty , malnourishment , and communicable diseases . Bosch had provided logistical assistance during the events of May 1848 , and they remained friends even after van Hoëvell returned to the Netherlands . 
 = = = Return to the Netherlands : political career = = = 
 While Rochussen had been glad to see him go , back in the Netherlands van Hoëvell fared better politically . He was vindicated when the government canceled the acceptance of his forced resignation , and he was cleared of any wrongdoing in the events of May 1848 . The publication of the Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsch @-@ Indië , which had stopped at his expulsion from Batavia , was resumed in 1849 , now in a less repressive environment . For some pamphlets , he used the pseudonym <unk> . In September 1849 , he was elected to the House of Representatives of the Netherlands for the Liberal party and he remained a member of parliament until 1862 . He was one of only a handful of Dutch parliamentarians who had actually been to the East Indies , and often spoke eloquently on colonial matters in parliament . He became " one of the most ferocious critics " of the Cultivation System , the government @-@ run system ( already criticized by W. Bosch and others ) that demanded that the local peasantry set aside a significant portion of their land to grow crops for the Dutch to export . Van Hoëvell was a proponent of private ownership , and argued that the system , besides being immoral , was also economically ineffective . His criticism of Dutch colonial practices extended to the Dutch West India Company ; he was a supporter of abolitionism at a time when Dutch colonists owned tens of thousands of slaves , mainly on plantations in Surinam . 
 In parliament , he continued what had become his mission : to educate the Dutch citizenry on the nature of Dutch colonialism . In his speeches , he occasionally used confidential government information sent to him from the Indies by his friend Bosch . With great expertise and sometimes " disturbing eloquence " he criticized the Dutch government for generating millions from the colonies while denying the locals " education , Christianity , and the blessings of progress " . 
 In 1860 , he was one of those politicians who forced Prime Minister and Minister of Colonial Affairs Jan Jacob Rochussen , his former Governor @-@ General , to resign his post , in part because a corruption scandal in the East Indies came to light . In that same year he promoted his friend Multatuli 's Max Havelaar , announcing in parliament that the book had sent tremors through the country . On 1 July 1862 , he was appointed to the Council of State of the Netherlands , where he served until his death in The Hague on 10 February 1879 . His wife died on 9 January 1888 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Van Hoëvell , deemed a " radical " for his opinions , stands alongside Dirk van Hogendorp as one of the most important and best @-@ known Dutch anti @-@ colonialists of the nineteenth century before Multatuli — he is regarded as one of Multatuli 's predecessors . He was a passionate man , who felt it his duty to inform the Dutch citizenry of the arrogance of the Dutch colonial rulers , the widespread corruption among the native ruling classes , and the imposition of backbreaking labor on the local peasantry . Moreover , according to van Hoëvell , the colonial system harmed relationships between peoples . These were themes that were also discussed by Multatuli in his Max Havelaar . Van Hoëvell 's efforts to abolish slavery , especially his 1854 book Slaves and free people under Dutch law , are credited with having hastened the emancipation of Dutch @-@ owned slaves in the East Indies in 1859 and in the West Indies in 1863 . The book is included in the Canon of Dutch Literature . 
 = = Publications = = 
 <unk> <unk> van de <unk> van <unk> en <unk> in Nederlands @-@ Indië ( " History of the practice of arts and sciences in the Dutch East Indies " ) . 1839 . 
 Episode uit de <unk> van <unk> @-@ Indië ( " Episode from the history of the Dutch East Indies " ) . 1840 . 
 <unk> <unk> . <unk> <unk> <unk> met een <unk> en <unk> ( " Originally Malay poem with translation and notes " ) . Batavia , 1844 . 
 <unk> en <unk> in Indië en <unk> in Nederland ( " Accusation and condemnation in the Indies and justification in the Netherlands " ) . 1850 
 De <unk> en de <unk> ( " The printing press and the Javanese " ) . 1851 . 
 Slaven en <unk> <unk> de Nederlandsche wet ( " Slaves and free people under Dutch law " ) . 1854 . 
 Reis over Java , Madura en Bali in het midden van 1847 ( " A journey across Java , Madura , and Bali in mid @-@ 1847 " ) . 1850 . 
 <unk> het Indische leven ( " From life in the Indies " ) . 1860 . Second edition printed in 1865 . 
 = Paper Airplane ( The Office ) = 
 " Paper Airplane " is the twentieth episode of the ninth season of the American comedy television series The Office . It originally aired on NBC on April 25 , 2013 . The episode features guest appearances from Roseanne Barr as Andy 's agent Carla Fern . In addition , it was also the final half @-@ hour episode of the series , being the fourth @-@ to @-@ last episode aired . 
 The series — presented as if it were a real documentary — depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania , branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In the episode , the office staff compete against each other in a paper airplane contest . Meanwhile , Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) prepares for a potential acting job , and Jim ( John Krasinski ) and Pam Halpert ( Jenna Fischer ) utilize new skills that they learned in couples ' counseling . 
 The episode received mostly mixed reviews from critics ; some felt that the episode was humorous , whereas others were critical of the main plot involving Pam and Jim . The episode was viewed by 3 @.@ 25 million viewers and received a 1 @.@ 7 / 5 rating among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 , giving it the lowest viewership rating of any episode of The Office . " Paper Airplane " ranked fourth in its timselot , but was nevertheless the highest @-@ rated NBC series of the night . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A paper airplane contest is being hosted at Dunder Mifflin by a new paper supplier . All of the office workers compete against each other for a $ 2 @,@ 000 prize . Erin Hannon in particular is fiercely competitive , and even as she realizes that she is showing an ugly side of herself to her boyfriend Pete Miller , she cannot hold back from smashing a box of packing peanuts when she loses in the semi @-@ finals . After several intense rounds , it comes down to Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) and Angela Lipton ( Angela Kinsey ) . Dwight , who is dating Esther ( Nora Kirkpatrick ) , tries to throw the contest . Angela is flattered by the gesture . However , when Esther expresses her condolences to Angela about her financial situation since her husband separated from her , she realizes that Dwight is letting her win out of pity , not love . Angered , she rebuffs Dwight 's pity and lets him win the contest . 
 Meanwhile , Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) prepares for an acting job in a laboratory safety video that was arranged by his talent agent , Carla Fern ( Roseanne Barr ) . The directors continuously have to talk him out of overacting , and he backs down from shooting a scene using an eye wash , since he has an aversion towards anything being shot into his eye . However , Carla threatens to have him blacklisted if he doesn 't go through with the scene . Darryl Philbin ( Craig Robinson ) , who came along as friendly support , gives Andy the confidence to shoot the scene , and in the end Andy even insists on doing two takes . 
 In couples ' counseling , Jim ( John Krasinski ) and Pam Halpert ( Jenna Fischer ) have been told to express appreciation for the things their spouse does for them , be frank about things that make them unhappy , and refer to anything they don 't want to do but must as an opportunity . Their exercising of these three habits is stiff and formal to begin with , and becomes increasingly snarky as the day goes on . Despite this , as Jim leaves the office to return to his business , he confesses to Pam that he thinks the three habits are helping and that they should keep them up . After he leaves , Pam runs after him to give him an umbrella . Jim takes the umbrella , and then embraces his wife , who finds that she lacks the emotional conviction to hug him back . However , she remembers that by marrying Jim she promised to love him in spite of any hardships , and she lovingly embraces him and kisses him . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Paper Airplane " was written by co @-@ executive producers Halsted Sullivan and Warren Lieberstein , marking their first writing credit for the season , as well as their first writing credit since season eight 's " Turf War " . It was directed by first @-@ time Office director , Jesse Peretz . Comedian Roseanne Barr guest stars in this episode . It was announced on January 31 , 2013 that she would be doing a two episode arc and would play a talent agent named Carla Fern . Barr began filming her scenes the week following January 31 . She first appeared in the previous episode , " Stairmageddon " . 
 The episode features both archival footage — as well as new footage — of Pam and Jim 's wedding from the sixth season episode " Niagara " . In order to get a shot of Pam and Jim looking into the camera , Greg Daniels restaged the scene four years after " Niagara " had been filmed . Daniels noted , " To get Jim and Pam 's eye line right for the camera , I stepped in as the minister [ when the camera was facing them ] so they were both looking at me with the full actor @-@ power of all the emotions they were supposed to be feeling at their own wedding , just blasting in my face . I got chills and a fever . " 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Dwight refers to the new paper as the " Cadillac of paper " . Andy notes that if he is successful in his industrial film , he could potentially land a role in the movie <unk> 2 , a sequel to the 2011 film Moneyball starring Brad Pitt . When told to act like he is doing a newscast , Andy does a Tom Brokaw impersonation . Andy also says that if necessary he will go all @-@ nude for the role in a " full @-@ on Lena Dunham " , a reference to her skit at the 64th Primetime Emmy Awards . Darryl tells Andy that he was in a production of The Wiz in high school . Kevin mistakes Orville and Wilbur Wright — the credited inventors of the airplane — for " Wilbur and Orville <unk> " — a brand of popcorn . In the last scene , when Jim and Pam resolve their differences , the cut @-@ scene shows the minister reading 1 Corinthians 13 : 7 – 13 from the Bible . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Paper Airplane " originally aired on April 25 , 2013 on NBC . In its original American broadcast , the episode was viewed by an estimated 3 @.@ 25 million viewers and received a 1 @.@ 7 rating / 5 percent share . At 3 @.@ 25 million viewers , it is the lowest rated episode of the series to ever air . This means that it was seen by 1 @.@ 7 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 5 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . This marked a decrease in the ratings from the previous episode , " Stairmageddon " . The Office ranked fourth in its timeslot , being beaten by an episode of the ABC series Grey 's Anatomy which scored a 2 @.@ 7 / 7 rating , an entry of the CBS series Person of Interest which garnered a 2 @.@ 4 / 7 rating , and installment of the Fox series Glee which received a 1 @.@ 8 / 5 rating . When DVR numbers were included , the episode was watched by 4 @.@ 956 million viewers and increased its ratings up 65 percent to a 2 @.@ 8 , meaning it was seen by , in total , 2 @.@ 8 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Roth Cornet of IGN awarded the episode an 8 @.@ 5 out of 10 , denoting a " great " episode . She praised the final scene , and said that Pam 's decision was " a gorgeously simple emotional shift " . She was complimentary towards the balance between characters and felt that " the rest of the episode was entertaining and well constructed , if not earth shatteringly hilarious . " Dan Forcella of TV Fanatic awarded the episode four out of five stars , summarizing that " An otherwise funny episode of The Office , highlighted by Toby 's awkwardness , Dwight 's craziness and Kevin 's pride , was held back by yet another trip down Pam and Jim 's boring avenue of problems . " 
 Nick Campbell of TV.com gave the episode a more moderate review , writing that " The Jam story was probably the only bright spot for me in an episode generally devoid of chuckles " , and that it was " not a terrible episode , but basic and a little boring . " He was complimentary towards the conclusion of the Jim @-@ Pam plot , noting that the final scene was " a warm moment " , although he was surprised by the scene 's placement in the season as a whole . Alan Sepinwall of HitFix wrote positively of the finale scene , noting that " it really worked " , and that Krasinski and Fischer were " terrific " during the sequence . However , he said that the " comedy parts of ' Paper Airplane ' were so dire I 'm not going to dwell on them at all " . 
 Erik Adams of The A.V. Club awarded the episode a " C + " and felt that the finale scene , while set up to be emotional , was " hollow " . He argued that the tension does not feel as threatening as it should ; he compared it to the second season episode " Casino Night " , which had invoked real fears about the future of Jim and Pam . He summed up : " I wish the final scene of “ Paper Airplane ” made me feel something deeper . " Adams also was not impressed with the Dwight @-@ Angela storyline , but was " enjoying Andy ’ s day on the industrial @-@ safety film — much more so than [ he ] anticipated " due to the " unintentional hilarity " that ensued . 
 Roseanne Bar 's performance was later submitted by the producers of The Office for an " Outstanding Guest Actor in Comedy Series " Emmy consideration . 
 = Château de Chinon = 
 Château de Chinon is a castle located on the bank of the Vienne river in Chinon , France . It was founded by Theobald I , Count of Blois . In the 11th century the castle became the property of the counts of Anjou . In 1156 Henry II of England , a member of the House of Anjou , took the castle from his brother Geoffrey after he had rebelled for a second time . Henry favoured the Château de Chinon as a residence : most of the standing structure can be attributed to his reign and he died there in 1189 . 
 Early in the 13th century , King Philip II of France harassed the English lands in France and in 1205 he captured Chinon after a siege that lasted several months , after which the castle remained under French control . When King Philip IV accused the Knights Templar of heresy during the first decade of the 14th century , several leading members of the order were imprisoned there . 
 Used by Charles VII in the 15th century , the Château de Chinon became a prison in the second half of the 16th century , but then fell out of use and was left to decay . It has been recognised as a monument historique by the French Ministry of Culture since 1840 . The castle , which contains a museum , is now owned and managed by the Indre @-@ et @-@ Loire General Council and is a major tourist attraction . In the early 21st century it was restored at a cost of 14 @.@ 5 million euros . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The settlement of Chinon is on the bank of the Vienne river about 10 kilometres ( 6 mi ) from where it joins the Loire . From prehistoric times , when the settlement of Chinon originated , rivers formed the major trade routes , and the Vienne joins the fertile southern plains of the Poitou and the city of Limoges to the thoroughfare of the Loire . The site was fortified early on , and by the 5th century a Gallo @-@ Roman castrum had been established . Theobald I , Count of Blois built the earliest known castle on the mount of Chinon in the 10th century . He fortified it for use as a stronghold . After Odo II , Count of Blois died in battle in 1037 , Fulk III , Count of Anjou marched into Touraine to capture Château de Langeais and then Chinon , some 22 km ( 14 mi ) away . When Fulk arrived at Chinon the castle 's garrison immediately sought terms and surrendered . In 1044 , Geoffrey ( the count of Anjou ) captured Theobald of Blois @-@ Chartres . In exchange for his release , Theobald agreed to recognise Geoffrey 's ownership of Chinon , Langeais , and Tours . From then until the early 13th century , Château de Chinon descended through his heirs . 
 = = = Counts of Anjou = = = 
 According to contemporaneous chronicler Robert of Torigni , on the death of Geoffrey Plantagenet , Count of Anjou in 1151 his second son , who was also called Geoffrey , inherited four castles . Robert did not specify which these were , but historian W. L. Warren speculated that Chinon , Loudun , and Mirebeau numbered amongst these castles as they were in the territory which may have been traditionally the inheritance of the second oldest son . Geoffrey rebelled against his older brother , Henry , in 1152 . Henry negotiated with the castellans of the castles of Chinon , Loudun , and Mirebeau to surrender before laying siege to Château de <unk> . Following the loss of <unk> , Geoffrey surrendered to his brother . By 1156 Chinon , Loudun , and Mirebeau were back under Geoffrey 's control . That year he readied them for war as he rebelled against Henry a second time . In the intervening years , his brother had been crowned King Henry II of England at the end of a long @-@ running civil war . Henry besieged and captured Geoffrey 's castles in the summer of 1156 and kept them under his control , giving Geoffrey an annuity of £ 1 @,@ 500 in compensation . The presence of a treasury and one of Henry II 's main arsenals marked Chinon as a particularly important castle in the 12th century . It was a primary residence of Henry II who was responsible for construction of almost all of the massive castle . 
 In 1173 Henry II betrothed his youngest son , Prince John , to the daughter of Count Humbert , an influential lord in Provence . John had no land , but as part of the arrangement Henry promised him the castles of Chinon , Loudun , and Mirebeau . Henry II 's eldest son , also called Henry , had been crowned King of England alongside his father but had no land of his own and was angered by the situation . His discontent grew and Henry the Young King demanded some of the land promised to him be handed over , claiming to have the support of the English barons and his father @-@ in @-@ law , King Louis VII of France . While the king was at Limoges he was informed of a conspiracy involving his wife and sons to overthrow him . Choosing to keep his eldest son by his side , Henry II set off north to Normandy , ensuring along the way that his castles in Aquitaine were prepared for war . En route they stayed at Chinon ; under the cover of darkness Henry the Young King escaped and set off to Paris to join the court of Louis VII . Two of Henry the Young King 's brothers , Richard and Geoffrey , joined him in rebellion along with the barons of France and some in England . War followed , lasting until 1174 , and Chinon , Loudun , and Châtellerault were key to Henry II 's defence . 
 After the revolt ended in 1174 , relations between Henry II and his sons continued to be strained . By 1187 Henry the Young King was dead , Richard was in line to inherit , and Henry II was on the brink of war with Philip II . In June that year Richard travelled to Paris with Philip II and struck up a friendship with the French king . Concerned his son might turn against him , Henry II asked him to return . Richard went to Chinon and raided the castle 's treasury so he could fund the repair of his own castles in Aquitaine . In 1189 Richard and Philip were wreaking havoc in Maine and Toulouse , capturing Henry II 's castles ; the king was ill and went to Château de Chinon . He left briefly in July to meet with Richard and Philip II and agree a truce , and died at Chinon on 6 July . The king 's body was taken to Fontevraud Abbey and Richard became king . 
 In 1199 , John succeeded his brother as King of England . By 1202 his lands in France were under threat from Philip II of France , threatening the east , and the barons of Brittany . In January 1203 John sent a band of mercenaries to retrieve Queen Isabelle from Chinon as it was under threat from rebels . In the spring Hubert de Burgh , 1st Earl of Kent , took over as commander of Chinon 's garrison ; the war was not going in John 's favour and in August that year he ordered the demolition of several castles , including Château de <unk> , to prevent them from being used by the enemy . By 1205 , Chinon was one of the last castles in the Loire Valley . Château de Chinon fell to French force in the Easter of 1205 after a siege of several months ; damage to the castle meant the garrison was no longer able to hold out so sallied to meet the French outside the castle walls . Hubert de Burgh was injured and taken prisoner in the event , and would remain in captivity until 1207 . Soon after Château de Chinon was captured , Philip II took Normandy from the England crown . The French king was a prolific castle @-@ builder and was responsible for building the cylindrical keep at Chinon , the Tour du Coudray . The round keep was typical of French design the period , a departure from usually square keeps , and was repeated by Philip II at the castles of Dourdan , Falaise , Gisors , Laon , and Lillebonne . 
 = = = French rule = = = 
 Though it was not the reason they were built , castles could often be used as prisons . One such instance from the 14th century illustrates this aspect of Château de Chinon 's history . Founded in the Holy Land as a crusading military order in the early 12th century , the Knights Templar had , by the close of the 13th century , gained swathes of lands in Europe , particularly France . King Philip IV of France had the members of the order in his kingdom arrested , accusing them of heretical practices . The leaders of the order , including the Grand Master Jacques de Molay , were imprisoned at Château de Chinon , in the Tour du Coudray built by Philip II one century earlier . Graffiti carved by the imprisoned knights can be seen on the walls of the tower . In August 1308 , Pope Clement V sent three cardinals to hear the leaders ' confessions . The outcome was that in 1312 the pope issued a bull , the Vox in excelso , suppressing the order and its property was given to the Knights Hospitaller . The leaders were sentenced to life imprisonment , apart from Jacques de Molay and Geoffrey de Charney who were burnt at the stake . 
 The Hundred Years ' War in the 14th and 15th centuries was fought between the kings of England and France over the succession to the French throne . The war ended in 1453 when the English were finally ejected from France , but in the early 15th century the English under King Henry V made significant territorial gains . The Treaty of Troyes in 1420 made Henry V the heir apparent to the French throne but when the French king , Charles VI , and Henry V died in the space of two months in 1422 the issue of succession was again uncertain . The English supported Henry V 's son , Henry VI who was still a child , while the French supported recognised Charles VII , the Dauphin of France . Between 1427 and 1450 Château de Chinon was the residence of Charles , when Touraine was virtually the only territory left to him in France , the rest being occupied by the Burgundians or the English . 
 On 6 March 1429 Joan of Arc arrived at Château de Chinon . She claimed to hear heavenly voices that said Charles would grant her an army to relieve the siege of Orléans . While staying at the castle she resided in the Tour du Coudray . Charles met with her two days after her arrival and then sent her to Poitiers so that she could be cross @-@ examined to ensure she was telling the truth . Joan returned to Chinon in April where Charles granted her supplies and sent her to join the army at Orléans . 
 In 1562 the château came briefly into the possession of the Huguenots and was turned into a state prison by Henry IV of France . Cardinal Richelieu was given the castle to prevent it from coming under the control of unfriendly forces , though he allowed it to fall into ruin . Château de Chinon was abandoned until 1793 when , during the Reign of Terror , the castle was temporarily occupied by royalist <unk> . Soon after , the castle lapsed back into decay . 
 The 19th century saw increasing public interest in France 's heritage and efforts were undertaken to preserve historic buildings . In 1830 the newly crowned Louis Philippe I created the role of Inspector @-@ General of Historic Monuments . Prosper Mérimée , better known as a writer , assumed the position in 1834 and helped halt the decay that had set in at Château de Chinon and instigated repairs to the structure . Since 1840 , the castle has been recognised as a monument historique by the French Ministry of Culture . 
 Between 2003 and 2010 the castle was the subject of a massive excavation and restoration project , costing 14 @.@ 5 million euros . It was hoped that the restored castle would attract 250 @,@ 000 tourists a year with a visitor centre built in the Fort St @-@ George , which was entirely excavated in advance . Before the visitor centre was built , the Fort St @-@ George was the subject of an archaeological excavation which covered nearly 4 @,@ 000 square metres ( 43 @,@ 000 sq ft ) , unearthing the entire interior of the fort . The royal lodgings ( logis <unk> ) which were roofless for two hundred years , were restored inside and out and given with a mock 15th @-@ century interior . In addition about 150 metres ( 490 ft ) of the ramparts were also restored as well as the Tour du Coudray . Today , it is owned and managed by the Indre @-@ et @-@ Loire General Council and is a major tourist attraction . 
 = = Description = = 
 Standing on a rocky outcrop above the Vienne river , Château de Chinon has natural defences on three sides and a ditch dug along the fourth . Writing in the 12th century , the chronicler William of Newburgh commented that even before Château de Chinon came under the control of Henry II " its strength was such that nature seemed to vie with human art in fortifying and defending it " . That said , in the 12th century Henry II undertook a project of rebuilding the castle and much of the extant remains date from this period . The stone used to build the castle was quarried on the site . 
 The castle is divided , along its length , into three enclosures , each separated by a deep dry moat . There are some similarities with Château Gaillard , built by Richard the Lionheart in the closing years of the 12th century , which also consists of three enclosures and sits on a promontory above a nearby town . 
 The easternmost enclosure is known as Fort St @-@ Georges , the central is the Château du Milieu ( the middle castle ) , while the westernmost is known as the Fort du Coudray . The Fort St @-@ George was built under Henry II and contained a chapel dedicated England 's patron saint . The Château du Coudray was added by Philip II in the early 13th century , while the Château de Milieu was built in the 12th and 14th centuries . The round Tour du Coudray built by Philip II ( which has parallels at Dourdan , Falaise , Gisors , Laon , and Lillebonne ) guarded the bridge linking the Fort du Coudray and the Château de Milieu . While the curtain wall stands in many places , the buildings within the château do not survive to the same extent , and in many cases little more can be said about them than the location of their foundations and possible use . 
 = Halo Legends = 
 Halo Legends is a collection of seven short anime films set in the Halo science @-@ fiction universe . Financed by Halo franchise overseer 343 Industries , the stories were created by six Japanese production houses : Bee Train , Bones , Casio Entertainment , Production I.G. , Studio 4 ° C , and Toei Animation . Shinji Aramaki , creator and director of Appleseed and Appleseed Ex Machina , serves as the project 's creative director . Warner Bros. released Legends on DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc on February 16 , 2010 . 
 The idea for an anime compilation existed for years before there was momentum for the project . 343 creative director Frank O 'Connor produced story outlines or finished scripts that the production houses animated in a variety of styles . 
 = = Development = = 
 To oversee development of the entire Halo franchise , Microsoft created an internal division , 343 Industries , to manage the Halo brand . Frank O 'Connor , 343 's creative director , said that such a move was vital : " If you look at how George Lucas held on to Star Wars , not just to make money from action figures but to control the direction the universe went in , you can see why we think it 's pretty vital . " 
 Halo Legends had origins in the 2006 Marvel Comics tie @-@ in , The Halo Graphic Novel ; O 'Connor said that the idea of an anime compilation existed for years before there was momentum for the project . Wanting to tell smaller stories in a different format than video games and novels and in different art styles , O 'Connor said that anime was a natural fit . An additional consideration was that 343 Industries felt that the Japanese style of narrative fit the stories well . Most of the animation studios Microsoft approached were available for the project . Most studios were " afraid " of creating their own stories , even if they were familiar with the series , so O 'Connor sent them possible story treatments . Microsoft was deeply involved in making sure story details were correct and writing the scripts for the stories — O 'Connor estimated that 50 % of the dialogue in the final products were verbatim from the original scripts . While all the stories save one are considered canon , O 'Connor noted that some discrepancies were the cause of artistic interpretation . 
 The animation studios were given wide latitude in their presentation . " We realized very early on [ that Halo ] could take interpretation , " said O 'Connor , saying that the look @-@ and @-@ feel of the universe persisted even through differing artistic styles . In developing their stories and styles , the anime studios were supplied with access to Halo 's story bible and art assets . 
 One of the artistic styles that is the most radical departure from traditional animation styles is in " The Duel " , which employs a filter that makes every cell look as though it was hand painted by watercolors . His goal that he was aiming for in this project was , " to make audiences understand there should be other styles of animation beyond the existing two primary kinds of animation presented — precisely cel @-@ drawing 2D style and CG 3D style . I wanted to show that creators are not limited , that they have many options for different ( animation ) styles to create stories . " 
 Voice recording for the English dub was done by Seraphim Digital in Houston , Texas . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 Several episodes were originally broadcast on Halo Waypoint on the specified date . The episodes range in length from ten to twenty minutes . 
 The DVD released in 2010 has another episode sequence . 
 Origins I 
 Origins II 
 The Duel 
 Homecoming 
 Odd One Out 
 Prototype 
 The Babysitter 
 The Package 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Halo Legends was originally to be released on February 9 , but launch was pushed back a week to February 16 . The compilation comes in three different retail packages : a standard DVD release with all the episodes , a two @-@ disc special @-@ edition which contains additional commentary , and the Blu @-@ ray Disc edition , featuring the special @-@ edition features and a summary of the Halo storyline . The film 's United States premiere was held at the AMC Metreon in San Francisco on February 10 , with the companion soundtrack released by Sumthing Distribution the day previous . 
 Reception to Legends was mixed . Orlando <unk> of IGN UK wrote that while the decision to merge Halo and Japanese anime seemed an odd choice , " Halo Legends proves a successful — if uneven — attempt to fuse these two universes , and will certainly prove essential viewing for those with more than a passing interest in Bungie 's seminal shooters . " IGN US reviewers Cindy White and Christopher Monfette said that the short films " prove surprisingly accessible to sci @-@ fi fans in general , " and that the collection was " well worth " the time . Matt Miller of Game Informer said that Halo Legends would appeal to story @-@ interested fans of the franchise , not those who cared about multiplayer gameplay . 
 Based on Rentrak and Home Media Magazine numbers , Legends ranked second and fourth in Blu @-@ ray Disc and DVD sales , respectively , during its first week of sales in the United States . It also ranked seventh in Blu @-@ ray Disc rankings in Japan . In its second week it dropped off the US Blu @-@ ray Disc Top 20 charts , and slipped to tenth for DVD sales . According to The @-@ <unk> , Legends sold $ 2 @.@ 56 million worth of merchandise or 168 @,@ 000 DVDs its first week . Total sales have reached $ 8 @.@ 32 million , selling almost 600 @,@ 000 units . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The soundtrack was composed by various artists , such as Tetsuya Takahashi and Yasuharu Takanashi . Although the soundtrack contains mostly remixes of original work by Martin O 'Donnell and Michael Salvatori , it also has some original material of its own . 
 = Composite image filter = 
 A composite image filter is an electronic filter consisting of multiple image filter sections of two or more different types . 
 The image method of filter design determines the properties of filter sections by calculating the properties they have in an infinite chain of such sections . In this , the analysis parallels transmission line theory on which it is based . Filters designed by this method are called image parameter filters , or just image filters . An important parameter of image filters is their image impedance , the impedance of an infinite chain of identical sections . 
 The basic sections are arranged into a ladder network of several sections , the number of sections required is mostly determined by the amount of stopband rejection required . In its simplest form , the filter can consist entirely of identical sections . However , it is more usual to use a composite filter of two or three different types of section to improve different parameters best addressed by a particular type . The most frequent parameters considered are stopband rejection , steepness of the filter skirt ( transition band ) and impedance matching to the filter terminations . 
 Image filters are linear filters and are invariably also passive in implementation . 
 = = History = = 
 The image method of designing filters originated at AT & T , who were interested in developing filtering that could be used with the multiplexing of many telephone channels on to a single cable . The researchers involved in this work and their contributions are briefly listed below ; 
 John Carson provided the mathematical underpinning to the theory . He invented single sideband modulation for the purpose of multiplexing telephone channels . It was the need to recover these signals that gave rise to the need for advanced filtering techniques . He also pioneered the use of operational calculus ( what has now become Laplace transforms in its more formal mathematical guise ) to analyse these signals . 
 George Campbell worked on filtering from 1910 onwards and invented the constant k filter . This can be seen as a continuation of his work on loading coils on transmission lines , a concept invented by Oliver Heaviside . Heaviside , incidentally , also invented the operational calculus used by Carson . 
 Otto Zobel provided a theoretical basis ( and the name ) for Campbell 's filters . In 1920 he invented the m @-@ derived filter . Zobel also published composite designs incorporating both constant k and m @-@ derived sections . 
 R S Hoyt also contributed . 
 = = The image method = = 
 The image analysis starts with a calculation of the input and output impedances ( the image impedances ) and the transfer function of a section in an infinite chain of identical sections . This can be shown to be equivalent to the performance of a section terminated in its image impedances . The image method , therefore , relies on each filter section being terminated with the correct image impedance . This is easy enough to do with the internal sections of a multiple section filter , because it is only necessary to ensure that the sections facing the one in question have identical image impedances . However , the end sections are a problem . They will usually be terminated with fixed resistances that the filter cannot match perfectly except at one specific frequency . This mismatch leads to multiple reflections at the filter terminations and at the junctions between sections . These reflections result in the filter response deviating quite sharply from the theoretical , especially near the cut @-@ off frequency . 
 The requirement for better matching to the end impedances is one of the main motivations for using composite filters . A section designed to give good matching is used at the ends but something else ( for instance stopband rejection or passband to stopband transition ) is designed for the body of the filter . 
 = = Filter section types = = 
 Each filter section type has particular advantages and disadvantages and each has the capability to improve particular filter parameters . The sections described below are the prototype filters for low @-@ pass sections . These prototypes may be scaled and transformed to the desired frequency bandform ( low @-@ pass , high @-@ pass , band @-@ pass or band @-@ stop ) . 
 The smallest unit of an image filter is an L half @-@ section . Because the L section is not symmetrical , it has different image impedances ( <formula> ) on each side . These are denoted <formula> and <formula> . The T and the Π in the suffix refer to the shape of the filter section that would be formed if two half sections were to be connected back @-@ to @-@ back . T and Π are the smallest symmetrical sections that can be constructed , as shown in diagrams in the topology chart ( below ) . Where the section in question has an image impedance different from the general case a further suffix is added identifying the section type , for instance <formula> . 
 = = = Constant k section = = = 
 The constant k or k @-@ type filter section is the basic image filter section . It is also the simplest circuit topology . The k @-@ type has moderately fast transition from the passband to the stopband and moderately good stopband rejection . 
 = = = m @-@ derived section = = = 
 The m @-@ derived or m @-@ type filter section is a development of the k @-@ type section . The most prominent feature of the m @-@ type is a pole of attenuation just past the cut @-@ off frequency inside the stopband . The parameter m ( 0 < m < 1 ) adjusts the position of this pole of attenuation . Smaller values of m put the pole closer to the cut @-@ off frequency . Larger values of m put it further away . In the limit , as m approaches unity , the pole approaches ω of infinity and the section approaches a k @-@ type section . 
 The m @-@ type has a particularly fast cut @-@ off , going from fully pass at the cut @-@ off frequency to fully stop at the pole frequency . The cut @-@ off can be made faster by moving the pole nearer to the cut @-@ off frequency . This filter has the fastest cut @-@ off of any filter design ; note that the fast transition is achieved with just a single section , there is no need for multiple sections . The drawback with m @-@ type sections is that they have poor stopband rejection past the pole of attenuation . 
 There is a particularly useful property of m @-@ type filters with m = 0 @.@ 6 . These have maximally flat image impedance <formula> in the passband . They are therefore good for matching in to the filter terminations , in the passband at least , the stopband is another story . 
 There are two variants of the m @-@ type section , series and shunt . They have identical transfer functions but their image impedances are different . The shunt half @-@ section has an image impedance which matches <formula> on one side but has a different impedance , <formula> on the other . The series half @-@ section matches <formula> on one side and has <formula> on the other . 
 = = = mm ' -type section = = = 
 The mm ' -type section has two independent parameters ( m and m ' ) that the designer can adjust . It is arrived at by double application of the m @-@ derivation process . Its chief advantage is that it rather better at matching in to resistive end terminations than the k @-@ type or m @-@ type . The image impedance of a half @-@ section is <formula> on one side and a different impedance , <formula> on the other . Like the m @-@ type , this section can be constructed as a series or shunt section and the image impedances will come in T and Π variants . Either a series construction is applied to a shunt m @-@ type or a shunt construction is applied to a series m @-@ type . The advantages of the mm ' -type filter are achieved at the expense of greater circuit complexity so it would normally only be used where it is needed for impedance matching purposes and not in the body of the filter . 
 The transfer function of an mm ' -type is the same as an m @-@ type with m set to the product mm ' . To choose values of m and m ' for best impedance match requires the designer to choose two frequencies at which the match is to be exact , at other frequencies there will be some deviation . There is thus some leeway in the choice but Zobel suggests the values m = 0 @.@ 7230 and m ' = 0 @.@ 4134 which give a deviation of the impedance of less than 2 % over the useful part of the band . Since mm ' = 0 @.@ 3 , this section will also have a much faster cut @-@ off than an m @-@ type of m = 0 @.@ 6 which is an alternative for impedance matching . 
 It is possible to continue the m @-@ derivation process repeatedly and produce mm 'm ' ' <unk> and so on . However , the improvements obtained diminish at each iteration and are not usually worth the increase in complexity . 
 = = = Bode 's filter = = = 
 Another variation on the m @-@ type filter was described by Hendrik Bode . This filter uses as a prototype a mid @-@ series m @-@ derived filter and transforms this into a bridged @-@ T topology with the addition of a bridging resistor . This section has the advantage of being able to place the pole of attenuation much closer to the cut @-@ off frequency than the Zobel filter , which starts to fail to work properly with very small values of m because of inductor resistance . See equivalent impedance transforms for an explanation of its operation . 
 = = = Zobel network = = = 
 The distinguishing feature of Zobel network filters is that they have a constant resistance image impedance and for this reason are also known as constant resistance networks . Clearly , the Zobel network filter does not have a problem matching to its terminations and this is its main advantage . However , other filter types have steeper transfer functions and sharper cut @-@ offs . In filtering applications , the main role of Zobel networks is as equalisation filters . Zobel networks are in a different group from other image filters . The constant resistance means that when used in combination with other image filter sections the same problem of matching arises as with end terminations . Zobel networks also suffer the disadvantage of using far more components than other equivalent image sections . 
 = = = Effect of end terminations = = = 
 A consequence of the image method of filter design is that the effect of the end terminations has to be calculated separately if its effects on response are to be taken into account . The most severe deviation of the response from that predicted occurs in the passband close to cut @-@ off . The reason for this is twofold . Further into the passband the impedance match progressively improves , thus limiting the error . On the other hand , waves in the stopband are reflected from the end termination due to mismatch but are attenuated twice by the filter stopband rejection as they pass through it . So while stopband impedance mismatch may be severe , it has only limited effect on the filter response . 
 = = Cascading sections = = 
 Several L half @-@ sections may be cascaded to form a composite filter . The most important rule when constructing a composite image filter is that the image impedances must always face an identical impedance ; like must always face like . T sections must always face T sections , Π sections must always face Π sections , k @-@ type must always face k @-@ type ( or the side of an m @-@ type which has the k @-@ type impedance ) and m @-@ type must always face m @-@ type . Furthermore , m @-@ type impedances of different values of m cannot face each other . Nor can sections of any type which have different values of cut @-@ off frequency . 
 Sections at the beginning and end of the filter are often chosen for their impedance match in to the terminations rather than the shape of their frequency response . For this purpose , m @-@ type sections of m = 0 @.@ 6 are the most common choice . An alternative is mm ' -type sections of m = 0 @.@ 7230 and m ' = 0 @.@ 4134 although this type of section is rarely used . While it has several advantages noted below , it has the disadvantages of being more complex and also , if constant k sections are required in the body of the filter , it is then necessary to include m @-@ type sections to interface the mm ' -type to the k @-@ types . 
 The inner sections of the filter are most commonly chosen to be constant k since these produce the greatest stopband attenuation . However , one or two m @-@ type sections might also be included to improve the rate of fall from pass to stopband . A low value of m is chosen for m @-@ types used for this purpose . The lower the value of m , the faster the transition , while at the same time , the stopband attenuation becomes less , increasing the need to use extra k @-@ type sections as well . An advantage of using mm ' <unk> for impedance matching is that these type of end sections will have a fast transition anyway ( much more so than m = 0 @.@ 6 m @-@ type ) because mm ' = 0 @.@ 3 for impedance matching . So the need for sections in the body of the filter to do this may be dispensed with . 
 Another reason for using m @-@ types in the body of the filter is to place an additional pole of attenuation in the stopband . The frequency of the pole directly depends on the value of m . The smaller the value of m , the closer the pole is to the cut @-@ off frequency . Conversely , a large value of m places the pole further away from cut @-@ off until in the limit when m = 1 the pole is at infinity and the response is the same as the k @-@ type section . If a value of m is chosen for this pole which is different from the pole of the end sections it will have the effect of broadening the band of good stopband rejection near to the cut @-@ off frequency . In this way the m @-@ type sections serve to give good stopband rejection near to cut @-@ off and the k @-@ type sections give good stopband rejection far from cut @-@ off . Alternatively , m @-@ type sections can be used in the body of the filter with different values of m if the value found in the end sections is unsuitable . Here again , the mm ' -type would have some advantages if used for impedance matching . The mm ' -type used for impedance matching places the pole at m = 0 @.@ 3 . However , the other half of the impedance matching section needs to be an m @-@ type of m = 0 @.@ 723 . This automatically gives a good spread of stopband rejection and as with the steepness of transition issue , use of mm ' -type sections may remove the need for additional m @-@ type sections in the body . 
 Constant resistance sections may also be required , if the filter is being used on a transmission line , to improve the flatness of the passband response . This is necessary because the transmission line response is not usually anywhere near perfectly flat . These sections would normally be placed closest to the line since they present a predictable impedance to the line and also tend to mask the indeterminate impedance of the line from the rest of the filter . There is no issue with matching constant resistance sections to each other even when the sections are operating on totally different frequency bands . All sections can be made to have precisely the same image impedance of a fixed resistance . 
 = = = Image filter types = = = 
 Constant k filter 
 m @-@ derived filter 
 General mn @-@ type image filters 
 mm ' -type filter 
 Zobel network 
 Lattice filter 
 = = = Design concepts = = = 
 Image impedance 
 Prototype filter 
 Loading coils 
 = = = People = = = 
 Otto Zobel 
 George Campbell 
 John Renshaw Carson 
 Oliver Heaviside 
 = Aryacakravarti dynasty = 
 The Aryacakravarti dynasty ( Tamil : <unk> ் <unk> ் <unk> ் <unk> ் <unk> ் <unk> ் <unk> ் ) were kings of the Jaffna Kingdom in Sri Lanka . The earliest Sri Lankan sources , between 1277 and 1283 , mention a military leader of this name as a minister in the services of the Pandyan Empire ; he raided the western Sri Lankan coast and took the politically significant relic of the Buddha ’ s tooth from the Sinhalese capital city of Yapahuwa . Political and military leaders of the same family name left a number of inscriptions in the modern @-@ day Tamil Nadu state , with dates ranging from 1272 to 1305 , during the late Pandyan Empire . According to contemporary native literature , the family also claimed lineage from the Tamil Brahmins of the prominent Hindu pilgrimage temple of Rameswaram in the modern Ramanathapuram District of India . They ruled the Jaffna kingdom from the 13th until the 17th century , when the last of the dynasty , Cankili II , was ousted by the Portuguese . 
 = = Origin theories = = 
 The origins of the Aryacakravarti are claimed in contemporary court chronicles ; modern historians offer some competing theories . 
 = = = Pandyan feudatory family = = = 
 From the thirteenth @-@ century inscriptions commemorating dignitaries calling themselves Aryacakravartis in present @-@ day Tamil Nadu we can deduce that they hailed from the coastal region of present @-@ day Ramanathapuram District , which they called <unk> Nadu . They administered land and held important military ranks . It is believed that who had become prominent during the days of the Pandyan king Maravarman Kulasekaran . 
 Furthermore , the title Cakravarti seem to have been commonly used in the Pandyan kingdom as job title . . Compound titles exist , such as <unk> that belonged to a <unk> chief as well as <unk> belonged to a <unk> chief . <unk> in Tamil denote a title that belong to a person from North Indian origin . Thus the title Arayacakravarti seems to consider to be originated from Satavahanas , fit the structure of similarly used titles across the Pandyan kingdom . 
 Some of the dignitaries noted in the inscriptions are one Devar Arayacakravarti , <unk> Arayacakravarti , <unk> Arayacakravarti and <unk> Arayacakravarti of whom Devar Arayacakravarti has at least two known inscriptions of which one at <unk> in Ramanathapuram in 1272 is the earliest . He caused a second inscription ( 1305 ) in <unk> in Ramanathapuram to be engraved thus indicating he was a minister or a feudatory . Notably the inscriptions also had the epithet <unk> signifying " in the order of Cetu . " 
 According to a Sinhalese primary source Culavamsa , a warlord or minister named Aryacakravarti invaded the Sinhalese capital of Yapahuwa on behalf of the Pandyan king <unk> Kulasekaran between the years 1277 – 1283 and took the politically significant Buddha ’ s tooth relic . 
 = = = Brahmins from Rameswaram = = = 
 The <unk> written during the Aryacakravarti rule in Jaffna asserts that the direct ancestors of the Kings belonged to a group of 512 <unk> ( a Brahmin priestly caste ) of the Pasupata sect hailed from <unk> settled of the Rameswaram Hindu temple . The source also claims that two out of the 512 were selected as Kings of <unk> . It also explains that a direct ancestor of the kings was a scribe in the Pandyan kingdom and was called during a war with other kingdoms to assist the king , and that the ancestors of the kings fought in wars against kings in the Hoysala and Karnataka . 
 During <unk> Sundara Pandyan 's rule the Pandyas overwhelmed their Hoysala enemies and killed the Hoysala monarch Vira Someshwara in 1254 . 
 A study of their epithets , such as <unk> ( " King of <unk> " ) , <unk> ( " Ariyan King of <unk> " ) and <unk> ( " Protector of Cetu " ) confirms their connections to Rameswaram Hindu temple , as <unk> , Cetu and <unk> are all names for the same location : Rameswaram . 
 = = = Ganga dynasty = = = 
 In the opinion of Rasanayagam Mudaliar and Swami <unk> the Aryacakravarti dynasty was connected to the Eastern Ganga Dynasty through maternal lines . Rasanayagam believes that a Brahmin from the town of Rameswaram married into the surviving family members of the Kalinga Magha , an invader claiming to be from Kalinga kingdom in India . Magha apparently belonged to the Eastern Ganga Dynasty . The Royal flag of the Jaffna kingdom is similar to the Royal insignia of the Eastern Gangas . Gangas themselves also claimed Brahmin origins . The Setu coins minted by the Aryacakravarti kings also have a similar symbol . 
 Swami <unk> believes that the first <unk> also called Cinkaiariyan ( Ariyan from <unk> ) was Kalinga Magha himself . Three main arguments are adduced to support the claim that these kings were of Eastern Ganga descent . The first is the similar device on their coins ; the bull <unk> and the crescent surmounting it were struck on coins issued by the Eastern Gangas and <unk> . The second is the traditions of their origins are almost identical . The last is the assumption of titles <unk> ( From the country of Ganges ) and <unk> ( Ariyan from the Ganga dynasty ) . According to S. Pathmanathan 's history of the Jaffna kingdom , these only establish similarity , but not any conclusive direct connections . Pathmanathan believes that we cannot categorically link the <unk> dynasty with Eastern Gangas and can explain most of the similarities based on influence , even Western Ganga Dynasty descendants who had moved into Tamil lands after their defeat by the Chola Empire around the year 1000 and interpret them simply as reflecting a claim of origin from the Hindu holy city of Varanasi on the banks of the holiest river Ganges . 
 = = = <unk> @-@ Kalinga invaders = = = 
 S. Paranavitana offered a novel surmise explaining the origins of the <unk> . According to him the Aryacakravarti are descendants of Chandrabhanu a Malay chieftain , who invaded the island from <unk> in 1247 . According to him refugees and immigrants from the Indian kingdom of Kalinga founded similarly named Kingdoms in South East Asia , and some of them came due to various reasons to north Sri Lanka and founded the Jaffna Kingdom . This view has been refuted by noted Indian historian K.A. Nilakanta Sastry as having no credible evidence , and other historians such as Louis Charles <unk> ( 1911 – 66 ) , an expert on Indonesian studies , Yutaka Iwamoto ( 1910 – 88 ) , a Buddhist scholar , and S. Pathmanathan . They assert that there were no kingdoms in South East Asia called Kalinga and such assertions are based on erroneous readings of the Chinese name for a locality called Ho @-@ ling which actually stood for <unk> not Kalinga . Further S. Pathmanathan asserts that Chandrabhanu had categorically claimed <unk> lineage whereas S. Paranavitana had adduced a <unk> lineage to the Aryacakravarti . Further he notes that the inscriptions that S. Paranavitana used to make his theory have not been deciphered by any other scholar to imply a <unk> connection to the Aryacakravartis . 
 = = Other sources = = 
 = = = Contemporary chronicles = = = 
 The earliest local Tamil chronicles on Jaffna Kingdom were composed in the Middle Ages . A prose work , <unk> <unk> Malai , compiled by poet <unk> <unk> in 1736 , cites four earlier writings such as <unk> Malai , <unk> <unk> , Pararasasekaran Ula and <unk> as its source . Of which <unk> ( or list of Kings ) has not been found and all what we know about is through <unk> <unk> Malai . These , composed not earlier than the 14th century , contain folkloric legends mixed with historical anecdotes . But an astrological work , <unk> Malai , written during the rule of <unk> V ( 1410 – 1440 ) by Soma <unk> has verifiable historical information and has been used extensively by historians from Humphrey <unk> to S. Pathmanathan to reconstruct the kingdom 's early history . 
 The Sinhalese chronicles , such as Culavamsa , Rajavaliya and a number of <unk> chronicles , such as Kokila Sandesaya and <unk> Sandesaya , have valuable information on the early and middle period of the kingdom , its activities and its eventual occupation by the rival Kotte Kingdom in 1450 – 1467 . Culavamsa mentions in detail the arrival and the conquest of the Sinhalese capital Yapahuwa by a minister named Aryacakravarti during the period 1277 to 1283 . It also mentions that the minister carried away the Budha ’ s relic from the capital to Pandyan Kingdom . The Rajavaliya a primary source written during the 17th century refers to the fact that the Aryacakravartis collected taxes from <unk> and southern lowlands . 
 The conquest by a certain Sapumal Kumaraya , a military leader sent by the Kotte king , seemed to have left an indelible impression on the Sinhalese literati . The victory of Sapumal Kumaraya is sung in the Kokila Sandesaya ( " Message carried by Kokila bird " ) written in the 15th century by the principal monk of the <unk> Tilaka <unk> in <unk> . The book contains a contemporary description of the country traversed on the road by the <unk> bird from Devi Nuwara ( " City of Gods " ) in the south to Nallur ( " Beautiful City " ) in the North of Sri Lanka . 
 " Beloved Kokila , wing the way to <unk> <unk> . Our Prince Sapumal has driven away from there King Arya Chakravarti , and has established himself in war @-@ like might . To him , I offer this message . Arya Chakravarti beheld his glory , dazzling as the glory of the sun . He beheld his might which was poised throughout the eighteen ratas . Thereupon grief entered into his heart , he abandoned his realm and fled beyond the sea . " 
 = = = Inscriptions = = = 
 <unk> 
 Parakramabahu V ( 1344 – 59 ) a king of Gampola who ruled from <unk> retreated to the southeast of the island , to a place called <unk> Maha Viharaya in the Ampara District after a confrontation with the Aryacakravarti . This is evident from inscriptions in a place called <unk> . 
 <unk> 
 The <unk> inscriptions dated 1359 found near a bo @-@ tree at <unk> in <unk> reveal that Martanda Cinkaiariyan appointed tax collectors to collect taxes from the villages belonging to the Gampola kingdom . 
 <unk> 
 The <unk> inscriptions found in <unk> District are a record of victory left by the Aryacakravarti kings of the Jaffna Kingdom in western Sri Lanka . The inscription was assigned to the 15th century by <unk> Bell , an archeologist , and Mudaliar Rasanayagam , based on paleographic analysis of the style of letters used . If this late date is to be accepted then this inscription stands in contrast to generally accepted theory based on Sinhalese literature that <unk> the local chieftain who confronted the Aryacakravarti kings in 1391 was victorious in his effort . 
 Rameswaram temple 
 <unk> Cinkaiariyan or his successor is credited with an inscription dated 1414 in the South Indian Hindu temple Rameswaram about renovating its sanctum sanctorum . It indicated that the stones for the renovations were shipped from the city of Trincomalee in present @-@ day eastern Sri Lanka . This inscription was destroyed in 1866 . 
 Tenkasi Ten 
 The Tenkasi Ten inscription of Arikesari Parakrama Pandya of Tinnevelly who saw the backs of kings at Singai , Anurai , ' and else where , may refer to kings of Singai . Singai or <unk> being the capital of <unk> and Anurai the name for any Sinhalese capital ; it is dated between 1449 / 50 and 1453 / 4 . 
 = = = Travelogues = = = 
 Marco Polo 
 Marco Polo was a Venetian trader and explorer who gained fame for his worldwide travels , recorded in the book Il <unk> ( " The Million " or The Travels of Marco Polo ) . He reached a port in the northern part of present @-@ day Sri Lanka between 1292 @-@ 94 . According to him the local king was an independent ruler who did not pay tribute to any other monarchs . He named the king as <unk> , which is considered to be a corruption of Cinkaiariyan . Polo 's was followed by a visit by John of Montecorvino , who was a Franciscan missionary , traveller and statesman . He wrote in December 1291 ( or 1292 ) , the earliest noteworthy account of the Coromandel coast furnished by any Western European . According to him , he saw the wreckage of sixty seagoing vessels in the general area of Jaffna . 
 Ibn Batuta 
 Abu Abdullah Muhammad Ibn Battuta was a Moroccan Berber scholar and <unk> from the Maliki Islamic law , and at times a Qadi or judge . He is best known as a traveler and explorer . He spent a few days as a guest of an Aryacakravarti in 1344 and wrote a detailed account of his encounter . According to him , the king controlled the economically important <unk> trade in the Palk Straights and had trading links with countries as far as Yemen . The monarch also spoke Persian and was located in the western coastal area of the island , in Puttalam region . He was also noted as receiving tribute of cinnamon from other southern rulers . 
 Giovanni de Marignolli 
 Giovanni de ' Marignolli , a notable traveller to the Far East in the 14th century , <unk> to Sri Lanka sometimes between 1330 and 1350 . He wrote in great detail about the country , its peoples and customs . According to him , the northern part of the island was ruled by a queen , with whom he had many audiences , who also lavished him with precious gifts . This queen is considered to be the mother of an <unk> and a regent who ruled on behalf of her young son . The so @-@ called " Catalan Map " drawn in 1375 also indicates that northern Sri Lanka was ruled by a queen . Before Marignolli , there was another traveler , Friar <unk> , who landed in Jaffna in 1322 ; he also wrote about the prosperity of the kingdom . According him 
 " The gold , silver and pearls this king had in his possession cannot be found anywhere else in the world " . 
 = = = Portuguese colonial documents = = = 
 In his Temporal and Spiritual Conquest of Ceylon , Father <unk> records a tradition as 
 In course of time , there came some <unk> , natives of <unk> called Arus , who claiming royal descent ; and with the favor of <unk> of Madura , they erected a pagoda at <unk> , whence they began to have trade and friendship with the king of <unk> , and one of them married a daughter of the king ; and finally her descendants became heirs to the Kingdom . 
 This rendition of basic story line seems to fit the modern consensus . Father <unk> ’ s time line is also anachronistic . The Aryacakravarti dynasty came to power a century before the ascendancy of the Madurai Nayaks but Pasupata Brahmins of Rameswaram had established a temple during the 10th Century after when Pasupata sect retreated to its strongholds of Gujarat , Nepal and the Himalayan hills . So it is possible that the Gujarati origin of the Kings paternal line along with native claims of origin from Nepal seems to be true . Arya Cakravarti built <unk> Temple in Jaffna , similar temple was built by another Pasupata King in West Bengal . 
 = = Current consensus = = 
 The current consensus held by historians such as S. Pathmanathan , Patrick Peebles and <unk> de Silva is that the Aryacakravartis were a Pandyan feudatory family that took power after the chaos created by the invasions of Kalinga Magha and Chandrabhanu . That the family was connected to the Ramanathapuram Hindu temple and was of Tamil Brahmin origin . It may have married into the family of eastern <unk> or even for that matter the <unk> ’ s successors , but the direct undeniable evidence for it is lacking . The influence of Eastern <unk> in its royal flag and the coins is indisputable . <unk> Cakravarti mentioned by the Tamil chronicles of the Kingdom may have been <unk> Magha . 
 = Operation Frequent Wind = 
 Operation Frequent Wind was the final phase in the evacuation of American civilians and " at @-@ risk " Vietnamese from Saigon , South Vietnam prior to the takeover of the city by the North Vietnamese Army ( PAVN ) in the Fall of Saigon . It was carried out on 29 – 30 April 1975 , during the last days of the Vietnam War . More than 7 @,@ 000 people were evacuated by helicopter from various points in Saigon . The airlift resulted in a number of enduring images . 
 Evacuation plans already existed as a standard procedure for American embassies . At the beginning of March , fixed @-@ wing aircraft began evacuating civilians from Tan Son Nhat Airport through neighboring countries . By mid @-@ April , contingency plans were in place and preparations were underway for a possible helicopter evacuation . As the imminent collapse of Saigon became evident , Task Force 76 ( TF76 ) was assembled off the coast near Vung Tau to support a helicopter evacuation and provide air support if required . In the event , air support was not needed as the North Vietnamese paused for a week at the outskirts of Saigon , possibly waiting for the South Vietnamese government to collapse and avoiding a possible confrontation with the U.S. by allowing the mostly @-@ unopposed evacuation of Americans from Saigon . 
 On 28 April , Tan Son Nhut Air Base ( lying adjacent to the airport ) came under artillery fire and attack from Vietnamese People 's Air Force aircraft . The fixed @-@ wing evacuation was terminated and Operation Frequent Wind commenced . The evacuation took place primarily from the Defense Attaché Office ( DAO ) compound , beginning around 14 : 00 on the afternoon of 29 April , and ending that night with only limited small arms damage to the helicopters . The U.S. Embassy in Saigon was intended to only be a secondary evacuation point for embassy staff , but it was soon overwhelmed with evacuees and desperate South Vietnamese . The evacuation of the embassy was completed at 07 : 53 on 30 April , but some 400 third country nationals were left behind . 
 Tens of thousands of Vietnamese evacuated themselves by sea or air . With the collapse of South Vietnam , numerous boats and ships , VNAF helicopters and some fixed @-@ wing aircraft sailed or flew out to the evacuation fleet . Helicopters began to clog ship decks and eventually , some were pushed overboard to allow others to land . Pilots of other helicopters were told to drop off their passengers and then take off and ditch in the sea , from where they would be rescued . During the fixed @-@ wing evacuation 50 @,@ 493 people ( including 2 @,@ 678 Vietnamese orphans ) were evacuated from Tan Son Nhut . In Operation Frequent Wind a total of 1 @,@ 373 Americans and 5 @,@ 595 Vietnamese and third @-@ country nationals were evacuated by helicopter . The total number of Vietnamese evacuated by Frequent Wind or self @-@ evacuated and ending up in the custody of the United States for processing as refugees to enter the United States totalled 138 @,@ 869 . This operation was the debut combat deployment of the F @-@ 14 Tomcat aircraft . 
 = = Planning = = 
 Planning for the evacuation of the Americans and their South Vietnamese allies from South Vietnam had begun prior to April , 1975 . When U.S. President Gerald Ford met with the National Security Council on 9 April , 1975 he was told by Henry Kissinger that a maximum of 1 @.@ 6 million people had been identified as possible evacuees and that these included : American citizens and their relatives , the diplomatic corps , the ICCS , third country nationals under contract by the U.S. government and the employees the US and their dependents ( estimated at about 200 @,@ 000 people ) . In addition , the Vietnamese relatives of American citizens and senior Govt. of Vietnam officials and their dependents ( <unk> . 600 @,@ 000 people ) were also identified as potential evacuees , along with Vietnamese formerly employed by the U.S. and their dependents . 
 Although American officials at the highest levels of the intelligence community ( e.g. CIA Director William Colby ) were certain that the South Vietnamese government would collapse , everyone in the U.S. government underestimated the speed of the North Vietnamese advance during the 1975 Spring Offensive and how quickly South Vietnam 's Army would collapse . 
 Evacuation plans are standard for American embassies . The Talon Vise / Frequent Wind plan had been developed over a number of years . Originally codenamed " Talon Vise " , the operation was renamed " Frequent Wind " when the original codename was compromised . 
 By 1975 the Frequent Wind plan had an estimate of approximately 8 @,@ 000 US citizens and third country nationals to be evacuated , but it was never able to estimate the number of South Vietnamese to include . There were approximately 17 @,@ 000 at @-@ risk Vietnamese on embassy rolls , which , using an average of seven dependents per family , meant that the number requiring evacuation was 119 @,@ 000 . Taken with other categories of Vietnamese , the number quickly increased to over 200 @,@ 000 . The Frequent Wind plan set out four possible evacuation options , as follows : 
 Option 1 : Evacuation by commercial airlift from Tan Son Nhut and other South Vietnamese airports as required 
 Option 2 : Evacuation by military airlift from Tan Son Nhut and other South Vietnamese airports as required 
 Option 3 : Evacuation by sea lift from Saigon port 
 Option 4 : Evacuation by helicopter to US Navy ships in the South China Sea 
 With Option 4 , the helicopter evacuation would be expected to be similar to Operation Eagle Pull – the American evacuation by air of Phnom Penh , Cambodia , on 12 April 1975 . 
 = = Preparations on the ground = = 
 On 1 April an evacuation control center manned by U.S. Army , U.S. Navy , U.S. Air Force ( USAF ) and U.S. Marine Corps ( USMC ) personnel began operating at the Defense Attaché Office ( DAO ) compound on 12 @-@ hour shifts , increasing to 24 @-@ hour shifts the next day . Also on 1 April , Plan Alamo was implemented to utilize and defend the DAO compound and its annex as an evacuee holding area , intended to care for 1 @,@ 500 evacuees for five days . By 16 April Alamo was complete : water , C @-@ rations , petroleum , oil and lubricants had been stockpiled , backup electricity generators had been installed , sanitary facilities were completed , and concertina wire protected the perimeter . 
 On 7 April Air America pilot Nikki A. <unk> , with USMC Lt Robert <unk> , assigned to the DAO as the US Navy liaison officer , surveyed 37 buildings in Saigon as possible landing zones ( LZ ) , selecting 13 of them as fit for use . Workers from Pacific Architects and Engineers visited each of the 13 LZs to remove obstructions and painted H 's ( the exact dimensions of a UH @-@ 1 Huey helicopter 's skids ) on each of the LZs . President Gerald Ford , in an address to the American public on 11 April , promised to evacuate Vietnamese civilians of various categories . The 9th Marine Amphibious Brigade ( 9th MAB ) , which was to supply helicopters and a security force for the evacuation , sent a delegation to consult with Ambassador Graham Martin on current plans on 12 April . Ambassador Martin told them that he would not tolerate any outward signs that the United States intended to abandon South Vietnam . All planning would have to be conducted with the utmost discretion . Brigadier General Richard E. Carey , commander of the 9th MAB , flew to Saigon the next day to see Ambassador Martin ; he later said that " The visit was cold , non @-@ productive and appeared to be an irritant to the Ambassador " . Thirteen Marines from the Marine Security Guard ( MSG ) detachment were deployed to the DAO Compound on 13 April to replace the eight Marine Guards withdrawn from the closed Danang and Nha Trang consulates who had been providing security up to that point . 
 By late April Air America helicopters were flying several daily shuttles from TF76 to the DAO Compound to enable the 9th MAB to conduct evacuation preparations at the DAO without exceeding the Paris Peace Accords ' limit of a maximum of 50 U.S. military personnel in South Vietnam . The US Government was continuing to observe its obligations under the Accords , notwithstanding the North Vietnamese invasion . In late April the MSG Marines were ordered to abandon Marshall Hall / Marine House , their billet at 204 Hong Thap Tu Street ( now 204 Nguyen Thi Minh Khai Street ) , and move into the recreation area in the Embassy compound . 
 The two major evacuation points chosen for Operation Frequent Wind were the DAO Compound adjacent to Tan Son Nhut Airport for American and Vietnamese civilian evacuees , and the US Embassy , Saigon for Embassy staff . The plan for the evacuation included buses positioned at 28 buildings throughout metropolitan Saigon designated as pick @-@ up points , with American civilian bus drivers standing by at those buildings . The buses would follow one of four planned evacuation routes from downtown Saigon to the DAO Compound , each route named after a Western Trail : Santa Fe , Oregon , Texas , etc . 
 = = Options 1 and 2 – fixed @-@ wing evacuation = = 
 By late March the Embassy began to reduce the number of US citizens in Vietnam by encouraging dependents and non @-@ essential personnel to leave the country by commercial flights and on Military Airlift Command ( MAC ) C @-@ 141 and C @-@ 5 aircraft , which were still bringing in emergency military supplies . In late March , two or three of these MAC aircraft were arriving each day and were used for the evacuation of civilians and Vietnamese orphans . On 4 April a C @-@ 5A aircraft carrying 250 Vietnamese orphans and their escorts suffered explosive decompression over the sea near Vung Tau and made a crash @-@ landing while attempting to return to Tan Son Nhut ; 153 people on board died in the crash . 
 Following the C @-@ 5 crash , and with the cause still unknown , the C @-@ 5 fleet was grounded and the MAC airlift was reduced to using C @-@ <unk> and C @-@ 130s ; rather than loading as many evacuees as possible , each evacuee required a seat and a seatbelt , reducing the number of passengers that could be carried on each flight . Each C @-@ 141 would carry 94 passengers while each C @-@ 130 would carry 75 , although these restrictions were relaxed , and then ignored altogether as the pace of the evacuation quickened . Armed guards were also present on each flight to prevent the possibility of hijacking . American commercial and contract carriers continued to fly out of Tan Son Nhut , but with decreasing frequency . In addition , military aircraft from Australia , Indonesia , Iran , Poland , UK , France , and other countries flew in to evacuate their embassy personnel . 
 Throughout April the " thinning out " proceeded slowly , largely because of difficulties experienced by Americans in obtaining the necessary paperwork from the South Vietnamese Government to enable them to take their Vietnamese dependents with them , with the result that MAC aircraft were often departing empty . Finally , on 19 April , a simple procedure was implemented that cleared up the paperwork jam and the number of evacuees dramatically increased from 20 April onwards . The fall of Xuân Lộc on 20 April and the resignation of President Nguyễn Văn Thiệu on 21 April brought greater crowds seeking evacuation to the DAO Compound as it became apparent that South Vietnam 's days were numbered . By 22 April 20 C @-@ 141 and 20 C @-@ 130s flights a day were flying evacuees out of Tan Son Nhut to Clark Air Base , some 1 @,@ 000 miles away in the Philippines . On 23 April President Ferdinand Marcos of the Philippines announced that no more than 2 @,@ 500 Vietnamese evacuees would be allowed in the Philippines at any one time , further increasing the strain on MAC which now had to move evacuees out of Saigon and move some 5 @,@ 000 evacuees from Clark Air Base on to Guam , Wake Island and Yokota Air Base . President Thieu and his family left Tan Son Nhut on 25 April on a USAF C @-@ 118 to go into exile in Taiwan . Also on 25 April the Federal Aviation Authority banned commercial flights into South Vietnam . This directive was subsequently reversed ; some operators had ignored it anyway . In any case this effectively marked the end of the commercial airlift from Tan Son Nhut . 
 On 27 April NVA rockets hit Saigon and Cholon for the first time since the 1973 ceasefire . It was decided that from this time only C @-@ 130s would be used for the evacuation due to their greater maneuverability . There was relatively little difference between the cargo loads of the two aircraft , C @-@ <unk> had been loaded with up to 316 evacuees while C @-@ 130s had been taking off with in excess of 240 . 
 = = Task Force 76 = = 
 With the fall of Saigon imminent , between 18 and 24 April the U.S. Navy concentrated a large assemblage of ships off Vũng Tàu under Commander Task Force 76 comprising : 
 Task Force 76 USS Blue Ridge ( command ship ) 
 Task Group 76 @.@ 4 ( Movement Transport Group Alpha ) 
 USS Okinawa 
 USS Vancouver 
 USS Thomaston 
 USS Peoria 
 Task Group 76 @.@ 5 ( Movement Transport Group Bravo ) 
 USS Dubuque 
 USS Durham 
 USS Frederick 
 Task Group 76 @.@ 9 ( Movement Transport Group Charlie ) 
 USS Anchorage 
 USS Denver 
 USS Duluth 
 USS Mobile 
 The task force was joined by : 
 USS Hancock 
 USS Midway 
 each carrying Marine , and Air Force ( eight 21st Special Operations Squadron CH @-@ 53s and two 40th Aerospace Rescue and Recovery Squadron HH @-@ 53s ) helicopters . 
 Seventh Fleet flagship USS Oklahoma City . 
 Amphibious ships : 
 USS Mount Vernon 
 USS Barbour County 
 USS Tuscaloosa 
 A guided missile frigate : 
 USS Worden 
 and eight destroyer types for naval gunfire , escort , and area defense , including : 
 USS Richard B. Anderson 
 USS Cochrane 
 USS Kirk 
 USS <unk> 
 USS Rowan 
 USS Cook 
 USS <unk> ( DD @-@ 845 ) 
 The USS Enterprise and USS Coral Sea carrier attack groups of Task Force 77 in the South China Sea provided air cover while Task Force 73 ensured logistic support . 
 The Marine evacuation contingent , the 9th Marine Amphibious Brigade ( Task Group 79 @.@ 1 ) , consisted of three Battalion Landing Teams ( BLT ) ; 2nd Battalion , 4th Marines ( 2 / 4 ) , 2nd Battalion 9th Marines ( 2 / 9 ) , 3rd Battalion 9th Marines ( 3 / 9 ) and three helicopter squadrons HMH @-@ 462 , HMH @-@ 463 , HMM @-@ 165 along with other support units from Marine Aircraft Group 39 ( MAG @-@ 39 ) . 
 In addition , a flotilla of Military Sealift Command ( MSC ) ships were assembled and these carried out seaborne evacuations from Saigon Port , this fleet comprised : Tug boats : 
 Asiatic Stamina 
 Chitose Maru 
 <unk> 
 Osceola 
 Shibaura Maru 
 and the following large transport ships : 
 SS American Challenger 
 SS Boo Heung Pioneer 
 SS Green Forest 
 SS Green Port 
 USNS Greenville Victory 
 SS Pioneer Contender 
 SS Pioneer Commander 
 USNS Sgt. Truman Kimbro 
 USNS Sgt. Andrew Miller 
 = = Tan Son Nhut under attack = = 
 On 28 April at 18 : 06 , three A @-@ 37 Dragonflies piloted by former VNAF pilots , who had defected to the Vietnamese People 's Air Force at the fall of Danang , dropped six <unk> 250 lb bombs on Tan Son Nhut Air Base destroying several aircraft . VNAF F @-@ 5s took off in pursuit , but they were unable to intercept the A @-@ 37s . C @-@ 130s leaving Tan Son Nhut reported receiving North Vietnamese Army ( PAVN ) .51 cal and 37 mm anti @-@ aircraft ( AAA ) fire , while sporadic PAVN rocket and artillery attacks also started to hit the airport and air base . C @-@ 130 flights were stopped temporarily after the air attack but resumed at 20 : 00 on 28 April . At 21 : 00 on 28 April Major General Homer D. Smith Jr . , the senior Defense Attaché , informed the evacuation control center that 60 C @-@ 130 flights would come in on 29 April to evacuate 10 @,@ 000 people . 
 At 03 : 30 on 29 April a PAVN rocket hit <unk> 1 at the DAO Compound , instantly killing Marine Corporals McMahon and Judge . They were the last American ground casualties in Vietnam . 
 At 03 : 58 , C @-@ 130E , # 72 @-@ 1297 , flown by a crew from the 776th Tactical Airlift Squadron , was destroyed by a 122 mm rocket while taxiing to pick up refugees after offloading a BLU @-@ 82 at Tan Son Nhut Air Base . The crew evacuated the burning aircraft on the taxiway and departed the airfield on another C @-@ 130 that had previously landed . This was the last USAF fixed @-@ wing aircraft to leave Tan Son Nhut . Between 04 : 30 and 08 : 00 up to 40 artillery rounds and rockets hit around the DAO Compound . 
 At dawn the VNAF began to haphazardly depart Tan Son Nhut Air Base as A @-@ 37s , F @-@ 5s , C @-@ 7s , C @-@ 119s and C @-@ 130s departed for Thailand while UH @-@ 1s took off in search of the ships of TF @-@ 76 . Some VNAF aircraft stayed to continue to fight the advancing PAVN . One AC @-@ 119 gunship had spent the night of 28 / 29 April dropping flares and firing on the approaching PAVN . At dawn on 29 April two A @-@ 1 Skyraiders began patrolling the perimeter of Tan Son Nhut at 2 @,@ 500 feet ( 760 m ) until one was shot down , presumably by an SA @-@ 7 missile . At 07 : 00 the AC @-@ 119 was firing on PAVN to the east of Tan Son Nhut when it too was hit by an SA @-@ 7 and fell in flames to the ground . 
 At 07 : 00 on 29 April , Major General Smith advised Ambassador Martin that fixed @-@ wing evacuations should cease and that Operation Frequent Wind , the helicopter evacuation of US personnel and at @-@ risk Vietnamese should commence . Ambassador Martin refused to accept General Smith 's recommendation and instead insisted on visiting Tan Son Nhut to survey the situation for himself . At 10 : 00 Ambassador Martin confirmed General Smith 's assessment and at 10 : 48 he contacted Washington to recommend Option 4 , the helicopter evacuation . Finally at 10 : 51 the order was given by CINCPAC to commence Option 4 ; due to confusion in the chain of command , General Carey did not receive the execute order until 12 : 15 . At 08 : 00 Lieutenant General Minh , commander of the VNAF and 30 of his staff arrived at the DAO compound demanding evacuation , signifying the complete loss of VNAF command and control . 
 = = Option 4 – White Christmas in April = = 
 In preparation for the evacuation , the American Embassy had distributed a 15 @-@ page booklet called SAFE , short for " Standard Instruction and Advice to Civilians in an Emergency . " The booklet included a map of Saigon pinpointing " assembly areas where a helicopter will pick you up . " There was an insert page which read : " Note <unk> signal . Do not disclose to other personnel . When the evacuation is ordered , the code will be read out on Armed Forces Radio . The code is : The temperature in Saigon is 105 degrees and rising . This will be followed by the playing of I 'm Dreaming of a White Christmas . " Frank <unk> later recalled the arrival of helicopters at the Embassy while the song was playing over the radio as a " bizarre Kafkaesque time " . Japanese journalists , concerned that they would not recognize the tune , had to get someone to sing it to them . 
 After the evacuation signal was given , the buses began to pick up passengers and head to the DAO Compound . The system worked so efficiently that the buses were able to make three return journeys rather than the expected one . The biggest problem occurred when the ARVN guarding the main gate at Tan Son Nhut refused to allow the last convoy of buses into the DAO Compound at about 17 : 45 . As this was happening , a firefight between two ARVN units broke out and caught the rearmost buses in the crossfire , disabling two of the vehicles . Eventually the ARVN commander controlling the gates agreed to permit the remaining buses to enter the compound . General Carey 's threat to use the AH @-@ 1J <unk> helicopter gunships flying overhead may have played a role in the ARVN commander 's decision . 
 = = Security and air support = = 
 It was not known whether the PAVN and / or the ARVN would try to disrupt the evacuation and so the planners had to take all possible contingencies into account to ensure the safety and success of the evacuation . The staff of 9th MAB prescribed altitudes , routes , and checkpoints for flight safety for the operation . To avert mid @-@ air collisions , the planners chose altitudes which would provide separation of traffic and also a capability to see and avoid the enemy 's AAA , SA @-@ 2 and SA @-@ 7 missile threat ( 6 @,@ 500 feet ( 2 @,@ 000 m ) for flights inbound to Saigon and 5 @,@ 500 feet ( 1 @,@ 700 m ) for those outbound from Saigon to the Navy ships ) . These altitudes were also high enough to avoid small arms and artillery fire . 
 In the event that the PAVN or ARVN shot down a helicopter or a mechanical malfunction forced one to make an emergency landing in hostile territory , two orbiting CH @-@ 46s of MAG @-@ 39 each carrying 15 @-@ man , quick @-@ reaction " Sparrow Hawk " teams of Marines from 1st Platoon , Company A , 1st Battalion , 9th Marines , from the USS Blue Ridge , were ready to land and provide security enabling a search and rescue helicopter to pick up the crew . In addition , two CH @-@ 46s would provide medical evacuation capabilities while AH @-@ 1J <unk> would fly cover for the transport helicopters and for any ground units who requested support . The <unk> could also serve as Forward Air Controllers . 
 The air wings of the USS Enterprise and USS Coral Sea , were ready to provide close air support and anti @-@ aircraft suppression if required with their A @-@ 6 and A @-@ 7 attack aircraft , and would provide continuous fighter cover the evacuation route including by VF @-@ 1 and VF @-@ 2 , flying from the Enterprise with the first combat deployment of the new F @-@ 14 Tomcat . USAF aircraft operating out of Nakhon Phanom Air Base , Korat Air Base and U @-@ Tapao Air Base in Thailand were also overhead for the duration of the helicopter evacuation . A C @-@ 130 Airborne Command and Control controlled all US air operations over land . USAF F @-@ 4s , F @-@ 111s and A @-@ 7s provided air cover during daylight , being replaced by AC @-@ 130s from the 16th Special Operations Squadron at night . Strategic Air Command KC @-@ 135 tankers provided air @-@ to @-@ air refueling . 
 The evacuation proceeded without interference from the PAVN . Aircraft flying air cover for the evacuation reported being tracked with surface to air radar in the vicinity of Bien Hoa Air Base ( which had fallen to the PAVN on 25 April ) , but there were no missile launches . The Hanoi leadership , reckoning that completion of the evacuation would lessen the risk of American intervention , had apparently instructed General Dũng not to target the airlift itself . Members of the police in Saigon had been promised evacuation in exchange for protecting the American evacuation buses and control of the crowds in the city during the evacuation . Disgruntled ARVN troops repeatedly hit American helicopters with small arms fire throughout the evacuation , without causing serious damage . Despite receiving sporadic NVA AAA fire , USAF and USN aircraft made no attacks on AAA or SAM sites during the evacuation . 
 Despite all the concern over these military threats , the weather presented the gravest danger . At the beginning of the operation , pilots in the first wave reported the weather as 2 @,@ 000 feet ( 610 m ) scattered , 20 @,@ 000 feet ( 6 @,@ 100 m ) overcast with 15 miles ( 24 km ) visibility , except in haze over Saigon , where visibility decreased to one mile . This meant that scattered clouds existed below their flight path while a solid layer of clouds more than two miles above their heads obscured the sun . The curtain of haze over Saigon so altered the diminished daylight that line of sight visibility was only a mile . The weather conditions deteriorated as the operation continued . 
 = = Air America = = 
 As part of the evacuation plan agreed with the DAO , Air America committed 24 of its 28 available helicopters to support the evacuation and 31 pilots agreed to stay in Saigon to support the evacuation ; this meant that most helicopters would have only one pilot rather than the usual two . At 08 : 30 on 29 April , with the shelling of Tan Son Nhut Airport subsiding , Air America began ferrying its helicopter and fixed @-@ wing pilots from their homes in Saigon to the Air America compound at Tan Son Nhut , across the road from the DAO Compound . Air America helicopters started flying to the rooftop LZs in Saigon and either shuttled the evacuees back to the DAO Compound or flew out to the ships of TF76 . By 10 : 30 all of Air America 's fixed @-@ wing aircraft had departed Tan Son Nhut , evacuating all non @-@ essential personnel and as many Vietnamese evacuees as they could carry and headed for Thailand . At some point during the morning VNAF personnel took 5 ICCS <unk> @-@ H Hueys and one Air America Bell 204 from the Air America ramp . 
 At 11 : 00 the security situation at the Air America compound was deteriorating as General Carey did not wish to risk his Marines by extending his perimeter to cover the Air America compound ( LZ 40 ) , so all Air America helicopters from this time operated out of the tennis courts in the DAO Annex ( LZ 35 ) . This move created fuel problems for Air America as they no longer had access to the fuel supplies in their compound and at least initially they were refused fuel by the ships of TF76 . According to US Naval Archives , at 12 : 30 an Air America Bell 205 landed Air Vice Marshal Nguyễn Cao Kỳ , Madame Kỳ , Dorothy Martin ( wife of Ambassador Martin ) and others on the USS Denver ; contemporary reports state and photos show that Marshal Kỳ piloted his own UH @-@ 1H Huey to the USS Midway . 
 At approximately 14 : 30 , Air America Bell 205 serial number " <unk> " landed on the roof of the Pittman Apartment Building at 22 Gia Long Street to collect a senior Vietnamese intelligence source and his family . The Pittman Building was not an approved LZ , but when the agreed pickup point at the Lee Hotel at 6 Chien Si Circle was declared unusable , CIA Station Chief Tom Polgar asked Oren B. Harnage , Deputy Chief of the Embassy 's Air Branch to change the pickup to the Pittman Building , which was the home of the Assistant Station Chief and had an elevator shaft believed capable of supporting the weight of a Huey . Harnage boarded an Air America Huey from the Embassy 's rooftop heliport and flew the short distance to the Pittman Building . Harnage leaned out of the Huey and helped approximately 15 evacuees board the Huey from the narrow helipad . The scene was famously captured on film by Hubert van Es ( see In Popular Culture below ) . 
 Air America helicopters continued to make rooftop pickups until after nightfall by which time navigation became increasingly difficult . Helicopters overflew the designated LZs to check no Americans had been left behind and then the last helicopters ( many low on fuel ) headed out to TF76 , located the USS Midway or the USS Hancock and shut down . All Air America flights had ceased by 21 : 00 . With its available fleet of only 20 Hueys ( 3 of which were impounded , ditched or damaged at TF76 ) , Air America had moved over 1 @,@ 000 evacuees to the DAO Compound , the Embassy or out to the ships of TF76 . 
 = = The DAO compound = = 
 At 14 : 06 two UH @-@ 1E Huey helicopters carrying General Carey and Colonel Gray ( commander of Regimental Landing Team 4 ( <unk> ) ) landed at the DAO Compound . During their approach to the compound , Carey and Gray got a firsthand view of the PAVN 's firepower as they shelled nearby Tan Son Nhut Airport with ground , rocket , and artillery fire . They quickly established an austere command post in preparation for the arrival of the Marine CH @-@ 53s and the ground security force . 
 The first wave of 12 CH @-@ 53s from HMH @-@ 462 loaded with BLT 2 / 4 's command groups " Alpha " and " Bravo , " and Company F and reinforced Company H arrived in the DAO Compound at 15 : 06 and the Marines quickly moved to reinforce the perimeter defenses . As they approached the helicopters had taken rifle and M @-@ 79 grenade fire from ARVN troops but without causing any apparent damage . The second wave of 12 CH @-@ 53s from HMH @-@ 463 landed in the DAO Compound at 15 : 15 bringing in the rest of the BLT . A third wave of two CH @-@ 53s from HMH @-@ 463 and eight USAF CH @-@ <unk> and two USAF HH @-@ 53s of the 40th Aerospace Rescue and Recovery Squadron ( all operating from the USS Midway ) arrived shortly afterwards . 
 " Alpha " command group , two rifle companies , and the 81 mm mortar platoon were deployed around the DAO headquarters building ( the Alamo ) and its adjacent landing zones . Companies E and F respectively occupied the northern and southern sections between the DAO headquarters and the DAO Annex . " Bravo " command group , consisting of two rifle companies and the 106 mm recoilless rifle platoon , assumed responsibility for security of the DAO Annex and its adjoining landing zones . Company G occupied the eastern section of the Annex , while Company H assumed control of the western section . 
 The HMH @-@ 462 CH @-@ 53s loaded with evacuees and left the compound , they unloaded the first evacuees delivered by Operation Frequent Wind at 15 : 40 . At about 17 : 30 General Carey ordered the extraction of 3rd Platoon , Company C of BLT 1 / 9 , which had been landed at the DAO Compound on 25 April to assist the Marine Security Guard . Between 19 : 00 and 21 : 00 General Carey transferred 3 platoons ( 130 men ) of BLT 2 / 4 into the Embassy compound to provide additional security and assistance for the Embassy . 
 At 19 : 30 General Carey directed that the remaining elements guarding the Annex be withdrawn to DAO headquarters ( the Alamo ) where the last of the evacuees would await their flight . Once completed , the new defensive perimeter encompassed only LZ 36 and the Alamo . By 20 : 30 the last evacuees had been loaded onto helicopters . With the evacuation of the landing control teams from the Annex and Alamo completed , General Carey ordered the withdrawal of the ground security forces from the DAO Compound around 22 : 50 . At 23 : 40 Marines destroyed the satellite terminal , the DAO Compound 's last means of direct communication with the outside world . At 00 : 30 on 30 April , thermite grenades , having been previously placed in selected buildings , ignited as two CH @-@ 53s left the DAO parking lot carrying the last elements of BLT 2 / 4 . 
 = = The Embassy = = 
 On 25 April 40 Marines from the 9th MAB on the USS Hancock were flown in by Air America helicopters in civilian clothes to the DAO compound to augment the 18 Marine Security Guards assigned to defend the Embassy ; an additional six Marines were assigned to protect Ambassador Martin . Martin had remained optimistic that a negotiated settlement could be reached whereby the US would not have to pull out of South Vietnam and , in an effort to avert defeatism and panic he instructed Major James Kean , Commanding Officer of the Marine Security Guard Battalion and Ground Support Force Commander United States Embassy Compound , that he could begin to remove the tamarind tree and other trees and shrubbery which prevented the use of the Embassy parking lot as a helicopter landing zone . 
 By the morning of 29 April it was estimated that approximately 10 @,@ 000 people had gathered around the Embassy , while some 2 @,@ 500 evacuees were in the Embassy and consular compounds . The crowds prevented the use of buses for transporting evacuees from the Embassy to the DAO Compound for evacuation and the Embassy gates were closed to prevent the crowd from surging through . Eligible evacuees now had to make themselves known to the Marine guards or Embassy staff manning the walls and were then lifted over the walls and into the Embassy compound . Among those arriving at the Embassy were Dr Phan Quang Dan , former Deputy Prime Minister and Minister responsible for social welfare and refugee resettlement , and Lieutenant @-@ General Dang Van Quang . 
 From 10 : 00 to 12 : 00 Major Kean and his Marines cut down the tamarind and other trees and moved vehicles to create an LZ in the Embassy parking lot behind the Chancery building . Two LZs were now available in the Embassy compound , the rooftop for UH @-@ 1s and CH @-@ 46 Sea Knights and the new parking lot LZ for the heavier CH @-@ 53s . Air America UH @-@ 1s began ferrying evacuees from other smaller assembly points throughout the city and dropping them on the Embassy 's rooftop LZ . At 15 : 00 the first CH @-@ 53s were sighted heading towards the DAO Compound at Tan Son Nhut . Major Kean contacted the Seventh Fleet to advise them of his airlift requirements , until that time the fleet believed that all evacuees had been bussed from the Embassy to the DAO Compound and that only two helicopters would be required to evacuate Ambassador Martin and the Marines from the Embassy . 
 Inside the Embassy , the evacuees had found whatever space was available inside the Embassy compound and evacuees and some staff proceeded to take alcohol from the Embassy 's stores . From the billowing incinerator on the Embassy roof floated intelligence documents and US currency , most charred ; some not . An Embassy official said that more than five million dollars were being burned . 
 At 17 : 00 the first CH @-@ 46 landed at the Embassy . Between 19 : 00 and 21 : 00 on 29 April approximately 130 additional Marines from 2nd Battalion 4th Marines were lifted from the DAO Compound to reinforce perimeter security at the Embassy , bringing the total number of Marines at the Embassy to 175 . The evacuation from the DAO Compound was completed by about 19 : 00 after which all helicopters would be routed to the Embassy ; Major Kean was informed that operations would cease at dark . Major Kean advised that the LZ would be well lit and had vehicles moved around the parking lot LZ with their engines running and headlights on to illuminate the LZ . At 21 : 30 a CH @-@ 53 pilot informed Major Kean that Admiral Whitmire , Commander of Task Force 76 had ordered that operations would cease at 23 : 00 . Major Kean saw Ambassador Martin to request that he contact the Oval Office to ensure that the airlift continued . Ambassador Martin soon sent word back to Major Kean that sorties would continue to be flown . At the same time , General Carey met Admiral Whitmire to convince him to resume flights to the Embassy despite pilot fatigue and poor visibility caused by darkness , fires and bad weather . 
 By 02 : 15 on 30 April one CH @-@ 46 and one CH @-@ 53 were landing at the Embassy every 10 minutes . At this time , the Embassy indicated that another 19 lifts would complete the evacuation . At that time Major Kean estimated that there were still some 850 non @-@ American evacuees and 225 Americans ( including the Marines ) , and Ambassador Martin told Major Kean to do the best he could . At 03 : 00 Ambassador Martin ordered Major Kean to move all the remaining evacuees into the parking lot LZ which was the Marines ' final perimeter . At 03 : 27 President Gerald Ford ordered that no more than 19 additional lifts would be allowed to complete the evacuation . At 04 : 30 with the 19 lift limit already exceeded , Major Kean went to the rooftop LZ and spoke over a helicopter radio with General Carey who advised that President Ford had ordered that the airlift be limited to US personnel . Major Kean was then ordered to withdraw his men into the Chancery building and withdraw to the rooftop LZ for evacuation . 
 Major Kean returned to the ground floor of the Chancery and ordered his men to withdraw into a large semicircle at the main entrance to the Chancery . Most of the Marines were inside the Chancery when the crowds outside the Embassy broke through the gates into the compound . The Marines closed and bolted the Chancery door , the elevators were locked by Seabees on the sixth floor and the Marines withdrew up the stairwells locking grill gates behind them . On the ground floor a water tanker was driven through the Chancery door and the crowd began to surge up through the building toward the rooftop . The Marines on the rooftop had sealed the doors and were using Mace to discourage the crowd from trying to break through . Sporadic gunfire from around the Embassy passed over the rooftop . 
 At 04 : 58 Ambassador Martin boarded a USMC CH @-@ 46 Sea Knight , call @-@ sign Lady Ace 09 of HMM @-@ 165 and was flown to the USS Blue Ridge . When Lady Ace 09 transmitted " Tiger is out , " those helicopter crews still flying thought the mission was complete , and delayed evacuating the Marines from the Embassy rooftop . CH @-@ 46s evacuated the Battalion Landing Team by 07 : 00 and after an anxious wait a lone CH @-@ 46 Swift 2 @-@ 2 of <unk> @-@ 164 arrived to evacuate Major Kean and the 10 remaining men of the Marine Security Guards , this last helicopter took off at 07 : 53 on 30 April and landed on USS Okinawa at 08 : 30 . 
 At 11 : 30 PAVN tanks smashed through the gates of the Presidential Palace ( now the Reunification Palace ) less than 1 km from the Embassy and raised the flag of the National Liberation Front for South Vietnam ( NLF ) over the building ; the Vietnam War was over . 
 = = Chaos at sea = = 
 During the course of the operation an unknown number of VNAF helicopters flew out of what remained of South Vietnam to the fleet . Around 12 : 00 five or six VNAF UH @-@ <unk> and one of the stolen ICCS UH @-@ <unk> , were circling around the USS Blue Ridge . The VNAF pilots had been instructed after dropping off their passengers to ditch their helicopters and they would then be picked up by one of the ship 's tenders . The pilot of the stolen ICCS Huey had been told to ditch off the port quarter of the ship , but seemed reluctant to do so , flying around the ship to the starboard bow he jumped from his helicopter at a height of 40 feet ( 12 m ) . His helicopter turned and hit the side of the USS Blue Ridge before hitting the sea . The tail rotor sheared off and embedded itself in the engine of an Air America Bell 205 that was doing a hot refueling on the helipad at the rear of the ship . The Air America pilot shut down his helicopter and left it and moments later a VNAF UH @-@ 1H attempted to land on the helipad , locked rotors with the Air America Bell , almost pushing it overboard . The stolen Air America Bell 204 , landed on the USS Kirk , from where US Navy pilots flew it to the USS Okinawa . 
 So many South Vietnamese helicopters landed on the TF76 ships that some 45 UH @-@ 1 Hueys and at least one CH @-@ 47 Chinook were pushed overboard to make room for more helicopters to land . Other helicopters dropped off their passengers and were then ditched into the sea by their pilots , close to the ships , their pilots bailing out at the last moment to be picked up by rescue boats . 
 One of the more notable events occurred on the USS Midway when the pilot of a VNAF Cessna O @-@ 1 dropped a note on the deck of the carrier , the note read " Can you move these helicopter to the other side , I can land on your runway , I can fly 1 hour more , we have enough time to move . Please rescue me . Major Buang , Wife and 5 child . " Midway 's CO , Captain L.C. Chambers ordered the flight deck crew to clear the landing area ; in the process an estimated US $ 10 million worth of UH @-@ 1 Huey helicopters were pushed overboard into the South China Sea . Once the deck was clear Major Buang approached the deck , bounced once and then touched down and taxied to a halt with room to spare . Major Buang became the first VNAF fixed @-@ wing pilot to ever land on a carrier . A second Cessna O @-@ 1 was also recovered by the USS Midway that afternoon . 
 At the same time as the aerial evacuation , tens of thousands of South Vietnamese fled towards TF @-@ 76 aboard junks , sampans , and small craft . MSC tugs pulled barges filled with people from Saigon Port out to TF @-@ 76 . A flotilla of 26 Republic of Vietnam Navy and other vessels concentrated off Long Sơn Island southwest of Vung Tau with 30 @,@ 000 sailors , their families , and other civilians on board . On the afternoon of 30 April , TF @-@ 76 moved away from the coast , picking up more refugees as they went . On 2 May , Task Force 76 , carrying the Operation Frequent Wind evacuees and 44 @,@ 000 seaborne evacuees and the RVN Navy group set sail for reception centers in the Philippines and Guam . 
 = = Results of the evacuation = = 
 During the fixed @-@ wing evacuation 50 @,@ 493 people ( including 2 @,@ 678 Vietnamese orphans ) were evacuated from Tan Son Nhut . Marine pilots accumulated 1 @,@ 054 flight hours and flew 682 sorties throughout Operation Frequent Wind . The evacuation of personnel from the DAO compound had lasted nine hours and involved over 50 Marine Corps and Air Force helicopters . In the helicopter evacuation a total of 395 Americans and 4 @,@ 475 Vietnamese and third @-@ country nationals were evacuated from the DAO compound and a further 978 U.S. and 1 @,@ 120 Vietnamese and third @-@ country nationals from the Embassy , giving a total of 1 @,@ 373 Americans and 5 @,@ 595 Vietnamese and third country nationals . In addition , Air America helicopters and RVNAF aircraft brought additional evacuees to the TF76 ships . Many of the Vietnamese evacuees were allowed to enter the United States under the Indochina Migration and Refugee Assistance Act . Some 400 evacuees were left behind at the Embassy including over 100 South Korean citizens , among them was Brigadier General Dai Yong Rhee , the intelligence chief at the South Korean Embassy in Saigon . The South Korean civilians were evacuated in 1976 , while General Rhee and two other diplomats were held captive until April 1980 . 
 While the operation itself was a success , the images of the evacuation symbolized the wastefulness and ultimate futility of American involvement in Vietnam . President Ford later called it " a sad and tragic period in America 's history " but argued that " you couldn 't help but be very proud of those pilots and others who were conducting the evacuation " . Nixon 's pledge of Peace with Honor in Vietnam had become a humiliating defeat , which together with Watergate contributed to the crisis of confidence that affected America throughout the 1970s . 
 = = Casualties = = 
 For an operation of the size and complexity of Frequent Wind , casualties were relatively light . Marine corporals McMahon and Judge killed at the DAO compound were the only members of US forces killed in action during the operation and they were the last US ground casualties in Vietnam . A Marine AH @-@ 1J <unk> ran out of fuel while searching for the USS Okinawa and ditched at sea , the two crew members were rescued by a boat from USS Kirk . A CH @-@ <unk> Swift 1 @-@ 4 of <unk> @-@ 164 from the USS Hancock flown by Captain William C. Nystul and First Lieutenant Michael J. Shea crashed into the sea on its approach to the ship after having flown a night sea and air rescue mission ( SAR ) . The two enlisted crew members survived , but the bodies of the pilots were not recovered . The cause of the crash was never determined . 
 = = Memorials = = 
 During the demolition of the Embassy , the ladder leading from the rooftop to the helipad was removed and sent back to the United States , where it is now on display at the Gerald R. Ford Presidential Museum . 
 The Cessna O @-@ 1 Bird Dog that Major Buang landed on the USS Midway is now on display at the National Museum of Naval Aviation at Naval Air Station Pensacola , Florida . Lady Ace 09 , CH @-@ 46 serial number <unk> , is now on display at the Flying Leatherneck Aviation Museum in San Diego , California . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 On the afternoon of 29 April 1975 , Hubert van Es , a Saigon @-@ based photographer for United Press International , took the iconic photo of Operation Frequent Wind of an Air America UH @-@ 1 on a rooftop picking up Vietnamese evacuees . The building in the photo was the Pittman Apartment building at 22 Gia Long Street ( now 22 Lý Tự Trọng Street ) , which was used as a residence by various embassy , CIA , and USAID employees . It has often been misidentified as the US Embassy . Hubert van Es ' photo is frequently used in political cartoons commenting on US foreign policy . 
 The First Act of the stage musical , Miss Saigon , depicts events leading up to , and during Operation Frequent Wind , with the main protagonists ( Chris and Kim ) becoming separated as a result of the evacuation . Writer Claude @-@ Michel Schönberg has acknowledged that the musical was inspired by pictures of the evacuation . Hugh van Es believed that Miss Saigon misappropriated his photo and considered legal action against the show , but decided against it . 
 In The Simpsons at the end of Episode 16 of Season 6 , " Bart vs. Australia " , the Simpsons are evacuated from the American Embassy as angry Australians gather outside in a scene reminiscent of Hubert van Es 's famous photo . Homer asks the helicopter pilot if they are being taken to an aircraft carrier and is told that " the closest vessel is the USS Walter Mondale . It 's a laundry ship " . 
 The operation was the subject of the 2014 PBS documentary Last Days in Vietnam . 
 = = = Archival collections = = = 
 Guide to the Khanh Van Thi Nguyen Narrative on Operation Frequent Wind . Special Collections and Archives , The UC Irvine Libraries , Irvine , California . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 Last Days in Vietnam on Youtube 
 BBC News footage of the Fall of Saigon 
 ITN News footage of the Fall of Saigon on YouTube . 
 Saigon Facilities Map 1969 
 Scenes from Operation Frequent Wind on YouTube . 
 21st SOS Frequent Wind and Mayaguez Incident gallery 
 Video clip : Footage of evacuation operations underway aboard USS Midway , including historic Cessna O @-@ 1 landing by VNAF pilot Major Buang 
 = Stardust ( Willie Nelson album ) = 
 Stardust is a 1978 album by Willie Nelson that spans the genres of pop , jazz , and country music . Its ten songs consist entirely of pop standards that Nelson picked from among his favorites . Nelson asked Booker T. Jones , who was his neighbor in Malibu at the time , to arrange a version of " Moonlight in Vermont " . Impressed with Jones 's work , Nelson asked him to produce the entire album . Nelson 's decision to record such well @-@ known tracks was controversial among Columbia executives because he had distinguished himself in the outlaw country genre . Recording of the album took only ten days . 
 Released in April , Stardust was met with high sales and near @-@ universal positive reviews . It peaked at number one in Billboard 's Top Country Albums and number thirty in the Billboard 200 . Meanwhile , it charted at number one in Canadian RPM 's Country Albums and number twenty @-@ eight in RPM 's Top Albums . The singles " Blue Skies " and " All of Me " peaked respectively at numbers one and three in Billboard 's Hot Country Singles . 
 In 1979 , Nelson won a Grammy Award for Best Male Country Vocal Performance for the song " Georgia on My Mind " . Stardust was on the Billboard 's Country Album charts for ten years — from its release until 1988 . The album also reached number one in New Zealand and number five in Australia in 1980 . In 2003 , the album was ranked number 257 on Rolling Stone magazine 's list of the 500 greatest albums of all time . It was originally certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America in December 1978 . In 1984 , when it was certified triple platinum , Nelson was the highest @-@ grossing concert act in the United States . In 2002 , the album was certified quintuple platinum , and it was later inducted in the Grammy Hall of Fame class of 2015 . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 After the critical and commercial success of 1975 's Red Headed Stranger , Nelson became one of the most recognized artists in country music . He replicated this success in 1976 , releasing Wanted ! The Outlaws ( featuring Waylon Jennings , Jessi Colter and Tompall Glaser ) , which became the genre 's first certified platinum album . 
 By 1977 , Nelson had decided to record a collection of American pop standards . During that time , Nelson was living in the same neighborhood in Malibu as producer Booker T. Jones . The two became friends , and Nelson asked Jones to arrange " Moonlight in Vermont " . Pleased by the results , Nelson later asked Jones to produce an entire standards album for him . Nelson selected his ten favorite pop songs from his childhood , starting with " Stardust " . Nelson and his sister Bobbie had sheet music for the song that he had tried to perform with his guitar , but did not like that arrangement . Jones adapted the song for Nelson , who also picked for the album " Georgia on My Mind " , " Blue Skies " , " All of Me " , " Unchained Melody " , " September Song " , " On the Sunny Side of the Street " , " Moonlight in Vermont " , " Don 't Get Around Much Anymore " and " Someone to Watch Over Me " . 
 The executives of Columbia Records were not convinced that the album would sell well , because the project was a radical departure from his earlier success in the outlaw movement . The album included pop , jazz and folk music styles , in addition to country . It was recorded from December 3 – 12 , 1977 . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The album was released in April 1978 . The album peaked at number one Billboard Top Country Albums , and number thirty on the Billboard 200 . Meanwhile , the songs " Blue Skies " and " All of Me " peaked at number one and three respectively on Hot Country Songs . Stardust was certified platinum on December 1978 and was named Top Country Album of the year for 1978 . The album charted at number one in Canadian RPM 's Country Albums , while charted at number 28 in RPM 's Top Albums . 
 Nelson became the highest @-@ grossing concert act in the United States . In 1979 , Nelson won a Grammy Best Male Country Vocal Performance for " Georgia on My Mind " . In 1979 , " September Song " peaked at number fifteen in Billboard 's Hot Country Singles . Stardust spent two years on the Billboard 200 , and the album charted 540 weeks ( ten years ) on top country albums . In 1980 the album ranked at number one in New Zealand top albums , while it ranked at number 5 in Australian top albums . 
 In 1984 , the album was certified triple platinum , earning US $ 2 @.@ 1 million . Later it was also certified quadruple platinum in 1990 , and quintuple platinum in 2002 . It was ranked by Rolling Stone at # 257 in The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time . In honor of the 35th anniversary of the release , it was announced that Nelson would perform the entire album live , with the <unk> of an orchestra directed by David Campbell during two shows on August 9 – 10 , 2013 at the Hollywood Bowl in Los Angeles , California . In December 2014 the induction of Stardust to the Grammy Hall of Fame was announced , the record was included among the 2015 class . 
 = = = Initial reviews ( 1978 – 1979 ) = = = 
 Stardust received positive reviews from most publications , both on its original release and for its various reissues . Rolling Stone praised the album : " For all the sleek sophistication of the material , Stardust is as down @-@ home as the Legion dance . Heard coast to coast in lounges and on elevator soundtracks , these tunes have become part of the folk music of exurban America . And that 's the way Nelson plays them — spare and simple , with a jump band 's verve and a storyteller 's love of a good tale . By offering these songs , he 's displaying the tools of a journeyman musician 's trade — worn smooth and polished by constant use — and when he lays them out this way , they kind of look like works of art . Willie Nelson may be acknowledging both his own and country music 's debt to Broadway and Tin Pan Alley , but he 's also showing these hallowed musical institutions how the country makes their music its own " . 
 Billboard delivered a favorable review : " Unusual pairing of artist and producer here as Booker T. Jones was the prime mover in Booker T & the MGs a few years back . But the combination works well [ ... ] ( Nelson ) puts his distinctive , soft vocal style to good use interpreting a number of standards as well as country @-@ flavored tunes . All of the material seems well suited to his easygoing style as Nelson backs himself with guitar and gets help with guitar , drums , keyboards , bass and harmonica " . Texas Monthly also favored the album , but noted the difference with previous Nelson recordings : " Stardust blends the stark economy of Red Headed Stranger with an underlying current of church spiritualism . More often than not it works . Though the selections are all at least twenty years old , the songs withstand the test of time . Occasionally Willie 's voice seems to crack , I do miss the more familiar hard @-@ bitten whine that accompanies his usual fare like " Whiskey River " . But nonetheless this is a sterling effort " . 
 New Times wrote : " In Texas , some folks swear that Willie could sing " The Star Spangled Banner " and make it sound soulful . This collection of hoary old standards is the next best thing to testing that proposition directly . " Orange Coast praised Nelson 's performance of the standards : " Willie Nelson is perhaps the finest male singer in country music [ ... ] his phrasing and sense of understated drama have caused him to be compared with the best jazz singers . Now he 's released an album of old pop standards , Stardust ( Columbia ) , and you can almost hear the stirrings of an outlaw uprising between the grooves [ ... ] although is definitively no step forward in Nelson 's career , it 's still a pleasurable showcase of his considerable artistry as a vocalist . Plus even though he 's dealing with the sophisticated likes of Irving Berlin , George Gershwin , and Kurt Weill , he remains essentially country " . 
 = = = Other reviews = = = 
 Robert Christgau of The Village Voice gave the album an A- letter grade , stating , " I 'm real happy this record exists , not just because Nelson can be a great interpretive singer — his " Moonlight in Vermont " is a revelation — but because he 's provided me with ten great popular songs that I 've never had much emotional access to . " Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic gave the record five stars out of five , and said : " ( Stardust ) showcases Nelson 's skills as a musician and his entire aesthetic — where there is nothing separating classic American musical forms , it can all be played together — perhaps better than any other album , which is why it was a sensation upon its release and grows stronger with each passing year . " 
 Pitchfork Media rated the album with 9 @.@ 3 points out of 10 , and wrote : " Thirty years ago , Willie Nelson took a typically left turn and followed up a string of successful albums with a cover album of songs made famous by decidedly non @-@ country musicians like Dean Martin , Frank Sinatra and Louis Armstrong [ ... ] What makes the record so thrilling and very often beautiful — and what separates him from today 's ham @-@ handed vocalists — is Nelson 's facility as an interpreter [ ... ] With his tender , textured voice and intuitively around @-@ the @-@ beat phrasing , Nelson gives these songs fresh readings , with just the touch of sentimentality and nostalgia they demand . The cliché ' makes them his own ' certainly applies here : He sings them as they 've never been sung before or since , which is quite a feat considering their age and popularity . Hardened from endless touring into a tough , tight roadhouse revue , Nelson 's band gives a surprisingly supple performance on each song , which reinforces the album 's sweetly ruminative mood . Producer Booker T. Jones , of Stax fame , facilitates every aspect of the band 's sound , showcasing the performers ' range while ensuring the arrangements play to the lyrics and vocals without overwhelming them [ ... ] Stardust set both the template for Nelson 's career and the standard . Few artists have treat the American Songbook so affectionately and so cavalierly . " 
 Zagat Survey rated Stardust five stars out of five : " On this legendary departure from the traditional Willie , America 's pop troubadour puts his one @-@ of @-@ a @-@ kind touch on old pop standards , finding common ground between outlaw country and mellow [ ... ] Sweet and simple , more bow tie than bandana , each song is turned and twisted until it 's his own and , paired with the production talents of Booker T. Jones , sets a romantic mood that appeals to a whole new audience . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Side one : 
 Side two : 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Willie Nelson – vocals , guitar 
 Bobbie Nelson – piano 
 Paul English – drums 
 Rex Ludwick – drums 
 Jody Payne – guitar 
 Bee Spears – bass 
 Chris <unk> – bass 
 Mickey Raphael – harmonica 
 Booker T. Jones – organ , piano 
 = = Chart Performance = = 
 Albums 
 Singles 
 = = Reissues = = 
 = = = Columbia Records 1999 reissue bonus tracks = = = 
 " Scarlet Ribbons " ( Evelyn Danzig , Jack Segal ) – 4 : 30 
 " I Can See Clearly Now " ( Johnny Nash ) – 4 : 18 
 = = = Sony Records ' 30th Anniversary Legacy Edition bonus tracks = = = 
 In 2008 , Columbia Records issued a version of Stardust subtitled 30th Anniversary Legacy Edition . The album contained a 16 track bonus disc of standards from Nelson 's other albums . None of the bonus tracks date to the original Stardust sessions . 
 " What a Wonderful World " ( George David Weiss , Bob Thiele ) 
 " Basin Street Blues " ( Spencer Williams ) 
 " I 'm <unk> ' ( That I Love You ) " ( D. Dougherty , E. Reynolds , A. <unk> ) 
 " I 'm Gonna Sit Right Down and Write Myself a Letter " ( Fred E. <unk> , Joe Young ) 
 " The Gypsy " ( Billy Reid ) 
 " Mona Lisa " ( Jay Livingston , Ray Evans ) 
 " Ac @-@ Cent @-@ <unk> @-@ Ate the Positive " ( Johnny Mercer , Harold Arlen ) 
 " Ole Buttermilk Sky " ( Hoagy Carmichael , J. Brooks ) 
 " That Lucky Old Sun " ( Haven Gillespie , Beasley Smith ) 
 " Little Things Mean a Lot " ( E. <unk> , C. Stutz ) 
 " Cry " ( Churchill <unk> ) 
 " You 'll Never Know " ( Mack Gordon , Harry Warren ) 
 " Tenderly " ( Jack Lawrence , Walter Lloyd Gross ) 
 " Stormy Weather " ( Harold Arlen , Ted Koehler ) 
 " One for My Baby ( and One More for the Road ) " ( Johnny Mercer , Harold Arlen ) 
 " Angel Eyes " ( Earl Brent , Matt Dennis ) 
 Tracks 1 , 7 , 8 from the album What a Wonderful World 
 Track 2 from the album The Promiseland 
 Tracks 3 , 4 , 6 from the album Somewhere Over the Rainbow 
 Tracks 5 , 16 from the album Angel Eyes 
 Track 9 from the album The Sound in Your Mind 
 Track 10 from the album Born for Trouble 
 Track 11 from the album City of New Orleans 
 Track 12 from the album Without a Song 
 Tracks 13 – 15 from the album One For the Road 
 = Battle of Constantinople ( 922 ) = 
 The Battle of Constantinople was fought in June 922 at the outskirts of the capital of the Byzantine Empire , Constantinople , between the forces of the First Bulgarian Empire and the Byzantines during the Byzantine – Bulgarian war of 913 – 927 . In the summer the Byzantine Emperor Romanos I Lekapenos sent troops under the commander Saktikios to repel another Bulgarian raid at the outskirts of the Byzantine capital . The Byzantines stormed the Bulgarian camp but were defeated when they confronted the main Bulgarian forces . During his flight from the battlefield Saktikios was mortally wounded and died the following night . 
 The Bulgarians , who by 922 were in control of most of the Balkans , continued to ravage the Byzantine countryside virtually unopposed . However , they lacked the maritime power to conduct a successful siege of Constantinople . The subsequent attempts to negotiate a Bulgarian – Arab alliance for a joint assault of Constantinople were discovered by the Byzantines and successfully countered . The strategic situation in the Balkans remained unchanged until both sides signed a peace treaty in 927 , which recognized the imperial title of the Bulgarian monarchs and the complete independence of the Bulgarian Orthodox Church as an autocephalous Patriarchate . 
 The primary sources for the battle are the continuation of George Hamartolos ' Chronicle and John Skylitzes ' Synopsis of Histories . 
 = = Background = = 
 During his short reign the Byzantine emperor Alexander ( r . 912 – 913 ) provoked a conflict with the Bulgarian monarch Simeon I ( r . 893 – 927 ) . Simeon I , who had long harboured ambitions to claim an imperial title for himself , took the opportunity to wage war . With the Byzantine Empire in disarray following Alexander 's death in June 913 , the Bulgarians reached Constantinople unopposed and forced the regency of the infant Constantine VII ( r . 913 – 959 ) to recognize Simeon I as emperor ( in Bulgarian , Tsar ) . Following a palace coup in 914 , the new Byzantine regency revoked the concessions to the Bulgarians and summoned the whole army , including the troops in Asia Minor , to deal with the Bulgarian threat once and all . In the decisive battle of Achelous in 917 the Byzantine forces were completely annihilated , leaving the Bulgarians in charge of the Balkans . Their annual campaigns reached the walls of Constantinople and the Isthmus of Corinth . All subsequent attempts to confront the Bulgarian army at Katasyrtai , Aquae Calidae and Pegae ended in defeat . 
 Despite his military supremacy over land , Simeon I was aware that he needed naval assistance in order to seize Constantinople . In 922 he clandestinely sent envoys to the Fatimid caliph Ubayd Allah al @-@ Mahdi Billah in Mahdia to negotiate the assistance of the powerful Arab navy . Simeon I proposed to divide equally all spoils ; the Bulgarians were to keep Constantinople and the Fatimids would gain the Byzantine territories in Sicily and South Italy . 
 = = The battle = = 
 To distract the Byzantine attention from the secret negotiations with the Arabs , in the summer of 922 the Bulgarians launched a campaign in Eastern Thrace . They captured and garrisoned a number of fortified towns in the region , including Bizye . In June they reached the outskirts of Constantinople and burned the Palace of Theodora , situated on the shores of the Golden Horn . 
 In response , emperor Romanos I Lekapenos ( r . 920 – 944 ) summoned the commanders of the tagmata on a feast and urged them to confront the Bulgarians . The following day one of them , Saktikios , led the assault against the Bulgarians . While most of the Bulgarian soldiers were dispersed to loot the countryside , the Byzantines attacked the Bulgarian camp and slaughtered the few defenders left there . When the main Bulgarian forces were informed about the attack , they headed back to the camp to engage the opponents . In the ensuing heavy struggle the Bulgarians prevailed and forced the Byzantines to flee despite the personal courage of Saktikios , who the Byzantine chroniclers claim to have " killed many " . During the flight , the horse of Saktikios got stuck in the mud of a river and the Byzantine commander was wounded in the seat and the thigh . His soldiers managed to free the horse from the mud and to bring him to the Blachernae alive . Saktikios was laid in the Church of St. Mary of Blachernae , where he died the following night . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After the victory Simeon I sent letters to the Ecumenical Patriarch Nicholas Mystikos and Romanos ' co @-@ emperor Constantine VII to propose peace negotiations . However , his intention was to prolong the negotiations until the return of his envoys to the Fatimids . While Simeon I and Nicholas Mystikos exchanged letters the military actions continued . In a few weeks the Bulgarian army captured Adrianople , the most important city in Byzantine Thrace . The fall of Adrianople raised fears in Constantinople that a Bulgarian assault of the city was imminent . The Byzantines tried to intimidate Simeon I by threatening to incite the Magyars , the Pechenegs and Kievan Rus ' to attack Bulgaria from the north @-@ east , as they had done in the war of 894 – 896 . Simeon I knew that these were empty words because the Byzantine Empire was in no position to carry out these threats . 
 In the meantime , the Bulgarian envoys received a warm welcome by al @-@ Mahdi . The Fatimid caliph accepted the Bulgarian terms and sent his own emissaries to Simeon I. However , on the way back their ship was captured by the Byzantines , who managed to outbid the Bulgarians and distract a Fatimid attack . The Bulgarians remained in control of most of the Balkans , annexing Byzantium 's ally Serbia in 924 , but without naval support were unable to launch a decisive attack on Constantinople . The war continued until the death of Simeon I in 927 , when his son Peter I ( r . 927 – 969 ) concluded a peace treaty with the Byzantines , who recognized the imperial title of the Bulgarian monarchs and the complete independence of the Bulgarian Orthodox Church as an autocephalous Patriarchate in return for most of Simeon I 's conquests in Thrace after 917 . 
 = Flag of Canada = 
 The flag of Canada , often referred to as the Canadian flag , or unofficially as the Maple Leaf and l <unk> ( French for " the one @-@ leafed " ) , is a national flag consisting of a red field with a white square at its centre in the ratio of 1 : 2 : 1 , in the middle of which is featured a stylized , red , 11 @-@ pointed maple leaf charged in the centre . It is the first ever specified by law for use as the country 's national flag . 
 In 1964 , Prime Minister Lester B. Pearson formed a committee to resolve the ongoing issue of the lack of an official Canadian flag , sparking a serious debate about a flag change to replace the Union Flag . Out of three choices , the maple leaf design by George Stanley , based on the flag of the Royal Military College of Canada , was selected . The flag made its first official appearance on February 15 , 1965 ; the date is now celebrated annually as National Flag of Canada Day . 
 The Canadian Red Ensign had been unofficially used since the 1890s and was approved by a 1945 Order in Council for use " wherever place or occasion may make it desirable to fly a distinctive Canadian flag " . Also , the Royal Union Flag remains an official flag in Canada . There is no law dictating how the national flag is to be treated . There are , however , conventions and protocols to guide how it is to be displayed and its place in the order of precedence of flags , which gives it primacy over the aforementioned and most other flags . 
 Many different flags created for use by Canadian officials , government bodies , and military forces contain the maple leaf motif in some fashion , either by having the Canadian flag charged in the canton , or by including maple leaves in the design . 
 = = Origins and design = = 
 The flag is horizontally symmetric and therefore the obverse and reverse sides appear identical . The width of the Maple Leaf flag is twice the height . The white field is a Canadian pale ( a square central band in a vertical triband flag , named after this flag ) ; each bordering red field is exactly half its size and it bears a stylized red maple leaf at its centre . The blazon was registered with the Canadian Heraldic Authority on March 15 , 2005 ; outlining the heraldic design as " Gules on a Canadian pale argent a maple leaf of the first " , as outlined in the original royal proclamation . 
 The maple leaf has been used as a Canadian emblem since the 18th century . It was first used as a national symbol in 1868 when it appeared on the coat of arms of both Ontario and Quebec . In 1867 , Alexander Muir composed the patriotic song " The Maple Leaf Forever " , which became an unofficial anthem in English @-@ speaking Canada . The maple leaf was later added to the Canadian coat of arms in 1921 . From 1876 until 1901 , the leaf appeared on all Canadian coins and remained on the penny after 1901 . The use of the maple leaf by the Royal Canadian Regiment as a regimental symbol extended back to 1860 . During the First World War and Second World War , badges of the Canadian Forces were often based on a maple leaf design . The maple leaf would eventually adorn the tombstones of Canadian military graves . 
 By proclaiming the Royal Arms of Canada , King George V in 1921 made red and white the official colours of Canada ; the former came from Saint George 's Cross and the latter from the French royal emblem since King Charles VII . These colours became " entrenched " as the national colours of Canada upon the proclamation of the Royal Standard of Canada ( the Canadian monarch 's personal flag ) in 1962 . The Department of Canadian Heritage has listed the various colour shades for printing ink that should be used when reproducing the Canadian flag ; these include : 
 FIP red : General Printing Ink , No. 0 @-@ 712 ; 
 <unk> Canada Ltd . , No. <unk> ; 
 Monarch <unk> , No. <unk> / 0 
 Rieger <unk> , No. <unk> 
 Sinclair and Valentine , No . <unk> / 0 . 
 The number of points on the leaf has no special significance ; the number and arrangement of the points were chosen after wind tunnel tests showed the current design to be the least blurry of the various designs when tested under high wind conditions . The image of the maple leaf used on the flag was designed by Jacques Saint @-@ Cyr ; however , Jack Cook claims that this stylized eleven @-@ point maple leaf was lifted from a copyrighted design owned by a Canadian craft shop in Ottawa . The colours 0 / 100 / 100 / 0 in the CMYK process , PMS 032 ( flag red 100 % ) , or PMS 485 ( used for screens ) in the Pantone colour specifier can be used when reproducing the flag . For the Federal Identity Program , the red tone of the standard flag has an RGB value of 255 – 0 – 0 ( web hexadecimal # <unk> ) . In 1984 , the National Flag of Canada Manufacturing Standards Act was passed to unify the manufacturing standards for flags used in both indoor and outdoor conditions . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early flags = = = 
 The first flag known to have flown in Canada was the St George 's Cross carried by John Cabot when he reached Newfoundland in 1497 . In 1534 , Jacques Cartier planted a cross in Gaspé bearing the French royal coat of arms with the fleurs @-@ de @-@ lis . His ship flew a red flag with a white cross , the French naval flag at the time . New France continued to fly the evolving French military flags of that period . As the de jure national flag of the United Kingdom , the Union Flag ( commonly known as the Union Jack and , by law , called the Royal Union Flag in Canada since 1964 ) was used similarly in Canada since the 1621 British settlement in Nova Scotia . Its use continued after Canada 's independence from the United Kingdom in 1931 until the adoption of the current flag in 1965 . 
 Shortly after Canadian Confederation in 1867 , the need for distinctive Canadian flags emerged . The first Canadian flag was that then used as the flag of the Governor General of Canada , a Union Flag with a shield in the centre bearing the quartered arms of Ontario , Quebec , Nova Scotia , and New Brunswick surrounded by a wreath of maple leaves . In 1870 the Red Ensign , with the addition of the Canadian composite shield in the fly , began to be used unofficially on land and sea and was known as the Canadian Red Ensign . As new provinces joined the Confederation , their arms were added to the shield . In 1892 , the British admiralty approved the use of the Red Ensign for Canadian use at sea . The composite shield was replaced with the coat of arms of Canada upon its grant in 1921 and , in 1924 , an Order in Council approved its use for Canadian government buildings abroad . In 1925 , Prime Minister William Lyon Mackenzie King established a committee to design a flag to be used at home , but it was dissolved before the final report could be delivered . Despite the failure of the committee to solve the issue , public sentiment in the 1920s was in favour of fixing the flag problem for Canada . New designs were proposed in 1927 , 1931 , and 1939 . 
 During the Second World War , the Red Ensign was the recognized Canadian national flag . A joint committee of the Senate and House of Commons was appointed on November 8 , 1945 , to recommend a national flag to officially adopt . It received 2 @,@ 409 designs from the public and was addressed by the director of the Historical Section of the Canadian Army , Fortescue Duguid , who pointed out red and white were Canada 's official colours and there was already an emblem representing the country : three joined maple leaves seen on the escutcheon of the Canadian coat of arms . By May 9 the following year , the committee reported back with a recommendation " that the national flag of Canada should be the Canadian red ensign with a maple leaf in autumn golden colours in a bordered background of white " . The Legislative Assembly of Quebec , however , had urged the committee to not include any of what it deemed as " foreign symbols " , including the Union Flag , and Mackenzie King , then still prime minister , declined to act on the report , leaving the order to fly the Canadian Red Ensign in place . 
 = = = Great Flag Debate = = = 
 By the 1960s , debate for an official Canadian flag intensified and became a subject of controversy , culminating in the Great Flag Debate of 1964 . In 1963 , the minority Liberal government of Lester B. Pearson gained power and decided to adopt an official Canadian flag through parliamentary debate . The principal political proponent of the change was Pearson . He had been a significant broker during the Suez Crisis of 1956 , for which he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize . During the crisis , Pearson was disturbed when the Egyptian government objected to Canadian peacekeeping forces on the grounds that the Canadian flag ( the Red Ensign ) contained the same symbol ( the Union Flag ) also used as a flag by the United Kingdom , one of the belligerents . Pearson 's goal was for the Canadian flag to be distinctive and unmistakably Canadian . The main opponent to changing the flag was the leader of the opposition and former prime minister , John Diefenbaker , who eventually made the subject a personal crusade . 
 In 1961 , Leader of the Opposition Lester Pearson asked John Ross Matheson to begin researching what it would take for Canada to have a new flag . Pearson knew the Red Ensign with the Union Jack was unpopular in Quebec , a base of support for his Liberal Party , but the Red Ensign was strongly favoured by English Canada . By April 1963 , Pearson was prime minister in a minority government and risked losing power over the issue . He formed a 15 @-@ member multi @-@ party parliamentary committee in 1963 to select a new design , despite opposition leader Diefenbaker 's demands for a referendum on the issue . On May 27 , 1964 , Pearson 's cabinet introduced a motion to parliament for adoption of his favourite design , presented to him by artist and heraldic advisor Alan Beddoe , of a " sea to sea " ( Canada 's motto ) flag with blue borders and three conjoined red maple leaves on a white field . This motion led to weeks of acrimonious debate in the House of Commons and the design came to be known as the " Pearson Pennant " , derided by the media and viewed as a " concession to Québec " . 
 = = = Flag today = = = 
 A new all @-@ party committee was formed in September 1964 , comprising seven Liberals , five Conservatives , one New Democrat , one Social Crediter , and one <unk> , with Herman Batten as chairman , while John Matheson acted as Pearson 's right @-@ hand man . Among those who gave their opinions to the group were Duguid , expressing the same views as he had in 1945 , insisting on a design using three maple leaves ; Arthur R. M. Lower , stressing the need for a distinctly Canadian emblem ; Marcel Trudel , arguing for symbols of Canada 's founding nations , which did not include the maple leaf ( a thought shared by Diefenbaker ) ; and A. Y. Jackson , providing his own suggested designs . Also considered by a steering committee were approximately 2 @,@ 000 suggestions from the public , in addition to 3 @,@ 900 others , " including those that had accumulated in the Department of the Secretary of State and those from a parliamentary flag committee of 1945 – 1946 " . Through a six @-@ week period of study with political manoeuvring , the committee took a vote on the two finalists : the Pearson Pennant ( Beddoe 's design ) and the current design . Believing the Liberal members would vote for the Prime Minister 's preference , the Conservatives voted for the single leaf design . The Liberals , though , all voted for the same , giving a unanimous , 14 to 0 vote for the option created by George Stanley and inspired by the flag of the Royal Military College of Canada ( RMC ) in Kingston , Ontario . 
 There , near the parade square , in March 1964 , while viewing the college flag atop the Mackenzie Building , Stanley , then RMC 's Dean of Arts , first suggested to Matheson , then Member of Parliament for Leeds , that the RMC flag should form the basis of the national flag . The suggestion was followed by Stanley 's memorandum of March 23 , 1964 , on the history of Canada 's emblems , in which he warned that any new flag " must avoid the use of national or racial symbols that are of a divisive nature " and that it would be " clearly inadvisable " to create a flag that carried either the Union Jack or a fleur @-@ de @-@ lis . According to Matheson , Pearson 's one " paramount and desperate objective " in introducing the new flag was to keep Quebec in the Canadian union . It was Dr. Stanley 's idea that the new flag should be red and white and that it should feature the single maple leaf ; his memorandum included the first sketch of what would become the flag of Canada . Stanley and Matheson collaborated on a design that was ultimately , after six months of debate and 308 speeches , passed by a majority vote in the House of Commons on December 15 , 1964 . Just after this , at 2 : 00 am , Matheson wrote to Stanley : " Your proposed flag has just now been approved by the Commons 163 to 78 . Congratulations . I believe it is an excellent flag that will serve Canada well . " The Senate added its approval two days later . 
 Elizabeth II , Queen of Canada , proclaimed the new flag on January 28 , 1965 , and it was inaugurated on February 15 of the same year at an official ceremony held on Parliament Hill in Ottawa , in the presence of Governor General Major @-@ General Georges Vanier , the Prime Minister , other members of the Cabinet , and Canadian parliamentarians . The Red Ensign was lowered at the stroke of noon and the new maple leaf flag was raised . The crowd sang " O Canada " followed by " God Save the Queen " . Of the flag , Vanier said " [ it ] will symbolize to each of us — and to the world — the unity of purpose and high resolve to which destiny beckons us . " Maurice Bourget , Speaker of the Senate , said : " The flag is the symbol of the nation 's unity , for it , beyond any doubt , represents all the citizens of Canada without distinction of race , language , belief , or opinion . " Yet there was still opposition to the change , and Stanley 's life was even threatened for having " assassinated the flag " . In spite of this , Stanley attended the flag raising ceremony . 
 At the time of the 50th anniversary of the flag , the government — held by the Conservative Party — was criticized for the lack of official ceremony dedicated to the date ; accusations of partisanship were levelled . Minister of Canadian Heritage Shelly Glover denied the charges and others , including Liberal Members of Parliament , pointed to community events taking place around the country . Governor General David Johnston did , though , preside at an official ceremony at Confederation Park in Ottawa , integrated with <unk> . He said " [ t ] he National Flag of Canada is so embedded in our national life and so emblematic of our national purpose that we simply cannot imagine our country without it . " Queen Elizabeth II stated : " On this , the 50th anniversary of the National Flag of Canada , I am pleased to join with all Canadians in the celebration of this unique and cherished symbol of our country and identity . " A commemorative stamp and coin were issued by Canada Post and the Royal Canadian Mint , respectively . 
 = = = Flags used in Canada from 1497 to the present = = = 
 = = Proclamation = = 
 After the resolutions proposing a new national flag for Canada were passed by the two houses of parliament , a proclamation was drawn up for signature by the Canadian queen . This was created in the form of an illuminated document on vellum , with calligraphy by Yvonne <unk> and heraldic illustrations . The text was rendered in black ink , using a quill , while the heraldic elements were painted in gouache with gilt highlights . The Great Seal of Canada was applied in wax over a silk ribbon . 
 This parchment was signed discreetly by the calligrapher , but was made official by the autographs of Queen Elizabeth II , Prime Minister Lester Pearson , and Attorney General Guy Favreau . In order to obtain these signatures , the document was flown to the United Kingdom ( for the Queen 's royal sign @-@ manual ) and to the Caribbean ( for the signature of Favreau , who was on vacation ) . This transport to different climates , combined with the quality of the materials with which the proclamation was created , and the subsequent storage and repair methods ( including the use of Scotch Tape ) contributed to the deterioration of the document : The gouache was flaking off , leaving gaps in the heraldic designs , most conspicuously on the red maple leaf of the flag design in the centre of the sheet , and the adhesive from the tape had left stains . A desire to have the proclamation as part of a display at the Canadian Museum of Civilization marking the flag 's 25th anniversary led to its restoration in 1989 . The proclamation is today stored in a temperature and humidity controlled , plexiglass case , so as to prevent the velum from changing dimensionally . 
 = = Alternative flags = = 
 As a symbol of the nation 's membership in the Commonwealth of Nations , the Royal Union Flag is an official Canadian flag and is flown on certain occasions . Regulations require federal installations to fly the Royal Union Flag beside the national flag when physically possible , using a second flagpole , on the following days : Commonwealth Day ( the second Monday in March ) , Victoria Day ( the same date as the Canadian sovereign 's official birthday ) , and the anniversary of the Statute of Westminster ( December 11 ) . The Royal Union Flag can also be flown at the National War Memorial or at other locations during ceremonies that honour Canadian involvement with forces of other Commonwealth nations during times of war . The national flag always precedes the Royal Union Flag , with the former occupying the place of honour . The Royal Union Flag is also part of the provincial flags of Ontario and Manitoba , forming the canton of these flags ; a stylized version is used on the flag of British Columbia and the flag of Newfoundland and Labrador . Several of the provincial lieutenant governors formerly used a modified union flag as their personal standard , but the Lieutenant Governor of Nova Scotia is the only one who retains this design . The Royal Union Flag and Red Ensign are still flown in Canada by veterans ' groups and others who continue to stress the importance of Canada 's British heritage and the Commonwealth connection . 
 The Red Ensign is occasionally still used as well , including official use at some ceremonies . It was flown at the commemorations of the Battle of Vimy Ridge in 2007 . This decision elicited criticism from those who believe it should not be given equal status to the Canadian flag and received praise from people who believe that it is important to retain the ties to Canada 's past . 
 In Quebec , the provincial flag ( a white cross on a field of blue with four fleurs @-@ de @-@ lis ) can be considered a national flag along with the Maple Leaf flag , as is the Acadian flag in the Acadian regions of the Maritime provinces , and the flags of the Iroquois Nation , the Metis Nation and other groups . 
