 = = Protocol = = 
 No law dictates the proper use of the Canadian flag . However , Canadian Heritage has released guidelines on how to correctly display the flag alone and with other flags . The guidelines deal with the order of precedence in which the Canadian flag is placed , where the flag can be used , how it is used , and what people should do to honour the flag . The suggestions , titled Flag Etiquette in Canada , were published by Canadian Heritage in book and online formats and last updated in August 2011 . The flag itself can be displayed on any day at buildings operated by the Government of Canada , airports , military bases , and diplomatic offices , as well as by citizens , during any time of the day . When flying the flag , it must be flown using its own pole and must not be inferior to other flags , save for , in descending order , the Queen 's standard , the governor general 's standard , any of the personal standards of members of the Canadian Royal Family , or flags of the lieutenant governors . The Canadian flag is flown at half @-@ mast in Canada to indicate a period of mourning . Canadian Forces does have a special protocol for folding the Canadian flag for presentations , such as during a funeral ceremony ; however , CF does not recommend this method for everyday use . 
 = = Promoting the flag = = 
 Since the adoption of the Canadian flag in 1965 , the Canadian government has sponsored programs to promote it . Examples include the Canadian Parliamentary Flag Program of the Department of Canadian Heritage and the flag program run by the Department of Public Works . These programs increased the exposure of the flag and the concept that it was part of the national identity . To increase awareness of the new flag , the Parliamentary Flag Program was set up in December , 1972 , by the Cabinet and , beginning in 1973 , allowed members of the House of Commons to distribute flags and lapel pins in the shape of the Canadian flag to their constituents . Flags that have been flown on the Peace Tower and the East and West Blocks of Parliament Hill are packaged by the Department of Public Works and offered to the public free of charge . However , the program has a 34 @-@ year waiting list for East and West Block flags , and a 48 @-@ year waiting list for Peace Tower flags . 
 Since 1996 , February 15 has been commemorated as National Flag of Canada Day . In 1996 , Minister of Canadian Heritage Sheila Copps instituted the One in a Million National Flag Challenge . This program was intended to provide Canadians with a million new national flags in time for Flag Day , 1997 . The program was controversial because it cost some $ 45 million , and provided no means to hoist or fly the flags . The official numbers from Canadian Heritage put the expenses at $ 15 @.@ 5 million , with approximately a seventh of the cost offset by donations . 
 = Borderline ( Madonna song ) = 
 " Borderline " is a song by American singer Madonna from her eponymous debut studio album Madonna ( 1983 ) . It was released on February 15 , 1984 by Sire Records as the album 's fifth single . Written and composed by producer Reggie Lucas , the song was remixed by Madonna 's then @-@ boyfriend John " Jellybean " Benitez . She used a refined and expressive voice for the song . Its lyrics dealt with the subject of a love that is never fulfilled . 
 Contemporary critics and authors applauded the song , calling it harmonically the most complex song from the Madonna album and complimenting the dance @-@ pop nature of the song . " Borderline " became Madonna 's first top ten hit on the Billboard Hot 100 , peaking at number ten . In the United Kingdom it reached number two after it was re @-@ released as a single in 1986 . Elsewhere , the song reached the top 10 or top 20 of a number of European nations while peaking the singles chart of Ireland . The song was placed at 84 on Blender magazine 's " The 500 Greatest Songs Since You Were Born " , while Time included it on the critic list " All @-@ Time 100 Songs " . 
 The accompanying music video portrayed Madonna with a Latin @-@ American man as her boyfriend . She was enticed by a British photographer to pose and model for him , but later returned to her original boyfriend . The video generated interest amongst academics , who noted the use of power as symbolism in it . With the video , Madonna was credited for breaking the taboo of interracial relationships and was considered one of her career @-@ making moments . The release of the video on MTV increased Madonna 's popularity further . Madonna has performed the song on her Virgin Tour ( 1985 ) and the Sticky & Sweet Tour ( 2008 ) , where a punk @-@ rock version of the song was performed . " Borderline " has been covered by a number of artists , including Duffy , Jody Watley , Counting Crows , and The Flaming Lips . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1982 , Madonna was working with producer Reggie Lucas on her debut album . She had already composed three songs , when Lucas brought one of his own compositions to the project and called it " Borderline " . However , after recording the song , Madonna was unhappy with the way the final version turned out . According to her , Lucas used too many instruments and did not consider her ideas for the song . This led to a dispute between the two . After finishing the album , Lucas left the project without altering the songs to Madonna 's specifications . Hence , Madonna brought her then boyfriend John " Jellybean " Benitez to remix " Borderline " and some of the other recorded tracks . On hearing the final version , Seymour Stein , head of Sire Records declared , " I dared to believe this was going to be huge beyond belief , the biggest thing I 'd ever had , after I heard ' Borderline ' ... The passion that she put into that song , I thought , there 's no stopping this girl . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Borderline " was recorded in February 1983 and ushered a change from the normal vocal tone expressed by Madonna in her songs . A sentimental track , the song talks about a love that is never quite fulfilled . According to author Santiago Fouz @-@ Hernández in his book Madonna 's drowned worlds , the lyrics of the song like " Something in way you love me won 't let me be / I don 't want to be your prisoner so baby won 't you set me free " depicted a rebellion against male chauvinism . Madonna used a refined and expressive voice to sing the song , backed by Lucas 's instrumentations . Considered as the best example of the working relationship between Lucas and Madonna , he pushed her to find emotional depth in the song . Although sounding icy , the chorus is contemporary in style and the vocal range for this song , was later used by Madonna as her own personal range through her whole music career . It opens with a keyboard rich intro played on a Fender @-@ Rhodes Electric Piano and a catchy synth melody provided by Fred Zarr . Bass player Anthony Jackson doubled Dean Gant 's synth bass to provide a solid and more complex texture . 
 The chords in the song were inspired by Seventies disco sound in Philadelphia as well as Elton John 's musical style during the mid @-@ seventies . The chord sequences cite from Bachman @-@ Turner Overdrive 's song " You Ain 't Seen Nothing Yet " while the synth phases display her typical musical style . The song is set in common time with a moderate tempo of 120 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of D major with Madonna 's vocal range spanning from F ♯ 3 to B4 . The song follows in the chord progression of D – C – G in the first verse to Bm – Em – A – F ♯ in the pre @-@ chorus , changes to A – F ♯ – Bm – A – E and G – D – A in the chorus . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Author J. Randy Taraborrelli , in his biography of Madonna , called " Borderline " along with " Holiday " the two key records which helped in establishing Madonna 's base in the music industry . He added that Madonna 's sober voice made the track " as close to an old Motown production as a hit could get in the dance @-@ music @-@ driven eighties . " Author Maury Dean in his book Rock ' n ' Roll Gold Rush called the song " echoey boogie " with " saucy @-@ style and come @-@ hither magnetism . " Author Rikky Rooksby in his book , The Complete Guide to the Music of Madonna called it harmonically the most complex track of her debut album . Stephen Thomas Erlewine from AllMusic called the song effervescent . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine called the song soulful . Commentator Dave Marsh in his book The Heart of Rock & Soul said that the " music 's too damn good to be denied , no matter whose value system it disrupts . " 
 Journalist Roxanne <unk> in her book , Shout , Sister , Shout ! commented that " Borderline " was the song which made Madonna the star she is . Thom Duffy of Orlando Sentinel commented that " Borderline " was a song " introduced Madonna , the helium @-@ induced pop star , and a siren kitten . " The song was placed at number 84 on Blender Magazine 's " The 500 Greatest Songs Since You Were Born . " Time also included it on the critic list " All @-@ Time 100 Songs " , stating that " Madonna went on to sing more @-@ clever songs ( ' Material Girl ' ) , more @-@ showy songs ( ' Like a Prayer ' ) , more @-@ sexy songs ( ' Justify My Love ' ) . But ' Borderline , ' her first top @-@ 10 hit , captures the essence of her pop appeal , its freshness , simplicity and vitality . " Pitchfork Media considered the song the 106th best one of the 1980s , stating that " ' Borderline ' is one of the first laid bricks in the cathedral of Madonna ’ s mythology , four minutes of emotional helium that became her first Top 10 hit on the heels of an iconic music video . " 
 At the 1984 Billboard Music Awards , " Borderline " received two nominations , in the categories of Best New Artist and Best Choreography in a Music Video , but did not win either . In September 2014 , the song was placed at number two on Rolling Stone 's list of " 100 Best Singles of 1984 " . Carrie Grant from the magazine described the track as a " melodic synth @-@ a @-@ <unk> with the <unk> low end " , and also noting that Madonna 's vocals were restrained on the song , but sounded emotional . " The radio remix , which trims nearly three minutes from the tune , boasts one of Madge 's most iconic fade @-@ outs , standing by as she " la la la " s into the void . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 In the United States , the song became Madonna 's first top ten hit when it reached position ten on the Billboard Hot 100 on June 16 , 1984 . The song reached a peak of two on the Hot Dance Music / Club Play chart . It also became a crossover success by charting on the Hot Adult Contemporary Tracks chart at 23 . On October 22 , 1998 , the song was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipment of one million copies . In Canada the song debuted at number 56 on the RPM issue dated August 4 , 1984 and reached a peak of number 25 on September 15 , 1984 . The song was on the chart for 14 weeks . 
 In the United Kingdom , with the original release of the song on June 2 , 1984 , it was able to reach a peak of only 56 . However , upon re @-@ releasing the song on January 1 , 1986 , it reached a new peak of two on the chart and was present for a total of nine weeks . The song was certified gold by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) on February 1986 , for shipment of 500 @,@ 000 copies of the single . According to the Official Charts Company , the song has sold 310 @,@ 000 copies there . Across Europe the song topped the chart in Ireland and entered the top ten of Belgium and Netherlands . It also peaked at number 23 in Switzerland and number 12 in Australia . 
 = = Music video = = 
 " Borderline " was filmed on location in Los Angeles , California from January 30 to February 2 , 1984 and was the first video that Madonna made with director Mary Lambert , who would later also direct the videos " Like a Virgin " , " Material Girl " , " La Isla Bonita " and " Like a Prayer " . Author Allen Metz noted how the video portrayed Madonna 's then " burgeoning star quality " . It is regarded as one of her career @-@ making moments when the video was started to be shown on MTV . She acted as the girlfriend of a Hispanic street guy who is picked up by a British photographer who publishes her picture on a magazine cover . The portrayal of the street life and high @-@ fashion scene in the video was a reference to Madonna 's life in the gritty , multiracial streets and clubs that she used to haunt while her career was beginning as well as the world of popularity and success she was experiencing at that moment . The storyline involved her being emotionally torn between the photographer and her boyfriend . Madonna 's boyfriend in the video is portrayed as Latino and her struggles with this relationship depicted the struggle Hispanic women faced with their men . Lambert said that there was " no formula " used when making the ' Borderline ' video and that they were " inventing it as we went along . " In the January 1997 issue of Rolling Stone , Lambert described the video and its plot as , " Boy and girl enjoy simple pleasures of barrio love , girl is tempted by fame , boy gets <unk> , girl gets famous , but her new beau 's out @-@ of @-@ line reaction to a behavioral trifle ( all she did was to spray @-@ paint his expensive sports car ) drives her back to her true love . " 
 The video narrative weaved the two relationship stories in color and black and white . In the color sequence , Madonna sings , flirts and seduces the Hispanic guy ( Louie Louie ) who becomes her boyfriend . In the black @-@ and @-@ white sequence she poses for the photographer , who also courts her . The video had Madonna in her usual sense of style in those years and wore her hair in a haystack , lace gloves , high heeled boots with thick socks and her trademark boy @-@ toy belt . She changes from one shot to another in color as well as black and white while wearing an unusual array of clothes including crop @-@ tops , T @-@ shits , vests and sweaters coupled with cut @-@ off pants and jeans as well as a couple of evening gowns . Posing for the photographer , Madonna looks towards the camera with challenge in her eyes thus depicting sexual aggression . At one moment in the video , she starts spraying graffiti over some lifeless classical statues thus portraying herself as a transgressor who breaks rules and attempts at innovation . With the video Madonna broke the taboo of interracial relationships . Although at first it seems that Madonna denies the Hispanic guy in favour of the photographer , later she rejects him thus implying her desire to control her own sexual pleasures or going over the established pop borderlines with lyrics like " You just keep on pushing my love , over the borderline " . The contrasting image of Madonna , first as a messy blonde in the Hispanic sequence and later as a fashioned glamorous blonde , suggested that one can construct one 's own image and identity . Portraying herself as a Hispanic also had the clever marketing strategy of appealing herself to Hispanic and black youths thus breaking down racial barriers . 
 After its airing " Borderline " attracted early attention from academics . They noted the symbolism of power in the two contrasting scenes of the video . The British photographer and his studio is decorated with the classical sculptures and nude statues holding spears in a phallic symbol . In contrast , phallic symbols portrayed in the Hispanic neighborhood included a street lamp which Madonna embraces and a pool cue held erect by Madonna 's boyfriend . Author Andrew Metz commented that with these scenes , Madonna displayed her sophisticated views on the fabrications of feminity as a supreme power rather than the normal views of oppression . Author Carol Clerk said that the videos of " Borderline " and " Lucky Star " established Madonna not as the girl @-@ next @-@ door , but as a sassy and smart , tough funny woman . Her clothes worn in the video were later used by designers like Karl Lagerfeld and Christian Lacroix in Paris Fashion week of the same year . Professor Douglas Kellner in his book Media Culture : Cultural Studies , Identity , and Politics Between the Modern and the Postmodern commented that the video depicted motifs and strategies which helped Madonna in her journey to become a star . 
 = = Live performances and covers = = 
 The song has been performed by Madonna on The Virgin Tour ( 1985 ) and the Sticky & Sweet Tour ( 2008 ) . In the Virgin Tour , Madonna performed the song wearing a black , fringed micro @-@ top and similar skirt , with her belly @-@ button exposed , and a number of crucifixes in different sizes , hanging from different parts of her body . Madonna performed the song in its original version . She appeared from behind a silhouette , and descended the steps , while waving her hands and singing . The performance was not included in the Madonna Live : The Virgin Tour VHS in 1985 . 
 " Borderline " was added to the set list of the first leg of her Sticky & Sweet Tour in 2008 during the Old School section of the performance . Madonna wore a pair of gym shorts in this section while wearing sneakers and long socks on her feet . The outfit was designed by Jeremy Scott and was a reference to Madonna 's old days in New York . A punk @-@ pop version of the song was performed by Madonna while playing a purple electric guitar on a microphone as the backdrops displayed Keith Harring 's cartoons and graphical imagery . Jon Pareles of The New York Times called the performance enthusiastic and punk @-@ pop . Nekesa Mumbi Moody of USA Today called it a " rocked out performance " . Caryn Ganz of Rolling Stone called it a " Cheap Trick @-@ style power pop song [ performance ] . " The song was not included in the 2009 leg of the tour and was replaced by a rock version of Madonna 's other song " Dress You Up . " In June 2016 , Madonna appeared on The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon and closed the show by performing " Borderline " , watched by the President of the United States , Barack Obama . 
 In 2000 , an electro @-@ industrial cover of the song by Nivek Ogre of <unk> was included on the tribute compilation album , Virgin Voices : A Tribute To Madonna , Vol . 2 . Heather Phares of AllMusic said that Ogre 's version " missed the mark . " Chicago pop punk band <unk> recorded a cover for the 2002 compilation album Punk Goes Pop . In 2006 singer Jody Watley covered the song for her album The Makeover . Watley 's downtempo version attained UK release as a single in October 2009 . An acoustic folk cover of the song by The Chapin Sisters was included on the 2007 Madonna tribute album Through the Wilderness . In 2008 , singer Duffy performed " Borderline " at Radio 1 's Big Weekend in Mote Park , Maidstone , Kent , England . The Flaming Lips and <unk> and White Dwarfs recorded a cover of the song for the 2009 Warner Bros. Records compilation , Covered , A Revolution in Sound . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic described the cover recording as turning Madonna 's version " inside out " . Counting Crows performed the song at the Royal Albert Hall in 2003 , an MP3 of the song was released on the band 's official website on March 17 , 2009 . The performance was criticised by ABC News , calling it anticlimatic . In 2010 , the TV show Glee covered it in the episode " The Power of Madonna " in a mashup with the song " Open Your Heart " , performed by Cory Monteith and Lea Michele . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 Note : Borderline " Dub Remix " is also known as " Instrumental " 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Madonna – lead vocals 
 Reggie Lucas – writer , producer , guitars , drum programming 
 Fred Zarr – synthesizers , electric and acoustic piano 
 Dean Gant – synthesizers , electric and acoustic piano 
 Ed Welch – synthesizers 
 Anthony Jackson – electric bass 
 Ira Siegal – guitars 
 Bobby Malach – tenor saxophone 
 Gwen Guthrie – background vocals 
 Brenda White – background vocals 
 Chrissy Faith – background vocals 
 Credits adapted from the album liner notes . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = The Bitch Is Back ( Veronica Mars ) = 
 " The Bitch Is Back " is the series finale of the American mystery television series Veronica Mars , the twentieth and final episode of the show 's third season , and the 64th episode overall . Co @-@ written by series creator Rob Thomas and executive producer Diane Ruggiero and directed by Michael Fields , the episode premiered on The CW on May 22 , 2007 , directly after the previous episode , " Weevils Wobble But They Don 't Go Down " . The series depicts the adventures of Veronica Mars ( Kristen Bell ) as she navigates life as a college student while moonlighting as a private detective . 
 In this episode , Veronica investigates the origins of a sex tape of her and Stosh " Piz " Piznarski ( Chris Lowell ) . <unk> Logan Echolls ( Jason Dohring ) because he assaulted Piz , Veronica eventually discovers that the perpetrators are a secret society at Hearst College known as the Castle , headed by Jake Kane ( Kyle Secor ) . Meanwhile , Parker Lee ( Julie Gonzalo ) ends her relationship with Logan , and Keith Mars ( Enrico Colantoni ) navigates the issues surrounding his candidacy in the upcoming sheriff 's election . 
 Several days prior to airing " The Bitch Is Back " , The CW announced that the series was cancelled . In an effort to prevent Veronica Mars from being cancelled , Thomas had filmed a twelve @-@ minute pitch for a concept involving Veronica in the FBI Academy , but it was rejected . When writing the episode , Thomas and Ruggiero removed seven minutes of material from the original cut ; they wanted to create an ambiguous finale that did not resolve everything neatly . At the time of its original broadcast , the episode was viewed by 2 @.@ 15 million people and received mostly positive reviews from television critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Logan informs Veronica about the sex tape of her and Piz and hands her a DVD , although she berates him and denies that the recording is authentic . She views the tape and goes to visit Piz , who is badly bruised . She makes sure that Piz did not upload the footage to the internet , which he confirms . After learning that Logan had attacked Piz , Parker visits Logan 's hotel room and tearfully breaks up with him , claiming that he still loves Veronica . Veronica goes to Logan 's hotel room and berates him for attacking Piz . She confronts Dick about the origins of the sex tape , and he reveals that he got it from Chip Diller before forwarding it to his whole address book . She investigates further before encountering a student who refuses to tell her anything . She gets Weevil to destroy the student 's car , and he names the individual , whom she later wiretaps . 
 Veronica learns that there may be a connection to a fraternity , and Wallace ( Percy Daggs III ) informs her that it is the secret society for which he is being recruited , the Castle . Wallace tells her that the equipment used to tape him was similar to that which was used to film Veronica and Piz . He starts to go through initiation with the group in order to ascertain the members ' identities for Veronica . The members make him go into a room and ask him very personal questions , electrically shocking him if he answers untruthfully . When they find out that Veronica has sent Wallace , they forcibly remove him , but he is able to figure out the identity of one of the other recruits . Veronica sneaks into the house of the recruit Wallace names and sees a large portrait of Lilly Kane ( Amanda Seyfried ) . She hears voices and hides behind a curtain before two men emerge . They speak about the Castle , and Veronica discovers that one of them is Jake Kane . After they leave , Veronica steals his computers . Keith investigates the robbery the following day , spotting Veronica on surveillance cameras ; however , he does not initially report his daughter . Veronica asks Mac ( Tina Majorino ) whether any computer could crack Jake 's password , and she is taken to a supercomputer on campus . 
 Keith questions Veronica about whether or not she broke into the house , despite knowing her guilt . Jake and a county prosecutor tell Keith that they will get a judge 's order and will return to prosecute Veronica . The supercomputer processes the names of all the Castle members just as Keith hands over the surveillance tape to the county prosecutor . Logan tries to apologize to Veronica . One of the Castle members comes up and tells her that the organization videotaped her , and Logan assaults him . Veronica returns the tape to Jake Kane on the condition that he does not tell Keith about it . She sees in the newspaper that charges have been filed against Keith for tampering with evidence relating to Veronica 's break @-@ in , likely meaning that he will lose the votes needed to win the sheriff 's election . She goes into a voting booth and votes for Keith as sheriff , walking away in pouring rain . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing , filming , and promotion = = = 
 " The Bitch Is Back " was co @-@ written by series creator Rob Thomas and executive producer Diane Ruggiero and directed by Michael Fields . The episode marked Thomas 's ninth writing credit , Ruggiero 's seventeenth installment of the series , and Fields 's eighth episode . The scene in which Veronica rebukes Logan was included because the writers thought that it would be a good note on which to end a season , even though it would not be the two characters ' final interaction in the series . Fields was heavily involved with the actors during filming of this scene . 
 Thomas highlighted the scene in which Logan attacks the Castle member for showcasing the romantic ambiguity between Logan , Veronica , and Piz . Thomas counseled Lowell about his facial expression before filming , and he was pleased with the end result , stating that " it breaks my heart " . While editing the final script , Thomas and Ruggiero had to remove roughly seven minutes from the original draft , including a scene featuring dialogue between Veronica and Leo . Later , Thomas thought that removing this scene made one voiceover by Veronica too sudden . 
 Thomas called the scene in which Keith makes Veronica dinner " quintessential Keith " and indicative of his lasting commitment to his daughter . Despite knowing that the episode could be the series finale , Thomas did not want it to completely resolve all plot lines ; his intention was to keep viewers guessing and prevent the conclusion from being too bland or typical . He ultimately felt that the final shot of Veronica walking away from the voting booth in the rain was " a pretty melancholy way to go out " . The song " It Never Rains in Southern California " by Albert Hammond plays during the final scene . In promotional advertising for the episode , The CW billed it as a season finale , despite the fact that the series had already been cancelled . 
 = = = FBI pitch = = = 
 Before cancellation , Thomas proposed his idea for season four to take place in the FBI Academy . Prior to the airing of " Un @-@ American Graffiti " , Enrico Colantoni stated that The CW had seen the filmed first ten pages and reacted negatively . However , Thomas denied this assertion and commented that The CW had not yet seen the FBI pitch . He added that it would be presented on May 2 , the day after the series came off a two @-@ month hiatus . Thomas 's statement was confirmed by a representative for the network . 
 Thomas filmed a twelve @-@ minute teaser for his new concept and presented it to The CW . The teaser was later released on the Veronica Mars third season DVD and the internet . The clip begins in medias res with Veronica , pretending to be a high schooler , talking to a teacher . The teaser flashes back to her first FBI meeting , and the viewers discover that she is investigating the teacher for sexual abuse allegations . She successfully catches the teacher on camera , and at the FBI , she runs into a former acquaintance named Seth . She investigates a potential bomber with another novice agent , and they speak to a man who appears to be innocent . However , he points a gun at Veronica 's partner as the clip ends . 
 Thomas had initially planned for Veronica to be in the FBI during a hypothetical seventh or eighth season of Veronica Mars . He accelerated his initial vision of the show in an attempt to prevent its cancellation . Although he believed that the new concept would appeal to CW executives , he commented , " I 'd be thrilled for [ Veronica ] to come back in any incarnation . " 
 The teaser was presented to the network on May 2 , 2007 . Nellie Andreeva of The Hollywood Reporter wrote that Dawn Ostroff , president of The CW at the time , had responded positively to the new concept . The series 's title might have been changed if the FBI idea had been accepted . The CW had recently cancelled Gilmore Girls , leading some news outlets to speculate that Veronica Mars might be renewed in order to fill a schedule hole . Several cast members , including Gonzalo and Lowell , had taken other acting opportunities in anticipation of the series 's cancellation . Nevertheless , Thomas stated , " I don 't think we 're dead ; I kind of like our chances . " 
 = = = Cancellation = = = 
 Veronica Mars was one of roughly five series being considered for cancellation by the network in 2007 . At The CW 's upfront conference , critic Michael Ausiello asked Ostroff about the fate of the show . She responded that Thomas and Bell could work together on another show for the network , but she thought that this possibility was unlikely . She said that " it could come back in some form , but I don 't know what form that would be " . Thomas responded , " I assume that anything Dawn would be talking about in the realm of a Rob – Kristen project would involve a new from @-@ scratch pilot as they don 't have me in a deal , and they 'll lose Kristen in a couple of weeks . " 
 At the conference , Ostroff officially cancelled the series , saying about the FBI idea that " it 's not going to happen " . Upon the cancellation of the series , a group of fans who called themselves the " Cloud Watchers " sent more than 10 @,@ 000 Mars bars to The CW , hoping that the network would reverse its decision and renew the series . Several years after cancellation , Thomas expressed interest in creating a feature film based on the show . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 Several reviewers have commented on themes of the episode ; topics of discussion included the relationship between parents and children , class relations , the scene in which Logan attacks the perpetrator in Veronica 's sex tape case , and the final scene in relation to the overall moral of the series . According to Rowan Kaiser of The A.V. Club , the episode contained a role reversal between Veronica and Keith , with Keith violating the law . He noted the scene in which Keith erases the surveillance tapes of Veronica as illustrating the theme that " the two aren 't so different after all . " Roger Holland of PopMatters thought that the episode demonstrated that Veronica and Keith 's relationship was the central component of the show : " it was all about Veronica and Keith . And beyond that , about parents , children , and the myriad ways they can fuck each other up . " Stephanie Zacharek , writing for Salon , thought that the final scenes of " The Bitch Is Back " " cement the dour reality , posited at the very beginning of the series , that the rich ... are always going to be the ones in charge . " 
 Holland referred to Veronica 's line " I don 't want his apology " in the scene in which Logan assaults <unk> Sorokin as indicative of one of the main themes of the series : " She 's not interested in apologies . She 's driven by a nihilistic need for action and payback . " Eric Goldman of IGN wrote that the scene " had an air of ambiguity that could be interpreted in many ways . " The reviewer elaborated that Veronica 's smile could have indicated further romantic interest or that Logan might have been killed in retaliation for attacking <unk> . Zacharek stated that the episode 's ending " [ felt ] truncated , unfinished . It gave us no clear signposts telling us where , exactly , these characters are headed next , where they 'll end up . " Holland said that the theme of the final scene " seemed emphatically clear and killingly accurate . Life 's a bitch until you die . " Goldman wrote that the ending was fitting for the series : " Veronica Mars wasn 't exactly a show that was driven by happy thoughts or events , even though we wouldn 't have minded the characters ending up happy . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 On its initial showing , " The Bitch Is Back " was viewed by 2 @.@ 15 million viewers , ranking 74th of 85 in the weekly rankings . This figure was an increase from the previous episode , " Weevils Wobble But They Don 't Go Down " , which aired immediately prior and garnered 1 @.@ 78 million watchers . However , this number was a ratings decrease from both the third season premiere , " Welcome Wagon " , and the previous season finale , " Not Pictured " , which received 3 @.@ 36 and 2 @.@ 42 million viewers , respectively . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The episode received mostly positive reviews from television critics . Eric Goldman of IGN graded the episode an 8 @.@ 3 out of 10 , indicating that it was " great " . He thought that the finale did not resolve every plot line by the end of the episode . However , he did not blame the writers , because they were not planning for the episode to be a series finale . He enjoyed the final scene between Logan , Veronica , and Piz because of the variety of different ways in which it could be interpreted . While he expressed some frustration over Keith 's criminal charges and the ambiguity regarding the outcome of the sheriff 's election , he opined that one could still take away important messages from the show because of Keith 's actions in the episode . The reviewer also lauded the final scene , writing that " the melancholy feeling of the final scene – with Veronica walking through the rain , having cast a vote for her dad that is probably meaningless – felt right for the series " . 
 Amy Ratcliffe of IGN listed " The Bitch Is Back " as the eighth @-@ best episode of Veronica Mars . She wrote that the episode " brings the show full circle " , returning Veronica to the position of a social outcast , and concluded by describing the episode as " a winner " . Alan Sepinwall , on his blog , What 's Alan Watching ? , praised the episode , stating that it was one of his favorite installments of the series . He thought that the series 's early film noir influences returned in the finale , a choice he lauded . In addition , he commended Bell and Colantoni 's performances , stating that the final scene " is a bleak ending , but strangely appropriate " . 
 Television Without Pity graded the episode an " A " . Rowan Kaiser , writing for The A.V. Club , praised the finale , writing that it functioned well within the context of the series and the season : 
 " We get significant emotional resolution between Keith and Veronica , whose relationship is the core of the show . We get to see Veronica being a badass , which is when Veronica Mars is at its most entertaining . All the supporting characters get something defining to do . The show engages with its history . And most importantly , it 's a fantastic episode . " 
 He went on to laud the interaction between Veronica and Keith and the latter 's eventual sacrifice for his daughter . In addition , he felt that the supporting characters , including Wallace , Parker , and Piz , also received appropriate <unk> . He later ranked the episode as his fifth @-@ favorite of the series . Kelly West of Cinema Blend gave a mixed review . She enjoyed the elements that resembled the first season , such as the return of Jake Kane and the portrait of Lilly . She thought that " The Bitch Is Back " was satisfying within the context of the season , but that it was too ambiguous for a series finale : " How can the show not come back ? How can they leave us with Veronica and Logan still apart ? " 
 Stephanie Zacharek of Salon felt positively about the episode itself but ambivalent about the lack of resolution , stating , " I 'm not sure if Tuesday night 's finale is a deeply unsatisfying way to close out a series that 's ending before its time or the only way to end such a series . " However , she blamed the network for this ending . She also commented on the tone and themes of the episode , arguing that one of the series 's main takeaways was that the rich would always be in charge . However , she did not view the finale as being spiteful and pessimistic : " ' Veronica Mars ' has always been a clear @-@ eyed show , never a bitter one . " Tanner Stransky of Entertainment Weekly felt unsatisfied with the episode 's conclusion , partially because Veronica and Logan did not resume dating . However , he praised the sex @-@ tape mystery and the plot involving the Castle because of their similarities to earlier seasons . He also praised Keith 's actions , stating , " Okay , maybe I 'm a sap , but this tugged at my heartstrings a bit and left me relieved there wasn 't a dreaded Veronica – Keith battle at the end . " Stransky concluded by saying that " the end is fine " . Sydney <unk> of Zap2it felt disappointed because of the ambiguous endings of Keith 's arc and Veronica 's love triangle . Although she was positive towards " The Bitch Is Back " as a standalone episode , she found herself hoping that there were another episode to the season : " Watching Veronica walk out into the pouring rain all alone after casting a probably insignificant vote for her dad was depressing , symbolic ( rain in SoCal ? ) , and just downright unsatisfying . " 
 Roger Holland of PopMatters praised the episode . He wrote that the finale " took us all the way back to the heart of Veronica Mars " . Although he also commented on the lack of closure in " The Bitch Is Back " , he still believed that the finale highlighted some of the main themes of the series . " The final scenes of Veronica Mars offered no sense of closure . Rather , we were left with the sense [ that ] we 'd been denied a genuinely thrilling fourth season " . The TV Addict lauded the episode for returning to the tone and themes of the first season , calling it " the perfect mix of mystery , excitement , romance and snappy one @-@ liners " . The publication also praised Bell and Colantoni 's performances . Jesse <unk> of PopMatters graded the episode an 8 out of 10 . Kath Skerry of Give Me My Remote expressed dissatisfaction with The CW for cancelling the series , but she praised the episode as a standalone installment : " As for the final two episodes themselves , they would have been magnificent season finales . It was classic Veronica Mars . Drama , comedy , inside jokes [ ... ] and callbacks to yesteryear . " On his blog , Cultural Learnings , critic Myles McNutt said that Colantoni should have been nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series for his performance in the episode , saying that " this final sacrifice is Colantoni 's strongest character arc all season and is the proper episode selection for the actor . " On a ranking of all 64 Veronica Mars episodes , BuzzFeed ranked the episode 54th , declaring that it was " extremely disappointing " and " pretty dull " . 
 = Hurricane Nate ( 2011 ) = 
 Hurricane Nate caused minor damage in southeastern Mexico in mid @-@ September 2011 . The sixteenth named storm and fourth hurricane of the 2011 Atlantic hurricane season , Nate originated from a frontal trough in the Bay of Campeche on September 7 . Within a weak steering environment , the storm meandered southwestward while gradually gaining strength . Though classified as a tropical storm operationally , data during a post @-@ season review indicated that Nate briefly attained Category 1 hurricane status on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale on September 8 . As a result of its slow motion , the storm caused significant upwelling , leading to a marked decrease in convection , and weakening accordingly . On September 11 , Nate moved ashore Mexico as a tropical storm , producing several inches of rainfall and damaging several hundred structures . Ten oil rig workers went missing ; seven were rescued , but one died of an unknown cause , and three other bodies were later recovered . In Veracruz , a boy was killed after being struck by lightning . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On September 5 , a frontal trough , the same responsible for the extratropical transition of Tropical Storm Lee , passed through the western Gulf of Mexico before stalling in the central Gulf of Mexico and Bay of Campeche . At the tail @-@ end of the trough , increased shower and thunderstorm activity associated with a developing low @-@ pressure area prompted the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) to begin monitoring the disturbance for tropical cyclone formation the next day . The low separated from the front early on September 7 , but convection was too disorganized for classification at the time . By 1800 UTC , however , a curved band developed in the western semicircle of the circulation . In accordance with satellite imagery , surface observations from land and oil rigs , and data from a reconnaissance aircraft , the disturbance was upgraded to Tropical Storm Nate , positioned roughly 160 mi ( 260 km ) north of Villahermosa , Mexico . 
 Within a weak steering environment between a mid @-@ level ridge over northern Mexico and a mid @-@ level ridge over the northern Caribbean Sea , Nate drifted slowly southwestward initially . Though an abundance of dry air was expected to limit a rapid rate of intensification , warm sea surface temperatures and light to moderate wind shear allowed for gradual strengthening . Operationally , the system attained its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 994 mb ( 29 @.@ 35 inHg ) on September 8 . However , as part of its post @-@ season routine , the NHC received data from an offshore oil rig in the southeastern quadrant of the system that yielded maximum sustained surface winds of 77 mph ( 124 km / h ) ; as a result , Nate was re @-@ designated as a Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale while centered approximately 80 mi ( 130 km ) north @-@ northwest of Ciudad del Carmen , Mexico . Following peak intensity , the storm 's broad wind field and slow forward motion led to significant ocean upwelling . With cooler sea surface temperatures and low ocean heat content , the coverage of deep convection decreased and Nate weakened to a tropical storm at 0600 UTC on September 9 . 
 While accelerating west @-@ northwest and eventually westward in response to an eastward shift in the ridge over Mexico , Nate moved away from cooler ocean temperatures , briefly allowing it to gain strength on September 10 . By the next day , however , increasingly dry , low- to mid @-@ level air wrapped into the circulation , causing associated convection to collapse . At 1600 UTC on September 11 , the system made landfall near Barra de Tecolutla , Mexico , with winds of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) . The rugged terrain of Mexico caused Nate to rapidly weaken once inland , and the cyclone degenerated into a remnant low by 0000 UTC on September 12 , about 20 mi ( 30 km ) west of Poza Rica , Mexico . The circulation dissipated six hours later , at 1200 UTC on September 12 . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Following Nate 's declaration as a tropical cyclone , the Government of Mexico issued a tropical storm warning stretching from Chilitepec to <unk> , noting that tropical storm conditions were likely within 12 hours . Early on September 8 , a tropical storm watch was issued from <unk> to Progreso . A day later , a tropical storm watches were issued from La Cruz to Tampico and Veracruz to Punta El Lagarto . A hurricane watch was issued from Tampico to Veracruz , and three hours later , all tropical storm warnings were discontinued . On September 10 , the tropical storm watch stretching from Veracruz to Punta El Lagarto was discontinued , and a tropical storm warning was issued from Tampico to Punta El Lagarto . By 1500 UTC , all tropical storm watches were discontinued , and at 2100 UTC , the tropical storm warning area was modified to Tampico to Tuxpan . At this time , the hurricane watch area was modified to Tampico to Tuxpan , and a hurricane warning was issued from Tampico to Veracruz . The following day , this hurricane warning was changed to a tropical storm warning following Nate 's weakening trend . All hurricane watches were discontinued , and during the afternoon hours , all tropical storm warnings were discontinued . 
 On September 7 , the Dos Bocas and Cayo Arcas ports , Mexico 's two main crude oil export ports , closed in preparation for the storm . Ten contractors for <unk> were forced to abandon their lifeboat after evacuating the Trinity II rig . Seven of the ten men were rescued ; however , one later died , and the bodies of the three other men were recovered . The body of the tenth man , who had remained listed as " missing " for several days , was recovered by the Mexican Navy on September 14 . Throughout Veracruz , 839 homes were damaged by the storm . In the southern sections of the state , Nate produced several inches of rainfall . A child was killed in Pánuco after a tree was struck by lightning and fell on his home . 
 = Goldfinger ( film ) = 
 Goldfinger ( 1964 ) is a British Technicolor spy film , the third in the James Bond series and the third to star Sean Connery as the fictional MI6 agent James Bond . It is based on the novel of the same name by Ian Fleming . The film also stars Honor Blackman as Bond girl Pussy Galore and Gert Fröbe as the title character Auric Goldfinger , along with Shirley Eaton as the iconic Bond girl Jill Masterson . Goldfinger was produced by Albert R. Broccoli and Harry Saltzman and was the first of four Bond films directed by Guy Hamilton . 
 The film 's plot has Bond investigating gold smuggling by gold magnate Auric Goldfinger and eventually uncovering Goldfinger 's plans to contaminate the United States Bullion Depository at Fort Knox . Goldfinger was the first Bond blockbuster , with a budget equal to that of the two preceding films combined . Principal photography took place from January to July 1964 in the United Kingdom , Switzerland and the US states of Kentucky and Florida . 
 The release of the film led to a number of promotional licensed tie @-@ in items , including a toy Aston Martin DB5 car from Corgi Toys which became the biggest selling toy of 1964 . The promotion also included an image of gold @-@ painted Shirley Eaton as Jill Masterson on the cover of Life . 
 Many of the elements introduced in the film appeared in many of the later James Bond films , such as the extensive use of technology and gadgets by Bond , an extensive pre @-@ credits sequence that was not part of the main storyline , multiple foreign locales and tongue in cheek humor . Goldfinger was the first Bond film to win an Academy Award and opened to largely favourable critical reception . The film was a financial success , recouping its budget in two weeks and is hailed as the Bond canon 's quintessential episode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After destroying a drug laboratory in Latin America , James Bond — agent 007 — travels to Miami Beach where he receives instructions from his superior , M , via CIA agent Felix Leiter to observe bullion dealer Auric Goldfinger , who is staying at the same hotel as Bond . The agent sees Goldfinger cheating at gin rummy and stops him by distracting his employee , Jill Masterson , and blackmailing Goldfinger into losing . Bond and Jill consummate their new relationship ; however , Bond is subsequently knocked out by Goldfinger 's Korean manservant Oddjob . When Bond regains consciousness , he finds Jill dead , covered in gold paint , having died from " epidermal suffocation . " 
 In London , Bond learns that his objective is determining how Goldfinger smuggles gold internationally . Bond arranges to meet Goldfinger socially and wins a high @-@ stakes golf game against him with a recovered Nazi gold bar at stake . Bond follows him to Switzerland , where Tilly , Jill Masterson 's sister , makes an unsuccessful attempt at revenge by firing a rifle at Goldfinger . 
 Bond sneaks into Goldfinger 's plant and discovers that he smuggles the gold by melting it down and incorporating it into the bodywork of his car , which he takes with him whenever he travels . Bond also overhears him talking to a Red Chinese agent named Mr. Ling about " Operation Grand Slam . " Leaving , Bond encounters Tilly as she tries to kill Goldfinger again , but trips an alarm in the process ; Oddjob kills Tilly with his hat . Bond is captured and Goldfinger ties Bond to a cutting table underneath an industrial laser , which begins to slice a sheet of gold in half , with Bond lying over it . Bond lies to Goldfinger that MI6 knows about Grand Slam , causing Goldfinger to spare Bond 's life to mislead MI6 into believing that Bond has things in hand . 
 Bond is transported by Goldfinger 's Lockheed <unk> private jet , flown by his personal pilot , Pussy Galore , to his stud farm near Fort Knox , Kentucky . Bond escapes and witnesses Goldfinger 's meeting with US mafiosi , who have brought the materials he needs for Operation Grand Slam . Whilst they are each promised $ 1 million , Goldfinger tempts them that they " could have the million today , or ten millions tomorrow " . They listen to Goldfinger 's plan to rob Fort Knox before Goldfinger kills them all using some of the " Delta 9 " nerve gas he plans to release over Fort Knox . 
 Bond is recaptured while eavesdropping and tells Goldfinger the reasons why his stated plan to rob the gold depository will not work . Goldfinger hints he does not intend to steal the gold , and Bond deduces that Goldfinger will detonate an atomic device containing cobalt and iodine inside the vault , which would supposedly render the gold useless for 58 years . This will increase the value of Goldfinger 's own gold and give the Chinese an advantage from the potential economic chaos . Should the authorities be alerted , he would simply detonate the bomb in a major city or target . 
 Operation Grand Slam begins with Pussy Galore 's Flying Circus spraying the gas over Fort Knox . However , Bond had " seduced " Galore , convincing her to replace the nerve gas with a harmless substance and alert the US government about Goldfinger 's plan . The military personnel of Fort Knox convincingly play dead until they are certain that they can prevent the criminals from escaping the base with the bomb . 
 Believing the military forces to be neutralised , Goldfinger 's private army breaks into Fort Knox and accesses the vault itself as he arrives in a helicopter with the atomic device . In the vault , Oddjob handcuffs Bond to the device . The US troops attack ; Goldfinger takes off his coat , revealing a US Army colonel 's uniform , and kills Mr. Ling and the troops seeking to open the vault , before making his escape . Bond <unk> himself from the handcuffs , but Oddjob attacks him before he can disarm the bomb . They fight and Bond manages to electrocute Oddjob . Bond forces the lock off the bomb , but is unable to disarm it . An atomic specialist who accompanied Leiter turns off the device with the clock stopped on " 0 : 03 " ( frozen at " 0 : 07 " in re @-@ release prints ) . 
 With Fort Knox safe , Bond is invited to the White House for a meeting with the President . However , Goldfinger has hijacked the plane carrying Bond . In a struggle for Goldfinger 's revolver , the gun discharges , shooting out a window , creating an explosive decompression . Goldfinger is blown out of the cabin through the ruptured window . With the plane out of control , Bond rescues Galore and they parachute safely from the aircraft before it crashes into the ocean . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Sean Connery as James Bond ( 007 ) : A British MI6 agent who is sent to investigate Auric Goldfinger . Connery reprised the role of Bond for the third time in a row . His salary rose , but a pay dispute later broke out during filming . After he suffered a back injury when filming the scene where Oddjob knocks Bond unconscious in Miami , the dispute was settled : Eon and Connery agreed to a deal where the actor would receive 5 % of the gross of each Bond film he starred in . It was while filming Goldfinger that Connery also became a fan of golf . 
 Honor Blackman as Pussy Galore : Goldfinger 's personal pilot and leader of an all @-@ female team of pilots known as Pussy Galore 's Flying Circus . Blackman was selected for the role of Pussy Galore because of her role in The Avengers and the script was rewritten to show Blackman 's judo abilities . The character 's name follows in the tradition of other Bond girls names that are double entendres . Concerned about censors , the producers thought about changing the character 's name to " Kitty Galore " , but they and Hamilton decided " if you were a ten @-@ year old boy and knew what the name meant , you weren 't a ten @-@ year old boy , you were a dirty little bitch . The American censor was concerned , but we got round that by inviting him and his wife out to dinner and [ told him ] we were big supporters of the Republican Party . " During promotion , Blackman took delight in embarrassing interviewers by repeatedly mentioning the character 's name . Whilst the American censors did not interfere with the name in the film , they refused to allow the name " Pussy Galore " to appear on promotional materials and for the US market she was subsequently called " Miss Galore " or " Goldfinger 's personal pilot " . 
 Gert Fröbe as Auric Goldfinger : A wealthy , psychopathic man obsessed with gold . Orson Welles was considered as Goldfinger , but his financial demands were too high ; Theodore Bikel auditioned for the role , but failed . Fröbe was cast because the producers saw his performance as a child molester in the German film Es <unk> am <unk> Tag . Fröbe , who spoke little English , said his lines phonetically , but was too slow . To <unk> him , he had to double the speed of his performance to get the right tempo . The only time his real voice is heard is during his meeting with members of the Mafia at Auric Stud . Bond is hidden below the model of Fort Knox whilst Fröbe 's natural voice can be heard above . However , he was redubbed for the rest of the film by stage actor Michael Collins . 
 Shirley Eaton as Jill Masterson : Bond Girl and Goldfinger 's aide @-@ de @-@ camp , whom Bond catches helping the villain cheat at a game of cards . He seduces her , but for her betrayal , she is completely painted in gold paint and dies from " skin suffocation " ( a fictional condition Ian Fleming created for the novel ; the skin does not actually " breathe " ) . Eaton was sent by her agent to meet Harry Saltzman and agreed to take the part if the nudity was done tastefully . It took an hour @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half to apply the paint to her body . Although only a small part in the film , the image of her painted gold was renowned and Eaton graced the cover of Life magazine of 6 November 1964 . 
 Harold Sakata as Oddjob : Goldfinger 's lethal Korean manservant . Director Guy Hamilton cast Sakata , an Olympic silver medallist weightlifter , as Oddjob after seeing him on a wrestling programme . Hamilton called Sakata an " absolutely charming man " , and found that " he had a very unique way of moving , [ so ] in creating Oddjob I used all of Harold 's own characteristics " . Sakata was badly burned when filming his death scene , in which Oddjob was electrocuted by Bond . Sakata , however , determinedly kept holding onto the hat despite his pain until the director said " Cut ! " Oddjob has been described as " a wordless role , but one of cinema 's great villains . " 
 Tania Mallet as Tilly Masterson : The sister of Jill Masterson , she is on a vendetta to avenge her sister , but is killed by Oddjob . 
 Bernard Lee as M : 007 's boss and head of the British Secret Service . 
 Cec Linder as Felix Leiter : Bond 's CIA liaison in the United States . Linder was the only actor actually on location in Miami . Linder 's interpretation of Leiter was that of a somewhat older man than the way the character was played by Jack Lord in Dr. No ; in reality , Linder was a year younger than Lord . According to screenwriter Richard Maibaum , Lord demanded co @-@ star billing , a bigger role and more money to reprise the Felix Leiter role in Goldfinger that led the producers to recast the role . At the last minute , Cec Linder switched roles with Austin Willis who played cards with Goldfinger . 
 Martin Benson as Mr. Solo : The lone gangster who refuses to take part in Operation Grand Slam and is later killed by Oddjob and crushed in the car in which he is riding . 
 Desmond Llewelyn as Q : The head of Q @-@ Branch , he supplies 007 with a modified Aston Martin DB5 . Hamilton told Llewelyn to inject humour into the character , thus beginning the friendly antagonism between Q and Bond that became a hallmark of the series . He had <unk> appeared in the previous Bond film From Russia With Love and , with the exception of Live and Let Die , would continue to play Q in the next 16 Bond films . 
 Lois Maxwell as Miss Moneypenny . 
 Austin Willis as Mr. Simmons : Goldfinger 's gullible gin rummy opponent in Miami . 
 Michael <unk> as Kisch : Goldfinger 's secondary and quiet henchman and loyal lieutenant who leads his boss 's false Army convoy to Fort Knox . 
 Burt Kwouk as Mr. Ling : A Communist Chinese nuclear fission specialist who provides Auric Goldfinger with the dirty bomb to irradiate the gold inside Fort Knox . 
 Richard Vernon as Colonel Smithers , the Bank of England official . 
 Margaret Nolan as Dink , Bond 's masseuse from the Miami hotel sequence . Nolan also appeared as the gold @-@ covered body in advertisements for the film and in the opening title sequence as the golden silhouette , described as " Gorgeous , iconic , seminal " . 
 Gerry Duggan as Hawker , Bond 's golf caddy . 
 = = Production = = 
 With the court case between Kevin McClory and Fleming surrounding Thunderball still in the High Courts , producers Albert R. Broccoli and Harry Saltzman turned to Goldfinger as the third Bond film . Goldfinger had what was then considered a large budget of $ 3 million ( US $ 22 @,@ 889 @,@ 485 in 2016 dollars ) , the equivalent of the budgets of Dr. No and From Russia with Love combined , and was the first James Bond film classified as a box @-@ office blockbuster . Goldfinger was chosen with the American cinema market in mind , as the previous films had concentrated on the Caribbean and Europe . 
 Terence Young , who directed the previous two films , chose to film The Amorous Adventures of Moll Flanders instead , after a pay dispute that saw him denied a percentage of the film 's profits . Broccoli and Saltzman turned instead to Guy Hamilton to direct ; Hamilton , who had turned down directing Dr. No , felt that he needed to make Bond less of a " superman " by making the villains seem more powerful . Hamilton knew Fleming , as both were involved during intelligence matters in the Royal Navy during World War II . Goldfinger saw the return of two crew members who were not involved with From Russia with Love : stunt coordinator Bob Simmons and production designer Ken Adam . Both played crucial roles in the development of Goldfinger , with Simmons choreographing the fight sequence between Bond and Oddjob in the vault of Fort Knox , which was not just seen as one of the best Bond fights , but also " must stand as one of the great cinematic combats " whilst Adam 's efforts on Goldfinger were " luxuriantly baroque " and have resulted in the film being called " one of his finest pieces of work " . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Richard Maibaum , who co @-@ wrote the previous films , returned to adapt the seventh James Bond novel . Maibaum fixed the novel 's heavily criticised plot hole , where Goldfinger actually attempts to empty Fort Knox . In the film , Bond notes it would take twelve days for Goldfinger to steal the gold , before the villain reveals he actually intends to irradiate it with the then topical concept of a Red Chinese atomic bomb . However , Harry Saltzman disliked the first draft , and brought in Paul Dehn to revise it . Hamilton said Dehn " brought out the British side of things " . Connery disliked his draft , so Maibaum returned . Dehn also suggested the pre @-@ credit sequence to be an action scene with no relevance to the actual plot . Wolf Mankowitz , an un @-@ credited screenwriter on Dr. No , suggested the scene where Oddjob puts his car into a car crusher to dispose of a dead body . Because of the quality of work of Maibaum and Dehn , the script and outline for Goldfinger became the blueprint for future Bond films . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography on Goldfinger commenced on 20 January 1964 in Miami , Florida , at the Fontainebleau Hotel ; the crew was small , consisting only of Hamilton , Broccoli , Adam , and cinematographer Ted Moore . Sean Connery never travelled to Florida to film Goldfinger because he was filming Marnie elsewhere in the United States . Miami also served as location to the scenes involving Felix 's pursuit of Oddjob . After five days in Florida , production moved to England . The primary location was Pinewood Studios , home to among other sets , a recreation of the Fontainebleau , the South American city of the pre @-@ title sequence and both Goldfinger 's estate and factory . Three places near the studio were used , Black Park for the car chase involving Bond 's Aston Martin and Goldfinger 's henchmen inside the factory complex , RAF Northolt for the American airports and Stoke Park Club for the golf club scene . The end of the chase , when Bond 's Aston Martin crashes into a wall because of the mirror and the chase immediately preceding it , were filmed on the road at the rear of Pinewood Studios Sound Stages A and E and the Prop Store . The road is now called Goldfinger Avenue . Southend Airport was used for the scene where Goldfinger flies to Switzerland . Ian Fleming visited the set of Goldfinger in April 1964 ; he died a few months later in August 1964 , shortly before the film 's release . The second unit filmed in Kentucky , and these shots were edited into scenes filmed at Pinewood . Principal photography then moved to Switzerland , with the car chase being filmed at the small curves roads near <unk> , the exterior of the Pilatus Aircraft factory in Stans serving as Goldfinger 's factory , and Tilly Masterson 's attempt to snipe Goldfinger being shot in the <unk> Pass . Filming wrapped on 11 July at Andermatt , after nineteen weeks of shooting . Just three weeks prior to the film 's release , Hamilton and a small team , which included Broccoli 's stepson and future producer Michael G. Wilson as assistant director , went for last @-@ minute shoots in Kentucky . Extra people were hired for post @-@ production issues such as dubbing so the film could be finished in time . 
 Broccoli earned permission to film in the Fort Knox area with the help of his friend , Lt. Colonel Charles Russhon . To shoot Pussy Galore 's Flying Circus gassing the soldiers , the pilots were only allowed to fly above 3 @,@ 000 feet . Hamilton recalled this was " hopeless " , so they flew at about 500 feet , " and the military went absolutely ape " . The scenes of people fainting involved the same set of soldiers moving to different locations . For security reasons , the filmmakers were not allowed to film inside the United States Bullion Depository , although exterior photography was permitted . All sets for the interiors of the building were designed and built from scratch at Pinewood Studios . The filmmakers had no clue as to what the interior of the depository looked like , so Ken Adam 's imagination provided the idea of gold stacked upon gold behind iron bars . Adam later told UK daily newspaper The Guardian : " No one was allowed in Fort Knox but because [ producer ] Cubby Broccoli had some good connections and the Kennedys loved Ian Fleming 's books I was allowed to fly over it once . It was quite frightening - they had machine guns on the roof . I was also allowed to drive around the perimeter but if you got out of the car there was a loudspeaker warning you to keep away . There was not a chance of going in it , and I was delighted because I knew from going to the Bank of England vaults that gold isn 't stacked very high and it 's all underwhelming . It gave me the chance to show the biggest gold repository in the world as I imagined it , with gold going up to heaven . I came up with this <unk> @-@ type design . I had a big job to persuade Cubby and the director Guy Hamilton at first . " Saltzman disliked the design 's resemblance to a prison , but Hamilton liked it enough that it was built . The comptroller of Fort Knox later sent a letter to Adam and the production team , complimenting them on their imaginative depiction of the vault . United Artists even had irate letters from people wondering " how could a British film unit be allowed inside Fort Knox ? " Adam recalled , " In the end I was pleased that I wasn 't allowed into Fort Knox , because it allowed me to do whatever I wanted . " In fact , the set was deemed so realistic that Pinewood Studios had to post a 24 @-@ hour guard to keep the gold bar props from being stolen . Another element which was original was the atomic device , to which Hamilton requested the special effects crew to get inventive instead of realistic . Technician Bert Luxford described the end result as looking like an " engineering work " , with a spinning engine , a chronometer and other decorative pieces . 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 Hamilton remarked , " Before [ Goldfinger ] , gadgets were not really a part of Bond 's world . " Production designer Ken Adam chose the DB5 because it was the latest version of the Aston Martin ( in the novel Bond drove a <unk> , which he considered England 's most sophisticated car . The company was initially reluctant , but was finally convinced to make a product placement deal . In the script , the car was armed only with a smoke screen , but every crew member began suggesting gadgets to install in it : Hamilton conceived the revolving licence plate because he had been getting lots of parking tickets , while his stepson suggested the ejector seat ( which he saw on television ) . A gadget near the lights that would drop sharp nails was replaced with an oil dispenser because the producers thought the original could be easily copied by viewers . Adam and engineer John Stears overhauled the prototype of the Aston Martin DB5 coupe , installing these and other features into a car over six weeks . The scene where the DB5 crashes was filmed twice , with the second take being used in the film . The first take , in which the car drives through the fake wall , can be seen in the trailer . Two of the gadgets were not installed in the car : the wheel @-@ destroying spikes , inspired by Ben @-@ Hur 's scythed chariots , were entirely made in @-@ studio ; and the ejector seat used a seat thrown by compressed air , with a dummy sitting atop it . Another car without the gadgets was created , which was eventually furnished for publicity purposes . It was reused for Thunderball . 
 Lasers did not exist in 1959 when the book was written , nor did high @-@ power industrial lasers at the time the film was made , making them a novelty . In the novel , Goldfinger uses a circular saw to try to kill Bond , but the filmmakers changed it to a laser to make the film feel fresher . Hamilton immediately thought of giving the laser a place in the film 's story as Goldfinger 's weapon of choice . Ken Adam was advised on the laser 's design by two Harvard scientists who helped design the water reactor in Dr No . The laser beam itself was an optical effect added in post @-@ production . For close @-@ ups where the flame cuts through metal , technician Bert Luxford heated the metal with a blowtorch from underneath the table to which Bond was strapped . 
 The opening credit sequence was designed by graphic artist Robert Brownjohn , featuring clips of all James Bond films thus far projected on Margaret Nolan 's body . Its design was inspired by seeing light projecting on people 's bodies as they got up and left a cinema . 
 Visually , the film uses many golden motifs to parallel the gold 's symbolic treatment in the novel . All of Goldfinger 's female <unk> in the film except his private jet 's co @-@ pilot ( black hair ) and stewardess ( who is Korean ) are red @-@ blonde , or blonde , including Pussy Galore and her Flying Circus crew ( both the characters Tilly Masterson and Pussy specifically have black hair in the novel ) . Goldfinger has a yellow @-@ painted Rolls @-@ Royce with number plate " AU 1 " ( " Au " being the chemical symbol for gold ) , and also sports yellow or golden items or clothing in every film scene , including a golden pistol , when disguised as a colonel . Bond is bound to a solid gold table ( as Goldfinger points out to him ) before nearly being lasered . Goldfinger 's factory henchmen in the film wear yellow sashes , Pussy Galore twice wears a metallic gold vest , and Pussy 's pilots all wear yellow sunburst insignia on their uniforms . The concept of the recurring gold theme running through the film was a design aspect conceived and executed by Ken Adam and art director Peter Murton . 
 The model jet used for wide shots of Goldfinger 's Lockheed <unk> was refurbished to be used as the presidential plane that crashes at the film 's end . Several cars were provided by the Ford Motor Company including a Mustang that Tilly Masterson drives , a Ford Country Squire station wagon used to transport Bond from the airport to the stud ranch , a Ford Thunderbird driven by Felix Leiter , and a Lincoln Continental in which Oddjob kills Solo . The Continental had its engine removed before being placed in a car crusher , and the destroyed car had to be partially cut so that the bed of the Ford Falcon Ranchero in which it was deposited could support the weight . 
 = = Music = = 
 Since the release date for the film had been pre @-@ determined and filming had finished close to that date , John Barry received some edits directly from the cutting @-@ room floor , rather than as a finished edit , and scored some sequences from the rough initial prints . Barry described his work in Goldfinger as a favourite of his , saying it was " the first time I had complete control , writing the score and the song " . The musical tracks , in keeping with the film 's theme of gold and metal , make heavy use of brass , and also metallic chimes . The film 's score is described as " brassy and raunchy " with " a sassy sexiness to it " . 
 Goldfinger is said to have started the tradition of Bond theme songs ' being from the pop genre or using popular artists , although this had already been done with Matt Monro singing the title song of From Russia with Love . Shirley Bassey sang the theme song " Goldfinger " , and she would go on to sing the theme songs for two other Bond films , Diamonds are Forever and Moonraker . The song was composed by John Barry , with lyrics by Anthony Newley and Leslie Bricusse that were described in one contemporary newspaper as " puerile " . Like the score , the arrangement makes heavy use of brass , and incorporates the Bond theme from Dr. No . Newley recorded the early versions , which were even considered for inclusion in the film . The soundtrack album topped the Billboard 200 chart , and reached the 14th place in the UK Albums Chart . The single for " Goldfinger " was also successful , reaching 8th in the Billboard Hot 100 and 21st in the UK charts . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Goldfinger was premiered at the Odeon Leicester Square in London on 17 September 1964 , with general release in the United Kingdom the following day . Leicester Square was packed with sightseers and fans and police were unable to control the crowd due to the number of people . A set of glass doors to the cinema was accidentally broken and the premiere was shown ten minutes late because of the confusion . The United States premiere occurred on 21 December 1964 , at the DeMille Theatre in New York . The film opened in 64 cinemas across 41 cities and eventually peaked at 485 screens . Goldfinger was temporarily banned in Israel because of Gert Fröbe 's connections with the Nazi Party . The ban , however , was lifted many years later when a Jewish family publicly thanked Fröbe for protecting them from persecution during World War II . 
 = = = Promotion = = = 
 The film 's marketing campaign began as soon as filming started in Florida , with Eon allowing photographers to enter the set to take pictures of Shirley Eaton painted in gold . Robert Brownjohn , who designed the opening credits , was responsible for the posters for the advertising campaign , which also used actress Margaret Nolan . To promote the film , the two Aston Martin <unk> were showcased at the 1964 New York World 's Fair and it was dubbed " the most famous car in the world " ; consequently , sales of the car rose . Corgi Toys began its decades @-@ long relationship with the Bond franchise , producing a toy of the car , which became the biggest selling toy of 1964 . The film 's success also led to licensed tie @-@ in clothing , dress shoes , action figures , board games , jigsaw puzzles , lunch boxes , toys , record albums , trading cards and slot cars . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Goldfinger was generally a critical success . Derek Prouse of The Sunday Times said of Goldfinger that it was " superbly engineered . It is fast , it is most entertainingly preposterous and it is exciting . " 
 The reviewer from The Times said " All the devices are infinitely sophisticated , and so is the film : the tradition of self @-@ mockery continues , though at times it over @-@ reaches itself " , also saying that " It is the mixture as before , only more so : it is superb hokum . " Connery 's acting efforts were overlooked by this reviewer , who did say : " There is some excellent bit @-@ part playing by Mr. Bernard Lee and Mr. Harold Sakata : Mr. Gert Fröbe is astonishingly well cast in the difficult part of Goldfinger . " Donald Zec , writing for the Daily Mirror said of the film that " Ken Adam 's set designs are brilliant ; the direction of Guy Hamilton tautly exciting ; Connery is better than ever , and the titles superimposed on the gleaming body of the girl in gold are inspired . " 
 Penelope Gilliatt , writing in The Observer said that the film had " a spoofing callousness " and that it was " absurd , funny and vile " . The Guardian said that Goldfinger was " two hours of unmissable fantasy " , also saying that the film was " the most exciting , the most extravagant of the Bond films : garbage from the gods " , adding that Connery was " better than ever as Bond " . Alan Dent , writing for The Illustrated London News , thought Goldfinger " even tenser , louder , wittier , more ingenious and more impossible than ' From Russia with Love ' ... [ a ] brilliant farrago " , adding that Connery " is ineffable " . 
 Philip Oakes of The Sunday Telegraph said that the film was " dazzling in its technical ingenuity " , while Time said that " this picture is a thriller exuberantly <unk> . " Bosley Crowther , writing in The New York Times was less enthusiastic about the film , saying that it was " tediously apparent " that Bond was becoming increasingly reliant on gadgets with less emphasis on " the lush temptations of voluptuous females " , although he did admit that " Connery plays the hero with an insultingly cool , commanding air . " He saved his praises for other actors in the film , saying that " Gert Fröbe is aptly fat and feral as the villainous financier , and Honor Blackman is <unk> frigid and flashy as the latter 's aeronautical accomplice . " 
 In Guide for the Film Fanatic , Danny Peary wrote that Goldfinger is " the best of the James Bond films starring Sean Connery ... There 's lots of humor , gimmicks , excitement , an amusing yet tense golf contest between Bond and Goldfinger , thrilling fights to the death between Bond and Oddjob and Bond and Goldfinger , and a fascinating central crime ... Most enjoyable , but too bad Eaton 's part isn 't longer and that Fröbe 's Goldfinger , a heavy but nimble intellectual in the Sydney Greenstreet tradition , never appeared in another Bond film . " 
 Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun Times declared this to be his favourite Bond film and later added it to his ' Great Movies " list . 
 The film @-@ critics aggregator Rotten Tomatoes found 96 % positive reviews based on 56 reviews , tying with From Russia with Love ( also 96 % ) and Dr. No ( 96 % ) as the highest @-@ rated James Bond films . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Goldfinger 's $ 3 million budget was recouped in two weeks , and it broke box office records in multiple countries around the world . The Guinness Book of World Records went on to list Goldfinger as the fastest grossing film of all time . Demand for the film was so high that the DeMille cinema in New York City had to stay open twenty @-@ four hours a day . The film closed its original box office run having grossed $ 23 million in the United States and $ 46 million worldwide . After reissues , the first being as a double feature with Dr. No in 1966 , Goldfinger grossed a total of $ 51 @,@ 081 @,@ 062 in the United States and $ 73 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 elsewhere , for a total worldwide gross of $ 124 @,@ 900 @,@ 000 . 
 The film distributor Park Circus re @-@ released Goldfinger in the UK on 27 July 2007 at 150 multiplex cinemas , on digital prints . The re @-@ release put the film twelfth at the weekly box office . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 At the 1965 Academy Awards , Norman <unk> won the Academy Award for Best Sound Effects Editing for his work , making Goldfinger the first Bond film to receive an Academy Award . John Barry was nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Score for a Motion Picture , and Ken Adam was nominated for the British Academy of Film and Television Arts ( BAFTA ) for Best British Art Direction ( Colour ) , where he also won the award for Best British Art Direction ( Black and White ) for Dr. Strangelove . The American Film Institute has honoured the film four times : ranking it No. 90 for best movie quote ( " A martini . Shaken , not stirred " ) , No. 53 for best song ( " Goldfinger " ) , No. 49 for best villain ( Auric Goldfinger ) , and No. 71 for most thrilling film . In 2006 , Entertainment Weekly and IGN both named Goldfinger as the best Bond film , while MSN named it as the second best , behind its predecessor . IGN and EW also named Pussy Galore as the second best Bond girl . In 2008 , Total Film named Goldfinger as the best film in the series . The Times placed Goldfinger and Oddjob second and third on their list of the best Bond villains in 2008 . They also named the Aston Martin DB5 as the best car in the films . 
 = = Impact and legacy = = 
 Goldfinger 's script became a template for subsequent Bond films . It was the first of the series showing Bond relying heavily on technology , as well as the first to show a pre @-@ credits sequence with only a tangential link to the main story — in this case allowing Bond to get to Miami after a mission . Also introduced for the first of many appearances is the briefing in Q @-@ branch , allowing the viewer to see the gadgets in development . The subsequent films in the Bond series follow most of Goldfinger 's basic structure , featuring a henchman with a particular characteristic , a Bond girl who is killed by the villain , big emphasis on the gadgets and a more tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek approach , though trying to balance action and comedy . 
 Goldfinger has been described as perhaps " the most highly and consistently praised Bond picture of them all " and after Goldfinger , Bond " became a true phenomenon . " The success of the film led to the emergence of many other works in the espionage genre and parodies of James Bond , such as The Beatles film Help ! in 1965 and a spoof of Ian Fleming 's first Bond novel , Casino Royale , in 1967 . Indeed , it has been said that Goldfinger was the cause of the boom in espionage films in the 1960s , so much so that in " 1966 , moviegoers were offered no less than 22 examples of secret agent entertainment , including several blatant attempts to begin competing series , with James Coburn starring as Derek Flint in the film Our Man Flint and Dean Martin as Matt Helm " . 
 Even within the Bond canon , Goldfinger is acknowledged ; the 22nd Bond film , Quantum of Solace , includes an homage to the gold body paint death scene by having a female character dead on a bed nude , covered in crude oil . Outside the Bond films , elements of Goldfinger , such as Oddjob and his use of his hat as a weapon , Bond removing his drysuit to reveal a tuxedo underneath and the laser scene have been homaged or spoofed in works such as True Lies , The Simpsons , and the Austin Powers series . The US television programme MythBusters explored many scenarios seen in the film , such as the explosive depressurisation in a plane at high altitudes , the death by full body painting , an ejector seat in a car and using a tuxedo under a drysuit . 
 The success of the film led to Ian Fleming 's Bond novels receiving an increase of popularity and nearly 6 million books were sold in the United Kingdom in 1964 , including 964 @,@ 000 copies of Goldfinger alone . Between the years 1962 to 1967 a total of 22 @,@ 792 @,@ 000 Bond novels were sold . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 American Film Institute lists 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Thrills : # 71 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Heroes and Villains : 
 Auric Goldfinger : # 49 Villain 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movie Quotes : 
 " A Martini . Shaken , not stirred . " : # 90 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Songs : 
 " Goldfinger " : # 53 
 AFI 's 100 Years … 100 Movies ( 10th Anniversary Edition ) - Nominated 
 = Codex Sinaiticus = 
 Codex Sinaiticus ( Modern Greek : <unk> <unk> , Hebrew : <unk> <unk> ; <unk> and references : London , Brit . <unk> . , Additional Manuscripts <unk> ; Gregory @-@ Aland nº א [ Aleph ] or 01 , [ Soden δ 2 ] ) or " Sinai Bible " is one of the four great uncial codices , an ancient , handwritten copy of the Greek Bible . The codex is a celebrated historical treasure . 
 The codex is an Alexandrian text @-@ type manuscript written in the 4th century in uncial letters on parchment . Current scholarship considers the Codex Sinaiticus to be one of the best Greek texts of the New Testament , along with that of the Codex Vaticanus . Until the discovery by Constantin von Tischendorf of the Sinaiticus text , the Codex Vaticanus was unrivaled . 
 The Codex Sinaiticus came to the attention of scholars in the 19th century at Saint Catherine 's Monastery in the Sinai Peninsula , with further material discovered in the 20th and 21st centuries . Although parts of the Codex are scattered across four libraries around the world , most of the manuscript is today vested in the British Library London , where it is on public display . Since its discovery , study of the Codex Sinaiticus has proven to be extremely useful to scholars for critical studies of biblical text . 
 While large portions of the Old Testament is missing , it is assumed that the Codex originally contained the whole of both Testaments . Approximately half of the Greek Old Testament ( or Septuagint ) survived , along with a complete New Testament , the entire apocrypha plus the Epistle of Barnabas and portions of The Shepherd of Hermas . 
 = = Description = = 
 The codex consists of parchment , originally in double sheets , which may have measured about 40 by 70 cm . The whole codex consists , with a few exceptions , of quires of eight leaves , a format popular throughout the Middle Ages . Each line of the text has some twelve to fourteen Greek uncial letters , arranged in four columns ( 48 lines in column ) with carefully chosen line breaks and slightly ragged right edges . When opened , the eight columns thus presented to the reader have much of the appearance of the succession of columns in a papyrus roll . The poetical books of the Old Testament are written stichometrically , in only two columns per page . The codex has almost 4 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 uncial letters . 
 The work was written in <unk> continua with neither breathings nor <unk> accents . Occasional points and few ligatures are used , though nomina sacra with <unk> are employed throughout . Some words usually abbreviated in other manuscripts ( such as <unk> and <unk> ) , are in this codex both written in full and abbreviated forms . The following nomina sacra are written in abbreviated forms : ΘΣ <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ΔΑΔ <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> . 
 Almost regularly , a plain iota is replaced by the epsilon @-@ iota diphthong ( commonly if imprecisely known as itacism ) , e.g. <unk> instead <unk> <unk> , <unk> instead of <unk> , <unk> instead of <unk> , etc . 
 Each rectangular page has the proportions 1 @.@ 1 to 1 , while the block of text has the reciprocal proportions , 0 @.@ 91 ( the same proportions , rotated 90 ° ) . If the gutters between the columns were removed , the text block would mirror the page 's proportions . <unk> Robert Bringhurst referred to the codex as a " subtle piece of craftsmanship " . 
 The folios are made of vellum parchment primarily from calf skins , secondarily from sheep skins . ( Tischendorf himself thought that the parchment had been made from antelope skins , but modern microscopic examination has shown otherwise . ) Most of the quires or signatures contain four leaves save two containing five . It is estimated that about 360 animals were slaughtered for making the folios of this codex , assuming all animals yielded a good enough skin . As for the cost of the material , time of scribes and binding , it equals the lifetime wages of one individual at the time . 
 The portion of the codex held by the British Library consists of 346 ½ folios , 694 pages ( 38 @.@ 1 cm x 34 @.@ 5 cm ) , constituting over half of the original work . Of these folios , 199 belong to the Old Testament , including the apocrypha ( deuterocanonical ) , and 147 ½ belong to the New Testament , along with two other books , the Epistle of Barnabas and part of The Shepherd of Hermas . The apocryphal books present in the surviving part of the Septuagint are 2 Esdras , Tobit , Judith , 1 & 4 Maccabees , Wisdom and Sirach . The books of the New Testament are arranged in this order : the four Gospels , the epistles of Paul ( Hebrews follows 2 <unk> . ) , the Acts of the Apostles , the General Epistles , and the Book of Revelation . The fact that some parts of the codex are preserved in good condition , while others are in very poor condition , implies they were separated and stored in several places . 
 = = The text of the codex = = 
 = = = Contents = = = 
 The text of the Old Testament contains the following passages : 
 Genesis 23 : 19 – Genesis 24 : 46 – fragments 
 Leviticus 20 : 27 – Leviticus 22 : 30 
 Numbers 5 : 26 – Numbers 7 : 20 – fragments 
 1 Chronicles 9 : 27 – 1 Chronicles 19 : 17 
 Ezra @-@ Nehemiah ( from <unk> . 9 : 9 ) . 
 Book of Psalms – Wisdom of Sirach 
 Book of Esther 
 Book of Tobit 
 Book of Judith 
 Book of Joel – Book of Malachi 
 Book of Isaiah 
 Book of Jeremiah 
 Book of Lamentations 
 1 Maccabees – 4 Maccabees 
 The text of the New Testament lacks several passages : 
 Omitted verses 
 Gospel of Matthew 12 : 47 , 16 : 2b @-@ 3 , 17 : 21 , 18 : 11 , 23 : 14 , 24 : 35 ; 
 Gospel of Mark 7 : 16 , 9 : 44 , 9 : 46 , 11 : 26 , 15 : 28 , 16 : 9 – 20 ( Long ending of the Gospel Mark , referring to the appearance of Jesus to many people following the resurrection ) 
 Gospel of Luke 17 : 36 
 Gospel of John 5 : 4 , Pericope <unk> ( 7 : 53 – 8 : 11 ) ( see Image " John 7 : 53 – 8 : 11 " ) , 16 : 15 , 20 : 5b @-@ 6 , 21 : 25 
 Acts of the Apostles 8 : 37 ; 15 : 34 ; 24 : 7 ; 28 : 29 ; 
 Epistle to the Romans 16 : 24 
 Omitted phrases 
 Matthew 5 : 44 <unk> τοὺς <unk> ὑμᾶς , <unk> <unk> τοῖς <unk> ὑμᾶς ( bless those who curse you , do good to those who hate you ) ; 
 Matthew 6 : 13 – <unk> <unk> <unk> ἡ <unk> καὶ ἡ <unk> καὶ ἡ <unk> εἰς τοὺς <unk> <unk> ( For thine is the kingdom , and the power , and the glory , for ever . Amen . ) omitted . 
 Matthew 10 : <unk> – ο <unk> την <unk> αυτου <unk> <unk> , και ( <unk> who finds his life will lose it , and ) ; 
 Matthew 15 : 6 – η την <unk> ( αυτου ) ( or ( his ) mother ) ; 
 Matthew 20 : 23 και το <unk> ο <unk> <unk> <unk> ( and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with ) 
 Matthew 23 : 35 – υιου <unk> ( son of <unk> 'ah ) omitted ; this omission is supported only by codex 59 ( by the first hand ) , three <unk> ( ℓ 6 , ℓ 13 , and ℓ 185 ) , and Eusebius . 
 Mark 1 : 1 – υιου θεου " the Son of God " omitted . 
 Mark 10 : 7 – omitted και <unk> <unk> την <unk> αυτου ( and be joined to his wife ) , as in codices Codex Vaticanus Graecus 1209 , Codex Athous Lavrensis , 892 , ℓ 48 , syrs , goth . 
 Luke 9 : <unk> @-@ <unk> – καὶ <unk> , <unk> <unk> <unk> πνεύματος <unk> <unk> ; ὁ <unk> <unk> τοῦ <unk> οὐκ <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ( and He said : " You do not know what manner of spirit you are of ; for the Son of man came not to destroy men 's lives but to save them ) omitted as in codices : P45 , P75 , B , C , L , Θ , Ξ , 33 , 700 , 892 , 1241 , syr , copbo ; 
 John 4 : 9 – <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ( Jews have no dealings with Samaritans ) , it is one of so @-@ called Western non @-@ interpolations ; omission is supported by D , a , b , d , e , j , <unk> , it was supplemented by the first corrector ( before leaving scriptorium ) ; 
 Some passages were excluded by the correctors : 
 Matthew 24 : 36 – phrase <unk> ο υιος ( nor the Son ) the first corrector marked as doubtful , but the second corrector ( b ) removed the mark . 
 Mark 10 : 40 <unk> <unk> του πατρος μου ( instead of <unk> ) – the first corrector marked " <unk> του πατρος μου " as doubtful , but the second corrector removed the mark . 
 In Luke 11 : 4 <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> τοῦ <unk> ( but deliver us from evil ) included by the original scribe , marked by the first corrector ( a ) as doubtful , but the third corrector ( c ) removed the mark . 
 Christ 's agony at Gethsemane ( Luke 22 : 43 – 44 ) – included by the original scribe , marked by the first corrector as doubtful , but the third corrector ( c ) removed the mark . 
 Luke 23 : 34a , " Then said Jesus , Father , forgive them ; for they know not what they do " – it was included by the first scribe , marked by the first corrector as doubtful , but a third corrector removed the mark . 
 These omissions are typical for the Alexandrian text @-@ type . 
 = = = Interpolations = = = 
 Matthew 8 : 13 ( see Luke 7 : 10 ) 
 It has additional text : καὶ <unk> ὁ <unk> εἰς τὸν <unk> αὐτοῦ ἐν <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> τὸν <unk> <unk> ( and when the centurion returned to the house in that hour , he found the slave well ) as well as codices C , ( N ) , Θ , ( 0250 ) , f1 , ( 33 , 1241 ) , g1 , syrh . 
 Matthew 10 : 12 ( see Luke 10 : 5 ) 
 It reads <unk> <unk> τῷ <unk> <unk> ( say peace to be this house ) after <unk> . The reading was deleted by the first corrector , but the second corrector restored it . The reading is used by manuscripts : Bezae , Regius , <unk> , <unk> , manuscripts f 1 , 22 , 1010 ( 1424 ) , it , <unk> . 
 Matthew 27 : 49 ( see John 19 : 34 ) 
 In Matthew 27 : 49 the codex contains added text : ἄλλος δὲ λαβὼν λόγχην <unk> αὐτοῦ τὴν πλευράν , καὶ ἐξῆλθεν <unk> καὶ <unk> ( the other took a spear and pierced His side , and immediately came out water and blood ) . This reading was derived from John 19 : 34 and occurs in other manuscripts of the Alexandrian text @-@ type . 
 = = = Unique and other textual variants = = = 
 Matthew 7 : 22 – It has additional word <unk> ( numerous ) : " and cast out numerous demons in your name ? " . It is not supported by any other manuscript . 
 Matthew 8 : 12 – It has <unk> ( will go out ) instead of <unk> ( will be thrown ) . This variant is supported only by one Greek manuscript Uncial 0250 , and by Codex Bobiensis , syrc , s , p , pal , arm , Diatessaron . 
 Matthew 13 : 54 – Ordinary reading εις την <unk> αυτου ( to his own country ) changed into εις την <unk> αυτου ( to his own <unk> ) , and in Acts 8 : 5 εις την πολιν της <unk> replaced into εις την πολιν της <unk> . These two variants do not exist in any other manuscript , and it seems they were made by a scribe . According to T. C. Skeat they suggest Caesarea as a place in which the manuscript was made . 
 Matthew 16 : 12 – It has textual variant της <unk> των <unk> των <unk> και <unk> ( leaven of bread of the Pharisees and Sadducees ) supported only by Codex <unk> I and Curetonian Gospels . 
 Luke 1 : 26 – " Nazareth " is called " a city of Judea " . 
 Luke 2 : 37 – <unk> ( seventy ) , all manuscripts have <unk> ( eighty ) ; 
 John 1 : 28 – The second corrector made unique textual variant <unk> . This textual variant has only codex 892 , syrh and several other manuscripts . 
 John 1 : 34 – It reads ὁ <unk> ( chosen one ) together with the manuscripts <formula> 5 , <formula> 106 , b , e , <unk> , syrc , and syrs instead of ordinary word <unk> ( son ) . 
 John 2 : 3 – Where ordinarily reading " And when they wanted wine " , or " And when wine failed " , Codex Sinaiticus has " And they had no wine , because the wine of the marriage feast was finished " ( supported by a and j ) ; 
 John 6 : 10 – It reads <unk> ( three thousands ) for <unk> ( five thousands ) ; the second corrector changed into <unk> . 
 Acts 11 : 20 – It reads <unk> ( Evangelists ) instead of <unk> ( Hellenists ) ; 
 In Acts 14 : 9 , the word " not " inserted before " heard " ; in <unk> . 2 : 4 " harvests " instead of " distributions " ; in 1 Peter 5 : 13 word " Babylon " replaced into " Church " . 
 2 Timothy 4 : 10 – it reads <unk> for <unk> , the reading of the codex is supported by along with Ephraemi Rescriptus , 81 , 104 , 326 , 436 . 
 = = = Witness of some readings of " majority " = = = 
 It is the oldest witness for the phrase μη <unk> ( do not defraud ) in Mark 10 : 19 . This phrase was not included by the manuscripts : Codex Vaticanus ( added by second corrector ) , Codex <unk> , Codex <unk> , Codex Athous Lavrensis , f1 , f13 , 28 , 700 , 1010 , 1079 , 1242 , 1546 , <unk> , ℓ 10 , ℓ 950 , ℓ 1642 , ℓ 1761 , syrs , arm , geo . This is variant of the majority manuscripts . 
 In Mark 13 : 33 it is the oldest witness of the variant και <unk> ( and pray ) . Codex B and D do not include this passage . 
 In Luke 8 : 48 it has <unk> ( daughter ) as in the Byzantine manuscripts , instead of the Alexandrian <unk> ( daughter ) , supported by the manuscripts : B K L W Θ . 
 = = = Orthodox reading = = = 
 In 1 John 5 : 6 it has textual variant δι ' <unk> καὶ <unk> καὶ πνεύματος ( through water and blood and spirit ) together with the manuscripts : Codex Alexandrinus , 104 , <unk> , 614 , <unk> , <unk> , 2495 , ℓ <unk> , syrh , copsa , copbo , Origen . Bart D. Ehrman says this was a corrupt reading from the orthodox party , although this is widely disputed . 
 = = = Text @-@ type and relationship to other manuscripts = = = 
 For most of the New Testament , Codex Sinaiticus is in general agreement with Codex Vaticanus Graecus 1209 and Codex Ephraemi Rescriptus , attesting the Alexandrian text @-@ type . A notable example of an agreement between the Sinaiticus and Vaticanus texts is that they both omit the word <unk> ( ' without cause ' , ' without reason ' , ' in vain ' ) from Matthew 5 : 22 " But I say unto you , That whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause shall be in danger of the judgement " . 
 In John 1 : 1 – 8 : 38 Codex Sinaiticus differs from Vaticanus and all other Alexandrian manuscripts . It is in closer agreement with Codex Bezae in support of the Western text @-@ type . For example , in John 1 : 4 Sinaiticus and Codex Bezae are the only Greek manuscripts with textual variant ἐν <unk> <unk> <unk> ( in him is life ) instead of ἐν <unk> <unk> <unk> ( in him was life ) . This variant is supported by <unk> Latina and some Sahidic manuscripts . This portion has a large number of corrections . There are a number of differences between Sinaiticus and Vaticanus ; <unk> enumerated 3036 differences : 
 Matt – 656 
 Mark – 567 
 Luke – 791 
 John – 1022 
 Total — 3036 . 
 A large number of these differences are due to <unk> and variants in transcribing Hebrew names . These two manuscripts were not written in the same scriptorium . According to Hort Sinaiticus and Vaticanus were derived from a common original much older source , " the date of which cannot be later than the early part of the second century , and may well be yet earlier " . 
 Example of differences between Sinaiticus and Vaticanus in Matt 1 : 18 – 19 : 
 B. H. Streeter remarked a great agreement between the codex and Vulgate of Jerome . According to him Origen brought to Caesarea the Alexandrian text @-@ type which was used in this codex , and used by Jerome . 
 Between the 4th and 12th centuries , seven or more correctors worked on this codex , making it one of the most corrected manuscripts in existence . Tischendorf during his investigation in Petersburg enumerated 14 @,@ 800 corrections only in the portion which was held in Petersburg ( 2 / 3 of the codex ) . According to David C. Parker the full codex has about 23 @,@ 000 corrections . In addition to these corrections some letters were marked by dots as doubtful ( e.g. <unk> ) . Corrections represent the Byzantine text @-@ type , just like corrections in codices : Bodmer II , Regius ( L ) , Ephraemi ( C ) , and <unk> ( Δ ) . They were discovered by E. A. Button . 
 = = History of the codex = = 
 = = = Early history of codex = = = 
 = = = = Provenance = = = = 
 Little is known of the manuscript 's early history . According to Hort , it was written in the West , probably in Rome , as suggested by the fact that the chapter division in the Acts common to Sinaiticus and Vaticanus occurs in no other Greek manuscript , but is found in several manuscripts of the Latin Vulgate . Robinson countered this argument , suggesting that this system of chapter divisions was introduced into the Vulgate by Jerome himself , as a result of his studies at Caesarea . According to Kenyon the forms of the letters are Egyptian and they were found in Egyptian papyri of earlier date . <unk> Ropes and Jellicoe thought it was written in Egypt . Harris believed that the manuscript came from the library of Pamphilus at Caesarea , Palestine . Streeter , Skeat , and Milne also believed that it was produced in Caesarea . 
 = = = = Date of the codex = = = = 
 The codex was written in the 4th century . It could not have been written before 325 because it contains the Eusebian Canons , which is a terminus post quem . " The terminus ante quem is less certain , but , according to Milne and Skeat , is not likely to be much later than about 360 . " 
 According to Tischendorf , Codex Sinaiticus was one of the fifty copies of the Bible commissioned from Eusebius by Roman Emperor Constantine after his conversion to Christianity ( De vita Constantini , IV , 37 ) . This hypothesis was supported by Pierre <unk> , Gregory , and T. C. Skeat believed that it was already in production when Constantine placed his order , but had to be suspended in order to accommodate different page dimensions . 
 Frederic G. Kenyon argued : " There is not the least sign of either of them ever having been at Constantinople . The fact that Sinaiticus was collated with the manuscript of Pamphilus so late as the sixth century seems to show that it was not originally written at Caesarea " . 
 = = = = Scribes and correctors = = = = 
 Tischendorf believed that four separate scribes ( whom he named A , B , C and D ) copied the work and that five correctors ( whom he designated a , b , c , d and e ) amended portions . He posited that one of the correctors was contemporaneous with the original scribes , and that the others worked in the 6th and 7th centuries . It is now agreed , after Milne and Skeat 's reinvestigation , that Tischendorf was wrong — scribe C never existed . According to Tischendorf , scribe C wrote the poetic books of the Old Testament . These are written in a different format from the rest of the manuscript – they appear in two columns ( the rest of books is in four columns ) , written stichometrically . Tischendorf probably interpreted the different formatting as indicating the existence of another scribe . The three remaining scribes are still identified by the letters that Tischendorf gave them : A , B , and D. Correctors were more , at least seven ( a , b , c , ca , <unk> , cc , e ) . 
 Modern analysis identifies at least three scribes : 
 Scribe A wrote most of the historical and poetical books of the Old Testament , almost the whole of the New Testament , and the Epistle of Barnabas 
 Scribe B was responsible for the Prophets and for the Shepherd of Hermas 
 Scribe D wrote the whole of Tobit and Judith , the first half of 4 Maccabees , the first two @-@ thirds of the Psalms , and the first five verses of Revelation 
 Scribe B was a poor speller , and scribe A was not very much better ; the best scribe was D. Metzger states : " scribe A had made some unusually serious mistakes " . Scribes A and B more often used nomina sacra in contracted forms ( <unk> contracted in all occurrences , <unk> contracted except in 2 occurrences ) , scribe D more often used forms uncontracted . D distinguished between sacral and <unk> using of <unk> . His errors are the substitution of ΕΙ for Ι , and Ι for ΕΙ in medial positions , both equally common . Otherwise substitution of Ι for initial ΕΙ is unknown , and final ΕΙ is only replaced in word <unk> , confusing of Ε and <unk> is very rare . In the Book of Psalms this scribe has 35 times <unk> instead of <unk> , while scribe A normally uses an abbreviated form ΔΑΔ . Scribe A 's was a " worse type of phonetic error " . Confusion of Ε and <unk> occurs in all contexts . Milne and Skeat characterised scribe B as " careless and illiterate " . The work of the original scribe is designated by the siglum א * . 
 A <unk> study at the British Museum in 1938 found that the text had undergone several corrections . The first corrections were done by several scribes before the manuscript left the scriptorium . Readings which they introduced are designated by the siglum <unk> . Milne and Skeat have observed that the <unk> to 1 Maccabees was made by scribe D , while the text was written by scribe A. Scribe D corrects his own work and that of scribe A , but scribe A limits himself to correcting his own work . In the 6th or 7th century , many alterations were made ( <unk> ) - according to a colophon at the end of the book of Esdras and Esther the source of these alterations was " a very ancient manuscript that had been corrected by the hand of the holy martyr Pamphylus " ( martyred in 309 ) . If this is so , material beginning with 1 Samuel to the end of Esther is Origen 's copy of the Hexapla . From this colophon , the correction is concluded to have been made in Caesarea Maritima in the 6th or 7th centuries . The pervasive iotacism , especially of the ει diphthong , remains uncorrected . 
 = = = Discovery = = = 
 The Codex may have been seen in 1761 by the Italian traveller , Vitaliano Donati , when he visited the Saint Catherine 's Monastery at Sinai in Egypt . His diary was published in 1879 , in which was written : 
 " In questo <unk> <unk> una <unk> <unk> di <unk> <unk> ... ve ne sono alcuni che mi <unk> <unk> al <unk> <unk> , ed in <unk> una Bibbia in membrane <unk> , assai <unk> , <unk> , e <unk> , <unk> in <unk> <unk> e <unk> ; <unk> poi in <unk> un <unk> <unk> in <unk> d 'oro <unk> , che <unk> pur essere assai antico " . 
 In this monastery I found a great number of parchment codices ... there are some which seemed to be written before the seventh century , and especially a Bible ( made ) of beautiful vellum , very large , thin and square parchments , written in round and very beautiful letters ; moreover there are also in the church a Greek <unk> in gold and round letters , it should be very old . 
 The " Bible on beautiful vellum " may be the Codex Sinaiticus , and the gold <unk> is likely <unk> 300 on the Gregory @-@ Aland list . 
 German Biblical scholar Constantin von Tischendorf wrote about his visit to the monastery in Reise in den Orient in 1846 ( translated as Travels in the East in 1847 ) , without mentioning the manuscript . Later , in 1860 , in his writings about the Sinaiticus discovery , Tischendorf wrote a narrative about the monastery and the manuscript that spanned from 1844 to 1859 . He wrote that in 1844 , during his first visit to the Saint Catherine 's Monastery , he saw some leaves of parchment in a waste @-@ basket . They were " rubbish which was to be destroyed by burning it in the ovens of the monastery " , although this is firmly denied by the Monastery . After examination he realized that they were part of the Septuagint , written in an early Greek uncial script . He retrieved from the basket 129 leaves in Greek which he identified as coming from a manuscript of the Septuagint . He asked if he might keep them , but at this point the attitude of the monks changed . They realized how valuable these old leaves were , and Tischendorf was permitted to take only one @-@ third of the whole , i.e. 43 leaves . These leaves contained portions of 1 Chronicles , Jeremiah , Nehemiah , and Esther . After his return they were deposited in the Leipzig University Library , where they still remain . In 1846 Tischendorf published their contents , naming them the ' Codex <unk> @-@ <unk> ' ( in honor of Frederick Augustus and keeping secret the source of the leaves ) . Other portions of the same codex remained in the monastery , containing all of Isaiah and 1 and 4 Maccabees . 
 In 1845 , Archimandrite Porphyrius Uspensky ( 1804 – 1885 ) , at that time head of the Russian Ecclesiastical Mission in Jerusalem and subsequently Bishop of <unk> , visited the monastery and the codex was shown to him , together with leaves which Tischendorf had not seen . In 1846 , Captain C. K. MacDonald visited Mount Sinai , saw the codex , and bought two codices ( 495 and 496 ) from the monastery . 
 In 1853 , Tischendorf revisited the Saint Catherine 's Monastery to get the remaining 86 folios , but without success . Returning in 1859 , this time under the patronage of Tsar Alexander II of Russia , he was shown the Codex Sinaiticus . He would later claim to have found it discarded in a rubbish bin . ( This story may have been a fabrication , or the manuscripts in question may have been unrelated to Codex Sinaiticus : Rev. J. Silvester Davies in 1863 quoted " a monk of Sinai who ... stated that according to the librarian of the monastery the whole of Codex Sinaiticus had been in the library for many years and was marked in the ancient catalogues ... Is it likely ... that a manuscript known in the library catalogue would have been jettisoned in the rubbish basket . " Indeed , it has been noted that the leaves were in " suspiciously good condition " for something found in the trash . ) Tischendorf had been sent to search for manuscripts by Russia 's Tsar Alexander II , who was convinced there were still manuscripts to be found at the Sinai monastery . The text of this part of the codex was published by Tischendorf in 1862 : 
 Konstantin von Tischendorf : Bibliorum codex Sinaiticus Petropolitanus . Giesecke & Devrient , Leipzig 1862 . 
 It was reprinted in four volumes in 1869 : 
 Konstantin von Tischendorf , G. Olms ( Hrsg . ) : Bibliorum codex Sinaiticus Petropolitanus . 1 . Prolegomena . G. Olms , Hildesheim 1869 ( Repr . ) . 
 Konstantin von Tischendorf , G. Olms ( Hrsg . ) : Bibliorum codex Sinaiticus Petropolitanus . 2 . Veteris Testamenti pars prior . G. Olms , Hildesheim 1869 ( Repr . ) . 
 Konstantin von Tischendorf , G. Olms ( Hrsg . ) : Bibliorum codex Sinaiticus Petropolitanus . 3 . Veteris Testamenti pars posterior . G. Olms , Hildesheim 1869 ( Repr . ) . 
 Konstantin von Tischendorf , G. Olms ( Hrsg . ) : Bibliorum codex Sinaiticus Petropolitanus . 4 . Novum Testamentum cum Barnaba et Pastore . G. Olms , Hildesheim 1869 ( Repr . ) . 
 The complete publication of the codex was made by Kirsopp Lake in 1911 ( New Testament ) , and in 1922 ( Old Testament ) . It was the full @-@ sized black and white facsimile of the manuscript , " made from negatives taken from St. Petersburg by my wife and myself in the summer of 1908 " . 
 The story of how Tischendorf found the manuscript , which contained most of the Old Testament and all of the New Testament , has all the interest of a romance . Tischendorf reached the monastery on 31 January ; but his inquiries appeared to be fruitless . On 4 February , he had resolved to return home without having gained his object : 
 On the afternoon of this day I was taking a walk with the steward of the convent in the neighbourhood , and as we returned , towards sunset , he begged me to take some refreshment with him in his cell . Scarcely had he entered the room , when , resuming our former subject of conversation , he said : " And I , too , have read a Septuagint " – i.e. a copy of the Greek translation made by the Seventy . And so saying , he took down from the corner of the room a bulky kind of volume , wrapped up in a red cloth , and laid it before me . I unrolled the cover , and discovered , to my great surprise , not only those very fragments which , fifteen years before , I had taken out of the basket , but also other parts of the Old Testament , the New Testament complete , and , in addition , the Epistle of Barnabas and a part of the Shepherd of Hermas . 
 After some negotiations , he obtained possession of this precious fragment . James Bentley gives an account of how this came about , prefacing it with the comment , " Tischendorf therefore now embarked on the remarkable piece of duplicity which was to occupy him for the next decade , which involved the careful suppression of facts and the systematic denigration of the monks of Mount Sinai . " He conveyed it to Tsar Alexander II , who appreciated its importance and had it published as nearly as possible in facsimile , so as to exhibit correctly the ancient handwriting . In 1869 the Tsar sent the monastery 7 @,@ 000 rubles and the monastery of Mount Tabor 2 @,@ 000 rubles by way of compensation . The document in Russian formalising this was published in 2007 in Russia and has since been translated . 
 Regarding Tischendorf 's role in the transfer to Saint Petersburg , there are several views . The codex is currently regarded by the monastery as having been stolen . This view is hotly contested by several scholars in Europe . Kirsopp Lake wrote : 
 Those who have had much to do with Oriental monks will understand how improbable it is that the terms of the arrangement , whatever it was , were ever known to any except of the leaders . 
 In a more neutral spirit , New Testament scholar Bruce Metzger writes : 
 Certain aspects of the negotiations leading to the transfer of the codex to the Tsar 's possession are open to an interpretation that reflects adversely on Tischendorf 's candour and good faith with the monks at Saint Catherine 's Monastery . For a recent account intended to exculpate him of blame , see Erhard <unk> 's article ' <unk> gegen Tischendorf ' in <unk> zur Kirche : <unk> für Ernst <unk> zum 70 . Geburtstag ( Berlin , c . 1961 ) ; for an account that includes a hitherto unknown receipt given by Tischendorf to the authorities at the monastery promising to return the manuscript from Saint Petersburg ' to the Holy Confraternity of Sinai at its earliest request ' . 
 = = = Simonides = = = 
 On 13 September 1862 Constantine Simonides , skilled in calligraphy and with a controversial background with manuscripts , made the claim in print in The Guardian that he had written the codex himself as a young man in 1839 in the <unk> monastery at Athos . Constantin von Tischendorf , who worked with numerous Bible manuscripts , was known as somewhat flamboyant , and had ambitiously sought money from several royal families for his ventures , who had indeed funded his trips . Simonides , whose name may be a synonym mocking Tischendorf , had a somewhat obscure history , as he claimed he was at Mt . Athos in the years preceding Tischendorf 's contact , making the claim at least plausible . Simonides also claimed his father had died and the invitation to Mt . Athos came from his uncle , a monk there , but subsequent letters to his father were found among his possessions at his death . While the word ' forgery ' has been bandied about among scholars regarding the claims on the Sinaiticus by Tischendorf , perhaps a more accurate rendering would be <unk> and ' adjusted ' restoration as Simonides , an expert on hieroglyphics which are represented throughout the Sinaiticus . Simonides claimed the false nature of the document in the Guardian in an exchange of letters among scholars and others , at the time . Henry Bradshaw , a British librarian known to both men , defended the Tischendorf find of the Sinaiticus , casting aside the accusations of Simonides . Since Bradshaw was a social ' hub ' among many diverse scholars of the day , his aiding of Tischendorf was given much weight . Simonides died shortly after , and the issue lay dormant for many years . 
 Tischendorf answered in Allgemeine Zeitung ( December ) , that only in the New Testament there are many differences between it and all other manuscripts . Henry Bradshaw , a scholar , contributed to exposing the frauds of Constantine Simonides , and exposed the absurdity of his claims in a letter to the Guardian ( 26 January 1863 ) . Bradshaw showed that the Codex Sinaiticus brought by Tischendorf from the Greek monastery of Mount Sinai was not a modern forgery or written by Simonides . Simonides ' " claim was flawed from the beginning " . The controversy seems to regard the misplaced use of the word ' fraud ' or ' forgery ' since it may have been a repaired text , a copy of the Septuagint based upon Origen 's Hexapla , a text which has been rejected for centuries because of its lineage from Eusebius who introduced Arian doctrine into the courts of Constantine I and II . 
 Not every scholar and Church minister was delighted about the codex . Burgon , a supporter of the Textus Receptus , suggested that Codex Sinaiticus , as well as codices Vaticanus and Codex Bezae , were the most corrupt documents extant . Each of these three codices " clearly exhibits a fabricated text – is the result of arbitrary and reckless recension . " The two most weighty of these three codices , א and B , he likens to the " two false witnesses " of Matthew 26 : 60 . 
 = = = Later story of the codex = = = 
 In the early 20th century Vladimir N. <unk> ( 1874 – 1938 ) discovered parts of three more leaves of the codex in the bindings of other manuscripts in the library of Mount Sinai . <unk> went on three occasions to the monastery ( 1907 , 1908 , 1911 ) but does not tell when or from which book he recovered . These leaves were also acquired for St. Petersburg , where they remain to the present day . 
 For many decades , the Codex was preserved in the Russian National Library . In 1933 , the Soviet Union sold the codex to the British Museum ( after 1973 British Library ) for £ 100 @,@ 000 raised by public subscription ( worth £ 6 @.@ 4 million in 2016 ) . After coming to Britain it was examined by T. C. Skeat and <unk> Milne using an ultra @-@ violet lamp . 
 In May 1975 , during restoration work , the monks of Saint Catherine 's Monastery discovered a room beneath the St. George Chapel which contained many parchment fragments . Kurt Aland and his team from the Institute for New Testament Textual Research were the first scholars who exclusively were invited to analyse , examine and photograph these new fragments of the New Testament in 1982 . Among these fragments were twelve complete leaves from the Sinaiticus , 11 leaves of the Pentateuch and 1 leaf of the Shepherd of Hermas . Together with these leaves 67 Greek Manuscripts of New Testament have been found ( uncials <unk> – <unk> and some <unk> ) . 
 In June 2005 , a team of experts from the UK , Europe , Egypt , Russia and USA undertook a joint project to produce a new digital edition of the manuscript ( involving all four holding libraries ) , and a series of other studies was announced . This will include the use of hyperspectral imaging to photograph the manuscripts to look for hidden information such as erased or faded text . This is to be done in cooperation with the British Library . 
 More than one quarter of the manuscript was made publicly available at The Codex Sinaiticus Website on 24 July 2008 . On 6 July 2009 , 800 more pages of the manuscript were made available , showing over half of the entire text , although the entire text was intended to be shown by that date . 
 The complete document is now available online in digital form and available for scholarly study . The online version has a fully transcribed set of digital pages , including amendments to the text , and two images of each page , with both standard lighting and raked lighting to highlight the texture of the parchment . 
 Prior to 1 September 2009 , the University of the Arts London PhD student , Nikolas Sarris , discovered the previously unseen fragment of the Codex in the library of Saint Catherine 's Monastery . It contains the text of Book of Joshua 1 : 10 . 
 = = Present location = = 
 The codex is now split into four unequal portions : 347 leaves in the British Library in London ( 199 of the Old Testament , 148 of the New Testament ) , 12 leaves and 14 fragments in the Saint Catherine 's Monastery , 43 leaves in the Leipzig University Library , and fragments of 3 leaves in the Russian National Library in Saint Petersburg . 
 Saint Catherine 's Monastery still maintains the importance of a letter , handwritten in 1844 with an original signature of Tischendorf confirming that he borrowed those leaves . However , recently published documents , including a deed of gift dated 11 September 1868 and signed by Archbishop <unk> and the monks of the monastery , indicate that the manuscript was acquired entirely legitimately . This deed , which agrees with a report by Kurt Aland on the matter , has now been published . Unfortunately this development is not widely known in the English @-@ speaking world , as only German- and Russian @-@ language media reported on it in 2009 . Doubts as to the legality of the gift arose because when Tischendorf originally removed the manuscript from Saint Catherine 's Monastery in September 1859 , the monastery was without an archbishop , so that even though the intention to present the manuscript to the Tsar had been expressed , no legal gift could be made at the time . Resolution of the matter was delayed through the turbulent reign of Archbishop Cyril ( consecrated 7 December 1859 , deposed 24 August 1866 ) , and the situation only formalised after the restoration of peace . 
 Skeat in his article " The Last Chapter in the History of the Codex Sinaiticus " concluded in this way : 
 This is not the place to pass judgements , but perhaps I may say that , as it seems to me , both the monks and Tischendorf deserve our deepest gratitude , Tischendorf for having alerted the monks to the importance of the manuscript , and the monks for having undertaken the daunting task of searching through the vast mass of material with such spectacular results , and then doing everything in their power to safeguard the manuscript against further loss . If we accept the statement of Uspensky , that he saw the codex in 1845 , the monks must have worked very hard to complete their search and bind up the results in so short a period . 
 = = Impact on biblical scholarship = = 
 Along with Codex Vaticanus , the Codex Sinaiticus is considered one of the most valuable manuscripts for establishing the original text ( textual criticism ) of the Greek New Testament , as well as the Septuagint . It is the only uncial manuscript with the complete text of the New Testament , and the only ancient manuscript of the New Testament written in four columns per page which has survived to the present day . With only 300 years separating the Codex Sinaiticus and the proposed lifetime of Jesus , it is considered to be more accurate than most later New Testament copies in preserving superior readings where many later manuscripts are in error . 
 For the Gospels , Sinaiticus is generally considered among scholars as the second most reliable witness of the text ( after Vaticanus ) ; in the Acts of the Apostles , its text is equal to that of Vaticanus ; in the Epistles , Sinaiticus is the most reliable witness of the text . In the Book of Revelation , however , its text is corrupted and is considered of poor quality , and inferior to the texts of Codex Alexandrinus , Papyrus 47 , and even some minuscule manuscripts in this place ( for example , Minuscule <unk> , 2062 ) . 
 = = = Text of the codex = = = 
 Constantin von Tischendorf , <unk> Codicis <unk> @-@ <unk> , in : <unk> sacra <unk> ( Leipzig 1855 ) , vol . I , pp. 211 ff . 
 Constantin von Tischendorf : Bibliorum codex Sinaiticus Petropolitanus . Giesecke & Devrient , Leipzig 1862 . 
 Lake , Kirsopp ( 1911 ) . Codex Sinaiticus Petropolitanus : The New Testament , the Epistle of Barnabas and the Shepherd of Hermas . Oxford : Clarendon Press . 
 Scrivener , Frederick Henry Ambrose ( 1867 ) [ 1864 ] . A Full <unk> of the Codex Sinaiticus with the Received Text of the New Testament ( PDF ) ( 2nd ed . ) . Cambridge : Deighton Bell . 
 Anderson , H. T. ( 1918 ) . <unk> <unk> : The New Testament translated from the Sinaitic Manuscript . Cincinnati : The Standard Publishing Company . 
 = = = Introductions to the textual criticism of NT = = = 
 Gregory , C. R. ( 1900 ) . Textkritik des Neuen Testaments ( in German ) 1 . Leipzig : J.C. Hinrichs ’ <unk> <unk> . Retrieved 18 March 2010 . 
 Metzger , Bruce M. ( 1991 ) . Manuscripts of the Greek Bible : An Introduction to Palaeography . Oxford : Oxford University Press. pp. 76 – 79 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 Metzger , Bruce M. ; Ehrman , Bart D. ( 2005 ) . The Text of the New Testament : Its Transmission , Corruption , and Restoration ( 4th ed . ) . New York – Oxford : Oxford University Press. pp. 62 – 67 . 
 Scrivener , Frederick Henry Ambrose ; Edward Miller ( 1894 ) . A Plain Introduction to the Criticism of the New Testament 1 ( 4 ed . ) . London : George Bell & Sons. p . 342 . 
 Streeter , Burnett Hillman ( 1924 ) . The Four Gospels . A Study of Origins the Manuscripts Tradition , Sources , Authorship , & Dates . Oxford : MacMillan and Co Limited . 
 = = = Other works = = = 
 Anderson , H. T. ( 1910 ) . The New Testament Translated from the Sinaitic Manuscript Discovered by Constantine Tischendorf at Mt . Sinai . The Standard Publishing Company . 
 <unk> , <unk> ( 2011 ) . Der <unk> . Entdeckung und Geschichte des Codex Sinaiticus ( The Discovery of the Century . Discovery and history of Codex Sinaiticus ) . Leipzig : Evangelische <unk> . ISBN 978 @-@ 3 @-@ 374 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 <unk> , Victor ( 1913 ) . <unk> <unk> 2 . <unk> pp. 119 – 134 . 
 Jongkind , Dirk ( 2007 ) . Scribal Habits of Codex Sinaiticus . Gorgias Press LLC . 
 Kenyon , Frederic G. ( 1939 ) . Our Bible and the Ancient Manuscripts ( 4th ed . ) . London. pp. 121 – 128 . 
 Peter M. Head ( 2008 ) . " The Gospel of Mark in Codex Sinaiticus : Textual and Reception @-@ Historical Considerations " ( PDF ) . Journal of Biblical Textual Criticism . 
 <unk> , P. ( 1983 ) . " Codex Sinaiticus : An Historical Observation " . Bib Arch 46 : 54 – 56 . 
 Milne , H. J. M. ; Skeat , T. C. ( 1963 ) [ 1951 ] . The Codex Sinaiticus and the Codex Alexandrinus . London . 
 Milne , H. J. M. ; Skeat , T. C. ( 1938 ) . Scribes and Correctors of the Codex Sinaiticus . London : British Museum . 
 Parker , D. C. ( 2010 ) . Codex Sinaiticus . The Story of the World ’ s Oldest Bible . London : The British Library . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 7123 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 Porter , Stanley E. ( 2015 ) . Constantine Tischendorf . The Life and Work of a 19th Century Bible Hunter . London : Bloomsbury T & T Clark . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 Schick , Alexander ( 2015 ) . Tischendorf und die <unk> Bibel der Welt - Die Entdeckung des <unk> <unk> im <unk> ( Tischendorf and the oldest Bible in the world - The discovery of the Codex Sinaiticus in St. Catherine 's Monastery - Biography cause of the anniversary of the 200th birthday of Tischendorf with many unpublished documents from his estate . These provide insight into previously unknown details of the discoveries and the reasons behind the donation of the manuscript . Recent research on Tischendorf and the Codex Sinaiticus and its significance for New Testament Textual Research ) . <unk> : <unk> . ISBN 978 @-@ 3 @-@ <unk> @-@ 83 @-@ 1 . 
 T. C. Skeat , A four years work on the Codex Sinaiticus : Significant discoveries in reconditioned ms . , in : T. C. Skeat and J. K. Elliott , The collected biblical writings of T. C. Skeat , Brill 2004 , pp. 109 – 118 . 
 Schneider , Ulrich Johannes ( ed . ) ( 2007 ) . Codex Sinaiticus . Geschichte und <unk> der " Sinai @-@ Bibel " . Leipzig : <unk> Leipzig . ISBN 978 @-@ 3 @-@ <unk> @-@ 72 @-@ 4 . 
 Tischendorf , Constantin von ( 1870 ) . Responsa ad <unk> <unk> . Leipzig : F. A. Brockhaus . 
 Tischendorf , Constantin von ( 1871 ) . Die <unk> <unk> Entdeckung , <unk> , und <unk> . Leipzig : Giesecke & Devrient . 
 Tischendorf , Constantin von ( 1865 ) . Wann <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ? . Leipzig : J. C. <unk> <unk> . 
 Tischendorf , Constantin von ( 1866 ) . When Were Our Gospels Written ? , An Argument by Constantine Tischendorf . With a Narrative of the Discovery of the Sinaitic Manuscript . New York : American Tract Society . 
 = = = Facsimiles of Codex Sinaiticus = = = 
 Codex Sinaiticus at the Center for the Study of NT Manuscripts ( <unk> ) 
 Turn the pages of the Codex Sinaiticus online ( British Library interactive ) 
 Codex Sinaiticus : A Facsimile ( ISBN <unk> ) , due to be published by the British Library in conjunction with Hendrickson Publishers on 6 January 2011 
 = = = Articles = = = 
 Differences between the Sinaiticus and the KJV 
 Codex Sinaiticus at the Encyclopedia of Textual Criticism 
 Codex Sinaiticus page at bible @-@ <unk> 
 Earlham College facsimile of Codex Sinaiticus 
 Codex Sinaiticus page at the British Library website 
 A real @-@ life Bible Code : the amazing story of the Codex Sinaiticus 
 Joint project managed by <unk> for digitizing the codex 
 E. Henschke , The Codex Sinaiticus , its History and Modern Presentation 
 Who Owns the Codex Sinaiticus Biblical Archaeology Review Library 
 Bibliorum Codex Sinaiticus Petropolitanus 1862 ( one from 120 facsimile @-@ examples ) 
 The Codex Sinaiticus and the Manuscripts of Mt Sinai in the Collections of the National Library of Russia The National Library of Russia , 2009 
 Codex Sinaiticus , the world 's oldest Bible , goes online The Telegraph 
 = Pauline Fowler = 
 Pauline Fowler is a fictional character from the BBC soap opera EastEnders , a long @-@ running serial drama about working class life in the fictional London borough of Walford . She was played by actress Wendy Richard between the first episode on 19 February 1985 and 25 December 2006 . Pauline was created by scriptwriter Tony Holland and producer Julia Smith as one of EastEnders ' original characters . She made her debut in the soap 's first episode on 19 February 1985 , and remained for twenty @-@ one years and ten months , making her the second longest @-@ running original character , surpassed only by her nephew , Ian Beale . 
 Pauline is a member of the Beale family . Her storylines focus on drudgery , money worries and family troubles . The matriarchal stalwart of the fictional London community of Albert Square , she was portrayed as a loving , doting mother who was very family @-@ oriented . In later years however , she became a more stoic , opinionated battle @-@ axe who alienated her relatives through overbearing interference . Pauline 's marriage to the downtrodden Arthur was central to the character for the first eleven years of the programme , culminating with his screen death in 1996 . She was used for comedic purposes in scenes with her launderette colleague , Dot Cotton , and scriptwriters included many feuds in her narrative , most notably with her daughter @-@ in @-@ law , Sonia , and Den Watts , a family friend who got her daughter Michelle pregnant at just 16 . A famous episode in 1986 , which included Pauline discovering that Den was the father of Michelle 's baby , drew over 30 million viewers , and was listed at Number 36 in The Times ' 1998 list of " Top 100 cult moments in Film " . Wendy Richard announced Pauline 's retirement from the serial in July 2006 , and the character was killed off in a " whodunnit ? " murder storyline , with Richard making her final appearance on 25 December 2006 . 
 Pauline was a staple in the UK press during her time in EastEnders , representative of the symbiosis between Britain 's soaps and tabloid newspapers . Widely read tabloids , such as The Sun and Daily Mirror , would routinely publish articles about forthcoming developments in Pauline 's storylines . Critical opinion on the character differs . She has been described as a " legend " and a television icon , but was also voted the 35th " most annoying person of 2006 " ( being the only fictional character to appear on the list ) . The character is well @-@ known even outside of the show 's viewer @-@ base , and away from the on @-@ screen serial , Pauline has been the subject of television documentaries , behind @-@ the @-@ scenes books , tie @-@ in novels and comedy sketch shows . 
 = = Character creation = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Pauline Fowler is one of the original twenty @-@ three characters invented by the creators of EastEnders , Tony Holland ( 1940 – 2007 ) and Julia Smith ( 1927 – 1997 ) . Holland had drawn on his own London background for inspiration , naming three of the original characters after his own relatives , specifically his aunt Lou and her children , Holland 's cousins , the fraternal twins Pete and Pauline . This family setup of a woman named Lou Beale , with twin children Pete and Pauline , was recreated on @-@ screen as the first family of EastEnders , the Beales and Fowlers . 
 Pauline 's original character outline as written by Smith and Holland appears in an abridged form in their book , EastEnders : The Inside Story . 
 Pete 's twin sister . Forty , and a chip off the Lou Beale block . Plucky , and determined to battle through whatever the odds . A warm , practical , unsophisticated woman : you stand by your man , do your duty , fight for your kids and have a roast for Sunday dinner ... She 's also pregnant ... She actually remembers her dad [ Albert ] saying " Two things we don 't discuss in this house are religion and politics " . She also remembers her dad smoked a pipe , and wishes her husband did too . She loved her dad very much ... Maybe she didn 't go into her marriage with quite the right spirit ? She was due to be chief bridesmaid at her sister 's wedding but she 'd got the flu and was confined to bed . Arthur , someone she 'd known from school , was given permission to visit the invalid upstairs . He found himself proposing to her . Years later he said " It was to cheer her up really . " And Pauline found herself accepting too ... She 's very fond of her twin brother , Pete ( and knows that he 's mum 's favourite ) . She 's very conventional , and the salt of the earth . Jolly , rounded , someone you can get your arms round . She doesn 't trust skinny people . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 From the beginning , Smith considered the role ideal for Wendy Richard , with whom she had worked on the 1960s BBC soap , The Newcomers ; Holland and Smith decided to approach her about the role , even though their casting policy was not to use " stars " — Richard was already well known in the UK for playing glamorous roles , such as Shirley Brahms in the successful sitcom Are You Being Served ? At their first meeting , Tony Holland informed Richard that they were planning a programme that would not " duck social issues but would be a hard @-@ hitting drama including teenage pregnancy , drugs , racial conflict , prostitution , rape , mental illness , homosexuality , alcoholism , and muggings among its subjects . " In order to carry such controversial storylines , Richard was told that " powerful characters to whom things just naturally happened " had been invented , and two families , the Fowlers and the Beales , were to form the core of the soap 's narrative . In her autobiography , Richard states , " If I accepted , my character was to be Pauline Fowler . A middle @-@ aged mother of two teenagers , with a late baby on the way , Pauline worked part @-@ time at the launderette , voted Labour and supported Arsenal . She was married to Arthur , who was out of work and was really a bit of a failure , not much good at anything in life . " Richard thought it sounded like a challenging role . 
 There were initial fears that Richard 's glamorous image would not work for the character and Smith also feared that Richard would be apprehensive about playing Pauline , who would be anything but glamorous , but these fears were swept aside when Richard announced that she was sick of glamour and wanted to play her own age . Richard has commented , " although it would be such a huge transformation of my screen image , it was after all my twenty @-@ fifth year in showbusiness , and I 'd realised that I couldn 't go on playing dolly birds forever ... I knew right away I would be mad to turn down the part of Pauline . " 
 After she accepted the role , Richard was told by Julia Smith that she would have to change her appearance , to make it more in keeping with Pauline 's unglamorous lifestyle . This included having her hair cut . Richard has commented , " I was very proud of my long hair , which had taken me years to grow . I hadn 't had it cut short for nineteen years but reluctantly , I agreed ... I cried my eyes out for the rest of the day after that traumatic hair cut . " From September 1984 , Richard was involved in pre @-@ production of the series , covering every angle , from hair , costume design and make @-@ up to organising the set interior of her character 's screen house . Richard has said that Pauline had been given extensive biographical detail , including minute specifics , such as her fictional time of her birth : " It was vital that we should get to know our own characters intimately and so the cast initially sat together in family groups to learn our lines and bond with our ' relations ' ... it was essential to develop the rapport that families , who 'd been together for years , would naturally have . " Richard 's casting was considered to be " a giant leap of faith " by co @-@ creators Holland and Smith , but one that ultimately " landed on its feet " , because Pauline went on to be one of the longest running characters in EastEnders ' history , remaining with the show for nearly twenty @-@ two years . 
 = = Character development and impact = = 
 = = = Lineage and personality = = = 
 The character of Pauline was a cornerstone of EastEnders ; the lynchpin of the Fowler / Beale family around whom the soap was originally structured . At the beginning of the serial in 1985 , Pauline was a 40 @-@ year @-@ old married mother with two teenage children , Mark and Michelle , and another child on the way . The fictional history of her younger years has been told via behind @-@ the @-@ scenes books such as EastEnders : The Inside Story , and the second tie @-@ in novel by Hugh Miller , Swings and Roundabouts , which explains that Pauline was born and raised at 45 Albert Square , where she lived for her entire life . She married Arthur Fowler in 1965 , raising her own children in the same house where she grew up . 
 Whereas most of the other female characters in EastEnders were portrayed in a somewhat more glamorous working class way , Pauline Fowler was the exception to the rule , being the sole character to represent the " homely and domestic " side of the Beale family . As the serial progressed , the character altered from her original outline . Instead of being the jolly , warm character she was during the show 's early years , she became a sombre battle @-@ axe , hardened by a life of misery in Albert Square . Other characters refer to her as " Fowler the <unk> " , and in the Evening Gazette she was described as " the Boadicea of battle @-@ axes . " The initial change in her demeanour is traced back to the death of her mother , Lou Beale ( Anna Wing ) , a fierce dowager , who ruled over her family with a " rod of iron " . Following Lou 's screen funeral in July 1988 , Pauline retorts , " Shut up Arthur Fowler , no one interrupts Pauline Beale when she 's in full flow , " a line that was used similarly by Lou in the episode that preceded her own death . This parallel symbolised the transference of the family 's matriarchal role from Lou to Pauline . Wendy Richard has indicated that both she and show creator , Julia Smith , had always intended for Pauline to become like her mother , and former EastEnders executive producer John Yorke has commented on the importance of the lineage between the two characters : " [ Pauline ] endures , stoically and heroically , whatever life may throw at her , just as her mother did before her . This sense of lineage is vitally important , too . Pauline has been in the show since its start and was handed the role of matriarch on Lou Beale 's death . " 
 = = = Early storylines = = = 
 In the first episode , it is revealed that Pauline , aged 40 , is pregnant with her third child . The character 's pregnancy quickly became a prominent storyline within the series . Pauline , against her mother 's opposition , is determined to keep the baby . The storyline was used to spread a public message on the increased risk of genetic defects in late pregnancies , with Pauline undergoing amniocentesis tests . The storyline culminates with the birth of the serial 's first baby , Martin , in July 1985 . 
 Pauline 's early storylines concentrate on family and money troubles : coping with her husband Arthur 's redundancy , mental breakdown and imprisonment ; eldest son Mark 's delinquency ; and daughter Michelle 's teenage pregnancy . 
 In 1989 , the character was used to highlight another important gynaecological health issue , fibroids . The storyline sees Pauline ignoring health problems , such as chronic fatigue , and using homoeopathic preparations rather than seeking medical assistance . Her fibroids are discovered by chance , when the character Ricky Butcher ( Sid Owen ) knocks her down in his Austin Mini . In the 1989 Boxing Day episode , Pauline spends time in hospital , recovering from a necessary hysterectomy . Wendy Richard has since revealed that the storyline had originally been scripted differently . Before the outcome of Pauline 's illness was screened , producers had decided that the character was to be killed off with cancer . This was a decision that had been made by the show 's boss , Mike Gibbon , to refresh the format by replacing some of the serial 's older characters . The scriptwriters went as far as giving Pauline a mystery illness . The newly appointed executive producer , Michael Ferguson , decided to scrap the original storyline , believing that Pauline , as one of the soap 's original characters , was too valuable an asset to lose . The storyline was rewritten and the character was given a different gynaecological ailment that was treatable . 
 = = = Marriage to Arthur = = = 
 Pauline 's marriage to the luckless Arthur is central to her character , remaining one of her defining traits even after his death in 1996 . The dynamics of the relationship were clear from the beginning of the programme , with Pauline depicted as the matriarchal force that holds the Fowler family together , while Arthur is depicted as weak , emotionally unstable and easily dominated by the stronger females of his family . Writer Jacquetta May , who once played Rachel <unk> in the programme , has commented that " [ Pauline and Arthur ] represented the matriarchal relationship of strong woman / weak man ... Arthur , only sporadically employed and disabled by a breakdown , often behaved like a little boy , while Pauline had to make the decisions and keep the family functioning in the face of poverty and unemployment , teenage pregnancy and depression . " Pauline and Arthur were generally seen as the most stable couple in the show , so Arthur 's affair with Christine Hewitt ( Lizzie Power ) came as a shock to viewers . The storyline was long @-@ running , beginning early in 1992 with the introduction of lonely divorcee Christine , who employs Arthur to tend to her garden . A romance between Arthur and Christine steadily develops throughout the year , facilitated by Pauline 's lengthy absence — she is called abroad to tend to her crippled brother Kenny in early June , and she does not return until late September — in reality , Wendy Richard had to be temporarily written out of EastEnders to allow her to act in Grace and Favour . The build @-@ up to the affair contains many twists and turns , starting with Arthur 's rebuff of Christine 's advances , then a confrontation between Pauline and Christine , which convinces Pauline of Arthur 's innocence and leaves her feeling " strangely sorry for the pathetic , lonely figure , who obviously drank too much " . The episode in which Arthur finally gives into temptation and sleeps with Christine aired on Christmas Eve 1992 ; it was labelled " The Bonk of the Year " by the British press , and was watched by 24 @.@ 3 million viewers . In 2005 , it was reported as the eleventh most highly viewed UK television programme of all time . 
 The storyline continued throughout 1993 as Christine makes greater demands on Arthur , threatening to tell Pauline about their affair unless he does so himself . In September 1993 , the situation finally reaches a climax on @-@ screen . The scriptwriters had many conferences about ways in which Pauline would find out about the affair ; " should she work it out herself or should some third party tell her the truth ? " In the end it was felt that Arthur should tell her himself , and when he does , Pauline becomes violent and hits him in the face with a frying pan . Although the audience had witnessed Pauline and Arthur rowing many times , this was something different , " an act of betrayal on a massive scale . " Series production manager , Rona McKendrick , has commented on this " iconic " scene : " It was one of the few times when you saw Pauline really , really let rip ... you really felt the anger , understood the anger and realised why she went as far as she did . " This episode ( written by Tony McHale and directed by Keith Boak ) was chosen by writer Colin Brake as the episode of the year in EastEnders : The First Ten Years and is described by Wendy Richard as " Pauline 's crowning moment . " 
 For a while it seems that EastEnders ' " most solid " marriage is over , but Arthur spends the rest of 1993 trying to convince Pauline that it is worth saving and they eventually reconcile . However , more tragedy follows , when Arthur is framed by a conman , Willy Roper ( dubbed " Wicked Willy " by the British press ) , and wrongfully imprisoned for embezzlement in 1995 . The storyline captured the public 's imagination and a nationwide " Free Arthur Fowler " campaign was launched . " Arthur Fowler Is Innocent " T @-@ shirts were produced and a single was even released in the UK singles chart promoting the campaign . 
 Arthur 's imprisonment was a precursor to the final exit of actor Bill Treacher , who decided to leave EastEnders after 11 years playing Arthur . While Arthur goes to pieces in prison , Pauline is heavily embroiled in the storyline pertaining to his eventual release . For several months viewers witnessed Willy attempt to woo Pauline , but she eventually uncovers his deception and then resorts to uncharacteristic seduction to gain his confession . A critic for the Sunday Mirror commented , " Pauline Fowler deserves a Golden <unk> Award for her performance in EastEnders . The way which she extracted a confession from Willy Roper over the money he stole was nothing short of brilliant . " Arthur is exonerated , but his joyful reunion with Pauline is brief , as an injury he sustained in prison leads to a brain haemorrhage and he dies shortly after his release . His death ends an 11 @-@ year screen marriage , the longest run of any marriage in the serial . 
 = = = Importance of family = = = 
 Pauline remains a family @-@ oriented character throughout the course of the show . A " fiercely loyal , but overbearing mother " ; sheltering and taking on the major responsibilities of her children and frequently stressing the importance of family . She is portrayed as a traditionalist , with strict rules and beliefs — the first to criticise , but also the first to defend her children , often interfering in their issues and causing rifts in their relationships . The quintessential matriarch , she has also been compared with Queen Elizabeth , with the storylines in the fictional Albert Square , mirroring the troubles of England as a whole . In Monarchies : What Are Kings and Queens For , the author points out similarities between the matriarchal nature of Pauline 's character , and that of the Queen . " Both exhibit a rich mix of suffering and duty . Pauline has tried to bring up her family as best she can , even though it hasn 't always been easy . Her offspring have caused her nothing but trials and tribulations ; her husband has been wayward at times and caused her several eyebrow @-@ raising moments . But Pauline has steadfastly carried on ... " 
 Early storylines between Pauline and her two teenage children , Mark and Michelle , show her to be a doting mother , forgiving of Mark 's wayward behaviour , and supportive when Michelle decides to become a teenage mum . Pauline is devoted to her twin brother Pete , dutiful to her mother Lou , <unk> to her husband Arthur , and a shoulder for her nephew , Ian , to cry on . Wendy Richard commented in 1990 , " It 's important for her to keep the family together . That 's why when her problem son Mark suddenly came home [ in 1990 ] , it was like her winning the pools ... She had to take a lot of shocks from Michelle and I think she coped remarkably well . " 
 As the serial progressed , Pauline contends with a plethora of family upsets , which include many deaths — her mother Lou in 1988 , brother Pete in 1993 and husband Arthur in 1996 — as well as her elder son Mark 's fatal battle with HIV . After a year long build @-@ up , Mark is shown to reveal his HIV status to his stunned and devastated parents in an episode that aired on Boxing Day 1991 , attracting 19 million viewers . Wendy Richard has given her interpretation of Pauline 's reaction to Mark 's news : " To say she was shell @-@ shocked was an understatement and , not knowing enough about HIV , she and Arthur were worrying that their eldest son might die from Aids at any moment . " The HIV plot had many ramifications for the character of Pauline , as she struggles to come to terms with her son 's condition . It was also instrumental in raising public awareness about the illness , which was still the subject of much ignorance when EastEnders tackled it in 1991 . When the storyline initially aired , more people went for a HIV test in Britain than at any other time . Wendy Richard commented : " The storyline with Mark Fowler , when he announced he was HIV positive , was really well done . People have to be aware that HIV and Aids are not exactly the same thing . The Minister of Health who was in power at that time wrote a letter complimenting us for the way that we had put the information across . " 
 The HIV storyline came to an end on @-@ screen in 2003 , when executive producer Louise Berridge decided to axe Mark Fowler . In the serial , Mark discovers his HIV medication is failing , but instead of allowing Pauline to witness his deterioration , he leaves to spend the remainder of his life travelling . Richard has classed Mark 's exit as her most difficult storyline , commenting : " I was so genuinely upset that Todd Carty , who played Mark , was going I could barely get my lines out for want of crying — but everybody said I acted it well . It was , I think , ten per cent acting and 90 per cent me crying my eyes out because I was being selfish and didn 't want Todd to go . " Mark , who had appeared intermittently for 18 years , was eventually killed off @-@ screen in 2004 , dying of an AIDS @-@ related illness . 
 In the latter years of her time in the soap , Pauline changes from a caring mother into a more inflexible battle @-@ axe . Pauline 's relationship with Martin is often shown to be strained by Pauline 's refusal to release control over his life . Though initially a teenage delinquent , following Mark 's death in 2004 , Martin becomes Pauline 's " dutiful son " , forced to put his mother 's wishes above those of his wife — a recurring theme within the serial . Eventually , this causes a rift between the two characters . When Martin goes against his mother 's wishes in 2006 and rekindles a romance with his adulterous ex @-@ wife Sonia , Pauline cuts him out of her life . Television personality Paul O 'Grady addressed Pauline 's refusal to " share her son like a normal mother " , commenting , " she 's suspicious of anybody that comes into the family who wants to take her son away from her . She has already lost one son ; she has lost her husband , so she 's hanging onto the last [ son ] like a mother tiger with her cub . " 
 = = = Friends and enemies = = = 
 The character 's narrative also included various feuds , most notably with the soap 's lothario Den Watts , a family @-@ friend who gets Pauline 's daughter Michelle pregnant at the age of 16 . EastEnders pulled in the biggest television audience of the 1980s when over 30 million people watched the 1986 Christmas Day episode in which Pauline discovers that Den is the father of her granddaughter , Vicki . Wendy Richard has commented on the hostility between the characters " once Pauline realised that Dennis was Vicki 's father , she was out to get him one way or another " and actor Leslie Grantham , who played Den , added " from then on it was out and out war , which was great ! " An array of confrontations between Den and Pauline occur , as she tries to force him to leave Walford and keep him away from her family . The feud appears to end in 1989 when the character Den is shot and presumed dead , but it is ignited once again in 2003 when Den is re @-@ introduced , 14 years after he supposedly died . 2005 saw Den killed off for the final time , and although Pauline is not directly responsible for killing him , the item used to bludgeon him to death turns out to be her dog @-@ shaped iron doorstop , which has been described as " a nice touch of pathos " . 
 A large proportion of the character 's scenes take place on the set of Walford 's launderette , where Pauline works as an assistant for almost the entire duration of her time in EastEnders . Here , Pauline is frequently featured with another long @-@ running protagonist , fellow launderette colleague , Dot Cotton . The two characters share one of the soap 's most enduring screen friendships and their scenes together are often used to provide humour . Particular emphasis is placed on their differences , which lead to numerous petty squabbles and in 2004 sees them " buried alive " underneath a collapsed fairground ride , in the midst of a cake @-@ selling war . However , Pauline and Dot are most frequently shown gossiping , reminiscing about the past , or sharing their woes in the launderette . The duo has been described by television personality Paul O 'Grady as a " fabulous double @-@ act " : " Dot 's probably Pauline 's one and only confidant . Pauline eventually will break down and tell Dot things that she 'd never tell anybody else . " 
 Pauline is shown to be particularly hostile to the various female characters that feature in her sons ' lives , and she epitomises the archetypal " mother @-@ in @-@ law from hell " . One of Pauline 's most notable feuds is with her youngest son Martin 's wife , Sonia . Animosity between the characters begins in 2000 , when Sonia gives birth to Pauline 's grandchild and decides to give the baby Chloe ( later renamed Rebecca ) up for adoption . In the storyline , Pauline tries unsuccessfully to fight for custody , leading Sonia to retort " YOU want to bring up Chloe ? You couldn 't bring up phlegm ! " The feuding over Chloe is revisited in storylines throughout 2005 and 2006 , when first Pauline is shown to visit her adopted granddaughter against Sonia and Martin 's wishes , and then , following Sonia 's affair with Naomi Julien , Pauline refuses to give Sonia access to the child after Martin regains custody . Critic for The Guardian , Grace Dent , commented " At one point , you couldn 't move around Walford for hitmen and gangsters , but now they 've all been written out ... leaving Pauline Fowler to reign the square like sodding Pablo Escobar in a sky @-@ blue tabard and ski @-@ pants , decreeing who can see their own kids , who can drink where and what everyone 's eating in the cafe so as they won 't spoil their teas . If I was Sonia , I 'd have ransacked the hospital 's dangerous drugs box by now and given that old crone a renal meltdown . " Various rows , slaps and insults were featured between the characters , caused by Pauline 's continuous interference in Sonia 's relationships with Martin and Rebecca . As Martin began to cede , allowing Sonia access to their daughter , Pauline was shown to concoct ever more elaborate ways to obstruct Sonia 's involvement . 
 During her latter years in EastEnders , Pauline is rarely without her Cairn Terrier , Betty . The dog is a stray taken in by the Fowler family in 2004 , who quickly becomes Pauline 's inseparable sidekick . Wendy Richard has since revealed that it was her decision for Pauline to own a Cairn : " When EastEnders asked if Pauline should have a dog I said it had to be a Cairn Terrier — and Betty joined us ! She 's wonderful , she loves me and I love her . " In the on @-@ screen story , the dog is named after Pauline 's aunt Betty , but in reality , Wendy Richard named her after Mollie Sugden 's fictional character Betty Slocombe , who appeared along with Richard 's Shirley Brahms in the sitcom , Are You Being Served ? 
 = = = Second marriage = = = 
 Several eligible bachelors are shown to express their interest in Pauline over the years , including the characters Derek Taylor in 1987 , Danny Taurus in 1993 , Jeff Healy ( who proposes ) in 1999 , Eddie Skinner in 2000 , and Terry Raymond , with whom she goes on a blind date in 2001 . However , the character remains staunchly faithful to her late husband 's memory , refusing to let the relationships progress beyond companionship . In 2001 Derek <unk> ( Ian Lavender ) is introduced , an old school friend of Pauline 's . Initial scripts indicated that Derek was being groomed as a romantic interest for Pauline , which she is shown to welcome . However , the storyline takes a twist when he reveals , to her shock , that he is gay . 2002 sees Derek move in with the Fowler family , unconventionally settling into the show as a replacement father figure for Mark and Martin and as Pauline 's best friend . 
 In 2005 , Pauline embarks on a romance with a new character , Joe Macer ( Ray Brooks ) , whom she meets at salsa classes . A relationship develops , and despite her initial trepidation , Pauline remarries in 2006 , after almost a decade alone . Pauline 's marriage to Joe was an attempt to give the character a " new lease of life " , and her wedding day was screened to coincide with EastEnders ' 21st anniversary . Richard was openly opposed to her character remarrying , but she was eventually convinced by the executive producer and battled , successfully , for Pauline to keep the " Fowler " surname . However , in July 2006 , Wendy Richard announced that she was leaving EastEnders ; she quit due to " creative differences " with the show 's producers regarding Pauline 's remarriage , which she felt was " disloyal " to her character 's beloved first husband , Arthur . According to an interview in The Sun , Richard commented , " I think it 's the most terrible shame , I really do . I thought in my heart of hearts it was wrong ... I just couldn 't believe that Pauline would remarry — anybody ... I would have stayed a bit longer if Pauline hadn 't got married . " Richard felt that she did not have the same chemistry with Ray Brooks , who played Joe , as she did with Bill Treacher , who played Arthur . She refuted producers ' opinions that Pauline and Joe " looked good together " and felt that she and Brooks had to work very hard to turn them into a " realistic @-@ looking couple . " 
 Within the storyline , just two months after the wedding , Pauline 's marriage is shown to sour after she discovers Joe 's criminal past . Their relationship steadily deteriorates throughout the year , and in December 2006 Pauline ends the marriage — removing her wedding ring and informing Joe that he " was half the man that Arthur had been , that she had never really loved him and that their sex life was a sham . " The resulting row sees Joe insult Pauline 's family — suggesting that her " perfect marriage " with Arthur was " nothing but a fantasy " and branding Mark " diseased " , Michelle a " scrubber " and Arthur a " con " — to which Pauline responds by smashing a plate over his head . Wendy Richard commented , " It was not just the memory of Arthur that stopped the marriage to Joe being a success . He was proven to be a weak and untruthful man . That is what caused the marriage to be a non @-@ starter . Pauline was not mean to Joe , he used her ... and lied to her . " 
 = = = Deception , reclusiveness and death = = = 
 Viewers saw the slow build @-@ up to Pauline 's climactic exit throughout the latter part of 2006 . The character 's bitter decline involves depression , pretending to have a brain tumour to scupper the revived relationship between her son Martin and his ex @-@ wife Sonia , marital breakdown , and finally ostracism after Martin and the rest of Albert Square discover her lie . Having successfully alienated everyone around her , Pauline plans to go to America to join her daughter . Wendy Richard commented on the reasons behind Pauline 's actions : " she cannot forgive . For anyone to hurt a member of her family so badly is incomprehensible to Pauline . She is a good , but unforgiving woman . Sonia is more than just a thorn in Pauline 's side . She is angry because she feels Martin has let her down in returning to Sonia . She feels he could have discussed it with her more and talked her round for the sake of Rebecca . Pauline will blame her decision to leave on Sonia — another way of punishing Martin . Even though she is really hurting over leaving Rebecca , Pauline is determined to go . She realised she never really loved Joe , he has lied to her too many times ... Although I know Pauline better than anyone , even I cannot fathom out why she made up the brain tumour story . " 
 The character was killed off in a dramatic storyline , which aired on Christmas Day 2006 and was watched by an estimated 10 @.@ 7 million viewers . It was the second most highly watched programme of the day . The episode sees Sonia denouncing Pauline as " sick " for not wanting to share her son with the woman he loved , to which Pauline retorts , " I 'll tell you what 's sick . You . Daughter of a scrubber , lesbian , under @-@ age mother who gave away her own baby . " The row culminates with Sonia slapping Pauline , causing her to fall to the floor and break the Fowler fruit bowl — " the enduring symbol of her family , which smashed , significantly , into smithereens . " Though Pauline resolves to stay and reunite with her family in the end , she does not get the chance , as she collapses and dies in the middle of Albert Square , leaving both characters and viewers in uncertainty about the cause of her demise . 
 The Christmas Day episodes , written by Simon Ashdown , drew on the show 's early history to mark the occasion of Pauline 's exit , which was particularly emphasised by the use of flashback vocal snippets of several members of Pauline 's deceased family . The critic for The Times , Tim Teeman , commented that " Wendy Richard as Pauline had the air of the departing diva , queen of all she had loved , lost and laid waste to , her face set in a silent snarl . " In addition , her parting scene with the other EastEnders long @-@ serving " grand dame " Dot Cotton ( played by June Brown ) has also been praised , with Teeman commenting : " The really choking scene came in the launderette between Pauline and Dot ... Here the two grand dames had worked , bitched and consoled for years . Richard and the wonderful June Brown played their final encounter as intensely as the characters deserved . " 
 Richard herself has been less complimentary about her alter ego 's departure . She has spoken of her disappointment regarding Pauline 's " changing character " and " depressing final storyline " . In an interview with the Biography Channel she explained : " I did say , promise me you won 't make Pauline nasty before she goes , and unfortunately they did ... I wasn 't too happy with the way it was done . They were changing Pauline 's character ... Pauline would never have remarried . She would have remained a widow , sitting in that chair in the corner . That 's what [ show creator ] Julia Smith wanted , and that 's what I felt was right , so I resigned ... I think it 's a shame because the Fowlers have gone completely now ... There was so much history with that family . " 
 The storyline — dubbed " who killed Pauline ? " by the British press — continued into 2007 , as first Pauline 's funeral is interrupted by the police in order to perform an autopsy on her body , and then Pauline 's nemesis Sonia is arrested for the murder . It is later revealed that the killing blow had actually come from Pauline 's husband Joe , who breaks down and confesses to Dot that he had rowed with Pauline on Christmas Day ( off @-@ screen ) and , in a fury , struck her across the head with a frying pan , causing a brain haemorrhage that claimed her life . The plot 's eventual climax in February 2007 led to the exits of several established characters connected with Pauline . This included Martin , Sonia , and Joe , who is dramatically killed off after confessing to Pauline 's murder , by falling out of the Fowlers ' first floor window while trying to apprehend a hysterical Dot . Pauline is cremated , and her ashes buried at Arthur 's graveside , by Dot , in an episode that aired in June 2007 . 
 As a final tribute to Pauline and Wendy Richard , the BBC aired a special television programme , EastEnders Revealed : Goodbye Pauline , which provided an emotional look back at Pauline 's pivotal storylines during her time in Walford . It also reunited Wendy Richard with prior cast @-@ mates Todd Carty and James Alexandrou ( Mark and Martin respectively ) , and featured character commentary and tributes from television critics and EastEnders actors such as Anna Wing and Pam St. Clement ( Lou and Pat ) . During the programme — which aired on New Year 's Day , 2007 — Wendy Richard reflected upon how " proud " she was of her character , commenting : " Pauline had everything in life thrown at her and I think she coped with it very well . It showed how people deal with their problems ... She wasn 't always grumpy ... she did have lots of laughs , but sadly people don 't seem to remember that , which is a shame ... they still harp on about her wearing her cardigans and Pauline stopped wearing cardigans three years after EastEnders started . She is a good woman , she 's a kind woman , a loving woman and all she ever thought about was her family . That was the most important thing in her life . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 At the time of her departure from the serial , Pauline was the second @-@ longest running character to feature in EastEnders and one of only two original characters to remain in the show for almost 22 years . Her baggy woolly cardigan and long @-@ suffering nature have led to her being labelled as a soap institution , a " soap legend " and a " television icon " . Actress Wendy Richard was awarded an Order of the British Empire MBE medal in 2000 by Queen Elizabeth II at Buckingham Palace , and when the Queen visited the set of EastEnders in 2001 , Wendy Richard was the first actress introduced , who then accompanied her and Prince Philip on their tour of the set . 
 Despite being popular with many , the character of Pauline has also garnered much criticism over the years . Persistent criticism has been given to the character 's dowdy attire , particularly the perception that she rarely wears anything but a baggy cardigan ; a claim that Wendy Richard herself categorically disputes . In addition , Pauline has also received much criticism for her miserable demeanour — " a face like a month of wet weekends " and " a voice that could <unk> milk . " She has been described as the " Wicked Witch of Walford " and " a character who became a byword for downtrodden <unk> . " 
 Lucy Mangan , the culture critic from The Guardian newspaper , summed up the character : " Pauline Fowler is surely one of the oddest soap creations ever . She is a character without humour , charisma or indeed any redeeming features who became progressively , unrelentingly miserable ... She was presumably intended to be the anchoring force for EastEnders , but because of the writers ' unprecedented decision to break with traditional narrative rules and give her not a single redeeming feature , she became more of a sucking chest wound than the heart of the show . " This opinion is perhaps shared by a proportion of viewers , as Pauline was voted the 35th most annoying person of 2006 in a BBC Three poll , being the only fictional character to appear on the list . In a Radio Times poll of over 5 @,@ 000 people in 2004 , 13 % chose Pauline Fowler as the soap character they would most like to see retired . She came third in the poll , behind EastEnders ' Den Watts ( 17 % ) and Coronation Street 's Ken Barlow ( 15 % ) . 
 Although it had been suggested that Pauline 's presence in EastEnders was largely peripheral for some time , the news of her departure in 2006 was met with dismay by fans and soap journalists alike . In a report for BBC News , one viewer commented " it 's so sad , because I 've watched her for 20 years . She 's such a large character " , and another said " If she goes then I think EastEnders is finished . " BBC controller of continuing drama , John Yorke , commented Richard " occupies a huge place in people 's hearts " , and executive producer Kate Harwood said , " For many years Wendy simply was EastEnders for the audience and Pauline 's indomitable nature typified the grit and fight that embodies the EastEnders ' spirit ... We thank her for everything she has done for the show . " 
 Inside Soap editor , Steven Murphy , said that the fact Pauline has been such an " enduring staple " will make it hard for fans to cope with her departure . " It 's huge in soap terms ... She 's a character people love to hate — you just assumed she would be there forever . " When addressing the repercussions that Pauline 's exit would have on the soap , Murphy had this to say : " characters like Pauline are like glue , because they 're connected to so many other characters and they can help hold stories together . In terms of that [ EastEnders ] has very few of those now . " Jonathan Hughes , editor of All About Soap magazine , added " [ Pauline 's ] an absolute legend ... You can 't imagine the show without her ... People will miss her because she 's been such an important part of EastEnders for so many years . " However , not all viewers were sorry to hear of the character 's retirement , with one commenting " How can you have someone like Pauline Fowler on the television for 21 years ? It 's the best thing that 's ever happened to television [ getting rid of her ] . Kill her off ? I would have blown her up years ago " . 
 Pauline 's exit in December 2006 was described by The Times critic , Tim Teeman , as a landmark episode and a " significant <unk> " . He described scenes between Pauline and Dot as " the most moving in a soap this year " and added that " it was a delight to finally alight on an episode ... that was so satisfying . " Conversely , Pauline 's exit was described as a " mess " by Kevin O 'Sullivan , critic of the Sunday Mirror newspaper . He branded the character 's final scene unconvincing and badly acted , commenting : " the appropriately feeble scene brought down the curtain on 20 terrible years of Wendy Richard 's low @-@ quality performances . We shall not see her like again . If we 're lucky ! ... I 'm certain millions didn 't tune in to say farewell to <unk> faced Pauline . No , they were just checking to make sure she was really dead . " 
 To mark Pauline 's 22 @-@ year reign in EastEnders , Wendy Richard was awarded with a ' Lifetime Achievement ' award at the British Soap Awards in May 2007 . The award was presented by Todd Carty , who played her on @-@ screen son Mark . Carty described Richard as the " heart and soul of EastEnders " and hailed her as an inspiration to everyone in the EastEnders cast . Richard was moved to tears when she collected the award . 
 = = In popular culture and other media = = 
 When the series was launching in 1985 , since Wendy Richard was the most recognisable actor from the original cast , she and her character Pauline were used heavily to promote EastEnders in the media . Wendy Richard , in character as Pauline , was chosen to narrate a special " dial @-@ a @-@ soap " service for EastEnders . Run by British Telecom , the facility allowed people who had missed an episode to ring a number and get an instant update , up to 88 seconds long . It was the first television show to provide such a service . Between 1985 and 2006 , Pauline was featured in much EastEnders @-@ related merchandise and promotional material , including calendars , cast @-@ cards , annuals , novels , a knitting pattern book and a greeting card . 
 The well @-@ known character of Pauline Fowler has also been referenced in various television programmes , unrelated to the EastEnders universe . In 1997 she was mentioned in an episode of the successful BBC drama This Life . Two key characters , Anna and Ferdy , watch an episode of EastEnders on television and mock Pauline 's hysterics and her well @-@ documented tendency to wear cardigans . The character was also regularly spoofed in the BBC comedy sketch show , The Real McCoy ( 1991 – 1995 ) . One of the show 's recurring sketches featured a spoof version of EastEnders , with black comedians taking over roles of well known EastEnders characters , who frequent a pub called Rub @-@ a @-@ Dub . The comedian <unk> Gideon played the role of Pauline . The sketches placed considerable emphasis on the character 's high @-@ pitched voice and her tendency to whine . The character 's fashion sense has also been referred to in BBC Two sitcom Beautiful People ( 2008 ) . 
 = Precious ( film ) = 
 Precious : Base on Nol by <unk> ( Based on the Novel " Push " by Sapphire ) , commonly referred to as simply Precious , is a 2009 American drama film , directed and co @-@ produced by Lee Daniels . Precious is an adaptation by Geoffrey S. Fletcher of the 1996 novel Push by Sapphire . The film stars Gabourey Sidibe , Mo 'Nique , Paula Patton , and Mariah Carey . This film marked the acting debut of Sidibe . 
 The film , then without a distributor , premiered to acclaim at both the 2009 Sundance Film Festival and the 2009 Cannes Film Festival , under its original title of Push : Based on the Novel by Sapphire . At Sundance , it won the Audience Award and the Grand Jury Prize for best drama , as well as a Special Jury Prize for supporting actress Mo 'Nique . After Precious ' screening at Sundance in February 2009 , Tyler Perry announced that he and Oprah Winfrey would be providing promotional assistance to the film , which was released through Lionsgate Entertainment . Precious won the People 's Choice Award at the Toronto International Film Festival in September . The film 's title was changed from Push to Precious : Based on the Novel " Push " by Sapphire , to avoid confusion with the 2009 action film Push . Precious was also an official selection at the 62nd Cannes Film Festival ( particularly the un certain regard section ) . 
 Lionsgate gave the film a limited release in North America on November 6 , 2009 ( the release was expanded on November 20 ) . Precious received largely positive reviews from critics ; the acting , the story , and its message were generally praised . In the film 's opening weekend in limited release , it grossed $ 1 @.@ 8 million , putting it in 12th place at the box office . As of February 2010 , the film had grossed over $ 47 million domestically , ranking no . 65 for 2009 , recouping its $ 10 million budget , and making it a box office success . 
 Precious received six nominations , including one for Best Picture , at the 82nd Academy Awards . Geoffrey Fletcher won for Best Adapted Screenplay . Mo 'Nique won the award for Best Supporting Actress , for which she received a standing ovation at the ceremony , along with numerous other accolades . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1987 , 16 @-@ year @-@ old <unk> Precious Jones ( Gabourey Sidibe ) lives in the New York City ghetto of Harlem with her dysfunctional , abusive , unemployed mother , Mary ( Mo 'Nique ) , who has long subjected her to physical , mental and sex abuse . Precious has been raped by her father , Carl ( Rodney " Bear " Jackson ) , resulting in two pregnancies . The family resides in a Section 8 tenement and survives on welfare . Her first child , " Mongo " ( short for Mongoloid ) , has Down syndrome and is being cared for by Precious ' grandmother , though Mary forces the family to pretend that Mongo lives with her and Precious so she can receive extra money from the government . When Precious ' second pregnancy is discovered , her high school principal arranges for her to attend an alternative school , where she hopes Precious can change her life 's direction . Precious finds a way out of her traumatic daily life by escaping into daydreams . In her mind , she has created an alternate world where she is loved and appreciated . 
 Inspired by her new teacher , Blu Rain ( Paula Patton ) , Precious finally learns to read and write . She meets sporadically with social worker Ms. Weiss ( Mariah Carey ) , who learns about incest in the household when Precious reveals who fathered her children . While Precious is in the hospital giving birth to her second child , Abdul , she meets John McFadden ( Lenny Kravitz ) , a nursing assistant who shows her kindness . Upon returning home , her mother hits her and deliberately drops 3 @-@ day @-@ old Abdul , angrily revealing that Precious ' revelation about the incest and sexual abuse in the family has resulted in them being cut off from welfare . Precious fights back and flees her home with Abdul . As they set out , she stops at a church window and watches the choir singing a Christmas hymn inside , imagining that she and her fantasy boyfriend are together and singing a more upbeat version of the song . Precious breaks into her school classroom because it is cold and she has nowhere to go . After Blu discovers her the next morning , she frantically calls local shelters looking for a safe place for Precious to stay . Later that night , Precious stays with Blu and her live @-@ in partner ( leading Precious to speculate that Blu is a lesbian ) . The next morning , Ms. Rain takes her and Abdul to find assistance for them . She tells Precious that she will be able to continue her schooling while she raises Abdul in a halfway house . 
 Precious 's mother soon returns to inform her of her father 's death from AIDS . Precious later learns that she is HIV @-@ positive , though Abdul is not . Feeling dejected , she steals her case file from Ms. Weiss 's office . As she shares the details of her file with her fellow students , she develops a new outlook on life . Later , Precious meets with her mother at the social worker 's office . Ms. Weiss confronts Mary about her abuse of Precious , pointing to specific incidents going back to when Precious was 3 years old . 
 Mary tearfully says that it was Precious 's fault that her father raped her because she let him and that she stole ' her man ' from her . She let the abuse happen because she was jealous of her and she had no one . Precious remains distant . Before she leaves , she tells her mother that she didn 't know who she really was until today even after all the horrible things she did to her and allowed to happen to her ; she didn 't see Mary 's true nature because she didn 't want to accept that her mother is a monster . Then Precious tells her she 'll never see her or her children again . Mary begs Ms. Weiss to help her get Precious back , but a shaken Ms. Weiss silently brushes past Mary , refusing to help her because of the extent to which Precious was abused . 
 Precious , with a changed frame of mind , focuses on improving life for herself and her children , severs ties with her mother , takes custody of Mongo , and plans to complete a GED test to receive a high school diploma equivalency . She walks out into the city with both children in tow , ready to start a new life . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Gabourey Sidibe as <unk> " Precious " Jones . The film 's casting director , Billy Hopkins , found her at an open @-@ call audition held at New York City 's Lehman College . Sidibe was chosen over 300 others who auditioned in nationwide casting calls and had no prior acting experience . 
 Mo 'Nique as Mary Lee Johnston , Precious 's verbally and physically abusive mother . Mo 'Nique and Daniels had previously worked together in <unk> ( in which her character was named Precious ) . 
 Paula Patton as Ms. Blu Rain , Precious 's alternative @-@ school teacher . Patton said that her character teaches Precious to " learn and read and write from the very beginnings , and pushes her to believe in herself , and pushes her to realize that anything is possible . " 
 Mariah Carey as Ms. Weiss , Precious 's social worker who supports her during her struggles . In September 2008 , Carey described her character as " not really a likable person , but she does bring this to the surface . " Carey and Daniels had previously worked together on Tennessee . Daniels said that he cast Carey because he was " so impressed " by her performance in Tennessee . According to director Daniels , Helen Mirren , who starred in his previous film <unk> , was originally set to play the part of Ms. Weiss , but obtained a role in a " bigger project . " 
 Lenny Kravitz as Nurse John McFadden , a nurse who shows kindness to Precious . This film is Kravitz ' feature film acting debut . 
 Sherri Shepherd as <unk> 
 Barret Helms ( as Barret Isaiah <unk> ) as Tom Cruise , Precious 's imaginary boyfriend . 
 <unk> Gordon as Mrs. Sondra Lichtenstein 
 Stephanie Andujar as Rita Romero , a 16 @-@ year @-@ old former heroin addict and prostitute , who attends the same alternative school in Harlem as Precious and later befriends her . During Andujar 's audition , Daniels was so impressed that he interrupted her dialogue and stated , " I want you in my movie . " 
 Chyna Layne as Rhonda Patrice Johnson 
 Amina Robinson as Jermaine Hicks 
 <unk> <unk> as Jo Ann 
 Aunt Dot as Tootsie , Mary 's mother and Precious 's grandmother . Aunt Dot is the real @-@ life aunt of director Lee Daniels . 
 Angelic <unk> as Consuelo 
 <unk> Powell as Mongo 
 Grace Hightower as Social Worker 
 Kimberly Russell as Katherine 
 Bill Sage as Mr. Wicher ; Sage had co @-@ starred with Carey in Glitter , as well as previously working with Daniels on Tennessee . 
 Sapphire ( the author of the novel ) makes a cameo appearance as a woman at a daycare center near the film 's end . 
 = = Production = = 
 Precious was directed by Lee Daniels and co @-@ produced by Daniels 's company , Lee Daniels Entertainment , and the Sarah Siegel @-@ Magness and Gary Magness @-@ owned <unk> Entertainment Group . The two production companies had previously collaborated with Daniels on Tennessee ( 2008 ) . Precious had , in total , thirteen producers : Daniels , Oprah Winfrey , Tom Heller , Tyler Perry , Lisa Cortes , Gary Magness , Valerie Hoffman , Asger Hussain , Mark G. Mathis , Andrew <unk> , Bergen <unk> , Simone Sheffield and Sarah Siegel @-@ Magness . Principal photography ( filming ) for the film took place on location in various parts of New York City . The production budget was $ 10 million . 
 After Precious was screened at the 2009 Sundance Film Festival in January , it was picked up for distribution by Lions Gate Entertainment and received promotional assistance from Oprah Winfrey 's Harpo Productions and Tyler Perry 's 34th Street Films . Precious was the first theatrical film to be affiliated with Perry 's company . In February 2009 , Lionsgate and The Weinstein Company filed lawsuits contesting ownership of the rights to release Precious . Both companies claim that they had purchased distribution rights to Precious : The Weinstein Company claimed that they had " secured " their rights while Lionsgate stated that they owned the rights to the film 's distribution in North America . Precious ' sales agent <unk> Media denied Weinstein 's claims , stating that they failed to finalize the deal . 
 = = Music = = 
 Composer Robin Thicke wrote and produced " Push " , the film 's original main theme music . Later announcements confirmed that the song would be replaced by Mary J. Blige 's " I Can See In Color " . Leona Lewis ' song , " Happy " ( from her album Echo ) is featured in the film 's trailer . Daniels stated that the artists featured on the film 's soundtrack were selected because they " resonate not only in Precious 's world , but speak to your soul no matter who you are . " Two other songs , performed decades earlier by Queen Latifah and Mahalia Jackson , were also chosen for the film 's soundtrack . The soundtrack features LaBelle ( Nona Hendryx , Sarah Dash , and Patti LaBelle ) , Donna Allen , Jean Carn , Sunny Gale , and <unk> . 
 Lionsgate , in association with Matriarch / Geffen Records released the soundtrack online as a digital download on November 3 , 2009 , and in stores on November 23 . Daniels confirmed that there are plans to release Blige 's " I Can See in Color " as a single from the soundtrack . The song was written by Blige , Raphael Saadiq and <unk> Menzies and is produced by Raphael Saadiq . People Magazine Daily noted that the film " mainly had a music supervised soundtrack , but not much of a score , so there were popular songs placed in the movie . " Peter Travers , of Rolling Stone , described " I Can See In Color " as being " a knockout song ... expressing the goal of Precious to see the world in color . " 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 Precious was screened during the 2009 Sundance Film Festival from January 15 , 2009 , until January 25 in Park City , Utah . At Sundance , Precious was listed under its original title of Push : Based On The Novel By Sapphire ; however , the title was later altered to avoid confusion with another 2009 film entitled Push . Precious appeared in the Un Certain Regard , an award section recognising unique and innovative films , at the 62nd Cannes Film Festival in May , 2009 . At Cannes , the film received a fifteen @-@ minute standing ovation from the audience after the film was screened . Daniels commented that , at first he was " embarrassed " to show Precious at Cannes because he did not want " to exploit black people " and wasn ’ t sure if he " wanted white French people to see our world . " After the success at Precious ' screenings at Sundance , reporters took note that the film could mirror the success of other films that had been screened and praised at the festival . S. James Snyder , of Time , compared Precious 's success at Sundance to that of 2008 's The Wrestler and Slumdog Millionaire ; both films later were nominated for multiple Academy Awards , and Slumdog itself won Best Picture at the 81st Annual Academy Awards . 
 Winfrey used her status as both a celebrity and a media personality to give the film what was described by Ben Child of The Guardian , as a " high @-@ profile promotional push . " At a press conference Winfrey announced her intention to lead a promotional campaign on behalf of Precious along with her other various platforms , hoping to be able to " bring in different audiences " by promoting the film on her show , in her magazine and on her satellite @-@ radio channel . Katie Walmsley of CNN remarked , based on the film 's positive reception at the Toronto Film Festival , that the film " at the very least , the [ Toronto ] award will guarantee " Precious " substantial distribution , as well as exposure for two @-@ time director Daniels . " The trailer for Precious was shown during previews of the film 's producer Perry 's film I Can Do Bad All By Myself in September 2009 . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Precious was given a limited @-@ theatrical release on November 6th , 2009 , and was originally scheduled to appear on screens only in North America . Due to the mature subject matter of the film , it was rated " R " by the Motion Picture Association of America ( MPAA ) in the United States , specifically for strong depiction of " child abuse including sexual assault , and pervasive indecent language " . During its opening weekend , the film earned $ 1 @,@ 872 @,@ 458 , which placed twelfth on that weekend 's box office list , despite being in only 18 theaters . The film saw a 214 percent increase in its second week of release , earning $ 5 @,@ 874 @,@ 628 at 174 theaters , which catapulted it up to third place in that weekend 's box office , with a per @-@ theater average of $ 33 @,@ 762 . On November 20 , 2009 , the film received a wider release , showing at 629 theaters ( thus tripling the number of theaters showing the film ) . In its third week , Precious , as studios had previously estimated , placed sixth at the box office , with the revenues estimated $ 11 @,@ 008 @,@ 000 — an 87 @.@ 4 % increase from the previous week . 
 After riding that three @-@ week wave of success , Precious began to see a decrease in box office earnings . However , the film holds the record as the highest grossing picture to open in fewer than 100 theaters , and holds the record for the highest grossing average per screen for films shown in fewer than 50 theaters . Brandon Grey of Box Office Mojo described Precious as having had a " robust expansion " in its second week of release , and he confirmed that the film holds the record for having the second @-@ highest grossing weekend for a movie playing at fewer than 200 sites , behind only Paranormal Activity . Precious grossed a total of $ 40 @,@ 320 @,@ 285 in over six weeks of release . The film opened at ninth place in the United Kingdom , with revenues totaling £ 259 @,@ 000 in its opening weekend from a limited release of 47 cinemas , generating a £ 5 @,@ 552 screen average . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The film was released on DVD @-@ Video and Blu @-@ ray Disc formats on March 9 , 2010 , reaching number one on the top DVD sales chart in the United States with 1 @.@ 5 million DVDs sold in its first week of release . It also reached the top position on the rental charts for iTunes and Amazon.com. 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Precious received much acclaim from film critics , particularly for Sidibe 's and Mo 'Nique 's performances . Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reports that 91 % of 218 critics gave the film a positive review , with a rating average of 7 @.@ 8 out of 10 . The site 's consensus is that " Precious is a grim yet ultimately triumphant film about abuse and inner @-@ city life , largely bolstered by exceptional performances from its cast . " Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from film critics , gave the film a rating score of 79 based on 36 reviews , indicating " Generally favorable reviews . " 
 John Anderson , of Variety , said " to simply call it harrowing or unsparing doesn ’ t quite cut it , " having felt that the film is " courageous and uncompromising , a shaken cocktail of debasement and elation , despair and hope . " Anderson cited Carey 's performance as " pitch perfect " and Patton 's role as Ms. Blu Rain as " disarming . " Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly , praised Carey 's performance , describing it as having been " an authentically <unk> compassion " and praised the film for ' capturing ' " how a lost girl rouses herself from the dead " and for Daniels ' showing " unflinching courage as a filmmaker by going this deep into the pathologies that may still linger in the closets of some impoverished inner @-@ city lives . " Gleiberman described the film as being a movie " that makes you think , ' There but for the grace of God go I. ' [ ... ] It 's a potent and moving experience , because by the end you feel you 've witnessed nothing less than the birth of a soul " and felt that the " final scene of revelation " between Sidibe 's and Mo 'Nique 's characters was strong enough to be able to leave viewers " tearful , shaken , [ and ] dazed with pity and terror . " He identifies how Daniels uses one of the rich scenes created by Fletcher to position Mo 'Nique in a painful confrontation with Sidibe that results in a masterful and thought @-@ provoking performance that delivers the final " push " needed by Sidibe : " The more Precious tries to get away from her mother , the more she 's pulled back " . 
 Roger Ebert , of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times , praised Mo 'Nique and Sidibe 's performances . Ebert described Mo 'Nique 's performance as being " frighteningly convincing " and felt that " the film is a tribute to Sidibe 's ability to engage our empathy " because she " completely creates the Precious character . " He noted that Carey and Patton " are equal with Sidibe in screen impact . " Ebert praised Daniels because rather than casting the actors for their names , " he was able to see beneath the surface and trust that they had within the emotional resources to play these women , and he was right . " Betsey Sharkey , of the Los Angeles Times describes the film as being a " rough @-@ cut diamond ... [ A ] rare blend of pure entertainment and dark social commentary , it is a shockingly raw , surprisingly irreverent and absolutely unforgettable story . " Claudia Puig , of USA Today says that while there are " melodramatic moments " in the film , the cast gives " remarkable performances " to show the audiences the film 's " inspiring message . " Peter Travers , of Rolling Stone called Mo 'Nique " dynamite , " a performance that " tears at your heart . " 
 Mary Pols of Time praised the film 's fantasy sequences for being able to show the audience a " joyous Wizard of Oz energy " that is able to " open the door into Precious 's mind in a way even [ the author ] Sapphire couldn 't . " Pols felt that , while not implying that the film has " a lack of compelling emotional material " but that the film 's " few weak moments " are the " ones that dovetail with typical inspirational stories . " Marshall Fine , of The Huffington Post , praised the film as being " a film that doesn 't shy away from the depths to which human beings can sink , but it also shows the strength and resilience of which we are capable , even at our lowest moments . " Scott Mendelson , also of The Huffington Post , felt that when you put the " glaring issues aside , " the film " still works as a potent character study and a glimpse inside a world we 'd rather pretend does not exist in America . " But while the film " succeeds as a powerful acting treat and a potent character study , there are some major narrative issues that prevent the film from being an accidental masterpiece . " Mendelson described the film as being " an acting powerhouse " based on its many emotional themes . 
 Critic Jack Mathews wrote : " Without being familiar with the source material , you really have no idea how much work went into the adaptation or how well it was done .... ' Precious : Based on the Novel ' Push ' by Sapphire ' ... First @-@ time screenwriter Geoffrey Fletcher did yeoman 's work turning Sapphire 's graphic , idiomatic novel into a coherent and inspiring story about the journey of an abused Harlem teenager . " 
 Erin Aubry Kaplan writes on Salon.com that the question posed by the film is how to assess the " hopeless story of a ghetto teen ... in the Age of Obama . " She goes on to say that " ' Precious ' proves you don 't always have to choose between artistic and commercial success ; the film 's first opening weekend was record @-@ breaking . It 's a sign how much we needed to tell this story . And , perhaps , how many stories there are left to tell . " 
 A. O. Scott identifies the script 's precise use of force and adept use of language , including a memorable line created by Fletcher for the adaptation : a " risky , remarkable film adaptation , written by Geoffrey Fletcher , the facts of Precious 's life are also laid out with unsparing force ( though not in overly graphic detail ) . But just as Push achieves an eloquence that makes it far more than a fictional diary of extreme dysfunction , so too does Precious avoid the traps of well @-@ meaning , preachy lower @-@ depths realism . It howls and stammers , but it also sings ... Inarticulate and emotionally shut down , her massive body at once a prison and a hiding place , Precious is also perceptive and shrewd , possessed of talents visible only to those who bother to look . At its plainest and most persuasive , her story is that of a writer discovering a voice . ' These people talked like TV stations I didn 't even watch , ' she remarks of Ms. Rain and her lover ( Kimberly Russell ) , displaying her awakening literary intelligence even as she marvels at the discovery of her ignorance . " 
 Conversely , reflecting the transformation from script to screen , Dana Stevens of Slate disagrees with Gleiberman 's suggestion that the " film makes you think " and argues that the film 's " eagerness " to " drag " the audience " through the lower depths of human experience " leaves little space for independent " conclusions " . Stevens noted that while the film is about improvement and self @-@ actualization , " it wields an awfully large cudgel " in contrast to Scott 's view of balance : " unsparing force ( though not in overly graphic detail ) " . Perhaps sharing Mathews ' view regarding the daunting challenge of adapting the harsh story of Push , Stevens ' observes that " Daniels and Fletcher no doubt intended for their film to lend a voice to the kind of protagonist too often excluded from American movie screens : a poor , black , overweight single mother from the inner city . " 
 Precious has also received some negative responses from critics . Writing for the New York Press , Armond White compared the film to The Birth of a Nation as " demeaning the idea of black American life , " calling it the " con job of the year . " In two separate articles , The New York Times cited White 's article as the most powerful negative review , adding that in a recent interview he had remarked that the film 's popularity is a result of the " fact " that " black pathology sells . " Courtland Milloy , of The Washington Post said Precious was " a film of prurient interest that has about as much redeeming social value as a porn flick . " David Edelstein , of New York Magazine , commented that while the film has " elements " that are " powerful and shocking , " he felt the movie was " programmed " and that the film had " its own study guide . " Keith Uhlich , of Time Out New York , felt that the film did not live up to its " long hype , " and felt that it was " bewildering " to discover the film 's praise at the Sundance Film Festival because Uhlich characterized the film as having " shrug @-@ worthiness . " Peter Bradshaw wrote in The Guardian that the film catalogues a " horrendous , unending nightmare of abuse " and then abruptly turns into something resembling Fame . Bradshaw commended the film 's acting and energy but said it was not quite the " transcendent masterpiece " some had made it out to be . Sukhdev Sandhu said in The Daily Telegraph that he found the film " a dispiriting mix of cliché and melodrama , " although he acknowledged that the film does feature some superb acting . 
 Noting Daniels ' admiration of the work of John Waters and Pedro Almodóvar and the joking attitude he and the actors sometimes took towards their material while making the movie , Jim Emerson argued that Precious is best understood as a deliberately over @-@ the @-@ top piece of camp in the vein of Waters 's Female Trouble . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Precious received dozens of nominations in award categories , including six Academy Award nominations , not only for the film itself but for the cast 's performances , the direction and cinematography , and the adaptation of the novel to the screenplay . Director Lee Daniels won the People 's Choice Award , an award given by audience members at the 2009 Toronto International Film Festival . Daniels won both awards for which he was nominated at the San Sebastián International Film Festival — the TVE Otra <unk> Award and the Audience Award . He was also nominated in the category of Bronze Horse at the Stockholm Film Festival , and won the Best Feature Film Award at the Hawaii International Film Festival . 
 Precious received five awards at the 2009 Independent Spirit Awards ( ISA ) in the categories for Best Film , Best First Screenplay , Best Direction , Best Actress and Best Supporting Actress . 
 Precious received nominations from the 67th Annual Golden Globes for the film and for the performances of Mo 'Nique and Sidibe ; Mo 'Nique won Best Supporting Actress . 
 The film was nominated in all three major categories at the 2009 Screen Actor Guild Awards : Best Cast , Best Actress , and Best Supporting Actress ( in which Mo 'Nique won ) . 
 Precious was considered for the BAFTA awards in several categories , including Best Picture , Best Director , Best Adapted Screenplay , Best Editing , Best Leading Actress ( Gabourey Sidibe ) , and Best Supporting Actress ( Mo 'Nique ) . 
 On February 2 , 2010 , the film received Academy Award nominations at the 82nd Academy Awards for Best Picture , Best Actress ( Sidibe ) , Best Supporting Actress ( Mo 'Nique ) , Best Director ( Daniels ) , Best Adapted Screenplay ( Fletcher ) , and Best Film Editing ( Klotz ) . On March 7 , 2010 , Mo 'Nique ( Best Supporting Actress ) and Fletcher ( Best Adapted Screenplay ) won Academy Awards in their respective categories . The film was also nominated for a GLAAD Media Award for " Outstanding Film - Wide Release " during the 21st GLAAD Media Awards . 
 = Murder of Russel Timoshenko = 
 Russel Timoshenko ( August 18 , 1983 – July 14 , 2007 ) was a 23 @-@ year @-@ old New York Police Department ( NYPD ) police officer who was shot on July 9 , 2007 , and died five days later , after pulling over a stolen BMW automobile in New York City 's Crown Heights , Brooklyn neighborhood . After a four @-@ day manhunt that stretched across three states , all three suspects were eventually apprehended and convicted — two of murder , and the third for weapons possession . At his widely attended funeral , Timoshenko was posthumously promoted to the rank of Detective . The case garnered national media attention because the weapons used were all illegally obtained handguns . This sparked widespread debate over gun control laws in New York City , and over the process by which firearms are traced by police departments . 
 = = Murder = = 
 Timoshenko and his partner , Officer Herman Yan , had been driving in a marked 71st precinct police car on a routine patrol in Crown Heights , with Timoshenko riding as the passenger when they spotted a 2003 black BMW sports utility vehicle headed westbound on <unk> Avenue at 2 : 30 am . The officers scanned the BMW 's license plate on a computer in their police car . When the check came back , it indicated that the plate was assigned to a 2007 Mitsubishi Outlander , not the BMW . Timoshenko and Yan signaled for the vehicle to pull over , and the driver complied , turning north onto Rogers Avenue , where both officers got out of their car and approached the stopped vehicle . 
 Before the officers arrived at the front of the car , Dexter Bostic , 34 , opened fire from the passenger 's seat with a .45 caliber handgun , striking Timoshenko once in the face and once in the throat . Yan had been approaching on the driver 's side , while Timoshenko was coming up from the passenger 's side . From the back seat of the BMW , Robert Ellis , 34 , shot Yan with a 9mm handgun , striking him in the arm and chest ; Yan was saved by his ballistic vest and was able to return fire . A third suspect , 29 @-@ year @-@ old Lee Woods , was driving the BMW at the time of the shooting . After firing at least seven rounds at the officers , the three suspects fled the scene . Police later found the abandoned car on Kingston Avenue , about four blocks from where the shooting occurred . 
 Timoshenko was rushed to Kings County Hospital Center once medical personnel arrived at the scene . Each of the two bullets that struck Timoshenko cut across his spinal cord , just beneath his brain , which left him unable to breathe on his own or to move his muscles . According to doctors , he had no oxygen for 15 to 20 minutes after he was shot because of his initial paralysis . The loss of oxygen left him in a coma since the shooting , so he was placed on life support machines that allowed him to breathe . Tests conducted on July 14 determined that he had no brain activity ( matching the definition of legal death in the state of New York ) ; as a result , the doctors pronounced him dead at 4 : 14 p.m. and turned off the artificial respirator . He was 23 years old at the time of his death . 
 = = = Motive = = = 
 Media reports stated that the men committed the crime in an effort to avoid returning to prison , as all three had violent criminal records . Bostic previously served nine years in state prison for assault , robbery , and sodomy in 1990 . He was sent to prison again in 2001 to serve three years for armed robbery ( in which an accomplice fired shots ) , resulting in his second felony . In 1992 , at the age of 19 , Ellis was convicted of first @-@ degree rape and sodomy . Woods was sent to prison in 1997 , also at age 19 , for illegal weapons possession and assaulting a police officer during his arrest . 
 If the police identified Bostic even before the shooting occurred , he would have faced a two @-@ year prison sentence for violating the terms of his parole , since he was out past his curfew . After the shooting , police discovered the BMW had been stolen from the Five Towns Mitsubishi car dealership in Inwood , Long Island where Bostic worked as a salesman . A motor vehicle theft or gun possession conviction would have been Bostic 's third felony , likely resulting in a lengthy prison sentence . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Manhunt = = = 
 Police apprehended Lee Woods at the home of his girlfriend , Nicole Bostic ( Dexter Bostic ’ s sister ) in Far Rockaway , Queens , New York on July 10 . He identified Bostic and Ellis as his accomplices , and told police that while he knew his friends had guns , he was unaware they were going to open fire on the officers . City detectives were tipped to the whereabouts of Bostic and Ellis on the afternoon of July 11 , after being contacted by man who , unaware of the suspects ' fugitive status , assisted the suspects in their escape by driving them across Long Island , from Far Rockaway to Port Jefferson , New York , before riding a ferry across Long Island Sound to Bridgeport , Connecticut . They then drove west , stopping at a supermarket in Tarrytown , New York , where they purchased food and water , before continuing on to Pennsylvania , according to New York City Police Commissioner Raymond Kelly . Remnants of the same food the men purchased were found in a Pennsylvania forest , where investigators had eventually tracked the suspects . 
 Hundreds of NYPD officers , U.S. marshals , and Pennsylvania State Troopers were involved in the manhunt , using helicopters and four police dogs to assist with the search . By July 11 , 2007 , the bounty for information leading to the whereabouts of Bostic and Ellis reached $ 64 @,@ 000 , with the <unk> 's Benevolent Association proposing an additional $ 25 @,@ 000 . The driver initially dropped off Bostic and Ellis about 14 miles from where Bostic was finally arrested in Pocono Township , Pennsylvania . 
 On July 11 , a passing motorist spotted the fugitives by Interstate 80 and called police . The men fled when authorities arrived at the scene shortly after , but Bostic was tackled by a state trooper shortly after 6 p.m. , while Ellis managed to escape . At 8 a.m. the next morning , Ellis was cornered near I @-@ 80 by two police dogs . Both men were extradited to New York from Pennsylvania on July 12 . Police brought Timoshenko 's handcuffs and used them to apprehend Ellis during his arrest . Police did not release the name of the driver who assisted the suspects . 
 = = = Mourning = = = 
 Over 30 @,@ 000 people attended Timoshenko 's funeral in <unk> , Brooklyn , where Mayor Michael Bloomberg delivered the eulogy , praising the fallen officer , stating , " By stopping that car , he and Officer Yan helped us capture three career criminals whose appetite for evil knew no bounds — saving who knows how many future victims , people who will never know how lucky they are . " Detective Timoshenko ’ s name is engraved on Panel 16 @-@ West , Line 26 of the National Law Enforcement Officers Memorial in Washington , DC . 
 = = = Awards and recognition = = = 
 Timoshenko had served with the NYPD for 18 months . In a ceremony held on July 27 , 2007 , Timoshenko was posthumously promoted to the rank of Detective First Grade and his partner , Herman Yan , was promoted to Detective . Mayor Bloomberg called the promotion , " A small measure of our appreciation for the supreme sacrifice that Russel made , and to honor his life . " 
 On June 16 , 2008 , Mayor Bloomberg and NYPD Commissioner Kelly bestowed the New York City Police Department Medal of Honor on Timoshenko and Yan . The award is the highest law enforcement medal given by the NYPD , which was awarded posthumously Timoshenko and accepted by his parents in a ceremony held at the NYPD headquarters in New York . New York Governor David Paterson named the two officers Police Officers of the Year in New York State on July 24 , 2009 . The award , first given in 1983 , recognizes a single police officer or team for " an exceptional act of valor symbolizing the service of police in New York State . " 
 On October 6 , 2009 , Timoshenko 's parents accepted the James S. Brady Law Enforcement Award ( named after the former assistant to President Ronald Reagan ) , given to their son posthumously in recognition of his commitment to public safety through his outstanding law enforcement career . The award was presented by NYPD Commissioner Kelly . 
 In November 2009 , a local street , Durant Avenue , was renamed to Detective Russel Timoshenko Way in the detective 's honor . Incidentally , following the controversial decision to rename a street to Sean Bell Way for police shooting victim Sean Bell , some community members had recommended doing the same for Timoshenko . However , the latter case had attracted much less media attention . 
 = = Trial = = 
 All three suspects were arraigned and charged with aggravated first degree murder for the killing of Timoshenko , and other charges related to the wounding of Yan , including attempted murder and aggravated assault on a police officer . They faced life in prison if convicted of the first degree murder charges . The city 's police union and other parties asked federal prosecutors to take over the case so that the three suspects could face the death penalty , but the case was tried by the Brooklyn district attorney on November 10 , 2008 , after federal officials refused to prosecute the case . Although the three defendants were being prosecuted simultaneously , there was a rare separate jury assigned to each of them . 
 On December 17 , 2008 , Robert Ellis was found not guilty on the charges of aggravated murder and attempted aggravated murder , but was found guilty on three charges of gun possession . On January 14 , 2009 , a judge sentenced Ellis to 15 years in prison on the gun possession charges . On December 19 , 2008 , Dexter Bostic was found guilty of aggravated murder , attempted aggravated murder , and three charges of gun possession ; he was sentenced to life in prison without the possibility of parole . 
 Lee Woods was tried twice , after his first trial ended in a mistrial due to a juror in her 20s falling ill . Wood 's attorney , Samuel J. Karlin , told the judge his client wanted to continue with the ill juror , instead of using an alternate . At his second trial on March 16 , 2009 , Lee Woods was found guilty of aggravated murder , attempted aggravated murder , and 3 charges of gun possession . He was also sentenced to life in prison without the possibility of parole . 
 Prosecutors believed Nicole Bostic , 26 at the time , aided Lee Woods in hiding the guns found in the BMW that Timoshenko and Yan pulled over , dumping them in a nearby garage before police retrieved them ; N. Bostic , however , only admitted to giving Woods a ride . She pled guilty to helping the three men escape , and originally faced seven years in prison for her role . She later accepted a plea bargain , pleading guilty to a misdemeanor count of hindering the prosecution in exchange for three years probation , thereby avoiding jail . 
 = = Gun legislation = = 
 Several press accounts reported that Timoshenko was shot by an unlicensed gun that came from Virginia . Previous reports indicated that the gun dealer had previously been indicted for his illegal gun sales , and that all the weapons found in the BMW were illegally obtained . The gun shop in question is now closed , and the dealer has been stripped of his license . Because the gun was used by a person with a criminal history , and because the NYPD was denied requests to look up the seller of the gun , legislators sought to make it easier for law enforcement to carry out their investigative duties . 
 = = = Senate hearings = = = 
 In September 2007 , Senator Charles Schumer questioned Michael J. Sullivan , nominated to be the director of the Bureau of Alcohol , Tobacco , Firearms and Explosives ( ATF ) , at a Senate Judiciary Committee hearing looking into why the NYPD 's request for information on who had sold the gun ( used to kill Timoshenko ) was denied . The NYPD asked the ATF for data about which dealers in Virginia supplied the most crime guns — like the one used to kill Officer Timoshenko — so they could identify the traffickers . The ATF refused that request for data , citing the <unk> Amendment , which restricts cities ' access to and use of ATF trace data ) . The New York Daily News ran a headline editorial in support for repealing the amendment , entitled " Congress <unk> This Hero . " 
 At the Senate hearing in Washington D.C. , Schumer stated , " If this is true , it is an outrage . If it is true , it is a horrible example of gun laws gone wrong . " Sullivan , then acting director of the ATF , replied to the criticism , stating , " I 'm not sure why the request was turned down " , and pledged to look into the matter and provide further clarification in writing . 
 = = = New gun laws for New York City = = = 
 The complications regarding the illegal firearms used in Timoshenko 's murder inspired new laws passed in New York City , which authorized new penalties , touted as " part of the toughest illegal gun possession law in the country . " A public awareness campaign , named " <unk> = <unk> " , featured posters calling attention to the 3 ½ year prison sentence given to anyone caught carrying an illegal loaded handgun in New York . At a press conference , Mayor Bloomberg stated , " Police Officer Russell Timoshenko was just the latest victim killed by a gunman firing at close range . If the prospect of three and a half years in jail deters just one would @-@ be killer from carrying a gun and taking the life of another police officer in another deadly confrontation , then the law and the efforts to publicize it are well worth it . " NFL player Plaxico Burress was charged with this new law due to an incident that occurred inside of a New York City nightclub . On August 20 , 2009 , Burress plead guilty to a gun possession charge and agreed to a two @-@ year prison sentence . 
 = The Parent Rap = 
 " The Parent Rap " is the second episode and official premiere of the thirteenth season of The Simpsons . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on November 11 , 2001 . In the episode , Bart and his father , Homer , are sentenced by the cruel judge Constance Harm to be tethered to each other as a result of Bart stealing Police Chief Wiggum 's car . Eventually , Homer 's wife , Marge , is fed up with the punishment and cuts the rope , which instead leads to Judge Harm sentencing them to have their heads and hands locked up in wooden stocks . 
 The episode was written by George Meyer and Mike Scully , who also served as the show runner for the episode , and Mark Kirkland worked as the director . The writers based the story on “ a couple of incidents ” in real life in which troublesome children , through alternative sentencing , were tethered to their parents . The episode marks the first appearance of the infamous and notoriously cruel Judge Constance Harm , who is played by actress Jane Kaczmarek . When it was first broadcast , “ The Parent Rap ” was watched by 14 @.@ 4 million viewers , making it the second most watched show of its timeslot that night . After its release on DVD and Blu @-@ ray , however , the episode garnered mixed reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 When Homer makes Bart and Milhouse walk to school , the boys get into trouble and are arrested for stealing Chief Wiggum 's squad car . Milhouse gets off but when Bart comes to the bench , Judge Snyder takes a vacation and Judge Constance Harm takes over and lays down the law . She holds Homer responsible for Bart 's deeds and sentences him and Bart to be tethered together . The two are against it at first , but after a while , the two begin to bond . Marge finally gets fed up with the punishment , when Bart has to stay in the room when she and Homer make love , and cuts the tether . Only now , Bart and his parents get brought back before Judge Harm . Homer and Marge have their heads and hands locked up in old @-@ fashioned wooden stocks . Not being able to bear the punishment any longer , they break free and decide to get back at the judge . When the plan goes awry , they accidentally sink the judge 's houseboat and are once again brought into court . 
 Bart asks Judge Harm to go easy on his parents and accepts responsibility for his own actions . Judge Harm 's harsh expressions briefly softens and she admits she appreciates him being responsible for his actions . However , she also realizes that she must still lay down the law . Just before she is ready to bang her gavel and punish Bart to serve five years in <unk> , Judge Snyder comes back from his fishing trip just in time to stop her verdict . He declares a verdict of " boys will be boys " , dismissing the case and sending an irate Judge Harm on her way when she tried to complain about him being too lenient . 
 Afterwards , Marge asks the family not to break the law for an entire year , a promise Homer instantly breaks when he unintentionally runs over Hans Moleman , and turns up the radio to keep the family from hearing him whimper in pain . 
 = = Production and cultural references = = 
 “ The Parent Rap ” was co @-@ written by George Meyer and Mike Scully , and Mark Kirkland served as the director for the episode . It was first broadcast on the Fox network in the United States on November 11 , 2001 . The title of the episode is a reference to The Parent Trap . Even though " Treehouse of Horror XII " - the first episode of the thirteenth season - had aired the previous week , " The Parent Rap " was considered the official premiere of the season . “ The Parent Rap ” was the last episode written in its production line . “ As I recall , we got toward the end of the season and we had to write another episode in a hurry ” , said Meyer in a DVD audio commentary for the episode . Judge Constance Harm is a parody of Judge Judy . 
 The writing staff contributed a rough outline for the episode , and Meyer and Scully went into one of the writer 's room and “ basically , kind of locked [ themselves ] in for five days ” writing the episode . Meyer and Scully both thoroughly enjoyed the writing process of the episode ; “ It really came together easily ” , stated Meyer , “ ... because we had known each other so long and were comfortable with each other 's style ” . Ian Maxtone @-@ Graham , one of the writers for The Simpsons , commented that the draft Meyer and Scully had written was “ awfully good ” . 
 The episode was based on “ a couple of incidents ” that the writers had heard about in which troublesome children , through alternative sentencing , were tethered to their parents . The scene in which Homer and Marge get spanked by Springfield 's citizens as part of their punishment was also based on an alternative sentencing , in which the sentenced had to wear certain shirts or signs that indicated whether they , for example , had not paid taxes . The scene in which Bart accidentally drives away with Chief Wiggum 's police car was based on one of Scully 's friends in high school , who stole a still running police car parked at a Dunkin ' Donuts while the police were in the store . 
 The episode featured the first appearance of Judge Constance Harm , portrayed by American actress Jane Kaczmarek . The character 's name was conceived by Meyer , who had always thought that Constance was a scary name . 
 The episode makes a reference to Blue Öyster Cult 's hit song “ ( Don 't Fear ) The Reaper ” , which also plays during the episode 's end credits , and inspired the title of a later episode . Meyer later got to meet the band , who said that they were “ stoked ” to be referenced in a Simpsons episode . 
 = = Release = = 
 In its original American broadcast on November 11 , 2001 , “ The Parent Rap ” was seen by approximately 14 @.@ 4 million viewers , according to Nielsen Media Research . The episode received a 6 @.@ 9 rating / 16 share among adults between ages 18 and 49 , making it the second most watched television show of the night in its demographic , losing the number @-@ one spot to Malcolm in the Middle . The episode was listed among the 15 most watched shows in its demographic that week . 
 Following the episode 's broadcast , as well as the home video release of thirteenth season of The Simpsons , “ The Parent Rap " received generally mixed reviews from critics . Writing for NY Daily News , Eric Mink gave the episode a mixed review . " To be sure , the show has its moments " , wrote Mink , " But there 's not much zip here , and the show has , of all things , a warm @-@ and @-@ fuzzy ending ... ' The Simpsons ' and warm @-@ and @-@ fuzzy is not a healthy combination " . Nate Boss of Project @-@ Blu described the episode as “ filler ” and praised the episode 's concept , but criticized how the episode was executed . Colin Jacobsson of DVD Movie Guide also gave the episode a mixed response , and wrote that “ ' Rap ' starts with a clever – if absurd – concept ” , but “ does little to churn good comedy out of its theme ” , and concluded by calling the episode “ disappointing ” . Writing for Obsessed With Film , Adam Rayner described the episode as “ woefully weak ” and “ an example of the farcical that the series would fall deeper and deeper into ” . He did , however , praise the episode for being original . Jennifer Malkowski , reviewing the season for DVD Verdict , was more positive towards the episode . Giving the episode a rating of B + , Malkowski listed “ The Parent Rap ” among episodes in the season where “ We see wacky scenarios force Homer to bond with his family , to a rather heartwarming effect ” . Ron Martin of 411Mania was also favorable , calling the episode “ decent ” . 
 = Action of 6 April 1809 = 
 The Action of 6 April 1809 was a small naval battle fought between the French frigate Niémen and several British frigates , principally HMS Amethyst , as part of the blockade of Brest , France during the Napoleonic Wars . During the Wars , a central part of British strategy was to isolate French ports from international trade in an attempt to both restrict French imports of food and military supplies and simultaneously to damage the French economy . To achieve this , British warships maintained a constant vigil off the French coastline , attacking ships that attempted to enter or leave French ports . Despite the threat that their ships faced , communication and the transfer of supplies between France and her colonies was vital to the French war effort , and the French Navy made constant attempts to evade the patrolling British squadrons . In late 1808 , a significant French squadron was deployed to Isle de France ( now Mauritius ) to disrupt British trade in the Indian Ocean . This force required reinforcement and supply from France , and periodic attempts were made to reach the isolated convoy with new frigates , the first of which was Niémen . 
 Niémen was a new and fast ship , carrying 40 guns and a large quantity of much needed naval supplies . However , in order to leave her home port of Brest , it was necessary to avoid contact with the British frigates that constantly watched the entrance to the harbour in search of enemy movement . In April 1809 , these ships were HMS Amethyst and Emerald , loosely supported by other patrolling ships and tasked specifically with the capture of Niémen , acting on intelligence passed on by the Admiralty . When Niémen emerged on 5 April , she was immediately spotted and chased . Amethyst retained contact throughout the night and brought the French ship to action on the morning of 6 April . The ensuing battle was fiercely contested and both ships suffered severe damage and heavy casualties . 
 While the outcome of the battle was still undecided , a second British frigate — HMS Arethusa — arrived . Outnumbered , the French captain saw no alternative and surrendered his ship . The late arrival of Arethusa — under Captain Robert Mends , who claimed the victory for himself — sparked a furious argument that developed into a lasting animosity between Mends and Captain Michael Seymour of Amethyst . The failure of Niémen to reach Isle de France also had serious repercussions for the French squadron there . With naval supplies severely limited , their ability to operate at sea for long periods of time was hampered and by late 1810 few of their vessels were still seaworthy . 
 = = Background = = 
 During the Napoleonic Wars , as with the French Revolutionary Wars that preceded them , the British Royal Navy enjoyed almost complete dominance at sea . By 1809 , their superiority was so entrenched that few French ships even left port , because to do so meant breaking through a system of blockading warships off every major French harbour . The biggest port in France at the time was Brest in Brittany , and thus it was there that the greatest concentration of British warships off the French coast was concentrated . The main squadron was formed from large ships of the line , often dubbed the " Offshore Squadron " due to their position up to a hundred miles from the coast , to avoid the risks posed by the rocky Biscay shore . This was complemented by the " Inshore Squadron " , formed primarily from frigates and brigs , which was tasked with watching the myriad entry points to Brest and other Biscay ports . These frigates often sailed independently or in small squadrons , maintaining contact with each other and with the Offshore Squadron via signals and despatch boats . 
 Despite their inferiority at sea , both in numbers and experience , frigates of the French Navy were still required to leave port regularly on raiding missions against British commerce and to convoy supplies and reinforcements to overseas regions of the French Empire . These colonies formed bases for French commerce raiders , and in 1808 a determined effort was made to develop a raiding squadron on the French Indian Ocean territories of Isle de France and Île Bonaparte . These ships — led by Commodore Jacques Hamelin — required regular resupply from France as they were unable to repair damage and replenish ammunition and food from the reserves on the Indian Ocean islands alone . In early 1809 , therefore , it was decided to reinforce and resupply the squadron by despatching the newly built frigate Niémen from Brest under Captain Jean Dupotet . 
 In January 1809 , John Tremayne Rodd — captain of the frigate HMS Indefatigable , then part of the Inshore Squadron — obtained information that Niémen was preparing to sail from Brest . Rodd passed this information to the Admiralty , who took immediate steps to intercept the French ship . For this purpose , they selected Captains Michael Seymour of HMS Amethyst and Frederick Lewis Maitland of HMS Emerald . These captains had extensive experience serving with the Inshore Squadron off Brest and Seymour , who had lost an arm at the Glorious First of June , was much in favour for his recent capture of the French frigate Thétis at the Action of 10 November 1808 . Seymour and Maitland — during their patrols in 1808 that led to the capture of Thétis — had entered into a verbal agreement that any prize money they earned would be shared equally over both crews . This agreement continued on their new commission , which was jealously guarded from other captains : when Seymour discovered HMS Naiad hunting in the same area in March , he was furious and ordered her away . 
 = = Battle = = 
 On 3 April 1809 , Niémen — laden with provisions and naval stores for Isle de France — sailed from Brest , passing through the rocky passages that sheltered the port during the night and thus avoiding discovery by the regular Inshore Squadron . Steering westwards , Dupotet made good time , travelling nearly 100 nmi ( 120 mi ; 190 km ) over the next two days with the intention of escaping the British patrols in the Bay of Biscay and reaching the open Atlantic . At 11 : 00 on 5 April , however , Dupotet spotted two sails to the northwest . Assuming them to be British , Dupotet turned southwards in the hope of outrunning them . The sails — which belonged to Amethyst and Emerald — immediately gave chase . Throughout the day , the three ships sailed southward , Amethyst slightly gaining on Niémen but leaving Emerald far behind , Maitland 's ship disappearing from view at 19 : 20 as darkness fell . 
 Dupotet attempted to throw off Amethyst 's pursuit during the night by turning westwards once more , but Seymour anticipated this manoeuvre and turned his ship westwards as well , discovering Niémen only a few miles ahead at 21 : 40 . Rapidly gaining on the French ship , Seymour began firing his bow @-@ chasers , small guns situated in the bows of the frigate , in an attempt to damage her rigging so that he could bring his broadsides to bear . Dupotet responded with his stern @-@ chasers , but by 01 : 00 on 6 April it was clear that Amethyst was going to catch the French frigate . The pursuit had been exhausting : since first sighting the British ships , Niémen had travelled over 140 nmi ( 160 mi ; 260 km ) and was just 12 nmi ( 14 mi ; 22 km ) from the Spanish coast when she was caught . At 01 : 15 , Amethyst opened fire , Niémen immediately responding and turning to the northeast in an attempt to shake off the British ship . Seymour followed his opponent and at 01 : 45 was again close enough to engage , the frigates firing upon one another from close range for over an hour . 
 At 02 : 45 , Amethyst was able to pull across the bows of Niémen , inflicting a devastating raking fire on the French ship which caused terrible damage . Niémen surged forward into Amethyst , but the collision caused little damage and at 03 : 00 Amethyst again raked her opponent , this time from the east . The frigates were so close that shot from Amethyst started fires among Niémen 's hammock netting , placed along the decks to deter boarding actions . At 03 : 15 , Niémen 's mizenmast and main topmast collapsed and another fire broke out in the main top , but Amethyst was also severely damaged and at 03 : 30 her mainmast fell onto the deck from a combination of shot damage and stress in high winds . Niémen 's mainmast also collapsed a few minutes later . Both frigates had stopped firing at 03 : 25 , as the confusion on their decks was brought under control . 
 Although Niémen was very badly damaged , Amethyst was almost uncontrollable and despite Seymour 's best efforts , he was unable to close with Niémen to ensure her surrender . Dupotet meanwhile was overseeing hasty repairs in the hope of getting away before Amethyst could recover . At 03 : 45 , however , a new ship emerged from the darkness , soon revealed to be the British frigate HMS Arethusa . Arethusa was deployed as part of the force blockading the ports of Northern Spain and her commander , Captain Robert Mends , was a successful officer who had been commended just two weeks earlier for raiding the French @-@ held port of Lekeitio . Mends immediately pulled alongside Niémen and Dupotet fired a single shot each at Amethyst and Arethusa . The shot at Amethyst missed its target , but the one at Arethusa struck the ship and threw up splinters . Mends was struck on the forehead and badly wounded , the only man to be hit . Both Amethyst and Arethusa then opened fire , Niémen surrendering immediately . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Aside from Captain Mends on Arethusa , casualties were severe on both sides . Amethyst had eight killed and 37 wounded from a crew of 222 , while the French ship lost 47 killed and 73 wounded from a crew of 339 . <unk> among the British officers began within minutes of the French surrender : Mends took possession of Niémen and sent a note to Seymour informing him that he had seized the valuable French nautical charts and the French captain 's personal stores . The note also requested that Seymour send back Arethusa 's surgeon , who had gone aboard Amethyst to assist with the wounded , so that Mends could be ready to leave without notice . Seymour , who was still effecting hasty repairs and dealing with his casualties , responded angrily , forcing Mends to back down and return the stores . Seymour was also annoyed by Mends ' late arrival , which meant that Arethusa was entitled to half the prize money from the captured frigate without having done any of the fighting . Repairs were completed on 7 April , and Amethyst and Niémen limped back to Plymouth , arriving on 13 April . 
 On arrival in Britain , Seymour was celebrated and rewarded with a baronetcy for his second victory in less than six months while all of his officers were promoted . Niémen was purchased into the Navy for the sum of £ 29 @,@ 979 @-@ 2 @-@ 10d , which was split between the government , the crew and a number of other parties . The share that went to the captors came under dispute : Mends had no intention of abiding by Seymour 's agreement with Maitland and refused to allow Emerald to share in the prize money . Seymour and Maitland took Mends to court and the ensuing legal battle lasted years , Mends deliberately exaggerating his role in the capture of Niémen in public ( although privately admitting that the victory was entirely Seymour 's ) . Seymour and Mends became bitter enemies and their animosity continued throughout their lives , although both remained in the Navy and had successful careers . Forty years later , the battle was among the actions recognised by a clasp attached to the Naval General Service Medal , awarded upon application to all British participants still living in 1847 . 
 In France , the action was infamous for a despatch supposedly sent by Dupotet and subsequently printed in edited form in the newspaper Le Moniteur Universel . The report , which was later used by Mends in his dispute with Seymour , claimed that Niémen had not only been largely undamaged before Arethusa 's arrival , but that Seymour had actually surrendered to the French captain before Mends arrived . This story , almost totally invented , was widely believed in France at the time . The effect on the Mauritius campaign of the defeat of Niémen was not immediately apparent , Hamelin 's squadron remaining a menace to British shipping well into 1810 . However , in the aftermath of the destructive Battle of Grand Port , the French , although the victors , were unable to repair their ships due to lack of naval stores and their effectiveness declined until they were unable to resist the Invasion of Isle de France in November 1810 . This inability was directly related to the failure of all but one of the French frigates sent to reinforce and resupply the island to reach it , the others either captured or driven back en route . 
 = Up in the Air ( 2009 film ) = 
 Up in the Air is a 2009 American comedy @-@ drama film directed by Jason Reitman and co @-@ written by Reitman and Sheldon Turner . It is a film adaptation of the 2001 novel of the same name , written by Walter Kirn . The story is centered on corporate " <unk> " Ryan Bingham ( George Clooney ) and his travels . The film follows his isolated life and philosophies and the people he meets along the way . Filming was primarily in St. Louis , Missouri , which substituted for a number of other cities . Several scenes were filmed in Detroit , Omaha , Nebraska , Las Vegas , and Miami . 
 Reitman promoted Up in the Air with personal appearances at film festivals and other showings , starting with the Telluride Film Festival on September 5 , 2009 . The Los Angeles premiere was at the Mann Village Theater on Monday , November 30 , 2009 . Paramount scheduled a limited North American release on December 4 , 2009 , broadening the release on December 11 , 2009 , with a wide release on December 23 , 2009 . 
 The National Board of Review and the Washington D.C. Area Film Critics Association named Up in the Air the Best Picture of 2009 . It received eight Broadcast Film Critics Association nominations and garnered a win for Adapted Screenplay , six Golden Globe nominations , earning a win for Best Screenplay , and three Screen Actors Guild nominations . It received six Academy Award nominations , but did not win in any category . Up in the Air also received recognition from numerous critics ' associations . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Ryan Bingham ( George Clooney ) works for a HR consultancy firm which specializes in termination assistance , and makes his living travelling to workplaces across the United States in order to conduct company layoffs and firings on behalf of employers . Ryan also gives motivational speeches , using the analogy " What 's In Your Backpack ? " to extoll the virtues of a life free of burdensome relationships with people as well as things . A frequent flyer , Ryan relishes his travels , and has a personal ambition to become only the seventh person ( as well as the youngest ) to earn ten million frequent flyer miles with American Airlines . During his travels , he meets another frequent flyer named Alex ( Vera Farmiga ) and they begin a casual relationship . 
 One day , Ryan is unexpectedly called back to his company 's offices in Omaha , Nebraska . Natalie Keener ( Anna Kendrick ) , an ambitious , freshly @-@ graduated new hire , promotes a plan to cut costs by conducting layoffs via videoconferencing . Ryan raises concerns that the program could potentially come across as detached and <unk> , arguing that Natalie knows nothing about the reality of the firing process , live or not , and does not know how to handle upset people . He then plays the role of a fired employee to demonstrate her inexperience . His boss ( Jason Bateman ) assigns him to take Natalie with him on his next round of terminations to show her the ropes , much to his annoyance . 
 As they travel together and become better acquainted , Natalie questions Ryan 's philosophies on life , but an unmoved Ryan is adamant that he is more than happy with his lifestyle . During the trip , Natalie is shattered when her boyfriend unceremoniously dumps her by text message , and Ryan and Alex try to comfort her . Natalie later lectures Ryan about his refusal to consider a commitment to Alex in spite of their obvious compatibility , and becomes infuriated ; she apologizes later , but soon afterwards they are both ordered back to Omaha to begin implementing Natalie 's program . On the test run , the earlier concerns Ryan had raised immediately prove true ; one laid off person breaks down in tears before the camera , and she is unable to comfort him . 
 Instead of returning immediately to Omaha , Ryan convinces Alex to accompany him to his younger sister 's wedding . He learns that the reason the couple had him take photos of a cutout picture of them in various places was because they cannot afford a honeymoon trip . When the groom gets cold feet , Ryan ’ s older sister talks him into using his motivational skills to persuade him to go through with it . Although this runs counter to Ryan 's personal philosophy , he successfully argues that the important moments in life are rarely unshared . The wedding goes off without any further hitches . 
 Ryan begins having second thoughts about his own life . As he starts to deliver his " What 's In Your Backpack ? " speech at a convention in Las Vegas , he realizes he no longer believes it , and walks off the stage . On an impulse , he flies to Alex 's home in Chicago . When she opens the door , he is stunned to discover she is a married woman with children ; Ryan leaves without a word before her husband can suspect anything . She later tells him on the phone that her family is her real life and he is simply an escape . Again , he ends the conversation wordless . 
 On his flight home , the crew announces that Ryan has just crossed the ten million mile mark . The airline 's chief pilot ( Sam Elliott ) comes out of the cockpit to meet Ryan . He notes that Ryan is the youngest person to reach the milestone . When asked where he is from , a disheartened Ryan can only respond " here " . 
 Back in his office , Ryan calls the airline to transfer five hundred thousand miles each to his sister and brother @-@ in @-@ law , enough for them to fly around the world for their honeymoon . His boss tells Ryan that a woman he and Natalie fired has killed herself , and that an upset Natalie has quit via text message . The company also puts the remote @-@ layoff program on hold because of related concerns . 
 Natalie applies for a job in San Francisco , the city she was originally offered a job before following her now ex @-@ boyfriend to Omaha instead . The interviewer is impressed by her qualifications and a glowing recommendation from Ryan , and hires her . The film concludes with Ryan standing in front of a vast destination board , looking up , and letting go of his luggage . 
 = = Cast = = 
 George Clooney as Ryan Bingham , " a suave , smartly dressed businessman in his 40s " 
 Vera Farmiga as Alex Goran , a 34 @-@ year @-@ old constantly traveling businesswoman 
 Anna Kendrick as Natalie Keener , an ambitious 23 @-@ year @-@ old 
 Jason Bateman as Craig Gregory , owner of Career Transition Counseling 
 Amy Morton as Kara Bingham , Ryan 's older sister 
 Melanie Lynskey as Julie Bingham , Ryan 's younger sister 
 Danny McBride as Jim Miller , Julie 's fiancé 
 Zach Galifianakis as Steve , a fired employee 
 J. K. Simmons as Bob , a fired employee 
 Sam Elliott as Maynard Finch , Chief Pilot 
 <unk> Jones as Karen Barnes , a fired employee 
 <unk> Kalyan as a fired IT worker 
 = = Themes = = 
 The film has a thematic connection to the children 's book The <unk> Rabbit , which appears in the film , before the wedding . 
 Reitman noted that 
 " In one sense , it 's a movie about a man who fires people for a living . In another sense , it 's a movie about a man who collects air miles excessively . In another sense , it 's about a man who meets a woman who 's so similar to him that even though they both believe in the idea of living solo , they begin to fall in love . " 
 Reitman also later stated that " the movie is about the examination of a philosophy . What if you decided to live hub to hub , with nothing , with nobody ? " 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Walter Kirn wrote Up in the Air , the book on which the film is based , during a snowbound winter on a ranch in rural Montana , while thinking about airports , airplanes and first @-@ class passengers he had met who would strongly resemble Ryan Bingham . The novel was published in 2001 and , shortly after , Sheldon Turner discovered the book and wrote a screenplay adaptation , which he sold to DreamWorks in 2003 . 
 Canadian @-@ American filmmaker Jason Reitman later came upon the novel ( initially attracted by the Christopher Buckley blurb on the cover ) while browsing in the Los Angeles bookstore Book Soup . Reitman persuaded his father , Canadian @-@ American filmmaker Ivan Reitman , to purchase the book 's film rights , and the elder Reitman commissioned a screenplay from Ted Griffin and Nicholas Griffin , who used some elements from Turner 's script in their work . Jason Reitman then developed his own screenplay , incorporating some of the original script that was ( unbeknownst to Reitman ) written by Turner . Some Turner inventions that were used in the film include Ryan 's boilerplate termination speech ( " Anyone who ever built an empire or changed the world sat where you 're sitting right now ... " ) , a key plot point involving a suicide , and the character of Ryan 's partner ( written by Turner as male ) . Reitman initially attempted to claim sole credit for writing the film , then later admitted to confusion when the Writers Guild of America ruled that he should share credit with Turner , whose script Reitman claimed to have never read . He and Turner later appeared at a WGA event where both said they were happy to share credit , after Turner 's contribution to the final product was made clear . At a press screening , Reitman also said that his father Ivan had written " the best line in the movie . " 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Though Reitman has claimed in countless interviews that he wrote the parts specifically for George Clooney , Vera Farmiga , Anna Kendrick , Jason Bateman , Danny McBride , Melanie Lynskey , Amy Morton , Sam Elliott and Zach Galifianakis , some of the actors publicly stated their confusion in Reitman 's assertion , if only because they knew he was meeting with other actors all along including his choice to fill his last lead role with Ellen Page ( who starred in Reitman 's previous film Juno ) for the part that Kendrick ultimately played . On the part played by Farmiga , he cited her ability to walk a fine line between aggressiveness and femininity . On Kendrick , Reitman cited that he was inspired by her performance in Rocket Science . On Clooney , he said , " If you 're going to make a movie about a guy who fires people for a living and you still want to like him , that actor better be damn charming and I don 't think there 's a more charming actor alive than George Clooney . I was very lucky he said yes . " Reitman said , on the B.S. Report with Bill Simmons , that he considered Steve Martin for the part if Clooney declined the role . Reitman said that he would have changed the movie with Martin and given Martin " his Lost in Translation . " 
 Approximately 4 @,@ 600 people applied to be extras in the film during the open call on January 24 , 2009 and January 25 , 2009 , at Crestwood Court in St. Louis , Missouri . Up in the Air cast 2 @,@ 000 extras with 15 to 25 Missouri actors in minor speaking roles . About 250 extras were used from the Omaha , Nebraska , area . They were used for filming inside and outside the terminal at Eppley Airfield , while Clooney acted out most of his scenes inside the terminal . 
 While filming in St. Louis and Detroit , Reitman placed an ad in the paper asking if people who recently lost their job wanted to be in a documentary about job loss . He specified " documentary " in the ad so that actors would not respond . Reitman was amazed by how many people of different age , race , and gender were willing to speak frankly about what happened and what a cathartic experience it had been . The film crew received a startling 100 responses , including 60 people filmed ( 30 in Detroit and 30 in St. Louis ) . Twenty @-@ two are seen in the film . The interviews ran for about ten minutes on what it is like to lose their job in this poor economy , and after that they would " fire " them on camera and ask them to either respond the way they did the day they lost their job or , if they preferred , the way they wished they had responded . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Filming was mostly done in the St. Louis area . Several scenes were filmed at the Berry and McNamara Terminals at Detroit Metro Airport in late February 2009 with minimal filming in Omaha , in Las Vegas and in Miami , Florida . Missouri and St. Louis leaders provided $ 4 @.@ 1 million in tax credits for the $ 25 million film . Producers set up a St. Louis , Missouri production office on January 5 , 2009 . Filming began in St. Louis on March 3 , 2009 , and continued through the end of April . The film includes 80 different sets at 50 locations throughout the St. Louis area , including Lambert @-@ St. Louis International Airport Concourse C and Concourse D ( which played the part of several airports across America ) , the Mansion House apartments in downtown St. Louis , Hilton St. Louis at the Ballpark , Hilton St. Louis Airport , the Cheshire Inn , the <unk> building , Renaissance Grand Hotel , Maplewood United Methodist Church , and <unk> High School . The film was shot at Lambert @-@ St. Louis International Airport for five days , twenty hours each day . 
 In October 2008 , Production Services of Omaha scouted locations in Omaha , Nebraska for three days of filming in late April with Clooney . Some of the scenes were shot inside the Visitor 's Bureau and in a condo in the Old Market area of downtown Omaha and at the south end of the main terminal at Eppley Airfield . 
 Reitman needed fifty days to film Up in the Air , eight of which were devoted to aerial shooting . The aerial shots turned out to be more difficult than expected . He was unable to use three days of the aerial filming . Many aerial shots , such as the crop circle on fire , are seen in the Paramount trailer , but are not used in the film . The pilot who flies the Boeing 747 that carried the space shuttle flew the aircraft for the aerial shots . 
 The film features heavy product placement , with American Airlines , Chrysler , Hertz , <unk> , and Hilton Hotels all featured prominently . Competing brands are displayed as blurs in scene backgrounds or are replaced with pseudonyms in dialogue . However , the brands did not pay for the exposure ; rather , they waived the fees for the producers to shoot on location , such as at AA 's airport areas and inside Hilton hotels . Reitman expressed his desire to use actual brands as he finds them less distracting . 
 = = = Editing = = = 
 The post @-@ production schedule for Up in the Air was shorter than Jason Reitman 's previous two films . The editing team had only 16 to 17 weeks post @-@ schedule , whereas an editing deadline is usually from 22 to 26 weeks . Reitman was involved in post @-@ production while shooting . The film was shot entirely on location and <unk> stayed in Los Angeles to cut . She would send him scenes every day or every other day as she finished them , and he would view them . He flew home every weekend to work with her for a few hours on Saturday or Sunday in order to stay on schedule . 
 Editing helped determine how nonverbal moments shape the first meeting between Ryan and Alex , who become lovers . " In a scene like that , there is a sort of playfulness that goes on , " editor , Dana E. <unk> said . " There were little looks that they gave each other . Sometimes I stayed a beat longer on a take to get that little sparkle in their eyes ... You can see a lot of playfulness in the quick cuts back and forth when they are teasing each other , but then there are also certain moments that Vera would give a little raise of an eyebrow , or George would give the same thing . Those tiny nuances are really helpful to show their character and show what they are after . " 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 Up in the Air : Music from the Motion Picture is the official soundtrack to the film , released by Warner Music on November 9 , 2009 , and composed by Rolfe Kent , who recorded his score with a 55 @-@ piece ensemble of the Hollywood Studio Symphony at the Sony Scoring Stage . It was orchestrated by Tony <unk> . 
 Kevin Renick wrote the song " Up in the Air " two years prior to knowing that Reitman was working on a film adaptation to the book . He had been laid off at the time , and was an unrecorded , unemployed St. Louis musician . When Renick researched the film he discovered that the theme of the film was much the same as the song he had written . " The song is about uncertainty , disconnection and loneliness , while alluding to career transition , " Renick explained . " It 's a melancholy song , and a narrative about finding out where your life 's going to go . " He handed a cassette to Reitman after the director did an interview at Webster University . Renick included a spoken @-@ word introduction about the song on the cassette so that Reitman would know why he was given the song . Reitman found a tape deck , listened , liked the song and placed the original introduction and song from the cassette midway through the credits . Reitman stated that the song has a do @-@ it @-@ yourself authenticity . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Strategy = = = 
 Reitman heavily promoted Up in the Air with personal appearances at film festivals and other showings . He stated that he could relate to and enjoys the idea of Ryan Bingham 's lifestyle . " Yesterday [ October 28 , 2009 ] I took my 10th flight in 10 days so I live that life myself and I kinda enjoy it , " Reitman said , " I think when you 're in an airplane it 's the last refuge for the people who enjoy being alone and reading a book . " 
 Reitman documented his experiences promoting the film . He took photos of everyone who interviewed him and recorded videos in every city he visited . He edited these images into a short video titled Lost In The Air : The Jason Reitman Press Tour Simulator . 
 Up in the Air was screened as a " sneak preview " at the Telluride Film Festival on September 6 , 2009 , before its world premiere at the Toronto International Film Festival ( TIFF ) on September 12 . The film was initially not scheduled to be completed for another three months , but Reitman rushed production in order to maintain a streak of debuting his films at TIFF . 
 During October and November 2009 , Up in the Air screened at festivals including the Aspen Filmfest , the Woodstock Film Festival , the Hamptons International Film Festival , the Mill Valley Film Festival , the Austin Film Festival , the London Film Festival , the St. Louis International Film Festival , the Starz Denver Film Festival , and the Stockholm International Film Festival . It was the only American film to compete for the Golden Marc <unk> Audience Award for Best Film at the International Rome Film Festival . On November 6 , The New York Times film critic Janet Maslin interviewed Reitman and Kirn at the Jacob Burns Film Center following a screening of the film . 
 Following the positive response the film received at the Telluride Film Festival , Paramount intended to move Up in the Air from its original release date of December 4 , 2009 , planning for a November 13 limited release going wide before the Thanksgiving holiday . However , this schedule conflicted with the release of The Men Who Stare at Goats , another Clooney film . The film was eventually released on December 4 in fifteen theaters spanning twelve markets , broadening in the next week to 72 theaters and going into wide release on December 23 , 2009 . It was released in other countries beginning in early 2010 . 
 = = = = September 2009 = = = = 
 Up in the Air was shown at a sneak preview on September 5 , 2009 and September 6 , 2009 at the Telluride Film Festival . Reitman had fueled speculation that he would give a sneak preview at that festival . He posted pictures from Telluride on his Twitter account . Prior to the first showing , people waited two hours to get into Up in the Air and hundreds were turned away . 
 The world premiere for Up in the Air occurred at 2009 's Toronto International Film Festival ( TIFF ) which ran from September 10 to 19 , 2009 . The press showing was on Friday September 11 , 2009 . Public screenings were on September 12 , 13 , and 19 . Reitman originally did not plan to debut the film at TIFF , since it was not scheduled to be ready for another three months . He rushed production to keep his Toronto debut streak going . 
 The first clip of the film debuted on Apple Inc. website on September 8 , 2009 . The first trailer was available on iTunes on September 10 , 2009 and on September 18 , 2009 , it screened before the new movies The Informant ! and Love Happens . The second trailer became available on October 1 , 2009 . 
 = = = = October 2009 = = = = 
 Reitman received Aspen Film 's first New Directions Award and participated in a question and answer session following a screening of Up in the Air on Friday October 2 , 2009 at the Wheeler Opera House . The Aspen Film Festival ran from September 30 , 2009 through October 4 , 2009 . It was shown twice at the Tinker Street Cinema on the closing day of the Tenth Annual Woodstock Film Festival 2009 on October 4 , 2009 . Vera Farmiga and Lucy Liu participated in a question and answer session moderated by entertainment journalist Martha Frankel after the film and in the Sunday noontime <unk> Actor 's Dialogue panel . The 2009 Hamptons International Film Festival showed Up in the Air on October 10 , 2009 during its run at Long Island , New York 's east end from October 8 to October 12 , 2009 . 
 The Spotlight Tribute held during the 32nd edition of Mill Valley Film Festival hosted an interview with Reitman and a screening of Up in the Air on Wednesday October 14 , 2009 in the Smith Rafael Film Center , San Rafael , California . The Mill Valley Film Festival ran from October 8 to October 18 , 2009 . It was also shown four times at the 53rd London Film Festival which was held from October 14 – 19 , 2009 . Up in the Air was the only American film to compete for the Golden Marc <unk> Audience Award for Best Film at the fourth annual International Rome Film Festival which ran from October 15 through October 23 , 2009 . It was shown three times from October 17 to October 19 , 2009 . Reitman showed Up in the Air at <unk> in Orlando , Florida on October 26 and October 27 , 2009 , and asked for the movie theater owners and managers to support the picture as fervently as they did his film Juno two years earlier . Reitman also held a Q & A and pep talk with film students at the University of Central Florida . 
 The first St. Louis press screening happened on October 28 , 2009 at the Tivoli Theater . Up in the Air closed the Austin Film Festival on October 29 , 2009 at the Paramount . Reitman attended the screening . The Austin Film Festival ran from October 22 to October 29 , 2009 . The Palm Springs International Film Society showed Up in the Air on Thursday , October 29 , 2009 at the Regal Cinema in Palm Springs , California . Anna Kendrick was present at the showing . 
 = = = = November 2009 = = = = 
 Vera Farmiga and Anna Kendrick hosted a screening of Up in the Air at the Paris Theatre , New York City , New York on Thursday November 5 , 2009 . On November 6 , 2009 , the New York City Apple Store in SoHo hosted a conversation with director Jason Reitman . On November 6 , 2009 The New York Times critic Janet Maslin interviewed Reitman and Kirn during a Q & A session held at the Jacob Burns Film Center after a screening of Up in the Air . The question and answer session was followed by a reception in the Jane Peck Gallery . The Boston Sunday Night Film Club had a free screening on Sunday November 8 , 2009 , with a Q & A session with Reitman following the screening . 
 Up in the Air was the centerpiece for the 18th Annual St. Louis International Film Festival , which was held from November 12 to November 22 , 2009 . The film was shown November 14 , 2009 at the Tivoli Theater in University City , Missouri with Jason Reitman and Michael <unk> in attendance . Kevin Renick , the St. Louis musician who wrote the song Up in the Air , performed half an hour prior to the screening . Yukon Jake , who performed in the wedding scene in Up in the Air , provided entertainment during the party prior to the screening . The party took place at the St. Louis Ballpark Hilton and the Airport Hilton . Both are featured in the film . 
 On November 14 , 2009 , Paramount flew 50 members of the press to New York with Anna Kendrick , Sad Brad Smith and representatives of American Airlines to promote Up in the Air . The film was shown on the aircraft 's video monitors during the flight from New York to Los Angeles . American Airlines provided the Boeing 767 gratis . Smith performed a few songs including Help Yourself in the aisle of the aircraft . On November 18 , 2009 , Backstage and Paramount Pictures had a special screening of Up in the Air for Screen Actors Guild and Backstage members at The Paramount Theatre ( on the Paramount Lot ) , Los Angeles , California . The screening of the film was followed by a conversation with cast members Vera Farmiga and Anna Kendrick . The Starz Denver Film Festival closed on November 22 , 2009 with a screening of Up in the Air , with an introduction by J.K. Simmons , who was in town to accept the festival 's Cassavetes Award earlier that afternoon . The 20th Stockholm International Film Festival , which ran from November 18 to November 29 , 2009 , closed with a screening of Up in the Air on November 29 , 2009 . 
 = = = Box office performance = = = 
 Up in the Air was released in 15 theaters in the U.S. on December 4 , 2009 and ranked number 13 . It took in $ 1 @,@ 181 @,@ 450 , with an average of $ 78 @,@ 763 per theater . After three days it expanded to 72 theaters and took in $ 2 @,@ 394 @,@ 344 ( $ 33 @,@ 255 per theater ) , during the second weekend . During its third weekend , it broke into the top 10 as it widened to 175 theaters ahead of its nationwide expansion on December 23 , 2009 . It came in at number 8 with $ 3 @,@ 210 @,@ 132 – $ 18 @,@ 344 per theater . The film expanded to 1 @,@ 895 theaters on December 23 . It completed its domestic run on April 8 , 2010 , with a total domestic gross of $ 83 @,@ 823 @,@ 381 and a foreign total of $ 83 @,@ 019 @,@ 358 for a worldwide gross of $ 166 @,@ 842 @,@ 739 . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The film was released in both DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc formats on March 9 , 2010 , and sold 536 @,@ 441 units in its first week of release , worth $ 9 @,@ 114 @,@ 133 of consumer spending . To date the film has sold 1 @,@ 162 @,@ 509 home copies , equivalent to $ 18 @,@ 517 @,@ 122 of sales . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Up in the Air received critical acclaim , with Clooney 's performance receiving widespread praise , as well as Kendrick and Farmiga . Review aggregate Rotten Tomatoes reports that 91 % of critics have given the film a positive review based on 269 reviews , with a rating average of 8 @.@ 1 / 10 . The critical consensus reads , " Led by charismatic performances by its three leads , director Jason Reitman delivers a smart blend of humor and emotion with just enough edge for mainstream audiences . " On Metacritic , the film has a rating score of 83 out of 100 , based on 36 reviews , indicating " universal acclaim " . 
 The sneak preview of Up in the Air was the highest profile hit during the Telluride film festival . The film also tied for third place in the Toronto International Film Festival Indiewire poll . 
 Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times wrote , " Up in the Air makes it look easy . Not just in its casual and apparently effortless excellence , but in its ability to blend entertainment and insight , comedy and poignancy , even drama and reality , things that are difficult by themselves but a whole lot harder in combination . This film does all that and never seems to break a sweat . " Entertainment Weekly 's Owen Gleiberman agreed , rating the film an A as a " rare and sparkling gem of a movie , directed by Jason Reitman with the polish of a master . " 
 Claudia Puig of USA Today praised the film 's sense of timeliness , writing , " It 's tough to capture an era while it 's still happening , yet Up in the Air does so brilliantly , with wit and humanity ... Reitman emerges as a modern @-@ day Frank Capra , capturing the nation 's anxieties and culture of resilience . " Stephen Saito of <unk> wrote , " It touches on larger themes of mass unemployment , cultural alienation and technology as a crutch . But ultimately , it 's really an expertly done character study that 's a dramatic change of pace from director Jason Reitman 's previous two films . " Jonathan Romney of The Independent wrote , " Its cynical wit almost places it in the Billy Wilder bracket : Up In The Air is as eloquent about today 's executive culture as The Apartment was about that of 1960 . It is a brutal , desolate film – but also a superb existential rom @-@ com , and the most entertaining lesson in contemporary socio @-@ economics that you could hope for . " Roger Ebert gave the film four stars and wrote , " This isn 't a comedy . If it were , it would be hard to laugh in these last days of 2009 . Nor is it a tragedy . It 's an observant look at how a man does a job . " 
 Calling the film " a slickly engaging piece of lightweight existentialism , " Todd McCarthy wrote in Variety that " Clooney owns his role in the way first @-@ rate film stars can , so infusing the character with his own persona that everything he does seems natural and right . The timing in the Clooney @-@ Farmiga scenes is like splendid tennis . " The New York Times ' Manohla Dargis especially appreciated the film 's strong female roles , noting that " the ferocious Ms. Kendrick , her ponytail swinging like an ax , grabs every scene she 's in , " but wrote that the film " is an assertively , and unapologetically , tidy package , from its use of romance to instill some drama ... and the mope rock tunes that Mr. Reitman needlessly overuses . " 
 The Chicago Tribune 's Michael Phillips wrote , " Up in the Air is a slickly crafted disappointment . [ It ] feels tailor @-@ made for George Clooney , who is very good . But the stakes remain frustratingly low and it 's one of those contemporary middlebrow projects that asks us to root for a genial , shallow individual as he learns to be a little less the man he was . " Julian Sancton of Vanity Fair wrote , " There are two movies in Up in the Air : one about a guy who 's flying around the country firing people , and one about a commitment @-@ <unk> who 's flying away from responsibility and a shot at true love , as embodied by Farmiga . There is no attempt to braid these two threads together , and that 's where the movie feels unsatisfying . " J. Hoberman of The Village Voice wrote , " Like Juno , Up in the Air conjures a troubling reality and then wishes it away . The filmmakers have peeked into the abyss and averted their eyes ... [ the film ] warns that you can 't go home again – and then , full of false cheer and false consciousness , pretends you can . " 
 Shave Magazine 's Jake Tomlinson gave the film four out of five stars and wrote , " There is a very strong sense of humor as well as emotional depth , yet the scope of the film sometimes limits these sentiments . As a moviegoer , this film provides a satisfying experience where one can take a step back to ponder some of the finer points in our daily lives , but don 't expect to find all the answers here . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Up in the Air earned various awards and nominations , in categories ranging from recognition of the film itself to its screenplay , direction and editing , to the performance of the three primary actors – George Clooney , Vera Farmiga , and Anna Kendrick . The film received six Academy Award nominations and Farmiga and Kendrick both received nominations for Best Supporting Actress , although the film failed to win any of the awards . At the 63rd British Academy Film Awards , Up in the Air won one award – Best Adapted Screenplay , awarded to Reitman and Turner – out of the five for which it was nominated . The Dallas @-@ Fort Worth Film Critics Association named Up in the Air Best Picture and awarded Reitman Best Director and Best Screenplay with Turner , and Clooney was given the award for Best Actor . The film also received five nominations at the 67th Golden Globe Awards , with Reitman and Turner taking the award for Best Screenplay . Reitman and Turner also received recognition for the film 's screenplay from the Writers Guild of America , where they won the Best Adapted Screenplay award . 
 The film garnered five nominations from the Satellite Awards , with Rolfe Kent , the film 's score composer , winning the Best Original Score award . Clooney , Farmiga and Kendrick were each nominated for an award at the 16th Screen Actors Guild Awards , but ultimately lost out . Kendrick earned an MTV Movie Award for Best Breakthrough Performance and the Rising Star Award from Palm Springs International Film Festival for her role in the film . Up in the Air won Best Film from eleven awards ceremonies , including the Florida Film Critics Circle , Iowa Film Critics , Southeastern Film Critics , and Vancouver Film Critics Circle . The film earned four nominations for the Best Cast from the Broadcast Film Critics Association , Central Ohio Film Critics , Denver Film Critics Society , and the Washington D.C. Area Film Critics Association . At the Kansas City Film Critics Circle and the National Board of Review , Up in the Air won each of the awards for which it was nominated . Costume Designer Danny <unk> was nominated for his work by the Costume Designers Guild in the Contemporary Film category . In addition , the film was included on lists of the ten best films of 2009 by Roger Ebert , the American Film Institute , and The New York Times . 
 = Barry Cogan ( footballer ) = 
 Barry Christopher Cogan ( born 4 November 1984 ) is an Irish semi @-@ professional footballer who plays as a midfielder . He is currently a free agent having spent one season at Dartford . He started his career with Belvedere before moving to Millwall , for whom he played as a substitute in the 2004 FA Cup Final , and making 24 appearances for in the Football League . In August 2006 , Cogan signed for Barnet playing one season playing 39 appearances and scoring three goals in League Two , before being signed by Ronnie Jepson for Gillingham in June 2007 . He was loaned to Grays Athletic in March 2008 , scoring five goals in 13 Conference National appearances . Cogan signed for Grays permanently in July 2008 following his release from Gillingham . He then moved to Crawley Town in June 2009 , after Steve Evans had tried to sign him the previous season . Cogan left Crawley in November 2010 by mutual consent , joining Dover Athletic a few days later . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Club career = = = 
 = = = = Millwall = = = = 
 Born in Sligo , County Sligo , Cogan joined Millwall from Belvedere at 15 years of age , waiting four years , until 20 April 2004 , before making his debut in a Championship game against Watford , replacing Peter Sweeney in the 80th minute . Cogan signed his professional contract in November 2004 . Cogan remained at Millwall for two further seasons , making 30 appearances in all competitions , including playing in the 2004 FA Cup Final after coming on as a substitute , and two UEFA Cup games against Ferencvárosi TC . 
 = = = = Barnet = = = = 
 In August 2006 , Cogan was signed by League Two club Barnet from Millwall for an undisclosed fee . He remained there for just one season before he was released by manager Paul Fairclough . He made over 40 appearances in all competitions , scoring three goals , all in matches won by Barnet . 
 = = = = Gillingham = = = = 
 Cogan joined Gillingham in June 2007 , being tipped by new manager Ronnie Jepson to fill the void left by Matt Jarvis , who had joined Wolverhampton Wanderers . He made his debut for Gillingham in the 3 – 0 defeat at Watford in the League Cup on 14 August , and scored his first goal for the club in the 3 – 1 home victory over Leyton Orient on 2 October 2007 . Following a string of bad results , Jepson resigned , and Mark Stimson was named as his permanent replacement in November 2007 . Stimson saw Cogan as surplus to requirements , and offered him a chance to go out on loan in February 2008 . He rejected this initial chance , but subsequently joined Grays Athletic for a month on 14 March 2008 , scoring five goals in thirteen Conference National matches . Gillingham released Cogan at the end of the 2007 – 08 season , after he made just 21 appearances in all competitions . 
 = = = = Grays Athletic = = = = 
 In June 2008 , Grays Athletic announced that Cogan had signed for the club , following a medical examination to test his fitness , on a trial basis . His first goal of the 2008 – 09 campaign came in the home win against Kidderminster Harriers on 7 September 2008 , receiving a pass from Jamie Taylor on the right @-@ wing to make the score 3 – 1 . Cogan scored in the 47th minute of Grays ' 1 – 1 draw against Woking on 18 October . In October 2008 , Grays Athletic announced that players had been asked to take a 50 % pay cut due to financial difficulties . During the FA Cup Fourth Round Qualifying tie against AFC Totton , Cogan scored a penalty in the 85th minute after Phil Warner handled a cross from Ishmael Welsh . His next goal came almost two months later when he netted both goals in Grays ' 2 – 1 victory over Barrow at the New Recreation Ground on 20 December . His first goal of the game came after Barrow 's goalkeeper , Alan Martin , spilled a cross from Ishmael Welsh which Cogan pounced on from barely a yard out . In the 56th minute , Cogan had a shot from the edge of the penalty area after out muscling defenders Steve McNulty and Paul Jones . In Grays ' next match against Canvey Island in the Essex Senior Cup on 23 December , Cogan scored a late penalty in the 90th minute to equalise the game 2 – 2 and send the game into extra time . Grays Athletic eventually lost 3 – 2 after extra time . The club released news that the players were again being paid in full and over the " Christmas period and for January " . On 14 February 2009 , Grays travelled to face Wrexham at the Racecourse Ground . He scored to equalise the game at 1 – 1 after the Wrexham goalkeeper struggled with George Beavan 's initial shot whilst Cogan scored the rebound . He then set up Grays ' second , crossing the ball to Andy Pugh , who scored a consolation goal as Grays lost 3 – 2 . He then scored in Grays ' 2 – 1 home victory over Altrincham on 7 March . Cogan finished the season as Grays ' top goal scorer in all competitions . 
 = = = = Crawley Town = = = = 
 Crawley Town manager Steve Evans signed Cogan on 8 June following his release from Grays Athletic . Evans admitted he tried signing Cogan three times the previous season , but had his attempts rejected . Cogan had other offers , but Crawley assistant manager Paul Raynor stated that the club 's South London location appealed to him . He made his debut for Crawley on 8 August , in the 4 – 0 away defeat to Mansfield Town , replacing Daniel Powell as a substitute in the 52nd minute . Having made only three appearances in the 2010 – 11 season , Cogan was released by mutual consent on 16 November 2010 . Evans stated that Cogan wanted to " play some first team football " . 
 = = = = Dover Athletic = = = = 
 Cogan signed for Dover Athletic a few days after leaving Crawley , making his debut coming on as a substitute for Sam Long in the 2 – 1 home defeat against Woking in the FA Trophy on 20 November . 
 = = = = Dartford = = = = 
 In July 2015 , he signed for National League South side Dartford on a free transfer , following a successful trial with the club . He was released on 24 May 2016 following the end of the 2015 / 16 season having made 26 league appearances for the club scoring one goal against Bishop 's Stortford in a 2 @-@ 1 away victory on 24 October 2015 . 
 = = = International career = = = 
 Cogan was called up to the Republic of Ireland under @-@ 21 squad for the Madeira International Tournament , where he made his under @-@ 21 debut against Madeira on 27 February 2004 . 
 = D. B. Cooper = 
 D. B. Cooper is a media epithet popularly used to refer to an unidentified man who hijacked a Boeing 727 aircraft in the airspace between Portland , Oregon , and Seattle , Washington , on November 24 , 1971 , extorted $ 200 @,@ 000 in ransom ( equivalent to $ 1 @,@ 170 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) , and parachuted to an uncertain fate . Despite an extensive manhunt and protracted FBI investigation , the perpetrator has never been located or identified . 
 While FBI investigators stated from the beginning that Cooper probably did not survive his risky jump , they nevertheless pursued all credible leads , evidence , and witnesses over a 45 @-@ year period following the crime . As yet , no conclusive evidence has surfaced regarding Cooper 's true identity or whereabouts . ( The suspect purchased his airline ticket using the alias Dan Cooper , but because of a news media miscommunication he became known in popular lore as " D. B. Cooper " . ) 
 Numerous theories of widely varying plausibility have been proposed over the years by experts , reporters , and amateur enthusiasts . The discovery of a small cache of ransom bills in 1980 triggered renewed interest , but ultimately only deepened the mystery , and the great majority of the ransom remains unrecovered . The case remains the only unsolved air piracy in American aviation history . 
 The FBI officially suspended active investigation of the case in July 2016 , but continues to solicit submission of any physical evidence related to the parachutes or the ransom money that might emerge . 
 = = Hijacking = = 
 The incident began mid @-@ afternoon at Portland International Airport on Thanksgiving eve , November 24 , 1971 . A man carrying a black attaché case approached the flight counter of Northwest Orient Airlines . He identified himself as " Dan Cooper " and purchased a one @-@ way ticket on Flight 305 , a 30 @-@ minute trip to Seattle . 
 Cooper boarded the aircraft , a Boeing 727 @-@ 100 ( FAA registration <unk> ) , and took seat 18C ( 18E by one account , 15D by another ) in the rear of the passenger cabin . He lit a cigarette and ordered a bourbon and soda . Eyewitnesses on board recalled a man in his mid @-@ forties , between 5 feet 10 inches ( 1 @.@ 78 m ) and 6 feet 0 inches ( 1 @.@ 83 m ) tall . He wore a black lightweight raincoat , loafers , a dark suit , a neatly pressed white collared shirt , a black necktie , and a mother of pearl tie pin . 
 Flight 305 , approximately one @-@ third full , took off on schedule at 2 : 50 pm , local time ( PST ) . Cooper passed a note to Florence Schaffner , the flight attendant situated nearest to him in a jump seat attached to the aft stair door . Schaffner , assuming the note contained a lonely businessman 's phone number , dropped it unopened into her purse . Cooper leaned toward her and whispered , " Miss , you 'd better look at that note . I have a bomb . " 
 The note was printed in neat , all @-@ capital letters with a felt pen . Its exact wording is unknown , as Cooper later reclaimed it , but Schaffner recalled that it indicated he had a bomb in his briefcase , and wanted her to sit with him . Schaffner did as requested , then quietly asked to see the bomb . Cooper cracked open his briefcase long enough for her to glimpse eight red cylinders ( " four on top of four " ) attached to wires coated with red insulation , and a large cylindrical battery . After closing the briefcase , he dictated his demands : $ 200 @,@ 000 in " negotiable American currency " ; four parachutes ( two primary and two reserve ) ; and a fuel truck standing by in Seattle to refuel the aircraft upon arrival . Schaffner conveyed Cooper 's instructions to the cockpit ; when she returned , he was wearing dark sunglasses . 
 The pilot , William Scott , contacted Seattle @-@ Tacoma Airport air traffic control , which in turn informed local and federal authorities . The 36 other passengers were informed that their arrival in Seattle would be delayed because of a " minor mechanical difficulty " . Northwest Orient 's president , Donald <unk> , authorized payment of the ransom and ordered all employees to cooperate fully with the hijacker . The aircraft circled Puget Sound for approximately two hours to allow Seattle police and the FBI time to assemble Cooper 's parachutes and ransom money , and to mobilize emergency personnel . 
 Schaffner recalled that Cooper appeared familiar with the local terrain ; at one point he remarked , " Looks like Tacoma down there , " as the aircraft flew above it . He also mentioned , correctly , that McChord Air Force Base was only a 20 @-@ minute drive ( at that time ) from Seattle @-@ Tacoma Airport . Schaffner described him as calm , polite , and well @-@ spoken , not at all consistent with the stereotypes ( enraged , hardened criminals or " take @-@ me @-@ to @-@ Cuba " political dissidents ) popularly associated with air piracy at the time . Tina Mucklow , another flight attendant , agreed . " He wasn 't nervous , " she told investigators . " He seemed rather nice . He was never cruel or nasty . He was thoughtful and calm all the time . " He ordered a second bourbon and water , paid his drink tab ( and attempted to give Schaffner the change ) , and offered to request meals for the flight crew during the stop in Seattle . 
 FBI agents assembled the ransom money from several Seattle @-@ area banks — 10 @,@ 000 unmarked 20 @-@ dollar bills , many with serial numbers beginning with the letter " L " indicating issuance by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco , most carrying a " Series 1969 @-@ C " designation — and made a microfilm photograph of each of them . Cooper rejected the military @-@ issue parachutes offered by McChord AFB personnel , demanding instead civilian parachutes with manually operated <unk> . Seattle police obtained them from a local skydiving school . 
 = = = Passengers released = = = 
 At 5 : 24 pm Cooper was informed that his demands had been met , and at 5 : 39 pm the aircraft landed at Seattle @-@ Tacoma Airport . Cooper instructed Scott to taxi the jet to an isolated , brightly lit section of the tarmac and extinguish lights in the cabin to deter police snipers . Northwest Orient 's Seattle operations manager , Al Lee , approached the aircraft in street clothes ( to avoid the possibility that Cooper might mistake his airline uniform for that of a police officer ) and delivered the cash @-@ filled knapsack and parachutes to Mucklow via the aft stairs . Once the delivery was completed , Cooper permitted all passengers , Schaffner , and senior flight attendant Alice Hancock to leave the plane . 
 During refueling Cooper outlined his flight plan to the cockpit crew : a southeast course toward Mexico City at the minimum airspeed possible without stalling the aircraft — approximately 100 knots ( 190 km / h ; 120 mph ) — at a maximum 10 @,@ 000 foot ( 3 @,@ 000 m ) altitude . He further specified that the landing gear remain deployed in the takeoff / landing position , the wing flaps be lowered 15 degrees , and the cabin remain unpressurized . Copilot William Rataczak informed Cooper that the aircraft 's range was limited to approximately 1 @,@ 000 miles ( 1 @,@ 600 km ) under the specified flight configuration , which meant that a second refueling would be necessary before entering Mexico . Cooper and the crew discussed options and agreed on Reno , Nevada , as the refueling stop . Finally , Cooper directed that the plane take off with the rear exit door open and its staircase extended . Northwest 's home office objected , on grounds that it was unsafe to take off with the aft staircase deployed . Cooper countered that it was indeed safe , but he would not argue the point ; he would lower it himself once they were airborne . 
 An FAA official requested a face @-@ to @-@ face meeting with Cooper aboard the aircraft , which was denied . The refueling process was delayed because of a vapor lock in the fuel tanker truck 's pumping mechanism , and Cooper became suspicious ; but he allowed a replacement tanker truck to continue the refueling — and a third after the second ran dry . 
 = = = Back in the air = = = 
 At approximately 7 : 40 pm the 727 took off with only Cooper , pilot Scott , flight attendant Mucklow , copilot Rataczak , and flight engineer H. E. Anderson aboard . Two F @-@ 106 fighter aircraft scrambled from nearby McChord Air Force Base followed behind the airliner , one above it and one below , out of Cooper 's view . A Lockheed T @-@ 33 trainer , diverted from an unrelated Air National Guard mission , also shadowed the 727 until it ran low on fuel and turned back near the Oregon – California state line . 
 After takeoff , Cooper told Mucklow to join the rest of the crew in the cockpit and remain there with the door closed . As she complied , Mucklow observed Cooper tying something around his waist . At approximately 8 : 00 pm a warning light flashed in the cockpit , indicating that the aft airstair apparatus had been activated . The crew 's offer of assistance via the aircraft 's intercom system was curtly refused . The crew soon noticed a subjective change of air pressure , indicating that the aft door was open . 
 At approximately 8 : 13 pm the aircraft 's tail section sustained a sudden upward movement , significant enough to require trimming to bring the plane back to level flight . At approximately 10 : 15 pm Scott and Rataczak landed the 727 , with the aft airstair still deployed , at Reno Airport . FBI agents , state troopers , sheriff 's deputies , and Reno police surrounded the jet , as it had not yet been determined with certainty that Cooper was no longer aboard ; but an armed search quickly confirmed that he was gone . 
 = = Investigation = = 
 Aboard the airliner FBI agents recovered 66 unidentified latent fingerprints , Cooper 's black clip @-@ on tie and mother of pearl tie clip , and two of the four parachutes , one of which had been opened and two shroud lines cut from its canopy . Eyewitnesses in Portland , Seattle , and Reno , and all those who personally interacted with Cooper were interviewed . A series of composite sketches was developed . 
 Local police and FBI agents immediately began questioning possible suspects . One of the first was an Oregon man with a minor police record named D. B. Cooper , contacted by Portland police on the off @-@ chance that the hijacker had used his real name , or the same alias in a previous crime . His involvement was quickly ruled out ; but a wire service reporter ( Clyde <unk> of United Press International by most accounts , Joe Frazier of the Associated Press by others ) , rushing to meet an imminent deadline , confused the eliminated suspect 's name with the pseudonym used by the hijacker . The mistake was picked up and repeated by numerous other media sources , and the moniker " D. B. Cooper " became lodged in the public 's collective memory . 
 A precise search area was difficult to define , as even small differences in estimates of the aircraft 's speed , or the environmental conditions along the flight path ( which varied significantly by location and altitude ) , changed Cooper 's projected landing point considerably . An important variable was the length of time he remained in free fall before pulling his rip cord — if indeed he succeeded in opening a parachute at all . Neither of the Air Force fighter pilots saw anything exit the airliner , either visually or on radar , nor did they see a parachute open ; but at night , with extremely limited visibility and cloud cover obscuring any ground lighting below , an airborne human figure clad entirely in black clothing could easily have gone undetected . The T @-@ 33 pilots never made visual contact with the 727 at all . 
 An experimental re @-@ creation was conducted using the same aircraft hijacked by Cooper in the same flight configuration , piloted by Scott . FBI agents , pushing a 200 @-@ pound ( 91 kg ) sled out of the open airstair , were able to reproduce the upward motion of the tail section described by the flight crew at 8 : 13 pm . Based on this experiment , it was concluded that 8 : 13 pm was the most likely jump time . At that moment the aircraft was flying through a heavy rainstorm over the Lewis River in southwestern Washington . 
 Initial extrapolations placed Cooper 's landing zone within an area on the southernmost outreach of Mount St. Helens , a few miles southeast of Ariel , Washington , near Lake Merwin , an artificial lake formed by a dam on the Lewis River . Search efforts focused on Clark and Cowlitz Counties , encompassing the terrain immediately south and north , respectively , of the Lewis River in southwest Washington . FBI agents and Sheriff 's deputies from those counties searched large areas of the mountainous wilderness on foot and by helicopter . Door @-@ to @-@ door searches of local farmhouses were also carried out . Other search parties ran patrol boats along Lake Merwin and Yale Lake , the reservoir immediately to its east . No trace of Cooper , nor any of the equipment presumed to have left the aircraft with him , was found . 
 The FBI also coordinated an aerial search , using fixed @-@ wing aircraft and helicopters from the Oregon Army National Guard , along the entire flight path ( known as Victor 23 in standard aviation terminology but " Vector 23 " in most Cooper literature ) from Seattle to Reno . While numerous broken treetops and several pieces of plastic and other objects resembling parachute canopies were sighted and investigated , nothing relevant to the hijacking was found . 
 In early 1972 , shortly after the spring thaw , teams of FBI agents aided by some 200 Army soldiers from Fort Lewis , along with Air Force personnel , National Guard troops , and civilian volunteers , conducted another thorough ground search of Clark and Cowlitz Counties for eighteen days in March , and then an additional eighteen days in April . Electronic Explorations Company , a marine salvage firm , used a submarine to search the 200 @-@ foot ( 61 m ) depths of Lake Merwin . Two local women stumbled upon a skeleton in an abandoned structure in Clark County ; it was later identified as the remains of a female teenager who had been abducted and murdered several weeks before . Ultimately , the search operation — arguably the most extensive , and intensive , in U.S. history — uncovered no significant material evidence related to the hijacking . 
 = = = Later developments = = = 
 Subsequent analyses called the original landing zone estimate into question : Scott , who was flying the aircraft manually because of Cooper 's speed and altitude demands , later determined that his flight path was significantly farther east than initially assumed . Additional data from a variety of sources — in particular Continental Airlines pilot Tom Bohan , who was flying four minutes behind Flight 305 — indicated that the wind direction factored into drop zone calculations had been wrong , possibly by as much as 80 degrees . This and other supplemental data suggested that the actual drop zone was probably south @-@ southeast of the original estimate , in the drainage area of the Washougal River . 
 " I have to confess , " wrote retired FBI chief investigator Ralph Himmelsbach in his 1986 book , " if I [ were ] going to look for Cooper , I would head for the Washougal . " The Washougal Valley and its surroundings have been searched repeatedly by private individuals and groups in subsequent years ; to date , no discoveries directly traceable to the hijacking have been reported . 
