 = = = Search for ransom money = = = 
 In late 1971 the FBI distributed lists of the ransom serial numbers to financial institutions , casinos , race tracks , and other businesses routinely conducting significant cash transactions , and to law enforcement agencies around the world . Northwest Orient offered a reward of 15 percent of the recovered money , to a maximum of $ 25 @,@ 000 . In early 1972 U.S. Attorney General John Mitchell released the serial numbers to the general public . In 1972 two men used counterfeit 20 @-@ dollar bills printed with Cooper serial numbers to swindle $ 30 @,@ 000 from a Newsweek reporter named Karl Fleming in exchange for an interview with a man they falsely claimed was the hijacker . 
 In early 1973 , with the ransom money still missing , The Oregon Journal republished the serial numbers and offered $ 1 @,@ 000 to the first person to turn in a ransom bill to the newspaper or any FBI field office . In Seattle , the Post @-@ Intelligencer made a similar offer with a $ 5 @,@ 000 reward . The offers remained in effect until Thanksgiving 1974 , and though there were several near @-@ matches , no genuine bills were found . In 1975 Northwest Orient 's insurer , Global Indemnity Co . , complied with an order from the Minnesota Supreme Court and paid the airline 's $ 180 @,@ 000 claim on the ransom money . 
 = = = Statute of limitations = = = 
 In 1976 discussion arose over impending expiration of the statute of limitations on the hijacking . Most published legal analysis agreed that it would make little difference , as interpretation of the statute varies considerably from case to case and court to court , and a prosecutor could argue that Cooper had forfeited immunity on any of several valid technical grounds . The question was rendered moot in November when a Portland grand jury returned an indictment in absentia against " John Doe , aka Dan Cooper " for air piracy and violation of the Hobbs Act . The indictment formally initiated prosecution that can be continued , should the hijacker be apprehended , at any time in the future . 
 = = = Physical evidence = = = 
 In 1978 a placard containing instructions for lowering the aft stairs of a 727 was found by a deer hunter near a logging road about 13 miles ( 21 km ) east of Castle Rock , Washington , well north of Lake Merwin , but within the basic path of Flight 305 . 
 In February 1980 an eight @-@ year @-@ old boy named Brian Ingram , vacationing with his family on the Columbia River about 9 miles ( 14 km ) downstream from Vancouver , Washington , and 20 miles ( 32 km ) southwest of Ariel , uncovered three packets of the ransom cash , significantly disintegrated but still bundled in rubber bands , as he raked the sandy riverbank to build a campfire . FBI technicians confirmed that the money was indeed a portion of the ransom — two packets of 100 twenty @-@ dollar bills each , and a third packet of 90 , all arranged in the same order as when given to Cooper . 
 The discovery launched several new rounds of conjecture , and ultimately raised many more questions than it answered . Initial statements by investigators and scientific consultants were founded on the assumption that the bundled bills washed freely into the Columbia River from one of its many connecting tributaries . An Army Corps of Engineers hydrologist noted that the bills had disintegrated in a " rounded " fashion , and were matted together , indicating that they had been deposited by river action , as opposed to having been deliberately buried . If so , it confirmed that Cooper had not landed near Lake Merwin , nor in any other part of the Lewis River , which feeds into the Columbia well downstream from the discovery site ; and it lent credence to supplemental speculation ( see Later developments above ) placing the drop zone near the Washougal River , which merges with the Columbia upstream from the discovery site . 
 But the " free floating " hypothesis presented its own difficulties ; it did not explain the ten bills missing from one packet , nor was there a logical reason that the three packets would have remained together after separating from the rest of the money . Physical evidence was incompatible with geologic evidence : Himmelsbach observed that free @-@ floating bundles would have had to wash up on the bank " within a couple of years " of the hijacking ; otherwise the rubber bands would have long since deteriorated , an observation confirmed experimentally by the Cooper Research Team ( see Ongoing investigation below ) . Geologic evidence suggested , however , that the bills arrived at the area of their discovery — a beach front known as Tina ( or Tena ) Bar — well after 1974 , the year of a Corps of Engineers dredging operation on that stretch of the river . Geologist Leonard Palmer of Portland State University found two distinct layers of sand and sediment between the clay deposited on the river bank by the dredge and the sand layer in which the bills were buried , indicating that the bills arrived long after dredging had been completed . The Cooper Research Team later challenged Palmer 's conclusion , citing evidence that the clay layers were natural deposits . That finding , if true , favors an arrival time of less than one year after the event ( based on the rubber band experiment ) , but does not help to explain how the bundles got to Tina Bar , or from where they came . 
 Multiple alternative theories were advanced . Some surmised that the money had been found at a distant location by someone ( or possibly even a wild animal ) , carried to the river bank , and reburied there . There was also the possibility that the money had been found on the riverbank earlier , perhaps before the dredging , and buried in a superficial sand layer at a later time . The sheriff of Cowlitz County proposed that Cooper accidentally dropped a few bundles on the airstair , which then blew off the aircraft and fell into the Columbia River . One local newspaper editor theorized that Cooper , knowing he could never spend the money , dumped it in the river or buried it there ( and possibly elsewhere ) himself . No hypothesis offered to date satisfactorily explains all of the existing evidence . 
 In 1981 a human skull was unearthed along the same riverbank during excavations in search of additional evidence . Forensic pathologists eventually determined that it belonged to a woman , possibly of Native American ancestry . 
 In 1986 , after protracted negotiations , the recovered bills were divided equally between Ingram and Northwest Orient 's insurer ; the FBI retained 14 examples as evidence . Ingram sold fifteen of his bills at auction in 2008 for about $ 37 @,@ 000 . To date , none of the 9 @,@ 710 remaining bills have turned up anywhere in the world . Their serial numbers remain available online for public search . 
 In 1988 a portion of a parachute was raised from the bottom of the same stretch of the Columbia River , but FBI experts determined that it could not have been Cooper 's . In 2008 children unearthed another parachute near Amboy , Washington , about 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) due south of Lake Merwin , which proved to be of World War II @-@ era military origin . The Columbia River ransom money and the airstair instruction placard remain the only bona fide physical evidence from the hijacking ever found outside the aircraft . Some investigators have speculated that the 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens may have obliterated any remaining physical clues . 
 = = = Subsequent FBI disclosures = = = 
 In late 2007 , the FBI announced that a partial DNA profile had been obtained from three organic samples found on the hijacker 's clip @-@ on tie in 2001 , though they later acknowledged that there is no evidence that the hijacker was the source of the sample material . " The tie had two small DNA samples , and one large sample , " said Special Agent Fred <unk> . " It 's difficult to draw firm conclusions from these samples . " The Bureau also made public a file of previously unreleased evidence , including Cooper 's 1971 plane ticket from Portland to Seattle ( price : $ 18 @.@ 52 plus tax , total $ 20 @.@ 00 , paid in cash ) , and posted previously unreleased composite sketches and fact sheets , along with a request to the general public for information which might lead to Cooper 's positive identification . 
 They also disclosed that Cooper chose the older of the two primary parachutes supplied to him , rather than the technically superior professional sport parachute ; and that from the two reserve parachutes , he selected a " dummy " — an unusable unit with an inoperative ripcord intended for classroom demonstrations , although it had clear markings identifying it to any experienced skydiver as non @-@ functional . ( He cannibalized the other , functional reserve parachute , possibly using its shrouds to tie the money bag shut , and to secure the bag to his body as witnessed by Mucklow ) The FBI stressed that inclusion of the dummy reserve parachute , one of four obtained in haste from a Seattle skydiving school , was accidental . 
 In March 2009 , the FBI disclosed that Tom Kaye , a paleontologist from the Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture in Seattle , had assembled a team of " citizen sleuths " , including scientific illustrator Carol <unk> and metallurgist Alan Stone . The group , eventually known as the Cooper Research Team , <unk> important components of the case using GPS , satellite imagery , and other technologies unavailable in 1971 . While little new information was gained regarding the buried ransom money or Cooper 's landing zone , they were able to find and analyze hundreds of minute particles on Cooper 's tie using electron microscopy . Lycopodium spores ( likely from a pharmaceutical product ) were identified , as well as fragments of bismuth and aluminum . 
 In November 2011 , Kaye announced that particles of pure ( unalloyed ) titanium had also been found on the tie . He explained that titanium , which was much rarer in the 1970s than it is today , was at that time found only in metal fabrication or production facilities , or at chemical companies using it ( combined with aluminum ) to store extremely corrosive substances . The findings suggested that Cooper may have been a chemist or a metallurgist , or possibly an engineer or manager ( the only employees who wore ties in such facilities at that time ) in a metal or chemical manufacturing plant , or at a company that recovered scrap metal from those types of factories , he said . 
 In July 2016 , the FBI ended active investigation of the Cooper case , citing the need to focus on " more pressing priorities " , but stressed that their case file remains officially open . The bureau continues to solicit credible physical evidence related to the parachutes and the ransom money . 
 = = Theories and conjectures = = 
 In the years since the hijacking the FBI has periodically made public some of its working hypotheses and tentative conclusions about the case , drawn from witness testimony and the scarce physical evidence . 
 The official physical description remains unchanged and is considered reliable . Flight attendants Schaffner and Mucklow , who spent the most time with Cooper , were interviewed on the same night in separate cities , and gave nearly identical descriptions : 5 feet 10 inches ( 1 @.@ 78 m ) to 6 feet 0 inches ( 1 @.@ 83 m ) tall , 170 to 180 pounds ( 77 to 82 kg ) , mid @-@ 40s , with close @-@ set piercing brown eyes . Passengers and other eyewitnesses gave very similar descriptions . 
 Agents believe that Cooper was familiar with the Seattle area and may have been an Air Force veteran , based on testimony that he recognized the city of Tacoma from the air as the jet circled Puget Sound , and his accurate comment to Mucklow that McChord Air Force Base was approximately 20 minutes ' driving time from the Seattle @-@ Tacoma Airport — a detail most civilians would not know , or comment upon . His financial situation was very likely desperate , as extortionists and other criminals who steal large amounts of money nearly always do so , according to experts , because they need it urgently ; otherwise , the crime is not worth the considerable risk . ( A minority opinion is that Cooper was " a thrill seeker " who made the jump " just to prove it could be done . " ) 
 Agents theorize that he took his alias from a popular Belgian comic book series of the 1970s featuring the fictional hero Dan Cooper , a Royal Canadian Air Force test pilot who took part in numerous heroic adventures , including parachuting . ( One cover from the series , reproduced on the FBI web site , depicts test pilot Cooper skydiving in full paratrooper regalia . ) Because the Dan Cooper comics were never translated into English nor imported to the US , they speculate that he may have encountered them during a tour of duty in Europe . Tom Kaye 's Cooper Research Team ( see Ongoing investigation ) has suggested the alternative possibility that Cooper was Canadian , and found the comics in Canada , where they were also sold . They note his specific demand for " negotiable American currency " , a phrase seldom if ever used by American citizens ; since witnesses stated that Cooper had no distinguishable accent , Canada would be his most likely country of origin if he were not a US citizen . 
 The FBI task force believes that Cooper was a careful and shrewd planner . He demanded four parachutes to force the assumption that he might compel one or more hostages to jump with him , thus ensuring he would not be deliberately supplied with sabotaged equipment . He chose a 727 @-@ 100 aircraft because it was ideal for a bail @-@ out escape , due not only to its aft airstair , but also the high , <unk> placement of all three engines , which allowed a reasonably safe jump without risk of immediate incineration by jet exhaust . It had " single @-@ point fueling " capability , a recent innovation that allowed all tanks to be refueled rapidly through a single fuel port . It also had the ability ( unusual for a commercial jet airliner ) to remain in slow , low @-@ altitude flight without stalling ; and Cooper knew how to control its air speed and altitude without entering the cockpit , where he could have been overpowered by the three pilots . In addition , Cooper was familiar with important details , such as the appropriate flap setting of 15 degrees ( which was unique to that aircraft ) , and the typical refueling time . He knew that the aft airstair could be lowered during flight — a fact never disclosed to civilian flight crews , since there was no situation on a passenger flight that would make it necessary — and that its operation , by a single switch in the rear of the cabin , could not be overridden from the cockpit . He may even have known that the Central Intelligence Agency had been using 727s to drop agents and supplies behind enemy lines during the Vietnam War . 
 Cooper 's meticulous planning may also have extended to the timing of his operation , and even his choice of attire , according to Kaye 's research team . " The FBI searched but couldn 't find anyone who disappeared that weekend , " Kaye wrote , suggesting that the perpetrator may have simply returned to his normal occupation . " If you were planning on going ' back to work on Monday ' , then you would need as much time as possible to get out of the woods , find transportation and get home . The very best time for this is in front of a four @-@ day weekend , which is the timing Dan Cooper chose for his crime . " Furthermore , " if he was planning ahead , he knew he had to hitchhike out of the woods , and it is much easier to get picked up in a suit and tie than in old blue jeans . " 
 Despite his careful planning and attention to detail , the Bureau feels strongly that Cooper lacked crucial skydiving skills and experience . " We originally thought Cooper was an experienced jumper , perhaps even a paratrooper , " said Special Agent Larry Carr , leader of the investigative team from 2006 until its dissolution in 2016 . " We concluded after a few years this was simply not true . No experienced parachutist would have jumped in the pitch @-@ black night , in the rain , with a 200 @-@ mile @-@ an @-@ hour wind in his face , wearing loafers and a trench coat . It was simply too risky . He also missed that his reserve ' chute was only for training , and had been sewn shut — something a skilled skydiver would have checked . " He also failed to bring or request a helmet , chose to jump with the older and technically inferior of the two primary parachutes supplied to him , and jumped into a − 70 ° F ( − 57 ° C ) wind chill without proper protection against the extreme cold . 
 Assuming that Cooper was not a paratrooper , but was an Air Force veteran , Carr believes that he could have been an aircraft cargo loader . Such an assignment would have given him knowledge and experience in the aviation industry ; and loaders — because they throw cargo out of flying aircraft — wear emergency parachutes and receive rudimentary jump training . Such training would have given Cooper a working knowledge of parachutes — but " not necessarily sufficient knowledge to survive the jump he made . " 
 The Bureau has argued from the beginning that Cooper did not survive his jump . " Diving into the wilderness without a plan , without the right equipment , in such terrible conditions , he probably never even got his ' chute open , " said Carr . Even if he did land safely , agents contend , survival in the mountainous terrain would have been all but impossible without an accomplice at a predetermined landing point , which would have required a precisely timed jump — necessitating , in turn , cooperation from the flight crew . There is no evidence that Cooper had any such help from the crew , nor any clear idea where he was when he jumped into the stormy , overcast darkness . 
 = = Copycat hijackings = = 
 Cooper was not the first to attempt air piracy for personal gain . In early November 1971 , for example , a Canadian man named Paul Joseph Cini hijacked an Air Canada DC @-@ 8 over Montana , but was overpowered by the crew when he put down his shotgun to strap on the parachute he had brought with him . Cooper 's apparent success inspired a flurry of imitators , mostly during 1972 . Some notable examples : 
 Garrett Brock Trapnell hijacked a TWA airliner en route from Los Angeles to New York City in January . He demanded $ 306 @,@ 800 in cash , the release of Angela Davis , and an audience with President Richard Nixon . After the aircraft landed at Kennedy Airport he was shot and wounded by FBI agents , then arrested . 
 Richard Charles <unk> , an Army veteran and " New England beach bum " , boarded Hughes Airwest Flight 800 at McCarran airport in Las Vegas on January 20 . <unk> what he claimed was a bomb while the DC @-@ 9 was on the taxiway , he demanded $ 50 @,@ 000 , two parachutes , and a helmet . After releasing the passengers and two flight attendants he ordered the plane on an eastward trajectory toward Denver , then bailed out over the treeless plains of northeastern Colorado . Authorities , tracking the locator @-@ equipped parachute and his footprints in the snow and mud , apprehended him a few hours later . 
 Richard McCoy , Jr . , a former Army Green Beret , hijacked a United Airlines 727 @-@ 100 in April after it left Denver , Colorado , diverted it to San Francisco , then bailed out over Utah with $ 500 @,@ 000 in ransom money . He landed safely , but was arrested two days later . 
 Frederick <unk> used a handgun to hijack an Eastern Airlines 727 in Allentown , Pennsylvania , in May , demanded $ 303 @,@ 000 , and eventually parachuted into Honduras , his country of birth . A month later , with the FBI in pursuit and a $ 25 @,@ 000 bounty on his head , he surrendered to the American Embassy in Tegucigalpa . 
 Robb Dolin Heady , a paratrooper and Vietnam veteran , stormed a United Airlines 727 in Reno in early June , extorted $ 200 @,@ 000 and two parachutes , and jumped into darkness near Washoe Lake , about 25 miles ( 40 km ) south of Reno . Police found Heady 's car ( sporting a United States Parachute Association bumper sticker ) parked near the lake and arrested him as he returned to it the next morning . 
 Martin McNally , an unemployed service station attendant , used a submachine gun in late June to commandeer an American Airlines 727 en route from St. Louis to Tulsa , then diverted it eastward to Indiana and bailed out with $ 500 @,@ 000 in ransom . McNally lost the ransom money as he exited the aircraft , but landed safely near Peru , Indiana , and was apprehended a few days later in a Detroit suburb . 
 In all , 15 hijackings similar to Cooper 's — all unsuccessful — were attempted in 1972 . With the advent of universal luggage searches in 1973 ( see Airport security ) the general incidence of hijackings dropped precipitously . There were no further notable Cooper imitators until July 11 , 1980 , when Glenn K. Tripp seized Northwest flight 608 at Seattle @-@ Tacoma Airport , demanding $ 600 @,@ 000 ( $ 100 @,@ 000 by an independent account ) , two parachutes , and the assassination of his boss . After a ten @-@ hour standoff he was apprehended , but on January 21 , 1983 — while still on probation — he hijacked the same Northwest flight , this time en route , and demanded to be flown to Afghanistan . When the plane landed in Portland he was shot and killed by FBI agents . 
 = = Suspects = = 
 Since 1971 the FBI has processed over a thousand " serious suspects " along with assorted publicity seekers and deathbed confessors , most of whom have been definitively ruled out . Some notable examples : 
 = = = Kenneth Christiansen = = = 
 In 2003 a Minnesota resident named Lyle Christiansen , after watching a television documentary about the Cooper hijacking , became convinced that his late brother Kenneth was D. B. Cooper . After repeated futile attempts to convince first the FBI , and then the author and film director Nora Ephron ( who he hoped would make a movie about the case ) , he contacted a private investigator in New York City . In 2010 the detective , Skipp Porteous , published a book postulating that Christiansen was indeed the hijacker . In early 2011 an episode of the History series Brad Meltzer 's Decoded also summarized the circumstantial evidence linking Christiansen to the Cooper case . 
 Christiansen enlisted in the Army in 1944 and was trained as a paratrooper . The war had ended by the time he was deployed in 1945 , but he made occasional training jumps while stationed in Japan with occupation forces in the late 1940s . After leaving the Army he joined Northwest Orient in 1954 as a mechanic in the South Pacific , and subsequently became a flight attendant , and then a purser , based in Seattle . Christiansen was 45 years old at the time of the hijacking , but he was shorter ( 5 ft . 8 in . ) , thinner ( 150 pounds ) , and lighter <unk> than eyewitness descriptions . Christiansen smoked ( as did the hijacker ) , and displayed a particular fondness for bourbon ( Cooper 's preferred beverage ) . He was also left @-@ handed . ( Evidence photos of Cooper 's black tie show the tie clip applied from the left side , suggesting a left @-@ handed wearer . ) Flight attendant Florence Schaffner told a reporter that photos of Christiansen fit her memory of the hijacker 's appearance more closely than those of other suspects she had been shown . ( Tina Mucklow , who had the most contact with Cooper , has never granted a press interview . ) 
 Christiansen reportedly purchased a house with cash a few months after the hijacking . While dying of cancer in 1994 he told Lyle , " There is something you should know , but I cannot tell you . " Lyle said he never pressed his brother to explain . After Christiansen 's death family members discovered gold coins and a valuable stamp collection , along with over $ 200 @,@ 000 in bank accounts . They also found a folder of Northwest Orient news clippings which began about the time he was hired in the 1950s , and stopped just prior to the date of the hijacking , despite the fact that the hijacking was by far the most momentous news event in the airline 's history . Christiansen continued to work part @-@ time for the airline for many years after 1971 , but apparently never clipped another Northwest news story . 
 Despite the publicity generated by Porteous 's book and the 2011 television documentary , the FBI is standing by its position that Christiansen cannot be considered a prime suspect . They cite a poor match to eyewitness physical descriptions , a level of skydiving expertise above that predicted by their suspect profile , and an absence of direct incriminating evidence . 
 = = = William Gossett = = = 
 William Pratt Gossett was a Marine Corps , Army , and Army Air Force veteran who saw action in Korea and Vietnam . His military experience included advanced jump training and wilderness survival . After retiring from military service in 1973 he worked as an ROTC instructor , taught military law at Weber State University in Ogden , Utah , and hosted a radio talk show in Salt Lake City which featured discussions about the paranormal . He died in 2003 . 
 Gossett was widely known to be obsessed with the Cooper hijacking . He amassed a voluminous collection of Cooper @-@ related news articles , and told one of his wives that he knew enough about the case to " write the epitaph for D.B. Cooper " . Late in his life he reportedly told three of his sons , a retired Utah judge , and a friend in the Salt Lake City public defender 's office that he had committed the hijacking . Photos of Gossett taken circa 1971 bear a close resemblance to the most widely circulated Cooper composite drawing . 
 According to Galen Cook , a lawyer who has collected information related to Gossett for years , Gossett once showed his sons a key to a Vancouver , British Columbia safe deposit box which , he claimed , contained the long @-@ missing ransom money . Gossett 's eldest son , Greg , said that his father , a compulsive gambler who was always " strapped for cash " , showed him " wads of cash " just before Christmas 1971 , weeks after the Cooper hijacking . He speculated that Gossett gambled the money away in Las Vegas . 
 In 1988 Gossett changed his name to " Wolfgang " and became a Catholic priest , which Cook and others interpreted as an effort to disguise his identity . Other circumstantial evidence includes testimony that Cook claims to have obtained from William Mitchell , a passenger on the hijacked aircraft , regarding a mysterious " physical detail " ( which he will not divulge ) common to the hijacker and Gossett . Cook also claims to have found " possible links " to Gossett in each of four letters signed by " D.B. Cooper " and mailed to three newspapers within days after the hijacking , although there is no evidence that the actual hijacker created or mailed any of the letters . 
 The FBI has no direct evidence implicating Gossett , and cannot even reliably place him in the Pacific Northwest at the time of the hijacking . " There is not one link to the D.B. Cooper case , " said Special Agent Carr , " other than the statements [ Gossett ] made to someone . " 
 = = = Richard Floyd McCoy , Jr . = = = 
 McCoy was an Army veteran who served two tours of duty in Vietnam , first as a demolition expert , and later , with the Green Berets , as a helicopter pilot . After his military service he became a warrant officer in the Utah National Guard and an avid recreational skydiver , with aspirations , he said , of becoming a Utah State Trooper . 
 On April 7 , 1972 McCoy staged the best @-@ known of the so @-@ called " copycat " hijackings ( see above ) . He boarded United Airlines ' Flight 855 ( a Boeing 727 with aft stairs ) in Denver , and brandishing what later proved to be a paperweight resembling a hand grenade and an unloaded handgun , he demanded four parachutes and $ 500 @,@ 000 . After delivery of the money and parachutes at San Francisco International Airport , McCoy ordered the aircraft back into the sky and bailed out over Provo , Utah , leaving behind his handwritten hijacking instructions and his fingerprints on a magazine he had been reading . He was arrested on April 9 with the ransom cash in his possession , and after trial and conviction , received a 45 @-@ year sentence . Two years later he escaped from Lewisburg Federal Penitentiary with several accomplices by crashing a garbage truck through the main gate . Tracked down three months later in Virginia Beach , McCoy was killed in a shootout with FBI agents . 
 In their 1991 book , D.B. Cooper : The Real McCoy , parole officer Bernie Rhodes and former FBI agent Russell Calame asserted that they had identified McCoy as D.B. Cooper . They cited obvious similarities in the two hijackings , claims by McCoy 's family that the tie and mother @-@ of @-@ pearl tie clip left on the plane belonged to McCoy , and McCoy 's own refusal to admit or deny that he was Cooper . A principal proponent of their theory was the FBI agent who killed McCoy . " When I shot Richard McCoy , " he said , " I shot D. B. Cooper at the same time . " 
 While there is no reasonable doubt that McCoy committed the Denver hijacking , the FBI does not consider him a suspect in the Cooper case because of significant mismatches in his age ( 29 ) and description ; a level of skydiving skill well above that thought to be possessed by the hijacker ; and credible evidence that McCoy was in Las Vegas on the day of the Portland hijacking , and at home in Utah the day after , having Thanksgiving dinner with his family . 
 = = = Duane Weber = = = 
 Duane L. Weber was a World War II Army veteran who served time in at least six prisons from 1945 to 1968 for burglary and forgery . He was proposed as a suspect by his widow , based primarily on a deathbed confession : Three days before he died in 1995 , Weber told his wife , " I am Dan Cooper . " The name meant nothing to her , she said ; but months later , a friend told her of its significance in the hijacking . She went to her local library to research D.B. Cooper , found Max Gunther 's book , and discovered notations in the margins in her husband 's handwriting . 
 She then recalled , in retrospect , that Weber once had a nightmare during which he talked in his sleep about jumping from a plane , leaving his fingerprints on the " aft stairs " . He also reportedly told her that an old knee injury had been incurred by " jumping out of a plane " . Like the hijacker , Weber drank bourbon and chain smoked . Other circumstantial evidence included a 1979 trip to Seattle and the Columbia River , during which Weber took a walk alone along the river bank in the Tina Bar area ; four months later Brian Ingram made his ransom cash discovery in the same area . 
 The FBI eliminated Weber as an active suspect in July 1998 when his fingerprints did not match any of those processed in the hijacked plane , and no other direct evidence could be found to implicate him . Later , his DNA also failed to match the samples recovered from Cooper 's tie , though the Bureau has since conceded that they cannot be certain that the organic material on the tie came from Cooper . 
 = = = John List = = = 
 John Emil List was an accountant and World War II and Korean War veteran who murdered his wife , three teenage children , and 85 @-@ year @-@ old mother in Westfield , New Jersey fifteen days before the Cooper hijacking , withdrew $ 200 @,@ 000 from his mother 's bank account , and disappeared . He came to the attention of the Cooper task force due to the timing of his disappearance , multiple matches to the hijacker 's description , and the reasoning that " a fugitive accused of mass murder has nothing to lose . " After his capture in 1989 , List admitted to murdering his family , but denied any involvement in the Cooper hijacking . While his name continues to crop up in Cooper articles and documentaries , no substantive evidence implicates him , and the FBI no longer considers him a suspect . He died in prison in 2008 . 
 = = = Barbara Dayton = = = 
 Barbara Dayton , a recreational pilot and University of Washington librarian who was born Robert Dayton , served in the Merchant Marine in 1926 and then the Army during World War II . After discharge Dayton worked with explosives in the construction industry and aspired to a professional airline career , but could not obtain a commercial pilot 's license . 
 Dayton underwent gender reassignment surgery in 1969 and changed her name to Barbara . She claimed to have staged the Cooper hijacking two years later , disguised as a man , in order to " get back " at the airline industry and the FAA , whose insurmountable rules and conditions had prevented her from becoming an airline pilot . She said she hid the ransom money in a cistern near her landing point in Woodburn , a suburban area south of Portland , Oregon . Eventually she recanted her entire story , ostensibly after learning that she could still be charged with the hijacking . The FBI has never commented publicly on Dayton , who died in 2002 . 
 = = = Ted Mayfield = = = 
 Mayfield was an Army Special Forces veteran , pilot , competitive skydiver , and skydiving instructor who served time for negligent homicide after two of his students died when their parachutes failed to open . His criminal record also included armed robbery and transportation of stolen aircraft , and in 2010 he was sentenced to three years ' probation for flying a single @-@ engine plane , 26 years after permanent revocation of his pilot 's license . He was suggested repeatedly as a suspect early in the investigation , according to FBI Agent Ralph Himmelsbach , who knew Mayfield from a prior dispute at a local airport . He was ruled out , based partly on the fact that he called Himmelsbach less than two hours after Flight 305 landed in Reno to volunteer advice on standard skydiving practices and possible landing zones . 
 In 2006 two amateur researchers named Daniel Dvorak and Matthew Myers proposed him as a suspect once again , attracting coverage from a Portland television station and the syndicated program Inside Edition . They asserted that they had assembled a convincing circumstantial case that would be detailed in a forthcoming book . They theorized that Mayfield called Himmelsbach not to offer advice , but to establish an alibi ; and they challenged Himmelsbach 's conclusion that Mayfield could not possibly have found a phone in time to call the FBI less than four hours after jumping into the wilderness at night . Mayfield denied any involvement , and repeated a previous assertion that the FBI called him five times while the hijacking was still in progress to ask about parachutes , local skydivers , and skydiving techniques . ( Himmelsbach said the FBI never called Mayfield . ) Mayfield further charged that Dvorak and Myers asked him to play along with their theory , and " we 'll all make a lot of money " . ( Dvorak and Myers called any inference of collusion a " blatant lie " . ) 
 Dvorak died in 2007 , and the promised book was never published . The FBI offered no comment beyond Himmelsbach 's original statement that Mayfield , who died in 2015 , was ruled out as a suspect early on . 
 = = = Jack Coffelt = = = 
 Coffelt was a conman , ex @-@ convict , and purported government informant who claimed to have been the chauffeur and confidante of Abraham Lincoln 's last undisputed descendant , great @-@ grandson Robert Todd Lincoln Beckwith . In 1972 he began claiming he was D.B. Cooper , and attempted through an intermediary , a former cellmate named James Brown , to sell his story to a Hollywood production company . He said he landed near Mount Hood , about 50 miles ( 80 km ) southeast of Ariel , injuring himself and losing the ransom money in the process . Photos of Coffelt bear a resemblance to the composite drawings , although he was in his mid @-@ fifties in 1971 . He was reportedly in Portland on the day of the hijacking , and sustained leg injuries around that time which were consistent with a skydiving mishap . 
 Coffelt 's account was reviewed by the FBI , which concluded that it differed in significant details from information that had not been made public , and was therefore a fabrication . Brown , undeterred , continued peddling the story long after Coffelt died in 1975 . Multiple media venues , including the television news program 60 Minutes , considered and rejected it . In a 2008 book about Lincoln 's descendants , author Charles Lachman revisited Coffelt 's tale although it had been discredited 36 years before . 
 = = = Lynn Doyle Cooper = = = 
 L.D. Cooper , a leather worker and Korean War veteran , was proposed as a suspect in July 2011 by his niece , Marla Cooper . As an 8 @-@ year @-@ old , she recalled Cooper and another uncle planning something " very mischievous " , involving the use of " expensive walkie @-@ talkies " , at her grandmother 's house in Sisters , Oregon , 150 miles ( 240 km ) south of Portland . The next day flight 305 was hijacked ; and though the uncles ostensibly were turkey hunting , L.D. Cooper came home wearing a bloody shirt — the result , he said , of an auto accident . Later , she said , her parents came to believe that L.D. Cooper was the hijacker . She also recalled that her uncle , who died in 1999 , was obsessed with the Canadian comic book hero Dan Cooper ( see Theories and conjectures ) , and " had one of his comic books <unk> to his wall " — although he was not a skydiver or paratrooper . 
 In August New York magazine published an alternative witness sketch , reportedly based on a description by Flight 305 eyewitness Robert Gregory , depicting horn @-@ rimmed sunglasses , a " russet " <unk> suit jacket with wide lapels , and marcelled hair . The article notes that L.D. Cooper had wavy hair that looked marcelled ( as did Duane Weber ) . 
 On August 3 the FBI announced that no fingerprints had been found on a guitar strap made by L.D. Cooper . One week later they added that his DNA did not match the partial DNA profile obtained from the hijacker 's tie , but acknowledged , once again , that there is no certainty that the hijacker was the source of the organic material obtained from the tie . The Bureau has made no further public comment . 
 = = = Robert Rackstraw = = = 
 In 1978 , Robert Wesley Rackstraw , who grew up in Scotts Valley , California , was arrested on multiple charges , including check @-@ kiting , possession of explosives , and theft of an aircraft . A trained U.S. Army helicopter pilot who as a decorated Vietnam soldier , he was suspected and questioned by authorities , but was ultimately cleared . 
 In July 2016 , a TV special called D.B. Cooper : Case Closed ? aired on the History Channel , and postulated " D.B. Cooper " to be Rackstraw . A team of more than 40 ( many retired ) investigators , including former FBI agents , point to him as D.B. Cooper , citing his criminal history , skill set , and resemblance to the 1972 composite sketch . The case for Rackstraw 's involvement in the <unk> is detailed in Tom Colbert 's book , The Last Master Outlaw : How He <unk> the FBI Six Times But Not A Cold Case Team . However , key eyewitnesses to the hijacking — including Mucklow — were unable to corroborate the theory . 
 The FBI , citing a lack of prosecutable evidence , chose not to pursue further investigation of Rackstraw . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Airport security = = = 
 The Cooper hijacking marked the beginning of the end for unfettered and <unk> airline travel . Despite initiation of the federal Sky Marshal program the previous year , 31 hijackings were committed in U.S. airspace in 1972 , 19 of them for the specific purpose of extorting money . ( Most of the rest were attempts to reach Cuba . ) In 15 of the extortion cases the hijackers also demanded parachutes . In early 1973 the FAA began requiring airlines to search all passengers and their bags . Amid multiple lawsuits charging that such searches violated Fourth Amendment protections against search and seizure , federal courts ruled that they were acceptable when applied universally , and when limited to searches for weapons and explosives . In contrast to the 31 hijackings in 1972 , only two were attempted in 1973 , both by psychiatric patients , one of whom intended to crash the airliner into the White House to kill President Nixon . 
 = = = Aircraft modifications = = = 
 In the wake of multiple " copycat " hijackings in 1972 the FAA required that all Boeing 727 aircraft be fitted with a device , later dubbed the " Cooper vane " , that prevents lowering of the aft airstair during flight . Also mandated as a direct result of the hijacking was the installation of peepholes in all cockpit doors , making it possible for the cockpit crew to observe events in the passenger cabin with the cockpit door closed . 
 = = = Subsequent history of <unk> = = = 
 In 1978 the hijacked 727 @-@ 100 aircraft was sold by Northwest to Piedmont Airlines where it was reregistered <unk> and continued in domestic carrier service . In 1984 it was purchased by the now @-@ defunct charter company Key Airlines , reregistered <unk> , and incorporated into the Air Force 's civilian charter fleet that shuttled workers between Nellis Air Force Base and the Tonopah Test Range during the top @-@ secret F @-@ 117 Nighthawk development program . In 1996 the aircraft was scrapped for parts in a Memphis boneyard . 
 = = = Earl <unk> = = = 
 In late April 2013 Earl <unk> , the owner of the skydiving school that furnished the four parachutes given to Cooper , was found dead in his home in Woodinville , a suburb of Seattle . His death was ruled a homicide due to blunt @-@ force trauma to the head . The perpetrator remains unknown . Conspiracy theorists immediately began pointing out possible links to the Cooper case , but authorities responded that they have no reason to believe that any such link exists . Woodinville officials later announced that the most likely motive for the crime was burglary . 
 = = Cultural phenomena = = 
 While D.B. Cooper was an air pirate and extortionist ( Himmelsbach famously called him a " rotten sleazy crook " ) who endangered the lives of 42 people and caused immeasurable inconvenience for many others , his bold , adventurous , unprecedented crime inspired a cult following , expressed through song , film and literature . Cities in the Pacific Northwest sold tourist souvenirs and held celebrations in his memory . He is remembered in Ariel , Washington , with a " Cooper Day " event held annually on the weekend after Thanksgiving weekend , and elsewhere with Cooper @-@ themed promotions held by restaurants and bowling alleys . Cooper has also been used in the storylines of such popular TV series as Prison Break , NewsRadio , and Numb3rs , as well as a book titled The Vesuvius Prophecy , based on The 4400 TV series . 
 = Chaplain – Medic massacre = 
 The Chaplain – Medic massacre was a war crime that took place in the Korean War on July 16 , 1950 , on a mountain above the village of Tuman , South Korea . Thirty unarmed , critically wounded United States Army soldiers and an unarmed chaplain were murdered by members of the North Korean army during the Battle of Taejon . 
 Operating at the Kum River during the Battle of Taejon , troops of the U.S. Army 's 19th Infantry Regiment , 24th Infantry Division , were cut off from resupply by a roadblock established by North Korean troops of the NK 3rd Division . The roadblock proved difficult to break , and forced U.S. troops to move through nearby mountains to evacuate their wounded . 
 Thirty critically wounded U.S. troops were stranded at the top of a mountain . Attended to by only two non @-@ combatants , a chaplain and a medic , the wounded were discovered by a North Korean patrol . Though the medic was able to escape , the North Koreans executed the unarmed chaplain as he prayed over the wounded , then killed the rest of them . The massacre was one of several incidents that led U.S. commanders to establish a commission in July to look into war crimes during the war . The same month , the North Korean commanders , concerned about the way their soldiers were treating prisoners of war , laid out stricter guidelines for handling enemy captives . Other than this change , the historiography of the incident in North Korean sources is largely unknown ; as a result , sources detailing the incident are almost exclusively from the United States and other United Nations allies . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Outbreak of war = = = 
 Following the invasion of the Republic of Korea ( South Korea ) by its northern neighbor , the Democratic People 's Republic of Korea ( North Korea ) , the United Nations committed troops to the conflict to prevent the collapse of the South Korean state . However , the number of U.S. forces in the Far East available to support this effort had been steadily decreasing since the end of World War II , five years earlier . The closest U.S. division , the 24th Infantry Division of the Eighth United States Army , headquartered in Japan , was understrength , and most of its equipment was antiquated due to defense cutbacks enacted in the first Truman administration . Nevertheless , the 24th Infantry Division was the first US unit sent into Korea to absorb the initial " shock " of North Korean advances and to buy time for the deployment of additional forces , such as the 7th Infantry Division , 25th Infantry Division , 1st Cavalry Division , 1st Provisional Marine Brigade and other Eighth Army supporting units . 
 = = = Delaying action = = = 
 Advance elements of the 24th Infantry Division were badly defeated in the Battle of Osan on July 5 , during the first battle between American and North Korean forces . The force at the battle , Task Force Smith , retreated from Osan , and U.S. forces were again defeated in the Battle of Pyongtaek . For over a week after the defeat of Task Force Smith , 24th Infantry Division soldiers were repeatedly defeated and forced south by the North Korean force 's superior numbers and equipment . The regiments of the 24th Infantry Division were systematically pushed south at and around Chochiwon , Chonan , Pyongtaek , Hadong , and Yechon . These American soldiers , most of whom had experienced only occupation duty in Japan and no actual combat , were unprepared compared to the more disciplined North Korean units . 
 On July 12 , the division 's commander , Major General William F. Dean , ordered the division 's 19th , 21st , and 34th Infantry Regiments to cross the Kum River , destroying all bridges behind them , and to establish defensive positions around Taejon . Taejon was a major South Korean city 100 miles ( 160 km ) south of Seoul and 130 miles ( 210 km ) northwest of Pusan , and was the site of the 24th Infantry Division 's headquarters . Dean formed a line with the 34th Infantry and 19th Infantry facing east , and held the heavily battered 21st Infantry in reserve to the southeast . The Kum River wrapped north and west around the city , providing a defensive line 10 to 15 miles from the outskirts of Taejon , which is protected on the south by the <unk> Mountains . With major railroad lines and roads emanating in all directions , Taejon stood as a major transportation hub between Seoul and Taegu , giving it great strategic value for both the American and North Korean forces . Taejon had to be held to stop the North Korean forces from converging on the unfinished defensive lines around Pusan . 
 = = Massacre = = 
 = = = North Korean attack = = = 
 Following an initial penetration to the north , the retreating 34th Infantry moved south to <unk> . On July 15 , the 19th Infantry moved its 2nd Battalion to fill some of the gaps left by the 34th . There , it was reinforced by troops from the Republic of Korea Army . The combined forces observed a large build @-@ up of North Korean troops on the west side of the river . At 03 : 00 on July 16 , the North Koreans launched a massive barrage of tank , artillery and mortar fire on the 19th Infantry positions and North Korean troops began to cross the river in boats . The North Korean forces gathered on the west bank and assaulted the positions of the 1st Battalion 's C and E Companies , followed by a second landing against B Company . North Korean forces pushed against the entire battalion , threatening to overwhelm it . The regimental commander ordered all support troops and officers to the line and they were able to repulse the assault . However , in the melee , North Korean forces infiltrated their rear elements , attacking the reserve forces and blocking supply lines . Stretched thin , the 19th Infantry was unable to hold the line at the Kum River and simultaneously repel the North Korean forces . 
 = = = Roadblock = = = 
 North Korean troops promptly set up a roadblock directly behind the 19th Infantry 's line in its main route of supply along the road near the village of Tuman , just south of <unk> on Taejon 's western outskirts . The roadblock quickly became a serious problem for U.S. forces trying to move ammunition and wounded to and from the Kum River line . Around 13 : 00 on July 16 , the 19th Infantry Regimental commander contacted Dean , who ordered him to break the roadblock . However , North Korean troops had set up at least six machine @-@ gun nests above the road at Tuman , and repeated attacks against it were unable to drive the North Korean troops away . 
 The roadblock was preventing evacuation of the wounded . Troops attempted to drive wounded in jeeps through the roadblock , but this exposed them to machine @-@ gun fire . By 16 : 00 supply columns were also piling up at the block , unable to proceed as armor and airstrikes attempted to dislodge the North Koreans . Five hundred men from the regiment were gathered waiting to break the roadblock while heavy armor units from Taejon moved against it from the other side . During this time , U.S. troops from the 19th Infantry , desperate to move around the roadblock to obtain supplies and care for wounded , began moving through the surrounding hills . One tank was able to make it through the roadblock to evacuate the 19th Infantry 's wounded commander , but by 19 : 00 commanders ordered the regiment to move its wounded along the ridges to the east of the roadblock . 
 = = = Executions = = = 
 At 21 : 00 , about 100 men of the 19th Infantry moved into the hills to the east of the town . They carried with them about 30 wounded , including several litter @-@ bound patients too seriously wounded to walk . Some of the group of 100 were ordered to carry these men , but many of them separated from the group in the mountains . By the time they reached the top of the mountain , officers decided some of the seriously wounded could not be carried any further , as their carriers were exhausted . The regimental medical officer , Captain Linton J. Buttrey , and Chaplain Herman G. Felhoelter remained behind with the wounded , intending to move them when another group of troops came through who could carry them . Buttrey wore a Red Cross brassard identifying him as a medic , while Felhoelter wore a large white Latin cross brassard , identifying him as a military chaplain in the U.S. Army Chaplain Corps . The two who remained and the wounded were non @-@ combatants under international law , as they carried no weapons . 
 Soon after , Buttrey and Felhoelter heard a North Korean patrol approaching , a group of men from the North Korean 3rd Division which had infiltrated the U.S. lines . Felhoelter told Buttrey to escape , and although Buttrey was shot and severely wounded in the ankle by North Korean fire while running , he was able to get away . Felhoelter then began administering last rites and extreme unction to the wounded as they lay on their litters . From this point , observers from the 19th Infantry 's regimental Headquarters and Headquarters Company watched through binoculars from a distance as a patrol of young @-@ looking and possibly untrained North Korean troops approached the site of the wounded . The troops were armed with Soviet @-@ made rifles and PPSh @-@ 41 " burp guns " . As Felhoelter knelt to pray over the wounded U.S. soldiers , the North Korean troops shot him in the head and back . They then proceeded to shoot and kill all of the 30 critically wounded soldiers with their automatic weapons before withdrawing into the wilderness . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 American troops were able to recover the bodies of only three of the victims of the massacre due to the chaos of the battle and subsequent American withdrawal , and were unable to capture any North Korean troops who participated in the massacre . For his actions in volunteering to stay behind with the wounded , Herman G. Felhoelter was posthumously awarded the Distinguished Service Cross , the second highest decoration for valor awarded by the U.S. military . He was the first chaplain of the war to receive an award for valor . He received a brief obituary in Time Magazine in December 1952 . Felhoelter was the first of twelve chaplains killed or missing at that point in the war , including Emil J. <unk> , the second chaplain of the war to be awarded a Distinguished Service Cross . 
 = = = U.S. response = = = 
 The incident would be one of the first of a series of atrocities the U.S. forces accused North Korean soldiers of committing . After the Chaplain – Medic , Hill 303 and Bloody Gulch massacres , U.S. commanders established a commission on July 27 to investigate allegations of war crimes and collect evidence . 
 In late 1953 , the United States Senate Committee on Government Operations , led by Joseph McCarthy , conducted an investigation of up to 1 @,@ 800 reported incidents of war crimes allegedly committed throughout the Korean War . The Chaplain – Medic massacre was one of the first to be investigated , and it was here that the incident got its name . Buttrey , the lone survivor of the executions , was called to testify before the committee , and the U.S. Government concluded that the North Korean army violated the terms of the Geneva Convention , and condemned its actions . 
 In 1981 , the United States erected a series of monuments in Arlington National Cemetery in Arlington , Virginia , listing the names of chaplains killed in various wars including World War II , the Korean War and the Vietnam War . Felhoelter 's name was among those engraved in the memorial . 
 = = = North Korean response = = = 
 Generally subsequent research has found the North Korean command did not directly order its troops to mistreat prisoners or unarmed wounded during the early phase of the war . The Chaplain – Medic massacre and similar atrocities are believed to have been conducted by " uncontrolled small units , by vindictive individuals , or because of unfavorable and increasingly desperate situations confronting the captors . " The more North Korean troops suffered from worsening conditions on the front lines , the more they mistreated American wounded and prisoners . T. R. Fehrenbach , a military historian , wrote in his analysis of the event that North Korean troops committing these acts were probably accustomed to torture and execution of prisoners due to decades of rule by oppressive armies of the Empire of Japan up until World War II . 
 A July 28 , 1950 , order by General Lee Yong Ho , commander of the North Korean 3rd Division , was intercepted by UN intelligence . The document was signed by Kim Chaek , Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , and Choi Yong @-@ kun , commander of the Advanced General Headquarters of the North Korean Army , and stated that killing prisoners of war was " strictly prohibited . " Lee directed individual units ' Cultural Sections to inform the division 's troops of the rule . The higher @-@ profile Hill 303 massacre the next month prompted North Korean division commanders to issue sterner orders on the treatment of prisoners of war . 
 = The Wrestlers ( Etty ) = 
 The Wrestlers is an oil painting on millboard by English artist William Etty , painted around 1840 and currently in the York Art Gallery . It depicts a wrestling match between a black man and a white man , both glistening with sweat and under an intense light emphasising their curves and musculature . While little documentation of the painting exists prior to 1947 , it is likely that it was painted over a period of three evenings at the life class of the Royal Academy . 
 The Royal Academy had moved to new premises in Trafalgar Square in 1837 , and the studio used by the life class was cramped and hot , a fact thought to account for the <unk> of the central figures . Etty was best known for his painting of nude or near @-@ nude women in historical and mythological settings but had also painted men involved in various forms of combat . 
 In the period in which The Wrestlers was painted , sports were becoming increasingly popular , and the painting is both a reflection of this trend and a part of the English tradition of copying poses from classical Hellenistic works . It was also a time of change in the British attitude to race relations . Etty in this period was generally making a conscious effort to illustrate moral lessons in his work , and it is not clear whether he chose the topic as a form of social commentary or simply because the contrast between the black and white flesh tones was visually striking . 
 Although The Wrestlers was probably exhibited as part of a major retrospective of Etty 's work in 1849 , it then went into a private collection and was not publicly exhibited again for almost a century . In 1947 it was put on sale ; with little interest from commercial galleries owing to its subject , it was bought for the bargain price of 30 guineas by the York Art Gallery , where it remains . The painting formed a part of major exhibitions in 2002 and 2011 – 12 . 
 = = Background = = 
 William Etty ( 1787 – 1849 ) , the seventh son of a York baker and miller , had originally been an apprentice printer in Hull , but on completing his seven @-@ year apprenticeship in 1805 moved to London to become an artist . In January 1807 he was admitted to the Royal Academy Schools as a probationer , and in July of that year became a student of renowned portrait painter Thomas Lawrence , studying under him for a year . 
 Strongly influenced by the works of Titian and Rubens , Etty became famous for painting nude figures in biblical , literary and mythological settings . He became well @-@ respected for his ability to capture flesh tones accurately in painting , and for his fascination with contrasts in skin tones . Many of his peers greatly admired his work , and in February 1828 he defeated John Constable by 18 votes to five to become a full Royal Academician , at the time the highest honour available to an artist . 
 Between 1820 and 1829 Etty exhibited 15 paintings , of which 14 depicted nude figures . While some nude paintings by foreign artists existed in private collections in England , the country had no tradition of nude painting and the display and distribution of nude material to the public had been suppressed since the 1787 Proclamation for the Discouragement of Vice . 
 Etty was the first British artist to specialise in the nude , and the prurient reaction of the lower classes to these paintings caused concern throughout the 19th century . Although his portraits of male nudes were generally well received , many critics condemned his recurrent depictions of female nudity as indecent . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The Wrestlers is an oil study from life , depicting a black and a white wrestler grappling . Although at first glance the white wrestler appears to be dominant , the figures are in fact equally matched ; this was unusual for the time , as it was a common belief in Britain in this period that black people were physically weaker than whites . Showing the subjects under bright light , the painting is a combination of intense juxtapositions between intimacy and violence , dark and light skin , and hard and soft surfaces . The black wrestler is naked ; the white wrestler wears a loincloth , although it is possible that this was added after Etty 's death . The intense light casts deep shadows , emphasising the curves and musculature of the wrestlers ' bodies , as the skin of the two combatants is stretched and distorted under the pressure of the grapple . The figures are set against a dark green curtain and a brown wall , rather than in a wrestling ring . 
 The identity of the wrestlers is not known . Alison Smith , Lead Curator of British Art to 1900 at Tate , speculates that the white figure may have been John Wilton of Somerset , who had possibly been the model for Little John in Daniel Maclise 's 1839 Robin Hood and His Merry Men Entertaining Richard the Lionheart in Sherwood Forest . The figures glisten with sweat . Art historian Sarah Victoria Turner speculates that this is not simply for dramatic effect , but reflects the fact that after the Royal Academy 's 1837 move to its new building in Trafalgar Square the studio used by the life class was a cramped and poorly ventilated room lit by gaslight , which when crowded with students and with the lights on could become extremely hot . 
 The Wrestlers is thought to have been painted in around 1840 . It is likely that it was executed at the Royal Academy 's life class ; despite his senior status , Etty continued to attend there throughout his life . While students at the class usually worked from a single model , Etty would occasionally arrange for " a Treat " , in which a group of models would be used to create an entire composition for the students to sketch ( often arranged in poses derived from Old Master paintings ) . Painted on millboard , The Wrestlers was probably executed over the course of three evenings . On the first evening Etty would have drawn the models in chalk or charcoal and inked the outline ; on the second evening the figures would have been painted in oil paint , and on the third evening a thin glaze would have been applied to the painting to which colour would then have been added . 
 = = = Subject = = = 
 Although best known for his paintings of women , Etty had also produced paintings of nude or semi @-@ nude men engaged in combat , such as 1829 's Benaiah . There was a tendency among British artists in this period to attempt to illustrate the physiques of strong and well @-@ proportioned living men , as an indication that the best of British manhood had reached or surpassed the Hellenistic ideal which at that time was considered the model of perfection . Almost all artists , as part of their training , would be expected to draw from reproductions of classical statues in British museums , or to visit Italy and Greece to view the originals in situ . Etty , and other British artists of the day , would have been familiar with the technical issues of drawing men wrestling , as the Uffizi Wrestlers ( the <unk> ) was one of the subjects new entrants to the Royal Academy Schools were required to draw . Etty had also made lengthy visits to France and Italy in 1816 , 1822 – 24 and 1830 to view and sketch the paintings and statuary of those countries , with additional visits to Belgium in 1840 and 1841 to view the works of Rubens , whom he greatly admired . 
 Moreover , as the industrial revolution took hold and the prevalence of manual labour declined , there were increasing concerns that British men would become unfit and undisciplined ; images of sport and combat were thought to motivate the viewer to aspire to an ideal of physical strength which people were worried was becoming lost . Wrestling and boxing thus were popular subjects for artworks , and Etty had produced other paintings and sketches of men engaged in fights of one kind or another . It had become common for artists to use boxers and soldiers as models , as they had the strength and bearing considered desirable , and the discipline to hold a pose for long periods in the studio . 
 The motivation behind Etty 's choice to pair a black and a white wrestler is not clear . Etty had painted black and Indian subjects in the past , and it was not unusual in that period for artists to use non @-@ white models , but it was rare to show a black and a white figure embracing . It is possible that he was simply interested in the contrast between the flesh tones ; it is documented that he would sometimes arrange models of different skin colours for that reason . It is also possible that he saw " primitive " black men as closer in spirit or physique to the wrestlers of the classical civilisations . Sarah Victoria Turner argues that combat was the only subject in which it would have been felt appropriate at the time to depict naked black and white figures in intimate closeness . 
 1840 , the year in which The Wrestlers is likely to have been painted , saw the World Anti @-@ Slavery Convention in London and the London exhibition of The Slave Ship and The Slave Trade , and race relations had become a major social and political issue . While black wrestlers and boxers — often former slaves from the United States or their descendants — were not unusual in England in the period , and the former slave Tom <unk> had twice challenged for the boxing world championship in 1811 , they were still treated with suspicion by many members of the public . 
 = = Sale and exhibition = = 
 Virtually no contemporary records or reviews of The Wrestlers exist , and it was probably sold to a private collector either on its completion or in the sale of over 800 works found in Etty 's studio following his death ; Dennis Farr 's 1958 biography of Etty lists the painting exhibited in 1849 as " lent by C. W. Wass " . The Wrestlers was probably exhibited at the June 1849 Royal Society of Arts retrospective of over 130 works by Etty , shortly before his death on 13 November of that year . ( Etty produced three paintings entitled The Wrestlers , and it is not certain which was the one exhibited in 1849 , although it is thought likely to be this one . ) 
 Etty died in 1849 , and his work enjoyed a brief boom in popularity . Interest in him declined over time , and by the end of the 19th century the value of all his paintings had fallen below their original levels . Following his death , nude paintings went out of fashion very rapidly in Britain . 
 An old man , semi @-@ nude , is stepping forward while another man , seen from the back and of dark complexion , embraces his legs . The picture is in my opinion not only a genuine Etty , but very well painted indeed , and as the subject is quite unsuitable for the art trade , it may go at a very cheap figure . 
 The Wrestlers was sold by a private collector on 31 October 1947 . Owing to its subject matter there was little interest from commercial galleries , and it was bought by York Civic Trust for the bargain price of 30 guineas ( £ 31 @.@ 50 ; about £ 680 in 2016 terms ) . It was immediately presented to the York Art Gallery , where it remains . The painting was one of four works by Etty exhibited in Tate Britain 's 2002 exhibition Exposed : The Victorian Nude , and was a central component of a major retrospective of Etty 's work at the York Art Gallery in 2011 – 12 . 
 = Jetpac = 
 Jetpac is a 1983 shooter video game developed and published by Ultimate Play The Game and released for the ZX Spectrum and VIC @-@ 20 . It was later released for BBC Micro in 1984 . The game is the first instalment in the Jetman series , and is the first game to be released by the company , who were later known as Rare . The game follows Jetman as he must rebuild his rocket in order to explore different planets , whilst simultaneously defending himself from aliens . Jetpac has since been included in other Rare games such as an unlockable in Donkey Kong 64 and part of a compilation in Rare Replay . The game later spawned two sequels and a 2007 remake , Jetpac Refuelled , which was released for the Xbox Live Arcade service . 
 The game was written by Chris Stamper and graphics were designed by Tim Stamper . Jetpac was one of the very few Spectrum games also available in ROM format for use with the Interface 2 , allowing " instantaneous " loading of the game when the normal method of cassette loading took minutes . The game was met with critical acclaim upon release , with reviewers praising the game 's presentation and playability . It later won the " Game of the Year " title at the Golden Joystick Awards in 1983 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The game world is presented in a horizontal wraparound and consists of three platforms which Jetman can manoeuvre onto . Jetman must assemble his rocket ( which spawns in instalments scattered around the map ) , and then fill it with fuel before taking off to the next planet , where the procedure is broadly repeated . In addition , the player has to defend themselves from the planet 's aliens , and for bonus points collect valuable resources which occasionally fall from above . 
 After the first level , the rocket stays assembled and just requires refuelling . However , every four levels , the rocket resets ( giving the player an extra life ) and the replacement has to be built before it can be re @-@ fuelled for take off . Each new model has a new design with a higher number written on it , although the gameplay remains unchanged . The enemies change forms each level ( cycling back to the first after eight levels ) and each alien has a different pattern of movement which means they can be dealt with in a different manner . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 Ashby Computers and Graphics was founded by brothers Tim and Chris Stamper , along with Tim 's wife , Carol , from their headquarters in Ashby @-@ de @-@ la @-@ Zouch in 1982 . Under the trading name of Ultimate Play The Game , they began producing multiple video games for the ZX Spectrum throughout the early 1980s . The company were known for their reluctance to reveal details about their operations and upcoming projects . Little was known about their development process except that they used to work in " separate teams " ; one team would work on development whilst the other would concentrate on other aspects such as sound or graphics . Whilst developing Jetpac , the Stamper brothers closely studied the emerging Japanese video gaming market and had started to practice developing games for their upcoming Famicom console , later predicting that the ZX Spectrum had a limited lifespan . 
 Jetpac was one of the few Spectrum games also available in ROM format for use with the Interface 2 , allowing " instantaneous " loading of the game when the normal method of cassette loading took minutes . The game used the common technique of placing planar sprites with image sprites atop another , which often created overlapped colours on both ZX Spectrum and BBC Micro versions of the game . The game was also able to run on the 16K version of the Spectrum . 
 The game sold a total of 300 @,@ 000 units for the ZX Spectrum and generated £ 1 million in revenue for Ultimate Play The Game , which enabled the Stamper brothers to gain a foothold in the early video gaming market . After the game 's release , Jetpac was parodied in a long @-@ running Crash comic strip named Lunar Jetman . The strip , designed by John Richardson , lasted from July 1984 to October 1991 and gained popular reception from readers . To develop the comic , photographs had to be processed manually on a photo @-@ mechanical tone and then transferred to paper , later being fully colourised in the late 1980s . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game was critically acclaimed upon release . Crash praised the graphics and presentation , citing that they were of " the highest standard " and added that it was " difficult to find any real faults " with the game . CVG similarly praised the graphics , stating that the presentation was " superb " and the gameplay was considered addictive . In a retrospective review , Chris Wilkins of Eurogamer noted that the colourful graphics and sound effects were advanced for the time , but what truly made for a " faultless " experience was its simple gameplay . 
 ZX Computing praised the game 's playability and replay @-@ value , stating that Jetpac was " a very well put together piece of software " . The game was number one in the first Spectrum sales chart published by CVG . The ZX Spectrum version was voted number 73 in the Your Sinclair Readers ' Top 100 Games of All Time in 1993 and was voted the 14th best game of all time by the readers of Retro Gamer for an article that was scheduled to be in a special Your Sinclair tribute issue . The game won the title " Game of the Year " at the 1983 Golden Joystick Awards . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Jetpac 's popularity further spawned two sequels , Lunar Jetman ( 1983 ) and Solar Jetman : Hunt for the Golden Warpship ( 1990 ) . The latter , however , was not released for the ZX Spectrum due to disappointing sales of the original NES version , although a version for the Commodore 64 was finished but never released . 
 Since its release , Jetpac has been included in other games developed by Rare . The game is playable in Donkey Kong 64 , where it could be unlocked to play in Cranky Kong 's laboratory after obtaining 15 Banana Medals . Beating Cranky Kong 's high score rewards the player with the Rareware Coin , which is necessary to beat the game . The game was retained in the April 2015 Virtual Console re @-@ release of Donkey Kong 64 on the Wii U , despite it being technically owned by Microsoft . An enhanced remake of Jetpac , entitled Jetpac Refuelled , was released on the Xbox Live Arcade in March 2007 . Microsoft 's E3 2015 press conference unveiled the compilation title Rare Replay , which has a selection of thirty games from Rare 's lifetime game library , including Jetpac and its sequels and remake . 
 = Puri = 
 Puri ( listen ) ( Odia : <unk> ) is a city and a municipality in the state of Odisha in eastern India . It is the district headquarters of Puri district and is situated on the Bay of Bengal , 60 kilometres ( 37 mi ) south of the state capital of Bhubaneswar . It is also known as Jagannath Puri after the 12th @-@ century Jagannath Temple located in the city . It is one of the original Char Dham pilgrimage sites for Hindus . 
 Puri is known by several names since the ancient times , and was locally known as " <unk> " and Lord Jagannath temple is known as " <unk> " . Puri and the Jagannath Temple were invaded 18 times by Hindu and Muslim rulers , from the 4th century AD till the early 19th century with the objective of looting the treasures of the temple . Odisha , including Puri and its temple , were under the British Raj from 1803 till India attained independence in August 1947 . Even though princely states do not exist in India today the heirs of the Gajapati Dynasty of Khurda still perform the ritual duties of the temple . The temple town has many Hindu religious maths or monasteries . 
 The economy of Puri town is dependent on the religious importance of the Jagannath Temple to the extent of nearly 80 percent . The 24 festivals , including 13 major ones , held every year in the temple complex contribute to the economy ; Ratha Yatra and its related festivals are the most important which are attended by millions of people every year . Sand art and <unk> art are some of the important crafts of the city . 
 Puri has been chosen as one of the heritage cities for Heritage City Development and Augmentation Yojana ( HRIDAY ) scheme of Government of India . 
 = = Geography and climate = = 
 = = = Geography = = = 
 Puri , located on the east coast of India on the Bay of Bengal , is in the centre of the Puri district . It is delimited by the Bay of Bengal on the southeast , the Mauza <unk> on the west , Mauza <unk> in the north and Mauza <unk> in the east . It is within the 67 kilometres ( 42 mi ) coastal stretch of sandy beaches that extends between <unk> Lake and the south of Puri city . However , the administrative jurisdiction of the Puri Municipality extends over an area of 16 @.@ 3268 square kilometres ( 6 @.@ <unk> sq mi ) spread over 30 wards , which includes a shore line of 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) . 
 Puri is in the coastal delta of the Mahanadi River on the shores of the Bay of Bengal . In the ancient days it was near to <unk> ( also known as " Ashokan <unk> " ) . Then the land was drained by a tributary of the Bhargavi River , a branch of the Mahanadi River . This branch underwent a meandering course creating many arteries altering the estuary , and formed many sand hills . These sand hills could not be cut through by the streams . Because of the sand hills , the Bhargavi River , flowing to the south of Puri , moved away towards the <unk> Lake . This shift also resulted in the creation of two lagoons , known as Sar and <unk> , on the eastern and northern parts of Puri respectively . Sar lagoon has a length of 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) in an east @-@ west direction and a width of 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) in north @-@ south direction . The estuary of the Bhargavi River has a shallow depth of just 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) and the process of siltation continues . According to a 15th @-@ century Odia writer <unk> , the bed of the unnamed stream that flowed at the base of the Blue Mountain or <unk> was filled up . <unk> , a 16th @-@ century chronicle ( <unk> ) , attributes filling up of the bed of the river which flowed through the present Grand Road , as done during the reign of King Narasimha II ( 1278 – 1308 ) of Eastern Ganga dynasty . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 According to the Köppen – Geiger climate classification system the climate of Puri is classified as Aw ( Tropical savanna climate ) . The city has moderate and tropical climate . Humidity is fairly high throughout the year . The temperature during summer touches a maximum of 36 ° C ( 97 ° F ) and during winter it is 17 ° C ( 63 ° F ) . The average annual rainfall is 1 @,@ 337 millimetres ( 52 @.@ 6 in ) and the average annual temperature is 26 @.@ 9 ° C ( 80 @.@ 4 ° F ) . The weather data is given in the following table . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Names in history = = = 
 Puri , the holy land of Lord Jagannatha , also known by the popular vernacular name <unk> , has many ancient names in the Hindu scriptures such as the Rigveda , Matsya purana , Brahma Purana , Narada Purana , Padma Purana , Skanda Purana , Kapila Purana and <unk> . In the Rigveda , in particular , it is mentioned as a place called <unk> @-@ grama meaning the place where the Creator deity of the world – Supreme Divinity deified on an altar or mandapa was venerated near the coast and prayers offered with Vedic hymns . Over time the name got changed to Purushottama Puri and further shortened to Puri , and the Purusha came to be known as Jagannatha . Sages like Bhrigu , Atri and Markandeya had their hermitage close to this place . Its name is mentioned , conforming to the deity worshipped , as <unk> , Purusottama <unk> , Purusottama Kshetra , Purusottama Puri and Jagannath Puri . Puri , however , is the popular usage . It is also known by the geographical features of its location as <unk> ( the layout of the town is in the form of a conch shell ) , <unk> ( " Blue mountain " a terminology used to name a very large sand lagoon over which the temple was built but this name is not in vogue ) , <unk> , <unk> . In Sanskrit , the word " Puri " means town or city , and is cognate with polis in Greek . 
 Another ancient name is Charita as identified by General Alexander Cunningham of the Archaeological Survey of India , which was later spelled as Che @-@ li @-@ ta @-@ lo by Chinese traveller Hiuen Tsang . When the present temple was built by the Eastern Ganga king <unk> <unk> in the 11th and 12th centuries AD , it was called <unk> . However , the <unk> , the Marathas and early British rulers called it Purushottama @-@ <unk> or just <unk> . In Moghul ruler Akbar 's Ain @-@ i @-@ Akbari and subsequent Muslim historical records it was known as Purushottama . In the Sanskrit drama <unk> Raghava Nataka as well , authored by Murari Mishra , a playwright , in the 8th century AD , it is referred to as Purushottama . It was only after the 12th century AD that Puri came to be known by the shortened form of Jagannatha Puri , named after the deity or in a short form as Puri . It is the only shrine in India , where Radha , along with Lakshmi , Saraswati , Durga , Bhudevi , Sati , Parvati , and Shakti , abodes with Krishna , who is also known by the name Jagannath . 
 = = = Ancient period = = = 
 According to the chronicle <unk> Panji , in 318 AD , the priests and servitors of the temple spirited away the idols to escape the wrath of the Rashtrakuta king <unk> . In the temple 's historical records it finds mention in the Brahma Purana and Skanda Purana stating that the temple was built by the king <unk> , <unk> . 
 S. N. Sadasivan , a historian , in his book A Social History of India quotes William Joseph Wilkins , author of the book Hindu Mythology , Vedic and <unk> as stating that in Puri , Buddhism was once a well established practice but later Buddhists were persecuted and Brahmanism became the order of the religious practice in the town ; the Buddha deity is now worshipped by the Hindus as Jagannatha . It is also said by Wilkinson that some relics of Buddha were placed inside the idol of Jagannath which the Brahmins claimed were the bones of Lord Krishna . Even during Maurya king Ashoka 's reign in 240 BC , Kalinga was a Buddhist center and that a tribe known as <unk> ( barbarians from outside Odisha ) converted to Buddhism and built a temple with an idol of Buddha which is now worshipped as Jagannatha . Wilkinson also says that the <unk> deposited some Buddha relics in the precincts of the temple . 
 Construction of the Jagannatha Temple started in 1136 AD and completed towards the latter part of the 12th century . The Eastern Ganga king <unk> III dedicated his kingdom to Lord Jagannatha , then known as the Purushottam @-@ Jagannatha , and resolved that from then on he and his descendants would rule under " divine order as Jagannatha 's sons and vassals " . Even though princely states do not exist in India today , the heirs of the Gajapati dynasty of Khurda still perform the ritual duties of the temple ; the king formally sweeps the road in front of the chariots before the start of the Ratha Yatra . 
 = = = Medieval and early modern periods = = = 
 The history of Puri is on the same lines as that of the Jagannath Temple , which was invaded 18 times during its history to plunder the treasures of the temple , rather than for religious reasons . The first invasion occurred in the 8th century AD by <unk> king Govinda @-@ III ( 798 – 814 AD ) , and the last took place in 1881 AD by the monotheistic followers of <unk> ( Mahima Dharma ) who did not recognise the worship of Jagannatha . From 1205 AD onward there were many invasions of the city and its temple by Muslims of Afghan and Moghul descent , known as Yavanas or foreigners . In most of these invasions the idols were taken to safe places by the priests and the servitors of the temple . Destruction of the temple was prevented by timely resistance or surrender by the kings of the region . However , the treasures of the temple were repeatedly looted . The table lists all the 18 invasions along with the status of the three images of the temple , the triad of Jagannath , Balabhadra and Subhadra following each invasion . 
 Puri is the site of the Govardhana Matha , one of the four cardinal institutions established by Adi Shankaracharya , when he visited Puri in 810 AD , and since then it has become an important <unk> ( divine centre ) for the Hindus ; the others being those at Sringeri , Dwarka and Jyotirmath . The Matha ( monastery of various Hindu sects ) is headed by <unk> <unk> . It is a local belief about these <unk> that Lord Vishnu takes his dinner at Puri , has his bath at Rameshwaram , spends the night at Dwarka and does penance at Badrinath . 
 In the 16th century , Chaitanya Mahaprabhu of Bengal established the Bhakti movements of India , now known by the name the Hare Krishna movement . He spent many years as a devotee of Jagannatha at Puri ; he is said to have merged with the deity . There is also a matha of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu here . 
 In the 17th century , for the sailors sailing on the east coast of India , the temple served as a landmark , being located in a plaza in the centre of the city , which they called the " White Pagoda " while the Konark Sun Temple , 60 kilometres ( 37 mi ) away to the east of Puri , was known as the " Black Pagoda " . 
 The iconic representation of the images in the Jagannatha temple is believed to be the forms derived from the worship made by the tribal groups of <unk> belonging to northern Odisha . These images are replaced at regular intervals as the wood deteriorates . This replacement is a special event carried out ritualistically by special group of carpenters . 
 The city has many other <unk> as well . The Emar Matha was founded by the Tamil Vaishnava saint Ramanujacharya in the 12th century AD . This Matha , which is now located in front of <unk> across the eastern corner of the Jagannath Temple , is reported to have been built in the 16th century during the reign of kings of <unk> <unk> . The Matha was in the news on 25 February 2011 for the large cache of 522 silver slabs unearthed from a closed chamber . 
 The British conquered Orissa in 1803 , and , recognising the importance of the Jagannatha Temple in the life of the people of the state , they initially appointed an official to look after the temple 's affairs and later declared the temple as part of a district . 
 = = = Modern history = = = 
 In 1906 , Sri Yukteswar , an exponent of Kriya Yoga and a resident of Puri , established an ashram , a spiritual training center , named " <unk> " in Puri . He died on 9 March 1936 and his body is buried in the garden of the ashram . 
 The city is the site of the former summer residence of British Raj , the Raj Bhavan , built in 1913 – 14 during the era of governors . 
 For the people of Puri , Lord Jagannatha , visualized as Lord Krishna , is synonymous with their city . They believe that Lord Jagannatha looks after the welfare of the state . However , after the partial collapse of the Jagannatha Temple ( in the <unk> part of the temple ) on 14 June 1990 , people became apprehensive and considered it a bad omen for Odisha . The replacement of the fallen stone by another of the same size and weight ( 7 tonnes ( 7 @.@ 7 tons ) ) , that could be done only in the early morning hours after the temple gates were opened , was done on 28 February 1991 . 
 Puri has been chosen as one of the heritage cities for the Heritage City Development and Augmentation Yojana scheme of the Indian Government . It is chosen as one of the 12 heritage cities with " focus on holistic development " to be implemented within 27 months by the end of March 2017 . 
 Non @-@ Hindus are not permitted to enter the shrines but are allowed to view the temple and the proceedings from the roof of the Raghunandan library , located within the precincts of the temple , for a small donation . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 According to the 2011 Census of India , Puri is an urban agglomeration governed by the Municipal Corporation in Odisha state , with a population of 201 @,@ 026 This rose to 200 @,@ 564 in 2011 – comprising 104 @,@ 086 males , 96 @,@ 478 females , and 18 @,@ 471 children ( under six years of age ) . The sex ratio is 927 . The average literacy rate in the city is 88 @.@ 03 percent ( 91 @.@ 38 percent for males and 84 @.@ 43 percent for females ) . 
 = = Economy = = 
 The economy of Puri is dependent on tourism to the extent of about 80 percent . The temple is the focal point of the city and provides employment to the people of the town . Agricultural production of rice , ghee , vegetables and so forth of the region meet the large requirements of the temple . Many settlements around the town exclusively cater to the other religious requirements of the temple . The temple administration employs 6 @,@ 000 men to perform the rituals . The temple also provides economic sustenance to 20 @,@ 000 people . According to Colleen Taylor Sen an author on food and travel , writing on the food culture of India , the temple kitchen has 400 cooks serving food to as many as 100 @,@ 000 people , . According to J Mohapatra , Director , Ind <unk> Power Infra Ltd ( <unk> ) , the kitchen is known as " a largest and biggest kitchen of the world . " 
 = = City management and governance = = 
 The Puri Municipality , Puri Konark Development Authority , Public Health Engineering Organisation and Orissa Water Supply Sewerage Board are some of the principal organisations that are devolved with the responsibility of providing for civic amenities such as water supply , sewerage , waste management , street lighting and infrastructure of roads . The major activity , which puts maximum pressure on these organisations , is the annual event of the Ratha Yatra held during <unk> July . According to the Puri Municipality more than a million people attend this event . Hence , development activities such as infrastructure and amenities to the pilgrims , apart from security , gets priority attention . 
 The civic administration of Puri is the responsibility of the Puri Municipality . The municipality came into existence in 1864 in the name of the Puri Improvement Trust , which was converted into Puri Municipality in 1881 . After India 's independence in 1947 , the Orissa Municipal Act ( 1950 ) was promulgated entrusting the administration of the city to the Puri Municipality . This body is represented by elected representatives with a Chairperson and councilors representing the 30 wards within the municipal limits . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 = = = Jagannatha Temple at Puri = = = 
 The Jagannatha Temple at Puri is one of the major Hindu temples built in the Kalinga style of architecture . The temple tower , with a spire , rises to a height of 58 metres ( 190 ft ) , and a flag is unfurled above it , fixed over a wheel ( chakra ) . 
 The temple is built on an elevated platform ( of about 420 @,@ 000 square feet ( 39 @,@ 000 m2 ) area ) , 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) above the adjacent area . The temple rises to a height of 214 feet ( 65 m ) above the road level . The temple complex covers an area of 10 @.@ 7 acres ( 4 @.@ 3 ha ) . There are four entry gates in four cardinal directions of the temple , each gate located at the central part of the walls . These gates are : the eastern gate called the Singhadwara ( Lions Gate ) , the southern gate known as <unk> Dwara ( Horse Gate ) , the western gate called the <unk> Dwara ( Tigers Gate ) or the <unk> Gate , and the northern gate called the Hathi Dwara or ( elephant gate ) . These four gates symbolize the four fundamental principles of Dharma ( right conduct ) , Jnana ( knowledge ) , Vairagya ( renunciation ) and Aishwarya ( prosperity ) . The gates are crowned with pyramid shaped structures . There is a stone pillar in front of the Singhadwara , called the Aruna Stambha { Solar Pillar } , 11 metres ( 36 ft ) in height with 16 faces , made of chlorite stone ; at the top of the <unk> an elegant statue of Arun ( Sun ) in a prayer mode is mounted . This pillar was shifted from the <unk> Sun Temple . The four gates are decorated with guardian statues in the form of lion , horse mounted men , tigers , and elephants in the name and order of the gates . A pillar made of fossilized wood is used for placing lamps as offering . The Lion Gate ( Singhadwara ) is the main gate to the temple , which is guarded by two guardian deities Jaya and Vijaya . The main gate is ascended through 22 steps known as <unk> <unk> , which are revered , as it is believed to possess " spiritual animation " . Children are made to roll down these steps , from top to bottom , to bring them spiritual happiness . After entering the temple , on the left side , there is a large kitchen where food is prepared in hygienic conditions in huge quantities ; the kitchen is called as " the biggest hotel of the world " . 
 According to a legend King <unk> was directed by Lord Jagannath in a dream to build a temple for him which he did as directed . However , according to historical records the temple was started some time during the 12th century by King <unk> of the Eastern Ganga dynasty . It was completed by his descendant , <unk> Deva , in the 12th century . The wooden images of Jagannath , Balabhadra and Subhadra were then deified here . The temple was under the control of the Hindu rulers up to 1558 . Then , when Orissa was occupied by the Afghan Nawab of Bengal , it was brought under the control of the Afghan General <unk> . Following the defeat of the Afghan king by Raja Mansingh , the General of Mughal emperor Akbar , the temple became part of the Mughal empire till 1751 . Subsequently , it was under the control of the Marathas till 1803 . During the British Raj , the Puri Raja was entrusted with its management until 1947 . 
 The triad of images in the temple are of Jagannatha , personifying Lord Krishna , Balabhadra , His older brother , and Subhadra , His younger sister . The images are made of neem wood in an unfinished form . The stumps of wood which form the images of the brothers have human arms , while that of Subhadra does not have any arms . The heads are large , painted and non @-@ carved . The faces are marked with distinctive large circular eyes . 
 = = = The Pancha Tirtha of Puri = = = 
 Hindus consider it essential to bathe in the Pancha Tirtha or the five sacred bathing spots of Puri , to complete a pilgrimage to Puri . The five sacred water bodies are the <unk> Tank , the Rohini Kunda , the Markandeya Tank , the <unk> Tank , and the Bay of Bengal also called the <unk> , in Sanskrit ' <unk> ' means a " great ocean " ; all are considered sacred bathing spots in the Swargadwar area . These tanks have perennial sources of supply from rainfall and ground water . 
 = = = Gundicha Temple = = = 
 The Gundicha Temple , known as the Garden House of Jagannatha , stands in the centre of a beautiful garden , bounded by compound walls on all sides . It lies at a distance of about 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) to the northeast of the Jagannatha Temple . The two temples are located at the two ends of the Bada Danda ( Grand Avenue ) , which is the pathway for the Rath Yatra . According to a legend , Gundicha was the wife of King <unk> who originally built the Jagannath temple . 
 The temple is built using light @-@ grey sandstone , and , architecturally , it exemplifies typical Kalinga temple architecture in the Deula style . The complex comprises four components : vimana ( tower structure containing the sanctum ) , jagamohana ( assembly hall ) , nata @-@ mandapa ( festival hall ) and bhoga @-@ mandapa ( hall of offerings ) . There is also a kitchen connected by a small passage . The temple is set within a garden , and is known as " God 's Summer Garden Retreat " or garden house of Jagannatha . The entire complex , including the garden , is surrounded by a wall which measures 430 by 320 feet ( 131 m × 98 m ) with height of 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) . 
 Except for the 9 @-@ day Rath Yatra , when the triad images are worshipped in the Gundicha Temple , otherwise it remains unoccupied for the rest of the year . Tourists can visit the temple after paying an entry fee . Foreigners ( generally prohibited entry in the main temple ) are allowed inside this temple during this period . The temple is under the Jagannath Temple Administration , Puri , the governing body of the main temple . A small band of servitors maintain the temple . 
 = = = Swargadwar = = = 
 Swargadwar is the name given to the cremation ground or burning ghat which is located on the shores of the sea . Here thousands of dead bodies of Hindus brought from faraway places are cremated . It is a belief that the <unk> <unk> disappeared from this Swargadwar about 500 years back . 
 = = = Beach = = = 
 The beach at Puri , known as the " <unk> beach , at the mouth of <unk> River , is 8 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) away from the town and is fringed by <unk> trees . It has golden yellow sand . Sunrise and sunset are pleasant scenic attractions here . Waves break in at the beach which is long and wide . 
 = = = District museum = = = 
 The Puri district museum is located on the station road where the exhibits in display are the different types of garments worn by Lord Jagannath , local sculptures , <unk> ( traditional , cloth @-@ based scroll painting ) , ancient Palm @-@ leaf manuscripts , and local craft work . 
 = = = <unk> library = = = 
 <unk> Library is located in the Emara Matha complex ( opposite <unk> or lion gate , the main entrance gate ) . The Jagannatha <unk> <unk> Samiti ( Jagannatha Historical Centre ) is also located here . The library houses ancient palm leaf manuscripts on Jagannatha , His cult and the history of the city . 
 = = Festivals of Puri = = 
 Puri witnesses 24 festivals every year , of which 13 are major . The most important of these is the Rath Yatra , or the car festival , held in the June – July , which is attended by more than 1 million people . 
 = = = Rath Yatra at Puri = = = 
 The Jagannatha Temple triad are normally worshipped in the sanctum of the temple at Puri , but once during the month of Asadha ( rainy season of Orissa , usually in June or July ) , they are brought out on the Bada Danda ( main street of Puri ) and taken over a distance of ( 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) ) to the Shri Gundicha Temple in huge chariots ( <unk> ) , allowing the public to have darśana ( holy view ) . This festival is known as the Rath Yatra , meaning the journey ( yatra ) of the chariots . The yatra starts every year according to the Hindu calendar on the Asadha <unk> <unk> day , the second day of bright fortnight of Asadha ( June – July ) . 
 Historically , the ruling Ganga dynasty instituted the Rath Yatra on the completion of the Jagannatha Temple around 1150 AD . This festival was one of those Hindu festivals that was reported to the Western world very early . Friar Odoric , in his account of 1321 , reported how the people put the " idols " on chariots , and the King , the Queen and all the people drew them from the " church " with song and music . 
 The <unk> are huge wooden structures provided with large wheels , which are built anew every year and are pulled by the devotees . The chariot for Lord Jagannatha is about 45 feet ( 14 m ) high and 35 square feet ( 3 @.@ 3 m2 ) and takes about 2 months for its construction . The chariot is mounted with 16 wheels , each of 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) diameter . The carving in the front face of the chariot has four wooden horses drawn by Maruti . On its other three faces , the wooden carvings are of Rama , Surya and Vishnu . The chariot is known as Nandi Ghosha . The roof of the chariot is covered with yellow and golden coloured cloth . The next chariot is of Balabhadra which is 44 feet ( 13 m ) in height fitted with 14 wheels . The chariot is carved with Satyaki as the charioteer . The carvings on this chariot include images of Narasimha and Rudra as Jagannatha 's companions . The next chariot in the order is of Subhadra , which is 43 feet ( 13 m ) in height supported on 12 wheels , roof covered in black and red colour cloth , and the chariot is known as <unk> <unk> and the charioteer carved is Arjuna . Other images carved on the chariot are of Vana Durga , Tara Devi and Chandi Devi . The artists and painters of Puri decorate the cars and paint flower petals and other designs on the wheels , the wood @-@ carved charioteer and horses , and the inverted lotuses on the wall behind the throne . The chariots of Jagannath pulled during Rath Yatra is the etymological origin of the English word Juggernaut . The Ratha Yatra is also termed as the Shri Gundicha yatra and Ghosha yatra 
 = = = <unk> <unk> = = = 
 The <unk> <unk> ( sweeping with water ) is a significant ritual associated with the Ratha Yatra . During this ritual , the Gajapati King wears the outfit of a sweeper and sweeps all around the deities and chariots . The king cleans the road in front of the chariots with a gold @-@ handled broom and sprinkles sandalwood water and powder . As per the custom , although the Gajapati King has been considered the most exalted person in the <unk> kingdom , he still renders the menial service to Jagannatha . This ritual signifies that under the lordship of Jagannatha , there is no distinction between the powerful sovereign and the humblest devotee . 
 = = = Chandan Yatra = = = 
 The Chandan Yatra festival held every year on Akshaya Tritiya day marks the commencement of the construction of the chariots of the Rath Yatra . It also marks the celebration of the Hindu new year . 
 = = = Snana Yatra = = = 
 Every year , on the Purnima day in the Hindu calendar month of Jyestha ( June ) , the triad images of the Jagannatha Temple are ceremonially bathed and decorated on the occasion of Snana Yatra . Water for the bath is taken in 108 pots from the Suna kuan ( meaning : " golden well " ) located near the northern gate of the temple . Water is drawn from this well only once in a year for the sole purpose of the religious bath of the deities . After the bath the triad images are dressed in the fashion of the elephant god , Ganesha . Later , during the night , the original triad images are taken out in a procession back to the main temple but kept at a place known as Anasara pindi . After this the <unk> Yatra is performed when proxy images of the deities are taken out in a grand procession for 21 days , cruised over boats in the Narmada tank . 
 = = = <unk> or Anasara = = = 
 Anasara , a derivative of the Sanskrit word " <unk> " , literally means vacation . Every year after the holy Snana Yatra , the triad images , without the Sudarshana Chakra , are taken to a secret altar named <unk> Ghar ( also known as Anasara pindi , ' pindi ' is Oriya term meaning " platform " ) where they remain for the next fortnight of ( Krishna paksha ) ; devotees are not allowed to view these images . Instead , devotees go to the nearby Brahmagiri to see the Lord in the four @-@ handed form of <unk> , a depiction of Vishnu . Devotees then get the first glimpse of the Lord only on the day before Rath Yatra , which is called <unk> . It is a local belief that the gods suffer from fever after taking an elaborate ritual bath , and they are treated by the special servants , the <unk> , for 15 days . <unk> perform special <unk> ( rites ) known as <unk> ( a rite of painting the eyes of the triad ) . During this period cooked food is not offered to the deities . 
 = = = <unk> <unk> = = = 
 <unk> <unk> is one of the most grand events associated with the Lord Jagannatha that takes place when one lunar month of Ashadha is followed by another of Ashadha called <unk> Masa ( extra month ) . This can take place at an interval of 8 , 12 or even 18 years . Literally meaning the " New Body " ( Nava 
 = New , <unk> = 
 Body ) in Odia , the festival is witnessed by millions of people and the budget for this event generally exceeds $ 500 @,@ 000 . The event involves installation of new images in the temple and burial of the old ones in the temple premises at <unk> Vaikuntha . During the <unk> ceremony held during July 2015 the idols that were installed in the temple in 1996 were replaced by specially carved new images made of neem wood . More than 3 million people are reported to have attended this festival . 
 = = = Suna <unk> = = = 
 Suna <unk> , ( ' Suna <unk> 'in Oriya language means “ dressing in gold ” ) also known as Raja or Rajadhiraja Bhesha or Raja Bhesha , is an event when the triad images of the Jagannatha Temple are adorned with gold jewelry . This event is observed five times in a year . It is commonly observed on Magha Purnima ( January ) , <unk> Ekadashi also known as Asadha Ekadashi ( July ) , <unk> ( <unk> ) ( October ) , Karthik Purnima ( November ) , and <unk> Purnima ( December ) . One such Suna Bhesha event is observed on <unk> Ekadashi during the Rath Yatra on the chariots placed at the <unk> . The other four <unk> are observed inside the temple on the Ratna <unk> ( gem studded altar ) . On this occasion gold plates are decorated over the hands and feet of Jagannatha and Balabhadra ; Jagannatha is also adorned with a Chakra ( disc ) made of gold on the right hand while a silver conch adorns the left hand . Balabhadra is decorated with a plough made of gold on the left hand while a golden mace adorns his right hand . 
 = = = <unk> <unk> = = = 
 <unk> <unk> , celebrated in the Hindu calendar month Asadha ( June – July ) on <unk> ( 13th day ) , marks the end of the Ratha Yatra . The large wooden images of the triad of gods are taken out from the chariots and then carried to the sanctum sanctorum , swaying rhythmically ; a ritual which is known as <unk> . 
 = = = Sahi yatra = = = 
 The Sahi Yatra , considered the world 's biggest open @-@ air theatre , is an annual event lasting 11 days ; a traditional cultural theatre festival or folk drama which begins on Ram Navami and ends on Rama <unk> ( Sanskrit meaning : anointing ) . The festival includes plays depicting various scenes from the Ramayana . The residents of various localities , or <unk> , are entrusted the task of performing the drama at the street corners . 
 = = = Samudra <unk> = = = 
 The Samudra arati is a daily tradition started by the present Shankaracharya 9 years ago . The daily practise includes prayer and fire offering to the sea at Swargadwar in Puri by disciples of the Govardhan Matha . On Paush Purnima of every year the Shankaracharya himself comes out to offer prayers to the sea . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Earlier , when roads did not exist , people used to walk or travel by animal @-@ drawn vehicles or carriages along beaten tracks to reach Puri . Travel was by riverine craft along the Ganges up to Calcutta , and then on foot or by carriages . It was only during the Maratha rule that the popular Jagannath Sadak ( Road ) was built around 1790 . The East India Company laid the rail track from Calcutta to Puri , which became operational in 1898 . Puri is now well @-@ connected by rail , road and air services . A broad gauge railway line of the South Eastern Railways which connects Puri with Calcutta , and Khurda is an important railway junction on this route . The rail distance is about 499 kilometres ( 310 mi ) from Calcutta and 468 kilometres ( 291 mi ) from Vishakhapatnam . Road network includes NH 203 that links the city with Bhubaneswar , the state capital , situated about 60 kilometres ( 37 mi ) away . NH 203 B connects the city with <unk> via Brahmagiri . Marine drive , which is part of NH 203 A , connects Puri with Konark . The nearest airport is the Biju Patnaik International Airport at Bhubaneswar . Puri railway station is among the top hundred booking stations of the Indian Railways . 
 = = Arts and crafts = = 
 = = = Sand art = = = 
 Sand art is a special art form that is created on the beaches of Puri . The art form is attributed to <unk> Das , a poet who lived in the 14th century . Sculptures of various gods and famous people are now created in sand by amateur artists . These are temporary in nature as they get washed away by waves . This art form has gained international fame in recent years . One of the famed sand artists of Odisha is Sudarshan Patnaik . He established the Golden Sand Art Institute in 1995 , in the open air on the shores of Bay of Bengal , to provide training to students interested in this art form . 
 = = = Appliqué art = = = 
 Appliqué art , which is a stitching @-@ based craft unlike embroidery , was pioneered by Hatta Maharana of <unk> . It is widely used in Puri , both for decoration of the deities and for sale . Maharana 's family members are employed as <unk> or tailors or <unk> by the Maharaja of Puri . They prepare articles for decorating the deities in the temple for various festivals and religious ceremonies . The appliqué works are brightly coloured and patterned fabric in the form of canopies , umbrellas , drapery , carry bags , flags , coverings of dummy horses and cows , and other household textiles ; these are marketed in Puri . The cloth used is made in dark colours of red , black , yellow , green , blue and turquoise blue . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Cultural activities , including the annual religious festivals , in Puri are : The Puri Beach Festival held from 5 to 9 November every year , and the <unk> Utsav held from 20 December to 2 January every year . The cultural programmes include unique sand art , display of local and traditional handicrafts and food festival . In addition , cultural programmes are held for two hours on every second Saturday of the month at the district Collector 's Conference Hall near Sea Beach Police Station . Odissi dance , Odia music and folk dances are part of this event . Odissi dance is the cultural heritage of Puri . This dance form originated in Puri from the dances performed by Devadasis ( <unk> ) attached to the Jagannatha Temple who performed dances in the Nata mandapa of the temple to please the deities . Though the devadasi practice has been discontinued , the dance form has become modern and classical and is widely popular ; many of the Odissi virtuoso artists and gurus ( teachers ) are from Puri . Some of the famous Odissi dancers are Kelucharan Mohapatra , <unk> <unk> , Sonal Mansingh , Sanjukta <unk> and many more . 
 = = Education = = 
 Some of the educational institutions in Puri are : 
 <unk> <unk> Institute of Technology and Management 
 Gangadhar Mohapatra Law College , established in 1981 
 Extension Unit of Regional Research Institute of <unk> , Puri , under Central Council for Research in <unk> ( <unk> ) , New Delhi ; established in March 2006 
 Shri Jagannath Sanskrit University , established in July 1981 
 <unk> Ayurveda <unk> , a college and hospital where treatment and training is based on Ayurveda school of medicine 
 The Industrial Training Institute , a premier technical institution to provide education to skilled , committed & talented technicians was established in 1966 by the Government of India 
 = = Puri people = = 
 <unk> Das – Social worker 
 Nilakantha Das – Social activist 
 Kelucharan Mohapatra – Odissi dancer 
 Pankaj Charan Das – Dancer 
 Manasi Pradhan – Writer and activist 
 Raghunath Mohapatra – Architect and sculptor 
 <unk> <unk> - ALC Global Fellow at University of Oxford , United Kingdom 
 Sudarshan Patnaik – Sand artist 
 <unk> <unk> – Singer 
 = Megan Rapinoe = 
 Megan Anna Rapinoe ( / <unk> / ) ; born July 5 , 1985 , is an American professional soccer midfielder / winger who plays for Seattle Reign FC in the National Women 's Soccer League . As a member of the United States women 's national soccer team , she helped the U.S. win gold at the 2015 FIFA Women 's World Cup and 2012 London Olympics , and silver at the 2011 FIFA Women 's World Cup . 
 Rapinoe is internationally known for her crafty style of play and her precise cross to Abby Wambach in the 122nd minute of the 2011 FIFA Women 's World Cup quarterfinals against Brazil , which resulted in an equalizer goal and eventual win for the Americans after a penalty kick shootout . During the 2012 London Olympics , she scored three goals and tallied a team @-@ high four assists to lead the United States to a gold medal . She is the first player , male or female , to score a Goal Olimpico at the Olympic Games . 
 Rapinoe is an advocate for numerous LGBT organizations , including the Gay , Lesbian & Straight Education Network ( GLSEN ) and Athlete Ally . In 2013 , she was awarded the Board of Directors Award by the Los Angeles Gay and Lesbian Center . She is sponsored by Nike , Samsung and <unk> Global , and has appeared in multiple promotional pieces for clothing company <unk> , as well as for Nike . She previously played for the Chicago Red Stars , Philadelphia Independence and magicJack in Women 's Professional Soccer ( WPS ) as well as Olympique Lyonnais in France 's Division 1 Féminine . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Rapinoe grew up in Redding , California , with her parents , Jim and Denise , and five siblings , including her fraternal twin , Rachael . She spent most of her youth playing with teams coached by her father until high school . Instead of playing soccer at Foothill High School , Rapinoe played for the Elk Grove Pride club team , located south of Sacramento . She competed in track as a freshman and sophomore ; basketball as a freshman , sophomore , and senior ; and was on the honor roll every semester of high school . Rapinoe was named Parade and National Soccer Coaches Association of America ( NSCAA ) All @-@ American as a junior and senior . She was named to McDonald 's All @-@ American Game in 2004 . Rapinoe played for the under @-@ 14 Northern California state Olympic Development Program ( ODP ) team in 1999 as well as the regional ODP team in 2002 . 
 = = = Elk Grove United , 2002 – 05 = = = 
 From 2002 to 2005 , Rapinoe played for Elk Grove Pride in the Women 's Premier Soccer League ( <unk> ) along with her twin sister , Rachael , and future national teammate , Stephanie Cox . She and her family commuted two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half hours from her hometown to play with the team . During the US Youth Soccer National Championships , she scored an equalizer goal in the 18th minute to tie the game 1 – 1 against the Peachtree City Lazers . Elk Grove United finished second at the nationals after the Lazers scored a game @-@ winning goal in the second half . 
 = = = University of Portland Pilots , 2005 – 08 = = = 
 Rapinoe and her sister both attended the University of Portland in Portland , Oregon . The Rapinoe twins almost committed to Santa Clara University before choosing to play for the Portland Pilots on full scholarships . In 2004 , Rapinoe did not play college soccer in what would have been her freshman season in order to play in the 2004 FIFA U @-@ 19 Women 's World Championship where the United States placed third . 
 In 2005 as a freshman , Rapinoe helped the Pilots to an undefeated season and the NCAA Division I Women 's Soccer Championship . During the College Cup quarterfinal against Notre Dame , she scored twice and served one assist helping the Pilots win 3 – 1 and advance to the College Cup . During the College Cup final against UCLA , she scored one goal and served an assist helping the Pilots win 4 – 0 . She was named NSCAA First Team All @-@ American and was on the Soccer America First Team Freshman All @-@ America . Rapinoe made the NCAA Women 's Soccer Championship All Tournament Team and was the West Coast Conference Freshman of the Year . She was also named to the All @-@ West Coast Conference First Team and the All @-@ West Coast Conference Freshman Team . Rapinoe played and started all 25 games as an attacking midfielder , scoring 15 goals and adding 13 assists for 43 points – ranking fifth for freshman point totals in the school 's history . That year , she also scored seven game @-@ winning goals . 
 As a sophomore in 2006 , Rapinoe was among the nation 's leading scorers with ten goals and two assists in eleven matches . During a match against Washington State University on October 5 , she suffered her first season @-@ ending anterior cruciate ligament ( ACL ) injury . Despite her injury , she was one of three Portland players in the program 's history , including Tiffeny Milbrett and Shannon MacMillan , to score 25 goals and 15 assists in 2 seasons . In 2007 , Rapinoe suffered her second season @-@ ending ACL injury two games into the season . She was granted a medical hardship waiver by the NCAA , but did not use it . 
 After taking her time to recover from her second ACL injury , Rapinoe returned for the 2008 season and was on the starting lineup in all 22 games for the Pilots . She helped the team secure a 20 – 2 record scoring five goals and serving 13 assists . Her 13 assists ranked first for the Pilots as well as in the West Coast Conference and she was named West Coast Conference Player of the Year . She was also named a Soccer America First @-@ Team All @-@ American and NSCAA Second Team All @-@ American . Although she had one more season of college eligibility remaining due to her NCAA medical hardship waiver , she opted to enter the Women 's Professional Soccer Draft instead . Rapinoe 's 88 @-@ point career , including 30 goals and 28 assists , ranks tenth in the school 's history despite her playing only 60 games . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Women 's Professional Soccer ( WPS ) , 2009 – 11 = = = 
 Rapinoe was selected second overall in the 2009 WPS Draft by the Chicago Red Stars for the inaugural season of Women 's Professional Soccer ( WPS ) , the highest division of soccer in the United States at the time . She was on the starting lineup in 17 of the 18 games in which she appeared for the Red Stars for a total of 1 @,@ 375 minutes on the pitch . Rapinoe scored two goals and assisted on three others . In August 2009 , she was named to the league 's All @-@ Star Team and played in the 2009 WPS All @-@ Star Game against Swedish Damallsvenskan champions Umeå IK . In 2010 , she started in 19 of the 20 games in which she appeared for the Red Stars . She scored one goal . 
 In December 2010 , Rapinoe signed with expansion team Philadelphia Independence after the Chicago Red Stars ceased operations . She appeared in four games and scored one goal before being traded to magicJack ( formerly Washington Freedom ) while she was in Germany for the 2011 FIFA Women 's World Cup . It was reported that the " cash considerations " involved in the transfer were $ 100 @,@ 000 . The average salary for a female player in the league was $ 25 @,@ 000 . Rapinoe scored two goals in her eight regular season appearances for magicJack helping the team finish third in the league standings and secure a spot in the playoffs . During the team 's semifinal match against the Boston Breakers on August 17 , 2011 , Rapinoe scored in the 61st minute solidifying the team 's 3 – 1 win and advancement to the championship <unk> magicJack was later defeated 2 – 0 by the Philadelphia Independence in the final . On October 25 , 2011 , the WPS voted to terminate the magicJack franchise , leaving Rapinoe and many other players as free agents for the 2012 season . The league suspended operations in early 2012 . 
 = = = Sydney FC and Seattle Sounders Women , 2011 – 12 = = = 
 In October 2011 , Rapinoe signed with Australian W @-@ League team Sydney FC as a guest player for two games . In her second game against Melbourne Victory , she scored with seven minutes remaining to seal three points for Sydney . The win was the first for Sydney during the 2011 – 12 season . Sydney FC went on to finish third in the regular season and advanced to the playoffs where they were defeated by Brisbane Roar in penalty kicks . 
 During the summer of 2012 , Rapinoe joined fellow national team members Hope Solo , Sydney Leroux , Alex Morgan and Stephanie Cox to play with the Seattle Sounders Women in between camps with the national team as they prepared for the 2012 Summer Olympics . Of the signing , Sounders head coach Michelle French said , " Stemming from her leadership and success at the University of Portland , Megan has continued to evolve and grow into one of the most exciting , unpredictable , creative , and flashy players in the women 's game . " Rapinoe made two appearances during the regular season with the team , serving two assists . With Rapinoe and her national teammates ' presence on the team , the Sounders sold out nine of their ten home matches at the 4 @,@ 500 capacity Starfire Stadium . Average attendance during the 2012 season for the Sounders Women was four times higher than the next closest team . 
 = = = Olympique Lyonnais , 2013 – 14 = = = 
 In January 2013 , Rapinoe signed for six months with Olympique Lyonnais , the French side that had previously won six consecutive French league championships and two straight European titles , for a reported 11 @,@ 000 euros ( or approximately $ 14 @,@ 000 ) a month . Rapinoe played in six regular season matches for the team , scoring two goals primarily playing as a left winger in the squad 's 4 – 3 – 3 formation . 
 Rapinoe made her UEFA Women 's Champions League debut during the first leg of the 2012 – 13 quarterfinal against FC Malmö on March 20 , 2013 . She scored one goal during her 24 minutes on the pitch contributing to Lyon 's 5 – 0 final victory . She later scored a goal and served an assist during Lyon 's 6 – 1 win over <unk> <unk> in the second leg of the semifinals . Rapinoe became the fifth American woman in history to play in a Champions League final when Lyon faced German side VfL Wolfsburg on May 23 , 2013 . Lyon was defeated 1 – 0 in the final . Rapinoe concluded her Champions League debut having made five appearances , scoring two goals and serving one assist . 
 After returning to Lyon for the 2013 – 14 season , Rapinoe scored three goals in her eight appearances for the club . During the 2013 – 14 Champions League , she made four appearances for Lyon and scored one goal during the team 's 6 – 0 defeat of FC Twente . Lyon was eliminated in the Round of 16 . In January 2014 , it was announced that Rapinoe had ended her time with Lyon earlier than planned and would be returning to the Seattle Reign for the entire 2014 season . She finished her time with Lyon having scored 8 goals in 28 matches in all competitions . 
 = = = Seattle Reign FC , 2013 – present = = = 
 In 2013 , Rapinoe joined Seattle Reign FC to which she had been previously allocated in the National Women 's Soccer League . Before Rapinoe joined the squad , the team had been struggling to score goals and were 0 – 9 – 1 in ten games . With the addition of Rapinoe , her national team and former Seattle Sounders Women teammate , Hope Solo , and some lineup changes to the front line , the Reign improved their goal @-@ scoring ability and turned their league record around . During a match against her former team in the WPS , the Chicago Red Stars , Rapinoe played a direct role in all of Seattle 's four goals – leading the team to a 4 – 1 win over Chicago . After scoring two goals and serving one assist during the match , she was named NWSL Player of the Week for Week 16 for the 2013 NWSL season . Despite only playing approximately half of the season ( 12 out of 22 regular season games ) , Rapinoe was the Reign 's leading scorer with five goals . 
 After suffering a foot injury during the first home match of the 2014 season on April 14 , Rapinoe sat out several games and made her second season appearance on July 3 against Western New York Flash . Her four goals and one assist during the regular season helped the Reign secure the league 's regular season title ( NWSL Shield ) with a 16 @-@ 2 @-@ 6 record and 54 points - 13 points ahead of the second place team , FC Kansas City . During the team 's playoff semi @-@ final match against Washington Spirit , Rapinoe scored a goal helping the Reign win 2 – 1 and advance to the championship final against FC Kansas City . Despite Rapinoe 's goal during the championship final , the Reign was ultimately defeated by Kansas City 2 – 1 . 
 Rapinoe returned to the Reign for the 2015 season . During the team 's first match against Western New York Flash , she scored her first professional hat trick and served an assist to Jess Fishlock to help the Reign defeat the Flash 5 – 1 . She was subsequently named the league 's NWSL Player of the Week for week 1 of the season . 
 = = International career = = 
 = = = Youth national teams = = = 
 Rapinoe played for the United States under @-@ 16 national soccer team in 2002 and traveled with the team to France and Houston , Texas . She also played at the United States Youth Soccer Association International Tournament in Houston in May 2003 . 
 From 2003 to 2005 , Rapinoe played for the United States under @-@ 19 team . She made 21 appearances and scored nine goals . Her first camp with the under @-@ 19 team occurred in January 2003 in Chula Vista , California . She traveled with the team during a European tour to the Netherlands and Germany in July 2003 . She scored her first goal with the team against Mexico on March 1 , 2003 . Rapinoe played in three matches at the 2004 CONCACAF Under @-@ 19 qualifying tournament , scoring three goals . During the 2004 FIFA U @-@ 19 Women 's World Championship in Thailand she scored a team @-@ high three goals , including one in the third place match victory against Brazil . 
 = = = Senior national team = = = 
 = = = = National team debut and injury recovery , 2006 – 09 = = = = 
 Rapinoe trained with the United States women 's national soccer team for the first time during the team 's 2006 Residency Training Camp in Carson , California . She made her debut for the senior team on July 23 , 2006 , during a friendly match against Ireland . She scored her first two goals on October 1 , 2006 , during a friendly match against Taiwan . 
 Due to two separate ACL injuries , Rapinoe did not play for the senior team in 2007 or 2008 and subsequently missed the 2007 FIFA Women 's World Cup and the 2008 Beijing Olympics . Upon her return to the team in 2009 , she led the team in points with five , including two goals and one assist . She was on the starting lineup in six of the seven games in which she played the same year . 
 During the 2009 Algarve Cup , Rapinoe scored the game @-@ winning goal against Norway leading the team to a 1 – 0 victory during the team 's third group stage match of the tournament . After the U.S. finished at the top of their group , they were defeated during a penalty kick shoutout by Sweden in the championship final . 
 = = = = 2011 FIFA Women 's World Cup = = = = 
 In 2010 , Rapinoe started eight of the ten games she played and scored four goals with two assists . Rapinoe scored against Sweden and China and twice against Guatemala at the 2010 CONCACAF Women 's World Cup Qualifying Tournament , in which she played three games . After the United States finished third at the tournament , they traveled to Italy to vie for a place at the 2011 FIFA Women 's World Cup in the UEFA @-@ CONCACAF play @-@ off against Italy . During the team 's second match of the series , Rapinoe served the assist for Amy Rodriguez 's game @-@ winning goal helping the United States earn a berth to the 2011 World Cup . 
 Rapinoe was named to the United States roster for the 2011 FIFA Women 's World Cup . During the team 's second group stage match against Colombia , she entered the match during the 50th minute and scored almost immediately to put the United States up 2 – 0 . Rapinoe celebrated her goal by running to the corner to the left of Colombia 's goal , picking up an on @-@ field microphone being used for the match 's television broadcast , tapping it , and singing Bruce Springsteen 's " Born in the U.S.A. " into it . 
 During the quarterfinal match against Brazil , Rapinoe came on as a substitute and served the precise cross to Abby Wambach 's equalizer goal in the 122nd minute of the game : a goal that holds the record for latest goal ever scored in a World Cup match . Rapinoe would later convert her shot during the penalty shootout to help send the United States to the semifinals . Rapinoe described her last minute cross against Brazil : " I just took a touch and friggin ' smacked it with my left foot . I don 't think I 've hit a ball like that with my left foot . I got it to the back post and that beast in the air just got a hold of it . " 
 Following the match against Brazil , Rapinoe was named ESPN 's Next Level Player of the Week for completing 5 of 10 crosses while the rest of the team was 0 for 18 . She served an assist in the semifinal against France in which the United States won 3 – 1 . During the dramatic final match against Japan in front of 48 @,@ 817 spectators at sold @-@ out Commerzbank @-@ Arena in Frankfurt and a record @-@ breaking international television audience , Rapinoe served her third assist of the tournament to Alex Morgan who scored the game @-@ opening goal in the 69th minute . The United States tied Japan 2 – 2 during regular and overtime leading to their second penalty kick shootout of the tournament . They were defeated 3 – 1 in penalties and concluded the tournament with a silver medal . Rapinoe 's tournament record included one goal and three assists . She played in all six games for the United States . 
 = = = = 2012 London Olympics = = = = 
 Rapinoe helped lead the United States to a gold medal at the 2012 Olympic Games in London . During the team 's second group stage match against Colombia , she scored the game @-@ winning goal in the 33rd minute in what became a 3 – 0 win for the Americans . After the U.S. defeated North Korea 1 – 0 in their final group stage match , they faced New Zealand in the quarterfinals and won 2 – 0 . 
 During a dramatic semifinal match against Canada at Old Trafford , Rapinoe scored two game @-@ equalizing goals in the 54th and 70th minutes . Her first goal was a rare Goal Olimpico – a corner kick that goes untouched by another player into the net . She is the first and so far only player , male or female , to score an Olimpico at the Olympic Games . The U.S. defeated Canada 4 – 3 with a stoppage time goal in the 123rd minute by Alex Morgan . With her two goals , Rapinoe is one of only five players , including Wei <unk> , <unk> , Angela <unk> and Christine Sinclair , to have scored two goals during an Olympic semifinal . 
 The U.S. clinched the gold medal after defeating Japan 2 – 1 at Wembley Stadium in front of 80 @,@ 203 spectators – the largest crowd ever for a women 's Olympic soccer game . Rapinoe assisted on Carli Lloyd 's second goal of the final in the 53rd minute . She ended the tournament with three goals and a team @-@ high of four assists ( tied with Alex Morgan ) . Widely regarded as one of the top players of the Olympics , Rapinoe was named to numerous ' Team of the Tournament ' lists including those selected by the BBC and All White Kit . 
 Rapinoe had a career @-@ high 8 goals and 12 assists for the United States throughout all of 2012 . 
 = = = = 2013 – 14 = = = = 
 At the 2013 Algarve Cup in Portugal , Rapinoe was named the Player of the Tournament , despite playing in only two of the four matches in which the United States competed . She was injured in practice and did not play during the final as the team defeated Germany to win the 2013 Algarve Cup . 
 During a friendly match against South Korea on June 20 , 2013 , Rapinoe served a corner kick that ended up being the assist for Abby Wambach 's record @-@ breaking 159th international goal . Wambach 's goal broke the world record for most international goals scored by a male or female . During a friendly match against New Zealand at Candlestick Park in San Francisco , California , Rapinoe scored the game @-@ opening goal on a direct free kick ( her 23rd international goal ) to help the U.S. win 4 – 1 and was named Player of the Match . 
 = = = = 2015 FIFA Women 's World Cup = = = = 
 In April 2015 , Rapinoe was named to the roster for the 2015 FIFA Women 's World Cup in Canada coached by national team head coach Jill Ellis . During the team 's first group stage match against Australia , she scored the game opening goal in the 12th minute . She also scored a second goal in the 78th minute . With an additional goal scored by teammate Christen Press in the 61st minute , the United States won 3 – 1 . 
 During training for a Victory Tour match to celebrate the team 's world cup win in late 2015 , Rapinoe tore her ACL . 
 = = = International summary = = = 
 Updated through 2015 @-@ 01 @-@ 03 
 = = = International goals = = = 
 = = Honors and awards = = 
 Following the 2011 FIFA Women 's World Cup , Rapinoe 's hometown of Redding honored her with a parade and named September 10 " Megan Rapinoe Day . " She received the Harry Glickman Professional Female Athlete of the Year award at the 60th annual Oregon Sports Awards held on February 12 , 2012 . On October 25 , 2012 , she was one of ten female soccer players shortlisted for the FIFA World Player of the Year award . The same year , she was named a finalist for Sports Illustrated 's Most Inspiring Performers of 2012 . Rapinoe was awarded the Board of Directors Award by the Los Angeles Gay and Lesbian Center on November 10 , 2012 , for bringing awareness to LGBT people in sports . 
 In March 2013 , Rapinoe was named Player of the Tournament at the 2013 Algarve Cup which the U.S. won . She tallied a goal and assist in two games played . After scoring two goals and serving one assist during a 4 – 1 win over the Chicago Red Stars on July 25 , 2013 , she was named NWSL Player of the Week by the media for Week 16 of the 2013 NWSL season . 
 In December 2014 , Rapinoe was inducted into the Shasta County Sports Hall Of Fame along with several other athletes from Shasta County including Ryan O 'Callaghan and Ricky Ray . 
 In 2015 , she was inducted into the National Gay and Lesbian Sports Hall of Fame . 
 Also in 2015 , she was named NWSL Player of the Week for Week 2 of the 2015 NWSL season . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 On July 2 , 2012 , Rapinoe came out as lesbian in an interview with Out magazine , in which she revealed that she had been in a relationship with Australian football player Sarah Walsh since 2009 . After approximately five years together , Rapinoe and Walsh ended their relationship in 2013 . Rapinoe has since been dating Sub Pop recording artist Sera <unk> . Rapinoe and <unk> announced their engagement in August 2015 . 
 = = = Philanthropy = = = 
 Rapinoe has done philanthropic work for the Gay , Lesbian & Straight Education Network ( GLSEN ) and the United States Olympic Committee . In 2013 , she became an ambassador for Athlete Ally , a nonprofit organization that focuses on ending homophobia and transphobia in sports . 
 = = = Endorsements = = = 
 Rapinoe has signed endorsement deals with Nike and Samsung . She has appeared in multiple commercials for Nike . In 2013 , she appeared in advertisements for the clothing company , <unk> and began a partnership with medical device company , <unk> Global . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 = = = Print media = = = 
 Rapinoe was featured on the cover of the March 2013 edition of Curve . She was profiled in August 6 , 2012 , edition of Sports Illustrated and the July 2012 edition of Out . The April 11 , 2013 , edition of The New York Times featured an article about her experiences in France , with the national team , and coming out publicly before the 2012 Olympics . In July 2014 , she was featured in the ESPN 's The Body Issue . 
 = = = Television and film = = = 
 Rapinoe has made appearances on The Daily Show with Jon Stewart , The Today Show , The Rachel Maddow Show and Good Morning America . In 2012 , she appeared in an ESPN feature called Title IX is Mine : USWNT . She was the focus of a Fox Soccer feature entitled , Fox Soccer Exclusive : Megan Rapinoe in November 2012 . 
 = = = Video Games = = = 
 Rapinoe was featured along with her national teammates in the EA Sports ' FIFA video game series starting in FIFA 16 , the first time women players were included in the game . In September 2015 , she was ranked by EA Sports as the # 2 women 's player following teammate Carli Lloyd . 
 = = = Ticker Tape Parade , White House Honor , and Corn Maze = = = 
 Following the United States ' win at the 2015 FIFA Women 's World Cup , Rapinoe and her teammates became the first women 's sports team to be honored with a Ticker Tape Parade in New York City . Each player received a key to the city from Mayor Bill de Blasio . In October of the same year , the team was honored by President Barack Obama at the White House and the president made note of the Northern California farm that had built a corn maze in the shape of Rapinoe 's face . 
 = Preston railway station = 
 Preston railway station serves the city of Preston in Lancashire , England , and is a major station on the West Coast Main Line , and is the notional half @-@ way point on the WCML between London Euston and Glasgow Central 194 miles from Glasgow Central and 206 from London Euston although ( the actual half @-@ way point is at Leyland , approximately 6 miles south ) . It is served by Northern , Virgin Trains , and TransPennine Express services , plus Caledonian Sleeper overnight services between London and Scotland . 
 A station was first opened on this site by the North Union Railway in 1838 . It was extended in 1850 with new platforms under the separate management of the East Lancashire Railway , and by 1863 , London – Scotland trains stopped here to allow passengers to eat in the station dining room . The current station was built 1880 and extended in 1903 and 1913 , when it had fifteen platforms . A free buffet for servicemen was provided during both World Wars . The " East Lancashire " platforms were demolished in the 1970s as connecting lines closed . Only eight platforms remain in regular use today . 
 As well as intercity trains to London , Birmingham , Manchester , Glasgow and Edinburgh , the station is served by local trains to most parts of Lancashire , and parts of Cumbria , Greater Manchester , Merseyside and Yorkshire . 
 = = Station layout and amenities = = 
 The main entrance to the station is at the bottom of the station approach , a ramp off the bridge that carries Fishergate over the railway . The ticket office exists within the small concourse . This concourse gives direct access , down the ramp , to the intercity platforms 3 and 4 . There are footbridges on either side of this ramp to all other platforms . The eastern footbridge ends at an alternative entrance to the station on Butler Street , giving closer access to Preston city centre and the station car park . There also exists a subway which provides step @-@ free access to all eight platforms in use at the station and with platform 7 , at the south end of which is another entrance serving the station car park . 
 The island forming platforms 3 and 4 is a very wide island platform with a long series of buildings . Inside these buildings are services and amenities including a newsagent and several food outlets including a licensed restaurant . There are also toilets and a large waiting room . A small travel centre on platform 3 , near the ramp , is operated by Virgin Trains staff to give information for passengers on the platform . In addition to these main amenities , there is a small coffee shop outlet on platform 4 , as well as an additional shop on platforms 1 and 2 . 
 Passenger information systems were updated during 2007 and now use dot matrix display screens . Preston retains a manual tannoy system , a rarity amongst the larger stations in the UK . In 2009 the station was identified as one of the ten worst category B interchange stations for mystery shopper assessment of fabric and environment , and was set to receive a share of £ 50m funding for improvements prior to a public spending review initiated in 2010 . 
 = = Services = = 
 There are currently six through and two bay platforms in use at Preston , with two more available for emergency use . All lines are electrified , allowing any train to use any platform . 
 = = = Northern = = = 
 <unk> to Blackpool North 
 <unk> to Barrow @-@ in @-@ Furness 
 <unk> to Windermere 
 1tph to Liverpool South Parkway 
 <unk> to York 
 1tph to Colne 
 1tph to Manchester Airport 
 1tph to Manchester Victoria 
 1tph to Hazel Grove 
 1tph to Ormskirk 
 = = = TransPennine Express = = = 
 1tph to Manchester Airport 
 1tph to Glasgow Central or Edinburgh Waverley ( <unk> ) 
 = = = Virgin Trains = = = 
 <unk> to London Euston 
 1tph to Glasgow Central 
 1 train every 2 hours to Edinburgh Waverley 
 Serco operate their " Highland " Caledonian Sleeper service with a call at Preston to and from the Scottish Highlands . They are the only services through the station not operated by the three companies listed above . London Midland 's single evening peak service from Birmingham New Street no longer operates , having been withdrawn at the end of the 2007 @-@ 08 timetable . 
 Great North Western Railway has been given permission to run 6 trains a day from London to Blackpool North from 2018 , which will call at Preston . The London terminus will be either Euston or Queen 's Park , depending on network capacity during planned infrastructural work to the West Coast Mainline . Additional intermediate stations at which the service will stop are also dependent upon future capacity . 
 = = History = = 
 In coaching days , Preston was an important centre for both passenger and postal traffic . This importance continued into the railway age , both as a major junction and as a stopping point about half way between London and Glasgow . 
 = = = Preston ’ s railways = = = 
 The first rail lines in Preston were those of the Lancaster Canal Tramroad , a horse @-@ drawn line connecting two parts of the Lancaster Canal . It opened in 1805 , but never carried passengers and never converted to steam . It ceased operating in Preston in 1862 . 
 The first steam @-@ hauled passenger railway in Preston was the North Union Railway ( NUR ) . On 31 October 1838 it opened its line from Wigan to a station on the site of the present @-@ day Preston Station . This immediately linked the town to London , Birmingham , Liverpool and Manchester . 
 Each subsequent line was built by a different company . Rivalry often prevented any cooperation over shared facilities , and so almost every railway line into Preston used its own station . It was not until 1900 that all lines in Preston shared a single station , by which time all the companies had been taken over by one or both of just two companies . 
 The second passenger railway into Preston was the Preston and Longridge Railway , which opened as another horse @-@ drawn tramway on 1 May 1840 , to a terminus in Deepdale Street . It converted to steam in 1848 , but did not run its trains into the North Union station until 1885 . 
 The Lancaster and Preston Junction Railway ( L & PJR ) was the third line , which opened on 25 June 1840 , initially using the North Union station . However , relations between the NUR and L & PJR soured , and , from 1 January 1842 , most L & PJR trains used , instead , Maxwell House railway station , a short distance to the north of the North Union station . A few trains passed through , but the NUR charged a toll of 6d per passenger . Most passengers refused to pay , preferring to alight at Maxwell House and walk the 200 yards ( 200 m ) to the North Union station , but the NUR refused to hold the train to allow passengers to walk and <unk> . The NUR advised northbound passengers to travel by the Lancaster Canal rather than the L & PJR . On 1 January 1844 , Maxwell House station came into the possession of the NUR , and lack of agreement led to several weeks when hapless L & PJR passengers had to alight on the trackside at nearby Dock Street ( off Pitt Street ) . Lancaster trains were able to use the North Union station from 12 February . 
 Preston ’ s fourth railway was the Preston and Wyre Joint Railway to Fleetwood , opening , just a few weeks after the L & PJR , on 16 July 1840 , to its own terminus at <unk> in Leighton Street . After 12 February 1844 , regular Preston and Wyre trains used the North Union station , along with the L & PJR , although <unk> Station continued to be used for excursions for some decades . 
 The fifth company to run trains into Preston was the Bolton and Preston Railway ( BPR ) , from 22 June 1843 . Its line joined the North Union ’ s at Euxton , 5 1 ⁄ 2 miles ( 9 km ) south of Preston , but the company used Maxwell House station instead of the North Union ’ s . However , the NUR charged 1s per passenger to BPR trains over its tracks , and eventually the BPR resorted to ferrying its passengers by road between Euxton and Preston . The BPR was driven into submission and was taken over by the NUR from 1 January 1844 . 
 The sixth line into Preston was that of the Preston and Blackburn Railway , which opened on 1 June 1846 , joining the North Union line immediately south of Farrington Station ( <unk> “ Farington ” from October 1857 ) . The railway company was absorbed into the East Lancashire Railway ( ELR ) on 3 August 1846 . Once again , the NUR charged high tolls for the use of its line which led the ELR to build its own line into Preston . The line was initially opposed by Preston Corporation , but was eventually permitted on condition that the embankment north of the Ribble ( which later became the dividing line between <unk> and Miller Parks ) be ornamentally laid out , and that a pedestrian path ( still in use today ) be provided on the river bridge . The line ran into new platforms built on the east side of the North Union station , which were managed and staffed by the ELR , and which had their own booking hall and entrance in Butler Street . The new platforms were effectively a separate station . The new line and station opened on 2 September 1850 . 
 The seventh line in Preston was the North Union ’ s own Victoria Quay Branch to Victoria Quay on the River Ribble ( later extended to Preston Docks in 1882 and which now connects to the heritage Ribble Steam Railway ) . The single @-@ track goods line opened in October 1846 from a south @-@ facing junction immediately south of Preston Station , through a tight curve into a tunnel with a gradient of 1 in 29 , emerging north of Fishergate Hill near the riverside . 
 The eighth line to Preston was the Liverpool , Ormskirk and Preston Railway , owned by the ELR and connected to its Blackburn line into Preston . It opened on 2 April 1849 . From 1891 , its trains used a new curve at Farington to enter Preston via the North Union line . 
 The ninth and final line into Preston was the West Lancashire Railway ( WLR ) from Southport . The railway arrived in Preston on 16 September 1882 , by which time all the town ’ s other lines were owned by the London and North Western Railway ( LNWR ) or the Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway ( LYR ) , or jointly by both . The independent WLR built its own Fishergate Hill station . It also built a connecting line to the former ELR ( then LYR ) line , via which the majority of Southport @-@ to @-@ Preston trains continued to Blackburn . The railway was not a success , and on 1 July 1897 it was taken over by the LYR . This resulted in the diversion of all passenger services to use the East Lancashire platforms of Preston Station from 16 July 1900 . 
 The network of lines south of Preston allowed great flexibility in the routing of trains . A train approaching the town on any of the lines from the south ( except the WLR from Southport ) could be routed to enter the station via either the North Union or the East Lancashire line . It was even possible for trains from the north to perform an effective U @-@ turn , a feat sometimes carried out by trains between Scotland and Blackpool that would otherwise have had to reverse . 
 = = = Station development = = = 
 When the station was first opened in 1838 by the North Union Railway , the line north of the station passed through a tunnel under the west end of Fishergate ( then Preston ’ s major thoroughfare ) . It was on a slope so steep that sometimes station staff had to push trains out of the station . By 1846 , the station was already very busy , handling trains from Wigan and the south , Bolton , Fleetwood , Blackpool , Lancaster and the north , and Blackburn . There were no footbridges ; passengers had to cross the lines escorted by station staff . North of the station was a network of goods lines around the end of the Lancaster Canal . The coal yards and sidings here continued to operate long after the canal had fallen into commercial disuse . 
 The station ’ s first expansion came in 1850 when the new East Lancashire line used new platforms staffed and managed by the East Lancashire Railway , with their own entrance and booking office in Butler Street . From 1863 , trains between London and Scotland , having no dining cars , were scheduled to allow 20 minutes at Preston for passengers to eat in the station ’ s dining room . The pressure on catering staff was increased when northbound and southbound trains would often arrive about the same time . The condition of the station deteriorated to the extent that on 18 August 1866 part of the roof on the East Lancashire side collapsed injuring three people , one seriously . By then , 150 trains a day passed through the station . 
 Eventually the station was rebuilt , at a cost of a quarter of a million pounds , reopening in July 1880 , and with seven through platforms and four bay platforms . At this time , both the Ribble bridge and the line as far as Euxton , were widened from two tracks to four . A striking feature of the new station was its long and wide central island platform , 1 @,@ 225 feet ( 373 m ) long and 110 feet ( 34 m ) wide . It was larger than any of the London terminal station platforms , the longest being Kings Cross at 990 feet ( 302 m ) . Along the centre of the platform were refreshment rooms , offices , and waiting rooms . A booking hall at the north end of the station was accessed from the middle of a new bridge carrying Fishergate over the railway . A broad ramp led down to the main island platform , with footbridges to smaller platforms on either side . Further south , the platforms were also linked by a passenger subway and a separate subway for luggage , accessed via hoists . At the south end of the main platform , a footbridge led to the nearby Park Hotel , a joint LYR / LNWR property , opened in 1883 . 
 On 30 January 1877 a heavy storm blew the roof completely away from the station , but a more serious accident occurred on 13 July 1896 when a Euston to Glasgow train passed through the station at an estimated 45 mph ( 70 km / h ) , despite a 10 mph ( 16 km / h ) speed limit . It was derailed on a tight curve at the north end of the station , killing one person . As a result of this , the tracks were realigned . Charles Street , to the west of the station , was demolished , as were more houses northwest of the station . Fishergate bridge was extended on its west side . This allowed more tracks and platforms to be built on the west side of the station , with gentler curves . The Ribble bridge was widened again , from four to six tracks . These enlargements were completed by 1903 . The east side of the station was also extended in 1913 . 
 By 1926 , the lines and platforms were used as follows , from west to east : 
 Southwest of the station was Christian Road Goods Station ( previously known as Charles Street Goods Station before 1903 ) . 
 Next was the single @-@ track goods line that curved west to enter the tunnel to the docks . 
 North of the tunnel was a goods loading platform , added in 1903 . 
 Then were two through lines for non @-@ stop traffic , added in 1903 . 
 Platforms 1 and 2 formed a large island platform , added in 1903 , with station buildings , handling through traffic to and from Blackpool . Platform 2 was also used as a terminal platform for Longridge trains , and as a reversal platform for trains between Lancaster and Blackpool . 
 Between platforms 2 and 3 was a centre line used as a run @-@ around loop . 
 Platforms 3 and 4 formed a narrow island platform without buildings . Platform 3 was used for terminal and reversal trains , as Platform 2 . Platform 4 was a loop platform for Platform 5 . 
 Platforms 5 and 6 formed the main , wide island platform , with a full set of buildings along its centre . The platforms were used mainly for West Coast Main Line services , northbound and southbound respectively . At the south end were two bay platforms , between platforms 5 and 6 , used for short trains and goods vans . 
 Platforms 7 and 8 formed another narrow island platform , somewhat shorter than the other platforms . Platform 7 was a loop platform for Platform 6 . Platform 8 was the northbound East Lancashire through platform . 
 Platform 9 was the main southbound East Lancashire through platform , containing more buildings and linked to the Butler Street station entrance . 
 Platform 10 was added in 1913 , as another southbound East Lancashire through platform , which trains accessed via a short tunnel underneath a rebuilt Butler Street entrance . 
 Platform 11 was a bay platform , set back at the south end of Platform 9 , and curving sharply to the east . 
 Platforms 12 and 13 were bay platforms , between Platforms 11 and 10 , also curving east . All three bay platforms were for terminating services to and from Southport , Blackburn and Liverpool via Ormskirk . Platform 13 was added in 1913 . 
 To the east of the station was Butler Street Goods Station , with a large number of sidings and two warehouses . 
 Later , platforms 11 , 12 , 13 and 10 were renumbered into the more logical sequence 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 . 
 = = = Contraction = = = 
 A number of lines around Preston have closed , including the Longridge line in 1930 and the West Lancashire line in 1964 . The old island platforms one and two were closed in 1970 together with the goods lines to the west of the station , but it was then extended northwards to allow platform two to become a dedicated parcels platform . The line towards Liverpool was truncated and singled in summer 1970 , with Preston services terminating at Ormskirk . This was followed by the closure of the East Lancashire line , between Preston and Bamber Bridge , via its original direct route , in April 1972 . The East Lancashire platforms 10 to 13 were demolished , along with the Butler Street Goods Yard . Their site is now covered by car parks for the station and the adjacent Fishergate Shopping Centre , which was built in the 1980s , partly over the north end of the former goods yard . The remaining platforms 3 to 9 were renumbered 1 to 7 . 
 Some of the station 's heritage can still be seen : 
 At the far north end of platform 4 are the remains of the <unk> Sidings , most of which was swept away by the ring road built in the 1990s . 
 At the north end of platform 3 , a disused bay platform can be seen . It follows the original alignment of the main platform before the 1903 expansion . 
 There is a tunnel between platforms 3 and 4 , under the station approach . Locomotives and trains are occasionally stored there . 
 At the north of platform 7 is the blocked up remains of the tunnel which took the platform 13 ( originally number 10 ) through @-@ line from the north , under the Butler Street entrance . 
 At the southern end of platform 7 , the platform edge curves away to the east but the line now turns westward to join the main line . 
 The former platforms 1 and 2 are also still in existence , but closed to passengers , and was used for Royal Mail <unk> services until recently . Old platform 1 and the lines to its west have been broken to form two bay platforms . Network Rail has its offices here . 
 = = = Special features = = = 
 A free buffet for servicemen was provided at the station during both World Wars . The Preston Station Free Buffet Association served free hot drinks , biscuits and buns and sold sandwiches at cost price to anyone in uniform 24 hours a day for the duration of the First World War . Four hundred women working 12 @-@ hour shifts served over 3 million men between 1915 and 1919 . 12 million cups of tea were served between 1939 and 1945 . It was funded by subscription and had its own marked crockery . The station was on a major north @-@ south route for troops . There are three commemorative plaques related to the First World War buffet in the waiting room on platforms 3 and 4 , the former site of WWI buffet . One of the drama segments of the televised Preston Passion of 2012 was set in the First World War servicemen 's buffet . The Second World War buffet was located in the southern building further down platforms 5 & 6 ( now platforms 3 & 4 ) . 
 One of the catenary stanchions on platform 4 is notably better kept than others , and carries a small plaque detailing the visit of Queen Elizabeth II on 7 May 1974 , after the completion of electrification of tracks north of the point where it stands . This was significant because it marked the completion of the total electrification of the West Coast Main Line . 
 = Hurricane Gonzalo = 
 Hurricane Gonzalo was a powerful Atlantic tropical cyclone that wrought destruction in the Leeward Islands and Bermuda in October 2014 . At the time , it was the strongest hurricane in the Atlantic since Igor in 2010 , Gonzalo struck Bermuda less than a week after the surprisingly fierce Hurricane Fay ; 2014 was the first season in recorded history to feature two hurricane landfalls on Bermuda . Gonzalo formed from a tropical wave on October 12 , while located east of the Lesser Antilles . It made landfall on Antigua , Saint Martin , and Anguilla as a Category 1 hurricane , causing damage on those and nearby islands . Antigua and Barbuda sustained US $ 40 million in losses , and boats were abundantly damaged or destroyed throughout the northern Leeward Islands . The storm killed three people on Saint Martin and Saint Barthélemy . Gonzalo tracked northwestward as it intensified into a Category 4 major hurricane , the first in the Atlantic since Ophelia in 2011 . Eyewall replacement cycles led to fluctuations in the hurricane 's structure and intensity , but on October 16 , Gonzalo peaked with maximum sustained winds of 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) . 
 After Hurricane Fay caused extensive power outages on the island just days before , residents of Bermuda were forced to complete preparations for Gonzalo in haste . Banks , businesses , schools , and government offices closed in advance of the storm , while the Royal Navy ship HMS Argyll left its post in the Caribbean to provide Bermuda with emergency assistance . The cyclone gradually weakened before crossing directly over central Bermuda at Category 2 strength around 00 : 30 UTC on October 18 . Gonzalo battered the island with wind gusts as high as 144 mph ( 232 km / h ) , downing hundreds of trees and creating widespread roof damage . At the height of the storm , about 31 @,@ 000 out of 36 @,@ 000 total electricity customers were without power ; service was not fully restored until early November . Many roads were impassable immediately following the hurricane , and in many cases the damage done by Gonzalo was indistinguishable from that of Fay . Bermuda Regiment soldiers and sailors from the Argyll took part in initial cleanup and repairs on the territory , and preliminary assessments revealed that the storm did not compare to the devastation of Hurricane Fabian in 2003 . Catastrophe modelling firms estimated that Bermuda suffered up to $ 400 million in losses , and despite the heavy disruptions , no deaths or serious injuries were reported there . 
 Departing Bermuda , Gonzalo accelerated toward the waters of the North Atlantic , passing close to southeastern Newfoundland before becoming extratropical on October 19 . Gusty winds and bands of heavy rain in the southeastern Avalon Peninsula engendered minor flooding and power outages . A large storm system involving the remnants of Gonzalo battered the British Isles and central Europe on October 21 , killing three people in the United Kingdom and severely hindering transportation . The system later played a role in triggering torrential rains over the Balkans , which resulted in severe flooding in Greece and Bulgaria . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Hurricane Gonzalo originated in a tropical wave that emerged from the western coast of Africa on October 4 and trekked across the Atlantic . Despite an attendant expanse of clouds and thunderstorms , hostile winds from an upper @-@ level trough hindered cyclogenesis . On October 10 , after encountering an eastward @-@ propagating Kelvin wave , the system developed more concentrated convection . With conditions increasingly favorable for further development , the disturbance gradually became better organized , forming a small low pressure area by October 11 . In turn , a tropical depression formed at 00 : 00 UTC on October 12 , located approximately 390 mi ( 630 km ) east of the Leeward Islands . Continued maturation amid warm waters and low wind shear yielded Tropical Storm Gonzalo 12 hours later . Operationally , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) did not begin issuing advisories on the cyclone until midday on October 12 , after a Hurricane Hunter flight into the system reported surface winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) . 
 A powerful ridge over the central Atlantic steered the nascent storm westward toward the Lesser Antilles . Thunderstorm activity was strong near the center , although initially somewhat disorganized and asymmetric . However , a tight inner core soon took shape , and Gonzalo began to quickly intensify throughout the day on October 12 . Following the appearance of an eye feature early the next day , the storm was upgraded to a Category 1 hurricane while located near Antigua in the eastern Caribbean . Shortly thereafter , the storm passed directly over the island . The hurricane later struck Saint Martin and Anguilla , and skirted just north of the British Virgin Islands while continuing to intensify . By that time , it was headed toward the northwest around the periphery of the aforementioned ridge . 
 On October 14 , the eye contracted to a diameter of 17 mi ( 28 km ) and improved its satellite presentation . At 18 : 00 UTC , Gonzalo strengthened to a Category 3 major hurricane while located about 170 mi ( 270 km ) north of San Juan , Puerto Rico . Six hours later it became the first Category 4 hurricane in the Atlantic basin since Hurricane Ophelia in 2011 . Subsequently , a concentric eyewall structure indicated an imminent eyewall replacement cycle , with the inner feature " about as small as it can get " according to the NHC . The eyewall replacement cycle briefly disrupted the storm 's core , causing Gonzalo to weaken slightly , but upon completion on the evening of October 15 , the system stabilized and resumed intensification . While moving northward early the next day , Gonzalo reached its peak intensity with winds of 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) and a barometric pressure of 940 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 76 inHg ) . By evening it had turned north @-@ northeastward , ahead of an advancing trough over the eastern United States and in the wake of the receding ridge . 
 From the evening of October 16 through the next morning , the hurricane experienced further internal fluctuations as it approached Bermuda from the south @-@ southwest . Concurrently , the storm began to weaken . In particular , cloud tops around the hurricane warmed , and convection became less uniform , likely attributable to cooler waters and heightened wind shear . The hurricane was downgraded to Category 2 as the northern eyewall crossed Bermuda , and at about 00 : 30 UTC on October 18 , the center of circulation passed directly over the island , signalling an official landfall . Along with Hurricane Fay , which struck Bermuda on October 12 , this represented the first recorded instance of two hurricanes making landfall on the island within the same season . Moving away from Bermuda , the hurricane continued to degrade , but showed signs of increased organization later on October 18 . As Gonzalo accelerated northeastward at over 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) , it passed about 50 miles ( 80 km ) southeast of Newfoundland 's Avalon Peninsula early on October 19 . In spite of sea surface temperatures below 50 ° F ( 10 ° C ) , the storm was able to maintain a central dense overcast and deep warm core . By 18 : 00 UTC , Gonzalo had finally succumbed to the cold environment and intense wind shear , completing its transition into a strong extratropical cyclone about 460 mi ( 740 km ) northeast of Cape Race , Newfoundland . It sped east @-@ northeastward until a frontal boundary absorbed it on October 20 , to the south @-@ southwest of Iceland . The resultant system brought stormy weather to the British Isles and parts of mainland Europe on October 21 , and later contributed to the formation of a large cut @-@ off low . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 When Gonzalo first formed , various governments across the eastern Caribbean issued tropical cyclone warnings and watches , extending from Guadeloupe to the coast of Puerto Rico . As the storm was strengthening and moving through the region , a hurricane warning was issued for the British Virgin Islands , Anguilla , and Saint Martin . Several major cruise lines altered their itineraries to avoid the storm . 
 Late on October 14 , while Gonzalo was still located about 700 mi ( 1 @,@ 130 km ) to the south , the Bermuda Weather Service issued a hurricane watch for the island . The watch was upgraded to a warning the next day . Having been affected by the unexpectedly destructive Hurricane Fay just days earlier , residents quickly began preparing for Gonzalo by obtaining emergency supplies and expediting cleanup efforts from the previous storm . Premier of Bermuda Michael Dunkley advised citizens to complete most preparations by the afternoon of October 16 . Banks and businesses began closing that day , while schools and government offices were closed by October 17 . One school functioned as a storm shelter , and 66 people ultimately sought refuge there . Bus and ferry services were suspended on the evening of October 16 . Bermuda 's only daily newspaper , the Royal Gazette , did not go to print on October 17 , but distributed the next day 's edition for free . Bermuda Regiment soldiers were stationed at various points to support emergency response crews and ensure the safety of the public . 
 The Caribbean Electric Utility Services Corporation ( <unk> ) sent linemen to assist the Bermuda Electric Light Company ( BELCO ) crews in the event of power outages from Gonzalo . Still completing restoration work after massive outages from Fay , BELCO stationed vehicles and supplies at strategic points on the island to prepare for the next hurricane . On the morning of October 16 , BELCO switched its focus from Fay to Gonzalo , leaving around 1 @,@ 500 households without power ; the remaining affected customers were asked to refrain from calling to report outages . Ahead of the storm , the Royal Navy frigate HMS Argyll sailed from the Caribbean to provide Bermuda with emergency assistance . Public beaches were closed as hurricane swells began to build , and the decision was made to shut down the Causeway early on October 17 , based on forecasts of long @-@ duration severe winds . Additionally , L.F. Wade International Airport closed prior to the storm 's onslaught , accounting for 62 canceled commercial flights . Three cruise ships were diverted from the island . 
 = = Impact and aftermath = = 
 = = = Caribbean = = = 
 While moving through the northeastern Lesser Antilles as a fledgling hurricane , Gonzalo produced sustained winds of 77 mph ( 124 km / h ) on Antigua , with gusts to 90 mph ( 145 km / h ) . Roads were blocked by uprooted trees , while numerous buildings , including several schools , received significant damage . Gonzalo caused an island @-@ wide power outage , and its storm surge damaged boats . Schools and businesses were forced to close , and four emergency shelters opened to storm victims . Debris and flooding forced V. C. Bird International Airport to delay its return to operation after closing as a precaution . Numerous homes sustained damage , largely to their roofs , with the Saint George Parish suffering the greatest losses . Farming communities and a variety of crops were severely impacted , which sparked concerns of imminent produce shortages . Some growers lost their entire banana crops . 
 Barbuda experienced gusts as high as 70 mph ( 113 km / h ) , as well as radar @-@ estimated rainfall of up to 6 in ( 150 mm ) . Although Barbuda was subject to less widespread devastation than its twin island , there were still snapped tree limbs , reports of flooding , and disruptions to utility services . Damages to residences , government buildings , and agriculture on Antigua contributed to Antigua and Barbuda 's national storm cost of around US $ 40 million , which also includes compensation to American Airlines for not meeting departing passenger quotas during the hurricane . Numerous individuals were treated for minor storm @-@ related injuries , none of them life @-@ threatening . Further west , Gonzalo caused minor power outages on Saint Kitts and Nevis , while a general 1 – 2 in ( 25 – 50 mm ) of rain accompanied wind gusts to 58 mph ( 93 km / h ) on Guadeloupe . 
 The storm wrecked dozens of boats around Saint Martin , including 22 in Simpson Bay Lagoon , and an elderly man aboard one of the stricken vessels was killed . Two people on Saint Martin and Saint Barthélemy went missing in the storm , and were presumed dead after remaining unaccounted for several months later . Fourteen other missing individuals were returned alive . Winds on Saint Barthélemy blew 86 mph ( 138 km / h ) sustained , with gusts to 126 mph ( 203 km / h ) . Fallen trees obstructed streets , and an aircraft flipped over on a runway at Gustaf III Airport . As many as 40 boats were reportedly beached on Saint Barthélemy . 
 On Saint Martin , sustained winds exceeded 60 mph ( 100 km / h ) , and L 'Espérance Airport recorded gusts to 93 mph ( 150 km / h ) before the observing equipment failed . As much as 5 @.@ 70 in ( 145 mm ) of rain fell over the island . Reports of urban flooding and entrance of water into homes were common . Gonzalo impaired water and electricity services throughout Dutch Sint <unk> and inflicted significant damage to homes . The St. Maarten Zoo sustained heavy structural damage , though all resident animals survived unharmed . The French side of the island incurred relatively little destruction , with scattered roof and window damage , though Orient Beach " was a scene of complete devastation " ; several businesses there suffered extensively . Emergency responders and military aircraft from Martinique were dispatched to aid in post @-@ storm recovery on Saint Barthélemy and Saint Martin . 
 Heavy rain on Anguilla flooded the Clayton J. Lloyd International Airport and portions of several districts , qualifying the government for a US $ 500 @,@ 000 " excess rainfall " insurance payout . The eastern and western ends of the island bore the brunt of the storm , facing damage to utility poles , vegetation , and roofs , and public schools did not reopen until October 20 or later . The sole hospital experienced minor flood damage . 
 Gonzalo produced squally weather in parts of Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands , causing power outages and prompting 20 people to stay in an emergency shelter . Cyril E. King Airport on Saint Thomas was temporarily closed due to the storm ; the airport endured blustery conditions , with gusts reaching 35 mph ( 56 km / h ) . Elsewhere , rough seas affected parts of the Greater Antilles and the Bahamas . 
 = = = Bermuda = = = 
 Gonzalo generated hurricane @-@ force winds across Bermuda over a period of about six hours , at their strongest from the northwest on the backside of the storm . Tropical storm conditions persisted for up to 24 hours . Elevated weather stations observed the highest winds ; Commissioner 's Point recorded 10 @-@ minute sustained winds of 109 mph ( 175 km / h ) , and St. David 's measured gusts as high as 144 mph ( 232 km / h ) . Gusts reached 113 mph ( 182 km / h ) at the Causeway , closer to sea level . The airport recorded 2 @.@ 85 in ( 72 mm ) of rain , but due to the strong winds , this was most likely an underestimation of what actually fell . The passage of the hurricane 's eye was marked by diminished winds and a lack of rain , but a drizzle of ocean mist reportedly fell over the island . As Gonzalo struck at low tide , the effects of storm surge were minimal . At Esso Pier on the north side of the island , storm tides peaked at 3 @.@ 25 ft ( 0 @.@ 99 m ) above normal . 
 The intense winds brought down utility poles and hundreds of trees ( likely exacerbated by saturated ground from record rainfall in the months prior ) , leaving " barely a road " passable . The storm razed several invasive species , with endemic trees proving more resilient . A composting facility received 1 @,@ 200 truckloads of plant debris per day after Fay and Gonzalo , up from an average of 100 . Damage from the storms totaled around US $ 260 @,@ 000 on Bermuda National Trust properties , which include nature preserves and cemeteries . Similarly , the Bermuda Botanical Gardens and Arboretum were closed due to safety hazards resulting from extensive vegetation damage . 
 The first storm @-@ related power outages took place in the early afternoon on October 17 as weather conditions worsened . At the height of the storm , about 31 @,@ 000 out of 36 @,@ 000 electricity customers were without power , including the 1 @,@ 500 outages left unresolved after Fay . Backup <unk> crews helped with specialty assignments , such as commercial outages and homes without power since before Gonzalo 's onslaught . Service was not fully restored until November 3 , and BELCO ultimately spent US $ 2 @.@ 9 million on system repairs after hurricanes Fay and Gonzalo . The company replaced 228 utility poles , 80 transformers , and over 4 mi ( 6 @.@ 5 km ) of wire . Other utilities , such as television and Internet services , also suffered , and technicians handled individual outages deep into the month of November . About 600 streetlights on main roads and several hundred more on side @-@ streets were inoperative following the hurricane ; some remained <unk> through January 2015 . 
 Structural damage ranged from the superficial to complete wall or roof failure , the latter being relatively uncommon . A multitude of buildings , including churches , a visitor 's center , the House of Assembly building in Hamilton , and the Bermuda Police Service headquarters at Prospect Camp , suffered some degree of roof damage . Older structures were particularly prone to substantial damage , as were commercial storage buildings subject to less strict building codes . In December , five new slate quarries were approved to accommodate the demand for roofing materials . Both the new and old portions of the King Edward VII Memorial Hospital received significant damage that exposed the facilities to the elements . An exhibit at the Bermuda Aquarium , Museum and Zoo was unroofed , and coastal erosion threatened to encroach on the site , though no animals were harmed . Part of the structure 's roof was blown a quarter mile ( 400 m ) . 
 L.F. Wade International Airport sustained some roof and runway lighting damage , and the Bermuda Weather Service building lost a storm shutter and saw water forced inside a communications room . A restaurant at the site of the Gibbs Hill Lighthouse was severely damaged , requiring a complete roof replacement . The Causeway was largely spared , with some damage to the safety walls alongside the road , and it was partially reopened on October 18 after initial repairs . However , one of two lanes remained shut down for several days . Many boats were washed ashore and damaged or wrecked by the storm , and other vessels tipped over in boatyards . According to preliminary estimates , properties in the Dockyard alone incurred US $ 1 million ( 2014 <unk> ) in damage . 
 The strongest hurricane to directly affect Bermuda since 2003 's Hurricane Fabian , Gonzalo was generally less destructive . Damage modelling firms estimated insured losses from the hurricane to settle between US $ 200 and US $ 400 million , not including damage to watercraft , though the CEO of the largest property insurer on Bermuda believed losses to be much lower . It was estimated that a Fabian equivalence in 2014 would cause about US $ 650 million in damage . Some insurance companies decided to treat Fay and Gonzalo as a single event , allowing one deductible to count toward claims from both storms . After initial assessments , Premier Dunkley reported that the territory fared " much better than we expected " , and the storm was not blamed for any deaths or major injuries on Bermuda . 
 In the aftermath of the hurricane , a Royal Navy helicopter aboard the Argyll flew out ahead of the ship to start aerial damage assessments . Members of the Bermuda Regiment immediately began cleanup and recovery efforts , while the government provided tarps to affected homeowners . Sailors from the Argyll teamed up with Regiment soldiers upon the ship 's arrival to continue relief work . Some 35 of the vessel 's crew members worked to clear debris from the runway at the airport , which reopened on October 19 after thorough evaluations . Including damage from Fay , about $ 2 million was spent on airport repairs , and the storms were later cited as evidence of the need for a newer terminal in a more protected location . All schools on the territory resumed classes by October 21 . 
 = = = Atlantic Canada = = = 
 On October 17 , the Canadian Hurricane Centre issued a tropical storm watch for the Avalon Peninsula of Newfoundland , between Arnold 's Cove and Chapel 's Cove . Some communities , including St. John 's , worked to clear debris from culverts and storm drains to minimize the effects of flooding . Outer rainbands produced up to 2 @.@ 7 in ( 69 mm ) of rain in just a few hours , which produced localized urban flooding in St. John 's . Winds gusted to 66 mph ( 106 km / h ) at Cape Pine and 55 mph ( 89 km / h ) at Cape Race . At St. John 's International Airport , sustained winds of 34 mph ( 54 km / h ) were punctuated by gusts to 46 mph ( 74 km / h ) . The winds briefly cut power to about 100 households in a St. John 's neighborhood . Offshore , a buoy over the Laurentian fan recorded peak wave heights to 68 ft ( 21 m ) , and an oil rig southeast of the storm 's center experienced sustained winds of 98 mph ( 158 km / h ) . Low astronomical tides prevented significant coastal flooding , but a 2 @.@ 6 ft ( 0 @.@ 8 m ) surge was recorded at both St. John 's and Argentia . Farther west , the hurricane generated rough seas and rip currents along the Atlantic coast of Nova Scotia . 
 = = = Europe = = = 
 The extratropical storm complex incorporating the remnants of Gonzalo generated strong winds across the British Isles , especially over Ireland and the northern United Kingdom . Winds gusted to 88 mph ( 142 km / h ) at Oban in western Scotland , while gusts exceeding 60 mph ( 100 km / h ) were common elsewhere . The system halted transportation throughout the region , forcing the cancellation of more than 100 flights at London Heathrow Airport , grounding ferries , and blocking roads and railways with debris . Falling trees killed one woman near Hyde Park , London , and injured several others . In Essex , the winds collapsed a car jack supporting a van , fatally crushing a man working underneath , while poor weather conditions were blamed on a traffic accident in Liverpool that killed a male motorist . The storm triggered minor power outages in Scotland and Wales , with more extensive outages in northwestern Ireland after gusts as high as 70 mph ( 115 km / h ) . 
 Western and central Europe were also impacted by damaging winds and downpours . The coast of the Netherlands endured high seas and gusts to 67 mph ( 108 km / h ) , uprooting trees and flooding the coastline . Rail services and flight operations were disrupted throughout the region . In Germany , gusts over 90 mph ( 145 km / h ) were recorded at high elevations . In Stuttgart alone , 50 vehicles were damaged by falling debris ; downed trees , torn roofs , and power outages were common throughout the nation . In the capital of Munich , the storm destroyed a large tin roof measuring over 850 sq ft ( 80 sq m ) , parts of which impacted cars and fences on the ground . Damage from the incident was estimated at € 500 @,@ 000 . Throughout Germany , the storm wrought € 60 – 100 million in insured losses . A woman died in a traffic accident , attributed to wet road conditions , along the <unk> 303 in the Bayreuth district . Northwesterly gales yielded a storm surge along the country 's North Sea coastline , with tides running over 7 ft ( 2 m ) above normal along the Elbe River at Hamburg . Neighboring Austria and Switzerland also experienced gales and power outages . A tornado touched down near <unk> an der <unk> in Austria , damaging homes and farms . Gusts in southern Switzerland reached 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) , leading to road and rail closures . In southern France , the system initiated a <unk> wind event . 
 The upper @-@ level low associated with the hurricane 's remnants blanketed parts of the Alps with heavy snowfall , accumulating to several feet , and subsequently fueled torrential rains in the Balkans on October 24 and 25 . Floodwaters caused by estimated rainfall totals nearing 6 in ( 150 mm ) inundated entire villages in southeastern Bulgaria , forcing hundreds to evacuate , and there were widespread disruptions of power and water services . A woman in Burgas died from drowning . In the Greek capital city of Athens , the deluge filled streets with rushing water that swept away hundreds of vehicles . More than 300 buildings were inundated in the Attica area . 
 = Battle of Porton Plantation = 
 The Battle of Porton Plantation ( 8 – 10 June 1945 ) took place near the village of Soraken on Bougainville Island , in the Solomon Islands archipelago during World War II . Involving forces from Australia , New Zealand and Japan , the battle was part of the wider Bougainville campaign , which had begun in late 1943 and lasted until the end of the war in August 1945 . The battle formed part of Australian efforts to liberate the northern part of Bougainville . 
 The fighting occurred after a company @-@ sized Australian force from the 31st / 51st Infantry Battalion made an amphibious landing north of the Porton Plantation jetties in an attempt to outflank the Japanese positions on the Ratsua front , which were holding up the advance of the 26th and the 31st / 51st Infantry Battalions from the 11th Brigade . The Australians landed unopposed and established a small perimeter , but some of their landing craft ran aground and they were unable to bring their heavy weapons and support elements ashore . Troops from the Japanese 87th Naval Garrison Force quickly surrounded the beachhead and , as their supply situation grew desperate , the Australians were forced to withdraw . In the course of their evacuation by sea another landing craft ran aground . Over the next two days several unsuccessful rescue attempts were made until eventually , in the early morning of 11 June , the last Australian survivors were picked up . 
 The battle was a victory for the Japanese and it proved instrumental in helping them to regain the initiative in the northern sector of Bougainville . As a result , shortly afterwards the Australian forces on Bougainville changed the focus of their operations to the southern sector of the island where they were able to advance along the coastal plain towards the main Japanese position at Buin . Since the end of the war , there has been considerable criticism of the planning undertaken by the Australians prior to the operation , and it has been argued that the operation failed due to poor intelligence and lack of resources and was ultimately unnecessary . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Strategic situation = = = 
 Japanese forces had landed on Bougainville in early 1942 , capturing it from the small force of Australians garrisoning the island . They had subsequently developed several airbases on the island , using it to conduct operations in the northern Solomon Islands and to attack the Allied lines of communication between the United States , Australia and the Southwest Pacific Area . These bases also helped protect Rabaul , the major Japanese garrison and naval base in Papua New Guinea , and throughout 1943 , Allied planners determined that Bougainville was vital for neutralising the Japanese base around Rabaul . US Marines conducted an amphibious landing at Cape Torokina , on the western coast of the island , north of Empress Augusta Bay , in November 1943 . After an initial counter @-@ attack which had been repulsed , the US Marines had been replaced by a garrison of US Army troops who began consolidating their position around Torokina , establishing a strong perimeter . In March 1944 , the Japanese launched a heavy counter @-@ attack , which was turned back with many casualties . After this , the situation on Bougainville became largely static , as the Japanese focused primarily on subsistence , and the US forces chose to adopt a mainly defensive posture focused on maintaining the perimeter around Torokina . 
 On 22 November 1944 , the Australian II Corps , consisting mainly of Militia troops under the command of Lieutenant General Stanley Savige , took over responsibility for Allied operations on Bougainville from the US XIV Corps . Throughout November and December Australian units began relieving the Americans who were then redeployed on subsequent operations in the Philippines . Although Japanese forces on Bougainville actually numbered around 40 @,@ 000 men at the time , Allied intelligence failed to determine this accurately , estimating that there were only about 17 @,@ 500 defenders . As a result of this error , Australian planning staff believed that they were opposed by a roughly equal @-@ sized force and the Australian corps commander , Savige , under orders from General Thomas Blamey , commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the Australian Military Forces during the war , to " destroy ... [ Japanese ] ... resistance ... without committing major forces " and limiting casualties , consequently decided that he would pursue a limited offensive campaign to clear the Japanese from Bougainville . The majority of the Japanese force was believed to be concentrated in the south and as a result the main effort of the Australian plan was focused upon driving towards Buin . Supporting operations were also conducted along two other fronts . In the north , it was planned that the Japanese would be forced into the narrow Bonis Peninsula and contained there while , in the centre , the seizure of Pearl Ridge would give the Australians control of the east – west avenues of approach , as well as affording them protection against further counter @-@ attacks and opening the way for a drive to the east coast . The Australian troops were largely inexperienced , but were according to historian Karl James " fresh ... [ and ] well equipped " . For their part , according to James , the Japanese force on Bougainville had been " ... reinforced from <unk> with troops , weapons and equipment " and although much of 1944 had been spent foraging and establishing food supplies on the island , there was only " enough food reserves for four months " . 
 The build up of Australian forces was hampered by a lack of resources , which were focused largely upon the US operations in the Philippines , and Australian operations in Borneo , which was considered the priority , and ultimately these considerations would impact upon Australian strategy upon the island due to the limited amount of amphibious support available . After initial moves by the Australians to take over the US perimeter at Torokina and garrison the Outer Islands in September and October , in November the Australians took over officially from the Americans . Later that month , troops from the 7th Brigade left the perimeter and took over from the small US forces holding outposts along the Numa Numa Trail in the centre of the island . From there , a couple of minor skirmishes followed culminating in the Battle of Pearl Ridge . In late December , the 11th Brigade , under the command of Brigadier John Stevenson , took over control of the northern sector of the island from the 7th Brigade , which was transferred to the southern sector to take part in the main offensive . Throughout January , as part of efforts to liberate the northern part of the island , the brigade advanced north along the coast from Kuraio Mission , clearing the main settlements while sending patrols inland in an effort to flush out the Japanese from the high features in an effort to draw them into fighting in the open . In mid @-@ January the lead Australian battalion , the 31st / 51st Infantry Battalion , under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Joseph Kelly , came up against a strong Japanese position at Tsimba Ridge and over the course of three weeks fought to gain control of the feature . The Australians lost 23 killed and 53 wounded while the Japanese had at least 66 men killed . 
 = = = Preliminary moves = = = 
 Following the fighting on Tsimba Ridge , the 31st / 51st was relieved by the 26th Infantry Battalion , and the Australians continued to advance north towards Soraken . Over the course of several months , the 26th advanced on several axes : from Downs ' Ridge they crossed the <unk> River , while on the coast another element advanced though <unk> to the Compton River . Between these two forces , another linked up with those that had crossed the <unk> , and proceeded north over the Compton towards Soraken Plantation . Elsewhere , barges were used to land forces on the Soraken Peninsula in several locations to dislocate the Japanese forces there and sever their lines of communication , while other landings took place on <unk> Island and Torokori Island . In April , the 26th was relieved by the 55th / 53rd Infantry Battalion which advanced north to Ratsua , from where the Australians planned to move along the Bonis Peninsula . By late May , however , casualties amongst the 55th / 53rd meant that they had to be withdrawn from the line , and the 26th Infantry Battalion was moved back up to replace them , along with the 31st / 51st . At the start of June the Australians were stretched out across a 5 @-@ mile ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) line between Ratsua to Ruri Bay . 
 On 4 June , the 31st / 51st Infantry Battalion began patrolling operations around Buoi Plantation . Two companies , ' B ' and ' D ' , were committed to these operations with ' B ' Company focusing upon the north @-@ eastern part of the plantation , while ' D ' Company patrolled to their east . Clashes followed over the next three days ; the Australians lost one killed , and the Japanese 10 . Australian intelligence suggested that the Japanese had concentrated strongly along the approaches to the peninsula , and in order to deal with these positions it was decided that an amphibious landing would be made by a company of the 31st / 51st Infantry Battalion near the jetties around Porton Plantation , 3 @.@ 1 miles ( 5 @.@ 0 km ) to the north of <unk> , to outflank them and launch an attack from the rear , while the main force – consisting of the remainder of the 31st / 51st and the 26th Infantry Battalion – pushed north from the Ratsua front to establish a new position along a line between Porton and <unk> . During the planning phase , concerns were raised by several officers about the size of the force allocated and the distance that the breakthrough force would be required to advance to link up with the force landing at the beachhead , but these were ultimately discounted . On the evening of 5 June , the Australian battalion commander outlined his plan and in the afternoon of the following day rehearsal landings were undertaken . Final preparations were made on the night of 6 / 7 June and continued throughout the next day . 
 = = = Opposing forces = = = 
 The Australian landing force consisted of 190 men embarked on six landing craft . The bulk of the force was made up of infantry from ' A ' Company and a platoon from ' C ' Company , 31st / 51st Infantry Battalion under the command of Captain Clyde Downs . Artillery support was provided by the 11th and 12th Batteries of the 4th Field Regiment and the 2nd Mountain Battery . Other supporting units included engineers from the 16th Field Company and 42nd Assault Landing Craft Company , medical support from the 19th Field Ambulance and logistics support from the 223rd Supply Platoon . Although aerial reconnaissance indicated that there were strong Japanese fortifications in the area , initially no air support was allocated to the operation , with requests for preliminary air strikes being denied by II Corps as they were , according to James , not " considered to be suitable air targets " . The Japanese force in the immediate vicinity initially consisted of about 100 men from the Imperial Japanese Navy 's 87th Naval Garrison Force which had been formed from men drawn from the 211th Pioneer Unit interspersed with regular naval personnel . However , over the course of the battle the strength of the Japanese force grew to between 400 and 500 men . The Japanese force was commanded by the senior naval officer at Buka , Captain Eikichi Kato , whose 87th Naval Garrison Force had taken over responsibility for the defence of the <unk> area when the Imperial Japanese Army 's 38th Independent Mixed Brigade was transferred south to the Numa Numa area . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Initial landing and fighting around the beachhead = = = 
 At 3 : 57 am on 8 June the first wave of Australian troops landed on the beach in three landing craft . They came ashore unopposed and after advancing about 100 yards ( 91 m ) inland established a small perimeter around the beachhead in the tree line surrounding the plantation . A series of forward positions were then established a further 50 yards ( 46 m ) inland . Instead of pushing his rifle platoons further inland , however , Downs decided that he would wait for the second wave to arrive . This ultimately proved critical as it allowed the Japanese commander , Kato , time to respond to the landing . As the three landing craft of the first wave withdrew , another three landing craft came in with reinforcements , heavy weapons and other support elements , however , they ran aground on a coral reef and the men aboard were forced to wade ashore . Although one of these craft was later able to float free , two of the others remained stuck . A short time later they began to take fire from Japanese machine @-@ guns , which stopped the Australians from unloading their equipment . 
 Lacking organic indirect fire support as all the mortars had been in the landing craft that were in the second wave , Downs established communications with the artillery , and a barrage was brought down on suspected Japanese positions by the artillery forward observation officer , Lieutenant David Spark , with the assistance of a Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) Boomerang that was on station overhead to provide aerial observation . By dawn , Downs ' company was taking sporadic fire from Japanese pill boxes , and they began patrolling forward of their perimeter to locate these positions . These patrols were unable to progress very far before they were forced back by Japanese fire , which confirmed how bad the company 's position was . They determined that they had landed about 270 yards ( 250 m ) north of where they had been supposed to land , and inside what the official historian Gavin Long described as an " arc of enemy trenches and pill @-@ boxes with a radius of about 400 yards " that effectively boxed them in . 
 Throughout the day the defenders began pressing against the Australian forward positions and engaging them with mortar fire as more reinforcements were brought up . Shortly after the landing , Kato was able to concentrate a force of about 100 Japanese defenders in the immediate vicinity , however , throughout the day he was able to bring in further reinforcements and by nightfall there were approximately 300 Japanese around the Australian perimeter . In order to respond , an attempt was made by the Australians to bring in reinforcements of their own and supplies by sea . Due to the low tide and heavy fire from the beach , the attempt failed , as did two subsequent attempts , as the Japanese commander pre @-@ empted their arrival and set up ambushes along the approaches north and south of the landing beach . While the fighting was going on around Porton , beginning on 4 June , the 26th Infantry Battalion and the rest of the 31st / 51st Infantry Battalion attempted to break through to the Australian company from Ratsua . They were unable to penetrate the Japanese lines ; however , as they came up against defenders that were determined to resist because they were unable to withdraw any further along the peninsula . 
 = = = Australian evacuation efforts = = = 
 By the morning of 9 June , the supply situation for Downs ' company had become critical and 11th Brigade headquarters decided that it would be best to evacuate the beach . Up until that point casualties had been relatively light with only four killed and seven wounded , but the Japanese force , which had increased overnight to between 400 and 500 men as reinforcements arrived by barges and trucks from the Buka Passage area , launched a strong attack aimed at destroying the Australian force , attacking from three sides of the perimeter . In order to defend themselves the Australians called down heavy artillery fire from the battery of 25 @-@ pounders that was supporting them from its position on the Soraken peninsula . As the fighting intensified , some of the artillery shells were brought down as close as 25 yards ( 23 m ) from their own troops . Air support was also called in , with 16 RAAF Boomerangs and Royal New Zealand Air Force Corsairs attacking Japanese positions around the perimeter . As a result of these attacks , the Australians were able to hold off the Japanese attacks until 4 : 30 pm when three assault landing craft arrived from Soraken to take them off the beach , and ferry them out to two larger vessels that were waiting further out to sea . 
 Amid a torrent of Japanese fire , the Australians broke contact and made for the landing craft , bringing the wounded out with them . The embarkation took only five minutes , but as the vessels attempted to depart two of them , overloaded with about 60 men on board , ran aground and stuck fast . In an effort to lighten the load , several men volunteered to leave the craft , which enabled one of the vessels to float free . The other , however , remained stuck . Coming under attack from the Japanese , some of whom waded out and attacked the men in the vessel with grenades , the casualties mounted , with a number of men , including Downs , being either killed or lost overboard and subsequently listed as missing , presumed killed . 
 As rations and water dwindled , unsuccessful attempts were made on 10 June to rescue the men in the stranded barge with support from artillery and aircraft . While Corsairs flew close support missions , Beaufort and Mitchell bombers dropped life rafts but the survivors were unable to reach them due to machine @-@ gun fire . Further casualties occurred when , in the early morning of 11 June , a Japanese soldier managed to reach the vessel and fired upon the occupants with a machine @-@ gun , killing two and wounding others before he was killed himself . Shortly after this a Japanese anti @-@ tank gun fired two shells at the landing craft , destroying its stern . Further shots were prevented when Australian artillery ranged in on the gun , having been directed by Captain John Whitelaw , an artillery observer on one of two landing craft that had been despatched with canvas assault boats , crewed by engineers from the 16th Field Company . 
 Launching 150 yards ( 140 m ) from the stranded craft , three assault boats set out and over the course of two hours ferried the survivors back to the landing craft , which then set out for Soraken , arriving there at 4 : 30 am on 11 June . Other men swam over 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) through the shark @-@ infested waters to Torokori Island , while others were either rescued at sea or managed to link up with the Australians along the Ratsua front , who had been attempting to break through to them but found themselves checked 500 yards ( 460 m ) from them , by sneaking through the Japanese lines from the rear . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Subsequent operations = = = 
 Following the failure of the landing at Porton Plantation , the planned Australian advance into the Bonis Peninsula was called off . The Australian high command decided to refocus their efforts upon the drive towards Buin in the south and as a result the effort in the north was reduced to that of a holding action as further resources were transferred out of the sector . Following the withdrawal , the 31st / 51st Infantry Battalion continued fighting along the Ratsua front before being relieved on 28 June by the 8th Infantry Battalion and withdrawing to Torokina , where they remained until the end of the war . The 23rd Brigade under Brigadier Arnold Potts took over control of the sector , and for a period of four weeks along the Ratsua front the 8th and 27th Infantry Battalions carried out patrolling operations before the Australians decided to withdraw to the Buoi Plantation in mid @-@ July , by which time the Japanese forces in the area , boosted by their victory at Porton , had begun to seize the initiative through the use of harassment tactics . Following this several small @-@ scale actions continued along the front until offensive action was discontinued on 11 August 1945 as the war came to a conclusion . 
 = = = Analysis = = = 
 Since the end of the war , the conceptual validity and strategic necessity of the Australian landing has been called into question by historians . Both James and Davidson state that several aspects of the planning undertaken by 11th Brigade staff and the 31st / 51st Infantry Battalion 's commander contributed to the defeat , particularly in relation to the failure of intelligence to adequately identify the risks posed by the nearby reefs , as well as the failure to adequately resource the operation , and an overestimation of the ability of neighbouring forces to breakthrough to the beachhead . Charlton also argues that the landing was hastily planned , under @-@ resourced and inadequately supported , and that it was part of a strategically unnecessary campaign . James agrees that it was under resourced , stating that the size of the assault force was " too small to establish a beachhead and push inland as well " , although ultimately argues that the campaign was necessary . It has also been speculated that the Japanese might also have gained prior knowledge of the attack . In support of this , James outlines that in the aftermath of the fighting , Blamey visited Kelly at his headquarters around Ratsua and upon interviewing him , stated to the II Corps commander , Savige , that he felt that Kelly had erred in conducting rehearsals of the barge landings during the planning stage within view of Japanese positions , potentially warning them of the operation . 
 The Battle of Porton Plantation ended in defeat for the Australians , as the landing was repulsed and the Japanese remained in possession of the beachhead . Amidst a campaign where largely the Australians dominated – it was the only defeat – the battle represented a shift in momentum in the northern sector , which was in part due to the shift in resources south , a fact which continued to impact Australian operations in the sector until the end of the war . During the course of the landing and the subsequent withdrawal , the Australians suffered 23 killed or missing , presumed dead , and 106 wounded , while the Japanese lost 26 killed . Both sides seem to have overestimated the casualties that they inflicted , with the Australians believing that they had killed between 147 and 197 Japanese , and the Japanese estimating Australian losses to have been around 60 killed and 100 wounded . 
 = = = Commemoration = = = 
 After the end of hostilities , a reconnaissance party including officers from the 31st / 51st Infantry Battalion returned to the area and found that the Japanese defenders had buried the Australians that had died on the beach and had constructed a memorial to them , reading : " The Australian soldiers buried here died by the sea " . For its part in the landing , the 31st / 51st Infantry Battalion received the battle honour of " Bonis – Porton " , as did the 26th Infantry Battalion . Today , this honour is held by both the 31st Battalion , Royal Queensland Regiment and the 51st Battalion , Far North Queensland Regiment , the successor units of the 31st / 51st Infantry Battalion . The following decorations were awarded to members of the Australian forces that took part in the battle : one Distinguished Conduct Medal , two Military Crosses , four Military Medals , and three Mentions in Despatches . Porton Training Depot in Cairns , Australia , was named after this battle . 
 = Scotland in the High Middle Ages = 
 The High Middle Ages of Scotland encompass Scotland in the era between the death of Domnall II in 900 AD and the death of King Alexander III in 1286 , which was an indirect cause of the Scottish Wars of Independence . 
 At the close of the ninth century , various competing kingdoms occupied the territory of modern Scotland . Scandinavian influence was dominant in the northern and western islands , Brythonic culture in the southwest , the Anglo @-@ Saxon or English Kingdom of Northumbria in the southeast and the Pictish and Gaelic Kingdom of Alba in the east , north of the River Forth . By the tenth and eleventh centuries , northern Great Britain was increasingly dominated by Gaelic culture , and by the Gaelic regal lordship of Alba , known in Latin as either Albania or Scotia , and in English as " Scotland " . From its base in the east , this kingdom acquired control of the lands lying to the south and ultimately the west and much of the north . It had a flourishing culture , comprising part of the larger Gaelic @-@ speaking world and an economy dominated by agriculture and trade . 
 After the twelfth @-@ century reign of King David I , the Scottish monarchs are better described as Scoto @-@ Norman than Gaelic , preferring French culture to native Scottish culture . A consequence was the spread of French institutions and social values including Canon law . The first towns , called burghs , appeared in the same era , and as they spread , so did the Middle English language . These developments were offset by the acquisition of the Norse @-@ Gaelic west and the Gaelicisation of many of the noble families of French and Anglo @-@ French origin . National cohesion was fostered with the creation of various unique religious and cultural practices . By the end of the period , Scotland experienced a " Gaelic revival " , which created an integrated Scottish national identity . By 1286 , these economic , institutional , cultural , religious and legal developments had brought Scotland closer to its neighbours in England and the Continent , although outsiders continued to view Scotland as a provincial , even savage place . By this date , the Kingdom of Scotland had political boundaries that closely resembled those of the modern nation . 
 = = Historiography = = 
 Scotland in the High Middle Ages is a relatively well @-@ studied topic and Scottish medievalists have produced a wide variety of publications . Some , such as David Dumville , Thomas Owen Clancy and Dauvit Broun , are primarily interested in the native cultures of the country , and often have linguistic training in the Celtic languages . <unk> , such as <unk> Barrow , are concerned with the Norman and Scoto @-@ Norman cultures introduced to Scotland after the eleventh century . For much of the twentieth century , historians tended to stress the cultural change that took place in Scotland during this time . However , scholars such as Cynthia Neville and Richard Oram , while not ignoring cultural changes , argue that continuity with the Gaelic past was just as , if not more , important . 
 Since the publication of Scandinavian Scotland by Barbara E. Crawford in 1987 , there has been a growing volume of work dedicated to the understanding of Norse influence in this period . However , from 849 on , when Columba 's relics were removed from Iona in the face of Viking incursions , written evidence from local sources in the areas under Scandinavian influence all but vanishes for three hundred years . The sources for information about the Hebrides and indeed much of northern Scotland from the eighth to the eleventh century , are thus almost exclusively Irish , English or Norse . The main Norse texts were written in the early thirteenth century and should be treated with care . The English and Irish sources are more contemporary , but according to historian Alex Woolf , may have " led to a southern bias in the story " , especially as much of the Hebridean archipelago became Norse @-@ speaking during this period . 
 There are various traditional clan histories dating from the nineteenth century such as the " monumental " The Clan Donald and a significant corpus of material from the Gaelic oral tradition that relates to this period , although their value is questionable . 
 = = Origins of the Kingdom of Alba = = 
 At the close of the ninth century various polities occupied Scotland . The Pictish and Gaelic Kingdom of Alba had just been united in the east ; the Scandinavian @-@ influenced Kingdom of the Isles emerged in the west . Ragnall ua Ímair was a key figure at this time although the extent to which he ruled territory in western and northern Scotland including the Hebrides and Northern Isles is unknown as contemporary sources are silent on this matter . Dumbarton , the capital of the Kingdom of Strathclyde had been sacked by the Uí Ímair in 870 . This was clearly a major assault , which may have brought the whole of mainland Scotland under temporary Uí <unk> control . The south @-@ east had been absorbed by the English Kingdom of Bernicia / Northumbria in the seventh century . Galloway in the south west was a Lordship with some regality . In a Galwegian charter dated to the reign of Fergus , the Galwegian ruler styled himself rex <unk> , King of Galloway . In the north east the ruler of Moray was called not only " king " in both Scandinavian and Irish sources , but before Máel Snechtai , " King of Alba " . 
 However , when Domnall mac Causantín died at Dunnottar in 900 , he was the first man to be recorded as rí Alban and his kingdom was the nucleus that would expand as Viking and other influences waned . In the tenth century the Alban elite had begun to develop a conquest myth to explain their increasing Gaelicisation at the expense of Pictish culture . Known as MacAlpin 's Treason , it describes how Cináed mac Ailpín is supposed to have annihilated the Picts in one fell takeover . However , modern historians are now beginning to reject this conceptualization of Scottish origins . No contemporary sources mention this conquest . Moreover , the Gaelicisation of Pictland was a long process predating Cináed , and is evidenced by Gaelic @-@ speaking Pictish rulers , Pictish royal patronage of Gaelic poets , and Gaelic inscriptions and placenames . The change of identity can perhaps be explained by the death of the Pictish language , but also important may be Causantín II 's alleged <unk> of the " Pictish " Church and the trauma caused by Viking invasions , most strenuously felt in the Pictish kingdom 's heartland of Fortriu . 
 = = Scandinavian @-@ influenced territories = = 
 = = = Kingdom of the Isles = = = 
 The Kingdom of the Isles comprised the Hebrides , the islands of the Firth of Clyde and the Isle of Man from the 9th to the 13th centuries AD . The islands were known to the Norse as the Suðreyjar , or " Southern Isles " as distinct from the Norðreyjar or " Northern Isles " of Orkney and Shetland , which were held by the Earls of Orkney as vassals of the Norwegian crown throughout the High Middle Ages . 
 After Ragnall ua Ímair , Amlaíb Cuarán , who fought at the Battle of Brunanburh in 937 and who also became King of Northumbria , is the next King of the Isles on record . In the succeeding years Norse sources also list various rulers such as Gilli , Sigurd the Stout , Håkon Eiriksson and Thorfinn Sigurdsson as rulers over the Hebrides as vassals of the Kings of Norway or Denmark . 
 Godred Crovan became the ruler of Dublin and Mann from 1079 and from the early years of the twelfth century the Crovan dynasty asserted themselves and ruled as " Kings of Mann and the Isles " for the next half century . The kingdom was then sundered due to the actions of Somerled whose sons inherited the southern Hebrides while the Manx rulers held on to the " north isles " for another century . 
 = = = The North = = = 
 The Scandinavian influence in Scotland was probably at its height in the mid eleventh century during the time of Thorfinn Sigurdsson , who attempted to create a single political and ecclesiastical domain stretching from Shetland to Man . The permanent Scandinavian holdings in Scotland at that time must therefore have been at least a quarter of the land area of modern Scotland . 
 By the end of the eleventh century the Norwegian crown had come to accept that Caithness was held by the Earls of Orkney as a fiefdom from the Kings of Scotland although its Norse character was retained throughout the thirteenth century . Raghnall mac Gofraidh was granted Caithness after assisting the Scots king in a conflict with Harald Maddadson , an earl of Orkney in the early thirteenth century . 
 In the ninth century Orcadian control stretched into Moray , which was a semi @-@ independent kingdom for much of this early period . The Moray rulers MacBeth ( 1040 – 1057 ) and his successor Lulach ( 1057 – 1058 ) became rulers of the entire Scottish kingdom for a time . However , Moray was subjugated by the Scottish kings after 1130 , when the native ruler , Óengus of Moray was killed leading a rebellion . Another revolt in 1187 was equally unsuccessful . 
 = = = South west Scotland = = = 
 By the mid tenth century Amlaíb Cuarán controlled The Rhinns and the region gets the modern name of Galloway from the mixture of Viking and Gaelic Irish settlement that produced the Gall @-@ Gaidel . Magnus Barelegs is said to have " subdued the people of Galloway " in the eleventh century and Whithorn seems to have been a centre of Hiberno @-@ Norse artisans who traded around the Irish Sea by the end of the first millennium . However , the place name , written and archaeological evidence of extensive Norse ( as opposed to Norse @-@ Gael ) settlement in the area is not convincing . 
 The ounceland system seems to have become widespread down the west coast including much of Argyll , and most of the south west apart from a region near the inner Solway Firth . In Dumfries and Galloway the place name evidence is complex and of mixed Gaelic , Norse and Danish influence , the last most likely stemming from contact with the extensive Danish holdings in northern England . Although the Scots obtained greater control after the death of Gilla Brigte and the accession of Lochlann in 1185 , Galloway was not fully absorbed by Scotland until 1235 , after the rebellion of the Galwegians was crushed . 
 = = Strathclyde = = 
 The main language of Strathclyde and elsewhere in the Hen Ogledd in the opening years of the High Middle Ages was Cumbric , a variety of the British language akin to Old Welsh . Some time after 1018 and before 1054 , the kingdom appears to have been conquered by the Scots , most probably during the reign of Máel Coluim mac Cináeda who died in 1034 . At this time the territory of Strathclyde extended as far south as the River Derwent . In 1054 , the English king Edward the Confessor dispatched Earl Siward of Northumbria against the Scots , then ruled by Mac Beth . By the 1070s , if not earlier in the reign of Máel Coluim mac Donnchada , it appears that the Scots again controlled Strathclyde , although William Rufus annexed the southern portion in 1092 . The territory was granted by Alexander I to his brother David , later King David I , in 1107 . 
 = = Kingdom of Alba or Scotia = = 
 = = = Gaelic kings : Domnall II to Alexander I = = = 
 Domnall mac Causantín 's nickname was <unk> . This simply meant a madman , or , in early Irish law , a man not in control of his functions and hence without legal culpability . The following long reign ( 900 – 942 / 3 ) of his successor Causantín is more often regarded as the key to formation of the Kingdom of Alba . 
 The period between the accession of Máel Coluim I and Máel Coluim mac Cináeda was marked by good relations with the Wessex rulers of England , intense internal dynastic disunity and , despite this , relatively successful expansionary policies . In 945 , king Máel Coluim I received Strathclyde as part of a deal with King Edmund of England , an event offset somewhat by Máel Coluim 's loss of control in Moray . Sometime in the reign of king <unk> ( 954 – 962 ) , the Scots captured the fortress called oppidum Eden , i.e. Edinburgh . Scottish control of Lothian was strengthened with Máel Coluim II 's victory over the Northumbrians at the Battle of Carham ( 1018 ) . The Scots had probably some authority in Strathclyde since the later part of the ninth century , but the kingdom kept its own rulers , and it is not clear that the Scots were always strong enough to enforce their authority . 
 The reign of King Donnchad I from 1034 was marred by failed military adventures , and he was defeated and killed by MacBeth , the Mormaer of Moray , who became king in 1040 . MacBeth ruled for seventeen years , so peacefully that he was able to leave to go on pilgrimage to Rome . However , he was overthrown by Máel Coluim , the son of Donnchad who some months later defeated MacBeth 's stepson and successor Lulach to become king Máel Coluim III . In subsequent medieval propaganda Donnchad 's reign was portrayed positively , while MacBeth was vilified . William Shakespeare followed this distorted history in describing both men and the Queen consort Gruoch in his play Macbeth . 
 It was Máel Coluim III , not his father Donnchad , who did more to create the dynasty that ruled Scotland for the following two centuries . Part of the resource was the large number of children he had , perhaps as many as a dozen , through marriage to the widow or daughter of Thorfinn Sigurdsson and afterwards to the Anglo @-@ Hungarian princess Margaret , granddaughter of Edmund Ironside . However , despite having a royal Anglo @-@ Saxon wife , Máel Coluim spent much of his reign conducting slave raids against the English , adding to the woes of that people in the aftermath of the Norman Conquest of England and the Harrying of the North . Marianus Scotus narrates that " the Gaels and French devastated the English ; and [ the English ] were dispersed and died of hunger ; and were compelled to eat human flesh " . 
 Máel Coluim 's Queen Margaret was the sister of the native claimant to the English throne , Edgar Ætheling . This marriage , and Máel Coluim 's raids on northern England , prompted interference by the Norman rulers of England in the Scottish kingdom . King William the Conqueror invaded and Máel Coluim submitted to his authority , giving his oldest son Donnchad as a hostage . From 1079 onwards there were various cross border raids by both parties and Máel Coluim himself and Edward , his eldest son by Margaret , died in one of them in the Battle of Alnwick , in 1093 . 
 Tradition would have made his brother Domnall Bán Máel Coluim 's successor , but it seems that Edward , his eldest son by Margaret , was his chosen heir . With Máel Coluim and Edward dead in the same battle , and his other sons in Scotland still young , Domnall was made king . However , Donnchad II , Máel Coluim 's eldest son by his first wife , obtained some support from William Rufus and took the throne . According to the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle his English and French followers were massacred , and Donnchad II himself was killed later in the same year ( 1094 ) by Domnall 's ally Máel <unk> of Mearns . In 1097 , William Rufus sent another of Máel Coluim 's sons , Edgar , to take the kingship . The ensuing death of Domnall Bán secured the kingship for Edgar , and there followed a period of relative peace . The reigns of both Edgar and his successor Alexander are obscure by comparison with their successors . The former 's most notable act was to send a camel ( or perhaps an elephant ) to his fellow Gael <unk> Ua Briain , High King of Ireland . When Edgar died , Alexander took the kingship , while his youngest brother David became Prince of Cumbria . 
 = = = Scoto @-@ Norman kings : David I to Alexander III = = = 
 The period between the accession of David I and the death of Alexander III was marked by dependency upon and relatively good relations with the Kings of England . The period can be regarded as one of great historical transformation , part of a more general phenomenon , which has been called " Europeanisation " . The period also witnessed the successful imposition of royal authority across most of the modern country . After David I , and especially in the reign of William I , Scotland 's Kings became ambivalent about the culture of most of their subjects . As Walter of Coventry tells us , " The modern kings of Scotland count themselves as Frenchmen , in race , manners , language and culture ; they keep only Frenchmen in their household and following , and have reduced the Gaels to utter servitude . " 
 This situation was not without consequence . In the aftermath of William 's capture at Alnwick in 1174 , the Scots turned on the small number of Middle English @-@ speakers and French @-@ speakers among them . William of Newburgh related that the Scots first attacked the Scoto @-@ English in their own army , and Newburgh reported a repetition of these events in Scotland itself . Walter Bower , writing a few centuries later about the same events confirms that " there took place a most wretched and widespread persecution of the English both in Scotland and Galloway " . 
 The first instance of strong opposition to the Scottish kings was perhaps the revolt of Óengus , the Mormaer of Moray . Other important resistors to the expansionary Scottish kings were Somerled , Fergus of Galloway , Gille Brigte , Lord of Galloway and Harald Maddadsson , along with two kin @-@ groups known today as the <unk> and the MacWilliams . The threat from the latter was so grave that , after their defeat in 1230 , the Scottish crown ordered the public execution of the infant girl who happened to be the last of the <unk> line . According to the Lanercost Chronicle : 
 Many of these resistors collaborated , and drew support not just in the peripheral Gaelic regions of Galloway , Moray , Ross and Argyll , but also from eastern " Scotland @-@ proper " , and elsewhere in the Gaelic world . However , by the end of the twelfth century , the Scottish kings had acquired the authority and ability to draw in native Gaelic lords outside their previous zone of control in order to do their work , the most famous examples being Lochlann , Lord of Galloway and Ferchar mac in <unk> . By the reign of Alexander III , the Scots were in a strong position to annex the remainder of the western seaboard , which they did following Haakon Haakonarson 's ill @-@ fated invasion and the stalemate of the Battle of Largs with the Treaty of Perth in 1266 . The conquest of the west , the creation of the <unk> of Carrick in 1186 and the absorption of the Lordship of Galloway after the Galwegian revolt of Gille Ruadh in 1235 meant that Gaelic speakers under the rule of the Scottish king formed a majority of the population during the so @-@ called Norman period . The integration of Gaelic , Norman and Saxon culture that began to occur may have been the platform that enabled King Robert I to emerge victorious during the Wars of Independence , which followed soon after the death of Alexander III . 
 = = Geography = = 
 At the beginning of this period the boundaries of Alba contained only a small proportion of modern Scotland . Even when these lands were added to in the tenth and eleventh centuries , the term Scotia was applied in sources only to the region between the River Forth , the central Grampians and the River Spey and only began to be used to describe all of the lands under the authority of the Scottish crown from the second half of the twelfth century . By the late thirteenth century when the Treaty of York ( 1237 ) and Treaty of Perth ( 1266 ) had fixed the boundaries with the Kingdom of the Scots with England and Norway respectively , its borders were close to the modern boundaries . After this time both Berwick and the Isle of Man were lost to England , and Orkney and Shetland were gained from Norway in the fifteenth century . 
 The area that became Scotland in this period is divided by geology into five major regions : the Southern Uplands , Central Lowlands , the Highlands , the North @-@ east coastal plain and the Islands . Some of these were further divided by mountains , major rivers and marshes . Most of these regions had strong cultural and economic ties elsewhere : to England , Ireland , Scandinavian and mainland Europe . Internal communications were difficult and the country lacked an obvious geographical centre . Dunfermline emerged as a major royal centre in the reign of Malcolm III and Edinburgh began to be used to house royal records in the reign of David I , but , perhaps because of its proximity and vulnerability to England , it did not become a formal capital in this period . 
 The expansion of Alba into the wider Kingdom of Scotland was a gradual process combining external conquest and the suppression of occasional rebellions with the extension of <unk> power through the placement of effective agents of the crown . Neighbouring independent kings became subject to Alba and eventually disappeared from the records . In the ninth century the term mormaer , meaning " great steward " , began to appear in the records to describe the rulers of Moray , Strathearn , Buchan , Angus and Mearns , who may have acted as " marcher lords " for the kingdom to counter the Viking threat . Later the process of consolidation is associated with the feudalism introduced by David I , which , particularly in the east and south where the crown 's authority was greatest , saw the placement of lordships , often based on castles , and the creation of administrative sheriffdoms , which overlay the pattern of local thegns . It also saw the English earl and Latin comes begin to replace the mormaers in the records . The result has been seen as a " hybrid kingdom , in which Gaelic , Anglo @-@ Saxon , Flemish and Norman elements all coalesced under its ' Normanised ' , but nevertheless native lines of kings " . 
 = = Economy and society = = 
 = = = Economy = = = 
 The Scottish economy of this period was dominated by agriculture and by short @-@ distance , local trade . There was an increasing amount of foreign trade in the period , as well as exchange gained by means of military plunder . By the end of this period , coins were replacing barter goods , but for most of this period most exchange was done without the use of metal currency . 
 Most of Scotland 's agricultural wealth in this period came from pastoralism , rather than arable farming . Arable farming grew significantly in the " Norman period " , but with geographical differences , low @-@ lying areas being subject to more arable farming than high @-@ lying areas such as the Highlands , Galloway and the Southern Uplands . Galloway , in the words of G. W. S. Barrow , " already famous for its cattle , was so overwhelmingly pastoral , that there is little evidence in that region of land under any permanent cultivation , save along the Solway coast " . The average amount of land used by a husbandman in Scotland might have been around 26 acres . The native Scots favoured pastoralism , in that Gaelic lords were happier to give away more land to French and Middle English @-@ speaking settlers , while holding on tenaciously to upland regions , perhaps contributing to the Highland / Galloway @-@ Lowland division that emerged in Scotland in the later Middle Ages . The main unit of land measurement in Scotland was the davoch ( i.e. " vat " ) , called the arachor in Lennox and also known as the " Scottish ploughgate " . In English @-@ speaking Lothian , it was simply ploughgate . It may have measured about 104 acres ( 0 @.@ 42 km2 ) , divided into 4 raths . Cattle , pigs and cheeses were among the chief foodstuffs , from a wide range of produce including sheep , fish , rye , barley , bee wax and honey . 
 David I established the first chartered burghs in Scotland , copying the burgher charters and Leges <unk> ( rules governing virtually every aspect of life and work ) almost verbatim from the English customs of Newcastle @-@ Upon @-@ Tyne . Early burgesses were usually Flemish , English , French and German , rather than Gaelic Scots . The burgh 's vocabulary was composed totally of either Germanic and French terms . The councils that ran individual burghs were individually known as lie <unk> , meaning the dozen . 
 = = = Demography and language = = = 
 The population of Scotland in this period is unknown . The first reliable information in 1755 shows the inhabitants of Scotland as 1 @,@ 265 @,@ 380 . Best estimates put the Scottish population for earlier periods in the High Middle Ages between 500 @,@ 000 and 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 people , growing from a low point to a high point . Linguistically , the majority of people within Scotland throughout this period spoke the Gaelic language , then simply called Scottish , or in Latin , lingua Scotica . Other languages spoken throughout this period were Old Norse and English , with the Cumbric language disappearing somewhere between 900 and 1100 . Pictish may have survived into this period , but the evidence is weak . After the accession of David I , or perhaps before , Gaelic ceased to be the main language of the royal court . From his reign until the end of the period , the Scottish monarchs probably favoured the French language , as evidenced by reports from contemporary chronicles , literature and translations of administrative documents into the French language . English , with French and Flemish , became the main language of Scottish burghs . However , they were , in Barrow 's words , " scarcely more than villages ... numbered in hundreds rather than thousands " . 
 = = = Society = = = 
 The legal tract known as Laws of the <unk> and Scots , probably compiled in the reign of David I , underlines the importance of the kin group as entitled to compensation for the killing of individual members . It also lists five grades of man : King , mormaer , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . The highest rank below the king , the mormaer ( " great officer " ) , were probably about a dozen provincial rulers , later replaced by the English term earl . Below them the <unk> ( leader ) , appear to have managed areas of the royal demesne , or that of a mormaer or abbot , within which they would have held substantial estates , sometimes described as shires and the title was probably equivalent to the later thane . The lowest free rank mentioned by the Laws of the <unk> and Scots , the <unk> ( literally , little or young lord ) , is a term the text does not translate into French . There were probably relatively large numbers of free peasant farmers , called husbandmen or bondmen , in the south and north of the country , but fewer in the lands between the Forth and Sutherland until the twelfth century , when landlords began to encourage the formation of such a class through paying better wages and deliberate immigration . Below the husbandmen a class of free farmers with smaller parcels of land developed , with cottars and grazing tenants ( <unk> ) . The non @-@ free <unk> , <unk> or serfs existed in various forms of service , with terms with their origins in Irish practice , including <unk> , <unk> and <unk> who were tied to a lord 's estate and unable to leave it without permission , but who records indicate often absconded for better wages or work in other regions or in the developing burghs . 
 The introduction of feudalism from the time of David I , not only introduced sheriffdoms that overlay the pattern of local thanes , but also meant that new tenures were held from the king , or a superior lord , in exchange for loyalty and forms of service that were usually military . However , the imposition of feudalism continued to sit beside existing system of landholding and tenure and it is not clear how this change impacted on the lives of the ordinary free and unfree workers . In places , feudalism may have tied workers more closely to the land , but the predominantly pastoral nature of Scottish agriculture may have made the imposition of a manorial system on the English model impracticable . Obligations appear to have been limited to occasional labour service , seasonal renders of food , hospitality and money rents . 
 = = Law and government = = 
 Early Gaelic law tracts , first written down in the ninth century , reveal a society highly concerned with kinship , status , honour and the regulation of blood feuds . Scottish common law began to take shape at the end of the period , assimilating Gaelic and Celtic law with practices from Anglo @-@ Norman England and the Continent . In the twelfth century , and certainly in the thirteenth , strong continental legal influences began to have more effect , such as Canon law and various Anglo @-@ Norman practices . Pre @-@ fourteenth century law among the native Scots is not always well attested , but extensive knowledge of early Gaelic Law gives some basis for its reconstruction . In the earliest extant Scottish legal manuscript , there is a document called Leges inter <unk> et <unk> . The document survives in Old French , and is almost certainly a French translation of an earlier Gaelic document . It retained a vast number of untranslated Gaelic legal terms . Later medieval legal documents , written both in Latin and Middle English , contain more Gaelic legal terms , examples including <unk> ( Old Irish <unk> or <unk> ; exemption ) and <unk> ( Old Irish <unk> ; ecclesiastic heir ) . 
 A Judex ( pl. <unk> ) represents a post @-@ Norman continuity with the ancient Gaelic orders of lawmen called in English today <unk> . Bearers of the office almost always have Gaelic names north of the Forth or in the south @-@ west . <unk> were often royal officials who supervised baronial , abbatial and other lower @-@ ranking " courts " . However , the main official of law in the post @-@ Davidian Kingdom of the Scots was the Justiciar who held courts and reported to the king personally . Normally , there were two <unk> , organised by linguistic boundaries : the Justiciar of Scotia and the Justiciar of Lothian . Sometimes Galloway had its own Justiciar too . 
 The office of Justiciar and Judex were just two ways that Scottish society was governed . In the earlier period , the king " delegated " power to hereditary native " officers " such as the Mormaers / Earls and <unk> / <unk> . It was a government of gift @-@ giving and bardic lawmen . There were also popular courts , the <unk> , testament to which are dozens of placenames throughout eastern Scotland . In the Norman period , sheriffdoms and sheriffs and , to a lesser extent , bishops ( see below ) became increasingly important . The former enabled the King to effectively administer royal demesne land . During David I 's reign , royal sheriffs had been established in the king 's core personal territories ; namely , in rough chronological order , at Roxburgh , Scone , Berwick @-@ upon @-@ Tweed , Stirling and Perth . By the reign of William I , there may have been about 30 royal sheriffdoms , including ones at Ayr and Dumfries , key locations on the borders of Galloway @-@ Carrick . As the distribution and number of sheriffdoms expanded , so did royal control . By the end of the thirteenth century , sheriffdoms had been established in westerly locations as far @-@ flung as Wigtown , Kintyre , Skye and Lorne . Through these , the thirteenth @-@ century Scottish king exercised more control over Scotland than any of his later medieval successors . The king himself was itinerant and had no " capital " as such although Scone performed a key function . By ritual tradition , all Scottish kings in this period had to be crowned there by the Mormaers of Strathearn and Fife . Although King David I tried to build up Roxburgh as a capital , in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries , more charters were issued at Scone than any other location . Other popular locations were nearby Perth , Stirling , Dunfermline and Edinburgh . In the earliest part of this era , Forres and Dunkeld seem to have been the chief royal residences . 
 Records from the Scandinavian @-@ held lands are much @-@ less well documented by comparison . Udal law formed the basis of the legal system and it is known that the Hebrides were taxed using the Ounceland measure . <unk> were open @-@ air governmental assemblies that met in the presence of the jarl and the meetings were open to virtually all free men . At these sessions decisions were made , laws passed and complaints adjudicated . Examples include Tingwall and Law Ting Holm in Shetland , Dingwall in Easter Ross , and Tynwald on the Isle of Man . 
 = = Warfare = = 
 = = = Land warfare = = = 
 By the twelfth century the ability of lords and the king to call on wider bodies of men beyond their household troops for major campaigns had become the " common " ( communis <unk> ) or " Scottish army " ( exercitus <unk> ) , the result of a universal obligation based on the holding of variously named units of land . Later decrees indicated that the common army was a levy of all able @-@ bodied freemen aged between 16 and 60 , with 8 @-@ days warning . It produced relatively large numbers of men serving for a limited period , usually as unarmoured or poorly armoured bowmen and spearmen . In this period it continued to be mustered by the earls and they often led their men in battle , as was the case in the Battle of the Standard in 1138 . It would continue to provide the vast majority of Scottish national armies , potentially producing tens of thousands of men for short periods of conflict , into the early modern era . 
 There also developed obligations that produced smaller numbers of feudal troops . The Davidian Revolution of the twelfth century was seen by Geoffrey Barrow as bringing " fundamental innovations in military organization " . These included the knight 's fee , homage and fealty , as well as castle @-@ building and the regular use of professional cavalry , as knights held castles and estates in exchange for service , providing troops on a 40 @-@ day basis . David 's Norman followers and their retinues were able to provide a force of perhaps 200 mounted and armoured knights , but the vast majority of his forces were the " common army " of poorly armed infantry , capable of performing well in raiding and guerrilla warfare . Although such troops were only infrequently able to stand up to the English in the field , nonetheless they did manage to do so critically in the wars of independence at Stirling Bridge in 1297 and Bannockburn in 1314 . 
 = = = Marine warfare = = = 
 The Viking onslaught of the British Isles was based on superior sea @-@ power , which enabled the creation of the thalassocracies of the north and west . In the late tenth century the naval battle of " <unk> " ( tentatively identified as taking place near the Slate Islands of Argyll ) was won by Alban forces over Vikings , although this was an unusual setback for the Norse . In 962 Ildulb mac Causantín , King of Scots , was killed ( according to the Chronicle of the Kings of Alba ) fighting the Norse near Cullen , at the Battle of <unk> , and although there is no evidence of permanent Viking settlement on the east coast of Scotland south of the Moray Firth , raids and even invasions certainly occurred . Dunnottar was taken during the reign of Domnall mac Causantín and the Orkneyinga saga records an attack on the Isle of May , by Sweyn Asleifsson and <unk> <unk> . The long @-@ ship , the key to their success , was a graceful , long , narrow , light , wooden boat with a shallow draft hull designed for speed . This shallow draft allowed navigation in waters only one metre deep and permitted beach landings , while its light weight enabled it to be carried over portages . Longships were also double @-@ ended , the symmetrical bow and stern allowing the ship to reverse direction quickly without having to turn around . In the Gàidhealtachd they were eventually succeeded by the Birlinn , highland galley and <unk> , which , in ascending order of size , and which replaced the steering @-@ board with a stern @-@ rudder from the late twelfth century . Forces of ships were raised through obligations of a ship @-@ levy through the system of ouncelands and pennylands , which have been argued to date back to the muster system of Dál Riata , but were probably introduced by Scandinavian settlers . Later evidence suggests that the supply of ships for war became linked to military feudal obligations . Viking naval power was disrupted by conflicts between the Scandinavian kingdoms , but entered a period of resurgence in the 13th century when Norwegian kings began to build some of the largest ships seen in Northern European waters , until Haakon <unk> 's ill @-@ fated expedition in 1263 left the Scottish crown the most significant power in the region . 
 = = Christianity and the Church = = 
 By the tenth century all of northern Britain was Christianised , except the Scandinavian north and west , which had been lost to the church in the face of Norse settlement . 
 = = = Saints = = = 
 Like every other Christian country , one of the main features of medieval Scottish Christianity was the Cult of Saints . Saints of Irish origin who were particularly revered included various figures called St <unk> and St. Colman , and saints <unk> and Finan . The most important missionary saint was Columba , who emerged as a national figure in the combined Scottish and Pictish kingdom , with a new centre established in the east at Dunkeld by Kenneth I for part of his relics . He remained a major figure into the fourteenth century and a new foundation was endowed by William I at Arbroath Abbey and the relics in the Monymusk Reliquary handed over to the Abbot 's care . Regional saints remained important to local identities . In Strathclyde the most important saint was St Kentigern , in Lothian , St Cuthbert and after this martyrdom around 1115 a cult emerged in Orkney , Shetland and northern Scotland around Magnus Erlendsson , Earl of Orkney . The cult of St Andrew in Scotland was established on the Eastern coast by the Pictish kings as early as the eighth century . The shrine , which from the twelfth century was said to have contained the relics of the saint , brought to Scotland by Saint Regulus , began to attract pilgrims from Scotland , but also from England and further away . By the twelfth century the site at Kilrymont , had become known simply as St. Andrews and it became increasingly associated with Scottish national identity and the royal family . It was renewed as a focus for devotion with the patronage of Queen Margaret , who also became important after her canonisation in 1250 and the ceremonial transfer of her remains to Dunfermline Abbey , as one of the most revered national saints . 
 = = = Organisation = = = 
 There is some evidence that Christianity made inroads into the Viking controlled Highlands and Islands before the official conversion at the end of the tenth century . There are a relatively large number of isles called Pabbay or Papa in the Western and Northern Isles , which may indicate a " hermit 's " or " priest 's isle " from this period . Changes in patterns of grave goods and the use of Viking place names using -kirk also suggest that the Christianity had begun to spread before the official conversion . According to the Orkneyinga Saga the Northern Isles were Christianised by Olav Tryggvasson in 995 when he stopped at South Walls on his way from Ireland to Norway . The King summoned the jarl Sigurd the Stout and said " I order you and all your subjects to be baptised . If you refuse , I 'll have you killed on the spot and I swear I will ravage every island with fire and steel . " Unsurprisingly , Sigurd agreed and the islands became Christian at a stroke , receiving their own bishop in the early eleventh century . Elsewhere in Scandinavian Scotland the record is less clear . There was a Bishop of Iona until the late tenth century and there is then a gap of more than a century , possibly filled by the Bishops of Orkney , before the appointment of the first Bishop of Mann in 1079 . 
 At the beginning of the period Scottish monasticism was dominated by monks called Céli Dé ( lit . " vassals of God " ) , anglicised as culdees . At St Andrews and elsewhere , Céli Dé abbeys are recorded and the round towers at Brechin and Abernethy are evidence of Irish influence . Gaelic monasticism was vibrant and expansionary for much of the period and dozens of monasteries , often called Schottenklöster , were founded by Gaelic monks on the continent . The introduction of the continental type of monasticism to Scotland is associated with Queen Margaret , the wife of Máel Coluim III , although her exact role is unclear . She was in communication with Lanfranc , Archbishop of Canterbury , and he provided a few monks for a new Benedictine abbey at Dunfermline ( c . 1070 ) . Subsequent foundations under Margaret 's sons , the kings Edgar , Alexander I and particularly David I , tended to be of the reformed type that followed the lead set by Cluny . These stressed the original Benedictine virtues of poverty , chastity and obedience , but also contemplation and service of the Mass and were followed in various forms by large numbers of reformed Benedictine , Augustinian and Cistercian houses . 
 Before the twelfth century most Scottish churches had collegiate bodies of clergy who served over a wide area , often tied together by devotion to a particular missionary saint . From this period local lay landholders , perhaps following the example of David I , began to adopt the continental practice of building churches on their land for the local population and endowing them with land and a priest , beginning in the south , spreading to the north @-@ east and then the west , being almost universal by the first survey of the Scottish Church for papal taxation in 1274 . The administration of these parishes was often given over to local monastic institutions in a process known as appropriation . Scotland had little clear diocesan structure before the Norman period . There were bishoprics based on various ancient churches , but some are very obscure in the records and there appear to be long vacancies . From around 1070 , in the reign of Malcolm III , there was a " Bishop of Alba " resident at St. Andrews , but it is not clear what authority he had over the other bishops . After the Norman Conquest of England , the Archbishops of both Canterbury and York each claimed superiority over the Scottish church . The church in Scotland attained independent status after the Papal Bull of Celestine III ( Cum universi , 1192 ) by which all Scottish bishoprics except Galloway were formally independent of York and Canterbury . However , unlike Ireland , which had been granted four <unk> in the same century , Scotland received no Archbishop and the whole Ecclesia <unk> , with individual Scottish bishoprics ( except Whithorn / Galloway ) , became the " special daughter of the see of Rome " . It was in practice run by special councils made up of all its bishops , with the bishop of St Andrews emerging as the most important player . 
 = = Culture = = 
 As a predominantly Gaelic society , most Scottish cultural practices throughout this period mirrored closely those of Ireland , or at least those of Ireland with some Pictish borrowings . After David I , the French @-@ speaking kings introduced cultural practices popular in Anglo @-@ Norman England , France and elsewhere . As in all pre @-@ modern societies , storytelling was popular . The English scholar D. D. R. Owen , who specialises in the literature of this era , writes that " Professional storytellers would ply their trade from court to court . Some of them would have been native Scots , no doubt offering legends from the ancient Celtic past performed ... in Gaelic when appropriate , but in French for most of the new nobility " . Almost all of these stories are lost , although some have come down in the Gaelic or Scots oral tradition . One form of oral culture extremely well accounted for in this period is genealogy . There are dozens of Scottish genealogies surviving from this era , covering everyone from the Mormaers of Lennox and Moray to the Scottish king himself . Scotland 's kings maintained an <unk> <unk> , a royal high poet who had a permanent place in all medieval Gaelic lordships , and whose purpose was to recite genealogies when needed , for occasions such as coronations . 
 Before the reign of David I , the Scots possessed a flourishing literary elite who regularly produced texts in both Gaelic and Latin that were frequently transmitted to Ireland and elsewhere . Dauvit Broun has shown that a Gaelic literary elite survived in the eastern Scottish lowlands , in places such as Loch Leven and Brechin into the thirteenth century , However , surviving records are predominantly written in Latin , and their authors would usually translate vernacular terms into Latin , so that historians are faced with researching a Gaelic society clothed in Latin terminology . Even names were translated into more common continental forms ; for instance , Gilla Brigte became Gilbert , Áed became Hugh , etc . As far as written literature is concerned , there may be more medieval Scottish Gaelic literature than is often thought . Almost all medieval Gaelic literature has survived because it was sustained in Ireland , not in Scotland . Thomas Owen Clancy has recently all but proven that the Lebor <unk> , the so @-@ called " Irish Nennius " , was written in Scotland , and probably at the monastery in Abernethy . Yet this text survives only from manuscripts preserved in Ireland . Other literary work that has survived include that of the prolific poet Gille Brighde Albanach . About 1218 , Gille Brighde wrote a poem — Heading for Damietta — on his experiences of the Fifth Crusade . In the thirteenth century , French flourished as a literary language , and produced the Roman de Fergus , one of the earliest pieces of non @-@ Celtic vernacular literature to survive from Scotland . 
 There is no extant literature in the English language in this era . There is some Norse literature from Scandinavian parts such as Darraðarljóð , which is located in Caithness , the story being a " powerful mixture of Celtic and Old Norse imagery " . The famous Orkneyinga Saga , which pertains to the early history of the Earldom of Orkney , was written down in Iceland . 
 In the Middle Ages , Scotland was renowned for its musical skill . Gerald of Wales , a medieval clergyman and chronicler , explains the relation between Scottish and Irish music : 
 Playing the harp ( <unk> ) was especially popular with medieval Scots – half a century after Gerald 's writing , King Alexander III kept a royal harpist at his court . Of the three medieval harps that survive , two come from Scotland ( Perthshire ) , and one from Ireland . Singers also had a royal function . For instance , when the king of Scotland passed through the territory of Strathearn , it was the custom that he be greeted by seven female singers , who would sing to him . When Edward I approached the borders of Strathearn in the summer of 1296 , he was met by these seven women , " who accompanied the King on the road between Gask and Ogilvie , singing to him , as was the custom in the time of the late Alexander kings of Scots " . 
 = = Outsiders ' views = = 
 The Irish thought of Scotland as a provincial place . Others thought of it as an outlandish or barbaric place . " Who would deny that the Scots are barbarians ? " was a rhetorical question posed by the author of the De <unk> <unk> ( i.e. " On the Conquest of Lisbon " ) . A century later Louis IX of France was reported to have said to his son " I would prefer that a Scot should come from Scotland and govern the people well and faithfully , than that you , my son , should be seen to govern badly . " 
 This characterisation of the Scots was often politically motivated , and many of the most hostile writers were based in areas frequently subjected to Scottish raids . English and French accounts of the Battle of the Standard contain many accounts of Scottish atrocities . For instance , Henry of Huntingdon notes that the Scots : " cleft open pregnant women , and took out the unborn babes ; they tossed children upon the spear @-@ points , and beheaded priests on altars : they cut the head of crucifixes , and placed them on the trunks of the slain ; and placed the heads of the dead upon the crucifixes . Thus wherever the Scots arrived , all was full of horror and full of savagery . " A less hostile view was given by Guibert of Nogent in the First Crusade , who encountered Scots and wrote that : " You might have seen a crowd of Scots , a people savage at home but unwarlike elsewhere , descend from their marshy lands , with bare legs , shaggy cloaks , their purse hanging from their shoulders ; their copious arms seemed ridiculous to us , but they offered their faith and devotion as aid . " 
 There was also a general belief that Scotland @-@ proper was an island , or at least a peninsula , known as Scotia , Alba or Albania . Matthew Paris , a Benedictine monk and cartographer , drew a map in this manner in the mid @-@ thirteenth century and called the " island " Scotia ultra marina . A later medieval Italian map applies this geographical conceptualization to all of Scotland . The Arab geographer al @-@ Idrisi , shared this view : " Scotland adjoins the island of England and is a long peninsula to the north of the larger island . It is uninhabited and has neither town nor village . Its length is 150 miles . " 
 = = National identity = = 
 In this period , the word " Scot " was not the word used by vast majority of Scots to describe themselves , except to foreigners , among whom it was the most common word . The Scots called themselves Albanach or simply Gaidel . Both " Scot " and Gaidel were ethnic terms that connected them to the majority of the inhabitants of Ireland . As the author of De Situ Albanie notes at the beginning of the thirteenth century : " The name <unk> [ Argyll ] means margin of the Scots or Irish , because all Scots and Irish are generally called ' <unk> ' . " 
 Likewise , the inhabitants of English and Norse @-@ speaking parts were ethnically linked with other regions of Europe . At Melrose , people could recite religious literature in the English language . In the later part of the twelfth century , the Lothian writer Adam of Dryburgh describes Lothian as " the Land of the English in the Kingdom of the Scots " . In the Northern Isles the Norse language evolved into the local Norn , which lingered until the end of the eighteenth century , when it finally died out and Norse may also have survived as a spoken language until the sixteenth century in the Outer Hebrides . 
 Scotland came to possess a unity that transcended Gaelic , English , Norman and Norse ethnic differences and by the end of the period , the Latin , Norman @-@ French and English word " Scot " could be used for any subject of the Scottish king . Scotland 's multilingual Scoto @-@ Norman monarchs and mixed Gaelic and Scoto @-@ Norman aristocracy all became part of the " Community of the Realm " , in which ethnic differences were less divisive than in Ireland and Wales . 
 = Dagr = 
 In Norse mythology , Dagr ( Old Norse " day " ) is day personified . This personification appears in the Poetic Edda , compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources , and the Prose Edda , written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson . In both sources , Dagr is stated to be the son of the god Dellingr and is associated with the bright @-@ maned horse Skinfaxi , who " draw [ s ] day to mankind " . Depending on manuscript variation , the Prose Edda adds that Dagr is either Dellingr 's son by Nótt , the personified night , or Jörð , the personified Earth . Otherwise , Dagr appears as a common noun simply meaning " day " throughout Old Norse works . Connections have been proposed between Dagr and other similarly named figures in Germanic mythology . 
 = = Attestations = = 
 = = = Poetic Edda = = = 
 Dagr is mentioned in stanzas 12 and 25 of the poem Vafþrúðnismál . In stanza 24 , the god Odin ( disguised as " Gagnráðr " ) asks the jötunn Vafþrúðnir from where the day comes , and the night and its tides . In stanza 25 , Vafþrúðnir responds : 
 Delling hight he who the day 's father is , 
 but night was of Nörvi born ; 
 the new and waning moons the beneficent powers created , 
 to count the years for men . 
 In stanza 12 , the horse Skinfaxi , his mane gleaming , is stated by Vafþrúðnir as " drawing day to mankind " . 
 In Sigrdrífumál , after the valkyrie Sigrdrífa is woken from her sleep curse by the hero Sigurd , Sigurd asks her name , and she gives him a " memory @-@ drink " of a drinking horn full of mead , and then <unk> says a prayer . The first verse of this prayer features a reference to the " sons of Dagr " and the " daughter of Nótt " : 
 Hail to the Day ! Hail to the sons of Day ! 
 To Night and her daughter hail ! 
 With placid eyes behold us here , 
 and here sitting give us victory . 
 Hail to the Æsir ! Hail to the Asyniur ! 
 Hail to the bounteous earth ! 
 Words and wisdom give to us noble twain , 
 and healing hands while we live ! 
 In the poem Hrafnagaldr Óðins , the appearance of Dagr and his horse and chariot are described : 
 The son of Delling 
 urged on his horse 
 adorned with 
 precious jewels . 
 Over Mannheim shines 
 the horse 's mane , 
 the steed <unk> 's <unk> 
 dew in his chariot . 
 = = = Prose Edda = = = 
 In the Prose Edda book Gylfaginning , Dagr is again personified . In chapter 10 , the enthroned figure of High states that Dagr is the son of the couple of Dellingr of the Æsir and his wife Nótt ( " night " ) . Dagr is described as " as bright and beautiful as his father 's people " . Odin took Dagr and his mother Nótt , gave them each a chariot and a horse — Dagr receiving the horse Skinfaxi , whose mane illuminates all the sky and the earth — and placed them in the sky to ride around the earth every 24 hours . 
 Dagr is again personified in chapter 24 of the Prose Edda book Skáldskaparmál , where he is stated as a brother of Jörð . As a common noun , Dagr appears in chapter 58 , where " Skinfaxi or Glad " is stated as pulling forth the day , and chapter 64 , where Dagr is stated as one of various words for time . 
 However , scholar Haukur Thorgeirsson points out that the four manuscripts of Gylfaginning vary in their descriptions of the family relations between Nótt , Jörð , Dagr , and Dellingr . In other words , depending on the manuscript , either Jörð or Nótt is the mother of Dagr and partner of Dellingr . Haukur details that " the oldest manuscript , U , offers a version where Jǫrð is the wife of Dellingr and the mother of Dagr while the other manuscripts , R , W and T , cast Nótt in the role of Dellingr 's wife and Dagr 's mother " , and argues that " the version in U came about accidentally when the writer of U or its antecedent shortened a text similar to that in RWT . The results of this accident made their way into the Icelandic poetic tradition " . 
 = = Theories = = 
 Otto <unk> theorized that Dagr may be related to ( or may be the same figure as ) the hero Svipdagr ( whose name means " the suddenly dawning day " ) who is attested in various texts . Among other sources , this figure is found in two poems compiled together and known as <unk> in the Poetic Edda , the Prologue to the Prose Edda , and by the name <unk> in the mythical genealogies of the Anglian houses of Anglo @-@ Saxon England . Otto <unk> also proposed that Svipdagr may have been a " Dagr of the Suebi " , and because of the names of his family members , <unk> ( " the sun @-@ light " , indicating a potential god of the skies ) and <unk> ( " growth " , indicating a possible goddess of growth ) , and his wooing of Menglöð ( often identified with the goddess Freyja ) , he further suggested that Svipdagr may have been a fertility god . 
 = Louis J. Sebille = 
 Louis Joseph " Lou " Sebille ( November 21 , 1915 – August 5 , 1950 ) was a fighter pilot in the United States Army Air Forces during World War II and later the United States Air Force during the Korean War . He rose to the rank of major and posthumously received the Medal of Honor for his heroic actions on August 5 , 1950 in South Korea during the Battle of Pusan Perimeter . 
 Born in Michigan , Sebille worked as an MC in Chicago , Illinois before joining the U.S. Army Air Corps shortly after the attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7 , 1941 . Sebille flew B @-@ 26 Marauder bombers over Europe from 1943 to 1945 . He flew 68 combat missions and accrued more than 3 @,@ 000 hours of flying time . Sebille briefly became a commercial airline pilot after the war before he was offered a commission as a first lieutenant and reentered the service in July 1946 . 
 Sebille commanded the 67th Fighter @-@ Bomber Squadron at the outbreak of the Korean War , flying F @-@ 51 Mustangs in close air support and air strike missions . On August 5 , 1950 , he attacked a North Korean armored column advancing on United Nations military units . Though his aircraft was heavily damaged and he was wounded during the first pass on the column , he turned his plane around and deliberately crashed into the convoy at the cost of his life . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Louis J. Sebille was born on November 21 , 1915 in Harbor Beach , Michigan . He attended Wayne State University in Detroit , Michigan . After his graduation from the university in the 1930s he moved to Chicago , Illinois where he worked as a Master of Ceremonies in several Chicago nightclubs under the nickname " Lou Reynolds . " He was described as " a handsome glib master of ceremonies who used to wow the customers with his own parody of My Blue Heaven " . Sebille married and his wife gave birth to a son in December 1949 . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 Sebille enlisted in the United States Army Air Corps two weeks after the attack on Pearl Harbor by the Empire of Japan . He began flight training in January 1942 , in spite of being two months older than the cutoff age of 26 , as the desperate need for pilots combined with Sebille 's skills as a pilot allowed him to waive the age restriction . During that time he was described as an outstanding pilot and leader , and his maturity was helpful for the younger flight trainees . After completing flight training , Sebille was commissioned as a second lieutenant and assigned to the 450th Bombardment Squadron , 322nd Bombardment Group 3rd Bombardment Wing at MacDill Field , Florida . Sebille flew B @-@ 26 Marauder aircraft . 
 Deployed to England in January 1943 , Sebille flew bombing missions in the European theatre . The 322nd Bombardment Group , the first unit to fly the B @-@ 26 Marauder , was sent on its first mission on May 14 , a low @-@ altitude attack on an electrical power plant in the Netherlands under the control of Nazi Germany . The mission was Sebille 's first sortie , and the group suffered one plane lost and 10 damaged . Three days later a second attack was assigned on the same target , however , Sebille was not on the mission list . Of the planes that flew the mission , one aborted and the rest did not return . Sebille advanced to flight leader and then was promoted to squadron operations officer with a temporary rank of major . By the end of the war , Sebille had flown 68 combat missions with 245 combat hours . In the war he had been awarded two Distinguished Flying Crosses and twelve Air Medals . His unit returned to the United States in March , 1945 . 
 After the end of the war , Sebille left active duty with the Air Force and began work as a commercial airline pilot . However he returned to the Air Force in July 1946 after he was offered a commission as a First Lieutenant . He held several positions , first as a staff officer with the Ninth United States Air Force headquarters at Biggs Army Airfield at Fort Bliss , Texas . Shortly thereafter , Sebille was assigned as an F @-@ 51 Mustang and F @-@ 80 Shooting Star instructor pilot , teaching other pilots how to transition from conventional fighter aircraft to newer jet engine powered models . Sebille then attended Air Tactical School at Tyndall Field , Florida . He was then assigned to Clark Air Base in the Philippines in 1948 . During this time , he flew an F @-@ 51D named Nancy III ( tail number 44 @-@ <unk> ) . In November 1948 , Sebille was once again promoted to major and made the commanding officer of the 67th Fighter @-@ Bomber Squadron , 18th Fighter @-@ Bomber Wing , a component of the Fifth United States Air Force stationed in Japan for post @-@ World War II occupation duties . In November 1949 , the squadron began receiving new F @-@ 80 's but continued to fly a mix of F @-@ 80 and F @-@ 51 aircraft . Eventually , the squadron transitioned entirely to F @-@ 80s , then back to F @-@ 51s . During this time , Sebille was known to spend time in his squadron 's Quonset hut . He frequently discussed fighting and death , including sentiments supporting suicide attack , at one point saying " If you have to die , then take some of the enemy with you . " During this time Sebille worked mostly administrative duty as the squadron absorbed new aircraft and pilots in Japan . 
 = = = Korean War = = = 
 With the outbreak of the Korean War on June 25 , 1950 , the United Nations voted to send troops into South Korea to aid it against the North Korean Army to prevent the country from collapsing . Sebille 's unit was among those send to assist the UN ground forces operating in Korea . By the end of July , the US had shipped a large number of aircraft of all types to Korea . On July 30 , the Far East Air Forces had 890 planes ; 626 F @-@ 80 's and 264 F @-@ 51 's , but only 525 of them were in units and available and ready for combat . 
 Early in the war , these aircraft were used primarily to conduct raids and gather intelligence on North Korean ground targets , focused on disrupting North Korean supply to the front lines . However , as soon as UN forces retreated to Pusan Perimeter following the Battle of Taejon , the Naval aircraft were immediately re purposed for close @-@ air support and airstrikes against North Korean ground troops on the front . These missions were significantly more risky and the aircraft suffered much higher losses due to North Korean ground fire . On August 1 , Sebille and his squadron moved to Ashiya Air Field and began conducting missions in support of the ground forces in Korea . By August 5 , Sebille had accrued over 3 @,@ 000 hours of flying time over the course of his career . During this time , the 67th Fighter @-@ Bomber Squadron operated primarily out of Ashiya but also used airfields at Taegu and Pusan . 
 = = = = Medal of Honor action and death = = = = 
 At the beginning of the Battle of Pusan Perimeter , the night of September 4 , North Korean troops established a beachhead across the Naktong River and were using it to advance across the river and attack Taegu , South Korea , where the UN 's Eighth United States Army was headquartered in defense of the perimeter . On September 5 , a T @-@ 6 Mosquito forward air controller spotted a North Korea column advancing through the village of <unk> . Sebille was ordered to lead a flight of three F @-@ 51 's on an airstrike against the North Korean troops advancing there . Sebille flew a P @-@ 51 ( tail number 44 @-@ <unk> ) loaded with two 500 pounds ( 230 kg ) bombs , six rockets , and six M2 Browning .50 caliber machine guns . He and his wingmen , Captain Martin Johnson and Lieutenant Charles Morehouse , approached the village at an altitude of 5 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 500 m ) and spotted a North Korean armored column crossing the river in a shallow area . Sebille positioned himself for a medium @-@ angle dive bomb run , planning to drop both of his bombs on his first attack . Diving , he held steady until about 2 @,@ 500 feet ( 760 m ) . When he spotted a target column of trucks , artillery guns and armored cars , led by a North Korean Armored Personnel Carrier , he hit the bomb release button on his control stick , and then made a sharp pull @-@ up to the left to stay away from his bomb blast . However , only one of his bombs had released , and the 500 pounds ( 230 kg ) of unbalanced weight under his left wing may have contributed to his near miss on the first run . 
 North Korean anti aircraft fire struck Sebille 's F @-@ 51 as he turned to make a second run , heavily damaging the aircraft and it began trailing smoke and glycol coolant . Sebille had intended to release his second bomb , but he radioed Johnson that he had been hit and injured , probably fatally . Johnson radioed back Sebille should try to head for a US emergency landing strip in Taegu a short distance away , but Sebille responded with his last known words , " No , I 'll never make it . I 'm going back and get that bastard ( sic ) " . He dove straight toward the APC that was his target . He fired his six rockets in salvo , but instead of pulling up to the regular 2 @,@ 000 feet ( 610 m ) , he deliberately continued to dive his airplane and the remaining bomb straight into the target , firing his six machine guns . His plane sustained even heavier damage , and he crashed into the North Korean convoy destroying a large contingent of North Korean ground troops and vehicles though being killed instantly himself . 
 He was buried at Forest Home Cemetery in Forest Park , Chicago . Upon hearing reports of Sebille 's death , commanders in Korea did not think highly of Sebille 's act , likening it to a kamikaze action . In spite of reluctance , Lieutenant Donald Bolt , the squadron 's assistant awards officer , forwarded a citation of the event to Washington D.C. where Sebille would be evaluated for the Medal of Honor . Shortly after the incident , both Bolt and Sebille 's second @-@ in @-@ command , Captain Robert Howell , were killed in separate combat engagements . A short obituary for Sebille appeared in Time Magazine after his death . The United States Air Force Academy also created a memorial to Sebille in Harmon Hall , the academy 's administration building . 
 = = Military awards = = 
 Sebille 's military decorations and awards include : 
