 = Russian monitor Strelets = 
 Strelets ( Russian : <unk> ) was an Uragan @-@ class monitor built for the Imperial Russian Navy in the mid @-@ 1860s . The design was based on the American Passaic @-@ class monitor , but was modified to suit Russian engines , guns and construction techniques . Spending her entire career with the Baltic Fleet , the ship was only active when the Gulf of Finland was not frozen , but very little is known about her service . She was struck from the Navy List in 1900 , converted into a floating workshop the following year and renamed <unk> No. 1 . The ship served as such through 1955 , although her ultimate fate is unknown . 
 = = Description = = 
 Strelets was 201 feet ( 61 @.@ 3 m ) long overall , with a beam of 46 feet ( 14 @.@ 0 m ) and a draft of 10 @.@ 16 – 10 @.@ 84 feet ( 3 @.@ 1 – 3 @.@ 3 m ) . She displaced 1 @,@ 500 – 1 @,@ 600 long tons ( 1 @,@ 500 – 1 @,@ 600 t ) , and her crew numbered 8 officers and 88 enlisted men in 1865 . They numbered 10 officers and 100 crewmen in 1877 . 
 The ship was fitted with a two @-@ cylinder , horizontal direct @-@ acting steam engine built by the Baird Works of Saint Petersburg . It drove a single propeller using steam that was provided by two rectangular boilers . Specific information on the output of the ship 's engine has not survived , but it ranged between 340 – 500 indicated horsepower ( 254 – 373 kW ) for all the ships of this class . During Strelets 's sea trials on 16 July 1865 , she reached a maximum speed of 6 knots ( 11 km / h ; 6 @.@ 9 mph ) . The ship carried a maximum of 190 long tons ( 190 t ) of coal , which gave her a theoretical endurance of 1 @,@ 440 nmi ( 2 @,@ 670 km ; 1 @,@ 660 mi ) at full speed . 
 Strelets was designed to be armed with a pair of 9 @-@ inch ( 229 mm ) smoothbore muzzle @-@ loading guns purchased from Krupp of Germany and rifled in Russia , but the rifling project was seriously delayed and the ship was completed with nine @-@ inch smoothbores . These lacked the penetration power necessary to deal with ironclads and they were replaced by license @-@ built 15 @-@ inch ( 380 mm ) smoothbore muzzle @-@ loading Rodman guns in 1867 – 68 . The <unk> were replaced around 1876 with the originally intended nine @-@ inch rifled guns . 
 All of the wrought @-@ iron armor that was used in the Uragan @-@ class monitors was in 1 @-@ inch ( 25 mm ) plates , just as in the Passaic @-@ class ships . The side of the ship was entirely covered with three to five layers of armor plates , of which the three innermost plates extended 42 inches ( 1 @.@ 1 m ) below the waterline . The gun turret was protected by eleven layers of armor and the pilothouse above it had eight layers of armor . Curved plates six layers thick protected the base of the funnel up to a height of 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) above the deck . Unlike their predecessors , the Uragans were built without deck armor to save weight , but Strelets was modified for the addition of 0 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 12 @.@ 7 mm ) armor plates after completion , but it is unknown if they were ever fitted . They were , however , manufactured and then placed in storage . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 Construction of the ship began on 13 June 1863 by S. G. Kudriavtsev at the state @-@ owned <unk> Island Shipyard in Saint Petersburg . Strelets , the Russian word for musketeer , was laid down on 1 December 1863 and she was launched on 2 June 1864 . She entered service on 27 July 1865 and cost a total of 1 @,@ 141 @,@ 800 rubles , almost double her contract cost of 600 @,@ 000 rubles . The ship was assigned to the Baltic Fleet upon completion and she , and all of her sister ships except Latnik , made a port visit to Stockholm , Sweden in July – August 1865 while under the command of General Admiral Grand Duke Konstantin Nikolayevich . She was present when the American warships Miantonomoh and Augusta visited Kronstadt in July – August 1866 . 
 Sometime after Strelets was completed , an armored ring , 5 inches ( 127 mm ) thick and 15 inches ( 381 mm ) tall , was fitted around the base of the turret to prevent splinters from jamming it . Later , an armored , outward @-@ curving bulwark was fitted around the top of the turret to protect any crewmen there . Three sponsons were later added , probably during the 1870s , to the upper portion of the turret . Each sponson , one above the gun ports and one on each side of the turret , mounted a light gun , probably a 1 @.@ 75 @-@ inch ( 44 mm ) Engstrem gun , for defense against torpedo boats . A fourth gun was mounted on a platform aft of the funnel when a hurricane deck was built between the funnel and the turret , also probably during the 1870s . 
 Little is known about the ship 's career other than that she was laid up each winter when the Gulf of Finland froze . On 21 July 1875 , the monitor Admiral Chichagov ran aground and Strelets was sent to aid her the following day . While assisting with the rigging of a hawser between Admiral Chichagov and the armored frigate Sevastopol , it unexpectedly slid across Strelets 's deck , injuring the ship 's executive officer and a bosun , who later died of his wounds . Coal and equipment from Admiral Chichagov was transferred to Strelets to lighten the former , but it was not enough to refloat her . 
 Strelets was reclassified as a coast @-@ defense ironclad on 13 February 1892 and turned over to the Port of Kronstadt for disposal on 6 July 1900 , although she was not stricken until 17 August . The ship was converted into a floating workshop the next year and renamed <unk> No. 1 . She remained in service through the end of 1955 , but her ultimate fate is unknown . 
 = Treaty of Devol = 
 The Treaty of Devol ( Greek : <unk> της <unk> ) was an agreement made in 1108 between Bohemond I of Antioch and Byzantine Emperor Alexios I Komnenos , in the wake of the First Crusade . It is named after the Byzantine fortress of Devol ( in modern Albania ) . Although the treaty was not immediately enforced , it was intended to make the Principality of Antioch a vassal state of the Byzantine Empire . 
 At the beginning of the First Crusade , Crusader armies assembled at Constantinople and promised to return to the Byzantine Empire any land they might conquer . However , Bohemond , the son of Alexios ' former enemy Robert Guiscard , claimed the Principality of Antioch for himself . Alexios did not recognize the legitimacy of the Principality , and Bohemond went to Europe looking for reinforcements . He launched into open warfare against Alexios , but he was soon forced to surrender and negotiate with Alexios at the imperial camp at <unk> ( Devol ) , where the Treaty was signed . 
 Under the terms of the Treaty , Bohemond agreed to become a vassal of the Emperor and to defend the Empire whenever needed . He also accepted the appointment of a Greek Patriarch . In return , he was given the titles of sebastos and doux ( duke ) of Antioch , and he was guaranteed the right to pass on to his heirs the County of Edessa . Following this , Bohemond retreated to Apulia and died there . His nephew , Tancred , who was regent in Antioch , refused to accept the terms of the Treaty . Antioch came temporarily under Byzantine sway in 1137 , but it was not until 1158 that it truly became a Byzantine vassal . 
 The Treaty of Devol is viewed as a typical example of the Byzantine tendency to settle disputes through diplomacy rather than warfare , and was both a result of and a cause for the distrust between the Byzantines and their Western European neighbors . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1097 , the Crusader armies assembled at Constantinople having traveled in groups eastward through Europe . Alexios I , who had requested only some western knights to serve as mercenaries to help fight the Seljuk Turks , blockaded these armies in the city and would not permit them to leave until their leaders swore oaths promising to restore to the Empire any land formerly belonging to it that they might conquer on the way to Jerusalem . The Crusaders eventually swore these oaths , individually rather than as a group . In return , Alexios gave them guides and a military escort . The Crusaders were however exasperated by Byzantine tactics , such as negotiating the surrender of Nicaea from the Seljuks while it was still under siege by the Crusaders , who hoped to plunder it to help finance their journey . The Crusaders , feeling betrayed by Alexios , who was able to recover a number of important cities and islands , and in fact much of western Asia Minor , continued on their way without Byzantine aid . In 1098 , when Antioch had been captured after a long siege and the Crusaders were in turn themselves besieged in the city , Alexios marched out to meet them , but , hearing from Stephen of Blois that the situation was hopeless , he returned to Constantinople . The Crusaders , who had unexpectedly withstood the siege , believed Alexios had abandoned them and considered the Byzantines completely untrustworthy . Therefore , they regarded their oaths as invalidated . 
 By 1100 , there were several Crusader states , including the Principality of Antioch , founded by Bohemond in 1098 . It was argued that Antioch should be returned to the Byzantines , despite Alexios 's supposed betrayals , but Bohemond claimed it for himself . Alexios , of course , disagreed ; Antioch had an important port , was a trade hub with Asia and a stronghold of the Eastern Orthodox Church , with an important Greek Patriarch . It had only been captured from the empire a few decades previously , unlike Jerusalem , which was much farther away and had not been in Byzantine hands for centuries . Alexios therefore did not recognize the legitimacy of the Principality , believing it should be returned to the Empire according to the oaths Bohemond had sworn in 1097 . He therefore set about trying to evict Bohemond from Antioch . 
 Bohemond added a further insult to both Alexios and the Orthodox Church in 1100 when he appointed Bernard of Valence as the Latin Patriarch , and the same time expelled the Greek Patriarch , John the <unk> , who fled to Constantinople . Soon after , Bohemond was captured by the Danishmends of Syria and was imprisoned for three years , during which the Antiochenes chose his nephew Tancred as regent . After Bohemond was released , he was defeated by the Seljuks at the Battle of Harran in 1104 ; this defeat led to renewed pressure on Antioch from both the Seljuks and the Byzantines . Bohemond left Tancred in control of Antioch and returned in the West , touring Italy and France for reinforcements . He won the backing of Pope Paschal II and the support of the French King Philip I , whose daughter he married . It is unclear whether his expedition qualified as a crusade . 
 Bohemond 's Norman relatives in Sicily had been in conflict with the Byzantine Empire for over 30 years ; his father Robert Guiscard was one of the Empire 's most formidable enemies . While Bohemond was away , Alexios sent an army to reoccupy Antioch and the cities of Cilicia . In 1107 , having organized a new army for his planned crusade against the Muslims in Syria , Bohemond instead launched into open warfare against Alexios , crossing the Adriatic to besiege Dyrrhachium , the westernmost city of the Empire . Like his father however , Bohemond was unable to make any significant advances into the Empire 's interior ; Alexios avoided a pitched battle and Bohemond 's siege failed , partly due to a plague among his army . Bohemond soon found himself in an impossible position , isolated in front of Dyrrhachium : his escape by sea was cut off by the Venetians , and Paschal II withdrew his support . 
 = = Settlements = = 
 In September 1108 , Alexios requested that Bohemond negotiate with him at the imperial camp at <unk> ( Devol ) . Bohemond had no choice but to accept , now that his disease @-@ stricken army would no longer be able to defeat Alexios in battle . He admitted that he had violated the oath sworn in 1097 , but refused to acknowledge that it had any bearing on the present circumstances , as Alexios , in Bohemond 's eyes , had also violated the agreement by turning back from the siege of Antioch in 1098 . Alexios agreed to consider the oaths of 1097 invalid . The specific terms of the treaty were negotiated by the general Nikephoros Bryennios , and were recorded by Anna Komnene : 
 Bohemond agreed to become a vassal of the emperor , and also of Alexios ' son and heir John ; 
 He agreed to help defend the empire , wherever and whenever he was required to do so , and agreed to an annual payment of 200 talents in return for this service ; 
 He was given the title of sebastos , as well as doux ( duke ) of Antioch ; 
 He was granted as imperial fiefs Antioch and Aleppo ( the latter of which neither the Crusaders nor the Byzantines controlled , but it was understood that Bohemond should try to conquer it ) ; 
 He agreed to return Laodicea and other Cilician territories to Alexios ; 
 He agreed to let Alexios appoint a Greek patriarch " among the disciples of the great church of Constantinople " ( The restoration of the Greek Patriarch marked the acceptance of submission to the empire , but posed canonical questions , which were difficult to resolve ) . 
 The terms were negotiated according to Bohemond 's western understanding , so that he saw himself as a feudal vassal of Alexios , a " liege man " ( homo <unk> or <unk> <unk> ) with all the obligations this implied , as customary in the West : he was obliged to bring military assistance to the Emperor , except in wars in which he was involved , and to serve him against all his enemies , in Europe and in Asia . 
 Anna Komnene described the proceedings with very repetitive details , with Bohemond frequently pointing out his own mistakes and praising the benevolence of Alexios and the Empire ; the proceedings must have been rather humiliating for Bohemond . On the other hand , Anna 's work was meant to praise her father and the terms of the treaty may not be entirely accurate . 
 The oral agreement was written down in two copies , one given to Alexios , and the other given to Bohemond . According to Anna , the witnesses from Bohemond 's camp who signed his copy of the treaty were <unk> , bishop of Amalfi and papal legate , Renard , bishop of Tarentum , and the minor clergy accompanying them ; the abbot of the monastery of St. Andrew in Brindisi , along with two of his monks ; and a number of unnamed " pilgrims " ( probably soldiers in Bohemond 's army ) . From Alexios ' imperial court , the treaty was witnessed by the sebastos Marinos of Naples , Roger son of Dagobert , Peter <unk> , William of Gand , Richard of the Principate , Geoffrey of <unk> , Hubert son of Raoul , Paul the Roman , envoys from the Queen 's relation ( from the family of the former <unk> / king of Bulgaria ) , the ambassadors Peres and Simon from Hungary , and the ambassadors Basil the Eunuch and Constantine . Many of Alexios ' witnesses were themselves Westerners , who held high positions in the Byzantine army and at the imperial court ; Basil and Constantine were ambassadors in the service of Bohemond 's relatives in Sicily . 
 Neither copy survives . It may have been written in Latin , Greek , or both . Both languages are equally likely given the number of westerners present , many of whom would have known Latin . It is not clear how far Bohemond 's concessions were known across Latin Europe as only a few chroniclers mention the treaty at all ; Fulcher of Chartres simply says that Bohemond and Alexios were reconciled . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 The Treaty was weighted in Alexios ' favor and provided for the eventual absorption of Antioch and its territory into the Empire . Alexios , recognizing the impossibility of driving Bohemond out of Antioch , tried to absorb him into the structure of Byzantine rule , and put him work for the Empire 's benefit . Bohemond was to retain Antioch until his death with the title of doux , unless the emperor ( either Alexios or , in the future , John ) chose for any reason to renege on the deal . The principality would revert to direct Byzantine rule on Bohemond 's death . Bohemond therefore could not set up a dynasty in Antioch , although he was guaranteed the right to pass on to his heirs the County of Edessa , and any other territories he managed to acquire in the Syrian interior . 
 Bohemond 's lands were to include St Simeon and the coast , the towns of <unk> and <unk> , and the Latin possessions in the Jebel as @-@ <unk> . Latakia and Cilicia , however , were to revert to direct Byzantine rule . As Thomas Asbridge points out , much of what the Emperor granted to Bohemond ( including Aleppo itself ) was still in Muslim hands ( e.g. neither Bohemond nor Alexios controlled Edessa , although at the time Tancred was regent there as well as in Antioch ) , which contradicts Lilie 's assessment that Bohemond did well out of the Treaty . René Grousset calls the Treaty a " <unk> " , but Jean Richard underscores that the rules of feudal law to which Bohemond had to submit " were in no way humiliating . " According to John W. Birkenmeier , the Treaty marked the point at which Alexios had developed a new army , and new tactical doctrines with which to use it , but it was not a Byzantine political success ; " it traded Bohemond 's freedom for a titular overlordship of Southern Italy that could never be effective , and for an occupation of Antioch that could never be carried out . " 
 The terms of the Treaty have been interpreted in various ways . According to Paul Magdalino and Ralph @-@ Johannes Lilie , " the Treaty as reproduced by Anna Komnene shows an astonishing familiarity with western feudal custom ; whether it was drafted by a Greek or by a Latin in imperial service , it had a sensitive regard for the western view of the status quo in the East Mediterranean . " So too did the diplomatic initiatives Alexios undertook , in order to enforce the Treaty on Tancred ( such as the treaty he concluded with Pisa in 1110 – 1111 , and the negotiations for Church union with Pascal II in 1112 ) . In contrast , Asbridge has recently argued that the Treaty derived from Greek as well as western precedents , and that Alexios wished to regard Antioch as falling under the umbrella of pronoia arrangements . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Bohemond never returned to Antioch ( he went to Sicily where he died in 1111 ) , and the carefully constructed clauses of the Treaty were never implemented . Bohemond 's nephew , Tancred , refused to honor the Treaty . In his mind , Antioch was his by right of conquest . He saw no reason to hand it over to someone who had not been involved in the Crusade , and had indeed actively worked against it ( as the Crusaders believed ) . The Crusaders seem to have felt Alexios had tricked Bohemond into giving him Antioch ; they already believed Alexios was devious and untrustworthy and this may have confirmed their beliefs . The treaty referred to Tancred as the illegal holder of Antioch , and Alexios had expected Bohemond to expel him or somehow control him . Tancred also did not allow a Greek Patriarch to enter the city ; instead , Greek Patriarchs were appointed in Constantinople and nominally held power there . 
 The question of the status of Antioch and the adjacent Cilician cities troubled the Empire for many years afterwards . Although the Treaty of Devol never came into effect , it provided the legal basis for Byzantine negotiations with the crusaders for the next thirty years , and for imperial claims to Antioch during the reigns of John II and Manuel I. Therefore , John II attempted to impose his authority , traveling to Antioch himself in 1137 with his army and besieging the city . The citizens of Antioch tried to negotiate , but John demanded the unconditional surrender of the city . After asking the permission of the King of Jerusalem , Fulk , which he received , Raymond , the Prince of Antioch , agreed to surrender the city to John . The agreement , by which Raymond swore homage to John , was explicitly based on the Treaty of Devol , but went beyond it : Raymond , who was recognized as an imperial vassal for Antioch , promised the Emperor free entry to Antioch , and undertook to hand over the city in return for investiture with Aleppo , Shaizar , Homs and Hama as soon as these were conquered from the Muslims . Then , Raymond would rule the new conquests and Antioch would revert to direct imperial rule . The campaign finally failed , however , partly because Raymond and Joscelin II , Count of Edessa , who had been obliged to join John as his vassals , did not pull their weight . When , on their return to Antioch , John insisted on taking possession of the city , the two princes organized a riot . John found himself besieged in the city , and was forced to leave in 1138 , recalled to Constantinople . He diplomatically accepted Raymond 's and Joscelin 's insistence that they had nothing to do with the rebellion . John repeated his operation in 1142 , but he unexpectedly died , and the Byzantine army retired . 
 It was not until 1158 , during the reign of Manuel I , that Antioch truly became a vassal of the empire , after Manuel forced Prince Raynald of Châtillon to swear fealty to him in punishment for Raynald 's attack on Byzantine Cyprus . The Greek Patriarch was restored , and ruled simultaneously with the Latin Patriarch . Antioch , weakened by powerless regents after Raynald 's capture by the Muslims in 1160 , remained a Byzantine vassal state until 1182 when internal divisions following Manuel 's death in 1180 hindered the Empire 's ability to enforce its claim . 
 In the Balkan frontier , the Treaty of Devol marked the end of the Norman threat to the southern Adriatic littoral during Alexios ' reign and later ; the efficacy of the frontier defenses deterred any further invasions through Dyrrachium for most of the 12th century . 
 = Mondo Cane ( album ) = 
 Mondo Cane is a 2010 album by Mike Patton . Featuring a forty @-@ member orchestra and fifteen @-@ piece backing band , the album contains a series of cover versions of 1950s and 1960s Italian pop music . Patton conceived of the album while living in Bologna , and became attracted to music he heard on the radio featuring pop singers backed by orchestras . 
 Released on May 4 , 2010 , through Patton 's record label Ipecac Recordings , Mondo Cane has been met with favorable responses from music critics . Reviewers have drawn comparisons to California , an earlier album by Patton 's first group Mr. Bungle . Mondo Cane peaked at number 2 in the United States ' Classical Albums chart , briefly charting in Switzerland and Finland as well . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Gestation = = = 
 Mondo Cane consists of Mike Patton 's arrangements and performances of 1950s and 1960s Italian pop songs . Patton had heard these songs while living in Bologna ; the singer had adopted the city as a second home after marrying Italian artist Titi <unk> , and had become a fluent speaker of Italian . Patton began exploring Italian popular music ; although initially wishing to listen to contemporary music , he found nothing that interested him . However , he became drawn to pop music from the 1950s and 1960s , intrigued by singers using orchestras for backing rather than pop bands . Having considered making an album covering these songs for some time , Patton initially believed he would approach the project with a small band , but was offered the chance to compose music for an orchestra . Patton then opted to use this opportunity to record Mondo Cane instead . 
 Patton had also been inspired by the music of Italian composer Ennio Morricone . Patton 's record label Ipecac Recordings had previously released Crime and Dissonance , a two @-@ disc retrospective of Morricone 's work . The singer has described his admiration for Morricone 's writing , feeling that the composer turned " what could be banal , surface @-@ style pop into really deep , orchestrated , tense and compelling music " . Several of the album 's songs had been written by Morricone , including " Deep Down " , written for the 1968 Mario Bava film Danger : Diabolik . Patton had been aware of the song for some time , having been a fan of the film and Morricone 's score ; however , the two musicians have not actually met or worked together before . 
 = = = Recording = = = 
 Mondo Cane was recorded with the backing of a forty @-@ strong orchestra , a fifteen @-@ piece band , and a choir . Recordings were made on a live tour , with the album 's tracks assembled as composites from the first three dates of the Italian leg of the tour . Each song contains elements taken from different recordings , with Patton describing the process as " a giant <unk> Cube [ sic ] " , noting that individual bars of one instrument 's music might be lifted from one concert and layered with bars of another instrument 's parts from another concert . 
 Stylistically , the album has been described by Allrovi 's Jason Lymangrover as ranging " from Frank Sinatra pop to psychedelic garage rock " ; while The Boston Globe 's James Reed has noted the " spare " sound of " <unk> " and the " furious and rocking " pace of " <unk> Negro " . Although wanting to remain faithful to the original versions of the songs covered , Patton wished to avoid simply mimicking the original recordings , stating " this is a record of covers , and I believe firmly that you have to make them your own . There is a very fine line to tread . You have to treat a song with respect , yet twist it up , fuck it up and somehow make it a part of your own voice " . When assembling the cut for " Deep Down " , Patton was able to get in touch with the original vocalist , a woman named Christy , though mutual friend Daniele <unk> . However , she declined to take part in the project . 
 One song on the record , " <unk> " , is sung in Neapolitan , rather than Italian , which required Patton to re @-@ learn the correct inflections and pronunciations in that language . However , the conductor of the orchestra Patton used on tour was a native of Naples and would frequently correct the singer during rehearsal until he was able to perform it correctly . Describing this collaboration , Patton noted " I had a lot of great people around me . I wouldn ’ t have been able to do any of this shit without them " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Although initially intended for released in 2009 , Mondo Cane was released on May 4 , 2010 through Patton 's record label , Ipecac Recordings . The album was released on both compact disc and vinyl record . The album 's cover feature a die @-@ cut design based on poster artwork created to advertise one of the early Mondo Cane concerts . 
 Mondo Cane has been met with generally favorable reviews . Review aggregation website Metacritic lists the album as having an average rating of 74 out of 100 , based on seventeen reviews . Writing for Allrovi , Jason Lymangrover rated the album four stars out of five , calling it Patton 's " most elaborate endeavor to date " . Lymangrover singled out " Deep Down " as a highlight , and felt that the covers were treated with due deference to the original recordings while still featuring Patton 's idiosyncratic take on them . Philip Bloomfield of Drowned in Sound awarded Mondo Cane a score of seven out of ten , describing it as " yet more proof that his talent and his breadth are perhaps indeed ' senza fine ' " . Bloomfield compared the sound of the album to California , a 1999 release by Patton 's first band Mr. Bungle ; and also felt that although the album 's covers were faithful to the original versions , they still showcased a degree of Patton 's versatility . Slant Magazine 's Jesse Cataldo rated Mondo Cane three stars out of five , describing Patton as " less a musician than a kind of gonzo multi @-@ specialty clearinghouse " . Cataldo felt that album was " actually simpler and less interesting than it sounds " , finding it to be well @-@ made but slightly <unk> . 
 Chris Martins of The A.V. Club awarded the album a B + rating , feeling that it " offers a new window into the obfuscated Patton oeuvre " . Martins also compared the record to California and felt that it would be greatly enjoyed by fans of Patton 's various side projects . Writing for The Boston Globe , James Reed described Mondo Cane as " offbeat for sure but not off @-@ putting " , adding that " language is no barrier with music this lovely " . Sputnikmusic 's Tyler Monro rated the album three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half out of five , feeling that it would be , in theory , a bad idea . However , Monro felt that , on listening to the album , it was " his best work in close to a decade " , describing it as " a summer @-@ time staple and a faithful reminder that Mike Patton can sing but sadly little else " . Writing for PopMatters , John Garratt rated the album seven out of ten , writing " even if this album is a genre exercise , it ’ s still a very fine one " . <unk> felt that " Deep Down " was the album 's best song , adding that it " feels like it was written just for Mike Patton to sing " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , Mondo Cane reached a peak position of # 2 on the Billboard Classical Albums chart , spending forty @-@ two weeks in the chart in total . The album also spent one week in the Independent Albums chart , at # 41 , and two weeks in the Top Heatseekers album chart , peaking at # 7 . Mondo Cane spent one week in the Swiss Music Charts , at # 81 , and one week in The Official Finnish Charts , at # 44 . 
 = Short Term 12 = 
 Short Term 12 is a 2013 American drama film written and directed by Destin Daniel Cretton . The film is based on Cretton 's short film of the same name , produced in 2009 . It stars Brie Larson as Grace , the supervisor of a group home for troubled teenagers . 
 Cretton was inspired to write Short Term 12 based on his own experience of working in a group facility for teenagers . He first wrote and produced a short film based on the idea and later adapted it into a feature @-@ length screenplay . While Larson and John Gallagher , Jr. won their roles after auditioning through Skype , most of the children featured in the film were cast through open casting calls . Filming took place over 20 days in Los Angeles , California in September 2012 . 
 Short Term 12 premiered on March 10 , 2013 at the South by Southwest film festival and was released in theaters on August 23 . It grossed over US $ 1 million and was met with critical acclaim . Reviewers praised the film 's realism and intimacy , drawing particular attention to Larson 's performance and Cretton 's direction . The film won South by Southwest 's Grand Jury and Audience Awards for a Narrative Feature , as well as three Independent Spirit Award nominations . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Grace is the young supervisor of Short Term 12 , a group home for troubled teenagers . She lives with her long @-@ term boyfriend and coworker , Mason , but finds it difficult to open up to him emotionally . When Grace finds out she is pregnant , she schedules an appointment for an abortion ; she eventually tells an overjoyed Mason about the pregnancy , but not about her plan to have an abortion . At the facility , Grace and Mason focus their efforts on Marcus , a Short Term 12 resident who is about to turn 18 and is struggling with the prospect of leaving the facility . 
 Grace bonds with Jayden , a recent arrival at Short Term 12 who has a history of self @-@ harm . Jayden distances herself from the other teenagers as she does not intend to stay at the facility for long , and when her father fails to pick her up on her birthday , she reacts violently towards the staff . After her outburst , she sits in the " cool @-@ down room " with Grace , who shows Jayden her own scars from cutting herself . That night , Jayden leaves the facility in the middle of her birthday celebrations and , unable to force her to return , Grace follows Jayden to her father 's house . After finding the house empty , they return to Short Term 12 . When Jayden reads Grace a cryptic story she has written , Grace begins to suspect that Jayden was abused by her father . 
 At a party hosted by Mason 's foster parents , he proposes to Grace , who accepts . The following morning , Grace is upset by a phone call that reveals her father is being released from prison , and refuses to be consoled by Mason . She arrives at Short Term 12 to discover that Jayden has been picked up by her father overnight . She is angry at the decision to send Jayden back to her father , but her boss maintains that Jayden denied that she was abused by him . Later that day , Grace finds that Marcus has attempted to commit suicide after the death of his fish . 
 While waiting at the hospital as Marcus is being treated , Grace breaks down and Mason becomes upset with her for refusing to talk to him about how she feels ; instead , she tells him that she no longer wants to marry him and that she plans to have an abortion . Upset , she returns to Jayden 's father 's house and breaks in , intending to injure him while he sleeps , but she is interrupted by Jayden , who suggests that they smash his car instead . Grace opens up to Jayden about being sexually abused by her own father , and after Jayden shows Grace bruises from where her father hit her they return together to Short Term 12 , where Jayden reports her father for physical abuse . Grace goes home to apologize to Mason , who tells her that Marcus will recover . 
 Several weeks later , Grace starts seeing a therapist and she is shown viewing a sonogram with Mason . Mason tells the rest of the staff about running into Marcus , who is doing well and has a girlfriend . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Brie Larson as Grace Howard 
 John Gallagher , Jr. as Mason 
 Kaitlyn Dever as Jayden Cole 
 Rami Malek as Nate 
 Keith Stanfield as Marcus 
 Kevin Hernandez as Luis 
 Melora Walters as Dr. Hendler 
 Stephanie Beatriz as Jessica 
 Lydia Du Veaux as Kendra 
 Alex Calloway as Sammy 
 Frantz Turner as Jack 
 Diana @-@ Maria Riva as Nurse Beth 
 = = Production = = 
 Short Term 12 was originally conceived by Destin Daniel Cretton as a short film based on his experiences as a line staff worker at a group facility for teenagers where he had worked for two years ; it served as his thesis project for his Master 's degree in film at San Diego State University . The short film ran for 22 minutes and premiered at the 2009 Sundance Film Festival , where it won the Jury Prize in Short Filmmaking . After graduating from film school , Cretton decided to adapt the short into a feature @-@ length screenplay , which won one of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences ' five Nicholl Fellowships in Screenwriting in 2010 . The largest change Cretton made when adapting the short film into a longer screenplay was changing the lead character 's gender : Denim , a man loosely based on Cretton himself , became Grace , a young woman and the facility 's supervisor . Cretton researched similar facilities and interviewed former employees for the film , noting that the script featured stories directly told by children in these facilities from his interviews . 
 Brie Larson auditioned for the role of Grace via Skype after the script had been sent to her ; John Gallagher , Jr. also won his role after a Skype conversation with Cretton , calling the screenplay " probably the best script that I 've been sent , ever " . Larson and Gallagher prepared for their roles by shadowing line staff at a group home similar to that in the film , and collaborated to create backstories for their characters . Keith Stanfield was the only actor from the original short film to reprise his role in the feature . Cretton struggled to contact Stanfield when casting the film in 2012 — Stanfield had stopped acting , left his managers , and did not own a cell phone — but Cretton was eventually able to reach him by email to tape an audition . Most of the children featured in the film were cast through open casting calls , and most had no prior acting experience . Alex Calloway , who played Sammy , found a casting call through Craigslist and won the role after sending in a cell phone video audition . 
 The film was shot over 20 days in September 2012 . Filming took place in Los Angeles , and scenes set at the group home were shot at a former short @-@ stay facility located near the neighborhood of Sylmar . The film was edited by Nat Sanders as it was filmed . Both the original cut of the film and the shortened director 's cut were over 2 hours long , whereas Cretton wanted the final cut to be under 100 minutes . Sanders said that the original cut of the film felt too heavy and " made you feel pretty depressed about humanity " , so a number of scenes were deleted or trimmed to " lighten up " the film 's mood , with a final running time of 96 minutes . 
 = = Release = = 
 Short Term 12 premiered in March 2013 at the South by Southwest Film Festival in Austin , Texas , where it won the Grand Jury and Audience Awards in the Narrative Feature category and was purchased for distribution by <unk> . Its international premiere was held at the Locarno Film Festival in August 2013 , where it received a standing ovation . 
 In theaters , the film was given a platform release : on August 23 , it was released in Los Angeles and New York City , expanding the next weekend to Phoenix , Washington , D.C. , Philadelphia , Boston and Berkeley , and progressively expanding to more cities until its widest release on September 13 . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The film grossed $ 56 @,@ 206 in its opening weekend , playing in four theaters , with a per @-@ theater average of $ 14 @,@ 052 that was considered a strong result by Forbes magazine 's Mark Hughes . Overall , it earned a total of $ 1 @,@ 013 @,@ 100 in North America over a total of 26 weeks in theaters , with a widest release of 75 theaters , and $ 632 @,@ 064 outside the United States for a total of $ 1 @,@ 645 @,@ 164 . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The film has a " Certified Fresh " score of 99 % on Rotten Tomatoes based on 153 reviews with an average rating of 8 @.@ 3 out of 10 . The critical consensus states : " Short Term 12 is an emphatic , revealing drama that pulls audiences into the perspective of neglected youths . " The film also has a score of 82 out of 100 on Metacritic based on 36 critics indicating " universal acclaim " . 
 Germain Lussier of / Film wrote of the film , " The whole thing just feels perfect or magical , a shining example of what cinema is all about " , adding , " The performances are mindblowing , the writing sharp , and the direction beautiful . It 's a very special movie . " In Variety , critic Peter Debruge wrote , " the stunning SXSW fest winner puts the recent Park City competition lineup to shame ... this compelling human drama finds fresh energy in the inspirational @-@ teacher genre , constantly revealing new layers to its characters . " In a review for the Los Angeles Times , Kenneth Turan described Short Term 12 as " a small wonder " , " a film of exceptional naturalness and empathy " , and " moving and intimate " , offering particular praise to the film 's honesty and plausibility . Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian , on the other hand , criticized the film 's credibility , describing it as " well intentioned , but somehow inauthentic " with a " too @-@ cute @-@ to @-@ be @-@ true ending " . 
 The Hollywood Reporter 's John DeFore called the film " genuinely moving " and " effortlessly balanced ... Brett <unk> 's handheld camerawork and Cretton 's unsentimental direction have a frankness that acknowledges the dramatic extremes in these lives without needing to parade it before the audience . " Manohla Dargis from The New York Times also praised Cretton 's direction , saying he " brings you into this coed group home and the lives of its inhabitants casually , with images and scenes that , no matter how transparently considered , feel as if they had been caught on the fly . " 
 Brie Larson 's performance as Grace was singled out for praise by critics . Katie Walsh of Indiewire writing , " [ Larson ] manages to convey her character as someone fierce and strong and steely , and also utterly fragile , delicate , scared and broken ... It 's an incredible emotional and physical performance , and she 's a whirlwind . " Similarly , Empire critic Ian Freer felt that Larson gave " a whirling dervish of a performance ... She , like the film , breaks your heart and raises your spirit in one fell swoop . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = Magdalena Neuner = 
 Magdalena " Lena " Neuner ( born 9 February 1987 ) is a retired German professional biathlete . She is the most successful woman of all time at Biathlon World Championships and a two @-@ time Olympic gold medalist . At the age of 21 , she became the youngest Overall World Cup winner in the history of the International Biathlon Union ( IBU ) . With 34 World Cup wins , Neuner is ranked second all @-@ time for career victories on the Biathlon World Cup tour . She has won the Overall World Cup title three times , in 2007 – 08 , in 2009 – 10 and her final season in 2011 – 12 . Neuner retired from the sport in March 2012 , citing a lack of motivation and her desire for a normal life . 
 Neuner started biathlon when she was nine years old and won five junior world championship titles from 2004 to 2006 . She made her World Cup debut in 2006 and won her first World Cup race in January 2007 . One month later , she claimed three gold medals in her first appearance at the Biathlon World Championships . In the 2007 – 08 season , Neuner won the Overall World Cup and once more claimed three titles at the 2008 World Championships . After a less successful winter in 2008 – 09 , she participated in her first Winter Olympic Games in 2010 , winning the gold medal in both the pursuit and the mass start , and silver in the sprint race . Neuner also claimed the 2009 – 10 Overall World Cup title . At the 2011 World Championships , she won three more gold medals . In her final winter on the World Cup tour , Neuner won two more titles at the 2012 World Championships and claimed the Overall World Cup for a third time . 
 During her seven World Cup seasons , Neuner won 34 World Cup races and achieved 63 podium finishes . As part of Germany 's World Cup team , she won ten relay races and three mixed relay events . During six appearances at Biathlon World Championships , Neuner claimed 17 medals : twelve gold , four silver and one bronze . In addition , she has won seven junior world championship titles . Neuner was known as one of the fastest cross @-@ country skiers in biathlon . She had been noted for her volatile shooting performances in the standing position , particularly in the early years of her career , often at the expense of better results . 
 Neuner has lived in the Bavarian village of Wallgau since birth . At the age of 16 , she joined the German Customs Administration to become a member of the government @-@ funded Customs @-@ Ski @-@ Team . Since winning three world championship gold medals in 2007 , Neuner is one of her home country 's most popular female athletes . She was named German Sportswoman of the Year in 2007 , 2011 and 2012 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Magdalena Neuner was born in the German alpine resort town of Garmisch @-@ Partenkirchen , the second of four children of bank clerk Paul Neuner and his wife Margit . She has an elder brother Paul , and two younger siblings — her brother Christoph and her sister Anna . Her sister is also an aspiring biathlete who participates in junior competitions and is a member in the youth squad of the Bavarian Ski Association . 
 Neuner grew up in the small Bavarian village of Wallgau , approximately 15 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) from Garmisch @-@ Partenkirchen . She started alpine skiing when she was four years old and later tried various other winter sports at her hometown ski club SC Wallgau . At the age of 16 , Neuner finished high school ( Realschule ) in Garmisch @-@ Partenkirchen and decided to pursue a career in biathlon . Her parents were reluctant , but they eventually supported her ambition to become a professional biathlete . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early career and World Cup debut = = = 
 Neuner started biathlon when she was nine years old after she had participated in a try out course at her local ski club . She won 29 races at the biathlon Student 's Cup of the German Ski Association ( DSV ) , claiming the overall title in her respective age @-@ group for four years in a row from 1999 to 2002 . After finishing school , Neuner joined the German Customs Administration in August 2003 to become a member in the government @-@ supported Customs @-@ Ski @-@ Team ( Zoll @-@ Ski @-@ Team ) . She officially holds the rank of Erste <unk> ( first head customs officer ) , although she is a full @-@ time professional athlete with no customs obligations . One of her team mates is alpine skiing world champion Maria <unk> @-@ Riesch . 
 In December 2003 , Neuner won the German Cup for 17 @-@ year @-@ olds , which led to her appointment for the 2003 – 04 European Cup competition for juniors . With four wins at European level , Neuner qualified for the 2004 Junior / Youth World Championships in Haute Maurienne , France , where she won the sprint and relay events , as well as silver in the pursuit . One year later at the 2005 Junior / Youth World Championships in Kontiolahti , Finland , she claimed two silver medals ( pursuit and relay ) , and again won the sprint discipline . With her success at junior level , Neuner at 18 years old , was considered one of Germany 's biggest biathlon talents ever . Even before achieving any results at senior level , she had signed a sponsorship deal . 
 During the 2005 – 06 season , Neuner made her first appearances in the Biathlon World Cup . Germany 's women 's national coach Uwe <unk> had already considered her for the team two years earlier , however , her parents and her hometown coaches Bernhard <unk> and Herbert Mayer were reluctant to let her start prematurely . On 13 January 2006 , Neuner made her debut in the World Cup sprint race in Ruhpolding , Germany , where she substituted for the injured <unk> <unk> . Although her first appearance ended unsuccessfully , coming in 41st place , she was appointed for nine more World Cup races for the remainder of the season . 
 Neuner returned as one of the favourites at the 2006 Junior / Youth World Championships in Presque Isle , Maine , United States , where she won two more titles ( pursuit and relay ) in addition to a silver medal in the sprint race . She did not participate in the 2006 Winter Olympics for the German team . At the World Cup in Kontiolahti in March 2006 , Neuner achieved her first top ten finishes : she was fourth in the sprint and came in ninth in the mass start race . 
 = = = Three world championship titles ( 2006 – 07 season ) = = = 
 While she had only competed in ten races during her first World Cup winter , Neuner became a fixture in the German team in the 2006 – 07 season . She proved to be one of the fastest cross @-@ country skiers in biathlon , and at 19 years old , regularly set the fastest course times . On 5 January 2007 , Neuner won her first World Cup event , the sprint race in Oberhof , Germany . Her victory on home soil , before a crowd of 19 @,@ 000 people , received considerable media attention and put her into the national spotlight for the first time . Two days later at the pursuit race , she forgot to reload her rifle after warm @-@ up . She was handed a new magazine during the prone shooting and managed to finish third despite a total of six shooting errors . 
 Neuner was scheduled to compete at the junior world championships in 2007 . However , following her first World Cup win , she was instead appointed for the senior World Championships in Antholz , Italy . On 3 February 2007 , she won gold in the sprint , beating Sweden 's Anna Carin Olofsson by 2 @.@ 3 seconds . It was her first world championship event ever and only her second victory at senior level . One day later , she also claimed the pursuit title , in spite of four shooting errors . Following a 14th place in the mass start , Neuner , alongside Martina Beck , Andrea Henkel and Kati Wilhelm , also won gold in the relay race on 11 February 2007 . With three titles , she was the championship 's most successful athlete and became the youngest triple world champion . 
 At the end of the season , she continued her successful run with four more World Cup wins . In March 2007 , Neuner won the pursuit and mass start races at Holmenkollen in Oslo , Norway , and she won the sprint and pursuit events at the season final in Khanty @-@ Mansiysk , Russia , giving her seven career World Cup wins . She ended her first complete season fourth in the Overall World Cup standings and finished second in the pursuit discipline . In the course of three months , Neuner had emerged from anonymity to become one of Germany 's most popular female athletes . At the end of 2007 , she had earned an estimated 1 @.@ 3 million euros through sponsorship and endorsement deals . 
 = = = Overall World Cup winner ( 2007 – 08 season ) = = = 
 After missing the podium at the 2007 – 08 season 's first two World Cups , Neuner was part of Germany 's winning relay team in Pokljuka , Slovenia in December 2007 . She claimed her eighth World Cup win at the mass start in Oberhof in January 2008 , and later that month won the relay race in Ruhpolding with the German team . Shortly before her 21st birthday , Neuner decided to again compete at the Junior / Youth World Championships , held in Ruhpolding in January 2008 — the last time she was eligible to enter . She won gold in the sprint and the pursuit , but withdrew from the individual race to prepare for the senior world championships alongside her German team mates . 
 Leading up to the 2008 World Championships in Östersund , Sweden , Neuner tried to lower expectations , stating a repeat of last year 's performance would be impossible . She failed to defend her titles in the sprint and pursuit races , with shooting errors preventing better results ; she finished 17th and sixth respectively . On 12 February 2008 , she won the mixed relay with Sabrina Buchholz , Andreas <unk> and Michael <unk> to claim her first gold medal . Four days later , she won her second title in the mass start , beating Norway 's Tora Berger by 3 @.@ 0 seconds . She had four shooting errors compared to Berger 's one and skied side by side with the Norwegian for most of the last lap , in what she later described as her hardest fought victory ever . Alongside Martina Beck , Andrea Henkel and Kati Wilhelm , Neuner also claimed gold in the relay race on 17 February 2008 . By winning three more titles , she became the youngest six @-@ time world champion , solidifying her status as Germany 's biggest biathlon star . 
 In the following World Cups , she won the sprint races in Pyeongchang , South Korea , and in Khanty @-@ Mansiysk — her tenth and eleventh World Cup victories . With a second @-@ place finish in the penultimate mass start race of the season , Neuner won the 2007 – 08 Mass start World Cup . At the season final in Oslo , she also claimed the season 's Sprint World Cup and took over the yellow bib of the Overall World Cup leader for the first time in her career . In the last race of the season , a ninth place in the mass start ensured Neuner the 2007 – 08 Overall Biathlon World Cup victory . She was the youngest Overall World Cup winner since the International Biathlon Union was established in 1993 . 
 = = = First setbacks ( 2008 – 09 season ) = = = 
 Neuner 's preparation for the 2008 – 09 season was affected by several illnesses . In the summer , she battled an intestinal fungus which forced her to pause training for seven weeks ; she later attributed it to pressure of public expectations . In October 2008 , she contracted influenza and in November , a bacterial infection caused her to miss two weeks of training . Subsequently , her ski speed saw a substantial drop at the start of the season . In the first four World Cups , Neuner only achieved two individual podiums ; atypically courtesy of good shooting performances , not her skiing . 
 Following the Christmas break , her skiing times had improved . In Ruhpolding in January 2009 , Neuner was part of the winning German relay team . She beat team mate Kati Wilhelm by 0 @.@ 2 seconds in the Ruhpolding sprint and also won the following pursuit event , which marked her World Cup wins twelve and thirteen . Neuner again missed the podium in Antholz . She was leading the mass start by 53 @.@ 6 seconds before the final shooting , in which she missed all five targets , eventually finishing sixth . This result received much public attention . She later described it as a pivotal moment in her career and called it the " total end of the world " . 
 Neuner suffered further setbacks at the 2009 World Championships in Pyeongchang , where she struggled with a cold and a high number of shooting errors . She finished eighth in the sprint , in which she crashed on a downhill slope , and came in eleventh in the pursuit race . She was not appointed for the individual race and could not start in the mixed relay due to her cold . On 21 February 2009 , Neuner claimed silver as part Germany 's women 's relay team , alongside Martina Beck , Andrea Henkel and Kati Wilhelm . On the last day of the championships , she came in seventh in the mass start race . 
 At the Olympic rehearsal in Vancouver , Canada , in March 2009 , Neuner claimed the 2008 – 09 Individual World Cup , despite never having won a race in that discipline . She also won the Vancouver relay race with the German team , and was second in the sprint , 0 @.@ 7 seconds behind Sweden 's Helena Ekholm . At the season final in Khanty @-@ Mansiysk , Neuner won the pursuit race — her 14th World Cup win . She ended the season fourth in the Overall Biathlon World Cup , which was generally considered disappointing in the media . 
 Neuner later revealed that due to public expectations and constant media attention , the 2008 – 09 season had been extremely difficult for her psychologically , and she even briefly contemplated retirement . She started working with a psychologist and cut down her media appearances as much as possible in the summer . 
 = = = Double Olympic champion ( 2009 – 10 season ) = = = 
 Neuner competed at the Summer Biathlon World Championships for the first time in September 2009 when they were held in Oberhof . She only reluctantly agreed to interrupt training and participate in the summer event , which is contested on roller ski , however she went on to win gold in all three competitions ( sprint , pursuit and mixed relay ) . Neuner missed the first World Cup of the 2009 – 10 season due to a cold in December 2009 . She returned at the following races in Hochfilzen , but was still affected by her cold and finished outside the top 20 . Her first podiums of the winter came in Pokljuka , finishing third in the sprint and second in the pursuit race . Thereby she secured her Olympic qualification within the German team . 
 Shortly before the Oberhof sprint in January 2010 , Neuner injured her back during warm @-@ up and had to withdraw . She returned in Ruhpolding where she came in third in both the sprint and the mass start race . In her first relay of the season , she dealt a blow to the German team by incurring two penalty loops , with Germany finishing fourth eventually . With some top competitors missing in Antholz at the last World Cup before the 2010 Winter Olympics , Neuner won two events — the first individual race of her career as well as the sprint , giving her 16 career World Cup wins . She also came in second in the pursuit , which marked her seventh consecutive podium finish . 
 Neuner went into her first Winter Olympics in Vancouver with the declared aim of winning a gold medal . On 13 February 2010 , she participated in the opening sprint , which was contested at Whistler Olympic Park in rainy conditions . With one shooting error , Neuner claimed the silver medal , finishing 1 @.@ 5 seconds behind Slovakia 's Anastasiya <unk> . She uncharacteristically lost five seconds against the unheralded Slovak on the cross @-@ country course , which led to speculation of inferior ski preparation in the German media . Three days later , Neuner won gold in the subsequent pursuit race . Despite missing two targets in the standing position , she beat sprint winner <unk> by 12 @.@ 3 seconds . In her third Olympic event , she finished tenth in the individual . She had three shooting mistakes and said it had been difficult for her to immediately get her concentration back after winning her first gold medal . On 21 February 2010 , Neuner claimed her second gold of the Games in the mass start . After missing two targets , she had been trailing by as much as 29 seconds , but she pushed the pace and a clean final standing shoot allowed her to overtake Russia 's Olga <unk> on the last lap . After the race , Neuner made the announcement not to participate in the relay , citing mental exhaustion and her desire to give all of her team mates the chance to win a medal . Her withdrawal allowed her friend Martina Beck a start in her last Olympic Games . Neuner was Germany 's most successful athlete in Vancouver and was chosen to carry the German flag at the closing ceremony . 
 Following her Olympic success , Neuner continued her good form at the season 's remaining three World Cups , finishing all races in the top ten . She came in second in the Kontiolahti pursuit , and third in Oslo 's mass start race , which increased her World Cup lead after taking over the yellow bib in Vancouver . Neuner ended the season with her 19th World Cup win in Khanty @-@ Mansiysk 's mass start , which ensured her the 2009 – 10 Overall World Cup , making her the first German woman to win the Biathlon World Cup for a second time . She also won the pursuit and mass start discipline World Cups . In the last event of the winter , the Mixed Relay World Championship , she won gold , alongside Simone <unk> , Simon <unk> and Arnd Peiffer , to claim her seventh world title . 
 = = = Record world champion ( 2010 – 11 season ) = = = 
 During the summer , Neuner admitted struggling for motivation for the upcoming season , having won every title in the sport at only 23 years old . However , she vowed to continue her career at least until the 2012 world championships in Ruhpolding . In December 2010 she suffered from a cold , missing the season 's first World Cup in Östersund for the second year in a row . She started the 2010 – 11 season in Hochfilzen , where she managed two seventh @-@ place finishes , and was part of the winning German relay team . At the third stop of the season in Pokljuka , she won the sprint race in spite of two shooting errors , claiming her 20th career victory . 
 Neuner continued the winter with mixed results in January 2011 . She reached the podium in the sprints of Oberhof and Ruhpolding , coming in second and third respectively . In the relay in Oberhof , Neuner was part of Germany 's team coming in sixth place , the team 's worst result since 2005 . She also had her worst personal result in 13 months , finishing in 16th place in the Ruhpolding individual race , which ended her streak of 24 consecutive top ten finishes ( including 15 podiums and 6 wins ) . At the World Cup in Antholz , Neuner again struggled with illness . She only participated in the concluding mass start , coming in 6th place . 
 At the World Cup stops in February in the United States , Neuner returned to good health and showed more consistency ; her worst result was a 6th @-@ place finish . In Presque Isle , Maine , she won the mixed relay as part of the German team . On week later in Fort Kent , Maine , Neuner finished all three races on the podium . She came in third in the sprint , second in the pursuit , and claimed her 21st World Cup win in the mass start — the last race before the world championships . 
 At the 2011 World Championships in Khanty @-@ Mansiysk , Neuner won three gold and two silver medals . She claimed silver , alongside Andrea Henkel , Arnd Peiffer and Michael <unk> , in the opening mixed relay . On 5 March 2011 , Neuner won the sprint race courtesy of a clean shooting performance . She finished second in the pursuit and fifth in the individual subsequently . On 12 March 2011 , Neuner won her second title in the mass start despite of four shooing errors . The following day she also claimed gold in the women 's relay , together with Andrea Henkel , Miriam <unk> and Tina Bachmann . Running the last leg for Germany , Neuner started in fourth , 67 @.@ 5 seconds off the lead , but she pulled back the entire time and moved in front on the last lap . Her five medals made her the most successful female athlete in the history of Biathlon World Championships . 
 The season ended in disappointment for Neuner in Oslo . After claiming her 24th career win in the sprint , she had moved into second place in the Overall World Cup ranking . However , she again suffered from a cold and had to pull out of the penultimate race of the winter , the pursuit in which she would have started 31 seconds in front . This effectively ended her hopes of retaining the World Cup crown . She eventually finished fifth in the overall standings , having missed five of the season 's 26 races . 
 = = = Final World Cup winter ( 2011 – 12 season ) = = = 
 Before the start of the 2011 – 12 season , Neuner hinted the upcoming season might be her last . She began the winter in Östersund with the best season start of her career , beating Tora Berger by 0 @.@ 2 seconds in the sprint to claim her 25th World Cup win . She also came third in the individual and the pursuit , and took the yellow bib of the Overall World Cup leader . On 6 December 2011 , Neuner announced her retirement from biathlon by the end of the season on her homepage . She explained her early departure from the sport ( at age 25 ) with a lack of motivation and her desire for a normal life . Neuner nonetheless continued her good form in Hochfilzen , where she claimed her 26th World Cup win in the sprint . 
 After Christmas , Neuner won both individual races in Oberhof – her World Cup wins 27 and 28 . In the women ’ s relay , she incurred 4 penalties in the final shooting , which foiled a likely German victory . Neuner suffered one of the biggest mishaps of her career , when she fired on the wrong targets in the Nove Mesto pursuit , dropping from first to seventh place . She recovered quickly by winning the sprint race in Antholz one week later . In February , Neuner claimed a double sprint and pursuit victory in Oslo despite suffering from a cold , which forced her to withdraw from the mass start . At the last World Cup stop before the world championships in Kontiolahti , she reached her sixth sprint win of the season , and extended her World Cup lead over Darya Domracheva . 
 At the 2012 World Championships in Ruhpolding , Neuner won bronze in the opening mixed relay , alongside Andrea Henkel , Andreas <unk> and Arnd Peiffer . On 3 March 2012 , she claimed her 11th world title in the sprint race courtesy of her clean shooting . Neuner dropped to second place one day later in the pursuit , in which Domracheva overtook her at the final shooting bout . During the second week of the championships , Neuner often struggled with her shooting . She only reached 23rd place in the individual – her worst world championships result ever . With Tina Bachmann , Miriam <unk> and Andrea Henkel she won her second gold medal in Ruhpolding in the women 's relay on 10 March 2012 , despite incurring a penalty loop . In the concluding mass start , Neuner came in tenth place , with six shooting mistakes in total . Her 12th gold medal made her the second most successful biathlete of all time at world championships , behind male record holder Ole Einar <unk> . 
 Having led the standings uninterruptedly since the second race of the winter , Neuner won her third Overall World Cup title at the season final in Russia , where she claimed her 34th and final World Cup win in the sprint . Neuner also won the 2011 – 12 Sprint World Cup thanks to an unprecedented eight out of ten sprint wins . With ten victories in total , her final World Cup season was the most successful in her career . She also became only the second woman after Magdalena Forsberg to win the overall title more than twice . On 18 March 2012 , Neuner ended her biathlon career with a sixth place in the Khanty @-@ Mansiysk mass start . 
 = = Skiing = = 
 Neuner was one of the fastest female cross @-@ country skiers in biathlon . During 66 of her 151 World Cup races ( 44 % ) , she has set the fastest course time ( race time without time spent at the shooting range or in the penalty loop ) . In addition , she has been among the top three fastest skiers in 77 % of her career races . 
 In her first World Cup races in the 2005 – 06 season , Neuner achieved average course times ; her best result was being fourth fastest in the pursuit race in Kontiolahti . During her first full season in 2006 – 07 , she finished among the top three fastest skiers in 19 of her 24 races and came in fastest in seven of them . Neuner won the 2007 – 08 Biathlon World Cup with dominating skiing performances . She set the fastest course time in 19 of her 25 races and was second or third fastest in the remaining six . At the beginning of the 2008 – 09 season , Neuner had a substantial drop in her skiing times due to a series of illnesses . However , she recovered and set the fastest course time in 14 of the remaining 18 races from January onwards . In the 2009 – 10 Olympic season , Neuner again started slowly in December , but came back finishing among the top three fastest skiers in 17 of her 21 races . She had her second best winter in 2010 – 11 when she set the fastest or second fastest skiing time in 90 % of her 21 races . 
 Neuner had been a fast cross @-@ country skier from an early age . When she was eight years old , she won the first cross @-@ country skiing competition she entered at her local ski club . At junior level , her lap times at the German Student 's Cup were comparable to older or male opponents . At the age of 15 , Neuner managed to set the same skiing times as her coeval male training partners . In preparation for the 2006 – 07 season , Neuner skied 5 @,@ 300 kilometres ( 3 @,@ 300 mi ) in training ; she increased the volume to 6 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 3 @,@ 700 mi ) for the 2007 – 08 season . Because of her ski speed , she has often been able to compensate for one or sometimes two or three shooting errors ( a penalty loop is 150 metres ( 160 yd ) long and normally takes 21 to 26 seconds ) . 
 During three of her 32 World Cup wins ( 2007 World Championships pursuit , 2008 World Championships mass start , and 2009 Ruhpolding pursuit ) , Neuner skied three additional penalty loops compared to the second @-@ place finisher . In March 2008 , she came in second in the Khanty @-@ Mansiysk mass start race , despite completing five penalty loops . She also reached third place in the Oberhof pursuit in January 2007 with six missed targets . At Neuner 's first World Cup victory in the individual discipline in January 2010 , she compensated for a total time penalty of two minutes on the 15 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) cross @-@ country course ( incurred by two additional shooting errors ) . 
 = = = Skiing statistics = = = 
 * Key : Number of respective times achieved / number of all races entered , percentage . Results in IBU World Cup races , no relay events . 
 * * Statistics as of 18 March 2012 . 
 = = Shooting = = 
 Neuner averaged a career shooting accuracy of 78 % . Her career average in the prone position was 88 % , while her career average in the standing position was 67 % . Her shooting results in the prone position were similar to other top contenders . The standing shoot had long been her weak point and her hit percentage was well below average in the World Cup field , although it had improved considerably in her later seasons . 
 With a 78 % accuracy , Neuner had solid shooting results during her 2005 – 06 season debut . Her average dropped to 74 % in her first complete season in 2006 – 07 . Neuner won the 2007 – 08 Biathlon World Cup with a shooting accuracy of 73 % , which is the lowest result for an Overall World Cup winner ever and roughly ten per cent below the previous three winners ' averages : Andrea Henkel ( 84 % ) , Kati Wilhelm ( 87 % ) and Sandrine Bailly ( 81 % ) . She steadily increased her shooting percentages in the following two seasons with a 76 % average in 2008 – 09 , and her career best results of 82 % in the 2009 – 10 Olympic season . In the 2010 – 11 season , she set her career high in the standing position with a 75 % accuracy . 
 Neuner 's shooting performances have been a regular topic in the German media . At times she has been reluctant to discuss her shooting in interviews and has said the public 's fixation on it contributes to the problem . She has insisted her difficulties in the standing position are not due to technical weaknesses but psychological , and her training results are just as good as the results of her team mates . She explained in interviews that she had developed a fear of the standing shooting over time , knowing she had to justify herself after the race if she missed . In 2008 , Neuner trained with Bundeswehr shooting coach and former large calibre world champion , Rudi Krenn , and subsequently changed her stance slightly . Since 2009 , she has worked with a psychologist , primarily focusing on mental techniques to build her confidence on the shooting range . Her standing position average has improved from 60 % to 75 % from 2008 to 2011 . Neuner has been wearing ear plugs during some of the races in order to better concentrate while shooting . The individual race , which places a high emphasis on shooting , has traditionally been her worst discipline ( each shooting error results in a one @-@ minute time penalty , instead of a penalty loop ) . 
 Neuner has won 6 races ( all sprints ) with a perfect shooting record : Khanty @-@ Mansiysk sprint in March 2007 , 2011 World Championship sprint and 4 sprints in her final 2011 – 12 season . She also shot clean on two other occasions , the sprint in Kontiolahti in March 2006 , coming in fourth place , and the Östersund sprint in December 2008 , finishing third . Her worst shooting performance came in December 2008 , with a total of nine shooting errors at the World Cup pursuit in Hochfilzen . Neuner 's costliest shooting occurred during a mass start race in Antholz in January 2009 . After 15 clean shots , she was leading by 53 @.@ 6 seconds before the final shooting , in which she missed all five targets , eventually dropping to sixth place . 
 = = = Shooting statistics = = = 
 * Key : Hits / shots , percentage . Results in all IBU World Cup races including relay events . 
 * * Statistics as of 18 March 2012 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Neuner has lived in Wallgau , Bavaria , Germany , a small alpine village of 1 @,@ 400 people , from birth . In 2007 , she bought her grandmother 's house in Wallgau , where she now lives in her own flat . Neuner plays the harp and owns an <unk> motorcycle . She has said she enjoys mountain biking , hiking and swimming during the off @-@ season . 
 Neuner had been involved in a nearly two @-@ year relationship with Austrian ski technician and former biathlete Franz <unk> , whom she had met during the 2006 Junior / Youth World Championships . Until the autumn of 2009 , she then lived in a relationship with DSV chief biathlon technician Björn <unk> for 19 months . 
 In December 2009 , Neuner confirmed a romantic relationship with Josef Holzer , a school day friend from Wallgau . The couple married in March 2014 and have one daughter , Verena Anna ( born 30 May 2014 in Garmisch @-@ Partenkirchen ) . 
 = = In the media = = 
 Biathlon is the most popular winter sport in Germany . Each World Cup event is shown live on German television and the January World Cup races in Oberhof , Ruhpolding and Antholz are regularly seen by over five million viewers . Following her three world championship titles in 2007 , Neuner quickly became one of Germany 's most popular female sport stars , often nicknamed " Gold Lena " in the media . During her first two years in the spotlight she signed several endorsement deals and claimed numerous awards . Neuner 's popularity grew further with her success during the 2010 Winter Olympics . Her second gold medal win in the Olympic mass start was seen live by 9 @.@ 75 million television viewers ( a 31 @.@ 5 per cent market share ) , the most watched programme of the Games in Germany . Her withdrawal from the Olympic relay was one of the dominating stories of the Winter Olympics in Germany , leading to much media speculation whether pulling out had been entirely her decision . She later received the Fair Play medal of Germany 's Olympic Society for setting an example of " team spirit " . 
 Neuner won the Biathlon Award , chosen by the national coaches of the World Cup teams , for Female Athlete of the Year in both 2007 and 2008 , and she was awarded the Goldener Ski ( Golden Ski ) , the highest award of the German Ski Association in 2007 , 2008 and 2010 . The Forum <unk> , a consortium of journalists form twelve countries , named her <unk> of the Year in the 2007 – 08 and 2009 – 10 seasons , beating out her male counterparts Ole Einar <unk> and Emil Hegle Svendsen respectively . Neuner was chosen as Germany 's 2007 Sportswoman of the Year by the country 's sports journalists . The following years , she came in third for the 2008 award and was voted in second place in 2010 . Along with all Olympic medal winners , she received the <unk> Lorbeerblatt ( Silver Laurel Leaf ) in 2010 , the highest state decoration for athletes in Germany . In 2011 , readers of Germany 's top selling newspaper Bild voted Neuner the seventh greatest German sportsperson of all time , and she was again named German Sportswoman of the Year . Nine months after her retirement , Neuner received Germany 's Sportswoman of the Year award for a third time . 
 Neuner 's interest in knitting has often been addressed by the German media and she maintains a knitting website , which includes detailed knitting instructions and a " knitting blog " . She has stated that she usually takes knitting equipment on her travels during the season and that knitting is a way for her to relax . In 2007 , Neuner declined an offer to appear nude in the German edition of Playboy . Outside of Germany , she is particularly popular in Russia , where she has a fan club and from where she has said to receive half of her fan mail . In 2010 , Neuner appeared in an advertising campaign for a lingerie line . She explained she tried to use it in a deliberate attempt to correct her media image , after becoming irritated with her public persona of " little sweet Lena " . She was an ambassador for the 2011 FIFA Women 's World Cup in <unk> and a member of the board of trustees for Munich 's bid to host the 2018 Winter Olympics . 
 = = Record = = 
 = = = Olympic Games = = = 
 Neuner has won two gold medals and one silver medal at the Winter Olympic Games . At her only appearance at the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver , Canada , she won gold in the pursuit and the mass start event . She also claimed silver in the opening sprint . After winning three medals , she decided not to participate in the concluding relay race . 
 = = = World championships = = = 
 Neuner is the most successful female biathlete in the history of Biathlon World Championships . She has won seventeen medals , twelve gold , four silver and one bronze . At her debut during the 2007 World Championships in Antholz , Italy , Neuner won three titles ( sprint , pursuit and relay ) . One year later at the 2008 World Championships in Östersund , Sweden , she again claimed three gold medals , winning the mass start , relay and mixed relay events . Neuner did not win a title at the 2009 World Championships in Pyeongchang , South Korea ; her best result was the silver medal in the relay event . She won her second mixed relay gold in Khanty @-@ Mansiysk , Russia , in 2010 . At the 2011 World Championships , she won three more titles ( sprint , mass start , relay ) and two silver medals ( pursuit and mixed relay ) . At her final championships in 2012 , Neuner won her world titles eleven ( sprint ) and twelve ( relay ) , as well as her fourth silver ( pursuit ) and her first bronze medal ( mixed relay ) . 
 = = = World Cup = = = 
 During her first World Cup season , Neuner only appeared in ten races , finishing 34th in the overall standings . In the 2006 – 07 season , she became a regular in the German team and ended the season in fourth place . Neuner won the Biathlon World Cup for the first time in 2007 – 08 ; she also won the sprint and mass start disciplines . She finished the 2008 – 09 season fourth , winning the individual discipline that year . In the 2009 – 10 season , Neuner won the overall World Cup for a second time ; by winning the pursuit and mass start scores as well , she has claimed each World Cup title at least once . In 2010 – 11 , she won the sprint discipline for a second time and finished fifth in the season ranking . In her final World Cup season in 2011 – 12 , Neuner won her third Overall World Cup title , as well as the sprint discipline . 
 * Key : Races — number of entered races / all races ; Points — won World Cup points ; Position — World Cup season ranking . 
 * Statistics as of 18 March 2012 . ' ' 
 = = = = World Cup wins = = = = 
 Over the course of seven seasons , Neuner has reached 34 personal World Cup wins . In the history of the International Biathlon Union she is ranked second behind Magdalena Forsberg ( 42 ) , with <unk> <unk> ( 30 ) third , for all @-@ time career victories . In addition , she has won nine relay races and three mixed relay events as part of the German World Cup team . Neuner has often started slowly at the beginning of a winter season and has claimed only three of her individual victories before Christmas . Consequently , 18 of her 47 wins came in the month of March . Geographically most of her wins occurred in Khanty @-@ Mansiysk , Russia ( 10 ) , followed by Antholz , Italy ( 6 ) and Ruhpolding , Germany ( 6 ) . 
 * Key : WCH — World Championships ; OG — Olympic Games . Statistics as of 18 March 2012 . 
 = = = Overall record = = = 
 During her seven season on the World Cup tour , Neuner had competed in a total of 175 races , winning 47 of them ( a 26 @.@ 86 win percentage ) . She has claimed at least one win in each discipline of biathlon and has scored World Cup points in all but three of her races . Neuner has reached a total of 82 World Cup podiums ( 63 in individual races and 19 in team events ) . In addition , she has achieved 137 top ten finishes — 78 @.@ 29 per cent of all the races she has entered . 
 * Results in all IBU World Cup races including relay events . Statistics as of 18 March 2012 . 
 = = = Junior / Youth World Championships = = = 
 Neuner has won seven gold and four silver medals at the Biathlon Junior / Youth World Championships . With the exception of the individual discipline , she has won a medal in every race she entered . In 2004 , at her first junior world championships in Haute Maurienne , France , Neuner won two titles ( sprint and relay ) . One year later , she claimed gold in the sprint race in Kontiolahti , Finland , and in 2006 , she again won two titles ( pursuit and relay ) in Presque Isle , Maine , United States . Neuner did not participate in the 2007 event . She returned to the junior world championships in 2008 when they were held in Ruhpolding , Germany , winning two more gold medals ( sprint and pursuit ) . 
 = = Achievements and honours = = 
 International titles 
 Winter Olympic Games – 2 gold <unk> : Pursuit , Mass start 
 Overall Biathlon World Cup winner – 2007 – 08 , 2009 – 10 , 2011 – 2012 
 Individual World Cup winner – 2008 – 09 
 Sprint World Cup winner – 2007 – 08 , 2010 – 11 , 2011 – 2012 
 Pursuit World Cup winner – 2009 – 10 
 Mass start World Cup winner – 2007 – 08 , 2009 – 10 
 Biathlon World Championships – 12 gold <unk> : Sprint , Pursuit , Relay 
 2008 : Mass start , Relay , Mixed relay 
 2010 : Mixed Relay 
 2011 : Sprint , Mass start , Relay 
 2012 : Sprint , Relay 
 Biathlon Junior / Youth World Championships – 7 gold medals 
 Awards 
 German Sportswoman of the Year – 2007 , 2011 
 Biathlon Award for Female Newcomer of the Year – 2007 
 Biathlon Award for Female Athlete of the Year – 2007 , 2008 
 Goldener Ski of the DSV – 2007 , 2008 , 2010 
 <unk> of the Year of the Forum <unk> – 2008 , 2010 
 Silbernes Lorbeerblatt – 2010 
 = HMS Prince George ( 1895 ) = 
 HMS Prince George was a Majestic @-@ class pre @-@ dreadnought battleship launched in 1895 . She was named after the future George V of the United Kingdom and was the fourth and final ship to bear that name . Commissioned in 1896 , she initially served with the Channel Fleet until 1904 . She was involved in a collision with her sister ship , Hannibal , and the resulting damage meant that much of the latter part of 1903 was spent being repaired . After a refit in 1904 , she was assigned to the Atlantic Fleet and then from 1907 , she was part of the Home Fleet . In 1912 , she was assigned to the 7th Battle Squadron . 
 When World War I broke out Prince George , together with the rest of the squadron , was attached to the Channel Fleet during the early stages of the war . In early 1915 , she was dispatched to the Mediterranean for service in the Dardanelles Campaign . She participated in bombardments of Turkish forts and supported the Allied operations at Gallipoli , including the evacuation from the peninsula late in 1915 . She spent the remainder of the war back in the United Kingdom , initially as an accommodation ship before being converted to a depot ship for destroyers in 1918 and stationed at Scapa Flow . For this latter role , she was renamed Victorious II before reverting to her original name in 1919 . Decommissioned in 1920 , she was sold for scrapping to a German company but sank off the Netherlands during transit to Germany . 
 = = Design = = 
 Prince George was laid down at the Portsmouth Dockyard on 10 September 1894 . She was launched less than a year later , on 22 August 1895 , after which fitting @-@ out work commenced . The ceremony was performed by HRH the Duchess of York ( later Queen Mary ) , in the presence of her husband Prince George , Duke of York ( later King George V ) , for whom the ship was named . She was commissioned into the Royal Navy on 26 November 1896 . The ship was 421 feet ( 128 m ) long overall and had a beam of 75 ft ( 23 m ) and a draft of 27 ft ( 8 @.@ 2 m ) . She displaced up to 16 @,@ 060 t ( 15 @,@ 810 long tons ; 17 @,@ 700 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two 3 @-@ cylinder triple expansion engines powered by eight coal @-@ fired cylindrical boilers . By 1907 – 1908 , she was re @-@ boilered with oil @-@ fired models . Her engines provided a top speed of 16 knots ( 30 km / h ; 18 mph ) at 10 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 7 @,@ 500 kW ) . The Majestics were considered good seaboats with an easy roll and good steamers , although they suffered from high fuel consumption . She had a crew of 672 officers and enlisted men . 
 Prince George was armed with four BL 12 @-@ inch Mk VIII guns in twin turrets , one forward and one aft . The turrets were placed on pear @-@ shaped barbettes ; six of her sisters had the same arrangement , but her sisters Caesar and Illustrious and all future British battleship classes had circular barbettes . Prince George also carried twelve QF 6 @-@ inch / 40 guns . They were mounted in casemates in two gun decks amidships . She also carried sixteen QF 12 @-@ pounder guns and twelve QF 2 @-@ pounder guns . She was also equipped with five 18 @-@ inch ( 450 @-@ mm ) torpedo tubes , four of which were submerged in the ship 's hull , with the last in a deck @-@ mounted launcher . Prince George and the other ships of her class had 9 inches ( 229 mm ) of Harvey armour , which allowed equal protection with less cost in weight compared to previous types of armour . This allowed Prince George and her sisters to have a deeper and lighter belt than previous battleships without any loss in protection . The barbettes for the main battery were protected with 14 in ( 360 mm ) of armour , and the conning tower had the same thickness of steel on the sides . The ship 's armoured deck was 2 @.@ 5 to 4 @.@ 5 in ( 64 to 114 mm ) thick . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ World War I = = = 
 HMS Prince George was commissioned at Portsmouth Dockyard on 26 November 1896 to serve with the Channel Fleet . Captain Arthur Barrow was appointed in command on 28 June 1899 . She was present at both the Fleet Review at Spithead for the Diamond Jubilee of Queen Victoria on 26 June 1897 and the Coronation Fleet Review for King Edward VII on 16 August 1902 . On 17 October 1903 , Prince George was badly damaged when her sister ship Hannibal rammed her in heavy seas at a speed of 9 knots ( 17 km / h ; 10 mph ) off Spain , punching a large hole below the waterline on Prince George 's starboard quarter . Prince George was in danger of sinking for several hours , but managed to make it to Ferrol , steering with her engines and with her sternwalk awash . After temporary repairs at Ferrol , she departed on 24 October 1903 for Portsmouth , where her repairs were completed . 
 Prince George ended her Channel Fleet service in July 1904 , and began a refit at Portsmouth . Upon its completion , she was commissioned into the reserve there on 3 January 1905 . On 14 February 1905 , she was commissioned for service with the Atlantic Fleet , which had been the Channel Fleet until a fleet reorganisation on 1 January 1905 . On 3 March 1905 she collided with the German armoured cruiser SMS Friedrich Carl at Gibraltar without serious damage . On 17 July 1905 , Prince George was transferred to the new Channel Fleet , ending this service on 4 March 1907 when she was paid off at Portsmouth . 
 Prince George was recommissioned on 5 March 1907 to serve as the flagship of the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , Portsmouth Division of the new Home Fleet which had been organised in January 1907 . On 5 December 1907 she collided with the armoured cruiser Shannon at Portsmouth , sustaining significant damage to her deck plating and boat davits . She was relieved as flagship in February 1909 , and from March to December she underwent a refit at Portsmouth , during which she had radio installed . Prince George was reduced to a nucleus crew and placed in the commissioned reserve in December 1910 . She moved to Devonport in 1911 . In June 1912 , Prince George became part of the 7th Battle Squadron , 3rd Fleet . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 Upon the outbreak of the First World War in August 1914 , Prince George returned to full commission on 8 August , and briefly was the squadron 's first flagship , until relieved in this role by the battleship Vengeance on 15 August . On 25 August , Prince George covered the passage of the Plymouth Marine Division to Ostend , Belgium , and in September she covered the movement of the British Expeditionary Force from England to France . Prince George 's Channel Fleet service ended in February 1915 when she transferred to the Dardanelles for service in the Dardanelles campaign as a " mine @-@ bumper " . She arrived at Tenedos on 1 March 1915 , which would be her base until February 1916 . She took part in attacks on Ottoman Turkish forts covering the Turkish Straits on 5 and 18 March . On 3 May , while firing on Turkish batteries , she took a 6 @-@ inch ( 152 @-@ mm ) hit below the waterline , and returned to Malta for repairs . 
 Prince George was back in action on 12 and 13 July , supporting French troops with gunfire support from off of Krithia and Achi Baba . On 18 and 19 December she covered the evacuation of Allied troops from Suvla Bay , and the evacuation from West Beach on 8 and 9 January 1916 ; she was hit by a torpedo off Cape Helles on 9 January , but it failed to explode and she suffered no damage . She was at Salonika in January and February . Prince George left the Mediterranean at the end of February and paid off at Chatham Dockyard in March to provide crews for antisubmarine vessels . She remained at Chatham in a care and maintenance status through February 1918 , serving as an auxiliary sickbay and in other subsidiary duties , then served as an accommodation ship there from March 1916 to May 1918 . 
 In May 1918 , Prince George began a refit a Chatham for conversion to a destroyer depot ship . She was renamed Victorious II in September 1918 , and emerged from refit in October 1918 . She was then attached to repair ship ( her sister ship and former battleship ) Victorious at Scapa Flow , where she served as a depot ship to destroyers of the Grand Fleet . She reverted to the name Prince George in February 1919 , and in March transferred to Sheerness to serve as depot ship to destroyers based on the Medway . Prince George was placed on the disposal list at Sheerness on 21 February 1920 , and was sold for scrapping to a British firm on 22 September 1921 . She was resold to a German firm in December 1921 , and departed for Germany for scrapping . During the voyage , Prince George was wrecked on 30 December 1921 off Camperduin , the Netherlands . She subsequently was stripped of valuable materials and left as a breakwater , remaining there to this day . 
 = Ely , Cambridgeshire = 
 Ely ( / <unk> / EE @-@ lee ) is a cathedral city in Cambridgeshire , England , 14 miles ( 23 km ) north @-@ north @-@ east of Cambridge and about 80 miles ( 129 km ) by road from London . Æthelthryth ( Etheldreda ) founded an abbey at Ely in AD 673 ; the abbey was destroyed in 870 by Danish invaders and was rebuilt by Ethelwold , Bishop of Winchester , in 970 . Construction of the cathedral was started in 1083 by a Norman abbot , Simeon . Alan of Walsingham 's octagon , built over Ely 's nave crossing between 1322 and 1328 , is the " greatest individual achievement of architectural genius at Ely Cathedral " , according to architectural historian Nikolaus Pevsner . Building continued until the dissolution of the abbey in 1539 during the Reformation . The cathedral was sympathetically restored between 1845 and 1870 by the architect George Gilbert Scott . As the seat of a diocese , Ely has long been considered a city ; in 1974 , city status was granted by royal charter . 
 Ely is built on a 23 @-@ square @-@ mile ( 60 km2 ) Kimmeridge Clay island which , at 85 feet ( 26 m ) , is the highest land in the fens . Major rivers including the Witham , Welland , Nene and Great Ouse feed into the fens and , until draining commenced in the 17th century , formed freshwater marshes and meres within which peat was laid down . There are two Sites of Special Scientific Interest in the city : a former Kimmeridge Clay quarry , and one of the United Kingdom 's best remaining examples of medieval ridge and furrow agriculture . 
 The economy of the region is mainly agricultural . Before the fens were drained , the harvesting of osier ( willow ) and sedge ( rush ) and the extraction of peat were important activities , as were eel fishing — from which the settlement 's name may have been derived — and wild fowling . The city had been the centre of local pottery production for more than 700 years , including pottery known as Babylon ware . A Roman road , Akeman Street , passes through the city ; the southern end is at Ermine Street near Wimpole and its northern end is at Brancaster . Little direct evidence of Roman occupation in Ely exists , although there are nearby Roman settlements such as those at Little Thetford and Stretham . A coach route , known to have existed in 1753 between Ely and Cambridge , was improved in 1769 as a turnpike ( toll @-@ road ) . The present day A10 closely follows this route ; a south @-@ western bypass of the city was built in 1986 . Ely railway station built in 1845 is on the Fen Line and is now a railway hub , with lines north to King 's Lynn , north @-@ west to Peterborough , east to Norwich , south @-@ east to Ipswich and south to Cambridge and London . 
 The King 's School is a coeducational boarding school which was granted a royal charter in 1541 by Henry VIII ; the school claims to have existed since 970 . Henry I granted the first annual Fair , Saint Audrey 's ( Etheldreda 's ) seven @-@ day event , to the abbot and convent on 10 October 1189 ; the word " tawdry " originates from cheap lace sold at this fair . Present day annual events include the Eel Festival in May , established in 2004 , and a fireworks display in Ely Park , first staged in 1974 . The city of Ely has been twinned with Denmark 's oldest town , Ribe , since 1956 . Ely City Football Club was formed in 1885 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ history = = = 
 Roswell Pits are a <unk> significant Site of Special Scientific Interest ( SSSI ) 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) north @-@ east of the city . The Jurassic Kimmeridge Clays were quarried in the 19th and 20th centuries for the production of pottery and for maintenance of river embankments . Many specimens of ammonites , belemnites and bivalves were found during quarrying , in addition to an almost complete specimen of a <unk> . 
 There is some scattered evidence of Late Mesolithic to Bronze Age activity in Ely such as Neolithic flint tools , a Bronze Age axe and spearhead . There is slightly denser Iron Age and Roman activity with some evidence of at least seasonal occupation . For example , a possible farmstead , of the late Iron Age to early Roman period , was discovered at West Fen Road and some Roman pottery was found close to the east end of the cathedral on The Paddock . There was a Roman settlement , including a tile kiln built over an earlier Iron Age settlement , in Little Thetford , 3 miles ( 5 km ) to the south . 
 = = = Name = = = 
 The origin and meaning of Ely 's name have always been regarded as obscure by place @-@ name scholars , and are still disputed . The earliest record of the name is in the Latin text of Bede 's Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum , where Bede wrote <unk> . This is apparently not a Latin name , and subsequent Latin texts nearly all used the forms Elia , Eli , or Heli with inorganic <unk> . In Old English charters , and in the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle , the spelling is usually <unk> . 
 Skeat derived the name Ely from what he called " O [ ld ] Northumbrian " <unk> , meaning " district of eels " . This uses a hypothetical word * ġē , which is not recorded in isolation but thought by some to be related to the modern German word Gau , meaning " district " . The theory is that the name then developed a vowel to become <unk> , and was afterwards re @-@ interpreted to mean " eel island " . This essentially is the explanation accepted by Reaney Ekwall , Mills and Watts . 
 But difficulties remain . Bailey , in his discussion of ġē names , has pointed out that Ely would be anomalous if really from <unk> " eel district " , being remote from the areas where possible examples of ġē names occur , and moreover , there is no parallel for the use of a fish @-@ name in compounds with ġē . More seriously , the usual English spelling remains <unk> , even in the dative case used after many prepositions , where <unk> would be expected if the second element were <unk> " island " . This is in conflict with all the other island names which surround Ely . 
 = = = Medieval and early modern periods = = = 
 The city 's origins lay in the foundation of an abbey in AD 673 , a mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) to the north of the village of Cratendune on the Isle of Ely , under the protection of St Etheldreda , daughter of King Anna . This first abbey was destroyed in 870 by Danish invaders and rededicated to Etheldreda in 970 by Ethelwold , Bishop of Winchester . The abbots of Ely then accumulated such wealth in the region that in the Domesday survey ( 1086 ) it was the " second richest monastery in England " . The first Norman bishop , Simeon , started building the cathedral in 1083 . The octagon was rebuilt by sacrist Alan of Walsingham between 1322 and 1328 after the collapse of the original nave crossing on 22 February 1322 . Ely 's octagon is considered " one of the wonders of the medieval world " . Architectural historian Nikolaus Pevsner believes the octagon " is a delight from beginning to end for anyone who feels for space as strongly as for construction " and is the " greatest individual achievement of architectural genius at Ely Cathedral " . 
 Cherry Hill is the site of Ely Castle which is of Norman construction and is a United Kingdom scheduled monument . Of similar construction to Cambridge Castle , the 250 @-@ foot ( 76 m ) diameter , 40 feet ( 12 m ) high citadel @-@ type motte and bailey is thought to be a royal defence built by William the Conqueror following submission of the Isle from rebels such as the Earl Morcar and the folk @-@ hero Hereward the Wake . This would date the first building of the castle to circa 1070 . 
 Following the accession of Mary I of England to the throne in 1553 , the papacy made its first effective efforts to enforce the Pope Paul III @-@ initiated Catholic reforms in England . During this time , which became known as the Marian Persecutions , two men from Wisbech , constable William Wolsey and painter Robert <unk> , " were accused of not ... believing that the body and blood of Christ were present in the bread and wine of the sacrament of mass " . For this Christian heresy they were condemned by the bishop 's chancellor , John Fuller , on the 9 October 1555 . On 16 October 1555 they were burnt at the stake " probably on the Palace Green in front of Ely Cathedral " . In The Book of Ely published in 1990 , Blakeman writes that " permission was not given " for a memorial to the martyrs to be placed on Palace Green . In 2011 , a plaque recording this martyrdom event was erected on the north @-@ east corner of Palace Green by the City of Ely Perspective . 
 Oliver Cromwell lived in Ely from 1636 to 1646 after inheriting a sixteenth @-@ century property — now known as Oliver Cromwell 's House — and the position of local tax collector from his mother 's brother , Sir Thomas Steward . Cromwell was one of the governors of Thomas Parsons ' Charity , which dates back to 1445 and was granted a Royal Charter by Charles I of England . The Charity still provides grants and housing to deserving local applicants . 
 = = = Post @-@ medieval decline = = = 
 There was a form of early workhouse in 1687 , perhaps at St Mary 's , which may have been part of an arrangement made between the Ely people and a Nicholas <unk> of Norwich in 1675 . He was paid £ 30 per annum to employ the poor to " spin jersey " and was to pay them in money not goods . A purpose @-@ built workhouse was erected in 1725 for 35 inmates on what is now St Mary 's Court . Four other workhouses existed , including Holy Trinity on Fore Hill for 80 inmates ( 1738 – 1956 ) and the Ely Union workhouse , built in 1837 , which housed up to 300 inmates . The latter became Tower Hospital in 1948 and is now a residential building , Tower Court . Two other former workhouses were the Haven Quayside for unmarried mothers and another on the site of what is now the Hereward Hall in Silver Street . 
 The diaries of writers and journalists such as William Camden , Celia Fiennes , Daniel Defoe , John Byng and William Cobbett illustrate the decline of Ely after the 14th century plague and the 16th century reformation which led to the dissolution of the monastery in 1539 . In the 1607 edition of Britannia , <unk> surveyor William Camden records that " as for Ely it selfe , it is no small Citie , or greatly to be counted off either for beauty or frequency and resort , as having an <unk> <unk> by reason of the fens round about " . In 1698 , Celia Fiennes was writing " the Bishop [ Simon Patrick ] does not Care to stay long in this place not being for his health ... they have lost their Charter ... and its a shame [ the Bishop ] does not see it better ordered and ye buildings and <unk> put in a better Condition . They are a slothful people and for little but ye <unk> Care of their Grounds and Cattle <unk> is of vast advantage " . Daniel Defoe , when writing in the Eastern Counties section of A tour thro ' the whole island of Great Britain ( 1722 ) , went " to Ely , whose cathedral , standing in a level flat country , is seen far and wide ... that some of it is so antient , <unk> so much with every gust of wind , looks so like a decay , and seems so near it , that when ever it does fall , all that ' tis likely will be thought strange in it , will be , that it did not fall a hundred years sooner " . On his way to a Midlands tour , John Byng visited Ely on 5 July 1790 staying at the Lamb Inn . In his diary he writes that " the town [ Ely ] is mean , to the extreme ... those withdrawn , their <unk> must decay " . Recording in his Rural Rides on 25 March 1830 , William Cobbett reports that " Ely is what one may call a miserable little town : very prettily situated , but poor and mean . Everything seems to be on the decline , as , indeed , is the case everywhere , where the clergy are the masters " . 
 The Ely and Littleport riots occurred between 22 and 24 May 1816 . At the Special Commission assizes , held at Ely between 17 and 22 June 1816 , twenty @-@ four rioters were condemned . Nineteen had their sentences variously commuted from penal transportation for life to twelve @-@ months imprisonment ; the remaining five were executed on 28 June 1816 . 
 = = = Victorian and twentieth @-@ century regeneration = = = 
 Ely Cathedral was " the first great cathedral to be thoroughly restored " . Work commenced in 1845 and was completed nearly thirty years later ; most of the work was " sympathetically " carried out by the architect George Gilbert Scott . The only pavement labyrinth to be found in an English cathedral was installed below the west tower in 1870 . 
 For over 800 years the cathedral and its associated buildings — built on an elevation 68 feet ( 21 m ) above the nearby fens — have visually influenced the city and its surrounding area . Geographer John Jones , writing in 1924 , reports that " from the roof of King 's Chapel in Cambridge , on a clear day , Ely [ cathedral ] can be seen on the horizon , 16 miles ( 26 km ) distant , an expression of the flatness of the fens " . In 1954 , architectural historian Nikolaus Pevsner wrote " as one approaches Ely on foot or on a bicycle , or perhaps in an open car , the cathedral dominates the picture for miles around ... and offers from everywhere an outline different from that of any other English cathedral " . Local historian Pamela Blakeman reports a claim that " Grouped around [ the cathedral ] ... is the largest collection of mediaeval buildings still in daily use in this country " . 
 As the seat of a diocese , Ely has long been considered a city : the caption to John Speed 's 1610 plan of Ely reads " Although this Citie of Ely " , and Aikin refers to Ely as a city in 1800 . Ely , however , was not formally granted city status until 1 April 1974 by the Queen by letters patent . Ely 's population of 20 @,@ 256 ( as recorded in 2011 ) classifies it as one of the smallest cities in England ; although the population has increased noticeably since 1991 when it was recorded at 11 @,@ 291 . 
 Henry III of England granted a market to the Bishop of Ely using letters close on 9 April 1224 although Ely had been a trading centre prior to this . Present weekly market days are Thursday and Saturday and seasonal markets are held monthly on Sundays and Bank Holiday Mondays from Easter to November . The city is situated on the River Great Ouse , which was a significant means of transport until the fens were drained and Ely ceased to be an island in the eighteenth century . The river is now a popular boating spot , and has a large marina . 
 = = = Liberty of Ely = = = 
 The abbey at Ely was one of many which were refounded in the Benedictine reforms of King Edgar the Peaceful ( 943 – 975 ) . The " special and peculiarly ancient " honour and freedoms given to Ely by charter at that time may have been intended to award only fiscal privilege , but have been interpreted to confer on subsequent bishops the authority and power of a ruler . These rights were reconfirmed in charters granted by Edward the Confessor and in William the Conqueror 's confirmation of the old English liberty at <unk> . The Isle of Ely was mentioned in some statutes as a county palatine ; this provided an explanation of the bishop 's royal privileges and judicial authority , which would normally belong to the sovereign ; but legal authorities such as Sir Edward Coke did not completely endorse the form of words . These bishop 's rights were not fully extinguished until 1837 . 
 = = = Local government = = = 
 The local authority of the city was the City of Ely Urban District Council from 1894 to 1974 . The Isle of Ely County Council governed the Isle of Ely administrative county that surrounding and included the city from 1889 to 1965 . In 1965 there was a reform of local government that merged the county council with that of Cambridgeshire to form the Cambridgeshire and Isle of Ely County Council . In 1974 as part of a national reform of local government , the Cambridgeshire and Isle of Ely County Council merged with the Huntingdon and Peterborough County Council to form the Cambridgeshire County Council . The City of Ely Urban District Council became the City of Ely Council , a parish council which covers the same area but with fewer powers , and the East Cambridgeshire District Council which covers a wider area . 
 = = Governance = = 
 Regular elections take place to the City of Ely Council , East Cambridgeshire District Council and Cambridgeshire County Council . The civil parish is divided into four wards called Ely North , Ely South , Ely East and Ely West . Fourteen councillors are elected to the parish council . The East Cambridgeshire District Council is also based in Ely . For elections to the East Cambridgeshire District Council the four wards of Ely South , Ely East and Ely West each return two district councillors ; and Ely North returns three . In 2011 , the seats were held by four Liberal Democrat and five Conservative councillors . For elections to the Cambridgeshire County Council the city returns two councillors , both of whom were Conservatives in 2013 . For elections to the UK Parliament , Ely is part of the South East Cambridgeshire constituency . James Paice held the seat from 1987 until he stepped down in 2015 . For elections to the European Parliament , Ely is part of the East of England constituency . 
 = = Geography = = 
 = = = Geology and topography = = = 
 The west of Cambridgeshire is made up of limestones from the Jurassic period , whilst the east Cambridgeshire area consists of Cretaceous ( upper Mesozoic ) chalks known locally as <unk> . In between these two major formations , the high ground forming the Isle of Ely is from a lower division Cretaceous system known as Lower Greensand which is capped by Boulder Clay ; all local settlements , such as Stretham and Littleport , are on similar islands . These islands rise above the surrounding flat land which forms the largest plain of Britain from the Jurassic system of partly consolidated clays or muds . Kimmeridge Clay beds dipping gently west underlie the Lower Greensand of the area exposed , for example , about 1 mile ( 2 km ) south of Ely in the Roswell Pits . The Lower Greensand is partly capped by glacial deposits forming the highest point in East Cambridgeshire , rising to 85 feet ( 26 m ) above sea level in Ely . 
 The low @-@ lying fens surrounding the island of Ely were formed , prior to the 17th century , by alternate fresh @-@ water and sea @-@ water incursions . Major rivers in the region , including the Witham , Welland , Nene and Great Ouse , drain an area of some 6 @,@ 000 square miles ( 16 @,@ 000 km2 ) — five times larger than the fens — into the basin that forms the fens . Defoe in 1774 described the fens as " the sink of no less than thirteen Counties " . On 23 November of that year , Church of England cleric and Christian <unk> John Wesley , wrote of his approach to Ely after visiting Norwich : " about eight , Wednesday , 23 , Mr. Dancer met me with a chaise [ carriage ] and carried me to Ely . Oh , what want of common sense ! Water covered the high road for a mile and a half . I asked , ' How must foot @-@ people come to the town ? ' ' Why , they must wade through ! ' " Peat formed in the fresh @-@ water swamps and meres whilst silts were deposited by the slow @-@ moving sea @-@ water . Francis Russell , Earl of Bedford , supported by Parliament , financed the draining of the fens during the 17th century , led by the Dutch engineer Cornelius Vermuyden ; the fens continue to be drained to this day . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 With an average annual rainfall of 24 inches ( 600 mm ) , Cambridgeshire is one of the driest counties in the British Isles . Protected from the cool onshore coastal breezes east of the region , Cambridgeshire is warm in summer and cold and frosty in winter . Regional weather forecasting and historical summaries are available from the UK Met Office . The nearest Met Office weather station is Cambridge . Additional local weather stations report periodic figures to the internet such as Weather Underground , Inc . 
 = = Demography = = 
 The Domesday survey of 1086 revealed 110 households which were mainly rural . In 1251 , a survey showed an increase to 345 households with the start of urban living although still largely rural . By the 1416 survey there were 457 occupied premises in the city and many of the streets were arranged much as they are today . See also the cartographer John Speed 's plan of Ely , 1610 . In 1563 there were 800 households and by 1753 the population was recorded as 3 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Economy = = 
 As an island surrounded by marshes and meres , the fishing of eels was important as both a food and an income for the abbot and his nearby tenants . For example , to the abbot of Ely in 1086 , <unk> was worth 24 @,@ 000 eels , <unk> 17 @,@ 000 eels and even the small village of <unk> was worth 3 @,@ 250 eels . Prior to the extensive and largely successful drainage of the fens during the seventeenth century , Ely was a trade centre for goods made out of willow , reeds and rushes and wild fowling was a major local activity . Peat in the form of " turf " was used as a fuel and in the form of " moor " as a building material . Ampthill Clay was dug from the local area for the maintenance of river banks and Kimmeridge Clay at Roswell Pits for the making of pottery wares . In general , from a geological perspective , " The district is almost entirely agricultural and has always been so . The only mineral worked at the present time is gravel for aggregate , although chalk , brick clay ( Ampthill and Kimmeridge clays ) , phosphate ( from Woburn Sands , Gault and Cambridge Greensand ) , sand and gravel , and peat have been worked on a small scale in the past " . 
 <unk> nodules , referred to locally as coprolites , were dug in the area surrounding Ely between 1850 and 1890 for use as an agricultural fertiliser . This industry provided significant employment for the local labour force . One of the largest sugar beet factories in England was opened in Queen Adelaide , 2 miles ( 3 km ) from the centre of Ely , in 1925 . The factory closed in 1981 , although sugar beet is still farmed locally . 
 Pottery was made in Ely from the 12th century until 1860 : records show around 80 people who classed their trade as potters . " Babylon ware " is the name given to pottery made in one area of Ely . This ware is thought to be so named because there were potters in an area cut off from the centre by the re @-@ routing of the River Great Ouse around 1200 ; by the seventeenth century this area had become known as Babylon . Although the reason for the name is unclear , by 1850 it was in official use on maps . The building of the Ely to King 's Lynn railway in 1847 cut the area off even further , and the inhabitants could only cross to Ely by boat . 
 = = Culture = = 
 = = = Annual events = = = 
 Annual fairs have been held in Ely since the twelfth century . Saint Audrey 's ( Etheldreda 's ) seven @-@ day fair , held either side of 23 June , was first granted officially by Henry I to the abbot and convent on 10 October 1189 . At this fair , cheap necklaces , made from brightly coloured silk , were sold — these were called " tawdry lace " . " <unk> " , a corruption of " Saint Audrey " , now means " pertaining to the nature of cheap and gaudy finery " . Two other fairs , the 15 day festival of St Lambert , first granted in 1312 and the 22 day fair beginning on the Vigil of the Ascension , first granted in 1318 . The festival of St Lambert had stopped by the eighteenth century . St Etheldreda 's and the Vigil of the Ascension markets still continue , although the number of days have been considerably reduced and the dates have changed . 
 Present @-@ day annual events in Ely include <unk> , which has been staged at the riverside by the Rotary Club on the first Sunday of July since 1978 . Other events include the Eel Day carnival procession and the annual fireworks display in Ely Park , first staged in 1974 . The Ely Folk Festival has been held in the city since 1985 . The Ely Horticultural Society have been staging their Great Autumn Show since 1927 . 
 = = = Twin town = = = 
 Since September 1956 , Ely has been twinned with Ribe , Denmark 's oldest town and part of the Municipality of Esbjerg ; officials from Ribe first came to Ely in 1957 . The golden anniversary of this twinning was celebrated in 2006 . Exchange visits occur roughly every two years . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 = = = War memorial = = = 
 A cannon , captured during the Crimean War at the Siege of Sevastopol ( 1854 – 1855 ) and given to Ely by Queen Victoria in 1860 , is located on Palace Green , west of the cathedral . The inscription reads " Russian cannon captured during the Crimean War presented to the people of Ely by Queen Victoria in 1860 to mark the creation of the Ely Rifle Volunteers " . The cannon was cast at the <unk> factory in 1802 , the factory 's director being the Englishman , Charles Gascoigne . The serial number is <unk> . The calibre is 30 pounds and the weight is 252 <unk> , or about 9 @,@ 000 pounds ( 4 @,@ 100 kg ) . The cannon is mounted on an iron carriage which would previously have been mounted on a " heavy iron traversing slide " known as ' Systeme <unk> 1853 ' . The Ely Rifle Volunteers , formed in 1860 , became part of the Cambridgeshire Regiment during 1914 – 1918 then subsequently part of the Royal Anglian Regiment until disbanded in 1999 . 
 = = = Notable buildings = = = 
 There are twenty three Grade I , six Grade II * and one hundred and fifty three Grade II listed buildings in the city of Ely . 
 Cherry Hill , to the south of Cathedral Park , is the remains of the Norman period , motte and bailey , Ely Castle . The earliest written record of this 40 feet ( 12 m ) high by 250 feet ( 76 m ) diameter castle is in the time of Henry I. Two twelfth century hospitals , St Mary Magdalene founded 1172 and St John the Baptist founded circa 1200 , were on the site of what is now a four @-@ building farmstead . Building dates are not known but the extant remains indicate circa 1175 – 85 . Bishop <unk> merged the two hospitals in 1240 . The farmstead Grade I listed building status was graded on 23 September 1950 between four properties : St John 's farmhouse , a barn to the south @-@ west ( formerly chapel of St John ) , a barn to the north ( formerly chapel of St Mary ) and a dovecote . Above the north doorway of the south @-@ western barn of St John 's farmhouse is a carved Barnack stone which is built into the thirteenth century wall . The stone is thought to have been robbed from the Anglo @-@ Saxon monastery of St Etheldreda . This heavily weathered eighth @-@ century stone shows a man blowing a horn whilst riding on an ox . 
 John Alcock , Bishop of Ely and founder of Jesus College , Cambridge , constructed the Bishop 's Palace during his bishopric , between 1486 and 1500 ; of the original fabric , only the east tower and the lower part of the west tower remain . A " startlingly huge " London Plane tree , planted in 1680 , still grows in the garden and is " said to be one of the largest in England " . Benjamin <unk> , Bishop of Ely from 1667 until 1675 , demolished much of Alcock 's work and thus became responsible for most of the present @-@ day building . This Grade I listed building is south @-@ west of and close to the west end of the cathedral , opposite the original village green , now named Palace Green . 
 St Mary 's Vicarage , better known locally as Cromwell House , is a Grade II * listed building of mainly sixteenth @-@ century plaster @-@ frame construction although there exist some stone arches , circa 1380 . A plaque on the front of the house records that this is " Cromwell House , the residence of Oliver Cromwell from 1636 to 1647 when collector of Ely Tithes " . Between 1843 – 1847 the house was the Cromwell Arms public house and it was restored in 1905 when it was given its " timbered appearance " . The house was opened as a re @-@ creation of seventeenth @-@ century living and a tourist information centre on 6 December 1990 . The former Ely Gaol is a late seventeenth @-@ century Grade II listed building which since has been the Ely museum . From the thirteenth century , buildings on this site have been ; a private house , a tavern and — since 1836 when the Bishop transferred his thirteenth @-@ century prison from Ely Porta — the Bishop 's Gaol . It was a registry office prior to becoming a museum . 
 The Lamb Hotel is a Grade II listed building which is prominently situated on the corner of Lynn Road and High Street 100 yards ( 91 m ) north of the west end of the cathedral . The hotel was erected as a coaching house on the site of the previous Lamb Inn during 1828 and 1829 . At that time it had stabling for 30 horses and a lock @-@ up for two coaches . In 1906 it had five bedrooms for the landlord , 15 rooms for lodgers , room for 15 horses and 12 vehicles . In 2007 it had 31 rooms for guests . It is claimed that an inn has existed on the site since Bishop Fordham 's survey between 1416 and 1417 . It is also claimed that an inn existed on the site in 1690 , but no earlier . 
 The city 's courthouse was built in 1821 , replacing a previous court in the Shire Hall . It ceased operation in 2011 as part of central government measures to close 93 magistrates ' courts across England and Wales . 
 = = = Notable sites = = = 
 The former Kimmeridge Clay quarry Roswell Pits , 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) south @-@ west of Ely Cathedral , is now a nature reserve and Site of Special Scientific Interest ( SSSI ) . The trees in Abbey Park were planted on Mount Hill in 1779 by James Bentham , a minor canon of Ely . Ely Castle once stood on Mount Hill , which was renamed Cherry Hill following the tree plantings by Bentham . The <unk> Meadow SSSI is a medieval ridge and furrow grassland about 0 @.@ 6 miles ( 1 km ) north of the city centre . This site , one of the UK 's best remaining examples of ridge and furrow agriculture , also contains protected species such as the Green @-@ winged Orchid . 
 = = Transport = = 
 = = = Rail = = = 
 Ely railway station , on the Fen Line , is a major railway hub with the Cambridge to Ely section opening in 1845 . Five major railway lines — excluding the former Ely and St Ives Railway — emanate from this hub : north to King 's Lynn , north @-@ west to Peterborough , east to Norwich , south @-@ east to Ipswich and south to Cambridge and London . At the opening of the 26 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 42 @.@ 6 km ) Lynn and Ely railway " with great <unk> " on 25 October 1847 , the Ely station building , completed in 1847 , was described by The Illustrated London News as " an extensive pile in pleasing mixed Grecian and Italian style " . The former Ely and St Ives Railway , known locally as the Grunty Fen Express , opened in 1865 but was never popular . In 1866 , the 7 @.@ 5 miles ( 12 @.@ 1 km ) return journey from Ely to Sutton cost 2s 0d , that equates to a cost of almost £ 8 in 2016 . The line closed to passengers in February 1931 and completely closed in 1964 . As of Autumn 2014 , train operating companies using Ely were : Great Northern , Abellio Greater Anglia , CrossCountry and East Midlands Trains with direct trains to Cambridge , London , most of East Anglia , the Midlands and the North . There are connecting services to many other parts of England and to Scotland . 
 = = = Road = = = 
 A Roman road , named Akeman Street , has been documented from Ermine Street near Wimpole through Cambridge , Stretham and Ely to Brancaster through Denver . This is not the same road as the major Roman road named Akeman Street which started from Verulamium ( south @-@ west of St Albans ) then via Tring and Aylesbury terminating near Alcester . In Bishop John Fordham 's survey of Ely in 1416 – 1417 , an east to west <unk> or <unk> is mentioned , which now forms part of the east @-@ west Egremont Street . Akeman Street would have been oriented north @-@ south passing through central Ely and therefore the east @-@ west oriented Egremont Street cannot have a Roman origin . It is suggested that the Wimpole to Brancaster road name of " Akeman " was derived by antiquarians , without justification , from <unk> @-@ <unk> , an ancient name for Bath . 
 Medieval accountant , Clement of Thetford made , or had others make on his behalf , many journeys between 1291 and 1292 , as evidenced by his sacrist 's rolls — the earliest known roll of the Ely Monastery . For example , he travelled the 25 miles ( 40 km ) to Bury ( Bury St Edmunds ) fair to obtain rice , sugar , etc . , the 16 miles ( 26 km ) to Barnwell for wheels , axles , etc. for carts , then the 51 miles ( 82 km ) to St Botolph 's ( Boston ) for wine , the 14 miles ( 23 km ) to Reche ( Reach ) for steel and iron and the 78 miles ( 126 km ) to London , principally for things needed in the vestry for the service of the Church , but also to pay taxes . Some or parts of these journeys will have been made by river . 
 The eighteenth @-@ century historian Edmund Carter , in his 1753 History of the County of Cambridge & c . , described a thrice @-@ weekly coach journey " for the conveniency of <unk> and receiving letters and <unk> parcels " from the Lamb Inn , Ely to the post @-@ house , Cambridge . In the 1760s , the Reverend James Bentham , an antiquarian and minor canon of Ely , encouraged the ecclesiastical authorities and townspeople of Ely to subscribe to a turnpike road between Ely and Cambridge ; improvements which started in 1769 . The eighteenth century London to King 's Lynn coach route , documented by the Postmaster General 's surveyor , John Cary , passed through Ely with a stop at the Lamb Inn , a coaching inn in 1753 and extant as the Lamb Hotel . Cary measured the distance of the London ( Shoreditch ) to Ely section as being 67 miles ( 108 km ) . The A142 road from Newmarket to Chatteris passes east – west , south of the town . 
 Ely is on the north @-@ south A10 road from London to King 's Lynn ; the south @-@ west bypass of the town was built in 1986 . A proposal for an Ely south @-@ east bypass of the A142 is included in the major schemes of the Cambridgeshire Local Transport Plan . The proposed route would include 1 @.@ 2 miles ( 1 @.@ 9 km ) of new road between new roundabout junctions on <unk> Causeway and Angel Drove . The bypass is intended to reduce congestion in Ely , and to avoid the low bridge on the Ely to King 's Lynn railway line , which has the third highest vehicle strike rate in the country . Proposals for the bypass went to public consultation in October 2011 and the County Council and District Council have announced that they may fund some of the costs of construction ( estimated to be up to £ 28 million ) with contributions from developers who wish to build a retail park near the proposed route . 
 = = = River = = = 
 The River Great Ouse flows through the south @-@ eastern boundary of the city . King Cnut arrived at Ely by boat for the Purification of St Mary ; " When they were approaching land [ at Ely ] , the king rose up in the middle of his men and directed the boatmen to make for the little port at full speed " . Archaeological excavations in the year 2000 , between Broad Street and the present river , revealed artificially cut channels " at right @-@ angles to the present river front " thus " evidently part of the medieval port of Ely " . In 1753 , Carter reports that " for the conveniency of <unk> , and heavy goods to and from Cambridge " a boat left Ely every Tuesday and Friday for Cambridge ; the 20 miles ( 32 km ) journey took six hours . 
 = = Religious sites = = 
 Ely Cathedral 
 The Anglican Cathedral Church of the Holy and Undivided Trinity is known as the Ship of the Fens , a name inspired by the distant views of its towers , which dominate the low @-@ lying wetlands known as " The Fens " . The diocese of Ely was created in 1108 out of the see of Lincoln , and a year later the bishopric of Ely was founded . Construction of the cathedral was begun by William the Conqueror in 1083 , with it finally opening in 1189 after 116 years . On 22 February 1322 it suffered the collapse of the crossing , which was rebuilt as an octagon . The cathedral was completed in 1351 . John Wesley wrote of his 22 November 1774 visit to Ely that " the cathedral , [ is ] one of the most beautiful I have seen . The western tower is exceedingly grand , and the nave of an amazing height " . 
 Ely is the nearest cathedral city to Cambridge , which lies within the same diocese . The Diocese of Ely covers 1 @,@ 507 square miles ( 3 @,@ 903 km2 ) , 641 @,@ 000 people ( 2011 ) and 335 churches . It includes the county of Cambridgeshire , except for much of Peterborough , and three parishes in the south which are in the diocese of Chelmsford . The Diocese of Ely also includes the western part of Norfolk , a few parishes in Peterborough and Essex , and one in Bedfordshire . 
 Other 
 The church of St Mary , dedicated by Bishop Eustace , is an early thirteenth @-@ century building with a circa 1300 spire and tower with eight bells . The church was heavily restored starting in 1877 . The Roman Catholic Church of St. Etheldreda , in Egremont Street , dates from 1891 . The Methodist chapel , in Chapel Street , was built in 1818 and was restored in 1891 . The Salem Baptist chapel was erected in 1840 . The Church of St Peter on Broad Street was built in 1890 ; the architect was James Piers St Aubyn . 
 = = Sport = = 
 Ely City F.C. was established in 1885 and joined the Eastern Counties Football League in 1960 . In the 1997 – 1998 season , they reached the 3rd round of the FA Vase . Since the 2007 – 08 season they have been members of the Eastern Counties Football League Premier Division . 
 The University of Cambridge rowing club has a boathouse on the bank of the river , and trains there for the annual Boat Race against the University of Oxford . In 1944 , the Boat Race took place on a 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) course on the River Great Ouse near Ely , the only time it has not been held on the River Thames . On that occasion the race was won by Oxford . 
 = = Education = = 
 The King 's School , Ely claims to have beginnings in the re @-@ foundation of St Etheldreda 's monastery in 970 by the Benedictine order . The wealthy sent their sons to such places to learn how to read and translate Latin texts . Edward the Confessor may have been educated at Ely between circa 1005 and 1010 . " The teaching of grammar continued in the cloisters [ of Ely ] and this tradition was the forerunner of the Cathedral Grammar School , today known as The King 's School Ely " . 
 Needham 's Charity School was founded in 1740 in Back Hill by Mrs Catherine Needham ' for the education , clothing and <unk> of poor children ' . There were originally 24 free scholars aged 9 to 14 years of age . ' The Needham 's School relocated to a new building in Downham Road adjacent to Ely High School in 1969 . This building is now part of Ely College . 
 The National School for boys was located in Silver Street . There was a National School for Girls in Market Street . Both National Schools received bursaries from the Parson 's <unk> Broad Street School was erected in 1858 . In later years the Silver Street and Broad Street schools operated as St Mary 's Junior School . The Ely High School for Girls opened in 1905 in St. Mary 's Street , moving to the Downham Road site in 1957 . In 1972 Ely High School closed when state secondary education in the area changed to the comprehensive model , the site becoming the City of Ely <unk> Form College , part of Ely Community College which is currently Ely College . 
 In 1940 the Bishop 's Palace was acquired by the Red Cross as a hospital and after the second world war it became a school for disabled children and young people . 
 Education in Ely , as of 2011 , includes The King 's School , Ely College and St John 's Community Primary School . 
 = = Public services = = 
 Anglian Water supplies the city 's water and sewage services from their Ely Public Water Supply . The water quality was reported as excellent in 2011 . In the same report , the hardness was reported as 292 mg / l . The nearest reservoir , <unk> Water , is 21 miles ( 34 km ) due west . 
 The Distribution Network Operator for electricity is EDF Energy . The largest straw @-@ burning power station in the world is at nearby Sutton . This renewable energy resource power station rated at 36 @.@ 85 MW from burning biomass , nearly 25 percent of the total renewable energy reported for Cambridgeshire in 2009 . The world 's largest poultry litter power plant , 38 @.@ 5 MW , is at Thetford , Norfolk . 
 East Cambridgeshire District Council is part of the Recycling in Cambridgeshire and Peterborough ( <unk> ) Partnership , which was granted Beacon status for waste and recycling in 2006 – 07 . 
 The Royal Air Force ( RAF ) Hospital on Lynn Road , north of Ely , was built during the Second World War , and until 1993 served nearby permanent RAF stations including at Marham , Feltwell , Lakenheath , and Mildenhall . HRH Diana , Princess of Wales renamed the hospital in 1987 , and since 1993 the Princess of Wales Hospital sees 40 @,@ 000 out @-@ patient visitors per year as a community hospital ; part of the lifespan healthcare NHS trust . National health services ( NHS ) for the city are administered ( 2011 ) by NHS East of England . Acute cases are handled by four hospitals , including Addenbrooke 's Hospital , 20 miles ( 32 km ) south and Papworth Hospital 28 miles ( 45 km ) south @-@ west of the city . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 The former RAF hospital based in Ely meant that many children of serving RAF parents were born in the city . These include rugby union player and Rugby World Cup 2003 winning manager with England national rugby team , Clive Woodward , Australian <unk> actor Guy Pearce , and actor Simon <unk> . <unk> world record @-@ holder Ken Wallis was also born in Ely . Other notable people from Ely include The Sisters of Mercy singer Andrew Eldritch , and journalist Chris Hunt . Crime writer Jim Kelly and award winning poet Wendy Cope currently live in the city . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Children 's book Tom 's Midnight Garden by Philippa Pearce is partly set in Ely and includes a scene in Ely Cathedral and scenes inspired by the author 's father 's own childhood experiences of skating along the frozen river from Cambridge to Ely in the frost of 1894 – 95 . The first series of Jim Kelly 's crime novels , featuring journalist Philip Dryden , is largely set in the author 's home town of Ely and in the Fens . Graham Swift 's 1983 novel Waterland takes place , and recounts several historical events , in and around the town of Ely . 
 The album cover for Pink Floyd 's The Division Bell was created by Storm Thorgerson with Ely as the background between two massive sculptures that he had erected outside the city . 
 = Pixar = 
 Pixar Animation Studios ( Pixar ) ( / <unk> / ) , is an American computer animation film studio based in Emeryville , California . Pixar is a subsidiary of The Walt Disney Company . Luxo Jr . , a character from the short film of the same name , is the studio 's mascot . 
 Pixar began in 1979 as the Graphics Group , part of the Lucasfilm computer division , before its spin @-@ out as a corporation in 1986 , with funding by Apple Inc. co @-@ founder Steve Jobs , who became the majority shareholder . Disney purchased Pixar in 2006 at a valuation of $ 7 @.@ 4 billion , a transaction that resulted in Jobs becoming Disney 's largest single shareholder at the time . 
 Pixar is best known for CGI @-@ animated feature films created with RenderMan , Pixar 's own implementation of the industry @-@ standard RenderMan image @-@ rendering application programming interface used to generate high @-@ quality images . 
 Pixar has produced 17 feature films , beginning with Toy Story ( 1995 ) , which was the first @-@ ever computer @-@ animated feature film , and its most recent being Finding Dory ( 2016 ) . All 17 films have debuted with CinemaScore ratings of at least " A − , " indicating positive receptions with audiences . The studio has also produced several short films . As of June 2016 , its feature films have made over $ 10 billion worldwide , with an average worldwide gross of $ 593 million per film . Three of Pixar 's films — Finding Nemo ( 2003 ) , Toy Story 3 ( 2010 ) , and Inside Out ( 2015 ) — are among the 50 highest @-@ grossing films of all time , with Toy Story 3 being the third all @-@ time highest animated film with a gross of $ 1 @.@ 063 billion , behind Walt Disney Animation Studios ' Frozen ( 2013 ) and Illumination Entertainment 's Minions ( 2015 ) , which grossed $ 1 @.@ 276 billion and $ 1 @.@ 159 billion respectively in their initial releases as of 2016 . Fourteen of Pixar 's films are among the 50 highest @-@ grossing animated films . 
 The studio has earned sixteen Academy Awards , seven Golden Globe Awards , and eleven Grammy Awards , among many other awards and acknowledgments . Most of Pixar 's films have been nominated for the Academy Award for Best Animated Feature , since its inauguration in 2001 , with eight winning ; this includes Finding Nemo , Toy Story 3 , and Inside Out , along with The Incredibles ( 2004 ) , Ratatouille ( 2007 ) , WALL @-@ E ( 2008 ) , Up ( 2009 ) , and Brave ( 2012 ) . Monsters , Inc . ( 2001 ) and Cars ( 2006 ) are the only two films that were nominated for the award without winning it , while Cars 2 ( 2011 ) , Monsters University ( 2013 ) , and The Good Dinosaur ( 2015 ) are the only three not to be nominated . Up and Toy Story 3 were also the second and third animated films to be nominated for the Academy Award for Best Picture , the first being Disney 's Beauty and the Beast ( 1991 ) . 
 On September 6 , 2009 , Pixar executives John Lasseter , Brad Bird , Pete Docter , Andrew Stanton , and Lee Unkrich were presented with the Golden Lion for Lifetime Achievement by the biennial Venice Film Festival . This award was presented by Lucasfilm founder , George Lucas . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 Pixar got its start in 1974 when NYIT 's founder Alexander Schure , who was also the owner of a traditional animation studio , established the Computer Graphics Lab ( CGL ) , recruited computer scientists who shared his ambitions about creating the world 's first computer @-@ animated film . Ed Catmull and Malcolm Blanchard were the first to be hired , and were soon joined by Alvy Ray Smith and David DiFrancesco some months later , which were the four original members the Computer Graphics Lab . Schure kept pouring money into the computer graphics lab , an estimated $ 15 million , giving the group everything they desired and drove NYIT into serious financial troubles . But they eventually realized they needed to work in a real movie studio in order to reach their goal , and when George Lucas approached them and offered them a job at his studio , six employees decided to move over to Lucasfilm . During the following months , they gradually resigned from CGL , found temporary jobs for about a year to avoid making Schure suspicious , before they joined The Graphics Group at Lucasfilm . 
 The Graphics Group , which was one third of the Computer Division of Lucasfilm , was launched in 1979 with the hiring of Edwin Catmull from the New York Institute of Technology ( NYIT ) , where he was in charge of the Computer Graphics Lab . He was then reunited with Alvy Ray Smith , who also made the journey from NYIT to Lucasfilm , and was made director of The Graphics Group . At NYIT , the researchers pioneered many of the CG foundation techniques — in particular the invention of the alpha channel ( by Catmull and Smith ) . Years later the CGL produced a few frames of an experimental film called The Works . After moving to Lucasfilm , the team worked on creating the precursor to RenderMan , called <unk> ( for " renders everything you ever saw " ) ; and developed a number of critical technologies for CG — including " particle effects " and various animation tools . 
 In 1982 , the team began working on special effects film sequences with Industrial Light & Magic . After years of research , and key milestones such as the Genesis Effect in Star Trek II : The Wrath of Khan and the Stained Glass Knight in Young Sherlock Holmes , the group , which then numbered 40 individuals , was spun out as a corporation in February 1986 by Catmull and Smith . Amongst the 38 remaining employees , there were also Malcolm Blanchard , David DiFrancesco , Ralph Guggenheim and Bill Reeves , who had been part of the team since the days of NYIT . Tom Duff , also a NYIT member , would later join Pixar after its formation . With Lucas ' 1983 divorce , which coincided with the sudden drop @-@ off in revenues from Star Wars licenses following the release of Return of the Jedi , they knew he would most likely sell the whole Graphics Group . Worried that the employees would be lost to them if that happened , which would prevent the creation of the first computer animated movie , they concluded that the best way to keep the team together was to turn the group into an independent company . But Moore 's Law also said that the first film was still some years away , and they needed to focus on a proper product while waiting for the computers to become powerful enough . Eventually , they decided they should be a hardware company in the meantime , with their Pixar Image Computer as the core product , a system primarily sold to government agencies and the scientific and medical community . 
 The newly independent company was headed by Edwin Catmull as President and Alvy Ray Smith as Executive Vice President . While looking for investors , Steve Jobs was interested , but Lucas found his offer too low . Yet he accepted it in the end after it turned out to be impossible to find other investors . Jobs , who had recently been fired from Apple Computer , paid $ 5 million to George Lucas for technology rights and put them and $ 5 million cash as capital into the company , and joined the board of directors as chairman . 
 One of the buyers of Pixar Image Computers was Walt Disney Studios , which was using it as part of their Computer Animation Production System ( CAPS ) project , using the machine and custom software written by Pixar to migrate the laborious ink and paint part of the 2D animation process to a more automated method . The Image Computer never sold well . In a bid to drive sales of the system , Pixar employee John Lasseter — who had long been working on non @-@ for @-@ profit short demonstration animations , such as Luxo Jr . ( 1986 ) , to show off the device 's capabilities — premiered his creations at SIGGRAPH , the computer graphics industry 's largest convention , to great fanfare . 
 Inadequate sales of Pixar 's computers threatened to put the company out of business as financial losses grew . Jobs invested more and more money in exchange for an increased stake in the company , reducing the proportion of management and employee ownership until eventually his total investment of $ 50 million gave him control of the entire company . In 1989 , Lasseter 's growing animation department , originally composed of just four people ( Lasseter , Bill Reeves , Eben Ostby , and Sam Leffler ) , was turned into a division that produced computer @-@ animated commercials for outside companies . Early successes included campaigns for Tropicana , <unk> , and Life Savers . In April 1990 , Pixar sold its hardware division , including all proprietary hardware technology and imaging software , to <unk> Systems , and transferred 18 of Pixar 's approximately 100 employees . That same year , Pixar moved from San Rafael to Richmond , California . Pixar released some of its software tools on the open market for Macintosh and Windows systems . RenderMan was one of the leading 3D packages of the early 1990s , and <unk> was a special @-@ purpose 3D text renderer that competed with Adobe <unk> . 
 During this period Pixar continued its successful relationship with Walt Disney Feature Animation , a studio whose corporate parent would ultimately become its most important partner . As 1991 began , however , the layoff of 30 employees in the company 's computer hardware department — including the company 's president , Chuck Kolstad , reduced the total number of employees to just 42 , essentially its original number . Yet Pixar made a historic $ 26 million deal with Disney to produce three computer @-@ animated feature films , the first of which was Toy Story . By then the software programmers , who were doing RenderMan and <unk> , and Lasseter 's animation department , which made television commercials ( and four Luxo Jr. shorts for Sesame Street the same year ) , were all that remained of Pixar . 
 Despite the total income from these projects the company continued to lose money and Jobs , as chairman of the board and now the full owner , often considered selling it . Even as late as 1994 Jobs contemplated selling Pixar to another company , most notably Microsoft . Only after learning from New York critics that Toy Story would probably be a hit — and confirming that Disney would distribute it for the 1995 Christmas season — did he decide to give Pixar another chance . For the first time he also took an active leadership role in the company and made himself CEO . Toy Story went on to gross more than $ 362 million worldwide and , when Pixar held its initial public offering on November 29 , 1995 , it exceeded Netscape 's as the biggest IPO of the year . In only its first half @-@ hour of trading Pixar stock shot from $ 22 to $ 45 , delaying trading because of un @-@ matched buy orders . Shares climbed to $ 49 before closing the day at $ 39 . 
 During the 1990s and 2000s , Pixar gradually developed the " Pixar Braintrust , " the studio 's primary creative development process , in which all directors , writers , and lead storyboard artists at the studio look at each other 's projects on a regular basis and give each other very candid " notes " ( the industry term for constructive criticism ) . The Braintrust operates under a philosophy of a " filmmaker @-@ driven studio , " in which creatives help each other move their films forward through a process somewhat like peer review , as opposed to the traditional Hollywood approach of an " executive @-@ driven studio " in which directors are micromanaged through " mandatory notes " from development executives ranking above the producers . According to Catmull , it evolved out of the working relationship between Lasseter , Stanton , Docter , Unkrich , and Joe Ranft on Toy Story . 
 As a result of the success of Toy Story , Pixar built a new studio at the Emeryville campus which was designed by <unk> Landscape Architecture and opened in November 2000 . 
 = = = Disney subsidiary ( 2006 @-@ present ) = = = 
 Pixar and Disney had disagreements after the production of Toy Story 2 ( 1999 ) . Originally intended as a straight @-@ to @-@ video release ( and thus not part of Pixar 's three @-@ picture deal ) , the film was eventually upgraded to a theatrical release during production . Pixar demanded that the film then be counted toward the three @-@ picture agreement , but Disney refused . Though profitable for both , Pixar later complained that the arrangement was not equitable . Pixar was responsible for creation and production , while Disney handled marketing and distribution . Profits and production costs were split 50 @-@ 50 , but Disney exclusively owned all story and sequel rights and also collected a 10- to 15 @-@ percent distribution fee . The lack of story and sequel rights was perhaps the most onerous aspect to Pixar and set the stage for a contentious relationship . 
 The two companies attempted to reach a new agreement for ten months before it fell through in January 2004 . The new deal would be only for distribution , as Pixar intended to control production and own the resulting film properties themselves . The company also wanted to finance their films on their own and collect 100 percent of the profits , paying Disney only the distribution fee . More importantly , as part of any distribution agreement with Disney , Pixar demanded control over films already in production under their old agreement , including The Incredibles ( 2004 ) and Cars ( 2006 ) . Disney considered these conditions unacceptable , but Pixar would not concede . 
 Disagreements between Steve Jobs and then @-@ Disney chairman and CEO Michael Eisner made the negotiations more difficult than they otherwise might have been . They broke down completely in mid @-@ 2004 , with Disney forming Circle 7 Animation and Jobs declaring that Pixar was actively seeking partners other than Disney . Despite this announcement , Pixar did not enter negotiations with other distributors , although a Warner Bros. spokesperson told CNN , " We would love to be in business with Pixar . They are a great company . " After a lengthy hiatus , negotiations between the two companies resumed following the departure of Eisner from Disney in September 2005 . In preparation for potential fallout between Pixar and Disney , Jobs announced in late 2004 that Pixar would no longer release movies at the Disney @-@ dictated November time frame , but during the more lucrative early summer months . This would also allow Pixar to release DVDs for their major releases during the Christmas shopping season . An added benefit of delaying Cars from November 4 , 2005 , to June 9 , 2006 was to extend the time frame remaining on the Pixar @-@ Disney contract , to see how things would play out between the two companies . 
 Pending the Disney acquisition of Pixar , the two companies created a distribution deal for the intended 2007 release of Ratatouille , if the acquisition fell through , to ensure that this one film would still be released through Disney 's distribution channels . In contrast to the earlier Disney / Pixar deal , Ratatouille was to remain a Pixar property and Disney would have received only a distribution fee . The completion of Disney 's Pixar acquisition , however , nullified this distribution arrangement . 
 In 2006 , Disney ultimately agreed to buy Pixar for approximately $ 7 @.@ 4 billion in an all @-@ stock deal . Following Pixar shareholder approval , the acquisition was completed May 5 , 2006 . The transaction catapulted Steve Jobs , who was the majority shareholder of Pixar with 50 @.@ 1 % , to Disney 's largest individual shareholder with 7 % and a new seat on its board of directors . Jobs ' new Disney holdings exceeded holdings belonging to ex @-@ CEO Michael Eisner , the previous top shareholder , who still held 1 @.@ 7 % ; and Disney Director Emeritus Roy E. Disney , who held almost 1 % of the corporation 's shares . Pixar shareholders received 2 @.@ 3 shares of Disney common stock for each share of Pixar common stock redeemed . 
 As part of the deal , John Lasseter , by then Executive Vice President , became Chief Creative Officer ( reporting to President and CEO Robert Iger and consulting with Disney Director Roy E. Disney ) of both Pixar and Walt Disney Animation Studios ( including its division , DisneyToon Studios ) , as well as the Principal Creative Adviser at Walt Disney Imagineering , which designs and builds the company 's theme parks . Catmull retained his position as President of Pixar , while also becoming President of Walt Disney Animation Studios , reporting to Bob Iger and Dick Cook , chairman of The Walt Disney Studios . Steve Jobs ' position as Pixar 's chairman and chief executive officer was also removed , and instead he took a place on the Disney board of directors . 
 After the deal closed in May 2006 , Lasseter revealed that Iger had realized Disney needed to buy Pixar while watching a parade at the opening of Hong Kong Disneyland in September 2005 . Iger noticed that of all the Disney characters in the parade , not one was a character that Disney had created within the last ten years , since all the newer ones had been created by Pixar . Upon returning to Burbank , Iger commissioned a financial analysis that confirmed that Disney had actually lost money on animation for the past decade , then presented that information to the board of directors at his first board meeting after being promoted from COO to CEO , and the board in turn authorized him to explore the possibility of a deal with Pixar . Lasseter and Catmull were wary when the topic of Disney buying Pixar first came up , but Jobs asked them to give Iger a chance ( based on his own experience negotiating with Iger in summer 2005 for the rights to ABC shows for the fifth @-@ generation iPod Classic ) , and in turn , Iger convinced them of the sincerity of his epiphany that Disney really needed to re @-@ focus on animation . 
 Lasseter and Catmull 's oversight of both the Disney and Pixar studios did not mean that the two studios were merging , however . In fact , additional conditions were laid out as part of the deal to ensure that Pixar remained a separate entity , a concern that analysts had expressed about the Disney deal . Some of those conditions were that Pixar HR policies would remain intact , including the lack of employment contracts . Also , the Pixar name was guaranteed to continue , and the studio would remain in its current Emeryville , California , location with the " Pixar " sign . Finally , branding of films made post @-@ merger would be " Disney • Pixar " ( beginning with Cars ) . 
 Jim Morris , producer of WALL @-@ E ( 2008 ) , became general manager of Pixar . In this new position , Morris took charge of the day @-@ to @-@ day running of the studio facilities and products . 
 After a few years , Lasseter and Catmull were able to successfully transfer the basic principles of the Pixar Braintrust to Disney , although meetings of the Disney Story Trust are reportedly " more polite " than those of the Pixar Braintrust . Catmull later explained that after the merger , to maintain the studios ' separate identities and cultures ( notwithstanding the fact of common ownership and common senior management ) , he and Lasseter " drew a hard line " that each studio was solely responsible for its own projects and would not be allowed to borrow personnel from or lend tasks out to the other . That rule ensures that each studio maintains " local ownership " of projects and can be proud of its own work . Thus , for example , when Pixar had issues with Ratatouille and Disney Animation had issues with Bolt ( 2008 ) , " nobody bailed them out " and each studio was required " to solve the problem on its own " even when they knew there were personnel at the other studio who theoretically could have helped . 
 In November 2014 , Morris was promoted to president of Pixar , while his counterpart at Disney Animation , general manager Andrew Millstein , was also promoted to president of that studio . Both will continue to report to Catmull , who retains the title of president of Walt Disney and Pixar Animation Studios . 
 = = = Expansion = = = 
 On April 20 , 2010 , Pixar Animation Studios opened Pixar Canada in the downtown area of Vancouver , British Columbia , Canada . The roughly 2 @,@ 000 square meters studio produced seven short films based on Toy Story and Cars characters . In October 2013 , the studio was closed down to refocus Pixar 's efforts at its main headquarters . 
 = = Headquarters ( campus ) = = 
 When Steve Jobs , chief executive officer of Apple Inc. and Pixar Animation Studios , and John Lasseter , then the executive vice president of Pixar , decided to move their studios from a leased space in Point Richmond , California , to larger quarters of their own , they chose a 20 @-@ acre site in Emeryville , California , formerly occupied by Del Monte Foods , Inc . The first of several buildings , a high @-@ tech structure designed by Bohlin Cywinski Jackson , has special foundations and generators to ensure continued film production , even through major earthquakes . The character of the building is intended to abstractly recall Emeryville 's industrial past . The two @-@ story steel @-@ and @-@ masonry building is a collaborative space with many pathways . 
 = = Feature films and shorts = = 
 = = = Traditions = = = 
 While some of Pixar 's first animators were former cel animators , including John Lasseter , they also came from computer animation or were fresh college graduates . A large number of animators that make up the animation department at Pixar were hired around the time Pixar released A Bug 's Life ( 1998 ) and Toy Story 2 ( 1999 ) . Although Toy Story was a successful film , it was Pixar 's only feature film at the time . The majority of the animation industry was ( and still is ) located in Los Angeles while Pixar is located 350 miles ( 560 km ) north in the San Francisco Bay Area . Also , traditional hand @-@ drawn animation was still the dominant medium for feature animated films . 
 With the scarcity of Los Angeles @-@ based animators willing to move their families so far north , give up traditional animation , and try computer animation , Pixar 's new hires at this time either came directly from college or had worked outside feature animation . For those who had traditional animation skills , the Pixar animation software ( Marionette ) was designed so that traditional animators would require a minimum amount of training before becoming productive . 
 In an interview with PBS talk show host Tavis Smiley , Lasseter said that Pixar 's films follow the same theme of self @-@ improvement as the company itself has : with the help of friends or family , a character ventures out into the real world and learns to appreciate his friends and family . At the core , Lasseter said , " it 's gotta be about the growth of the main character and how he changes . " 
 As of 2016 , every Pixar feature film produced for Disney has included a character voiced by John Ratzenberger , who had famously starred in the TV show Cheers . Pixar paid tribute to their " good luck charm " in the end credits of Cars ( 2006 ) by parodying scenes from three of their earlier films , replacing all of the characters with motor vehicles . After the third scene , Mack ( his character in Cars ) realizes that the same actor has been voicing characters in every film and angrily demands to know " What kind of a cut @-@ rate production is this ? " 
 Due to the traditions that have occurred within the film , such as anthropomorphic animals and easter egg crossovers between movies that have been spotted by fans , a blog post entitled The Pixar Theory was published in 2013 by Jon Negroni to make the belief that all of the characters within the Pixar universe were related . 
 = = = Sequels and prequels = = = 
 Toy Story 2 was originally commissioned by Disney as a 60 @-@ minute direct @-@ to @-@ video release . Expressing doubts about the strength of the material , John Lasseter convinced the Pixar team to start from scratch and make the sequel their third full @-@ length feature film . 
 Following the release of Toy Story 2 in 1999 , Pixar and Disney had a gentlemen 's agreement that Disney would not make any sequels without Pixar 's involvement , despite their own right to do so . After the two companies were unable to agree on a new deal , Disney announced in 2004 they would plan move forward on sequels with / without Pixar , and put Toy Story 3 into pre @-@ production at Disney 's new CGI division Circle 7 Animation . However , when Lasseter was placed in charge of all Disney and Pixar animation following the 2006 merger of the companies , he put all sequels on hold and Toy Story 3 was cancelled . In May 2006 , it was announced that Toy Story 3 was back in pre @-@ production with a new plot and under Pixar 's control . The film was released on June 18 , 2010 as Pixar 's eleventh feature film . 
 Shortly after announcing the resurrection of Toy Story 3 , Lasseter fueled speculation on further sequels by saying , " If we have a great story , we 'll do a sequel . " Cars 2 , Pixar 's first non @-@ Toy Story sequel , was officially announced in April 2008 and released on June 24 , 2011 as their twelfth . Monsters University , a prequel to Monsters , Inc . ( 2001 ) , was announced in April 2010 and initially set for release in November 2012 ; the release date was pushed to June 21 , 2013 , due to Pixar 's past success with summer releases , according to a Disney executive . 
 In June 2011 , Tom Hanks , who voiced Woody in the Toy Story series , implied that Toy Story 4 was " in the works , " although it had not yet been confirmed by the studio . In April 2013 , Finding Dory , a sequel to Finding Nemo , was announced for a June 17 , 2016 release . In March 2014 , The Incredibles 2 and Cars 3 were announced as films in development . In November 2014 , Toy Story 4 was confirmed to be in development with Lasseter serving as director . In an interview , Lasseter stated that " [ a ] lot of people in the industry view us doing sequels as being for the business of it , but for us it 's pure passion ... One of the things that was very important for me as an artist is to continue directing . When I direct , I get to work with the individual artists , with the animators . " In August 2015 , at the D23 Expo , Lasseter said that the film would focus on the romance between Woody and Bo Peep . Its story will be built on the fact that Bo Peep was absent in Toy Story 3 , with Woody and Buzz Lightyear trying to find her and bring her back . 
 = = = Adaptation to television = = = 
 Toy Story was the first Pixar film to be adapted onto television , with Buzz Lightyear of Star Command film and TV series . Cars became the second with the help of Cars Toons , a series of three @-@ to @-@ five @-@ minute short films running between regular Disney Channel shows and featuring Mater ( the tow truck voiced by comedian Larry the Cable Guy ) . Between 2013 and 2014 , Pixar released its first two television specials , Toy Story of Terror ! and Toy Story That Time Forgot . 
 = = = Animation and live @-@ action = = = 
 All Pixar films to date have been computer @-@ animated features , but WALL @-@ E so far has been the only Pixar film to not be completely animated , as it featured a small amount of live @-@ action footage . 1906 , the live @-@ action film by Brad Bird based on a screenplay and novel by James Dalessandro about the 1906 earthquake , was in development but has since been abandoned by Bird and Pixar . Bird has stated that he was " interested in moving into the live @-@ action realm with some projects " while " staying at Pixar [ because ] it 's a very comfortable environment for me to work in . " 
 The Toy Story Toons short , Hawaiian Vacation also includes the fish and shark as live @-@ action . 
 Jim Morris , general manager of Pixar , produced Disney 's John Carter ( 2012 ) , which Pixar 's Andrew Stanton co @-@ wrote and directed . 
 Pixar assisted in the story development of Disney 's The Jungle Book ( 2016 ) , as well as providing suggestions for the film 's end credits sequence . 
 = = = Upcoming projects = = = 
 Michael Wallis , the voice of Sheriff from the Cars franchise and a Route 66 consultant for the first two films , said in an August 2013 interview that Pixar would make a third film in the series , which will go back to Route 66 and will also include Route 99 ; a release date of June 16 , 2017 was announced later . 
 In April 2012 , Pixar announced their intention to create a film centered on the Mexican holiday Día de los Muertos which is to be directed by Lee Unkrich . In 2015 , the film 's title was announced as Coco , and a planned release in November 22 , 2017 . 
 In November 2014 , it was announced that John Lasseter will direct Toy Story 4 , scheduled for a June 15 , 2018 release . 
 A sequel to The Incredibles was announced in March 2014 , to be directed by Brad Bird , with a release date set for June 21 , 2019 . 
 = = Exhibitions = = 
 Since December 2005 , Pixar has held exhibitions celebrating the art and artists of Pixar , over their first twenty years in animation . 
 = = = Pixar : 20 Years of Animation = = = 
 Pixar celebrated its 20th anniversary in 2006 with the release of Pixar 's seventh feature film , Cars , and held two exhibitions , from April to June 2010 , at Science Centre Singapore , in Jurong East , Singapore , and the London Science Museum , London . It was their first time holding an exhibition in Singapore . 
 The exhibition highlights consist of work @-@ in @-@ progress sketches from various Pixar productions , clay sculptures of their characters , and an autostereoscopic short showcasing a 3D version of the exhibition pieces which is projected through four projectors . Another highlight is the Zoetrope , where visitors of the exhibition are shown figurines of Toy Story characters " animated " in real @-@ life through the zoetrope . 
 = = = Pixar : 25 Years of Animation = = = 
 Pixar celebrated its 25th anniversary in 2011 with the release of its twelfth feature film , Cars 2 . Pixar had celebrated its 20th anniversary with the first Cars . The Pixar : 25 Years of Animation exhibition was held at the Oakland Museum of California from July 2010 until January 2011 . The exhibition tour debuts in Hong Kong , and was held at the Hong Kong Heritage Museum in Sha Tin , between March 27 and July 11 , 2011 . In 2013 the exhibition was held in the EXPO in Amsterdam , The Netherlands . On November 16 , 2013 , the exhibition moved to the Art <unk> museum in Paris , France , with a scheduled run until March 2 , 2014 . The exhibition moved to three Spanish cities later in 2014 and 2015 : Madrid ( held in <unk> from March 21 until June 22 ) , Barcelona ( held also in <unk> from February until May ) and Zaragoza . 
 Pixar : 25 Years of Animation includes all of the artwork from Pixar : 20 Years of Animation , plus art from Ratatouille , WALL @-@ E , Up , and Toy Story 3 . 
 = = = The Science Behind Pixar = = = 
 The Science Behind Pixar is a travelling exhibition that first opened on June 28 , 2015 at the Museum of Science in Boston , Massachusetts . It was developed by the Museum of Science in collaboration with Pixar . The exhibit features forty interactive elements that explain the production pipeline at Pixar . They are divided into eight sections , each demonstrating a step in the filmmaking process : Modeling , Rigging , Surfaces , Sets & Cameras , Animation , Simulation , Lighting , and Rendering . Before visitors enter the exhibit , they watch a short video at an introductory theater . 
 The exhibition closed on January 10 , 2016 and moved to the Franklin Institute in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , where it opened on March 12 and will close on September 5 . After that , it will move to the California Science Center in Los Angeles , California and be open from October 15 , 2016 through April 9 , 2017 . It will make another stop at the Science Museum of Minnesota in St. Paul , Minnesota from May 27 through September 4 , 2017 . 
 = = = Pixar : 30 Years of Animation = = = 
 It is currently unknown what a 30 @-@ year anniversary celebration of Pixar 's films and achievements would entail . 
 = Førde Airport , Bringeland = 
 Førde Airport , Bringeland ( IATA : FDE , ICAO : <unk> ; Norwegian : Førde <unk> , Bringeland ) is a regional airport located at Bringelandsåsen in the municipality of Gaular , about 16 kilometers ( 10 mi ) south of the town of Førde in Sogn og Fjordane county , Norway . Owned and operated by the state @-@ owned Avinor , the airport has a single 1 @,@ 019 @-@ meter ( 3 @,@ 343 ft ) runway numbered 07 – 25 . It is served by Widerøe , which operates Dash 8 @-@ 100 aircraft to the cities of Bergen , Florø and Oslo . 
 Starting in 1970 , the town of Førde was served by Førde Airport , Øyrane , located in an industrial site in town and with poor operational conditions . Bringeland was opened in 1986 and the old airport was closed . Bringeland originally consisted of a 859 @-@ meter ( 2 @,@ 818 ft ) runway , but that was lengthened in 2010 . Since 1988 , the helicopter operator Airlift has also been based at the airport . The airport was originally municipal , but nationalized in 1996 . Bringeland served 82 @,@ 356 passengers in 2011 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Øyrane = = = 
 The first plans for an airport serving the Sunnfjord region was in the town of Florø ; construction started in 1956 , but was halted . A government commission recommended in 1964 that a primary airport be built in Florø serve the entire county . These plans were changed in 1965 , following Håkon Kyllingmark being appointed Ministry of Transport and Communications ( Norway ) . He instead insisted on a network of short take @-@ off and landing airports for smaller communities . Førde Airport , Øyrane was built with such specifications , but was located in the middle of the industrial area Øyrane , just outside the town center . From 1971 it became part of the regional aviation network in Western Norway . 
 From before the airport was built it was evident that the location was not well suited , and planning of an alternative location began in 1968 . The main concern was that the airport lacked an instrument landing system and could thus only be used during daylight hours . The first alternative location proposal was for <unk> , but the site was discarded by the Civil Aviation Administration ( CAA ) because of poor weather conditions . Late proposals were <unk> and then <unk> on the Sognefjord . By 1972 , the CAA had concluded that there probably was not a suitable location for an airport near Førde and recommended that the town instead by served by Florø Airport , located 70 kilometers ( 43 mi ) away . 
 = = = Construction and operational history = = = 
 Bringelandsåsen was proposed by the CAA in 1974 . Plans were developed and in 1983 the Ministry of Transport and Communications recommended that Øyrane be closed and replaced with an all @-@ new airport at Bringeland . Construction started in 1985 and the new airport opened on 31 August 1986 , taking over all scheduled traffic from Øyrane . Widerøe started scheduled services to Oslo and Bergen , originally using de Havilland Canada DHC @-@ 6 Twin Otter and DHC @-@ 7 Dash 7 aircraft , of which the latter which was used to Oslo . Airlift was established in 1986 and was based at Øyrane until 1988 , when it also moved to Bringeland . Dash 8 aircraft were phased in from 1993 . 
 The airport was originally owned as an inter @-@ municipal enterprise by Gaular and Førde . Operating deficits were covered through various subsidies from the state , often with unclear responsibilities and little financial risk for the owners . Most regional airports , including Førde , were nationalized in 1996 and transferred to the CAA , later renamed Avinor . Widerøe lost the public service obligation contract to fly to Florø Airport in 2000 , and therefore moved its technical base for Western Norway to Førde , which included a new hangar . 
 Førde Airport had a café until 2006 and originally 859 meters ( 2 @,@ 818 ft ) runway . In 2009 and 2010 , it was expanded with another 160 meters ( 520 ft ) to the west . SCAT @-@ I was installed in 2011 . The following year , Widerøe regained the Florø contract , and moved its technical base back there . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 Førde Airport , Bringeland is owned and operated by the state @-@ owned Avinor . The airport has a 1 @,@ 019 by 30 meters ( 3 @,@ 343 by 98 ft ) asphalt runway , aligned 07 – 25 . Instrument flight rules are only allowed for aircraft equipped with SCAT @-@ I. The terminal has a small conference center , and the airport is a seventeen @-@ minute drive from Førde . <unk> Billag operates an airport coach to <unk> , which takes twenty minutes . Paid parking , taxis and car rental is available at the airport . Airlift has its own hangar , helipad and administration buildings . 
 = = Airlines and destinations = = 
 Widerøe operates all scheduled services out of Førde , connecting it to Oslo Airport , Gardermoen and Bergen Airport , Flesland with a combined seven daily flights . The flights are operated with Dash 8 @-@ 100 aircraft and are subsidized as part of a public service obligation contract with the Ministry of Transport and Communications . Førde Airport is the local airport for ten municipalities in Sunnfjord and outer Sogn . The airport had 82 @,@ 356 passengers , 8 @,@ 109 aircraft movements and 3 tonnes of cargo in 2014 . Less than a fifth of the patronage travels to Bergen , and Førde even experiences some leakage by people driving to Bergen Airport directly . 
 The helicopter operator Airlift is based at Bringeland ; it is the largest employer in Gaular , with 150 employees in 2002 . The company flies air ambulance and various charter services . Also at the airport is an aviation club , Fjordane Flyklubb . 
 = = Future = = 
 Avinor has started a process to look at the airport structure in Sogn og Fjordane . Early plans have looked at closing down Førde Airport , and possibly also Sandane Airport , Anda , while expanding the runway at Florø Airport to 2 @,@ 000 meters ( 6 @,@ 600 ft ) . This would allow for jetliners to operate from Florø to Oslo with significantly lower ticket prices [ not likely with less than 80 @-@ 120 ' 000 citizens within 50 @-@ 80 km radius ] and remove the need for subsidies . Previously , the Ministry of Transport and Communications has proposed closing Sandane Airport and splitting the traffic between Førde and Ørsta @-@ Volda Airport , <unk> . The road distance from Sandane to Bringeland is 97 kilometers ( 60 mi ) , from Sandane to Florø Airport 93 km ( 58 mi ) and from Førde to Florø Airport 58 km ( 36 mi ) . 
 = Anton Chekhov = 
 Anton Pavlovich Chekhov ( / <unk> , <unk> / ; Russian : <unk> ́ н Па ́ <unk> <unk> ́ <unk> , pronounced [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ] ; 29 January 1860 – 15 July 1904 ) was a Russian playwright and short story writer who is considered to be among the greatest writers of short fiction in history . His career as a playwright produced four classics and his best short stories are held in high esteem by writers and critics . Along with Henrik Ibsen and August Strindberg , Chekhov is often referred to as one of the three seminal figures in the birth of early modernism in the theatre . Chekhov practiced as a medical doctor throughout most of his literary career : " Medicine is my lawful wife " , he once said , " and literature is my mistress . " 
 Chekhov renounced the theatre after the disastrous reception of The Seagull in 1896 , but the play was revived to acclaim in 1898 by Constantin Stanislavski 's Moscow Art Theatre , which subsequently also produced Chekhov 's Uncle Vanya and premiered his last two plays , Three Sisters and The Cherry Orchard . These four works present a challenge to the acting ensemble as well as to audiences , because in place of conventional action Chekhov offers a " theatre of mood " and a " submerged life in the text " . 
 Chekhov had at first written stories only for financial gain , but as his artistic ambition grew , he made formal innovations which have influenced the evolution of the modern short story . He made no apologies for the difficulties this posed to readers , insisting that the role of an artist was to ask questions , not to answer them . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Childhood = = = 
 Anton Chekhov was born on the feast day of St. Anthony the Great ( 17 January Old Style ) 29 January 1860 , the third of six surviving children , in Taganrog , a port on the Sea of Azov in southern Russia . His father , Pavel <unk> Chekhov , the son of a former serf , was from a village <unk> near <unk> ( Poltava Region in modern @-@ day Ukraine ) and ran a grocery store . A director of the parish choir , devout Orthodox Christian , and physically abusive father , Pavel Chekhov has been seen by some historians as the model for his son 's many portraits of hypocrisy . Chekhov 's mother , <unk> ( Morozova ) , was an excellent storyteller who entertained the children with tales of her travels with her cloth @-@ merchant father all over Russia . " Our talents we got from our father , " Chekhov remembered , " but our soul from our mother . " In adulthood , Chekhov criticised his brother Alexander 's treatment of his wife and children by reminding him of Pavel 's tyranny : " Let me ask you to recall that it was despotism and lying that ruined your mother 's youth . Despotism and lying so mutilated our childhood that it 's sickening and frightening to think about it . Remember the horror and disgust we felt in those times when Father threw a tantrum at dinner over too much salt in the soup and called Mother a fool . " 
 Chekhov attended the Greek School in Taganrog and the Taganrog Gymnasium ( since renamed the Chekhov Gymnasium ) , where he was kept down for a year at fifteen for failing an examination in Ancient Greek . He sang at the Greek Orthodox monastery in Taganrog and in his father 's choirs . In a letter of 1892 , he used the word " suffering " to describe his childhood and recalled : 
 When my brothers and I used to stand in the middle of the church and sing the trio " May my prayer be exalted " , or " The Archangel 's Voice " , everyone looked at us with emotion and envied our parents , but we at that moment felt like little convicts . 
 He later became an atheist . 
 In 1876 , Chekhov 's father was declared bankrupt after overextending his finances building a new house . To avoid debtor 's prison he fled to Moscow , where his two eldest sons , Alexander and Nikolay , were attending university . The family lived in poverty in Moscow , Chekhov 's mother physically and emotionally broken by the experience . Chekhov was left behind to sell the family 's possessions and finish his education . 
 Chekhov remained in Taganrog for three more years , boarding with a man called <unk> who , like Lopakhin in The Cherry Orchard , had bailed out the family for the price of their house . Chekhov had to pay for his own education , which he managed by private tutoring , catching and selling goldfinches , and selling short sketches to the newspapers , among other jobs . He sent every ruble he could spare to his family in Moscow , along with humorous letters to cheer them up . During this time , he read widely and analytically , including the works of Cervantes , Turgenev , Goncharov , and Schopenhauer , and wrote a full @-@ length comic drama , <unk> , which his brother Alexander dismissed as " an inexcusable though innocent fabrication . " Chekhov also enjoyed a series of love affairs , one with the wife of a teacher . 
 In 1879 , Chekhov completed his schooling and joined his family in Moscow , having gained admission to the medical school at I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University . 
 = = = Early writings = = = 
 Chekhov now assumed responsibility for the whole family . To support them and to pay his tuition fees , he wrote daily short , humorous sketches and vignettes of contemporary Russian life , many under pseudonyms such as " <unk> <unk> " ( <unk> <unk> ) and " Man without a Spleen " ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ) . His prodigious output gradually earned him a reputation as a satirical chronicler of Russian street life , and by 1882 he was writing for <unk> ( Fragments ) , owned by Nikolai Leykin , one of the leading publishers of the time . Chekhov 's tone at this stage was harsher than that familiar from his mature fiction . 
 In 1884 , Chekhov qualified as a physician , which he considered his principal profession though he made little money from it and treated the poor free of charge . 
 In 1884 and 1885 , Chekhov found himself coughing blood , and in 1886 the attacks worsened , but he would not admit his tuberculosis to his family or his friends . He confessed to Leykin , " I am afraid to submit myself to be sounded by my colleagues . " He continued writing for weekly periodicals , earning enough money to move the family into progressively better accommodations . 
 Early in 1886 he was invited to write for one of the most popular papers in St. Petersburg , <unk> Vremya ( New Times ) , owned and edited by the millionaire magnate Alexey Suvorin , who paid a rate per line double Leykin 's and allowed Chekhov three times the space . Suvorin was to become a lifelong friend , perhaps Chekhov 's closest . 
 Before long , Chekhov was attracting literary as well as popular attention . The sixty @-@ four @-@ year @-@ old Dmitry Grigorovich , a celebrated Russian writer of the day , wrote to Chekhov after reading his short story " The Huntsman " that " You have real talent , a talent that places you in the front rank among writers in the new generation . " He went on to advise Chekhov to slow down , write less , and concentrate on literary quality . 
 Chekhov replied that the letter had struck him " like a thunderbolt " and confessed , " I have written my stories the way reporters write up their notes about fires — mechanically , half @-@ consciously , caring nothing about either the reader or myself . " The admission may have done Chekhov a disservice , since early manuscripts reveal that he often wrote with extreme care , continually revising . Grigorovich 's advice nevertheless inspired a more serious , artistic ambition in the twenty @-@ six @-@ year @-@ old . In 1888 , with a little string @-@ pulling by Grigorovich , the short story collection At Dusk ( V <unk> ) won Chekhov the coveted Pushkin Prize " for the best literary production distinguished by high artistic worth . " 
 = = = Turning points = = = 
 In 1887 , exhausted from overwork and ill health , Chekhov took a trip to Ukraine , which reawakened him to the beauty of the steppe . On his return , he began the novella @-@ length short story " The Steppe , " which he called " something rather odd and much too original , " and which was eventually published in <unk> Vestnik ( The Northern Herald ) . In a narrative that drifts with the thought processes of the characters , Chekhov evokes a chaise journey across the steppe through the eyes of a young boy sent to live away from home , and his companions , a priest and a merchant . " The Steppe " has been called a " dictionary of Chekhov 's poetics " , and it represented a significant advance for Chekhov , exhibiting much of the quality of his mature fiction and winning him publication in a literary journal rather than a newspaper . 
 In autumn 1887 , a theatre manager named Korsh commissioned Chekhov to write a play , the result being Ivanov , written in a fortnight and produced that November . Though Chekhov found the experience " sickening " and painted a comic portrait of the chaotic production in a letter to his brother Alexander , the play was a hit and was praised , to Chekhov 's bemusement , as a work of originality . Although Chekhov did not fully realize it at the time , Chekhov 's plays , such as The Seagull ( written in 1895 ) , Uncle Vanya ( written in 1897 ) , The Three Sisters ( written in 1900 ) , and The Cherry Orchard ( written in 1903 ) served as a revolutionary backbone to what is common sense to the medium of acting to this day : an effort to recreate and express the " realism " of how people truly act and speak with each other and translating it to the stage in order to manifest the human condition as accurately as possible in hopes to make the audience reflect upon their own definition of what it means to be human , warts and all . 
 This philosophy of approaching the art of acting has stood not only steadfast , but as the cornerstone of acting for much of the 20th century to this day . Mikhail Chekhov considered Ivanov a key moment in his brother 's intellectual development and literary career . From this period comes an observation of Chekhov 's that has become known as Chekhov 's gun , a dramatic principle that requires that every element in a narrative be necessary and irreplaceable , and that everything else be removed . 
 Remove everything that has no relevance to the story . If you say in the first chapter that there is a rifle hanging on the wall , in the second or third chapter it absolutely must go off . If it 's not going to be fired , it shouldn 't be hanging there . 
 The death of Chekhov 's brother Nikolay from tuberculosis in 1889 influenced A Dreary Story , finished that September , about a man who confronts the end of a life that he realises has been without purpose . Mikhail Chekhov , who recorded his brother 's depression and restlessness after Nikolay 's death , was researching prisons at the time as part of his law studies , and Anton Chekhov , in a search for purpose in his own life , himself soon became obsessed with the issue of prison reform . 
 = = = Sakhalin = = = 
 In 1890 , Chekhov undertook an arduous journey by train , horse @-@ drawn carriage , and river steamer to the Russian Far East and the <unk> , or penal colony , on Sakhalin Island , north of Japan , where he spent three months interviewing thousands of convicts and settlers for a census . The letters Chekhov wrote during the two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ month journey to Sakhalin are considered to be among his best . His remarks to his sister about Tomsk were to become notorious . 
 Tomsk is a very dull town . To judge from the drunkards whose acquaintance I have made , and from the intellectual people who have come to the hotel to pay their respects to me , the inhabitants are very dull , too . 
 The inhabitants of Tomsk later retaliated by erecting a mocking statue of Chekhov . 
 Chekhov witnessed much on Sakhalin that shocked and angered him , including floggings , embezzlement of supplies , and forced prostitution of women . He wrote , " There were times I felt that I saw before me the extreme limits of man 's degradation . " He was particularly moved by the plight of the children living in the penal colony with their parents . For example : 
 On the Amur steamer going to Sakhalin , there was a convict who had murdered his wife and wore fetters on his legs . His daughter , a little girl of six , was with him . I noticed wherever the convict moved the little girl scrambled after him , holding on to his fetters . At night the child slept with the convicts and soldiers all in a heap together . 
 Chekhov later concluded that charity was not the answer , but that the government had a duty to finance humane treatment of the convicts . His findings were published in 1893 and 1894 as Ostrov Sakhalin ( The Island of Sakhalin ) , a work of social science , not literature , that is worthy and informative rather than brilliant . Chekhov found literary expression for the " Hell of Sakhalin " in his long short story " The Murder , " the last section of which is set on Sakhalin , where the murderer Yakov loads coal in the night while longing for home . Chekhov 's writing on Sakhalin is the subject of brief comment and analysis in Haruki Murakami 's novel <unk> . It is also the subject of a poem by the Nobel Prize winner Seamus Heaney , " Chekhov on Sakhalin " ( collected in the volume Station Island ) . 
 = = = Melikhovo = = = 
 In 1892 , Chekhov bought the small country estate of Melikhovo , about forty miles south of Moscow , where he lived with his family until 1899 . " It 's nice to be a lord , " he joked to his friend Ivan <unk> ( who wrote humorous pieces under the pseudonym <unk> ) , but he took his responsibilities as a landlord seriously and soon made himself useful to the local peasants . As well as organising relief for victims of the famine and cholera outbreaks of 1892 , he went on to build three schools , a fire station , and a clinic , and to donate his medical services to peasants for miles around , despite frequent recurrences of his tuberculosis . 
 Mikhail Chekhov , a member of the household at Melikhovo , described the extent of his brother 's medical commitments : 
 From the first day that Chekhov moved to Melikhovo , the sick began flocking to him from twenty miles around . They came on foot or were brought in carts , and often he was fetched to patients at a distance . Sometimes from early in the morning peasant women and children were standing before his door waiting . 
 Chekhov 's expenditure on drugs was considerable , but the greatest cost was making journeys of several hours to visit the sick , which reduced his time for writing . However , Chekhov 's work as a doctor enriched his writing by bringing him into intimate contact with all sections of Russian society : for example , he witnessed at first hand the peasants ' unhealthy and cramped living conditions , which he recalled in his short story " Peasants " . Chekhov visited the upper classes as well , recording in his notebook : " Aristocrats ? The same ugly bodies and physical uncleanliness , the same toothless old age and disgusting death , as with market @-@ women . " 
 In 1894 , Chekhov began writing his play The Seagull in a lodge he had built in the orchard at Melikhovo . In the two years since he had moved to the estate , he had refurbished the house , taken up agriculture and horticulture , tended the orchard and the pond , and planted many trees , which , according to Mikhail , he " looked after ... as though they were his children . Like Colonel Vershinin in his Three Sisters , as he looked at them he dreamed of what they would be like in three or four hundred years . " 
 The first night of The Seagull , at the <unk> Theatre in St. Petersburg on 17 October 1896 , was a fiasco , as the play was booed by the audience , stinging Chekhov into renouncing the theatre . But the play so impressed the theatre director Vladimir <unk> @-@ <unk> that he convinced his colleague Constantin Stanislavski to direct a new production for the innovative Moscow Art Theatre in 1898 . Stanislavski 's attention to psychological realism and ensemble playing coaxed the buried subtleties from the text , and restored Chekhov 's interest in playwriting . The Art Theatre commissioned more plays from Chekhov and the following year staged Uncle Vanya , which Chekhov had completed in 1896 . 
 = = = Yalta = = = 
 In March 1897 , Chekhov suffered a major hemorrhage of the lungs while on a visit to Moscow . With great difficulty he was persuaded to enter a clinic , where the doctors diagnosed tuberculosis on the upper part of his lungs and ordered a change in his manner of life . 
 After his father 's death in 1898 , Chekhov bought a plot of land on the outskirts of Yalta and built a villa , into which he moved with his mother and sister the following year . Though he planted trees and flowers , kept dogs and tame cranes , and received guests such as Leo Tolstoy and Maxim Gorky , Chekhov was always relieved to leave his " hot Siberia " for Moscow or travels abroad . He vowed to move to Taganrog as soon as a water supply was installed there . In Yalta he completed two more plays for the Art Theatre , composing with greater difficulty than in the days when he " wrote serenely , the way I eat pancakes now " . He took a year each over Three Sisters and The Cherry Orchard . 
 On 25 May 1901 , Chekhov married Olga <unk> quietly , owing to his horror of weddings . She was a former protegée and sometime lover of <unk> @-@ <unk> whom he had first met at rehearsals for The Seagull . Up to that point , Chekhov , known as " Russia 's most elusive literary bachelor , " had preferred passing liaisons and visits to brothels over commitment . He had once written to Suvorin : 
 By all means I will be married if you wish it . But on these conditions : everything must be as it has been hitherto — that is , she must live in Moscow while I live in the country , and I will come and see her ... I promise to be an excellent husband , but give me a wife who , like the moon , won 't appear in my sky every day . 
 The letter proved prophetic of Chekhov 's marital arrangements with Olga : he lived largely at Yalta , she in Moscow , pursuing her acting career . In 1902 , Olga suffered a miscarriage ; and Donald Rayfield has offered evidence , based on the couple 's letters , that conception may have occurred when Chekhov and Olga were apart , although Russian scholars have rejected that claim . The literary legacy of this long @-@ distance marriage is a correspondence that preserves gems of theatre history , including shared complaints about Stanislavski 's directing methods and Chekhov 's advice to Olga about performing in his plays . 
 In Yalta , Chekhov wrote one of his most famous stories , The Lady with the Dog ( also called " Lady with <unk> " ) , which depicts what at first seems a casual liaison between a married man and a married woman in Yalta . Neither expects anything lasting from the encounter , but they find themselves drawn back to each other , risking the security of their family lives . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 By May 1904 , Chekhov was terminally ill with tuberculosis . Mikhail Chekhov recalled that " everyone who saw him secretly thought the end was not far off , but the nearer [ he ] was to the end , the less he seemed to realise it . " On 3 June , he set off with Olga for the German spa town of Badenweiler in the Black Forest , from where he wrote outwardly jovial letters to his sister Masha , describing the food and surroundings , and assuring her and his mother that he was getting better . In his last letter , he complained about the way German women dressed . 
 Chekhov 's death has become one of " the great set pieces of literary history , " retold , embroidered , and fictionalised many times since , notably in the short story " Errand " by Raymond Carver . In 1908 , Olga wrote this account of her husband 's last moments : 
 Anton sat up unusually straight and said loudly and clearly ( although he knew almost no German ) : Ich <unk> ( " I 'm dying " ) . The doctor calmed him , took a syringe , gave him an injection of camphor , and ordered champagne . Anton took a full glass , examined it , smiled at me and said : " It 's a long time since I drank champagne . " He drained it and lay quietly on his left side , and I just had time to run to him and lean across the bed and call to him , but he had stopped breathing and was sleeping peacefully as a child ... 
 Chekhov 's body was transported to Moscow in a refrigerated railway car meant for oysters , a detail that offended Gorky . Some of the thousands of mourners followed the funeral procession of a General Keller by mistake , to the accompaniment of a military band . Chekhov was buried next to his father at the Novodevichy Cemetery . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 A few months before he died , Chekhov told the writer Ivan Bunin that he thought people might go on reading his writings for seven years . " Why seven ? " asked Bunin . " Well , seven and a half , " Chekhov replied . " That 's not bad . I 've got six years to live . " 
 Chekhov 's posthumous reputation greatly exceeded his expectations . The ovations for the play The Cherry Orchard in the year of his death served to demonstrate the Russian public 's acclaim for the writer , which placed him second in literary celebrity only to Tolstoy , who outlived him by six years . Tolstoy was an early admirer of Chekhov 's short stories and had a series that he deemed " first quality " and " second quality " bound into a book . In the first category were : Children , The Chorus Girl , A Play , Home , Misery , The Runaway , In Court , <unk> , Ladies , A Malefactor , The Boys , Darkness , Sleepy , The <unk> , and The Darling " ; in the second : A Transgression , Sorrow , The Witch , <unk> , In a Strange Land , The Cook 's Wedding , A Tedious Business , An Upheaval , Oh ! The Public ! , The Mask , A Woman 's Luck , Nerves , The Wedding , A Defenseless Creature , and Peasant Wives . 
 In Chekhov 's lifetime , British and Irish critics generally did not find his work pleasing ; E. J. Dillon thought " the effect on the reader of Chekhov 's tales was repulsion at the gallery of human waste represented by his fickle , spineless , drifting people " and R. E. C. Long said " Chekhov 's characters were repugnant , and that Chekhov reveled in stripping the last rags of dignity from the human soul " . After his death , Chekhov was reappraised . Constance Garnett 's translations won him an English @-@ language readership and the admiration of writers such as James Joyce , Virginia Woolf , and Katherine Mansfield , whose story " The Child Who Was Tired " is similar to Chekhov 's " Sleepy " . The Russian critic D. S. Mirsky , who lived in England , explained Chekhov 's popularity in that country by his " unusually complete rejection of what we may call the heroic values . " In Russia itself , Chekhov 's drama fell out of fashion after the revolution , but it was later incorporated into the Soviet canon . The character of Lopakhin , for example , was reinvented as a hero of the new order , rising from a modest background to eventually possess the gentry 's estates . 
 One of the first non @-@ Russians to praise Chekhov 's plays was George Bernard Shaw , who subtitled his Heartbreak House " A Fantasia in the Russian Manner on English Themes , " and pointed out similarities between the predicament of the British landed class and that of their Russian counterparts as depicted by Chekhov : " the same nice people , the same utter futility . " 
 In the United States , Chekhov 's reputation began its rise slightly later , partly through the influence of Stanislavski 's system of acting , with its notion of subtext : " Chekhov often expressed his thought not in speeches , " wrote Stanislavski , " but in pauses or between the lines or in replies consisting of a single word ... the characters often feel and think things not expressed in the lines they speak . " The Group Theatre , in particular , developed the subtextual approach to drama , influencing generations of American playwrights , screenwriters , and actors , including Clifford Odets , Elia Kazan and , in particular , Lee Strasberg . In turn , Strasberg 's Actors Studio and the " Method " acting approach influenced many actors , including Marlon Brando and Robert De Niro , though by then the Chekhov tradition may have been distorted by a preoccupation with realism . In 1981 , the playwright Tennessee Williams adapted The Seagull as The Notebook of Trigorin . One of Anton 's nephews , Michael Chekhov would also contribute heavily to modern theatre , particularly through his unique acting methods which differed from Stanislavski 's . 
 Despite Chekhov 's acclaim during his lifetime as a playwright , some writers believe that his short stories represent the greater achievement . Raymond Carver , who wrote the short story " Errand " about Chekhov 's death , believed that Chekhov was the greatest of all short story writers : 
 Chekhov 's stories are as wonderful ( and necessary ) now as when they first appeared . It is not only the immense number of stories he wrote — for few , if any , writers have ever done more — it is the awesome frequency with which he produced masterpieces , stories that <unk> us as well as delight and move us , that lay bare our emotions in ways only true art can accomplish . 
 Ernest Hemingway , another writer influenced by Chekhov , was more grudging : " Chekhov wrote about six good stories . But he was an amateur writer . " And Vladimir Nabokov criticized Chekhov 's " medley of dreadful <unk> , ready @-@ made epithets , repetitions . " But he also declared The Lady with the Dog " one of the greatest stories ever written " in its depiction of a problematic relationship , and described Chekhov as writing " the way one person relates to another the most important things in his life , slowly and yet without a break , in a slightly subdued voice . " 
 For the writer William Boyd , Chekhov 's historical accomplishment was to abandon what William Gerhardie called the " event plot " for something more " blurred , interrupted , mauled or otherwise tampered with by life . " 
 Virginia Woolf mused on the unique quality of a Chekhov story in The Common Reader ( 1925 ) : 
 But is it the end , we ask ? We have rather the feeling that we have overrun our signals ; or it is as if a tune had stopped short without the expected chords to close it . These stories are inconclusive , we say , and proceed to frame a criticism based upon the assumption that stories ought to conclude in a way that we recognise . In so doing we raise the question of our own fitness as readers . Where the tune is familiar and the end emphatic — lovers united , villains discomfited , intrigues exposed — as it is in most Victorian fiction , we can scarcely go wrong , but where the tune is unfamiliar and the end a note of interrogation or merely the information that they went on talking , as it is in <unk> , we need a very daring and alert sense of literature to make us hear the tune , and in particular those last notes which complete the harmony . 
 While a Professor of Comparative Literature at Princeton University , Michael Goldman presented his view on defining the elusive quality of Chekhov 's comedies stating : " Having learned that Chekhov is comic ... Chekhov is comic in a very special , paradoxical way . His plays depend , as comedy does , on the vitality of the actors to make pleasurable what would otherwise be painfully awkward -- inappropriate speeches , missed connections , faux pas , stumbles , childishness -- but as part of a deeper pathos ; the stumbles are not pratfalls but an energized , graceful dissolution of purpose . " 
 Alan Twigg , the chief editor and publisher of the Canadian book review magazine BC <unk> wrote , 
 One can argue Anton Chekhov is the second @-@ most popular writer on the planet . Only Shakespeare outranks Chekhov in terms of movie adaptations of their work , according to the movie database IMDb . ... We generally know less about Chekhov than we know about mysterious Shakespeare . 
 Chekhov has also influenced the work of Japanese playwrights including Shimizu Kunio , Yōji <unk> , and Ai Nagai . Critics have noted similarities in how Chekhov and Shimizu use a mixture of light humor as well as an intense depictions of longing . <unk> adapted several of Chekhov 's plays and transformed them in the general style of nō . Nagai also adapted Chekhov 's plays , including Three Sisters , and transformed his dramatic style into Nagai 's style of satirical realism while emphasizing the social issues depicted on the play . 
 Chekhov 's works have been adapted for the screen , including Sidney Lumet 's Sea Gull and Louis Malle 's Vanya on 42nd Street . His work has also served as inspiration or been referenced in numerous films . In Andrei Tarkovsky 's 1975 film The Mirror , characters discuss his short story Ward No. 6 . Plays by Chekhov are also referenced in Francois Truffaut 's 1980 drama film The Last Metro , which is set in a theater . A portion of a stage production of Three Sisters appears in the 2014 drama film Still Alice . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Dreadnought = 
 The dreadnought was the predominant type of battleship in the early 20th century . The first of its kind , the Royal Navy 's Dreadnought , made such a strong impression on people 's minds when launched in 1906 that similar battleships built subsequently were referred to generically as " dreadnoughts " , and earlier battleships became known as " pre @-@ dreadnoughts " . Dreadnought 's design had two revolutionary features : an " all @-@ big @-@ gun " armament scheme , with more heavy @-@ calibre guns than previous ships , and steam turbine propulsion . As dreadnoughts became a symbol of national power , the arrival of these new warships was a crucial catalyst in the intensifying naval arms race between the United Kingdom and Germany . With the launch of a single ship , Dreadnought , the scales of naval power were reset overnight . As a result , dreadnought races sprang up around the world , including in South America , during the lead up to the beginning of World War I. Successive designs increased rapidly in size and made use of improvements in armament , armour , and propulsion throughout the dreadnought era . Within five years , new battleships had outclassed Dreadnought . These more powerful vessels were known as " super @-@ dreadnoughts . " Most of the original dreadnoughts were scrapped after the end of World War I under the terms of the Washington Naval Treaty , but many of the newer super @-@ dreadnoughts continued to be used throughout World War II . The only surviving dreadnought is USS Texas , located near the San Jacinto Battleground State Historic Site . 
 Dreadnought @-@ building consumed vast resources in the early 20th century , but there was only one battle between large dreadnought fleets . In the 1916 Battle of Jutland , the British and German navies clashed with no decisive result . The term " dreadnought " gradually dropped from use after World War I , especially after the Washington Naval Treaty , as virtually all remaining battleships shared dreadnought characteristics ; the term can also be used to describe battlecruisers , the other type of ship resulting from the dreadnought revolution . 
 = = Origins = = 
 The distinctive all @-@ big @-@ gun armament of the dreadnought was developed in the first years of the 20th century as navies sought to increase the range and power of the armament of their battleships . The typical battleship of the 1890s , now known as the " pre @-@ dreadnought " , had a main armament of four heavy guns of 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) calibre , a secondary armament of six to eighteen quick @-@ firing guns of between 4 @.@ 7 inches ( 119 mm ) and 7 @.@ 5 inches ( 191 mm ) calibre , and other smaller weapons . This was in keeping with the prevailing theory of naval combat that battles would initially be fought at some distance , but the ships would then approach to close range for the final blows , when the shorter @-@ range , faster @-@ firing guns would prove most useful . Some designs had an intermediate battery of 8 @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) guns . Serious proposals for an all @-@ big @-@ gun armament were circulated in several countries by 1903 . 
 All @-@ big @-@ gun designs commenced almost simultaneously in three navies . The Imperial Japanese Navy authorized the construction of Satsuma , designed with twelve 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) guns in 1904 , laid down in May . The Royal Navy began the design of HMS Dreadnought in January 1905 which was laid down in October . The US Navy gained authorization for USS Michigan , carrying eight 12 @-@ inch guns in March , which was laid down in December 1906 . 
 The move to all @-@ big @-@ gun designs was accomplished because a uniform , heavy @-@ calibre armament offered advantages in both firepower and fire control , and the Russo @-@ Japanese War of 1904 – 1905 showed that naval battles could , and likely would , be fought at long distances . The newest 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) guns had longer range and fired heavier shells than a gun of 10 @-@ inch ( 254 mm ) or 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch ( 234 mm ) calibre . Most historians also cite advantages in fire control ; at long ranges guns were aimed by observing the splashes caused by shells fired in salvoes , and it was difficult to interpret different splashes caused by different calibres of gun . There is still debate as to whether this feature was important . 
 = = = Long @-@ range gunnery = = = 
 In naval battles of the 1890s the decisive weapon was the medium @-@ calibre , typically 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) , quick @-@ firing gun firing at relatively short range ; at the Battle of the Yalu River in 1894 , the victorious Japanese did not commence firing until the range had closed to 3 @,@ 900 metres ( 4 @,@ 300 yd ) and most of the fighting occurred at 2 @,@ 000 metres ( 2 @,@ 200 yd ) . At these ranges , lighter guns had good accuracy , and their high rate of fire delivered high volumes of ordnance on the target , known as the " hail of fire " . Naval gunnery was too inaccurate to hit targets at a longer range . 
 By the early 20th century , British and American admirals expected future battleships would engage at longer distances . Newer models of torpedo had longer ranges . For instance , in 1903 , the US Navy ordered a design of torpedo effective to 4 @,@ 000 yards ( 3 @,@ 700 m ) . Both British and American admirals concluded that they needed to engage the enemy at longer ranges . In 1900 , Admiral Sir John " Jackie " Fisher , commanding the Royal Navy Mediterranean Fleet , ordered gunnery practice with 6 @-@ inch guns at 6 @,@ 000 yards ( 5 @,@ 500 m ) . By 1904 the US Naval War College was considering the effects on battleship tactics of torpedoes with a range of 7 @,@ 000 yards ( 6 @,@ 400 m ) to 8 @,@ 000 yards ( 7 @,@ 300 m ) . 
 The range of light and medium @-@ calibre guns was limited , and accuracy declined badly at longer range . At longer ranges the advantage of a high rate of fire decreased ; accurate shooting depended on spotting the shell @-@ splashes of the previous salvo , which limited the optimum rate of fire . 
 On 10 August 1904 the Imperial Russian Navy engaged the Imperial Japanese Navy in one of the longest @-@ range gunnery duels to date - over 8 miles ( 13 km ) - during the Battle of the Yellow Sea . The Russian battleships were equipped with Liuzhol range finders with an effective range of 4 @,@ 000 metres ( 4 @,@ 400 yd ) and the Japanese ships had Barr & Stroud range finders that reached out to 6 @,@ 000 metres ( 6 @,@ 600 yd ) , but both sides still managed to hit each other with 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) main battery fire at 8 miles ( 13 km ) . Naval architects and strategists around the world took notice . 
 = = = All @-@ big @-@ gun mixed @-@ calibre ships = = = 
 An evolutionary step was to reduce the quick @-@ firing secondary battery and substitute additional heavy guns , typically 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch ( 234 mm ) or 10 @-@ inch ( 254 mm ) . Ships designed in this way have been described as ' all @-@ big @-@ gun mixed @-@ calibre ' or later ' semi @-@ dreadnoughts ' . Semi @-@ dreadnought ships had many heavy secondary guns in wing turrets near the centre of the ship , instead of the small guns mounted in barbettes of earlier pre @-@ dreadnought ships . 
 Semi @-@ dreadnoughts classes included the British King Edward VII and Lord Nelson ; Russian Andrei Pervozvanny ; Japanese Katori , Satsuma , and Kawachi ; American Connecticut and Mississippi ; French Danton ; Italian Regina Elena ; and Austro @-@ Hungarian Radetzky class . 
 The design process for these ships often included discussion of an ' all @-@ big @-@ gun one @-@ calibre ' alternative . The June 1902 issue of Proceedings of the US Naval Institute contained comments by the US Navy 's leading gunnery expert Prof. P.R Alger proposing a main battery of eight 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) guns in twin turrets . In May 1902 , the Bureau of Construction and Repair submitted a design for the battleship with twelve 10 @-@ inch guns in twin turrets , two at the ends and four in the wings . Lt. Cdr . H. C. Poundstone submitted a paper to President Roosevelt in December 1902 arguing the case for larger battleships . In an appendix to his paper , Poundstone suggested a greater number of 11 @-@ inch ( 279 mm ) and 9 @-@ inch ( 229 mm ) guns was preferable to a smaller number of 12 @-@ inch and 9 @-@ inch . The Naval War College and Bureau of Construction and Repair developed these ideas in studies between 1903 and 1905 . War @-@ game studies begun in July 1903 " showed that a battleship armed with twelve 11 @-@ inch or 12 @-@ inch guns hexagonally arranged would be equal to three or more of the conventional type . " 
 The Royal Navy was thinking along similar lines . A design had been circulated in 1902 – 03 for " a powerful ' all big @-@ gun ' armament of two calibres , viz. four 12 @-@ inch and twelve 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch guns . " The Admiralty decided to build three more King Edward VIIs ( with a mixture of 12 @-@ inch , 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch and 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) ) in the 1903 – 04 naval construction programme instead . The all @-@ big @-@ gun concept was revived for the 1904 – 05 programme , the Lord Nelson class . Restrictions on length and beam meant the midships 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch turrets became single instead of twin , thus giving an armament of four 12 @-@ inch , ten 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch and no 6 @-@ inch . The constructor for this design , J.H. <unk> , submitted an alternative drawing showing an armament of twelve 12 @-@ inch guns , but the Admiralty was not prepared to accept this . Part of the rationale for the decision to retain mixed @-@ calibre guns was the need to begin the building of the ships quickly because of the tense situation produced by the Russo @-@ Japanese War . 
 = = = Switch to all @-@ big @-@ gun designs = = = 
 The replacement of the 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) or 8 @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) guns with weapons of 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch ( 234 mm ) or 10 @-@ inch ( 254 mm ) calibre improved the striking power of a battleship , particularly at longer ranges . Uniform heavy @-@ gun armament offered many other advantages . One advantage was logistical simplicity . When the US was considering whether to have a mixed @-@ calibre main armament for the South Carolina class , for example , William Sims and Homer Poundstone stressed the advantages of homogeneity in terms of ammunition supply and the transfer of crews from the disengaged guns to replace gunners wounded in action . 
 A uniform calibre of gun also helped streamline fire control . The designers of Dreadnought preferred an all @-@ big @-@ gun design because it would mean only one set of calculations about adjustments to the range of the guns . Some historians today hold that a uniform calibre was particularly important because the risk of confusion between shell @-@ splashes of 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) and lighter guns made accurate ranging difficult . This viewpoint is controversial , as fire control in 1905 was not advanced enough to use the salvo @-@ firing technique where this confusion might be important , and confusion of shell @-@ splashes does not seem to have been a concern of those working on all @-@ big @-@ gun designs . Nevertheless , the likelihood of engagements at longer ranges was important in deciding that the heaviest possible guns should become standard , hence 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) rather than 10 @-@ inch ( 254 mm ) . 
 The newer designs of 12 @-@ inch gun mounting had a considerably higher rate of fire , removing the advantage previously enjoyed by smaller calibres . In 1895 , a 12 @-@ inch gun might have fired one round every four minutes ; by 1902 , two rounds per minute was usual . In October 1903 , the Italian naval architect Vittorio Cuniberti published a paper in Jane 's Fighting Ships entitled " An Ideal Battleship for the British Navy " , which called for a 17 @,@ 000 ton ship carrying a main armament of twelve 12 @-@ inch guns , protected by armour 12 inches thick , and having a speed of 24 knots ( 28 mph / 44 km / h ) . Cuniberti 's idea — which he had already proposed to his own navy , the Regia Marina — was to make use of the high rate of fire of new 12 @-@ inch guns to produce devastating rapid @-@ fire from heavy guns to replace the ' hail of fire ' from lighter weapons . Something similar lay behind the Japanese move towards heavier guns ; at Tsushima , Japanese shells contained a higher than normal proportion of high explosive , and were fused to explode on contact , starting fires rather than piercing armour . The increased rate of fire laid the foundations for future advances in fire control . 
 = = = Building the first dreadnoughts = = = 
 In Japan , the two battleships of the 1903 – 04 programme were the first in the world to be laid down as all @-@ big @-@ gun ships , with eight 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) guns . The armour of their design was considered too thin , demanding a substantial redesign . The financial pressures of the Russo @-@ Japanese War and the short supply of 12 @-@ inch guns — which had to be imported from the United Kingdom — meant these ships were completed with a mixture of 12 @-@ inch and 10 @-@ inch ( 254 mm ) armament . The 1903 – 04 design retained traditional triple @-@ expansion steam engines , unlike Dreadnought . 
 The dreadnought breakthrough occurred in the United Kingdom in October 1905 . The new First Sea Lord , John " Jackie " Fisher had long been an advocate of new technology in the Royal Navy and had recently been convinced of the idea of an all @-@ big @-@ gun battleship . Fisher is often credited as the creator of the dreadnought and the father of the United Kingdom 's great dreadnought battleship fleet , an impression he himself did much to reinforce . It has been suggested Fisher 's main focus was on the arguably even more revolutionary battlecruiser and not the battleship . 
 Shortly after taking office , Fisher set up a Committee on Designs to consider future battleships and armoured cruisers . The Committee 's first task was to consider a new battleship . The specification for the new ship was a 12 @-@ inch main battery and anti @-@ torpedo @-@ boat guns but no intermediate calibres , and a speed of 21 kn ( 39 km / h ) which was two or three knots faster than existing battleships . The initial designs intended twelve 12 @-@ inch guns , though difficulties in positioning these guns led the chief constructor at one stage to propose a return to four 12 @-@ inch guns with sixteen or eighteen of 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch ( 234 mm ) . After a full evaluation of reports of the action at Tsushima compiled by an official observer , Captain Pakenham , the Committee settled on a main battery of ten 12 @-@ inch guns , along with twenty @-@ two 12 pounders as secondary armament . The Committee also gave Dreadnought steam turbine propulsion , which was unprecedented in a large warship . The greater power and lighter weight of turbines meant the 21 @-@ knot ( 24 mph / 39 km / h ) design speed could be achieved in a smaller and less costly ship than if reciprocating engines had been used . Construction took place quickly ; the keel was laid on 2 October 1905 , the ship was launched on 10 February 1906 , and completed on 3 October 1906 — an impressive demonstration of British industrial might . 
 The first US dreadnoughts were the two South Carolina @-@ class ships . Detailed plans for these were worked out in July – November 1905 , and approved by the Board of Construction on 23 November 1905 . Building was slow ; specifications for bidders were issued on 21 March 1906 , the contracts awarded on 21 July 1906 and the two ships were laid down in December 1906 , after the completion of the Dreadnought . 
 = = Design = = 
 The designers of dreadnoughts sought to provide as much protection , speed , and firepower as possible in a ship of a realistic size and cost . The hallmark of dreadnought battleships was an " all @-@ big @-@ gun " armament , but they also had heavy armour concentrated mainly in a thick belt at the waterline and in one or more armoured decks . Secondary armament , fire control , command equipment , and protection against torpedoes also had to be crammed into the hull . 
 The inevitable consequence of demands for ever greater speed , striking power , and endurance meant that displacement , and hence cost , of dreadnoughts tended to increase . The Washington Naval Treaty of 1922 imposed a limit of 35 @,@ 000 tons on the displacement of capital ships . In subsequent years treaty battleships were commissioned to build up to this limit . Japan 's decision to leave the Treaty in the 1930s , and the arrival of the Second World War , eventually made this limit irrelevant . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Dreadnoughts mounted a uniform main battery of heavy @-@ calibre guns ; the number , size , and arrangement differed between designs . Dreadnought mounted ten 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) guns . 12 @-@ inch guns had been standard for most navies in the pre @-@ dreadnought era and this continued in the first generation of dreadnought battleships . The Imperial German Navy was an exception , continuing to use 280 @-@ millimetre ( 11 @.@ 0 in ) guns in its first class of dreadnoughts , the Nassau class . 
 Dreadnoughts also carried lighter weapons . Many early dreadnoughts carried a secondary armament of very light guns designed to fend off enemy torpedo boats . The calibre and weight of secondary armament tended to increase , as the range of torpedoes and the staying power of the destroyers expected to carry them also increased . From the end of World War I onwards , battleships had to be equipped with many light guns as anti @-@ aircraft armament . 
 Dreadnoughts frequently carried torpedo tubes themselves . In theory , a line of battleships so equipped could unleash a devastating volley of torpedoes on an enemy line steaming a parallel course . In practice , torpedoes fired from battleships scored very few hits , and there was a risk that a stored torpedo would cause a dangerous explosion if hit by enemy fire . 
 = = = = Position of main armament = = = = 
 The effectiveness of the guns depended in part on the layout of the turrets . Dreadnought , and the British ships which immediately followed it , carried five turrets : one forward , one aft and one amidships on the centreline of the ship , and two in the ' wings ' next to the superstructure . This allowed three turrets to fire ahead and four on the broadside . The Nassau and Helgoland classes of German dreadnoughts adopted a ' hexagonal ' layout , with one turret each fore and aft and four wing turrets ; this meant more guns were mounted in total , but the same number could fire ahead or broadside as with Dreadnought . 
 Dreadnought designs experimented with different layouts . The British Neptune @-@ class battleship staggered the wing turrets , so all ten guns could fire on the broadside , a feature also used by the German Kaiser class . This risked blast damage to parts of the ship over which the guns fired , and put great stress on the ship 's frames . 
 If all turrets were on the centreline of the vessel , stresses on the ship 's frames were relatively low . This layout meant the entire main battery could fire on the broadside , though fewer could fire end @-@ on . It meant the hull would be longer , which posed some challenges for the designers ; a longer ship needed to devote more weight to armour to get equivalent protection , and the magazines which served each turret interfered with the distribution of boilers and engines . For these reasons , HMS Agincourt , which carried a record fourteen 12 @-@ inch guns in seven centreline turrets , was not considered a success . 
 A superfiring layout was eventually adopted as standard . This involved raising one or two turrets so they could fire over a turret immediately forward or astern of them . The US Navy adopted this feature with their first dreadnoughts in 1906 , but others were slower to do so . As with other layouts there were drawbacks . Initially , there were concerns about the impact of the blast of the raised guns on the lower turret . Raised turrets raised the centre of gravity of the ship , and might reduce the stability of the ship . Nevertheless , this layout made the best of the firepower available from a fixed number of guns , and was eventually adopted generally . The US Navy used superfiring on the South Carolina class , and the layout was adopted in the Royal Navy with the Orion class of 1910 . By World War II , superfiring was entirely standard . 
 Initially , all dreadnoughts had two guns to a turret . One solution to the problem of turret layout was to put three or even four guns in each turret . Fewer turrets meant the ship could be shorter , or could devote more space to machinery . On the other hand , it meant that in the event of an enemy shell destroying one turret , a higher proportion of the main armament would be out of action . The risk of the blast waves from each gun barrel interfering with others in the same turret reduced the rate of fire from the guns somewhat . The first nation to adopt the triple turret was Italy , in the Dante Alighieri , soon followed by Russia with the Gangut class , the Austro @-@ Hungarian Tegetthoff class , and the US Nevada class . British Royal Navy battleships did not adopt triple turrets until after the First World War , with the Nelson class . Several later designs used quadruple turrets , including the British King George V class and French Richelieu class . 
 = = = = Main armament power and calibre = = = = 
 Rather than try to fit more guns onto a ship , it was possible to increase the power of each gun . This could be done by increasing either the calibre of the weapon and hence the weight of shell , or by lengthening the barrel to increase muzzle velocity . Either of these offered the chance to increase range and armour penetration . 
 Both methods offered advantages and disadvantages , though in general greater muzzle velocity meant increased barrel wear . As guns fire , their barrels wear out , losing accuracy and eventually requiring replacement . At times , this became problematic ; the US Navy seriously considered stopping practice firing of heavy guns in 1910 because of the wear on the barrels . The disadvantages of guns of larger calibre are that guns and turrets must be heavier ; and heavier shells , which are fired at lower velocities , require turret designs that allow a larger angle of elevation for the same range . Heavier shells have the advantage of being slowed less by air resistance , retaining more penetrating power at longer ranges . 
 Different navies approached the issue of calibre in different ways . The German navy , for instance , generally used a lighter calibre than the equivalent British ships , e.g. 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) calibre when the British standard was 13 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 343 mm ) . Because German metallurgy was superior , the German 12 @-@ inch gun had better shell weight and muzzle velocity than the British 12 @-@ inch ; and German ships could afford more armour for the same vessel weight because the German 12 " guns were lighter than the 13 @.@ 5 " guns the British required for comparable effect . 
 Over time the calibre of guns tended to increase . In the Royal Navy , the Orion class , launched 1910 , had ten 13 @.@ 5 @-@ inch guns , all on the centreline ; the Queen Elizabeth class , launched 1913 , had eight 15 @-@ inch ( 381 mm ) guns . In all navies , fewer guns of larger calibre came to be used . The smaller number of guns simplified their distribution , and centreline turrets became the norm . 
 A further step change was planned for battleships designed and laid down at the end of World War I. The Japanese Nagato @-@ class battleships in 1917 carried 410 @-@ millimetre ( 16 @.@ 1 in ) guns , which was quickly matched by the US Navy 's Colorado class . Both the United Kingdom and Japan were planning battleships with 18 @-@ inch ( 457 mm ) armament , in the British case the N3 class . The Washington Naval Treaty concluded on 6 February 1922 and ratified later limited battleship guns to not more than 16 @-@ inch ( 410 mm ) calibre , and these heavier guns were not produced . 
 The only battleships to break the limit were the Japanese Yamato class , begun in 1937 ( after the treaty expired ) , which carried 460 mm ( 18 @.@ 1 in ) main guns . By the middle of World War II , the United Kingdom was making use of 15 @-@ inch guns kept as spares for the Queen Elizabeth class to arm the last British battleship , HMS Vanguard . 
 Some World War II @-@ era designs were drawn up proposing another move towards gigantic armament . The German H @-@ 43 and H @-@ 44 designs proposed 508 @-@ millimetre ( 20 in ) guns , and there is evidence Hitler wanted calibres as high as 609 @-@ millimetre ( 24 in ) ; the Japanese ' Super Yamato ' design also called for 508 mm guns . None of these proposals went further than very preliminary design work . 
 = = = = Secondary armament = = = = 
 The first dreadnoughts tended to have a very light secondary armament intended to protect them from torpedo boats . Dreadnought carried 12 @-@ pounder guns ; each of her twenty @-@ two 12 @-@ pounders could fire at least 15 rounds a minute at any torpedo boat making an attack . The South Carolinas and other early American dreadnoughts were similarly equipped . At this stage , torpedo boats were expected to attack separately from any fleet actions . Therefore , there was no need to armour the secondary gun armament , or to protect the crews from the blast effects of the main guns . In this context , the light guns tended to be mounted in unarmoured positions high on the ship to minimize weight and maximize field of fire . 
 Within a few years , the principal threat was from the destroyer — larger , more heavily armed , and harder to destroy than the torpedo boat . Since the risk from destroyers was very serious , it was considered that one shell from a battleship 's secondary armament should sink ( rather than merely damage ) any attacking destroyer . Destroyers , in contrast to torpedo boats , were expected to attack as part of a general fleet engagement , so it was necessary for the secondary armament to be protected against shell splinters from heavy guns , and the blast of the main armament . This philosophy of secondary armament was adopted by the German navy from the start ; Nassau , for instance , carried twelve 150 @-@ mm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) and sixteen 88 @-@ mm ( 3 @.@ 45 in ) guns , and subsequent German dreadnought classes followed this lead . These heavier guns tended to be mounted in armoured barbettes or casemates on the main deck . The Royal Navy increased its secondary armament from 12 @-@ pounder to first 4 @-@ inch ( 100 mm ) and then 6 @-@ inch ( 150 mm ) guns , which were standard at the start of World War I ; the US standardized on 5 @-@ inch ( 130 mm ) calibre for the war but planned 6 @-@ inch guns for the ships designed just afterwards . 
 The secondary battery served several other roles . It was hoped that a medium @-@ calibre shell might be able to score a hit on an enemy dreadnought 's sensitive fire control systems . It was also felt that the secondary armament could play an important role in driving off enemy cruisers from attacking a crippled battleship . 
 The secondary armament of dreadnoughts was , on the whole , unsatisfactory . A hit from a light gun could not be relied on to stop a destroyer . Heavier guns could not be relied on to hit a destroyer , as experience at the Battle of Jutland showed . The casemate mountings of heavier guns proved problematic ; being low in the hull , they proved liable to flooding , and on several classes some were removed and plated over . The only sure way to protect a dreadnought from destroyer or torpedo boat attack was to provide a destroyer squadron as escort . After World War I the secondary armament tended to be mounted in turrets on the upper deck and around the superstructure . This allowed a wide field of fire and good protection without the negative points of casemates . Increasingly through the 1920s and 1930s the secondary guns were seen as a major part of the anti @-@ aircraft battery , with high @-@ angle , dual @-@ purpose guns increasingly adopted . 
 = = = Armour = = = 
 Much of the displacement of a dreadnought was taken up by the steel plating of the armour . Designers spent much time and effort to provide the best possible protection for their ships against the various weapons they would be faced with . Only so much weight could be devoted to protection , without compromising speed , firepower or seakeeping . 
 = = = = Central citadel = = = = 
 The bulk of a dreadnought 's armour was concentrated around the " armoured citadel " . This was a box , with four armoured walls and an armoured roof , around the most important parts of the ship . The sides of the citadel were the " armoured belt " of the ship , which started on the hull just in front of the forward turret and ran to just behind the aft turret . The ends of the citadel were two armoured bulkheads , fore and aft , which stretched between the ends of the armour belt . The " roof " of the citadel was an armoured deck . Within the citadel were the boilers , engines , and the magazines for the main armament . A hit to any of these systems could cripple or destroy the ship . The " floor " of the box was the bottom of the ship 's hull , and was unarmoured , although it was in fact a " triple bottom " . 
 The earliest dreadnoughts were intended to take part in a pitched battle against other battleships at ranges of up to 10 @,@ 000 yd ( 9 @,@ 100 m ) . In such an encounter , shells would fly on a relatively flat trajectory , and a shell would have to hit at or just about the waterline to damage the vitals of the ship . For this reason , the early dreadnoughts ' armour was concentrated in a thick belt around the waterline ; this was 11 inches ( 280 mm ) thick in Dreadnought . Behind this belt were arranged the ship 's coal bunkers , to further protect the engineering spaces . In an engagement of this sort , there was also a lesser threat of indirect damage to the vital parts of the ship . A shell which struck above the belt armour and exploded could send fragments flying in all directions . These fragments were dangerous , but could be stopped by much thinner armour than what would be necessary to stop an unexploded armour @-@ piercing shell . To protect the innards of the ship from fragments of shells which detonated on the superstructure , much thinner steel armour was applied to the decks of the ship . 
 The thickest protection was reserved for the central citadel in all battleships . Some navies extended a thinner armoured belt and armoured deck to cover the ends of the ship , or extended a thinner armoured belt up the outside of the hull . This " tapered " armour was used by the major European navies — the United Kingdom , Germany and France . This arrangement gave some armour to a larger part of the ship ; for the very first dreadnoughts , when high @-@ explosive shellfire was still considered a significant threat , this was useful . It tended to result in the main belt being very short , only protecting a thin strip above the waterline ; some navies found that when their dreadnoughts were heavily laden , the armoured belt was entirely submerged . The alternative was an " all or nothing " protection scheme , developed by the US Navy . The armour belt was tall and thick , but no side protection at all was provided to the ends of the ship or the upper decks . The armoured deck was also thickened . The " all @-@ or @-@ nothing " system provided more effective protection against the very @-@ long @-@ range engagements of dreadnought fleets and was adopted outside the US Navy after World War I. 
 The design of the dreadnought changed to meet new challenges . For example , armour schemes were changed to reflect the greater risk of plunging shells from long @-@ range gunfire , and the increasing threat from armour @-@ piercing bombs dropped by aircraft . Later designs carried a greater thickness of steel on the armoured deck ; Yamato carried a 16 @-@ inch ( 410 mm ) main belt , but a deck 9 @-@ inch ( 230 mm ) thick . 
 = = = = Underwater protection and subdivision = = = = 
 The final element of the protection scheme of the first dreadnoughts was the subdivision of the ship below the waterline into several watertight compartments . If the hull were holed — by shellfire , mine , torpedo , or collision — then , in theory , only one area would flood and the ship could survive . To make this precaution even more effective , many dreadnoughts had no doors between different underwater sections , so that even a surprise hole below the waterline need not sink the ship . There were still several instances where flooding spread between underwater compartments . 
 The greatest evolution in dreadnought protection came with the development of the anti @-@ torpedo bulge and torpedo belt , both attempts to protect against underwater damage by mines and torpedoes . The purpose of underwater protection was to absorb the force of a detonating mine or torpedo well away from the final watertight hull . This meant an inner bulkhead along the side of the hull , which was generally lightly armoured to capture splinters , separated from the outer hull by one or more compartments . The compartments in between were either left empty , or filled with coal , water or fuel oil . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 Dreadnoughts were propelled by two to four screw propellers . Dreadnought herself , and all British dreadnoughts , had screw shafts driven by steam turbines . The first generation of dreadnoughts built in other nations used the slower triple @-@ expansion steam engine which had been standard in pre @-@ dreadnoughts . 
 Turbines offered more power than reciprocating engines for the same volume of machinery . This , along with a guarantee on the new machinery from the inventor , Charles Parsons , persuaded the Royal Navy to use turbines in Dreadnought . It is often said that turbines had the additional benefits of being cleaner and more reliable than reciprocating engines . By 1905 , new designs of reciprocating engine were available which were cleaner and more reliable than previous models . 
 Turbines also had disadvantages . At cruising speeds much slower than maximum speed , turbines were markedly less fuel @-@ efficient than reciprocating engines . This was particularly important for navies which required a long range at cruising speeds — and hence for the US Navy , which was planning in the event of war to cruise across the Pacific and engage the Japanese in the Philippines . 
 The US Navy experimented with turbine engines from 1908 in the North Dakota , but was not fully committed to turbines until the Pennsylvania class in 1916 . In the preceding Nevada class , one ship , the Oklahoma , received reciprocating engines , while the Nevada received geared turbines . The two New York @-@ class ships of 1914 both received reciprocating engines , but all four ships of the Florida ( 1911 ) and Wyoming ( 1912 ) classes received turbines . 
 The disadvantages of the turbine were eventually overcome . The solution which eventually was generally adopted was the geared turbine , where gearing reduced the rotation rate of the propellers and hence increased efficiency . This solution required technical precision in the gears and hence was difficult to implement . 
 One alternative was the turbo @-@ electric drive where the steam turbine generated electrical power which then drove the propellers . This was particularly favoured by the US Navy , which used it for all dreadnoughts from late 1915 – 1922 . The advantages of this method were its low cost , the opportunity for very close underwater compartmentalization , and good astern performance . The disadvantages were that the machinery was heavy and vulnerable to battle damage , particularly the effects of flooding on the electrics . 
 Turbines were never replaced in battleship design . Diesel engines were eventually considered by some powers , as they offered very good endurance and an engineering space taking up less of the length of the ship . They were also heavier , however , took up a greater vertical space , offered less power , and were considered unreliable . 
 = = = = Fuel = = = = 
 The first generation of dreadnoughts used coal to fire the boilers which fed steam to the turbines . Coal had been in use since the very first steam warships . One advantage of coal was that it is quite inert ( in lump form ) and thus could be used as part of the ship 's protection scheme . Coal also had many disadvantages . It was labor @-@ intensive to pack coal into the ship 's bunkers and then feed it into the boilers . The boilers became clogged with ash . Airborne coal dust and related vapors were highly explosive , possibly evidenced by the explosion of USS Maine . Burning coal as fuel also produced thick black smoke which gave away the position of a fleet and interfered with visibility , signaling , and fire control . In addition , coal was very bulky and had comparatively low thermal efficiency . 
 Oil @-@ fired propulsion had many advantages for naval architects and officers at sea alike . It reduced smoke , making ships less visible . It could be fed into boilers automatically , rather than needing a complement of stokers to do it by hand . Oil has roughly twice the thermal content of coal . This meant that the boilers themselves could be smaller ; and for the same volume of fuel , an oil @-@ fired ship would have much greater range . 
 These benefits meant that , as early as 1901 , Fisher was pressing the advantages of oil fuel . There were technical problems with oil @-@ firing , connected with the different distribution of the weight of oil fuel compared to coal , and the problems of pumping viscous oil . The main problem with using oil for the battle fleet was that , with the exception of the United States , every major navy would have to import its oil . As a result , some navies adopted ' dual @-@ firing ' boilers which could use coal sprayed with oil ; British ships so equipped , which included dreadnoughts , could even use oil alone at up to 60 % power . 
 The US had large reserves of oil , and the US Navy was the first to wholeheartedly adopt oil @-@ firing , deciding to do so in 1910 and ordering oil @-@ fired boilers for the Nevada class , in 1911 . The United Kingdom was not far behind , deciding in 1912 to use oil on its own in the Queen Elizabeth class ; shorter British design and building times meant that Queen Elizabeth was commissioned before either of the Nevada @-@ class vessels . The United Kingdom planned to revert to mixed firing with the subsequent Revenge class , at the cost of some speed — but Fisher , who returned to office in 1914 , insisted that all the boilers should be oil @-@ fired . Other major navies retained mixed coal @-@ and @-@ oil firing until the end of World War I. 
 = = Dreadnought building = = 
 Dreadnoughts were developed as a move in an international battleship arms @-@ race which had begun in the 1890s . The British Royal Navy had a big lead in the number of pre @-@ dreadnought battleships , but a lead of only one dreadnought . This has led to criticism that the British , by launching HMS Dreadnought , threw away a strategic advantage . Most of the United Kingdom 's naval rivals were themselves contemplating or even building warships that featured a uniform battery of heavy guns . Both the Japanese Navy and the US Navy ordered " all @-@ big @-@ gun " ships in 1904 – 05 , with the Satsuma and South Carolina ships , respectively . Germany 's Kaiser Wilhelm II had advocated a fast warship armed only with heavy guns since the 1890s . By securing a head start in dreadnought construction , the United Kingdom ensured that its dominance of the seas continued . 
 The battleship race soon accelerated once more , placing a great burden on the finances of the governments which engaged in it . The first dreadnoughts were not much more expensive than the last pre @-@ dreadnoughts , but the cost per ship continued to grow thereafter . Modern battleships were the crucial element of naval power in spite of their price . Each battleship was a signal of national power and prestige , in a manner similar to the nuclear weapons of today . Germany , France , Russia , Italy , Japan and Austria all began dreadnought programmes , and second @-@ rank powers including the Ottoman Empire , Argentina , Brazil , and Chile commissioned dreadnoughts to be built in British and American yards . 
 = = = Anglo @-@ German arms race = = = 
 The building of Dreadnought coincided with increasing tension between the United Kingdom and Germany . Germany had begun to build a large battlefleet in the 1890s , as part of a deliberate policy to challenge British naval supremacy . With the conclusion of the Entente Cordiale between the United Kingdom and France in April 1904 , it became increasingly clear that the United Kingdom 's principal naval enemy would be Germany , which was building up a large , modern fleet under the ' Tirpitz ' laws . This rivalry gave rise to the two largest dreadnought fleets of the pre @-@ war period . 
 The first German response to Dreadnought came with the Nassau class , laid down in 1907 . This was followed by the Helgoland class in 1909 . Together with two battlecruisers — a type for which the Germans had less admiration than Fisher , but which could be built under authorization for armoured cruisers , rather than capital ships — these classes gave Germany a total of ten modern capital ships built or building in 1909 . The British ships were faster and more powerful than their German equivalents , but a 12 : 10 ratio fell far short of the 2 : 1 ratio that the Royal Navy wanted to maintain . 
 In 1909 , the British Parliament authorized an additional four capital ships , holding out hope Germany would be willing to negotiate a treaty about battleship numbers . If no such solution could be found , an additional four ships would be laid down in 1910 . Even this compromise solution meant ( when taken together with some social reforms ) raising taxes enough to prompt a constitutional crisis in the United Kingdom in 1909 – 10 . In 1910 , the British eight @-@ ship construction plan went ahead , including four Orion @-@ class super @-@ dreadnoughts , and augmented by battlecruisers purchased by Australia and New Zealand . In the same period , Germany laid down only three ships , giving the United Kingdom a superiority of 22 ships to 13 . The British resolve demonstrated by their construction programme led the Germans to seek a negotiated end to the arms race . The Admiralty 's new target of a 60 % lead over Germany was near enough to Tirpitz 's goal of cutting the British lead to 50 % , but talks foundered on the question on whether British Commonwealth battlecruisers should be included in the count , as well as non @-@ naval matters like the German demands for recognition of ownership of Alsace @-@ Lorraine . 
 The dreadnought race stepped up in 1910 and 1911 , with Germany laying down four capital ships each year and the United Kingdom five . Tension came to a head following the German Naval Law of 1912 . This proposed a fleet of 33 German battleships and battlecruisers , outnumbering the Royal Navy in home waters . To make matters worse for the United Kingdom , the Imperial Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy was building four dreadnoughts , while the Italians had four and were building two more . Against such threats , the Royal Navy could no longer guarantee vital British interests . The United Kingdom was faced with a choice of building more battleships , withdrawing from the Mediterranean , or seeking an alliance with France . Further naval construction was unacceptably expensive at a time when social welfare provision was making calls on the budget . Withdrawing from the Mediterranean would mean a huge loss of influence , weakening British diplomacy in the Mediterranean and shaking the stability of the British Empire . The only acceptable option , and the one recommended by First Lord of the Admiralty Winston Churchill , was to break with the policies of the past and make an arrangement with France . The French would assume responsibility for checking Italy and Austria @-@ Hungary in the Mediterranean , while the British would protect the north coast of France . In spite of some opposition from British politicians , the Royal Navy organised itself on this basis in 1912 . 
 In spite of these important strategic consequences , the 1912 Naval Law had little bearing on the battleship force ratios . The United Kingdom responded by laying down ten new super @-@ dreadnoughts in its 1912 and 1913 budgets — ships of the Queen Elizabeth and Revenge classes , which introduced a further step change in armament , speed and protection — while Germany laid down only five , concentrating resources on the Army . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 The American South Carolina @-@ class battleships were the first all @-@ big @-@ gun ships completed by one of the United Kingdom 's rivals . The planning for the type had begun before Dreadnought was launched . There is some speculation the US Navy design was influenced by informal contacts with sympathetic Royal Navy officials , but the American ship was very different . 
 The US Congress authorized the Navy to build two battleships , but of only 16 @,@ 000 tons or lower displacement . As a result , the South Carolina class were built to much tighter limits than Dreadnought . To make the best use of the weight available for armament , all eight 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) guns were mounted along the centreline , in superfiring pairs fore and aft . This arrangement gave a broadside equal to Dreadnought , but with fewer guns ; this was the most efficient distribution of weapons and was a precursor of the standard practice of future generations of battleships . The principal economy of displacement compared to Dreadnought was in propulsion ; South Carolina retained triple @-@ expansion steam engines , and could manage only 18 @.@ 5 kn ( 34 @.@ 3 km / h ) compared to 21 kn ( 39 km / h ) for Dreadnought . For this reason the later Delaware class were described by some as the US Navy 's first dreadnoughts ; only a few years after their commissioning , the South Carolina class could not operate tactically with the newer dreadnoughts due to their low speed , and were forced to operate with the older pre @-@ dreadnoughts . 
 The two ships of the Delaware class were the first US battleships to match the speed of British dreadnoughts . The decision to use a 10 @-@ gun 20 @,@ 500 ton ship over a 12 @-@ gun 24 @,@ 000 ton in this class was criticized , because the secondary battery was ' wet ' ( suffering from spray ) and the bow was low in the water . The alternative 12 @-@ gun design had many disadvantages as well ; the extra two guns and a lower casemate had ' hidden costs ' — the two wing turrets planned would weaken the upper deck , be almost impossible to adequately protect against underwater attack , and force magazines to be located too close to the sides of the ship . 
 The US Navy continued to expand its battlefleet , laying down two ships in most subsequent years until 1920 . The US continued to use reciprocating engines as an alternative to turbines until the Nevada class , laid down in 1912 . In part this reflected a cautious approach to battleship @-@ building , and in part a preference for long endurance over high maximum speed . 
 = = = Japan = = = 
 With their victory in the Russo @-@ Japanese War of 1904 – 05 , the Japanese became concerned about the potential for conflict with the US . The theorist Satō <unk> developed the doctrine that Japan should have a battlefleet at least 70 % the size of that of the US . This would enable the Japanese navy to win two decisive battles , the first early in a war against the US Pacific Fleet , and the second against the US Atlantic Fleet which would inevitably be dispatched as reinforcements . 
 Japan 's first priorities were to refit the pre @-@ dreadnoughts captured from Russia and to complete Satsuma and Aki . The <unk> were designed before Dreadnought , but financial shortages resulting from the Russo @-@ Japanese War delayed completion and resulted in their carrying a mixed armament , so they were known as ' semi @-@ dreadnought 's . These were followed by a modified Aki @-@ type : Kawachi and Settsu . These two ships were laid down in 1909 and completed in 1912 . They were armed with twelve 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) guns , but they were of two different models with differing barrel lengths , meaning that they would have had difficulty controlling their fire at long ranges . 
 = = = In other countries = = = 
 Compared to the other major naval powers , France was slow to start building dreadnoughts , instead finishing the planned Danton class of pre @-@ dreadnoughts , laying down five in 1907 and 1908 . In September 1910 the first of the Courbet class was laid down , making France the eleventh nation to enter the dreadnought race . In the Navy Estimates of 1911 , Paul Bénazet asserted that from 1896 to 1911 , France dropped from being the world 's second @-@ largest naval power to fourth ; he attributed this to problems in maintenance routines and neglect . The closer alliance with the United Kingdom made these reduced forces more than adequate for French needs . 
 The Italian navy had received proposals for an all @-@ big @-@ gun battleship from Cuniberti well before Dreadnought was launched , but it took until 1909 for Italy to lay down one of its own . The construction of Dante Alighieri was prompted by rumours of Austro @-@ Hungarian dreadnought building . A further five dreadnoughts of the Conte di Cavour class and Andrea Doria class class followed as Italy sought to maintain its lead over Austria @-@ Hungary . These ships remained the core of Italian naval strength until World War II . The subsequent Francesco Caracciolo @-@ class battleship were suspended ( and later cancelled ) on the outbreak of World War I. 
 In January 1909 , Austro @-@ Hungarian admirals circulated a document calling for a fleet of four dreadnoughts . A constitutional crisis in 1909 – 10 meant no construction could be approved . In spite of this , two dreadnoughts were laid down by shipyards on a speculative basis – due especially to the energetic manipulations of Rudolf Montecuccoli , Chief of the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy – and later approved along with an additional two . The resulting ships , all Tegetthoff class , were to be accompanied by a further four ships , but these were cancelled on the outbreak of World War I. 
 In June 1909 , the Imperial Russian Navy began construction of four Gangut class dreadnoughts for the Baltic Fleet , and in October 1911 , three more Imperatritsa Mariya class dreadnoughts for the Black Sea were laid down . Of seven ships , only one was completed within four years of being laid down , and the Gangut ships were " obsolescent and outclassed " upon commissioning . Taking lessons from Tsushima , and influenced by Cuniberti , they ended up more closely resembling slower versions of Fisher 's battlecruisers than Dreadnought , and they proved badly flawed due to their smaller guns and thinner armour when compared with contemporary dreadnoughts . 
 Spain commissioned three ships of the España class , with the first laid down in 1909 . The three ships were the smallest dreadnoughts ever built . They were built in Spain , with assistance ; construction on the third ship , Jaime I , took nine years from its laying down date to completion because of non @-@ delivery of critical material , especially armament , from the United Kingdom . 
 Brazil was the third country to begin construction on a dreadnought . It ordered three dreadnoughts from the United Kingdom which would mount a heavier main battery than any other battleship afloat at the time ( twelve 12 in ( 30 cm ) / 45 calibre guns ) . Two were completed : Minas Geraes was laid down on by Armstrong ( Elswick ) on 17 April 1907 , and its sister , São Paulo , followed thirteen days later at Vickers ( Barrow ) . Although many naval journals in Europe and the US speculated that the ships were really acting as a proxy for one of the naval powers and would hand the ships over to them as soon as they were complete , both ships were commissioned into the Brazilian Navy in 1910 . 
 The Netherlands intended by 1912 to replace its fleet of pre @-@ dreadnought armoured ships with a modern fleet composed of dreadnoughts . After a Royal Commission proposed the purchase of nine dreadnoughts in August 1913 , there were extensive debates over the need for such ships and , if they were necessary , the actual number needed . These lasted into August 1914 , when a bill authorizing funding for four dreadnoughts was finalized , but the outbreak of World War I halted the ambitious plan . 
 Turkey ordered two dreadnoughts from British yards , which were seized by the British on the outbreak of World War I , in order to reinforce the Royal Navy and prevent the ships falling into enemy hands . The ships <unk> and Sultan Osman I became HMS Erin and Agincourt ( 1913 ) respectively . The seizure of the ships was followed by Germany 's gift to Turkey of two warships , the battlecruiser SMS Goeben and the cruiser SMS Breslau . This became an important factor in the decision of the Ottoman Empire to join the Central Powers . 
 Greece had ordered a dreadnought from Germany , but work stopped on the outbreak of war . The main armament for the Greek ship had been ordered in the United States , and the guns consequently equipped a class of British monitors . Greece in 1914 purchased two pre @-@ dreadnoughts from the United States Navy , renaming them Kilkis and Lemnos in Royal Hellenic Navy service . 
 = = = Super @-@ dreadnoughts = = = 
 Within five years of the commissioning of Dreadnought , a new generation of more powerful " super @-@ dreadnoughts " was being built . The first super @-@ dreadnoughts are generally considered to be the British Orion class . What made them ' super ' was the unprecedented 2 @,@ 000 @-@ ton jump in displacement , the introduction of the heavier 13 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 343 mm ) gun , and the placement of all the main armament on the centreline . In the four years between Dreadnought and Orion , displacement had increased by 25 % , and weight of broadside ( literally , the weight of ammunition that can be fired in one salvo ) had doubled . 
 British super @-@ dreadnoughts were joined by those built by other nations as well . The US Navy New York class , laid down in 1911 , carried 14 @-@ inch ( 356 mm ) guns in response to the British move and this calibre became standard . In Japan , two Fusō class super @-@ dreadnoughts were laid down in 1912 , followed by the two Ises in 1914 , with both classes carrying twelve 14 @-@ inch ( 356 mm ) guns . In 1917 , the Nagato class was ordered , the first dreadnoughts to mount 16 @-@ inch ( 406 mm ) guns , making them arguably the most powerful warships in the world . All were increasingly built from Japanese rather than imported components . In France , the Courbets were followed by three super @-@ dreadnoughts of the Bretagne class , carrying 340 mm ( 13 @.@ 4 in ) guns ; another five <unk> were canceled on the outbreak of World War I. The aforementioned Brazilian dreadnoughts sparked a small @-@ scale arms race in South America , as Argentina and Chile each ordered two super @-@ dreadnoughts from the US and the United Kingdom , respectively . Argentina 's Rivadavia and Moreno had a main armament equaling that of their Brazilian counterparts , but were much heavier and carried thicker armour . Both of Chile 's battleships were purchased by the British on the outbreak of the First World War . One , Almirante Latorre , was later repurchased by Chile . 
 Later British super @-@ dreadnoughts , principally the Queen Elizabeth class , dispensed with the midships turret , so weight and volume were freed for larger , oil @-@ fired boilers . The new 15 @-@ inch ( 381 @-@ mm ) gun gave greater firepower in spite of the loss of a turret , and there was a thicker armour belt and improved underwater protection . The class had a 25 @-@ knot ( 46 @-@ km / h ) design speed , and they were considered the first fast battleships . 
 The design weakness of super @-@ dreadnoughts , which distinguished them from post @-@ World War I designs , was armour disposition . Their design emphasized the vertical armour protection needed in short @-@ range battles , where shells would strike the sides of the ship , and assumed that an outer plate of armour would detonate any incoming shells so that crucial internal structures such as turret bases needed only light protection against splinters . This was in spite of the fact that these ships could engage the enemy at 20 @,@ 000 yd ( 18 @,@ 000 m ) , ranges where the shells would be descending at angles of up to thirty degrees ( ' plunging fire ' ) and so could drop behind the outer plate and strike the internal structures directly . Post @-@ war designs typically had 5 to 6 inches ( 130 to 150 mm ) of deck armour laid across the top of single , much thicker vertical plates to defend against this . The concept of zone of immunity became a major part of the thinking behind battleship design . Lack of underwater protection was also a weakness of these pre @-@ World War I designs which were developed before the use of torpedoes became widespread . 
 The United States Navy 's ' Standard type battleships ' , beginning with the Nevada class , were designed with long @-@ range engagements and plunging fire in mind ; the first of these was laid down in 1912 , four years before the Battle of Jutland taught the dangers of long @-@ range fire to European navies . Important features of the standard battleships were ' all or nothing ' armour and ' raft ' construction — based on a design philosophy which held that only those parts of the ship worth giving the thickest possible protection were worth armouring at all , and that the resulting armoured " raft " should contain enough reserve buoyancy to keep afloat the entire ship in the event the unarmoured bow and stern were thoroughly punctured and flooded . This design was proven in battle at the 1942 Naval Battle of Guadalcanal , when an ill @-@ timed turn by South Dakota silhouetted her to Japanese guns . In spite of receiving 26 heavy hits , her armoured raft remained untouched and she remained both afloat and operational at the end of action . 
 = = In action = = 
 The First World War was almost an anticlimax for the great dreadnought fleets . There was no decisive clash of modern battlefleets to compare with Tsushima . The role of battleships was marginal to the great land struggle in France and Russia ; it was equally marginal to the German war on commerce ( Handelskrieg ) and the Allied blockade . 
 By virtue of geography , the Royal Navy could keep the German High Seas Fleet bottled up in the North Sea with relative ease , but was unable to break the German superiority in the Baltic Sea . Both sides were aware , because of the greater number of British dreadnoughts , that a full fleet engagement would most likely result in a British victory . The German strategy was therefore to try to provoke an engagement on favourable terms : either inducing a part of the Grand Fleet to enter battle alone , or to fight a pitched battle near the German coast , where friendly minefields , torpedo boats , and submarines could even the odds . 
 The first two years of war saw conflict in the North Sea limited to skirmishes by battlecruisers at the Battle of Heligoland Bight and Battle of Dogger Bank , and raids on the English coast . In May 1916 , a further attempt to draw British ships into battle on favourable terms resulted in a clash of the battlefleets on 31 May to 1 June in the indecisive Battle of Jutland . 
 In the other naval theatres , there were no decisive pitched battles . In the Black Sea , Russian and Turkish battleships skirmished , but nothing more . In the Baltic Sea , action was largely limited to convoy raiding and the laying of defensive minefields . The Adriatic was in a sense the mirror of the North Sea : the Austro @-@ Hungarian dreadnought fleet remained bottled up by British and French blockading fleets . And in the Mediterranean , the most important use of battleships was in support of the amphibious assault at Gallipoli . 
 The course of the war illustrated the vulnerability of battleships to cheaper weapons . In September 1914 , the U @-@ boat threat to capital ships was demonstrated by successful attacks on British cruisers , including the sinking of three elderly British armoured cruisers by the German submarine U @-@ 9 in less than an hour . Mines continued to prove a threat when a month later the recently commissioned British super @-@ dreadnought HMS Audacious struck one and sank in 1914 . By the end of October , British strategy and tactics in the North Sea had changed to reduce the risk of U @-@ boat attack . Jutland was the only major clash of dreadnought battleship fleets in history , and the German plan for the battle relied on U @-@ boat attacks on the British fleet ; and the escape of the German fleet from the superior British firepower was effected by the German cruisers and destroyers closing on British battleships , causing them to turn away to avoid the threat of torpedo attack . Further near @-@ misses from submarine attacks on battleships led to growing concern in the Royal Navy about the vulnerability of battleships . 
 For the German part , the High Seas Fleet determined not to engage the British without the assistance of submarines , and since submarines were more needed for commerce raiding , the fleet stayed in port for much of the remainder of the war . Other theatres showed the role of small craft in damaging or destroying dreadnoughts . The two Austrian dreadnoughts lost in 1918 were the casualties of Italian torpedo boats and frogmen . 
 = = Battleship building from 1914 onwards = = 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 The outbreak of World War I largely halted the dreadnought arms race as funds and technical resources were diverted to more pressing priorities . The foundries which produced battleship guns were dedicated instead to the production of land @-@ based artillery , and shipyards were flooded with orders for small ships . The weaker naval powers engaged in the Great War — France , Austria @-@ Hungary , Italy and Russia — suspended their battleship programmes entirely . The United Kingdom and Germany continued building battleships and battlecruisers but at a reduced pace . 
 In the United Kingdom , Fisher returned to his old post as First Sea Lord ; he had been created 1st Baron Fisher in 1909 , taking the motto Fear God and dread nought . This , combined with a government moratorium on battleship building , meant a renewed focus on the battlecruiser . Fisher resigned in 1915 following arguments about the Gallipoli Campaign with the First Lord of the Admiralty , Winston Churchill . 
 The final units of the Revenge and Queen Elizabeth classes were completed , though the last two battleships of the Revenge class were redesigned as battlecruisers of the Renown class . Fisher followed these ships with the even more extreme Courageous class ; very fast and heavily armed ships with minimal , 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) armour , called ' large light cruisers ' to get around a Cabinet ruling against new capital ships . Fisher 's mania for speed culminated in his suggestion for HMS Incomparable , a mammoth , lightly armoured battlecruiser . 
 In Germany , two units of the pre @-@ war Bayern class were gradually completed , but the other two laid down were still unfinished by the end of the War . Hindenburg , also laid down before the start of the war , was completed in 1917 . The Mackensen class , designed in 1914 – 15 , were begun but never finished . 
 = = = Post @-@ war = = = 
 In spite of the lull in battleship building during the World War , the years 1919 – 1922 saw the threat of a renewed naval arms race between the United Kingdom , Japan and the US . The Battle of Jutland exerted a huge influence over the designs produced in this period . The first ships which fit into this picture are the British Admiral class , designed in 1916 . Jutland finally persuaded the Admiralty that lightly armoured battlecruisers were too vulnerable , and therefore the final design of the Admirals incorporated much @-@ increased armour , increasing displacement to 42 @,@ 000 tons . The initiative in creating the new arms race lay with the Japanese and United States navies . The United States Naval Appropriations Act of 1916 authorized the construction of 156 new ships , including ten battleships and six battlecruisers . For the first time , the United States Navy was threatening the British global lead . This programme was started slowly ( in part because of a desire to learn lessons from Jutland ) , and never fulfilled entirely . The new American ships ( the Colorado @-@ class battleships and Lexington @-@ class battlecruisers ) , took a qualitative step beyond the British Queen Elizabeth class and Admiral classes by mounting 16 @-@ inch ( 406 mm ) guns . 
 At the same time , the Imperial Japanese Navy was finally gaining authorization for its ' eight @-@ eight battlefleet ' . The Nagato class , authorized in 1916 , carried eight 16 @-@ inch guns like their American counterparts . The next year 's naval bill authorized two more battleships and two more battlecruisers . The battleships , which became the Tosa class , were to carry ten 16 @-@ inch guns . The battlecruisers , the Amagi class , also carried ten 16 @-@ inch guns and were designed to be capable of 30 knots , capable of beating both the British <unk> and the US Navy 's Lexington @-@ class battlecruisers . 
 Matters took a further turn for the worse in 1919 when Woodrow Wilson proposed a further expansion of the United States Navy , asking for funds for an additional ten battleships and six battlecruisers in addition to the completion of the 1916 programme ( the South Dakota class not yet started ) . In response , the Diet of Japan finally agreed to the completion of the ' eight @-@ eight fleet ' , incorporating a further four battleships . These ships , the Kii class would displace 43 @,@ 000 tons ; the next design , the Number 13 class , would have carried 18 @-@ inch ( 457 mm ) guns . Many in the Japanese navy were still dissatisfied , calling for an ' eight @-@ eight @-@ eight ' fleet with 24 modern battleships and battlecruisers . 
 The British , impoverished by World War I , faced the prospect of slipping behind the US and Japan . No ships had been begun since the Admiral class , and of those only HMS Hood had been completed . A June 1919 Admiralty plan outlined a post @-@ war fleet with 33 battleships and eight battlecruisers , which could be built and sustained for £ 171 million a year ( approximately £ 7 @.@ 09 billion today ) ; only £ 84 million was available . The Admiralty then demanded , as an absolute minimum , a further eight battleships . These would have been the G3 battlecruisers , with 16 @-@ inch guns and high speed , and the N3 @-@ class battleships , with 18 @-@ inch ( 457 mm ) guns . Its navy severely limited by the Treaty of Versailles , Germany did not participate in this three @-@ way naval building competition . Most of the German dreadnought fleet was scuttled at Scapa Flow by its crews in 1919 ; the remainder were handed over as war prizes . 
 The major naval powers avoided the cripplingly expensive expansion programmes by negotiating the Washington Naval Treaty in 1922 . The Treaty laid out a list of ships , including most of the older dreadnoughts and almost all the newer ships under construction , which were to be scrapped or otherwise put out of use . It furthermore declared a ' building holiday ' during which no new battleships or battlecruisers were to be laid down , save for the British Nelson class . The ships which survived the treaty , including the most modern super @-@ dreadnoughts of all three navies , formed the bulk of international capital ship strength through the 1920s and 1930s and , with some modernisation , into World War II . The ships built under the terms of the Washington Treaty ( and subsequently the London Treaties in 1930 and 1936 ) to replace outdated vessels were known as treaty battleships . 
 From this point on , the term ' dreadnought ' became less widely used . Most pre @-@ dreadnought battleships were scrapped or hulked after World War I , so the term ' dreadnought ' became less necessary . 
 = Pennsylvania Route 97 ( Adams County ) = 
 Pennsylvania Route 97 ( PA 97 ) is a state highway in the U.S. state of Pennsylvania . Known for most of its length as Baltimore Pike , the highway runs 9 @.@ 363 miles ( 15 @.@ 068 km ) from the Maryland state line near Littlestown , where the highway continues as Maryland Route 97 ( MD 97 ) , northwest to U.S. Route 15 ( US 15 ) near Gettysburg . PA 97 connects Gettysburg and Littlestown in southeastern Adams County . The highway also links those communities with Westminster and Baltimore . From PA 97 's northern end , Baltimore Pike continues toward Gettysburg through the Gettysburg Battlefield Historic District , where it provides access to the Gettysburg Museum and Visitor Center . 
 Baltimore Pike was built as a turnpike in the early 19th century to connect Gettysburg , Littlestown , and Baltimore . The turnpike was a prominent linear feature during the 1863 Battle of Gettysburg despite not being the focus of a particular skirmish . Baltimore Pike was designated one of the original legislative routes in the early 1910s and became the northernmost part of US 140 in the late 1920s . The U.S. Highway was widened and resurfaced in the 1940s . When the US 140 designation was retired in the late 1970s , the highway became PA 97 to match the adjacent Maryland highway . With the creation of PA 97 , the route had its northern terminus at the US 15 interchange while Baltimore Pike north of there became unnumbered . 
 = = Route description = = 
 PA 97 begins at the Maryland state line in Germany Township . The highway continues south as MD 97 ( Littlestown Pike ) toward Westminster . PA 97 heads northwest along two @-@ lane Baltimore Pike . The highway crosses Piney Creek and enters the borough of Littlestown , through which the highway follows Queen Street . PA 97 intersects PA 194 ( King Street ) in the center of town . The state highway becomes Baltimore Pike again on leaving Littlestown and re @-@ entering Germany Township . PA 97 crosses Alloway Creek into Mount Joy Township . The highway crosses Plum Creek east of the hamlet of Germantown and Littles Run within Two Taverns . PA 97 widens to a four @-@ lane divided highway at its crossing of Plum Run just south of Lake Heritage , which is also the name of the surrounding residential development . The state highway passes north of The Outlet Shoppes at Gettysburg and reaches its northern terminus at its diamond interchange with US 15 . Baltimore Pike continues northwest through the Gettysburg Battlefield Historic District toward the Gettysburg Museum and Visitor Center , Evergreen Cemetery , several units of Gettysburg National Military Park , and the borough of Gettysburg . 
 = = History = = 
 The Gettysburg and Petersburg Turnpike Company was chartered in March 1807 to construct an artificial road from Gettysburg through Petersburg ( now Littlestown ) to the Maryland state line along the stagecoach route between Baltimore and Chambersburg . Baltimore Pike , as it was known colloquially , was a prominent linear feature during the Battle of Gettysburg as it lay along the side of Cemetery Hill and to the west of Culp 's Hill . Cemetery Hill served as the tip of the Union forces ' " fishhook " defensive formation throughout the three @-@ day battle . Baltimore Pike ran parallel to the Union defensive lines during the Battle of East Cemetery Hill , a Confederate offensive against Culp 's Hill and Cemetery Hill that started late on July 2 and finished early on July 3 , 1863 . During and in the time after the battle , the turnpike was lined with several field hospitals , many of which were created in the homes and on the land of civilians such as Henry Spangler . 
 In May 1911 , the Pennsylvania General Assembly passed the Sproul Roads Act , which created the Pennsylvania state road system and allowed the state to take over turnpikes . Baltimore Pike was designated Legislative Route 42 from the Maryland state line northwest to the borough of Gettysburg . The Sproul Roads Act was challenged as being unconstitutional , but the Pennsylvania Supreme Court upheld the legislation on June 27 , 1913 . The state took over the Gettysburg and Petersburg Turnpike and abolished tolls the next day , just in time for the March to Gettysburg ahead of the 1913 Gettysburg reunion . Baltimore Pike was improved as a macadam road from the state line to Gettysburg by 1916 . The highway from the state line to US 15 at the intersection of Baltimore Street and Steinwehr Avenue ( then Emmitsburg Road ) was designated the northernmost part of US 140 in 1927 . US 140 was widened and resurfaced with concrete from Gettysburg to Littlestown between 1941 and 1943 . The remainder of the highway through Littlestown to the Maryland state line was widened and resurfaced with asphalt between 1943 and 1953 . US 140 's interchange with modern US 15 was completed when the then – two @-@ lane US 15 bypass opened in June 1963 , immediately before the centennial of the Battle of Gettysburg . 
 In 1977 , plans were made for US 140 to be decommissioned , with PA 97 to replace the section in Pennsylvania . This proposal was made in order to eliminate short routes from the United States Numbered Highways system . The American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials approved the removal of the US 140 designation on October 28 , 1977 . In December 1978 , the borough of Littlestown protested the renumbering of US 140 to PA 97 . When the US 140 designation was retired on January 1 , 1979 , it was replaced by MD 140 from Baltimore to Westminster , and Maryland and Pennsylvania coordinated to have matching routes 97 on both sides of the state line between Westminster and Gettysburg . The northern terminus of PA 97 was located at the US 15 interchange , while the stretch of the former US 140 north into Gettysburg became unnumbered Baltimore Pike . With this change , the US 140 signs were removed from the square in downtown Gettysburg , and no signs directing motorists to PA 97 were put in their place . This move hurt businesses in the Littlestown area as motorists were unable to get to them without a marked route . The state did put signs directing motorists to PA 97 at the US 15 interchange and at the intersection of US 15 Business and Baltimore Street ; however , signs for PA 97 were not placed in the square due to opposition from local officials in Gettysburg who did not want sign clutter in the square . The stretch of Baltimore Pike from the bypass to US 15 Business became State Route 2035 by 1989 . PA 97 and the adjacent portion of Baltimore Pike were widened through the US 15 interchange in 2000 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Adams County . 
 = Henry Wrigley = 
 Air Vice Marshal Henry Neilson Wrigley , CBE , DFC , AFC ( 21 April 1892 – 14 September 1987 ) was a senior commander in the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) . A pioneering flyer and aviation scholar , he piloted the first trans @-@ Australia flight from Melbourne to Darwin in 1919 , and afterwards laid the groundwork for the RAAF 's air power doctrine . During World War I , Wrigley joined the Australian Flying Corps and saw combat with No. 3 Squadron on the Western Front , earning the Distinguished Flying Cross ; he later commanded the unit and published a history of its wartime exploits . He was awarded the Air Force Cross for his 1919 cross @-@ country flight . 
 Wrigley was a founding member of the RAAF in 1921 and held a variety of staff posts in the ensuing years . In 1936 , he was promoted to group captain and took command of RAAF Station Laverton . Raised to air commodore soon after the outbreak of World War II , he became Air Member for Personnel in November 1940 . One of his tasks was organising the newly established Women 's Auxiliary Australian Air Force and selecting its director , Clare Stevenson , in 1941 . He was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire the same year . Wrigley served as Air Officer Commanding RAAF Overseas Headquarters , London , from September 1942 until his retirement from the military in June 1946 . He died in 1987 at the age of ninety @-@ five . His writings on air power were collected and published posthumously as The Decisive Factor in 1990 . 
 = = Early life and World War I = = 
 Wrigley was born on 21 April 1892 in Collingwood , a suburb of Melbourne , to Henry and Beatrice Wrigley . He was educated at Richmond Central School and at Melbourne High School , where he joined the cadets . Studying at the University of Melbourne , he became a state school teacher and a member of the militia prior to the outbreak of World War I. He joined the Australian Flying Corps ( AFC ) on 5 October 1916 . Wrigley trained as a pilot under the tutelage of Lieutenant Eric Harrison at Central Flying School in Point Cook , Victoria , before departing Melbourne on 25 October aboard a troopship bound for Europe . 
 After further training in England , Wrigley was posted to France and flew on the Western Front with No. 3 Squadron AFC ( also known until 1918 as No. 69 Squadron , Royal Flying Corps ) . Operating Royal Aircraft Factory R.E.8s , the unit was engaged in reconnaissance , artillery @-@ spotting and ground support duties . Having been promoted to captain , Wrigley was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross for his " exceptional devotion to duty " , in particular his persistence in pressing home an attack against enemy infantry on 29 October 1918 in the face of " intense machine gun and rifle fire " ; the honour was promulgated in the London Gazette on 3 June 1919 . Wrigley later observed that most wartime aircraft were " impossible to fight in " , and that senior officers were " too occupied with coaxing aeroplanes into the air and teaching pilots to bring them down again without breaking their necks " to consider the wider implications of air power . 
 = = Between the wars = = 
 Wrigley became No. 3 Squadron 's commanding officer in January 1919 , and returned to Australia on 6 May . Later that year he took part in the first transcontinental flight across Australia , from Melbourne to Darwin , to coincide with the first England to Australia flight . Accompanied by his mechanic and former schoolmate , Sergeant Arthur " Spud " Murphy , Wrigley departed Point Cook on 16 November and arrived in Port Darwin on 12 December , having travelled some 4 @,@ 500 kilometres ( 2 @,@ 800 mi ) in forty @-@ seven flying hours . The men flew in a single @-@ engined Royal Aircraft Factory B.E.2 , with no radio , over unmapped and often hazardous terrain , and surveyed seventeen potential landing fields along the way . Wrigley considered the choice of Murphy as his cohort " a particularly happy one " but called the aircraft they were assigned " an obsolete type , even for training purposes " , while conceding that " it was structurally sound and airworthy . " In recognition of their achievement the men were each awarded the Air Force Cross , gazetted on 12 July 1920 . Such was the perceived danger of the expedition that while making preparations for the flight back they received a telegram from the Defence Department ordering them to dismantle the B.E.2 and return with it by ship . 
 On 1 January 1920 , Wrigley transferred to the Australian Air Corps ( AAC ) , a temporary organisation formed by the Army following disbandment of the wartime AFC . He was appointed adjutant at Central Flying School the following month . In 1921 , Wrigley joined the newly established Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) as a flight lieutenant . Popularly known as " <unk> " , he was one of the original twenty @-@ one officers on the Air Force 's strength at its formation that March . For the next seven years he held staff posts at RAAF Headquarters , Melbourne , beginning with the position of staff officer to the Director of Personnel and Training . On 5 July 1922 , Wrigley married Marjorie Rees ; the couple had a son and a daughter . The same month , he replaced Flight Lieutenant Frank McNamara as Staff Officer ( Operations and Intelligence ) . He served as RAAF Training Officer from March 1923 to April 1925 — during which time he was promoted to squadron leader — before being appointed Director of Organisation and Staff Duties . In November 1927 , he took part in an attempt to make the first night flight from Sydney to Melbourne . Taking off from RAAF Station Richmond in an Airco DH.9 , Wrigley and his co @-@ pilot were in the air for six hours and covered 345 miles ( 555 km ) when a broken fuel line forced them to land for repairs ; they completed the journey the following day . 
 Wrigley travelled to England in 1928 to attend RAF Staff College , Andover , becoming one of the first RAAF officers to complete the course . Remaining in England , he was appointed Australian Air Liaison Officer to the Air Ministry in 1929 . That October , he initiated correspondence with the British Air Council to discuss a proposal for the RAAF to adopt as its own the Royal Air Force 's motto Per <unk> Ad Astra ; informal approval was granted by letter to Wrigley in March 1930 . Returning to Australia , he became Director of Operations and Intelligence at RAAF Headquarters in October 1930 , and Director of Organisation and Staff Duties in December 1931 . He was promoted to wing commander in December 1932 . In 1935 he published his history of No. 3 Squadron , The Battle Below , which was considered an authoritative treatment on the subject of army co @-@ operation . He was promoted group captain in July 1936 , and that October took over as commanding officer of RAAF Station Laverton , Victoria , from Group Captain McNamara . Wrigley handed over the station 's command to Group Captain Adrian Cole in February 1939 . In May 1939 , Wrigley served as the senior expert assessor on the panel of an inquiry into three recent accidents involving Avro Ansons ; the full report handed down in October found that training on the type followed the syllabus , but that pilots needed more practical experience in dealing with in @-@ flight incidents , as human error was the likely explanation for at least one crash . 
 = = World War II = = 
 As part of the RAAF 's reorganisation following the outbreak of World War II , No. 1 Group was formed under Wrigley 's command in Melbourne on 20 November 1939 , to oversee the operations of air bases and units in Victoria , South Australia and Tasmania . Promoted air commodore , in 1940 Wrigley served as Air Officer Commanding ( AOC ) Southern Area , the successor organisation to No. 1 Group , before taking up the position of Air Member for Personnel ( AMP ) in November that year . He was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire in the 1941 New Year Honours . As AMP , Wrigley 's responsibilities included organising the Women 's Auxiliary Australian Air Force ( WAAAF ) , established on 25 March 1941 as the first uniformed women 's branch of an armed service in the country . He believed that recruiting servicewomen was essential to augment the many ground staff required to support the war effort , and considered that while such an organisation should be constitutionally separate from the RAAF , its members should be closely integrated within the current force structure . 
 The Chief of the Air Staff ( CAS ) was at this time an RAF officer , Air Chief Marshal Sir Charles Burnett , who hoped to see his daughter Sybil @-@ Jean , a veteran of Britain 's Women 's Auxiliary Air Force , take charge of the WAAAF . Wrigley successfully argued against this , telling Burnett that there had already been " enough public outcry " over a non @-@ Australian being named CAS , and there would be " a further public outcry " if anyone other than an Australian was appointed WAAAF Director . On 21 May , he selected Berlei executive Clare Stevenson as WAAAF Director , passing over temporary appointee Mary Bell , wife of a serving RAAF group captain . Wrigley chose Stevenson on the basis of her management background and because she was not a " socialite " . Bell , who was offered the position of Deputy Director , chose to resign from the WAAAF on learning of Stevenson 's appointment , but Wrigley later convinced her to rejoin . Meanwhile , Wrigley played a leading part in the development of the Air Training Corps , formed in April 1941 to facilitate basic training for youths aged sixteen to eighteen who hoped to become RAAF aircrew . 
 Wrigley 's promotion to acting air vice marshal was announced in May 1941 , making him only the third member of the RAAF — after Richard Williams and Stanley Goble — to attain this rank . In September 1942 , he was posted to London to take over from Frank McNamara as AOC RAAF Overseas Headquarters . For a time , he was involved in a tug @-@ of @-@ war with Air Marshal Williams over just who was in charge . Williams , who commanded Overseas Headquarters at its inception in December 1941 , with McNamara as his deputy , had subsequently been appointed as the RAAF 's representative to Washington , DC , leaving McNamara in charge of the London office until Wrigley arrived . The Minister for Air , Arthur Drakeford , was in favour of Williams commanding the RAAF offices in both the US and UK while Wrigley acted for him in London , despite Wrigley having been appointed AOC . Wrigley 's diary recorded that when Williams returned to London in October 1942 to attend a conference , he began " throwing his weight around " and " intriguing to have himself made AOC , and possibly AOC in C [ Air Officer Commanding @-@ in @-@ Chief ] of all RAAF units and personnel outside Australia and the SW Pacific " . Although Williams departed England in January 1943 , the matter was only fully laid to rest in mid @-@ 1943 , when the CAS , Air Vice Marshal George Jones , advised Williams that it was impractical for him to command offices in both Washington and London . 
 As AOC RAAF Overseas Headquarters , Wrigley was responsible for looking after the interests of RAAF aircrew stationed in the European and the Middle Eastern theatres , liaising between the British Air Ministry and the Australian government regarding technical developments and information on the war in the Pacific , and negotiating revisions to the terms of the Empire Air Training Scheme ( EATS ) . The role had little influence on the deployment of Australian personnel for the air offensive in Europe , who were subject to RAF policy and strategy even when they belonged to RAAF squadrons . According to the official history of Australia in the war , Wrigley and his predecessors could hardly do more than " retard the centrifugal forces affecting Australian disposition , and repair the worst administrative difficulties arising from wide dispersion " . Nevertheless , Wrigley became a familiar and popular figure for the thousands of Australian airmen who passed through London during the war , and was known to take off his jacket and tend bar at <unk> , the headquarters ' watering hole . An EATS graduate later remarked that " under Air Vice @-@ Marshal Wrigley we got tremendous service ... I was in North Africa , Italy , Sardinia , Corsica and then back in the United Kingdom . We got our mail , we got our comforts ... Not only that , when some cow went and pinched 100 quid from me when I was on leave in London , the next day , with a shaking hand , I was able to sign for another 100 quid and have a good time . " 
 In March 1943 , following negotiations that had begun the previous year , Wrigley signed a revision of EATS that finally recognised Australia 's " national aspirations " regarding concentration of her airmen in RAAF squadrons as opposed to them being scattered throughout RAF units , reasonable prospects of promotion and rotation for staff , and pay and other conditions of service confirmed as being per RAAF stipulations . The official history contended that " for the most part Australia was still left chasing a dream rather than a reality " , as many clauses in the agreement were " subject to operational exigencies " and to be adhered to only " as far as possible " . Wrigley toured the Mediterranean in September , visiting No. 459 Squadron in the Middle East , and travelling to Sicily to interview ground staff of No. 450 Squadron over their grievances concerning lack of promotion and leave ; his presence was considered to have defused this situation . 
 Wrigley 's son Ronald enlisted in the Royal Australian Navy in September 1944 , and served until his demobilisation in 1946 . The end of hostilities in Europe on 7 May 1945 raised a major logistical challenge for Wrigley as the senior officer responsible for some 13 @,@ 500 RAAF personnel spread across Britain , the Mediterranean , and the continent , only a minority of whom were in nominally Australian squadrons , the bulk serving with RAF establishments . " The task was energetically met " , according to the official history ; fewer than 1 @,@ 000 RAAF personnel remained in RAF units by 1 September , although repatriation continued through into the new year . 
 = = Retirement and legacy = = 
 Wrigley was summarily retired from the RAAF in 1946 , along with other senior commanders and veterans of World War I , ostensibly to make way for the advancement of younger and equally capable officers . Keenly disappointed with the decision , Wrigley was officially discharged on 6 June . He found it difficult to secure civilian employment because , " by the time I got back , all the worthwhile jobs round Australia had been snapped up by people , not only air force people but other people on the spot " . After an unsuccessful attempt to run his own retail business , he " eventually earned a living by taking on some administrative jobs which carried on for a few years " . Wrigley was made an honorary air vice marshal in July 1956 . In 1966 he became executive officer of the Victorian Overseas Foundation , and later a trustee . He published Aircraft and Economic Development : The RAAF Contribution through the Royal Aeronautical Society in 1969 . In March 1971 , he was among a select group of surviving founding members of the RAAF who attended a celebratory dinner at the Hotel Canberra to mark the service 's Golden Jubilee ; his fellow guests included Air Marshal Sir Richard Williams , Air Vice Marshal Bill Anderson , Air Commodore Hippolyte De La Rue , and Wing Commander Sir Lawrence Wackett . After the death of his first wife , Marjorie , Wrigley married Zenda Edwards on 5 January 1972 . In December 1979 , he was the guest of honour at celebrations marking sixty years of flying at Darwin ; the RAAF flew him from Point Cook to Darwin to commemorate his historic 1919 flight with Arthur Murphy . Wrigley wrote a history of the Victorian branch of the United Services Institution in 1980 . Aged ninety @-@ five , he died in Melbourne on 14 September 1987 . 
 Throughout his life , Wrigley was an " inveterate note @-@ taker " who compiled extensive documentation concerning the theory and practice of air power , on which he lectured among colleagues in the RAAF during the 1920s . The concepts that he propagated included air superiority , the need for an air force to be separate from the other branches of the armed services , control of the air as a means of carrying out offensive strikes , and the substitution of aerial forces for ground troops . While arguing for the independence of the air arm , Wrigley was quick to dispel any notion that it would simply " arrive from God knows where , drop [ its ] bombs God knows where , and go off again God knows where " ; rather it should act in concert with the army and navy in furtherance of government policy . He is thus credited with laying the foundations for the RAAF 's modern air power doctrine , which would eventually be codified as the Air Power Manual in 1990 . Wrigley 's widow bequeathed twenty volumes of his writings , maps and photographs to the RAAF Museum at Point Cook after his death ; they were edited and published by Air Commodore Brendan O <unk> and Wing Commander Alan Stephens in 1990 as The Decisive Factor : Air Power Doctrine by Air Vice @-@ Marshal H.N. Wrigley . In 1996 , Wrigley 's former residence as commanding officer of RAAF Station Laverton prior to World War II was christened Wrigley House in his honour . His name is also borne by Henry Wrigley Drive , approaching Darwin International Airport . In March 2010 the Chief of Air Force , Air Marshal Mark <unk> , established the AVM H.N. Wrigley Prize for air power analysis , as part of the annual Chief of Air Force Essay Competition . 
 = Green Knight = 
 The Green Knight is a character in the 14th @-@ century Arthurian poem Sir Gawain and the Green Knight and the related work The Greene Knight . His true name is revealed to be Bercilak de Hautdesert in Sir Gawain , while The Greene Knight names him " Bredbeddle " . The Green Knight later appears as one of Arthur 's greatest champions in the fragmentary ballad " King Arthur and King Cornwall " , again under the name " Bredbeddle " . In Sir Gawain and the Green Knight , Bercilak is transformed into the Green Knight by Morgan le Fay , a traditional adversary of King Arthur , in order to test his court . In The Green Knight he is transformed by a different woman for the same purpose . In both stories he sends his wife to seduce Gawain as a further test . " King Arthur and King Cornwall " portrays him as an exorcist and one of the most powerful knights in Arthur 's court . 
 In Sir Gawain , the Green Knight is so called because his skin and clothes are green . The meaning of his greenness has puzzled scholars since the discovery of the poem , who identify him variously as the Green Man , a vegetation being in medieval art ; a recollection of a figure from Celtic mythology ; a Christian symbol ; or the Devil himself . The medieval scholar C. S. Lewis said the character was " as vivid and concrete as any image in literature . " J. R. R. Tolkien called him the " most difficult character " to interpret in the introduction to his edition of Sir Gawain and the Green Knight . His major role in Arthurian literature includes being a judge and tester of knights , and as such the other characters see him as friendly but terrifying and somewhat mysterious . 
 = = Historical context = = 
 The earliest appearance of the Green Knight is in the late 14th century alliterative poem Sir Gawain and the Green Knight , which survives in only one manuscript along with other poems by the same author , the so @-@ called Pearl Poet . This poet was a contemporary of Geoffrey Chaucer , writer of The Canterbury Tales , although the two wrote in different parts of England . The later poem , The Greene Knight , is a late medieval rhyming romance that likely predates its only surviving copy : the 17th @-@ century Percy Folio . The other work featuring the Green Knight , the later ballad " King Arthur and King Cornwall " , also survives only in the Percy Folio manuscript . Its date of composition is conjectural ; it may be a version of an earlier story , though it is also possibly a product of the 17th century . 
 = = Role in Arthurian literature = = 
 In Sir Gawain and the Green Knight , the Green Knight appears before Arthur 's court during a Christmas feast , holding a bough of holly in one hand and a battle axe in the other . Despite disclaim of war , the knight issues a challenge : he will allow one man to strike him once with his axe , under the condition that he return the blow the following year . At first , Arthur takes up the challenge , but Gawain takes his place and decapitates the Green Knight , who retrieves his head and tells Gawain to meet him at the Green Chapel at the stipulated time . 
 The next time the Knight appears , he appears as Bercilak de <unk> , lord of a large castle , Gawain 's host before his arrival at the Green Chapel . At Bercilak 's castle , Gawain is submitted to tests of his loyalty and chastity , wherein Bercilak sends his wife to seduce Gawain and arranges that each time Bercilak gains prey in hunting , or Gawain any gift in the castle , each shall exchange his gain for the other 's . At New Year 's Day , Gawain departs to the Green Chapel , and bends to receive his blow , only to have the Green Knight feint two blows , then barely nick him on the third . He then reveals that he is Bercilak , and that Morgan le Fay had given him the double identity to test Gawain and Arthur . 
 The Greene Knight tells the same story as Sir Gawain and the Green Knight , with a few differences . Notably , the knight , here named " Bredbeddle " , is only wearing green , not green @-@ skinned himself . The poem also states the knight has been asked by his wife 's mother ( not Morgan in this version ) to trick Gawain . He agrees because he knows his wife is secretly in love with Gawain , and hopes to deceive both . Gawain falters in accepting a girdle from her , and the Green Knight 's purpose is fulfilled in a small sense . In the end , he acknowledges Gawain 's overall ability and asks to accompany him to Arthur 's court . 
 In King Arthur and King Cornwall , the Green Knight again appears as Bredbeddle , and is depicted as one of Arthur 's knights . He offers to help Arthur fight a mysterious sprite ( under the control of the magician , King Cornwall ) which has entered his chamber . When physical attacks fail , Bredbeddle uses a sacred text to subdue it . The Green Knight eventually gains so much control over the sprite through this text that he convinces it to take a sword and strike off its master 's head . 
 = = Etymologies = = 
 The name " Bertilak " may derive from <unk> , a Celtic word meaning " churl " ( i.e. <unk> , unmannerly ) , or from " <unk> " , meaning " contentious " . The Old French word <unk> translates as " Bertilak " in the Arthurian tale Merlin from the Lancelot @-@ Grail Cycle of Arthurian legend . Notably , the ' <unk> ' prefix means ' bright ' , and the ' <unk> ' can mean either ' lake ' or " play , sport , fun , etc " . " Hautdesert " probably comes from a mix of both Old French and Celtic words meaning " High Wasteland " or " High Hermitage " . It may also have a connection with <unk> meaning " disinherited " ( i.e. from the Round Table ) . 
 = = Similar or derivative characters = = 
 = = = Green Knights in other stories = = = 
 Characters similar to the Green Knight appear in several other works . In Thomas Malory 's Le Morte d 'Arthur , for example , Gawain 's brother Gareth defeats four brothers in different coloured armour , including a " Grene <unk> " , Sir <unk> . The three who survive the encounter eventually join the Round Table and appear several further times in the text . The stories of Saladin feature a certain " Green Knight " ; a Sicilian warrior in a shield vert and a helmet adorned with stag horns . Saladin tries to make him part of his personal guard . Similarly , a " Chevalier Vert " appears in the Chronicle of Ernoul during the recollection of events following the capture of Jerusalem in 1187 ; here , he is identified as a Spanish knight who earned this nickname from the Muslims due to his eccentric apparel . 
 Taking this into consideration , scientists have considered a connection to Islamic tales . The figure of Al @-@ Khidr ( Arabic : <unk> ) in the Qur 'an is called the " Green Man " . He tests Moses three times by doing seemingly evil acts , which are eventually revealed to be noble deeds to prevent greater evils or reveal great goods . Both the Arthurian Green Knight and Al @-@ Khidr serve as teachers to holy and upright men ( Gawain / Moses ) , who thrice put their faith and obedience to the test . It has been suggested that the character of the Green Knight may be a literary descendant of Al @-@ Khidr , brought to Europe with the Crusaders and blended with Celtic and Arthurian imagery . 
 = = = Characters fulfilling similar roles = = = 
 The beheading game appears in a number of tales , the earliest being the Middle Irish tale Bricriu 's Feast . The challenger in this story is named " Fear " , a <unk> ( churl ) , and is identified as Cú Roí in disguise . He challenges three warriors to his game , only to have them run from the return blow , until the hero Cú Chulainn takes the challenge . With Cú Chulainn under his axe , this antagonist also feints three blows before letting the hero go . In the Irish version , the cloak of the churl is described as grey ( glas ) , which may also mean green . In the Life of Caradoc , a Middle French narrative embedded in the anonymous First Continuation of Chrétien de Troyes ' Perceval , the Story of the Grail , another similar challenge is issued . In this story , a notable difference is that Caradoc 's challenger is his father in disguise , come to test his honour . The French romances La Mule sans <unk> and Hunbaut and the Middle High German epic poem Diu Crone feature Gawain in beheading game <unk> furnishes an interesting twist : Gawain cuts off the man 's head , and then pulls off his magic cloak before he can replace it , causing his death . A similar story , this time attributed to Lancelot , appears in the 13th century French work <unk> . 
 The 15th @-@ century The Turke and Gowin begins with a Turk entering Arthur 's court and asking , " Is there any will , as a brother , To give a <unk> and take another ? " Gawain accepts the challenge , and is then forced to follow the Turk until he decides to return the blow . Through the many adventures they have together , the Turk , out of respect , asks the knight to cut off the Turk 's head , which Gawain does . The Turk , surviving , then praises Gawain and showers him with gifts . Sir Gawain and the Carle of Carlisle contains a scene in which the Carl , a lord , orders Gawain to strike him with his spear , and bends over to receive the blow . Gawain obliges , the Carl rises , laughing and unharmed , and , unlike in Sir Gawain and the Green Knight , no return blow is demanded or given . Among all these stories , Sir Gawain and the Green Knight is the only one with a completely green character , and the only one tying Morgan le Fay to his transformation . 
 Several stories also feature knights struggling to stave off the advances of voluptuous women , including Yder , the Lancelot @-@ Grail Cycle , Hunbaut , and The Knight of the Sword . The Green Knight parallel in these stories is a King testing a knight as to whether or not he will remain chaste in extreme circumstances . The woman he sends is sometimes his wife ( as in Yder ) , if he knows that she is unfaithful and will tempt other men ; in The Knight of the Sword the king sends his beautiful daughter . All characters playing the Green Knight 's role kill unfaithful knights who fail their tests . 
 = = Significance of the colour green = = 
 In English folklore and literature , green has traditionally been used to symbolize nature and its embodied attributes , namely those of fertility and rebirth . Oftentimes it is used to embody the supernatural or spiritual other world . In British folklore , the devil was sometimes toned green which may or may not play into the concept of the Green Man / Wild Man dichotomy of the Green Knight . Stories of the medieval period also portray the colour as representing love and the amorous in life , and the base , natural desires of man . Green is also known to have signified witchcraft , devilry and evil for its association with the fairies and spirits of early English folklore and for its association with decay and toxicity . The colour , when combined with gold , is sometimes seen as representing the fading of youth . In the Celtic tradition , green was avoided in clothing for its superstitious association with misfortune and death . Green can be seen in Sir Gawain and the Green Knight as signifying a transformation from good to evil and back again ; displaying both the spoiling and regenerative connotations of the colour . Given these varied and even contradictory interpretations of the colour green , its precise meaning in the poem remains ambiguous . 
 = = = Interpretations = = = 
 Of the many characters similar to him , the Green Knight of Sir Gawain is the first to be green . Because of his strange colour , some scholars believe him to be a manifestation of the Green Man figure common in medieval art , or as a representation of both the vitality and fearful unpredictability of nature . That he carries a green holly branch , and the comparison of his beard to a bush , has guided many scholars in this direction . The gold entwined in the cloth wrapped around his axe , combined with the green , gives him both a wild and an aristocratic air . Others see him as being an incarnation of the Devil . In one interpretation , it is thought that the Green Knight , as the " Lord of Hades " , has come to challenge the noble knights of King Arthur 's court . Sir Gawain , the bravest of the knights , therefore proves himself equal to Hercules in challenging the Knight , tying the story to ancient Greek mythology . Another possible interpretation of the Green Knight views him as combining elements from the Greek Hades and the Christian Messiah , at once representing both good and evil and life and death as self @-@ proliferating cycles . This interpretation embraces the positive and negative attributes of the colour green and ties in with the enigmatic motif of the poem . The description of the Green Knight upon his entrance to Arthur 's Court as " from neck to loin … strong and thickly made " is viewed by other scholars as homoerotic . 
 C.S. Lewis declared the Green Knight " as vivid and concrete as any image in literature " and further described him as : 
