 a living <unk> oppositorum ; half giant , yet wholly a " lovely " knight " ; as full of <unk> energy as old Karamazov , yet in his own house , as jolly as a Dickensian Christmas host ; now exhibiting a ferocity so gleeful that it is almost genial , and now a geniality so outrageous that it borders on the ferocious ; half boy or buffoon in his shouts and laughter and <unk> ; yet at the end judging Gawain with the tranquil superiority of an angelic being 
 The Green Knight could also be interpreted as a blend of two traditional figures in romance and medieval narratives , namely , " the literary green man " and the " literary wild man . " " The literary green man " signifies " youth , natural vitality , and love , " whereas the " literary wild man " represents the " hostility to knighthood , " " the demonic " and " death . " The Knight 's green skin connects the green of the costume to the green of the hair and beard , thus connecting the green man 's pleasant manners and significance into the wild man 's grotesque qualities . 
 = = = Jack in the green = = = 
 The Green Knight is also compared to the English holiday figure Jack in the green . Jack is part of a May Day holiday tradition in some parts of England , but his connection to the Knight is found mainly in the Derbyshire tradition of Castleton Garland . In this tradition , a kind of Jack in the green known as the Garland King is led through the town on a horse , wearing a bell @-@ shaped garland of flowers that covers his entire upper body , and followed by young girls dressed in white , who dance at various points along the route ( formerly the town 's <unk> , who still make the garland , also performed this role ) . On the top of the King 's garland is the " queen " , a posy of bright flowers . The King is also accompanied by his elegantly dressed female consort ( nowadays , confusingly , also known as the Queen ) ; played by a woman in recent times , until 1956 " the Woman " was always a man in woman 's clothing . At the end of the ceremony , the queen posy is taken off the garland , to be placed on the town 's war memorial . The Garland King then rides to the foot of the church tower where the garland is hauled up the side of the tower and impaled upon a pinnacle . Due to the nature imagery associated with the Green Knight , the ceremony has been interpreted as possibly deriving from his famous beheading in the Gawain poem . In this case , the posy 's removal would symbolise the loss of the knight 's head . 
 = = Green Chapel = = 
 In the Gawain poem , when the Knight is beheaded , he tells Gawain to meet him at the Green Chapel , saying that all nearby know where it is . Indeed , the guide which is to bring Gawain there from Bertilak 's castle grows very fearful as they near it and begs Gawain to turn back . The final meeting at the Green Chapel has led many scholars to draw religious connections , with the Knight fulfilling a priestly role with Gawain as a penitent . The Green Knight ultimately , in this interpretation , judges Gawain to be a worthy knight , and lets him live , playing a priest , God , and judge all at once . 
 The Chapel is seen in Gawain 's eyes as an evil place : foreboding , " the most accursed church " , " the place for the Devil to recite matins " ; but when the mysterious Knight allows Gawain to live , Gawain immediately assumes the role of penitent to a priest or judge , as in a genuine church . The Green Chapel may also be related to tales of fairy hills or knolls of earlier Celtic literature . Some scholars have wondered whether " Hautdesert " refers to the Green Chapel , as it means " High Hermitage " ; but such a connection is doubted by most scholars . As to the location of the Chapel , in the Greene Knight poem , Sir Bredbeddle 's living place is described as " the castle of <unk> " , leading some scholars to suggest a connection with Hutton Manor House in Somerset . Gawain 's journey leads him directly into the centre of the Pearl Poet 's dialect region , where the candidates for the locations of the Castle at Hautdesert and the Green Chapel stand . Hautdesert is thought to be in the area of Swythamley in northwest Midland , as it is in the writer 's dialect area , and matches the land features described in the poem . The area is also known to have housed all of the animals hunted by Bertilak ( deer , boar , fox ) in the 14th century . The Green Chapel is thought to be in either Lud 's Church or Wetton Mill , as these areas closely match the descriptions given by the author . Ralph Elliott for example located the chapel the knight searches for near ( " two myle henne " <unk> ) the old manor house at Swythamley Park at the bottom of a valley ( " <unk> of the <unk> <unk> " <unk> ) on a hillside ( " <unk> a <unk> on the <unk> , on thi <unk> <unk> " <unk> ) in a large fissure ( " an olde <unk> , / or a <unk> of an olde <unk> " <unk> @-@ 83 ) . 
 = Art in early modern Scotland = 
 Art in early modern Scotland includes all forms of artistic production within the modern borders of Scotland , between the adoption of the Renaissance in the early sixteenth century to the beginnings of the Enlightenment in the mid @-@ eighteenth century . 
 Devotional art before the Reformation included books and images commissioned in the Netherlands . Before the Reformation in the mid @-@ sixteenth century the interiors of Scottish churches were often elaborate and colourful , with sacrament houses and monumental effigies . Scotland 's ecclesiastical art paid a heavy toll as a result of Reformation iconoclasm , with the almost total loss of medieval stained glass , religious sculpture and paintings . 
 In about 1500 the Scottish monarchy turned to the recording of royal likenesses in panel portraits . More impressive are the works or artists imported from the continent , particularly the Netherlands . The tradition of royal portrait painting in Scotland was probably disrupted by the minorities and regencies it underwent for much of the sixteenth century , but it flourished after the Reformation . James VI employed Flemish artists Arnold Bronckorst and Adrian Vanson , who have left behind a visual record of the king and major figures at the court . The first significant native artist was George Jamesone , who was succeeded by a series of portrait painters as the fashion moved down the social scale to lairds and burgesses . 
 The loss of ecclesiastical patronage that resulted from the Reformation created a crisis for native craftsmen and artists , who turned to secular patrons . One result of this was the flourishing of Scottish Renaissance painted ceilings and walls . Other forms of domestic decoration included tapestries and stone and wood carving . In the first half of the eighteenth century there was an increasing professionalisation and organisation of art . Large numbers of artists took the grand tour to Italy . The Academy of St. Luke was founded as a society for artists in 1729 . It included among its members Allan Ramsay , who emerged as one of the most important British artists of the era . 
 = = Devotional art = = 
 Devotional art acquired from the Netherlands in the later fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries included the images of St Catherine and St John brought to Dunkeld ; Hugo van Der Goes 's altarpiece for the Trinity College Church in Edinburgh , commissioned by James III , and the work after which the Flemish Master of James IV of Scotland is named . There are also a relatively large number of elaborate devotional books from the late fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries , usually produced in the Netherlands and France for Scottish patrons . These include the prayer book commissioned by Robert Blackadder , Bishop of Glasgow , between 1484 and 1492 and the Flemish illustrated book of hours , known as the Hours of James IV of Scotland , given by James IV to Margaret Tudor after 1503 and described by D. H. Caldwell as " perhaps the finest medieval manuscript to have been commissioned for Scottish use " . 
 Before the Reformation in the mid @-@ sixteenth century the interiors of Scottish churches were often elaborate and colourful . Particularly in the north @-@ east of the country there were highly decorated sacrament houses , like the ones surviving at Kinkell from 1524 and Deskford from 1541 . Monumental effigies in churches were usually fully coloured and gilded and dedicated to members of the clergy , knights and their wives . In contrast to England , where the fashion for stone @-@ carved monuments gave way to monumental brasses , in Scotland they continued to be produced until the end of the Medieval period . These include the very elaborate Douglas tombs in the town of Douglas and the tomb built for Alexander McLeod ( d . 1528 ) at Rodel in Harris . Scotland 's ecclesiastical art paid a heavy toll as a result of Reformation iconoclasm , with the almost total loss of medieval stained glass , religious sculpture and paintings . The only significant surviving pre @-@ Reformation stained glass in Scotland is a window of four roundels in the St. Magdalen Chapel of Cowgate , Edinburgh , completed in 1544 . Wood carving can be seen at King 's College , Aberdeen and Dunblane Cathedral . In the West Highlands , where there had been a hereditary caste of monumental sculptors , the uncertainty and loss of patronage caused by the rejection of monuments in the Reformation meant that they moved into another branches of the Gaelic learned orders or took up other occupations . The lack of transfer of carving skills is noticeable in the decline in quality when gravestones were next commissioned from the start of the seventeenth century . According to N. Prior , the nature of the Scottish Reformation may have had wider effects , limiting the creation of a culture of public display and meaning that art was channelled into more austere forms of expression with an emphasis on private and domestic restraint . 
 = = Portraiture = = 
 Around 1500 , about the same time as in England , Scottish monarchs turned to the recording of royal likenesses in panel portraits , painted in oils on wood , perhaps as a form of political expression . In 1502 James IV paid for delivery of portraits of the Tudor household , probably by the " Inglishe <unk> " named " Mynours , " who stayed in Scotland to paint the king and his new bride Margaret Tudor the following year . " Mynours " was Maynard Wewyck , a Flemish painter who usually worked for Henry VII in London . As in England , the monarchy may have had model portraits of royalty used for copies and reproductions , but the versions of native royal portraits that survive are generally crude by continental standards . Much more impressive are the works or artists imported from the continent , particularly the Netherlands , generally considered the centre of painting in the Northern Renaissance . The products of these connections included a fine portrait of William Elphinstone . It is one of the earliest representations of a Scottish subject to survive and was probably painted by a Scots artist using Flemish techniques . The tradition of royal portrait painting in Scotland was disrupted by the minorities and regencies it underwent for much of the sixteenth century . In his majority James V was probably more concerned with architectural expressions of royal identity . Mary Queen of Scots had been brought up in the French court , where she was drawn and painted by major European artists , but she did not commission any adult portraits , with the exception of the joint portrait with her second husband Henry Stuart , Lord Darnley . This may have reflected an historic Scottish pattern , where heraldic display or an elaborate tomb were considered more important than a portrait . 
 Portraiture began to flourish after the Reformation . There were anonymously painted portraits of important individuals , including one of James Hepburn , 4th Earl of Bothwell ( 1556 ) . Artists from the Low Countries remained important . Hans Eworth , who had been court painter to Mary I of England , painted a number of Scottish subjects in the 1560s . His 1561 wedding portraits were miniatures commemorating the brief marriage of the earl of Bothwell and Jean Gordon . He also painted James Stewart , 1st Earl of Moray in 1561 and two years later he painted a joint portrait of the young Darnley and his brother Charles Stuart . Lord Seton , Master of the Royal Household commissioned two portraits in the Netherlands in the 1570s , one of himself and one a family portrait . A specific type of Scottish picture is the " vendetta portrait " , designed to keep alive the memory of an atrocity . Examples include the <unk> memorial portrait , which shows the young James IV kneeling at his murdered father 's tomb and the lifesize portrait of the corpse of The Bonnie Early of Moray vividly showing the wounds received by James Stewart , 2nd Earl of Moray when he was killed by George Gordon , 1st Marquess of Huntly in 1592 . 
 There was an attempt to produce a series of portraits of Scottish kings in panel portraits , probably for the royal entry of the fifteen @-@ year @-@ old James VI in 1579 , which are Medieval in form . In James VI 's personal reign , Renaissance forms of portraiture began to dominate . He employed two Flemish artists , Arnold Bronckorst in the early 1580s and Adrian Vanson from around 1584 to 1602 , who have left us a visual record of the king and major figures at the court . However , the Union of Crowns in 1603 removed a major source of artistic patronage in Scotland as James VI and his court moved to London . The result has been seen as a shift " from crown to castle " , as the nobility and local lairds became the major sources of patronage . 
 By the seventeenth century the fashion for portraiture had spread down the social order to lairds such as Colin Campbell of Glenorchy and John Napier of Merchiston . The first significant native artist was George Jamesone of Aberdeen ( 1589 / 90 @-@ 1644 ) , who , having trained in the Netherlands , became one of the most successful portrait painters of the reign of Charles I. He trained the Baroque artist John Michael Wright ( 1617 – 94 ) , who painted both Scottish and English subjects . The Flemish @-@ Spanish painter John Baptist Medina ( 1659 – 1710 ) came to Scotland in 1693 and became the leading Scottish portrait painter of his generation . Among his best known works are a group of about 30 oval bust @-@ lengths , including a self @-@ portrait , in Surgeons ' Hall , Edinburgh . He trained his son , also John , and William Aikman ( 1682 – 1731 ) , who became the leading portrait painter of the next generation . Aikman migrated to London in 1723 , and from this point until the late eighteenth century , most Scottish painters of note followed him . 
 = = Domestic decoration = = 
 The loss of ecclesiastical patronage that resulted from the Reformation , created a crisis for native craftsmen and artists , who turned to secular patrons . One result of this was the flourishing of Scottish Renaissance painted ceilings and walls , with large numbers of private houses of burgesses , lairds and lords gaining often highly detailed and coloured patterns and scenes , of which over a hundred examples survive . These were undertaken by unnamed Scottish artists using continental pattern books that often led to the incorporation of humanist moral and philosophical symbolism , with elements that call on heraldry , piety , classical myths and allegory . The earliest surviving example is at the Hamilton palace of Kinneil , West Lothian , decorated in the 1550s for the then regent the James Hamilton , Earl of Arran . Other examples include the ceiling at Prestongrange House , undertaken in 1581 for Mark Kerr , Commendator of Newbattle , and the long gallery at Pinkie House , painted for Alexander Seaton , Earl of Dunfermline in 1621 . 
 Records also indicate that Scottish palaces were adorned by rich tapestries , like those that depicted scenes from the Iliad and Odyssey set up for James IV at Holyrood . Some of this was undertaken by exclusive professional <unk> , but needlework was part of female education at all levels of society . Some of these tapestries were produced by noble ladies , such as the bed <unk> made by Katherine Ruthven for her marriage in 1551 to Campbell of Glenorchy . These are the oldest surviving examples of Scottish produced embroidery . They display the couple 's initials , arms and the story of Adam and Eve . A carpet designed to cover a table may be connected to the marriage of Katherine Oliphant , which has her initials , arms , biblical verses and ( perhaps as a pun on her name ) an elephant . Much of the needle work of the sixteenth century has been attributed , probably erroneously , to Mary , Queen of Scots . It is thought that she did contribute to the <unk> <unk> while imprisoned in England . 
 Although tradition of stone and wood carving in churches largely ended at the Reformation , it continued in royal palaces , the great houses of the nobility and even the humbler homes of lairds and burgesses . The intricate lid of the fourteenth @-@ century Bute mazer , carved from a single piece of whale bone , was probably created in the early sixteenth century . At Stirling Castle , stone carvings on the royal palace from the reign of James V are taken from German patterns , and , like the surviving carved oak portrait roundels from the King 's Presence Chamber , known as the Stirling Heads , they include contemporary , biblical and classical figures . These , and the elaborate Renaissance fountain at Linlithgow Palace ( c . 1538 . ) , suggest that there was a workshop with an established connected with the court in the early sixteenth century . Some of the finest domestic wood carving is in the Beaton panels made for Arbroath Abbey and at Huntly Castle , rebuilt for George Gordon , 1st Marquess of Huntly in the early seventeenth century , which focused on heraldic images . Their " popish " overtones led to them being damaged by an occupying Covenanter army in 1640 . From the seventeenth century , as domestic architecture for the nobility was increasingly for comfort , rather than fortification , there was elaborate use of carving in carved pediments , fireplaces , heraldic arms and classical motifs . Plasterwork also began to be used , often depicting flowers and cherubs . Richly carved decoration on ordinary houses was common in the period . There is also the heraldic carving , such as the royal arms at Holyrood Palace , designed by the Dutch painter Jacob de Wet in 1677 . The tradition of carving also survived in work like the carved stone panels in the garden of Edzell Castle ( c . 1600 ) , the now lost carving done for Edinburgh and Glasgow universities in the seventeenth @-@ century and in the many elaborate sundials of the seventeenth century , like those at Newbattle . 
 = = Professionalisation of art = = 
 The growing importance of royal art can be seen in the post of Painter and Limner , created in 1702 for George Ogilvie . The duties included drawing pictures of the Monarch 's person , his successors and members of the royal family , for the <unk> of royal houses and palaces . However , from 1723 to 1823 the office was a sinecure held by members of the Abercrombie family , not necessarily connected with artistic ability . Many painters of the early part of the eighteenth century remained largely artisans , like the members of the Norie family , James ( 1684 – 1757 ) and his sons , Robert and the younger James , who painted the houses of the peerage with Scottish landscapes that were capriccios or pastiches of Italian and Dutch landscapes . They tutored artists and have been credited with the inception of the tradition of Scottish landscape painting that would come to fruition from the late eighteenth century . Italy became an important point of reference for Scottish artists , with many taking the Grand Tour there to paint , sample the art and learn from Italian masters . 
 In 1729 there was an attempt to found a school of painting in Edinburgh as the Academy of St. Luke , named after the Renaissance Accademia di San Luca in Rome . Its president was George Marshall , a painter of still lives and portraits , and its treasurer was the engraver Richard Cooper . Other members included Cooper 's student Robert Strange , the two younger Nories , the portrait painters John Alexander ( c . 1690 @-@ c . 1733 ) and Allan Ramsay ( 1713 – 84 ) . The success of the group was limited by its associations with Jacobitism , with Strange printing bank notes for the rebels . Alexander was a great grandson of George Jamesone . He studied in London and Rome , returning to Edinburgh about 1720 where he painted the Baroque The Rape of Proserpine , for the roof of a staircase at Gordon Castle and numerous portraits . Ramsay emerged as the most distinguished alumni of the academy . He studied in Sweden , London and Italy before basing himself in Edinburgh . There he established himself as a leading portrait painter to the Scottish nobility , before moving to London in 1757 . He made occasional return visits to Edinburgh to undertake commissions for the nobility and gentry . 
 = <unk> = 
 A plutoid or ice dwarf is a trans @-@ Neptunian dwarf planet , i.e. a body orbiting beyond Neptune that is massive enough to be rounded in shape . The term plutoid was adopted by the International Astronomical Union ( IAU ) working group Committee on Small Bodies Nomenclature , but was rejected by the IAU working group Planetary System Nomenclature . The term plutoid is not widely used by astronomers , though ice dwarf is not uncommon . 
 There are thought to be thousands of plutoids in the Solar System , although only four have been formally designated as such by the IAU . 
 The IAU developed this category of astronomical objects as a consequence of its 2006 resolution defining the word " planet " . The IAU 's formal definition of " plutoid " , announced 11 June 2008 , is : 
 <unk> are celestial bodies in orbit around the Sun at a semi @-@ major axis greater than that of Neptune that have sufficient mass for their self @-@ gravity to overcome rigid body forces so that they assume a hydrostatic equilibrium ( near @-@ spherical ) shape , and that have not cleared the neighbourhood around their orbit . Satellites of plutoids are not plutoids themselves . 
 In light of the difficulty of remotely ascertaining <unk> , the IAU only formally confers " dwarf planet " ( and by extension , " plutoid " ) status to those bodies whose minimum estimated size is substantially greater than what is generally thought necessary to guarantee hydrostatic equilibrium . As of 2009 , Pluto , Eris , Haumea , and Makemake are the only objects officially recognized as plutoids , while upwards of seventy more bodies that currently lack formal recognition are thought likely to meet the definition , and can expect formal recognition at some time in the future . 
 Alan Stern of the Southwest Research Institute believes the outer planets show signs of collisions with plutoids 1 @,@ 000 to 2 @,@ 000 kilometers in diameter : Uranus could have been tipped off its axis by a plutoid , and Triton , the largest moon of Neptune , is probably a captured plutoid from the Kuiper belt . 
 = = History of the term = = 
 On 24 August 2006 , the IAU decided to reclassify Pluto as a dwarf planet , requiring that a planet must " clear the neighbourhood around its orbit " . 
 The General Assembly of the IAU further resolved : 
 Pluto is [ … ] recognized as the prototype of a new category of Trans @-@ Neptunian Objects . 
 This new category had been proposed under the name " pluton " or a " plutonian object " earlier in the General Assembly . The former was rejected , in part because " pluton " is a geological term , and many geological experts sent in complaints pointing this out . " Pluton " was dropped midway through the Assembly and was abandoned in the final draft resolution ( 6b ) ; " Plutonian object " failed to win majority approval on a 183 – 186 vote in the IAU General Assembly on August 24 , 2006 . 
 The definition of the category also fluctuated during its early stages . When first proposed , the category , then named " pluton " , defined members as planets whose orbital period around the Sun was more than 200 Julian years , and whose orbit was more highly inclined and more elliptical than a traditional planetary orbit . Once it had been counter @-@ proposed to strip Pluto of planet status , this category of Pluto @-@ like objects was then applied to dwarf planets that met the conditions of being trans @-@ Neptunian and " like Pluto " in terms of period , inclination , and eccentricity . Ultimately , the final resolution left the formal definition , like the name , to be established at a later date . 
 Following the IAU General Assembly , the name " plutoid " was proposed by the members of the IAU Committee on Small Body Nomenclature ( CSBN ) , accepted by the Board of Division III , and approved by the IAU Executive Committee at its meeting in Oslo , Norway , on 11 June 2008 . The term was announced after the Executive Committee meeting , along with a greatly simplified definition : all trans @-@ Neptunian dwarf planets are plutoids . However , due to a communication error , the IAU Working Group for Planetary System Nomenclature ( WG @-@ PSN ) was not consulted , and they subsequently rejected the term . 
 As of 2009 , the term had not been widely accepted by the scientific community , with the term ice dwarf ( planet ) sometimes used instead . 
 = = Analogous terminology = = 
 Prior to the emergence of the term " plutoid " as an IAU @-@ sanctioned categorization , there had been some attempts at applying a title for this class of object . 
 The term " ice dwarf " saw some adoption as a near @-@ synonym to the eventual term " plutoid " . " Ice dwarf " , however , also saw some use as an umbrella term for all so @-@ called " distant minor planets " ( trans @-@ Neptunian objects plus centaurs ) or other , broad applications ; one attempted definition was that an ice dwarf " is larger than the nucleus of a normal comet and <unk> than a typical asteroid " . There are large numbers of such objects in the Oort cloud and the Kuiper belt . However , it is not clear whether all so @-@ categorized ice dwarfs are actually <unk> than icy asteroids such as Ceres ( now considered a dwarf planet ) . Nonetheless , Ceres is sometimes called a terrestrial dwarf to distinguish it from Pluto and Eris . 
 " Ice dwarf " as a term for an icy planetary body that generally orbits beyond Neptune was coined as part of a conception of a threefold division of the Solar System into inner terrestrial planets , central gas giants , and outer ice dwarfs , of which Pluto was the principal member . This conception foreshadowed the reclassification of Pluto to dwarf planet and plutoid after the discovery of Eris . 
 = = Naming process for plutoids = = 
 With the creation of the term " dwarf planet " , some ambiguity was created as to which of two IAU bodies would be responsible for naming dwarf planets . Eris had been named through the IAU Committee on Small Body Nomenclature and the IAU Working Group for Planetary System Nomenclature working in cooperation with one another . Along with announcing the name " plutoid " , the IAU decision of 11 June 2008 institutionalized this cooperative process involving the two bodies in the naming of new plutoids . In keeping with minor planet naming guidelines , priority will be given to names proposed by the discovery teams , and plutoids may not share a name with a small Solar System body . 
 = = = Complications related to " dwarf planet " definition = = = 
 When the definition of " dwarf planet " was instated at the IAU General Assembly of 2006 , Ceres , Pluto and Eris were identified by name as the initial members of the dwarf planet class . However , precise regulations as to how hydrostatic equilibrium would be measured were left undefined for the time being . Without an official procedure for calculating the lower bound of size to be a " dwarf planet " , no further bodies could be formally recognized as either dwarf planets or plutoids . 
 It was noted that the naming process would remain stalled without such rules , and that even with them , few of these bodies can be imaged with sufficient resolution to determine their shapes . Therefore , the IAU announced that for naming purposes , a trans @-@ Neptunian object will be assumed to be a plutoid if it has an absolute magnitude brighter than H = + 1 magnitude . 
 Mathematically , the smallest possible object that could possess an absolute magnitude of + 1 ( a perfectly reflective one with an albedo of 1 ) would be 838 km in diameter . It is highly unlikely that any body of this size or larger , regardless of composition , would not also surpass whatever threshold is ultimately adopted as proof of hydrostatic equilibrium . However , if it turns out upon further investigation that an object named as if it were a plutoid has not achieved hydrostatic equilibrium , the IAU has stated it will be reclassified , but keep its name . 
 This decision allowed for the naming of Makemake and Haumea , and their formal recognition as plutoids and dwarf planets , bringing the number of IAU @-@ accepted plutoids to four . However , the ( co ) discoverer of Eris , Makemake , and Haumea , Mike Brown , estimates that between 100 and 400 known bodies are plutoids , and that there are many more that have yet to be discovered . See list of possible dwarf planets . 
 = Lisa on Ice = 
 " Lisa on Ice " is the eighth television episode of The Simpsons ' sixth season . It was first broadcast on Fox in the United States on November 13 , 1994 . In the episode , Principal Skinner hands out academic alerts to the Springfield Elementary students , and Lisa discovers that she is in peril of failing a class for the first time in her life . When trying to salvage her gym grade , Lisa finds she possesses a skill for ice hockey . Rivalry between Lisa and Bart in the rink escalates into their home life and beyond , fueled considerably by Homer and coaches . 
 The episode was written by Mike Scully and directed by Bob Anderson , whose passion for hockey inspired the plot . It features cultural references to films such as Rollerball and The Pope of Greenwich Village . The episode was well received by critics , and acquired a Nielsen rating of 11 @.@ 6 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Principal Skinner calls all the Springfield Elementary School students down for an assembly to tell them which subjects they are failing . Lisa is surprisingly called up , and discovers to her horror that she is failing gym class . When she appeals to her teacher , they reach a compromise : Lisa can get a passing grade if she joins a sports program outside of school . She immediately attempts to join several , but fails , and her self @-@ esteem is devastated . Later , the family goes to see Bart play hockey for his team , the Mighty Pigs , coached by Chief Wiggum . After the game , Bart , while ridiculing his sister for being poor at sports , begins shooting pieces of litter at Lisa with his hockey stick , and Apu , the coach of the Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart <unk> , notices that she is a natural at hockey goal @-@ tending and makes her goalie for his team . Although Lisa has no interest in hockey , she accepts , seeing this as the only way to maintain her academic credentials . As it turns out , she is remarkably talented , and leads her team to their best season ever . 
 Due to Homer 's increasing pressure , a sibling rivalry develops between Bart and Lisa , and it peaks when the town learns that the <unk> will face the Mighty Pigs in their next match . The game proves to be a vicious one , but very close , with both Bart and Lisa playing their best . With four seconds left , Bart is tripped by Jimbo , giving him a penalty shot against Lisa that will decide the game . However , as they face each other , Bart and Lisa remember the good times they have had together as children before they began fighting . They each throw aside their equipment and hug , and the match ends in a tie . Marge admits she is proud of them , while a sobbing Homer declares them both losers and turns his attention to Maggie . Unsatisfied with the outcome ( although Snake is visibly moved ) , the residents of Springfield begin rioting and tear the stadium to pieces while Bart and Lisa blissfully skate together across the rink . 
 = = Production = = 
 The idea for the episode came from The Simpsons writer Mike Scully , who wanted to do an episode involving hockey because of his passion for the sport . Bob Anderson , who also had an interest for hockey , directed the episode . 
 The episode starts out with Lisa tricking Bart into believing it is a snow day by throwing a snowball at him which she made out of the ice in the fridge . The scene was inspired by Scully , who as a child loved to sit and listen by the radio waiting to see if there was going to be school snow day . Scully thought , because of his experience as a child , that there was nothing more disappointing than to wake up expecting a snow day , only to find out there was no snow . The academic alerts the Springfield Elementary School students receive were based on those Scully received in junior high . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 When Moe visits Bart and Lisa at the Simpson house to see if they have any injuries that may affect the odds of the upcoming game , Marge sends him away and he pleads : " They 're gonna take my thumbs " . This is a reference to Eric Roberts ' line , " Charlie , they took my thumb " , from the 1984 film The Pope of Greenwich Village . The episode features several references to the 1975 film Rollerball . At the academic alerts assembly , bully Kearney has Dolph take a memo on an Apple Newton , a personal digital assistant . When Dolph writes " Beat up Martin " on the screen , the handwriting recognition turns it into " Eat up Martha " , and Kearney throws the Newton at Martin instead , referencing the MessagePad 's poor handwriting recognition . The name of Bart 's team , " Mighty Pigs " , is a parody of the film series The Mighty Ducks . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Lisa on Ice " finished 34th in the ratings for the week of November 7 to November 13 , 1994 , with a Nielsen rating of 11 @.@ 6 . It was the second highest rated show on the Fox network that week . Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , called it " a fabulous episode for Lisa and Bart , although with a special mention for a few seconds of tremendous Edna Krabappel wickedness . " DVD Verdict 's Ryan Keefer said the episode " is one of the few episodes centered on Lisa that I enjoy watching " , and gave it a B. DVD Talk 's Aaron Beierle said " there are definitely some funny moments in this episode , the sweet @-@ natured way that the episode ends never sat right with me . " ESPN.com named this episode the fifth best sports moment in the history of the show . The Orlando Sentinel 's Gregory Hardy listed it as the seventh best episode of the show with a sports theme . 
 TV Squad 's Adam Finley gave the episode a positive review , commenting that it is " a skewering of parents who become too involved in their children 's sports and turn what should be a lesson in teamwork , trying your hardest , and losing gracefully into a kind of Roman Coliseum where grown adults live out violent fantasies and their own failed ambitions through their children . " He added that " Homer is an absolute jerk in this episode , taunting his children when they lose and praising them when they win and humiliate their sibling " and that " it 's not just Homer . Marge , characteristically so , tries to remain diplomatic , but even she starts screaming for blood when Bart is tripped by an opposing player . " 
 = Montauk Point land claim = 
 The Montauk Point land claim was a series of three lawsuits brought by Chief Wyandank Pharaoh , nephew of the Stephen <unk> who died in the same year ( 1879 ) that the tribe lost the last remaining vestige of their territory in the New York state courts , claiming Montauk Point on behalf of the Montaukett Indians , against the Long Island Rail Road ( LIRR ) and its predecessors in title . 
 The first suit , Montauk Tribe of Indians v. Long Island R.R. Co . , brought by Wyandank Pharaoh in the name of the tribe , was dismissed because the tribe had not been explicitly authorized by the state to sue in its own name . 
 As recommended by the Appellate Division 's opinion , the second suit , Johnson v. Long Island R.R. Co . , was brought in the name of Eugene M. Johnson , a citizen and tribal member . The New York Court of Appeals disavowed the previous dicta of the Appellate Division , and held that neither an individual Indian nor a tribe could sue in court without enabling legislation . 
 The tribe failed in its efforts to convince the federal government to pass legislation enabling the tribe to bring the claim in federal court . In 1906 , the state passed a statute enabling the tribe to sue , and Wyandank Pharaoh brought a third suit , Pharaoh v. Benson , in the name of the tribe . Reaching the merits , the New York courts held that the tribe no longer existed and that the transactions were valid . Since the litigation , the Montauks have failed in their efforts to obtain compensation from the federal and state government , and much of the land in question has come to be held by public parks . 
 = = Background = = 
 Circa 1875 , the Montauk tribe began renting out Montauk Point for pasturage through the Proprietors ' Company ; the company took possession of the grazing allotments , and paid the tribe an annuity . Circa 1880 , the shareholders of the company disagreed over whether the lands should continue to be leased , or whether they should be re @-@ apportioned . In 1878 , Robert M. Grinnell sued Edward M. Baker et al. for partition and division of the allotments . In Grinnell v. Baker ( unreported ) , the court ordered the lands sold at public auction ( subject to the Montauk claim ) , with the proceeds distributed equally among the non @-@ Indian lessees , rather than the Montauk tribe . 
 The auction took place at the home of <unk> Parsons . Arthur W. Benson bought the 11 @,@ 000 acres ( 45 km2 ) at auction for $ 151 @,@ 000 in 1879 . In turn , Benson sold 5 @,@ 000 acres ( 20 km2 ) of the land to the Long Island Rail Road for $ 600 @,@ 000 . 
 Benson hired Nathaniel Dominey to negotiate the removal of the Montauks still living on the reservation . At a later , Senate Sub @-@ Committee hearing , Dominey testified that eight Indians remained on the reservation at the time , including : future Chief Wyandank Pharaoh ( 10 years old at the time ) , his mother , and two of her brothers . Later , Dominey experienced a change of heart and cooperated with the Montauks in their claim , and turning over his letters from Benson . Dominey testified that he compensated Wyandank Pharaoh 's mother with a $ 100 semi @-@ annual annuity and two houses , to be inherited by Pharaoh , $ 80 each to her two brothers , and $ 10 to Wyandank . 
 Arthur Benson had viewed Montauk as " his private playground " ; after his death , his son approached Austin Corbin , President and controlling shareholder of the Long Island Rail Road , and Charles Pratt , of Standard Oil , about the possibility of voiding his fathers will and opening Montauk to development . Montauk Point was purchased by Corbin and Pratt in 1895 . 
 On October 30 , 1895 , Chief Wyandank Pharaoh returned from a research trip to Brooklyn and Washington , D.C. to gather evidence to pursue a claim . Pharaoh declared his intentions to undertake a hunting trip on the disputed land and initiate a lawsuit if he was interfered with . 
 The New York Times blamed Chief Pharaoh for the dispute : 
 If King Wyandank Pharaoh of the Montauk Tribe of Indians had not given for $ 10 the living members of the Montauk tribe might now be wealthy , instead of being poor and fighting for their rights with a desperate hope of regaining at least part of what they claim to be their lawful heritage . 
 = = Montauk Tribe of Indians v. Long Island R.R. Co . ( App . Div . 1898 ) = = 
 = = = Supreme Court = = = 
 Chief <unk> , on behalf of the tribe , filed suit , stating a cause of action for ejectment on February 5 , 1897 . For proof of tribal status , the tribe cited a partition action decided by Judge <unk> and the 1890 United States Census . The complaint valued the land at approximately $ 300 @,@ 000 . 
 On June 5 , 1897 , Judge Wilmot Moses Smith of the New York Supreme Court set a hearing date for June 19 in Patchogue to hear the oral arguments for the defendants ' demurrer . The matter was transferred to Judge Samuel T. Maddox in Brooklyn . Judge Maddox granted the demurrer , dismissing the action but allowing the tribe to re @-@ plead if they paid costs . 
 = = = Appellate Division = = = 
 The Montauk 's , represented by ex @-@ judge George M. Curtis , filed a notice of appeal on December 22 , 1897 . Before the Appellate Division , the Montauk 's case was argued by Leman B. Treadwell , with Francis M. Morrison ( both Boston lawyers ) also on the brief . Alfred A. Gardner argued on behalf of the LIRR , with William J. Kelly on the brief . The Appellate Division panel consisted of Judges Goodrich , Edgar M. Cullen , Willard Bartlett , Hatch , and Woodward . 
 The Appellate Division of the Second Department unanimously affirmed the judgment of the Suffolk Special Term on April 19 , 1898 . Citing Strong v. Waterman and Seneca Nation of Indians v. Christy , Judge Cullen noted that " no provision had been made by law for bringing ejectment to recover possession of [ Indians ] " and " as a body or tribe , the Indians have no corporate name by which they can institute such a suit . " Judge Cullen suggested that the tribe either petition the legislature for enabling legislation to allow them to sue as a tribe , or have individual members bring the suit . 
 = = Johnson v. Long Island R.R. Co . ( N.Y. 1900 ) = = 
 = = = Supreme Court = = = 
 Eugene M. Johnson , a U.S. citizen of Montauk descent , and a member of the tribe since birth , brought a similar suit in his own name , on behalf of himself and other similarly interested . The Special Term sustained a demurrer . 
 = = = Appellate Division = = = 
 The divided panel of the Appellate Division of the Second Department reversed on July 1 , 1899 . In a per curiam opinion , joined by all but Judge Willard Bartlett , the Appellate Division held : 
 While the right to maintain this action in its present form is not free from doubt , still , as it is brought in accordance with the view expressed by us on the prior appeal , we think we should adhere to our former decision , and allow the question to be finally determined by the court of appeals . 
 = = = Court of Appeals = = = 
 The Appellate Division certified three questions to the Court of Appeals : 
 1 . Has the plaintiff in this action legal capacity to sue ? 
 2 . Is there a defect of the parties plaintiff in this action , in that the members of the alleged Montauk Tribe of Indians are not made parties plaintiff ? 
 3 . Does the complaint herein state facts sufficient to constitute a cause of action ? 
 Before the Court of Appeals , Treadwell and Morrison again argued for the Montauks , while Gardner and Kelly again argued for the LIRR . 
 The New York Court of Appeals reversed the Appellate Division , and affirmed the Special Term , on April 17 , 1900 . The court answered all three certified questions in the negative , without costs to either party . Judge Edward T. Bartlett , joined by Judges Denis O 'Brien , Albert Haight , and <unk> E. Martin , held that Johnson had no capacity to bring a suit on the tribe 's behalf . The Court held that Indians , as wards of the state , had no right to sue unless conferred by statute : 
 A decision holding that this action could be maintained either by the tribe , or an individual member thereof on behalf of himself and all others who should come in and contribute , would be contrary to the policy and practice which have been long established in our treatment of the Indian tribes . They are regarded as the wards of the state , and , generally speaking , possessed of only such rights to appear and litigate in courts of justice as are conferred upon them by statute . 
 Chief Judge Alton B. Parker concurred in the result , without separate opinion ; Judges Irving G. Vann and Landon dissented , without opinion . 
 = = Senate Indian Affairs Sub @-@ Committee hearing ( 1900 ) = = 
 Chief Pharaoh , along with representatives of the Shinnecock Tribe , Narragansett Tribe , and Mohegan Tribe , testified before a Sub @-@ Committee of the Senate Indian Affairs Committee on September 22 , 1900 , at the Fifth Avenue Hotel . The Sub @-@ Committee consisted of Senators John M. Thurston ( R @-@ NE ) and Orville H. Platt ( R @-@ CT ) . In addition to Pharaoh , the testifying Indians were : Rev. Eugene A. Johnson , Nathan J. <unk> , and James <unk> ( of the Montauk Council ) , John <unk> , Joshua <unk> , and Donald <unk> ( of the Narragansett Council ) , David <unk> ( of the Shinnecock Council ) . Maria Crippen and Dr. William H. Johnson of the Montauk tribe were among the spectators . 
 Rev. Johnson testified that there were 300 living members of the Montauk tribe . Johnson also testified that the New York state legislature had denied the Montauks a hearing because they were not " persons . " Johnson argued that the Montauks could not alienate property without the consent of both New York and the federal government . He valued the disputed property at $ 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . 
 The tribes requested special legislation to allow them to bring their land claims , for fraud , in the United States circuit court . The Montauks and <unk> claimed 11 @,@ 000 acres ( 45 km2 ) of Montauk Point ; the Narragansetts an eight @-@ square @-@ mile tract near Narragansett Bay ; the Mohegans a reservation in and near Norwich , Connecticut . Tredwell and Morrison continued to represent the tribes before the hearing . 
 = = State enabling legislation ( 1906 ) = = 
 A bill granting the Montauks permission to sue was introduced in February 1903 . The Montauk 's lawyer , Charles O. Maas , was the key lobbyist for the bill . 
 On April 10 , 1906 , the New York legislature passed a statute enabling the Montauk tribe to bring suit , The act contained the following proviso : " the question as to the existence of the Montauk Tribe of Indians shall be a question of law and fact to be determined by the court . " Judge Blackmar interpreted the act as " providing that the act should not be construed as conferring tribal rights on any individuals , but that the question of the existence of the Montauk Tribe should be determined by the court . " 
 = = Pharaoh v. Benson ( N.Y. 1918 ) = = 
 = = = Supreme Court = = = 
 Pursuant to the enabling act , Chief Wyandank Pharaoh brought a third suit on behalf of the tribe in 1906 . The named defendants were : Jane Ann Benson and Mary Benson , the <unk> of Arthur Benson 's will , John J. Pierrepoint and Henry R. Hoyt , the executors and trustees of Frank Sherman Benson 's will , Mary Benson , the Montauk Company , the Montauk Dock and Improvement Company , Alfred W. Hoyt , the Montauk Extension Railroad Company , and the Long Island Rail Road . An area of 4 @,@ 200 acres ( 17 km2 ) was named in the third complaint ( 1 @,@ 200 acres ( 4 @.@ 9 km2 ) of it adjacent to the LIRR ) . 
 Chief Pharaoh was represented by Maas and Lawrence W. Trowbridge ( of counsel ) . The defendants were represented by Daly , Hoyt & Mason ( for the Bensons ) , Austin & McLanahan ( for the Dock and Improvement Co . ) , A. T. Mason ( for Pierrepoint and Henry Hoyt ) , P. Tecumseh Sherman ( for Alfred Hoyt ) , and Joseph <unk> ( for the LIRR ) . According to a 1910 Q & A in the New York Times , the lawyers fees were " long since supposed to have eclipsed the value of the land in litigation . " 
 The trial took place , without a jury , before Judge Abel Blackmar of the Supreme Court of Suffolk County , Special Term . Fourteen of the sixteen living Montauk men appeared as witnesses at trial . 
 Judge Blackmar , ruled against the Montauks on October 11 , 1910 . According to Blackmar , the Montauks individually conveyed all their lands and claims to Arthur Benson between 1885 and 1894 , in exchange for $ 100 to $ 250 each , except for Wyandank Pharaoh who received only $ 10 , plus between 5 and 45 acres ( 20 @,@ 000 and 182 @,@ 000 m2 ) in Freetown and East Hampton , plus a $ 240 annuity to be divided per capita . 
 Judge Blackmar also relied upon a December 1686 patent granted by Governor Thomas Dongan to the freeholders of East Hampton , granting them the exclusive right to purchase Indian lands in the area . Benson had separately purchased the fee rights from the descendants of the <unk> . 
 Judge Blackmar also held that the Montauks were no longer a tribe : 
 During this long period the number of the Indians was greatly reduced . Their blood became so mixed that in many of them Indian traits were obliterated . They had no internal government , and they lived a sort of shiftless life , hunting , fishing , cultivating the ground ' Indian fashion ' as a witness called it , and often leaving for long periods and working in some menial capacity for the whites . 
 = = = Appellate Division = = = 
 On appeal , the Montauks found a new lawyer : Allen Caruthers . 
 The Appellate Division — composed of Judges Jenks , Burr , Rich , Stapleton , and Putnam — affirmed on October 16 , 1914 . On appeal , the Montauks were represented by Allen Caruthers , while the defendants were represented by Charles K. Carpenter , with Alexander T. Mason and George T. Austin on the brief . Judge Burr , for a unanimous court , wrote the opinion . 
 = = = Court of Appeals = = = 
 The Court of Appeals — composed of Chief Judge Frank Harris Hiscock and Judges Emory A. Chase , Frederick Collin , William Herman <unk> , John W. Hogan , McLaughlin , and Frederick E. Crane — affirmed ( per curiam , without opinion ) on January 29 , 1918 , without costs . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Federal lobbying = = = 
 Maas departed for Washington , D.C. after the passage of the state enabling legislation . The Interior Department endorsed the idea on July 7 , 1906 . 
 In January 1921 , Senator James Wolcott Wadsworth , Jr . ( R @-@ NY ) and Representative Homer P. Snyder ( R @-@ NY ) introduced legislation and asked the Interior Secretary to report to Congress on the Montauk 's tribal status and the merits of their land claim . The Secretary prepared a report agreeing with the conclusions of Judge Blackmar and the New York appellate courts in Pharaoh v. Benson . The Senate Committee on Indian Affairs received the report on April 22 , 1922 , and introduced the Wadsworth bill that June ; the bill did not make it out of committee . 
 In 1996 , represented by Bell , Boyd & Lloyd , the Montauks filed a letter of intent with the Branch of Acknowledgement and Research of the Bureau of Indian Affairs , the first step towards federal recognition . The petition for recognition was submitted on June 23 , 1998 . The tribe received a request for documents from the BIA in January 1999 . 
 = = = State lobbying = = = 
 On February 14 , 1922 , New York state assemblyman John J. O 'Connor introduced legislation to compensate the Montauks . The bill excluded James Waters and the other members of the Montauk diaspora . The bill would have created a three @-@ person committee — composed of two assembly members and one state senator — to determine whether the land claim had been meritorious . The bill never reached the floor . 
 = = = Montaukett burial grounds = = = 
 In 1983 , Fort Hill Associates and Signal Hill Associates applied to the town of East Hampton for a permit to build homes on North Neck hill , above the Montauk 's ancestral burial ground . As quoted in the New York Times , the East Hampton town supervisor said , " Who cares about a bunch of dead Indians ? " The <unk> won a temporary injunction in court that July . That November , the town board voted to purchase the 30 acres ( 120 @,@ 000 m2 ) for $ 1 @.@ 4 million and preserve the burial ground . 
 In 1989 , developers announced plans touching on a different Montaukett burial ground in North Neck . After protests , the town government agreed to preserve the site in 1991 . 
 = = = State parks = = = 
 In 1984 , the federal government announced plans to sell Montauk Air Force Station , a 278 acres ( 1 @.@ 1 km2 ) air force installation south of Montauk Point , to real estate developers . New York State and the Town of East Hampton sued to block the sale . The land was eventually turned over to the New York State Park Service , becoming Camp Hero State Park . The state purchased 1 @,@ 000 acres ( 4 @.@ 0 km2 ) of Hither Woods in 1986 and created Hither Hills State Park . In 1988 , the state purchased 777 acres ( 3 @.@ 1 km2 ) more to augment the park . 
 = Peru national football team = 
 The Peru national football team has represented Peru in international football since 1927 . Organised by the Peruvian Football Federation ( FPF ) , it is one of the 10 members of FIFA 's South American Football Confederation ( CONMEBOL ) . The Peruvian team 's performance has been inconsistent ; it enjoyed its most successful periods in the 1930s and the 1970s . The team plays most of its home matches at the Estadio Nacional in Lima , the country 's capital . 
 The Peru national team has won the Copa América twice and qualified for FIFA World Cup finals four times ; it also participated in the 1936 Olympic football competition . It has longstanding rivalries with Chile and Ecuador . The team is well known for its white shirts adorned with a diagonal red stripe , which combine Peru 's national colours . This basic design has been used continuously since 1936 , and gives rise to the team 's common Spanish nickname , la <unk> ( " the white @-@ and @-@ red " ) . 
 Peru took part in the inaugural FIFA World Cup in 1930 and enjoyed victories in the 1938 Bolivarian Games and the 1939 Copa América , with goalkeeper Juan Valdivieso and forwards Teodoro Fernández and Alejandro Villanueva playing important roles . Peruvian football 's successful period in the 1970s brought it worldwide recognition ; the team then included the formidable forward partnership of Hugo Sotil and Teófilo Cubillas , often regarded as Peru 's greatest player , and defender Héctor Chumpitaz . This team qualified for three World Cups and won the Copa América in 1975 . 
 The Peruvian team last reached the World Cup finals in 1982 ; it has since not qualified , and has not won any major tournament . FIFA temporarily suspended the country from international competition in late 2008 during the Peruvian government 's investigations into alleged corruption within the FPF . Under the management of Ricardo Gareca , Peru came third at the 2015 Copa América , reached the quarterfinals of the Copa América Centenario , and currently participates in the qualification phase for the 2018 World Cup finals in Russia . 
 = = History = = 
 Football was introduced to Peru in the 19th century by British immigrants and Peruvians returning from England . In 1859 , members of the capital Lima 's British community founded the Lima Cricket Club , Peru 's first organization dedicated to the practice of cricket , rugby , and football . These new sports became popular among the local upper @-@ class over the following decades , but early developments were halted by the War of the Pacific against Chile from 1879 to 1883 . After the war , Peru 's coastal society embraced football as a modern innovation . The sport became a popular daily activity in Lima <unk> , encouraged by bosses who wanted it to inspire solidarity and improved productivity among their workers . In the adjacent port of Callao and other commercial areas , British civilian workers and sailors played the sport among themselves and with locals . Sports rivalries between locals and foreigners arose in Callao , and between elites and workers in Lima . Over time , as foreigners departed , this evolved into a rivalry between Callao and Lima . These factors , coupled with the sport 's rapid growth among the urban poor of Lima 's La Victoria district ( where the Alianza Lima club was formed in 1901 ) , led to Peru developing , according to historian Andreas Campomar , " some of the most elegant and accomplished football on the continent " , and the strongest footballing culture in the Andean region . 
 The Peruvian Football League was formed in 1912 and held each year until it broke up in 1921 amid disputes between the member clubs . The Peruvian Football Federation ( FPF ) was created the following year and , in 1926 , it reorganised the annual league competition . The FPF joined the South American Football Confederation ( CONMEBOL ) in 1925 , and formed a national team in 1927 — the delay was due to financial issues . The team debuted in the 1927 South American Championship , which the FPF hosted at the Estadio Nacional in Lima . Peru 's first match was a 0 – 4 loss against Uruguay ; their second was a 3 – 2 victory over Bolivia . Peru next took part in the inaugural FIFA World Cup in 1930 , but was eliminated in the first stage . 
 The 1930s have been called Peruvian football 's first golden era . During this decade , Peruvians traveled abroad in search of competition that would further develop their football . One notable travel was held in Europe between 1933 and 1934 by the <unk> del Pacífico , a squad composed of Chilean and Peruvian footballers , which provided the South Americans with much @-@ needed experience . Starting with <unk> Lima in 1926 , Peruvian clubs also toured Latin America , achieving numerous victories . During one of these tours — Alianza Lima 's undefeated journey through Chile in 1935 — a group of players emerged that became called the Rodillo Negro ( " Black Roller " ) , led by forwards Alejandro Villanueva and Teodoro Fernández and goalkeeper Juan Valdivieso . Sports historian Richard Witzig described these three as " a soccer triumvirate unsurpassed in the world at that time " , citing their combined innovation and effectiveness at both ends of the field . Peru and the Rodillo Negro awed crowds at the 1936 Summer Olympics , won the inaugural Bolivarian Games in 1938 , and finished the decade as South American champions . 
 Subsequent years proved less successful for the team ; according to historian David Goldblatt , " despite all the apparent preconditions for footballing growth and success , Peruvian football disappeared " . He attributes this sudden decline to Peruvian authorities ' repression of " social , sporting and political organisations among the urban and rural poor " during the 1940s and 1950s . Peru generally performed creditably at the South American Championships during this period , nevertheless , and only narrowly missed qualification for the Sweden 1958 World Cup finals , losing over two legs to eventual champions Brazil . 
 A series of successes during the late 1960s , culminating with qualification for the 1970 World Cup finals in Mexico , ushered in a second golden period for Peruvian football . The formidable forward partnership between Teófilo Cubillas and Hugo Sotil has been cited as a key factor in Peru 's success during the 1970s . Peru reached the quarter @-@ finals in 1970 , losing to the tournament winners Brazil , and earned the first FIFA Fair Play Trophy ; the team was , Richard Henshaw writes , " the surprise of the 1970 competition , showing flair and a high level of skill " . Five years later , Peru was crowned South American champions for the second time when it won the 1975 Copa América ( as the South American Championship was renamed that year ) . The team then qualified for two consecutive World Cup tournaments : it reached the second round in Argentina 1978 , and was knocked out in the first group stage at the 1982 tournament in Spain . Peru 's early elimination in 1982 ended a period when the side 's " flowing football was admired across the globe " . In spite of this , Peru barely missed the 1986 World Cup finals after placing second in a qualification group to eventual champions Argentina . 
 Renewed expectations for Peru were centred on a young generation of Alianza Lima players known colloquially as Los <unk> ( " The Colts " ) . Sociologists Aldo <unk> and Victor <unk> write that Los <unk> " became the hope of the entire country " — fans expected them to qualify for the 1990 World Cup in Italy . The national team entered a hiatus after the Alianza Lima air disaster of 8 December 1987 , when a plane carrying most of Alianza 's players and staff crashed into the Pacific Ocean . Only the pilot survived the crash ; among the dead were the Peru manager , Marcos Calderón , and several Peru international players , including goalkeeper José González <unk> and Luis Escobar , who was widely tipped as a future star forward . Afterward , Peru did not come close to reaching the World Cup finals until the process for France 1998 , when it missed qualification only on goal difference . This team would go on to win the 1999 Kirin Cup tournament in Japan ( sharing the title with Belgium ) and place third at the 2000 CONCACAF Gold Cup — which it contested as an invited guest team . 
 After the turn of the 21st century , qualification for the FIFA World Cup finals continued being an elusive objective for Peru . According to historian Charles F. Walker , the Peruvian national team and football league were marred by player indiscipline problems . Troubles in the FPF , particularly with its then @-@ president Manuel Burga , deepened the crisis in Peruvian football . Nonetheless , during this time Peru won the 2005 and 2011 Kirin Cup tournaments , and earned third place in the 2011 Copa América . In early 2015 , businessman Edwin Oviedo succeeded Burga as FPF president . In March 2015 , Ricardo Gareca was appointed as Peru 's new manager ; after coaching Peru to a third place in the 2015 Copa América and to the quarterfinals of the Copa América Centenario , he leads the team in the qualification phase for the Russia 2018 World Cup finals . 
 = = Colours = = 
 The Peru national football team plays in red and white , the country 's national colours . Its first @-@ choice kit has been , since 1936 , white shorts , white socks , and white shirts with a distinctive red " sash " crossing their front diagonally from the proper left shoulder to the right hip and returning on the back from the right hip to the proper left shoulder . This basic scheme has been only slightly altered over the years . It has won praise as one of world football 's most attractive kit designs ; Christopher Turpin , the executive producer of NPR 's All Things Considered news show , lauded the 1970 iteration in 2010 as " the beautiful game 's most beautiful shirt " , also commenting that it " was retro even in 1970 " . The version worn in 1978 came first in a 2010 ESPN list of the " Best World Cup jerseys of all time " , described therein as a " simple yet strikingly effective piece of design " . 
 Peru 's first kit , made for the 1927 South American Championship , comprised a white @-@ and @-@ red striped shirt , white shorts and black socks . Peru was compelled to use an alternative design in the 1930 World Cup because Paraguay had already registered a kit with white @-@ and @-@ red striped shirts . The Peruvians instead wore white shirts with a red collar , white shorts and black socks . For the 1935 South American Championship , a horizontal red stripe was added to the shirt . The following year , at the Berlin Olympics , the team adopted the red sash design it has retained ever since . According to historian <unk> @-@ Vidal <unk> , the idea for the diagonal red stripe came from school football matches in which coloured sashes worn over the shoulder would allow two teams wearing white shirts to play against each other . 
 The Peru national team has had eight official kit manufacturers . The first of these , Adidas , began supplying the team 's kit in 1978 . Peru have since had contracts with Penalty ( 1981 – 82 ) , Adidas ( 1983 – 85 ) , Calvo <unk> ( 1987 ) , Power ( 1989 – 91 ) , Diadora ( 1991 – 92 ) , local manufacturer <unk> ( 1993 – 95 ) , Umbro ( 1996 – 97 ) , and Peruvian company Walon Sport ( 1998 – 2010 ) . Umbro have again produced the team 's kit since 2010 . 
 = = Stadium = = 
 The traditional home of Peruvian football is the country 's national stadium , the Estadio Nacional in Lima , which houses 45 @,@ 000 spectators . The present ground is the Estadio Nacional 's third incarnation , the result of renovations conducted under the Alan García administration ; it was officially inaugurated on 24 July 2011 , 88 years to the day after the original ground opened on the same site in 1923 . 
 The original Estadio Nacional was a wooden structure with a capacity of 6 @,@ 000 , donated by members of Lima 's British community to celebrate the centenary of Peru 's independence from Spain . Following a campaign for the ground 's renovation , headed by Miguel Dasso , president of the Sociedad de <unk> de Lima , it was rebuilt with a larger capacity under General Manuel A. Odría and opened for the second time on 27 October 1952 . The stadium was last redeveloped in 2011 ; improvements included the construction of a plaque @-@ covered exterior , a multicoloured illumination system added inside the ground , as well as two giant LED screens and 375 private suites . 
 A distinctive feature of the ground is the Miguel Dasso Tower on its northern side , which contains luxury boxes ; it was most recently renovated in 2004 . The Estadio Nacional has a natural <unk> pitch . It was , from 2005 to 2011 , the only national stadium in CONMEBOL to have artificial turf , which was installed for the 2005 FIFA U @-@ 17 World Championship . The stadium was during this period one of Peru 's four " FIFA Star II " grounds , the highest certification granted to artificial pitches , but the synthetic turf was blamed for players ' injuries , such as burns and bruises . Natural grass was reinstalled as part of the redevelopments completed in 2011 . 
 Peru sometimes play home matches at other venues . Outside the desert @-@ like coast region of Lima , the thin atmosphere at the high @-@ altitude Estadio Garcilaso de la Vega in Cusco has been described as providing strategic advantages for Peru against certain visiting teams . Other common alternate venues for the national team include two other grounds in the Peruvian capital — Alianza 's Estadio Alejandro Villanueva and Universitario 's Estadio Monumental . The last time the Peruvian team played at an alternate venue was in 2012 , when it faced Chile at the Estadio Jorge <unk> in Tacna . 
 = = Supporters = = 
 Football has been the most popular sport in Peru since the early 20th century . Originally largely exclusive to Lima 's Anglophile elite and expatriates , and secluded from the rest of the city , football became an integral part of wider popular culture during the 1900s and 1910s . Over the following decades , Augusto B. <unk> 's government institutionalised the sport into a national pastime by promoting and organising its development . Consequently , the national football team became an important element of Peru 's national identity . 
 Peruvian football fans are known for their distinctive chant ¡ Arriba Perú ! ( " Come on Peru ! " ) , as well as for their use of traditional Peruvian <unk> criolla to express support , both at national team games and at club matches . Música criolla attained national and international recognition with the advent of mass media during the 1930s , becoming a recognised symbol of Peru and its culture . The national team 's most popular anthems are Peru <unk> , a <unk> criolla ( Peruvian polka ) glorifying Peru 's qualification for the Mexico 1970 World Cup , and Contigo Perú , a <unk> criollo ( Peruvian waltz ) that newspaper El Comercio calls " the hymn of Peruvian national football teams " . 
 The Estadio Nacional disaster of 24 May 1964 , involving Peruvian supporters , is cited as one of the worst tragedies in football history . During a qualifying match for the 1964 Olympics between Peru 's under @-@ 20 team and its counterpart from Argentina , the Uruguayan referee Angel <unk> disallowed a would @-@ be Peruvian equaliser , alleging rough play . Spectators threw missiles from the stands while two fans invaded the pitch and attacked the referee . Police threw tear gas into the crowd , causing a stampede ; trying to escape , fans were crushed against the stadium 's locked gates . A total of 315 people were killed in the chaos , with more than 500 others injured . 
 = = Rivalries = = 
 The Peru national football team maintains prominent rivalries with its counterparts from neighbouring Chile and Ecuador . The Peruvians have a favourable record against Ecuador and a negative record against Chile . Peru faced both rivals in the 1939 South American Championship in Lima , which was also the first time Peru faced Ecuador in an official tournament ; Peru won both games . Peru also defeated its rivals during qualifying for the Argentina 1978 World Cup , directly eliminating both teams . 
 The Chile – Peru football rivalry is known in Spanish as the Clásico del Pacífico ( " Pacific Derby " ) . CNN World Sport editor Greg Duke ranks it among the top ten football rivalries in the world . Peru first faced Chile in the 1935 South American Championship , defeating it 1 – 0 . The two countries traditionally compete with each other over the rank of fourth @-@ best national team in South America ( after Argentina , Brazil , and Uruguay ) . They also both claim to have invented the bicycle kick ; Peruvians call it the chalaca , while it is the chilena in Chile . 
 The rivalry between the Ecuador and Peru football teams is rooted in the historical border conflict between the countries dating back to the 19th century . In 1995 , after the brief <unk> War , CONMEBOL contemplated altering that year 's Copa América group stage to prevent a match between the two sides , but ultimately did not . According to Michael Handelsman , Ecuadorian fans consider losses to Colombia or Peru " an excuse to lament Ecuador 's inability to establish itself as an international soccer power " . Handelsman adds that " [ t ] he rivalries are intense , and the games always carry an element of national pride and honor " . 
 = = Players = = 
 = = = Current = = = 
 The following 23 players were called up for the Copa América Centenario squad . Caps and goals are correct as of 17 June 2016 after the match against Colombia . 
 = = = Recent = = = 
 The players listed below were not included in the most recent squad , but have been called up by Peru in the last 12 months . 
 INJ Withdrew because of injury 
 PRE Preliminary squad 
 WD Withdrew for personal reasons 
 = = = Notable = = = 
 A report published by CONMEBOL in 2008 described Peru as traditionally exhibiting an " elegant , technical and fine football style " , and praised it as " one of the most loyal exponents of South American football talent " . Peruvian players noted in the CONMEBOL article as " true artists of the ball " include forwards Teófilo Cubillas , Pedro Pablo León and Hugo Sotil , defender Héctor Chumpitaz and midfielders Roberto <unk> , César Cueto , José del Solar , and Roberto Palacios . 
 Cubillas , an attacking midfielder and forward popularly known as El Nene ( " The Kid " ) , is widely regarded as Peru 's greatest ever player . Chumpitaz is often cited as the team 's best defender ; Witzig lists him among his " Best Players of the Modern Era " , and praises him as " a strong reader of the game with excellent ball skills and distribution , [ who ] marshalled a capable defence to support Peru 's attack " . Cueto , Cubillas , and José Velásquez were together described as " the best [ midfield ] in the world " by El <unk> , an Argentine sports journal , in 1978 . 
 Teodoro Fernández , Alejandro Villanueva , and Juan Valdivieso are often regarded as the key members of the Rodillo Negro team of the 1930s . Fernández was the team 's forward and primary goalscorer ; his partner in attack , Villanueva , was a gifted playmaker . Valdivieso was a goalkeeper with a reputation for exceptional athleticism who often saved penalties . 
 A commemorative match between teams representing Europe and South America was organised in Basel , Switzerland for the benefit of homeless children in 1972 . Cubillas , Chumpitaz , Sotil , and Julio <unk> played in the South American team , which won the game 2 – 0 ; Cubillas scored the first goal . A similar match was held the next year at Barcelona 's Camp Nou with the declared intent of fighting global poverty ; Cubillas , Chumpitaz and Sotil again played , with Chumpitaz named South America 's captain . Each of the Peruvians scored in a 4 – 4 draw , which South America won 7 – 6 on penalties . 
 = = Managers = = 
 A total of 59 managers have led the Peru national football team since 1927 ( including multiple spells separately ) ; of these , 36 have been from Peru and 23 have been from abroad . Sports analysts and historians generally consider Peru 's most successful managers to have been the Englishman Jack Greenwell and the Peruvian Marcos Calderón . The former managed Peru to triumph in the 1938 Bolivarian Games and the 1939 South American Championship , and the latter led Peru to victory in the 1975 Copa América tournament and coached it at the 1978 FIFA World Cup . Three other managers have led Peru to tournament victories — Juan Carlos <unk> , Freddy <unk> , and Sergio <unk> each oversaw Peru 's victory in the Kirin Cup in Japan , in 1999 , 2005 and 2011 , respectively . 
 Peru 's first two managers were the Uruguayans Pedro Olivieri , who was hired to manage Peru in the 1927 South American Championship because of his prior experience managing Uruguay , and Julio Borelli , who spent a few years as a referee in Peru before managing the national team in the 1929 South American Championship . The team 's third manager , Spaniard Francisco Bru ( a former FC Barcelona player who had been the first manager of Spain ) , coached Peru at the inaugural World Cup in 1930 . The team 's first Peruvian head coach was its fourth manager , Telmo <unk> . The team 's current manager is the Argentine Ricardo Gareca . 
 Managers that brought changes to the Peru national team 's style of play , according to historian Andreas Campomar , include Hungarian György Orth and Brazilian <unk> Pereira . Orth coached Peru from 1957 to 1959 ; Campomar cites Peru 's " 4 – 1 thrashing of England in Lima " as evidence of Orth 's positive influence over the national team 's game . Pereira coached Peru from 1968 to 1970 and managed it at the 1970 FIFA World Cup ; Campomar attributes Pereira 's tactics as the reason for Peru 's development of a " free @-@ flowing football " style . Brazilian Elba de <unk> Lima , who managed Peru at the 1982 FIFA World Cup , was attributed by <unk> , a Brazilian sports journal , with making Peru " a team that plays beautiful , combining efficiency with that swagger that people thought only existed in Brazil " . 
 = = Competitive records = = 
 = = = FIFA World Cup = = = 
 The Peruvian team competed at the first World Cup in 1930 by invitation , and has entered each tournament at the qualifying stage since 1958 . Having qualified three times ( in 1970 , 1978 and 1982 ) , Peru has taken part in the World Cup finals four times . Its all @-@ time record in World Cup qualifying matches as of 2014 stands at 35 wins , 30 draws and 59 losses . In the finals , the team has won four matches , drawn three and lost eight , with 19 goals in favour and 31 against . Luis de Souza Ferreira scored Peru 's first World Cup goal on 14 July 1930 , in a match against Romania . Jefferson Farfán is Peru 's top scorer and seventh @-@ overall top scorer in CONMEBOL World Cup qualification , with 15 goals . Teófilo Cubillas is the team 's top scorer in the World Cup finals , with 10 goals in 13 games . 
 During the 1930 competition , a Peruvian became the first player sent off in a World Cup — his identity is disputed between sources . Peru 's Ramón Quiroga holds the unusual record of being the only goalkeeper to commit a foul in the opponent 's side of the pitch in a match at the World Cup finals . The national team won the inaugural FIFA Fair Play Trophy , awarded at the 1970 World Cup , having been the only team not to receive any yellow or red cards during the competition . 
 = = = Copa América = = = 
 Peru 's national team has taken part in 31 editions of the Copa América since 1927 , and has won the competition twice ( in 1939 and 1975 ) . The country has hosted the tournament six times ( in 1927 , 1935 , 1939 , 1953 , 1957 and 2004 ) . Peru 's overall record in the competition is 52 victories , 33 draws , and 57 losses . Peru won the Fair Play award in the 2015 edition . Demetrio <unk> scored Peru 's first goal in the competition on 13 November 1927 , in a match against Bolivia . Three tournaments have featured a Peruvian top scorer — Teodoro Fernández in 1939 and Paolo Guerrero in 2011 and 2015 . Fernández , the Copa América 's third @-@ overall scorer , was named best player of the 1939 tournament ; Teófilo Cubillas , voted the best player in the 1975 competition , is the only other Peruvian to win this award . 
 Peru won its first continental title in 1939 , when it won the South American Championship with successive victories over Ecuador , Chile , Paraguay and Uruguay . It was the first time the competition had been won by a team other than Uruguay , Brazil , or Argentina . Peru became South American champions for the second time in 1975 , when it won that year 's Copa América , the first to feature all ten CONMEBOL members . Peru came top of their group in the first round , eliminating Chile and Bolivia , and in the semifinals drew with Brazil over two legs , winning 3 – 1 in Brazil but losing 2 – 0 at home . Peru was declared the winner by drawing of lots . In the two @-@ legged final between Colombia and Peru , both teams won their respective home games ( 1 – 0 in Bogota and 2 – 0 in Lima ) , forcing a play @-@ off in Caracas which Peru won 1 – 0 . 
 = = = Olympic Games = = = 
 Peru 's senior side has competed in the Olympic football tournament once , at the 1936 Summer Olympics in Berlin , Germany . The multiracial 1936 team has been latterly described by historian David Goldblatt as " the jewel of the country 's first Olympic delegation " . It had a record of two victories , scoring 11 goals and conceding 5 . Teodoro Fernández scored Peru 's first goal in the tournament in the match against Finland on 6 August , and finished as the team 's top scorer with six goals in two games , including Peru 's only hat @-@ trick at the Olympics . 
 The 1935 South American Championship in Lima acted as the qualifying stage for the 1936 Olympic tournament . Uruguay won undefeated and Argentina came second , but neither took up their Olympic spot because of economic issues . Peru , who had come third , duly represented South America . The Peruvian team began the competition with a 7 – 3 win over Finland , after which it faced Austria , managed by Jimmy Hogan and popularly known as the <unk> , in the quarterfinals . After the game ended 2 – 2 , Peru scored twice in extra time to win 4 – 2 . Peru was expected to then face Poland in the semifinals , but events off the pitch led to the withdrawal of Peru 's Olympic delegation before the match was played . 
 = = Team records and results = = 
 The Peru national team has played 545 matches since 1927 , including friendlies . The largest margin of victory achieved by a Peru side is 9 – 1 against Ecuador , on 11 August 1938 at the Bolivarian Games in Colombia . The team 's record deficit , 7 – 0 , occurred against Brazil at the 1997 Copa América in Bolivia . 
 The Peruvian player with the most international caps is Roberto Palacios , who represented the country 122 times between 1992 and 2007 . Second is Héctor Chumpitaz , with 105 appearances ; Jorge Soto is third with 101 . The most capped goalkeeper is Óscar Ibáñez , who played for Peru 50 times between 1998 and 2005 . Second is Miguel Miranda with 47 appearances ; Ramón Quiroga is third with 40 . 
 The team 's all @-@ time top goalscorer is Paolo Guerrero , with 27 goals in 68 appearances . He is followed by Teófilo Cubillas , who scored 26 goals in 81 appearances , and Teodoro Fernández , with 24 goals in 32 games . Peru 's fastest goal — that is , that scored soonest after kick @-@ off — was scored by Claudio Pizarro less than a minute into the match against Mexico on 20 August 2003 . 
 = Not Pictured = 
 " Not Pictured " is the second season finale of the American mystery television series Veronica Mars , serving as the twenty @-@ second episode of the season and the forty @-@ fourth episode overall . Co @-@ written by series creator Rob Thomas and John Enbom and directed by John Kretchmer , the episode premiered on UPN on May 9 , 2006 . 
 The series depicts the adventures of Veronica Mars ( Kristen Bell ) as she deals with life as a high school student while moonlighting as a private detective . In this episode , Veronica learns the identity of the person responsible for the Neptune High bus crash . Meanwhile , Veronica and her classmates graduate from high school , and Neptune reacts to Aaron Echolls ( Harry Hamlin ) being acquitted . 
 " Not Pictured " reveals Cassidy " Beaver " Casablancas ( Kyle Gallner ) as the perpetrator behind the bus crash and Veronica 's rape . This plot twist was planned since Beaver 's introduction . The episode also features the final appearances of several characters , including Aaron Echolls , Beaver , Jackie Cook ( Tessa Thompson ) , Duncan Kane ( Teddy Dunn ) , and Woody Goodman ( Steve Guttenberg ) . This episode would be the final episode of the show to air on UPN before switching to The CW . The finale was critically acclaimed and is often cited as one of the best of the series . 
 = = Background = = 
 The second season revolves around a school bus that mysteriously goes off a cliff , killing nine people . Throughout the season , Veronica investigates the murder , focusing on a variety of suspects , including the Fitzpatrick family , Kendall Casablancas ( Charisma Carpenter ) , and Terrence Cook ( Jeffrey Sams ) before turning her suspicion on Woody Goodman ( Steve Guttenberg ) after she learns that he is a child molester . " Not Pictured " solves the mystery through a plot twist . Meanwhile , Veronica previously dated Duncan Kane ( Teddy Dunn ) , before he left with his baby daughter ( with one of the bus crash victims ) for Mexico . In addition , Aaron Echolls ( Harry Hamlin ) , the murderer of Lilly Kane , Duncan 's sister , was acquitted him of all charges . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After the Aaron Echolls trial , he is interviewed by press and cheering fans . Veronica tells Keith ( Enrico Colantoni ) that the Manning father has offered $ 20 @,@ 000 for the capture of Woody . Veronica talks to Wallace ( Percy Daggs III ) about Jackie ( Tessa Thompson ) leaving . Keith visits Vinnie ( Ken Marino ) in prison , and they agree to track Woody down together . Veronica and Keith learn that Woody was treated for chlamydia . In a dream , Veronica shares a happy family breakfast before her graduation , meeting Wallace for the first time that day before meeting Lilly ( Amanda Seyfried ) . Veronica makes a fake call as Gia to Woody 's lawyer , and he reveals that Woody was living at the Quail Creek Lodge under the name Mr. Underhill . At Veronica 's graduation , Keith says that he 's going to chase Woody , and Mac ( Tina Majorino ) tells Veronica that she is going to a hotel with Beaver that night . Just before he can graduate , Weevil ( Francis Capra ) is arrested for the murder of Thumper ( James Molina ) . Veronica graduates and says goodbye to Principal Clemmons ( Duane Daniels ) . 
 Keith surprises Veronica with plane tickets to New York . Alicia Fennel ( Erica Gimpel ) tells Veronica that Wallace has left for Paris to track Jackie . Veronica calls Jackie and tells her that she knows she was never accepted to the Sorbonne and asks her to meet Wallace in New York . At Woody 's hiding place , Keith attacks and tasers him . However , Woody denies crashing the bus . Veronica sees a little league team picture in Woody 's restaurant which suggests that Beaver was on Woody 's baseball team and thus connected to the crash . Veronica dashes to the after @-@ graduation party . Beaver and Mac are about to have sex , but while she is in the shower , Beaver reads a text from Veronica to Mac warning her , and Beaver texts Veronica to meet " her " on the roof . Aaron Echolls threatens Veronica in the elevator . Beaver meets Veronica and puts a gun on her . Veronica explains her hypothesis — that he killed Marcos and Peter so they would not spill the news of their molestation , that he got explosives from David " Curly " Moran , convinced the PCHers that Curly destroyed the bus before killing Curly himself , also writing Veronica Mars on his palm . 
 Veronica asks Beaver how she got chlamydia — Woody had it , and Beaver transmitted it to her the night she was raped ( revealing that he , not Duncan , raped her ) . Beaver is about to blow up the plane that has both Woody and Keith on it . Beaver pushes a button , and there is a flash in midair . Beaver tases Veronica before Logan appears , having read the text to Mac . The two steal Beaver 's gun , and he ends up committing suicide instead of facing the consequences of his actions . Aaron and Kendall ( Charisma Carpenter ) are in bed , and while she is in the shower , Clarence Weidman ( Christopher B. Duncan ) appears and shoots him in the head . The scene moves to Australia , where we learn that Duncan organized the murder . Jackie meets Wallace and tells him that she had to go back to New York , where she is actually from , in order to care for her two @-@ year @-@ old son , whom she left with her mother , when she came to Neptune to reconnect with Terrence . Veronica learns that Keith is alive — he was not ever on the plane , but Woody was . Kendall receives $ 8 million , as Cassidy basically gave her the money as part of her plan . Veronica and Logan ( Jason Dohring ) rekindle their relationship . Kendall makes Keith a business proposal , and as a result , he misses their plane flight to New York . 
 = = Arc significance = = 
 The episode <unk> several important plot strands of the second season . Together , Keith and Vinnie Van Lowe track down Woody Goodman and arrest him . Veronica imagines graduation if Lilly had not been murdered , and then actually graduates . Jackie reveals her true past to Wallace before leaving him finally . Veronica learns that Beaver was responsible for the bus crash and gave her chlamydia after he raped her . Beaver explodes the plane with Woody Goodman on it . Logan comes up to the roof and attacks Beaver . Afterwards , Beaver commits suicide by jumping off the top of the building . Aaron is murdered by Clarence Wiedman , and Duncan was the person responsible for the attack . Veronica and Keith plan to go to New York , but due to a business offer from Kendall , Keith misses their flight . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was co @-@ written by Rob Thomas and John Enbom and directed by John T. Kretchmer , marking Thomas ' sixth writing credit for Veronica Mars , Enbom 's tenth writing credit for the series , and Kretchmer 's ninth directing credit for the show . " Not Pictured " reveals Cassidy " Beaver " Casablancas as the perpetrator behind Veronica 's rape and the bus crash . Thomas and the crew had planned for Beaver to be the second season antagonist since the character 's first appearance in " M.A.D. " . Thomas said , " We knew that Beaver was the killer of Season 2 when we introduced him in Season 1 . We knew his motivation , so playing him as the picked @-@ upon , less @-@ manly Casablancas boy was all by design . " An episode earlier in the series , titled " A Trip to the Dentist " , supposedly revealed that Duncan had had sex with Veronica when they were both under the influence of drugs , a fact which is potentially negated by this episode . When writing the episode , Thomas and Diane Ruggiero did not plan for Beaver to be the actual rapist , with Thomas saying that " I wish I could claim that we were that clever . " 
 Lead actress Kristen Bell , who deduced that Aaron Echolls was the killer in Season 1 , was unable to figure out the identity of the murderer in Season 2 . " You never , ever see the show keep the killer in the main titles , " adding that the writers " think they 're so smart … and they are ! " Actor Michael Muhney , who plays Don Lamb , expressed some anxiety over the course of the season that he would be the killer . However , Bell played a prank on Muhney , telling him that she knew the killer was going to be Loretta Cancun , a minor character from the pilot . Bell said , " [ Muhney ] only believed me for like a day . " Kyle Gallner , who plays Beaver , did not know that his character was going to be the murderer until just before the shooting of " Not Pictured " , when one of the costume designers told him about the reveal : 
 I had no idea up until right before we shot the episode . They wouldn 't tell me . The only reason I found out was the wardrobe guy had gotten the script and he was like " Do you wanna know ? " and I was like " What ? " and he kinda spilled the beans actually . So I had no idea . I thought it was more along the lines of I was younger than everybody so I wasn 't going off to college . That 's why I was only in one season , I didn 't know it was because that whole thing was gonna happen . So I literally didn 't know until probably about a week before . 
 The episode also features the final appearance of Harry Hamlin as Season 1 antagonist Aaron Echolls after the character is murdered by Clarence Wiedman ( Christopher B. Duncan ) . Later , we learn that the murder was ordered by Duncan Kane ( Teddy Dunn ) , who appears briefly in a small cameo . Dunn had made his final regular appearance in " Donut Run " and had left the show partly due to fan dislike of the character . Dunn later stated that he thought that the purpose of the cameo was to garner sympathy for the character before his final departure . " I think Rob 's goal was to leave the character on a high note . I certainly think he did so in a heroic way . " 
 " Not Pictured " would mark the final appearance by series regular Jackie Cook ( Tessa Thompson ) . When asked whether Jackie was done with the show , Thomas replied , " She is . I would not hesitate for a second to have her come in to do an arc , but she will not be a series regular . " One notable recurring character absence in the finale is that of Gia Goodman ( Krysten Ritter ) . Ritter wanted to appear in the episode , but she was unable to do so because of scheduling conflicts . " It was unfortunate for me that I couldn 't be in the finale episode ( I booked a pilot ) because I was looking forward to showing how everything that went down affected her . On a side note , I did start to think that I was responsible for the crash . I really wanted her to be a bad guy . " She would later appear in the Veronica Mars movie . 
 " Not Pictured " was the final episode of Veronica Mars to air on UPN before the show switched to The CW as part of the 2006 United States broadcast TV realignment . Due to low ratings , there was considerable doubt that Veronica Mars would be renewed . Meanwhile , The CW had developed several new pilots . However , The CW did not pick up the majority of their pilots , making room on the schedule for other shows . In order to express their support for the show 's renewal , fans flew a banner outside the offices of UPN and The CW . 
 Renewal was uncertain until after the finale aired . In April , actor Enrico Colantoni , who plays Keith , stated regarding renewal , 
 Unofficially , everyone at CBS and Warner Bros is saying , " Yeah , no worries ! " But you know , those are always famous last words . And then last year they told us two days after we wrapped , and they got a lot of criticism over that . So I know they 're not gonna make that mistake again . They 're gonna wait until May . 
 Colantoni also expressed optimism towards the show 's future on The CW , believing that it would be a chance for the show to get more exposure . On May 15 , before the official press release was announced , it was believed that The CW had ordered 13 episodes of Veronica Mars . Later , it was revealed that the series had been renewed for a 22 @-@ episode season , but that the season could be shortened if ratings were poor . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Not Pictured " received 2 @.@ 42 million viewers , ranking 98th of 109 in the weekly rankings . This marked a decrease in viewers from the second season premiere , " Normal Is the Watchword " , which received 3 @.@ 29 million viewers and the first season finale , " Leave It to Beaver " , which received 2 @.@ 99 million viewers . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The episode was critically acclaimed . Jesse Hassenger of PopMatters wrote that " the season finale showcased the series at its surprising and funny best , not its rushed and convoluted worst . " He called the reversal of the rape plot line a " gimmicky reversal " but that " thematically it worked . " The reviewer commented positively on the reveal of Beaver as the murderer as well as the cliffhanger . " The season 's low @-@ key but effective cliffhanger … suggested again that her life , however charmed and TV @-@ ish it can seem , remains in youthful flux . " 
 Eric Goldman of IGN gave a glowing review , giving the episode a 9 out of 10 , indicating that it was " amazing . " He wrote that " most of the major mysteries established this season are given a satisfying and proper conclusion . " He praised how the episode combined all the second season storylines , including the mysteries and the Neptune High portion of Veronica 's life . " The final scenes do a very nice job of closing the high school chapter of the Veronica Mars story , while also leaving plenty of questions about the future of some characters in particular . " Goldman also lauded the performances of Kristen Bell and Enrico Colantoni , writing that " As always , Kristen Bell and Enrico Colantoni knock it out of the park , with Bell especially having to go through a rather stunning amount of emotional transitions , all of which she does spectacularly . " 
 In a review of the whole second season , Goldman wrote that " Their was [ sic ] some complaints that the season finale was a bit too rushed , with a lot of information offered all at once . Yet while that 's a bit valid , it 's also an exciting and surprising finale , that actually offers some bigger shocks than season 1 . " Rowan Kaiser of The A.V. Club gave a mostly positive review , praising the reveal of Beaver as the murderer while being slightly critical of his reveal as Veronica 's rapist . He wrote that " as twists go , this was a good one " and that " Kyle Gallner makes the transition from goofy , kind of pathetic little brother to insane mastermind quite well — the circles under his eyes , specifically , which seemed to indicate anxiety before suddenly indicated darkness and insanity when seen in a new light . " Regarding the rape reveal , the reviewers wrote that " On a narrative level , I was fine with it ... it 's still a big problem in an emotional sense . In general , rape is a difficult subject , and to see it used as a plot device creates problems on its own . " Kaiser summed up his review by writing , " ' Not Pictured ' acts as an effective capstone for a chaotic season . Sure , it doesn 't entirely work , but overall , it gets the job done with emotion and flair . " 
 Price Peterson , writing for TV.com , gave a glowing review , calling it " the best @-@ yet episode of Veronica Mars " . He elaborated by stating , 
 This episode was just a total triumph for how it brought together SO <unk> from the past 22 episodes and beyond . I loved the Aaron Echolls assassination . I loved that last image of Duncan enjoying his victory in a perpetual magic hour on some Australian beach . I especially loved the It 's a Wonderful Life @-@ esque dream sequence . This episode was so good that even though I knew Beaver was the bad guy , I still came away shocked by many of the reveals . That 's just good writing right there . 
 Conversely , Television Without Pity gave the episode a " B + " . 
 Amy Ratcliffe , writing for IGN , ranked the episode as the fifth best episode of Veronica Mars , writing , " the Season 2 finale had head @-@ twisting reveals , heartbreaking moments … tragedy , and so many jumps in crime @-@ solving that Sherlock might not have been able to keep up . " BuzzFeed called the episode the best episode of the series , stating , " It 's extremely violent , extremely scary , and extremely moving . If you don 't cry watching this episode , there 's a tiny little rock where your heart should be . " On a similar list , TV Line ranked the episode third , only behind " A Trip to the Dentist " and " Pilot " . Give Me My Remote also ranked the episode as the best of the series , writing , " If I had to pick a single episode to represent the show , this would be it . The actual plot of this episode was compelling , fast @-@ paced , and the twist at the end was shocking . " The reviewer went on to praise Kristen Bell 's performance and the less action @-@ heavy parts of the episode . 
 Digital Spy listed the episode on an unranked list of the five best Veronica Mars episodes , writing that it " has its issues " but that " the rooftop sequence with Veronica , Cassidy ( Kyle Gallner ) and Logan is pure , gorgeous melodrama , and Keith 's fake @-@ out death feels devastating instead of cheap thanks to Kristen Bell 's gut @-@ wrenching performance . " In a list of the 50 greatest TV shows of all time , Empire noted " Not Pictured " as the best episode of the series . Reviewer Alan Sepinwall wrote that he was " very pleased with how things turned out " and that the twist fit with the evidence . However , he was more critical of Keith 's near @-@ death , writing , " What did feel like piling on , however , was Beaver ' killing ' Keith . Kristen Bell tried her best to sell it , but I wasn 't buying . " Entertainment Weekly called the episode one of the " 10 Essential Episodes " of Veronica Mars . 
 = St Mary 's Church , Llanfair @-@ yn @-@ y @-@ Cwmwd = 
 St Mary 's Church , Llanfair @-@ yn @-@ y @-@ Cwmwd is a small medieval parish church near the village of <unk> , in Anglesey , north Wales . The building probably dates from the 15th century , with some alterations . It contains a 12th @-@ century carved stone font and a 13th @-@ century decorated coffin lid . The bell is inscribed with the year of its casting , 1582 . The historian Henry Rowlands was vicar of St Mary 's in the late 17th and early 18th centuries . Maurice Wilks , who invented the Land Rover , is buried in the churchyard . 
 Although at one time during the 19th century St Mary 's was too dilapidated to permit services to be held , repairs were carried out in the 19th century . The church is used for worship by the Church in Wales , one of five in a combined parish . Services are held once per month between April and September . St Mary 's is a Grade II * listed building , a national designation given to " particularly important buildings of more than special interest " , in particular because it is regarded as " a good example of a simple , substantially unaltered , late Medieval church " . It is also said to be " an important survival " because many of the older churches in Anglesey were extensively rebuilt or repaired during the 19th century , and the alterations at St Mary 's were less extensive . 
 = = History and location = = 
 St Mary 's Church is located in a churchyard about 100 yards ( 90 m ) from the road in the countryside near the village of <unk> , in Anglesey , north Wales . The church is about 5 @.@ 5 miles ( 9 km ) from the county town of Llangefni , and just under 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 5 km ) from the neighbouring church of St Ceinwen 's , Llangeinwen . Llanfair @-@ yn @-@ y @-@ Cwmwd takes its name in part from the church : the Welsh word llan originally meant " enclosure " and then " church " , and " ‑ fair " is a modified form of the patron saint 's name ( Mair being the Welsh for " Mary " , here referring to St Mary , the mother of Jesus ) . Cwmwd means " commote " ( a type of Welsh land division ) , so the full name of the parish means " St Mary 's Church in the commote " . 
 The date of construction of the church is uncertain , but it is a medieval building , probably from the 15th century . The 19th @-@ century clergyman and antiquarian Harry Longueville Jones thought that the church was probably 16th @-@ century in date , but might have been built using material from an older structure . The historian Antony Carr has suggested that Llanfair @-@ yn @-@ y @-@ Cwmwd was the church dedicated to St Mary that was sacked by Normans in 1157 . St Mary 's was formerly one of the chapels of ease to St Nidan 's , Llanidan , along with St Deiniol 's , Llanddaniel Fab and St Edwen 's , Llanedwen . St Nidan 's and its chapels were owned by the Augustinian priory at Beddgelert , Gwynedd ; the date of transfer is uncertain , since not all the records have survived , but St Nidan 's is mentioned as belonging to the priory in a charter of 1360 . Carr has written that " we shall never know " how the " distant community " in Beddgelert came to possess the four Anglesey churches , but thought that it might be significant that the priory also controlled two churches on the mainland , on the other side of the Menai Strait . 
 During the 16th century , the windows of the nave had mullions ( stonework supporting the window structure ) added , and the roof trusses date from later in the same century ( or early in the following century ) . In her 1833 history of Anglesey , the antiquarian Angharad Llwyd said that the church had been " for years in a state of such dilapidation as to preclude the performance of divine service " , but she noted that it was being rebuilt at that time . However , compared to other churches in Anglesey , the 19th @-@ century changes were not substantial . Repairs were undertaken in 1936 under the supervision of the architects Harold Hughes and William G. Williams . 
 St Mary 's is still used for worship by the Church in Wales . A service of Holy Communion ( in Welsh ) is held on one Sunday afternoon per month between April and September ; no services are held during the rest of the year . It is one of five churches in the combined benefice ( parishes combined under one priest ) of Newborough with Llanidan with Llangeinwen and Llanfair @-@ yn @-@ y @-@ <unk> . St Mary 's is within the deanery of Tindaethwy and Menai , the archdeaconry of Bangor and the Diocese of Bangor . As of 2012 , the priest in charge of the group of parishes is E. Roberts . 
 People associated with the church include Henry Rowlands , a clergyman and antiquarian . He was the incumbent priest of St Nidan 's and its chapels of ease from 1696 until his death in 1723 , and wrote a history of Anglesey , Mona Antiqua Restaurata . Maurice Wilks , who invented the Land Rover , is buried in the churchyard . He had a farm nearby in Newborough and some prototype testing of the Land Rover was carried out in Anglesey . 
 = = Architecture and fittings = = 
 The church is built from rubble masonry , dressed with sandstone , and measures 47 by 14 feet ( 14 @.@ 3 by 4 @.@ 3 m ) . The entrance is at the west end of the north wall . The roof , which is made from slate , has a bellcote with one bell at the west end . The inscription on the bell states that it was cast in 1582 , and the bell is also marked with a fleur @-@ de @-@ lys and the thrice @-@ repeated initials " AMN " . 
 Inside , although there is no structural division between the nave and the chancel , there is a 19th @-@ century wooden screen with wrought @-@ iron gates between them , and a step up into the chancel . The sanctuary is marked with a further step , as is the base of the altar ; both steps are decorated with encaustic tiles . The internal woodwork of the roof , which has seven bays ( or sections ) , is exposed . 
 The window in the centre north wall has two lights ( sections of window separated by a mullion ) ; there are two pairs of two @-@ light windows in the south wall . The window at the east end had a pair of lights , topped by trefoils ( a stonework pattern of three overlapping circles ) . 
 The roughly oval <unk> font at the west end of the nave , which is from the 12th century , has a zig @-@ zag pattern , and three sides decorated with a cross . The base of the font , which is rectangular with rounded corners , has misshapen carved human heads at the corners and in the middle of one side , and a snake on two of the sides . A " P " -shaped sign on the east side of the font may have been added later . St Mary 's has a coffin lid dating from the middle of the 13th century , displayed upside down on the north wall of the chancel . It is decorated with a carved cross and a foliage design . One 19th @-@ century visitor noted another three old plain coffin lids on the church floor , with another in the churchyard near the east window . As well as an 18th @-@ century slate plaque on the south wall of the nave , there are also various memorials from the 19th and 20th centuries . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 The church has national recognition and statutory protection from alteration as it has been designated as a Grade II * listed building – the second @-@ highest of the three grades of listing , designating " particularly important buildings of more than special interest " . It was given this status on 30 January 1968 , and has been listed because it is regarded as " a good example of a simple , substantially unaltered , late Medieval church . " Cadw ( the Welsh Government body responsible for the built heritage of Wales and the inclusion of Welsh buildings on the statutory lists ) also notes that many old churches in Anglesey were rebuilt or restored during the 19th century , and that St Mary 's " can be considered an important survival . " 
 Writing in 1846 , Harry Longueville Jones said that St Mary 's was " one of the smallest buildings of its class in the island " and had " no feature of any architectural value . " He noted the " elaborate " coffin lid , and said that the font ( a " rude production of the twelfth century " ) was " one of the most remarkable in the collection of Anglesey monuments " . The historian and clergyman Edmund Tyrrell Green , writing a survey of Anglesey church architecture and contents in 1929 , referred to the coffin lid as one of the county 's " outstanding examples " of sepulchral memorials . 
 A 2006 guide to the churches of Anglesey describes St Mary 's as " a good example of a small unspoilt country church . " It notes the " simple " rood screen and the " well @-@ maintained " churchyard . A 2009 guide to the buildings of the region refers to the church as a " small unicameral church of undeterminable date " and says that the font , on its " strangely carved rectangular base " , is " inconsistent " with the Romanesque fonts found elsewhere in Anglesey 
 = Lifeline ( Stargate Atlantis ) = 
 " Lifeline " is the second episode of the fourth season , and the 62nd episode overall , of the science fiction television series Stargate Atlantis . The episode first aired in the United States on October 5 , 2007 on the Sci Fi Channel , and subsequently aired October 16 on Sky One in the United Kingdom . It was written by executive producer Carl Binder , and directed by Martin Wood . The episode is a continuation of the previous episode , " Adrift " , following Colonel Sheppard and his team as they perform a mission to steal a Zero Point Module from the Asurans . It was described by executive producer Joseph Mallozzi as a " big op <unk> . " 
 The episode was considered to be somewhat of a send off to Elizabeth Weir ( played by the departing Torri Higginson ) . Although Wood was credited for directing , he was occupied with directing the movie Stargate : Continuum , so Andy Mikita did most of the actual directing for the episode . It received slightly lower ratings than " Adrift " , but was still well received . 
 = = Plot = = 
 To ensure the mission to steal a Zero Point Module is a success , Dr. McKay ( David Hewlett ) proposes to use Dr. Weir ( Torri Higginson ) and her nanites to access the Asuran collective and guide them ; should the Asurans take her over , McKay would activate a kill switch on the nanites , which would also effectively kill Weir . With their experimental jumper ready , Sheppard ( Joe Flanigan ) leaves Teyla ( Rachel Luttrell ) in command of Atlantis . The jumper 's hyperdrive works and they arrive over the Asuran homeworld ( <unk> @-@ 227 ) . With Weir 's access , Sheppard and Ronon ( Jason Momoa ) easily steal the Zero Point Module . McKay then finds a code that will cause the Asurans to attack the Wraith and convinces Sheppard to upload a programme to reactivate this dormant code . 
 McKay initiates an anti @-@ Replicator field to protect them from the Asurans , but Oberoth ( David Ogden Stiers ) discovers this and sends a wave to override the field . Weir leaves McKay , confronts Oberoth and uses his power to freeze all the Asurans , even tricking him into believing that he has captured the team , all to buy Sheppard enough time to upload the programme . However , Weir struggles to keep Asurans frozen , and when Sheppard finds her just as she loses control , she orders him to leave her behind as the Asurans unfreeze and capture her . The team escapes without Weir , but end up trapped as they lack the power to make it to hyperspace . They are unexpectedly assisted by the Apollo , who have found Atlantis with Colonel Carter 's ( Amanda Tapping ) help . The Apollo lays down covering fire long enough for the team to land in the fighter bay and carries them back to Atlantis . However , the Apollo is unable to lock onto Doctor Weir and beam her aboard . Now fully powered , Sheppard sends the city to M35 @-@ 117 , a back @-@ up planet , and makes a rough landing onto its ocean . Whilst the team mourns the loss of Weir , McKay regains contact with Stargate Command . Dr. Zelenka ( David Nykl ) announces that the Asurans have begun their attack against the Wraith , meaning Weir 's sacrifice was not in vain . Carter tells Sheppard that they will miss Weir , though Sheppard vows to find her again . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Lifeline " first surfaced in February 2007 . Carl Binder wanted to do a heist episode during the off @-@ season , though the writers had no idea where it would fit in the overall season arc . However , as " Adrift " was written , they realized their heist story flowed naturally from it . Even though Martin Wood was credited for directing the episode , Andy Mikita ended up directing most of it instead , as well as directing parts of " Adrift " ; Wood was directing Stargate : Continuum at the time of filming . Amanda Tapping requested that showrunners Mallozzi and Mullie not give her a big part for the episode , as she was in the Arctic filming for Stargate : Continuum . Another reason that Carter 's appearance was small was that Torri Higginson was still a part of the show , and the producers wanted Carter to be introduced slowly . The episode , as a " third part " , was difficult to write , since the second part ( " Adrift " ) is a comeback resolve of the first part ( " First Strike " ) , and the third part has to " resolve the resolve . " In the writing stages , there was also talk as to whether or not to save the experimental hyperdrive jumper . Eventually it was decided that it would be saved , to keep open the possibility of using it again . 
 Tapping felt acting on the new show went a little easier when filming Carter scenes with Bill Dow ( " Bill Lee " ) , with whom she had previously worked on Stargate SG @-@ 1 . She said another factor that made acting on Atlantis easier was the welcoming cast and crew of the series . Tapping 's hair was longer than it was during her time on SG @-@ 1 , and the military approved of the change as long as it was worn up . To save money on visual effects , the crew built set pieces to represent some of the buildings on <unk> @-@ 227 and placed them in front of the puddle jumper set . Another measure taken as a substitute to visual effects was to cast mime artists as the frozen Asurans . 
 While filming Weir guiding the team to find the ZPM , the fact that she can see " everything " without looking at anything was a hard sell for an actor , but with Higginson 's drive in her eyes , this would make the scene more believable for the audience . The scene was not written in the original script . The set for the core room in the Asuran city was the same set as Atlantis ' gate room , though in order to make it look as different as possible , the cameras were placed at angles not usually used for filming in the gate room , such as where they would normally place lights . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The episode earned a 1 @.@ 1 household Nielsen rating , which was down by one @-@ tenth of a point or 8 % from " Adrift " . It fell behind ECW on Sci Fi ( with a 1 @.@ 2 rating ) , Eureka ( with a 1 @.@ 4 rating ) and Ghost Hunters ( with a 1 @.@ 5 rating ) . In the United Kingdom , " Lifeline " received 443 @,@ 000 viewers , placing Stargate Atlantis as number six in the top ten broadcasts for Sky One for that week , behind The Simpsons and Prison Break . It was positively received by most critics . Tory Ireland Mell of IGN rated the episode a " masterful " 10 out of a possible 10 , praising the slow introduction of Carter , rather than having an SG @-@ 1 team member forced into the series , and stated the episode gets the viewer " glued to the television for one hour . " Critical Myth rated the episode 8 out of 10 , stating the episode as " light on plot twists but packs an emotional punch , " and was somewhat critical for the lack of surprises in the episode 's storyline . Brett Love of TV Squad liked the episode 's storyline , and thought Weir 's exit was executed well , despite leaks from the Internet that Weir would be leaving , and compared the scene between her and Oberoth to the confrontations between Neo and Agent Smith from The Matrix film series . However , Love was critical about the absence of Teyla throughout the majority of the episode . 
 = Ambush of Geary = 
 The Ambush of Geary was a skirmish of the American Revolutionary War fought on 14 December 1776 near Ringoes in Amwell Township , Hunterdon County , New Jersey . Cornet Francis Geary , the leader of a company of dragoons , was shot in an ambush set up by local militiamen . 
 After British forces captured New York City in the first part of the New York and New Jersey campaign , they established outposts throughout central New Jersey . Geary , the son of Admiral Sir Francis Geary , was operating from a station at Pennington when he was killed in the ambush . His body was concealed and later buried in a shallow grave , preventing its recovery by British troops . In the 19th century local historical interest led to the confirmation of his grave 's location , and the establishment of markers at the site and in England . 
 Making a casualty of Geary was one of a number of militia actions that resulted in a reduced scope of British reconnaissance , contributing to the eventual success of George Washington 's crossing of the Delaware and success at Trenton . 
 = = Background = = 
 After General William Howe successfully drove George Washington 's Continental Army out of New York City in the fall of 1776 , Washington retreated across New Jersey , pursued by General Charles Cornwallis . Washington retreated all the way across the Delaware River in early December , and the British began arranging winter quarters in New Jersey , establishing a chain of outposts from Perth Amboy to Bordentown . 
 The British and their Hessian allies regularly sent out reconnaissance and foraging parties . These were vulnerable to attack by local Patriot militia companies . The area around the Trenton outpost , commanded by Johann Rall and populated primarily by Hessians , was particularly vulnerable to these militia raids , as was a detachment of the 16th ( Queen 's ) Light Dragoons posted not far away from Trenton at Pennington . Hunterdon County , north of Trenton , was an area where atrocities were reported in early December , including claims of rape of girls and pregnant women , perpetrated by groups of British and German soldiers ; these reports contributed to an increase in Patriot militia activity in the area north of Trenton . 
 Cornet Francis Geary was the eldest son and heir of Admiral Sir Francis Geary and Mary Bartholomew . Born in 1752 , he was raised in Surrey and educated at Balliol College , Oxford . Purchasing a <unk> in the 16th Light Dragoons in 1773 , Geary was sent to North America in 1776 , arriving in New York at the end of September . In October and November , Geary 's unit was mainly occupied with forays in northern New Jersey where they met little organized resistance , but on 1 December , his company was ordered to camp at Pennington . On 14 December , Cornet Geary and seven other members of the 16th were sent north on a reconnaissance mission . 
 = = Ambush = = 
 The most detailed source for this action is a deposition attached to the application for a military pension of John Schanck , cousin of Captain John Schenck , the leader of the Patriot militia ; detailed British accounts do not appear to exist . According to this account , Geary 's party rode through Amwell Township toward Flemington to verify that a supply of salt beef and pork was ready for the army to pick up . The <unk> had received intelligence of this movement the previous day , and when John Schenck learned of it , he set out the next morning , gathering up a few men ( eight in number , according to the <unk> ) , and set up an ambush in a wooded area about 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) south of Flemington . When Geary 's company rode by , the militia fired a volley of musket fire , killing Geary . A more brief description by a non @-@ participating British officer reporting the event indicated that Geary was alerted to the impending fire , but was unable to escape the volley . The dragoons returned fire , but were driven off by continuing militia fire . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The militiamen appropriated portions of Geary 's uniform , including his sword and the silver plate on his cap that had his name inscribed on it . British troops that had been sent out to meet them and take the supplies questioned the local inhabitants and searched the area , but could not find his body . The militiamen had concealed it ; it was buried in a shallow grave the next day . 
 General John Burgoyne , in his capacity as colonel of the 16th , wrote to Admiral Geary : 
 " I have seldom felt a pain so acute as that of communicating to you the news from America , which personally regards yourself . I am afraid my authority is too good . Your Son has met a Soldier 's fate . Experienced in calamity , describes what it is to resign an object near the heart , and ho [ w ] poor our best fortitude is upon such trial I am unfit to comfort or exhort you . Time and reflection can alone relieve you : I wish therefore only add to the tears of the Corps . My private lamentations for the Son of an invaluable parent and the assurance of the respect I have bear to his memory . " 
 This ambush and similar militia attacks resulted in British troops reducing the range of their scouting forays , as the danger of going further than about 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) from Trenton was significant . This was crucial when the Americans began massing boats along the Delaware River prior to Washington 's crossing of the Delaware that culminated with the Battle of Trenton on 26 December 1776 . Geary 's troops were stationed only 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) from the river and Malta Island , the staging area for the crossing . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Hunterdon County traditions claim that Geary 's belongings were hidden to prevent their discovery by British troops . His coat is said to have been hidden under a pile of wheat on the floor of a garret , while his boots were hidden in an oven . It is also said that Geary 's red sash was unravelled and the thread was used for various ornamental purposes , his sword was melted to make <unk> and his stiff leather hat was used by a farmer to dip oats from his feed bin for his horses . 
 Many local residents of Hunterdon County were unaware that Geary had been buried there , and accounts persisted that the British had recovered his body . In 1891 the Hunterdon County Historical Society exhumed a body from a site suspected to contain his body . Found in the grave were a skeleton and silver buttons labeled " Q. L. D. " , signifying the Queen 's Light Dragoons . His family placed a grave marker on the site in 1907 . The St. Nicholas Church in Great Bookham , Surrey , contains a bas @-@ relief depicting Cornet Francis Geary and the incident . 
 = Barbette ( performer ) = 
 Barbette ( December 19 , 1898 – August 5 , 1973 ) was an American female impersonator , high @-@ wire performer , and trapeze artist born in Texas on December 19 , 1899 . Barbette attained great popularity throughout the United States but his greatest fame came in Europe and especially Paris , in the 1920s and 1930s . 
 Barbette began performing as an aerialist at around the age of 14 as one @-@ half of a circus act called The Alfaretta Sisters . After a few years of circus work , Barbette went solo and adopted his exotic @-@ sounding pseudonym . He performed in full drag , revealing himself as male only at the end of his act . 
 Following a career @-@ ending illness or injury , Barbette returned to Texas but continued to work as a consultant for motion pictures as well as training and choreographing aerial acts for a number of circuses . After years of dealing with chronic pain , Barbette committed suicide on August 5 , 1973 . Both in life and following his death , Barbette served as an inspiration to a number of artists including Jean Cocteau and Man Ray . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Barbette ( birth name cited as Vander Clyde and Vander Clyde Broadway ) was born on December 19 , 1899 , ( although it is sometimes cited as 1904 ) in Texas . Most sources indicate he was born in Round Rock , although Barbette stated that his birthplace was <unk> . His Draft Registration Card , dated 7 September 1918 , states that his birthday was 19 December 1898 . 
 Some confusion surrounds the name of Barbette 's father . On a 1923 passport application , Barbette lists his father 's name as " Henry Broadway " and notes him as deceased . However , Barbette 's death certificate gives his father 's first name as " Jeff . " The death certificate lists his mother 's name as " Hattie Wilson ; " Barbette listed her name as " Mrs. E. S. Loving " on his passport application , as well as his 1918 Draft Registration form . 
 In the United States Census of 1900 , Barbette ( then given the birth date of 19 December 1897 ) and his mother , Hattie Broadway ( née Martin , 1879 @-@ 1949 ) , were living in Llano , Texas , in the household of his maternal great @-@ grandparents , Florence E. and William Paschall , a farmer . Hattie , then aged 21 , was listed as a widow on the census , while her son 's birthdate is given as December 1897 . Also living in the household was Hattie Broadway 's younger brother , Malcolm Wilson . Hattie Broadway married , as her second husband , in 1906 , Samuel E. Loving ( 1868 @-@ 1953 ) , who worked in a broom factory , and had five more children , sons Eugene Loving ( 1908 @-@ 1971 ) and Sam Paschall Loving ( 1917 @-@ 1996 ) , and daughters Hugo Loving ( 1910 @-@ 1912 ) , <unk> Loving ( born 1914 ) , and Mary Martin Loving ( 1915 @-@ 1997 ) ; after his mother 's second marriage , Barbette was known as " Vander Loving " . 
 Barbette 's mother took him to the circus at an early age in Austin and he was fascinated by the wire act . " The first time she took me to the circus in Austin , I knew I would be a performer , and from then on I 'd work in the fields during the cotton @-@ picking season to earn money in order to go to the circus as often as possible . " Barbette practiced for hours by walking along his mother 's steel clothes line . He graduated from high school at the age of 14 . 
 After high school , Barbette began his circus career as one @-@ half of the aerialist team The Alfaretta Sisters . One of the sisters had died unexpectedly and Barbette answered the surviving sister 's ad for a replacement , auditioning in San Antonio . Together the pair decided that it was more dramatic for a woman to perform the acrobatic stunts . " She told me that women 's clothes always make a wire act more impressive ... and she asked me if I 'd mind dressing as a girl . I didn 't ; and that 's how it began . " Following his time as an Alfaretta , Barbette next joined an act called <unk> 's Whirling Sensation . This act included three people who hung from a spinning apparatus by their teeth . He then developed his solo act and moved to the vaudeville stage . He took on the name " Barbette " , believing that it had an exotic French sound and because it could conceivably be either a first or a last name . His solo debut was at the Harlem Opera House in 1919 . Barbette performed trapeze and wire stunts in full drag , maintaining the illusion of femininity until the end of his act , when he would pull off his wig and strike exaggerated masculine poses . For the next several years he toured the Keith Vaudeville Circuit , advertised as a " versatile specialty . " 
 = = The toast of Europe = = 
 Barbette made his European debut in 1923 , having been sent by the William Morris Agency first to England and then to Paris . He appeared in such venues as the Casino de Paris , the Moulin Rouge , the Empire , the <unk> Circus , the Alhambra Theater and the Folies Bergère . 
 He returned to America in 1924 to appear in The Passing Show of 1924 which ran for four months beginning in September . Also in this timeframe he became a featured attraction with Ringling Bros. and Barnum & Bailey Circus and toured London , Brussels and Berlin . It was during an engagement at the London Palladium that Barbette was found engaged in sexual activity with another man . His contract was cancelled and he was never able to obtain a work permit for England again . 
 Barbette was championed by avant garde artist Jean Cocteau . Cocteau wrote in 1923 to Belgian friend and critic Paul <unk> : 
 " Next week in Brussels , you 'll see a music @-@ hall act called ' Barbette ' that has been keeping me enthralled for a fortnight . The young American who does this wire and trapeze act is a great actor , an angel , and he has become the friend to all of us . Go and see him ... and tell everybody that he is no mere acrobat in women 's clothes , nor just a graceful daredevil , but one of the most beautiful things in the theatre . Stravinsky , Auric , poets , painters , and I myself have seen no comparable display of artistry on the stage since Nijinsky . " 
 To other friends he wrote " Your great loss for 1923 was Barbette – a terrific act at the Casino de Paris ... Ten unforgettable minutes . A theatrical masterpiece . An angel , a flower , a bird . " 
 In 1926 Cocteau wrote an influential essay on the nature and artifice of the theatre called " Le Numéro Barbette " that was published in Nouvelle Revue Française . In this essay , Cocteau celebrates Barbette as an exemplar of theatrical artifice . " Barbette , " writes Cocteau , " transforms effortlessly back and forth between man and woman . His female glamour and elegance Cocteau likens to a cloud of dust thrown into the eyes of the audience , blinding it to the masculinity of the movements he needs to perform his acrobatics . That blindness is so complete that at the end of his act , Barbette does not simply remove his wig but instead plays the part of a man . He rolls his shoulders , stretches his hands , swells his muscles ... And after the fifteenth or so curtain call , he gives a mischievous wink , shifts from foot to foot , mimes a bit of an apology , and does a shuffling little street urchin dance – all of it to erase the fabulous , dying @-@ swan impression left by the act . " Cocteau calls upon his fellow artists to incorporate deliberately this effect that he believes for Barbette is instinctive . Cocteau commissioned a series of photographs of Barbette by the Surrealist artist Man Ray , which captured not only aspects of Barbette 's performance but also his process of transformation into his female persona . 
 Cocteau cast Barbette in his experimental film Le Sang d 'un <unk> ( The Blood of a Poet ) ( 1930 ) , Cocteau 's first film . Barbette appears in a scene in a theatre box with several extras , dressed in Chanel gowns , who burst into applause at the sight of a card game that ends in suicide . He replaced the Vicomtesse de Noailles , who along with her husband had originally shot the scene but were appalled upon seeing the finished film , as the card game / suicide had been shot separately . Speaking of his preparation for the scene , Barbette , who knew he was replacing the Vicomtesse , said , 
 " I tried to imagine myself a descendant of the Marquis de Sade , of the Comtesse de <unk> ... and a long line of rich bankers – all of which the Vicomtesse was . For a boy from Round Rock , Texas , that demanded a lot of concentration – at least as much as working on the wire . " 
 Cocteau fell in love with the Barbette persona but their affair was short @-@ lived . Others in Barbette 's European circle included Josephine Baker , Anton Dolin , Mistinguett and Sergei Diaghilev . 
 Barbette is credited with having returned to the United States in 1935 to star on Broadway in the Billy Rose circus musical Jumbo . However , some sources suggest that this may have been a Barbette impersonator . 
 = = End of performing career and later life = = 
 Barbette continued to perform until the mid @-@ to @-@ late 1930s . Most sources report the year as 1938 , while others as early as 1936 and as late as 1942 . The end of Barbette 's performing career is attributed to a number of causes including a fall , pneumonia , polio , or some combination of the three . All generally agree that whatever the cause , Barbette was left in extreme pain and in need of surgery and extensive rehabilitation to allow him to walk again . He became the artistic director and aerialist trainer for a number of circuses , including Ringling Bros. and the Shrine <unk> work with Ringling Bros. has been described as " reinvent [ ing ] the aerial ballet " . The Bird Cage Girls , The Swing High Girls , The Whirl Girls and the Cloud Swing Girls were among the female aerialist troupes whose routines were Barbette 's specialty . Barbette served as a consultant on a number of films , including the circus sequences for Till the Clouds Roll By ( 1946 ) and The Big Circus ( 1959 ) , and was hired to coach Jack Lemmon and Tony Curtis on gender illusion for the film Some Like It Hot ( 1959 ) . Cocteau biographer Francis <unk> wrote a profile of Barbette for The New Yorker in 1969 entitled " An Angel , A Flower , A Bird " . He created the circus sequences for the Orson Welles @-@ produced Broadway musical Around the World . Barbette created the aerial ballet for Disney on Parade and toured with it in Australia from 1969 through 1972 . 
 Barbette spent his last months in Texas , living in Round Rock and Austin with his sister , Mary Cahill , often in severe pain . He committed suicide by overdose on August 5 , 1973 . He was survived by his sister Mary and a half @-@ brother , Sam Loving . Barbette was cremated and his ashes were buried in Round Rock Cemetery . 
 = = Cultural legacy = = 
 In addition to Cocteau 's essay Le Numéro Barbette and his appearance in Le Sang d 'un <unk> , Barbette also inspired the characterization of " Death " in Cocteau 's play Orphée . The book Barbette , collecting Cocteau 's essay , the New Yorker profile by <unk> , Man Ray 's photographs and other material , was published in 1989 . Alfred Hitchcock based a character in the 1930 film Murder ! on Barbette . Different <unk> is a book @-@ length poem about Barbette written by Albert <unk> . It won the <unk> Poetry Award from the Texas Institute of Letters . In 1993 , performance artist John Kelly , under commission from the Brooklyn Academy of Music , based his piece Light Shall Lift Them on him . Barbette 's story is also told in the play , Barbette , written by Bill <unk> and David Goodwin and first presented in Dallas , Texas , in 2003 . 
 Barbette may have been the inspiration for the 1933 German film , Viktor und Viktoria , which features a plot about a woman pretending to be a female impersonator , whose gimmick of removing her wig at the end of her act is " inspired by [ Barbette 's ] signature gesture . " Viktor und Viktoria was remade in 1935 ( First a Girl ) , 1957 ( Viktor und Viktoria ) and 1982 ( Victor Victoria , which inspired a 1992 Broadway musical of the same name ) . 
 A French restaurant in Minneapolis is named Barbette after the aerialist . 
 = Sie werden euch in den Bann tun , BWV 183 = 
 Sie werden euch in den Bann tun ( They will put you under banishment ) , BWV 183 , is a church cantata by Johann Sebastian Bach . He composed it in Leipzig for Exaudi , the Sunday after Ascension , and first performed it on 13 May 1725 . The work includes some unusual woodwind scoring , two oboes da caccia and two oboes d 'amore . 
 = = History and words = = 
 Bach wrote the cantata in his second year in Leipzig for the Sunday Exaudi , the Sunday after Ascension . The prescribed readings for the feast day were from the First Epistle of Peter , " serve each other " ( 1 Peter 4 : 8 – 11 ) , and from the second Farewell discourse in the Gospel of John , the promise of the Paraclete , the " Spirit of Truth " , and the announcement of prosecution ( John 15 : 26 – 16 : 4 ) . 
 Some of the cantatas composed by Bach in his second year were chorale cantatas , a format he chose for services between the first Sunday after Trinity and Palm Sunday . For Easter he had returned to cantatas on more varied texts . Nine of the cantatas for the period between Easter and Pentecost are based on texts of Christiana Mariana von Ziegler , including this cantata . Bach later assigned it to his third annual cycle . The poetess begins the cantata with the same quotation from the gospel as an unknown poet one year earlier in Sie werden euch in den Bann tun , BWV 44 , the prediction of persecution of Christians . " They will put you under banishment , but the time will come , when , whoever kills you will think that he does God a service by it " ( John 16 : 2 ) . She continues stressing the lack of fear possible for a follower who relies on " Jesu <unk> " ( the protective arm of Jesus ) . In movements 3 and 4 she refers to the beginning of the gospel , the spirit who will assist . The closing chorale is the fifth stanza of Paul Gerhardt 's " <unk> ein zu deinen Toren " . 
 Bach first performed the cantata on 13 May 1725 . 
 = = = Publication = = = 
 Bach ´ s music was not published until 1891 when it appeared as part of the first complete edition of the composer ´ s work , the Bach @-@ Gesellschaft @-@ Ausgabe . The editor of the volume in question was Alfred <unk> . 
 Ziegler published the text in a collection of her work , along with the other ones set by Bach . These printed versions are slightly different from the texts used in the cantatas , and this is believed to be the result of the composer modifying the libretti with which he was presented . In the case of Sie werden euch in den Bann tun the differences between the printed version and that set by Bach are less than in the preceding cantatas such as Auf Christi Himmelfahrt allein , BWV 128 . 
 = = Structure and scoring = = 
 Bach structured the cantata in five movements , beginning with what John Eliot Gardiner describes as a " curtain raiser " , a line from the gospel set as a recitative . This is followed by a sequence aria – recitative – aria , and the cantata is concluded by a four @-@ part chorale . Bach scored the work for four vocal soloists ( soprano , alto , tenor and bass ) , a four @-@ part choir only in the closing chorale , and a Baroque instrumental ensemble in an unusual combination of instruments , two oboes d 'amore ( Oa ) , two oboes da caccia ( Oc ) , two violins ( Vl ) , viola ( Va ) , a violoncello piccolo ( Vp ) and basso continuo . 
 In the following table of the movements , the scoring follows the Neue Bach @-@ Ausgabe . The continuo , playing throughout , is not shown . 
 = = Music = = 
 In the first movement the words of Jesus are given to the bass , the voice type which by convention was the vox Christi ( voice of Christ ) . A year earlier ( in Sie werden euch in den Bann tun , BWV 44 ) , Bach rendered the announcement of Jesus in a two @-@ part movement , a duet for bass and tenor followed by an agitated chorus . In this cantata , he sets it as a recitative of only five measures . The instrumentation is novel , having long chords of the four oboes , two oboes da caccia and two oboes d 'amore , accompany the voice above a pedal point held by the continuo . This creates a " sepulchral " sound . The Bach scholar Christoph Wolff notes that this " opulent oboe scoring " with all four oboes playing together is used only in the two recitatives ( 1 and 3 ) . 
 The second movement , the first aria , is the longest of the work . Although the part for violoncello piccolo is written in the alto clef , it is an instrument with a tenor @-@ bass range . The " dark and shaded " timbre of the movement has been seen as representing the protection provided by Christ . Denying the fear of the threatening death , the violoncello piccolo plays continuous runs . 
 Movement 3 is again a recitativo accompagnato , even more complex than the first one ; the strings play long chords , whereas all the oboes repeat the same four @-@ note motif throughout the movement , sung by the alto on the words " Ich bin <unk> " ( I am ready ) . 
 The second aria is accompanied by the strings and the two oboes da caccia in unison as obbligato instruments , thus both arias are dominated by instruments with a relatively low range ( oboes de caccia having a pitch below that of a normal oboe ) . 
 The cantata is closed by a four part chorale on the tune " <unk> mir Gotts Güte <unk> " . 
 = = Selected recordings = = 
 The selection is taken from the listing on the Bach @-@ Cantatas website . Choirs are roughly marked as large by red background to one voice per part ( OVPP ) by green background , orchestras from large ( red ) to period instruments in historically informed performances ( green ) . 
 = USS Winslow ( DD @-@ 53 ) = 
 USS Winslow ( Destroyer No. 53 / DD @-@ 53 ) was an O 'Brien @-@ class destroyer built for the United States Navy prior to the American entry into World War I. The ship was the second US Navy vessel named in honor of John Ancrum Winslow , a US Navy officer notable for sinking the Confederate commerce raider CSS Alabama during the American Civil War . 
 Winslow was laid down by William Cramp and Sons of Philadelphia in October 1913 and launched in February 1915 . The ship was a little more than 305 ft ( 93 m ) in length , just over 31 ft ( 9 @.@ 4 m ) abeam , and had a standard displacement of 1 @,@ 050 long tons ( 1 @,@ 070 t ) . She was armed with four 4 in ( 100 mm ) guns and had eight 21 in ( 530 mm ) torpedo tubes . Winslow was powered by a pair of steam turbines that propelled her at up to 29 kn ( 33 mph ; 54 km / h ) . 
 After her August 1915 commissioning , Winslow sailed off the east coast and in the Caribbean . She was one of seventeen destroyers sent out to rescue survivors from five victims of German submarine U @-@ 53 off the Lightship Nantucket in October 1916 . After the United States entered World War I in April 1917 , Winslow was sent overseas to patrol the Irish Sea out of Queenstown , Ireland . Winslow made several unsuccessful attacks on U @-@ boats , and rescued survivors of several ships sunk by the German craft . 
 Upon returning to the United States after the war , Winslow was placed in reduced commission in December 1919 . She was decommissioned at Philadelphia in June 1922 . In November she dropped her name to free it for a new destroyer of the same name , becoming known only as DD @-@ 53 . She was struck from the Naval Vessel Register in January 1936 and sold for scrapping in June . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 Winslow was authorized in March 1913 as the third of six ships of the O 'Brien class , which was an improved version of the Cassin @-@ class destroyers authorized in 1911 . Construction of the vessel was awarded to William Cramp and Sons of Philadelphia which laid down her keel on 1 October 1913 . On 11 February 1915 , Winslow was launched by sponsor Miss Natalie E. Winslow , grandniece of the ship 's namesake , John Ancrum Winslow . The ship was the second ship named for Winslow , a US Navy officer notable for sinking the Confederate commerce raider CSS Alabama during the American Civil War . As built , the destroyer was 305 ft 3 in ( 93 @.@ 04 m ) in length , 31 ft 1 in ( 9 @.@ 47 m ) abeam , and drew 10 ft 4 @.@ 5 in ( 3 @.@ 162 m ) . The ship had a standard displacement of 1 @,@ 050 long tons ( 1 @,@ 070 t ) and displaced 1 @,@ 171 long tons ( 1 @,@ 190 t ) when fully loaded . 
 Winslow had two Zoelly steam turbines that drove her two screw propellers , and an additional pair triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each connected to one of the propeller shafts , for cruising purposes . Four oil @-@ burning White @-@ Forster boilers powered the engines , which could generate 17 @,@ 000 shp ( 13 @,@ 000 kW ) , moving the ship at up to 29 knots ( 33 mph ; 54 km / h ) . 
 Winslow 's main battery consisted of four 4 in ( 100 mm ) / 50 caliber Mark 9 guns , with each gun weighing in excess of 6 @,@ 100 lb ( 2 @,@ 800 kg ) . The guns fired 33 lb ( 15 kg ) armor @-@ piercing projectiles at 2 @,@ 900 ft / s ( 880 m / s ) . At an elevation of 20 ° , the guns had a range of 15 @,@ 920 yd ( 14 @,@ 560 m ) . 
 Winslow was also equipped with eight 21 in ( 530 mm ) torpedo tubes . The General Board of the United States Navy had called for two anti @-@ aircraft guns for the O 'Brien @-@ class ships , as well as provisions for laying up to 36 floating mines . From sources , it is unclear if these recommendations were followed for Winslow or any of the other ships of the class . 
 = = Pre @-@ World War I = = 
 Winslow was commissioned into the United States Navy on 7 August 1915 under the command of Lieutenant Commander Neil E. Nichols . After trials off the upper east coast , Winslow joined the 6th Division , Atlantic Fleet Torpedo Flotilla . The destroyer participated in maneuvers in Cuban waters during the winter of 1915 and 1916 and , in the spring , began operations along the eastern seaboard . By October 1916 , she was serving in coastal waters near Newport , Rhode Island . 
 At 0530 on 8 October 1916 , wireless reports came in of a German submarine stopping ships near the Lightship Nantucket , off the eastern end of Long Island . After an SOS from the British steamer West Point was received at about 1230 , Rear Admiral Albert Gleaves ordered Winslow and other destroyers at Newport to attend to survivors . The American destroyers arrived on the scene about 1700 when the U @-@ boat , U @-@ 53 under the command of Kapitänleutnant Hans Rose , was in the process of stopping the Holland @-@ America Line cargo ship Blommersdijk . Shortly after , U @-@ 53 stopped the British passenger ship Stephano . As Rose had done with three other ships U @-@ 53 had sunk earlier in the day , he gave passengers and crew aboard Blommersdijk and Stephano adequate time to abandon the ships before sinking the pair . In total , 226 survivors from U @-@ 53 's five victims were rescued by the destroyer flotilla . 
 At the end of October , the warship went into the New York Navy Yard and remained there through the end of the year . In January 1917 , she steamed south to Cuba , where she joined the rest of the Fleet to participate in annual winter maneuvers . Following the Fleet exercise , Winslow returned north to the Chesapeake . 
 = = World War I = = 
 When the United States declared war on Germany on 6 April 1917 entering World War I , the destroyer was anchored in the York River near Yorktown , Virginia . She had been there guarding the river mouth since February when American relations with Germany began to deteriorate as a result of the latter country 's return to unrestricted submarine warfare . Soon after US Congress declared war , Winslow moved north to the New York Navy Yard to prepare for duty overseas . Less than a month later , she moved to Boston from where she got underway for Europe on 7 May with Cassin , Ericsson , Jacob Jones , Rowan , and Tucker . After a 10 @-@ day passage , Winslow reported for duty at Queenstown , Ireland , on the 17th . On the 21st , she began patrolling the approaches to the British Isles . 
 Winslow operated out of Queenstown for almost a year escorting convoys into and out of Queenstown and going to the assistance of ships attacked by U @-@ boats . Just after midnight on 11 June , she spied her first submarine and rushed to the attack . Her target submerged , and the destroyer dropped a series of depth charges . She failed , however , to find any evidence supporting the success of her attack and resumed her patrol . 
 On 30 July , Winslow picked up the master and 12 crewmen from SS Whitehall , torpedoed the day before by U @-@ 95 , and brought them safely into Queenstown . She sighted another U @-@ boat off Queenstown on 16 August , but heavy weather covered the submarine 's tracks when it submerged and Winslow made no attack . 
 Six weeks later , on 24 September , the warship rushed to the assistance of Henry Lippitt , an unarmed American schooner being shelled by U @-@ 60 . When the destroyer reached the 895 GRT sailing vessel , she was in flames , and the U @-@ boat had just submerged . Winslow dropped a depth charge barrage on what appeared to be the submarine 's moving wake , but broke off the attack to assist the schooner 's crew ; all were saved , but Henry Lippitt was sunk . 
 During the remainder of her assignment at Queenstown , Winslow attacked two more submarines , the first on 11 October and the second on 3 January 1918 . In both cases , she depth @-@ charged oil slicks which appeared to originate from damaged , submerged U @-@ boats . In neither case did she receive visible confirmation of a sinking ; however , during the 3 January attack , one of her depth charges threw a large mass of dark liquid high in the air . From this description , it appears that her depth charge brought up fuel oil from what was believed to be U @-@ 61 . Unfortunately for Winslow , lack of definite proof kept her from being credited with a sinking . 
 At the beginning of April 1918 , the destroyer was reassigned to the United States Naval Forces in France . Operating from Brest , she spent the remainder of the war escorting American troop transports into French ports . Although she engaged German submarines on at least seven different occasions , she did not score any confirmed successes . On 8 August , she came to the aid of Westward Ho , torpedoed in the Bay of Biscay earlier the same day by U @-@ 62 . 
 On 5 September , she attacked the German submarine U @-@ 82 , which had just torpedoed U.S. Navy transport Mount Vernon . Depth charges dropped by Winslow , Conner , Nicholson , and Wainwright failed to sink the U @-@ boat , but , combined with defensive efforts from Mount Vernon herself , helped prevent the submarine from launching a coup de grâce against the former German liner . Mount Vernon safely made it back to Brest with the loss of 37 crewmen out of the 1 @,@ 450 persons on board . 
 Winslow continued her patrols out of Brest through the end of hostilities on 11 November . 
 = = Inter @-@ war period = = 
 Following the signing of the Armistice on 11 November , which ended all fighting , Winslow remained in French waters . When President Woodrow Wilson arrived at Brest on George Washington on 13 December , the destroyer served as part of that transport 's escort into the harbor . 15 days later , the warship departed France to return to the United States , arriving at New York on 12 January 1919 . 
 After her return to the United States , Winslow resumed peacetime duty with the Atlantic Fleet . During May , she served as one of the rescue pickets stationed along the route across the Atlantic flown by three Navy NC @-@ type seaplanes in the first aerial crossing of the Atlantic . After that , the destroyer returned to normal operations along the east coast and annual winter maneuvers in Cuban waters until placed in reduced commission at Philadelphia on 10 December 1919 . 
 In July 1920 , she was assigned the hull code of DD @-@ 53 under the US Navy 's alphanumeric classification system . Winslow was decommissioned at Philadelphia on 5 June 1922 . On 1 July 1933 , she dropped the name Winslow to free it for a new destroyer of the same name , becoming known only as DD @-@ 53 . The ship was struck from the Naval Vessel Register on 7 January 1936 , and , on 30 June , was sold for scrapping . 
 = Nimitz @-@ class aircraft carrier = 
 The Nimitz @-@ class supercarriers are a class of ten nuclear @-@ powered aircraft carriers in service with the United States Navy . The lead ship of the class is named for World War II United States Pacific Fleet commander Fleet Admiral Chester W. Nimitz , the U.S. Navy 's last fleet admiral . With an overall length of 1 @,@ 092 ft ( 333 m ) and full @-@ load displacement of over 100 @,@ 000 long tons , they have been the largest warships built and in service , although they are being eclipsed by the upcoming Gerald R. Ford @-@ class aircraft carriers . Instead of the gas turbines or diesel @-@ electric systems used for propulsion on many modern warships , the carriers use two <unk> pressurized water reactors which drive four propeller shafts and can produce a maximum speed of over 30 knots ( 56 km / h ) and maximum power of around 260 @,@ 000 shp ( 190 MW ) . As a result of the use of nuclear power , the ships are capable of operating for over 20 years without refueling and are predicted to have a service life of over 50 years . They are categorized as nuclear @-@ powered aircraft carriers and are numbered with consecutive hull numbers between CVN @-@ 68 and CVN @-@ 77 . 
 All ten carriers were constructed by Newport News Shipbuilding Company in Virginia . USS Nimitz , the lead ship of the class , was commissioned on 3 May 1975 , and USS George H.W. Bush , the tenth and last of the class , was commissioned on 10 January 2009 . Since the 1970s , Nimitz @-@ class carriers have participated in many conflicts and operations across the world , including Operation Eagle Claw in Iran , the Gulf War , and more recently in Iraq and Afghanistan . 
 The angled flight decks of the carriers use a CATOBAR arrangement to operate aircraft , with steam catapults and arrestor wires for launch and recovery . As well as speeding up flight deck operations , this allows for a much wider variety of aircraft than with the STOVL arrangement used on smaller carriers . An embarked carrier air wing consisting of up to around 90 aircraft is normally deployed on board . After the retirement of the F @-@ 14 Tomcat , the air wings ' strike fighters are primarily F / A @-@ 18E and F / A @-@ 18F Super Hornets and F / A @-@ 18A + and F / A @-@ 18C Hornets . In addition to their aircraft , the vessels carry short @-@ range defensive weaponry for anti @-@ aircraft warfare and missile defense . 
 The unit cost is about $ 8 @.@ 5 billion in FY 12 dollars US $ 8 @.@ 86 billion ( 2016 ) inflation adjusted . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Nimitz @-@ class carriers have an overall length of 1 @,@ 092 ft ( 333 m ) and a full @-@ load displacement of about 100 @,@ 000 – 104 @,@ 000 long tons ( 102 @,@ 000 – 106 @,@ 000 t ) . They have a beam at the waterline of 135 ft ( 41 m ) , and the maximum width of their flight decks is 251 feet 10 inches ( 76 @.@ 76 m ) to 257 feet 3 inches ( 78 @.@ 41 m ) ( depending on the variant ) . The ships ' companies can number up to 3 @,@ 200 , not including an air wing of 2 @,@ 480 . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 The Nimitz @-@ class aircraft carriers were ordered to supplement the aircraft carriers of the Kitty Hawk class and Enterprise class , maintaining the strength and capability of the U.S. Navy after the older carriers were decommissioned . The ships were designed to be improvements on previous U.S. aircraft carriers , in particular the Enterprise and Forrestal @-@ class supercarriers , although the arrangement of the ships is relatively similar to that of the Kitty Hawk class . Among other design improvements , the two reactors on Nimitz @-@ class carriers take up less space than the eight reactors used on Enterprise . Along with a more generally improved design , this means that Nimitz @-@ class carriers can carry 90 % more aviation fuel and 50 % more ordnance when compared to the Forrestal class . 
 The U.S. Navy has stated that the carriers could withstand three times the damage sustained by the Essex class inflicted by Japanese air attacks during World War II . The hangars on the ships are divided into three fire bays by thick steel doors that are designed to restrict the spread of fire . This addition has been present on U.S. aircraft carriers since World War II , after the fires caused by Kamikaze attacks . 
 The first ships were designed around the time of the Vietnam War , and certain aspects of the design were influenced by operations there . To a certain extent , the carrier operations in Vietnam demonstrated the need for increased capabilities of aircraft carriers over their survivability , as they were used to send sorties into the war and were therefore less subject to attack . As a result of this experience , Nimitz carriers were designed with larger stores of aviation fuel and larger magazines in relation to previous carriers , although this was partly as a result of increased space available by the new design of the ships ' propulsion systems . 
 A major purpose of the ships was initially to support the U.S. military during the Cold War , and they were designed with capabilities for that role , including using nuclear power instead of oil for greater endurance when deployed in blue water , and the ability to make adjustments to the carriers ' weapons systems on the basis of new intelligence and technological developments . They were initially categorized only as attack carriers , but ships have been constructed with anti @-@ submarine capabilities since USS Carl Vinson . As a result , the ships and their aircraft are now able to participate in a wide range of operations , which can include sea and air blockades , mine laying , and missile strikes on land , air and sea . 
 Because of a design flaw , ships of this class have inherent lists to starboard when under combat loads that exceed the capability of their list control systems . The problem appears to be especially prevalent on some of the more modern vessels . This problem has been previously rectified by using damage control voids for ballast , but a solution using solid ballast which does not affect the ship 's survivability has been proposed . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 All ten Nimitz @-@ class aircraft carriers were constructed between 1968 and 2006 at Newport News Shipbuilding Company , in Newport News , Virginia , in the largest drydock in the western hemisphere , dry dock 12 , now 2 @,@ 172 feet ( 662 m ) long after a recent expansion . 
 Since USS Theodore Roosevelt , the aircraft carriers were manufactured in modular construction ( USS George H.W. Bush was constructed from 161 ' super @-@ lift ' modules ) . This means that whole sections could be welded together with plumbing and electrical equipment already fitted , improving efficiency . Using gantry cranes , the modules were lifted into the dry dock and welded . In the case of the bow section , these can weigh over 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 pounds ( 680 t ) . This method was originally developed by Ingalls Shipbuilding and increases the rate of work because much of the fitting out does not have to be carried out within the confines of the already finished hull . 
 The total cost of construction for each ship was around $ 4 @.@ 5 billion . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 All ships of the class are powered by two <unk> nuclear reactors , kept in separate compartments . They power four propeller shafts and can produce a maximum speed of over 30 knots ( 56 km / h ) and maximum power of 260 @,@ 000 bhp ( 190 MW ) . The reactors produce heat through nuclear fission which heats water . This is then passed through four turbines ( manufactured by General Electric ) which are shared by the two reactors . The turbines power the four bronze screws , each with a diameter of 25 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) and a weight of 66 @,@ 000 pounds ( 30 t ) . Behind these are the two rudders which are 29 feet ( 8 @.@ 8 m ) high and 22 feet ( 6 @.@ 7 m ) long , and each weigh 110 @,@ 000 pounds ( 50 t ) . The Nimitz @-@ class ships constructed since USS Ronald Reagan also have bulbous bows in order to improve speed and fuel efficiency by reducing Wave @-@ making resistance . As a result of the use of nuclear power , the ships are capable of operating continuously for over 20 years without refueling and are predicted to have a service life of over 50 years . 
 = = = Armament and protection = = = 
 In addition to the aircraft carried on board , the ships carry defensive equipment for use against missiles and hostile aircraft . These consist of either three or four NATO RIM @-@ 7 Sea Sparrow missile launchers designed for defense against aircraft and anti @-@ ship missiles as well as either three or four 20 mm Phalanx CIWS missile defense cannon . USS Ronald Reagan has none of these , having been built with the RIM @-@ 116 Rolling Airframe Missile system , two of which have also been installed on USS Nimitz and USS George Washington . These will be installed on the other ships as they return for Refueling Complex Overhaul ( RCOH ) . Since USS Theodore Roosevelt , the carriers have been constructed with 2 @.@ 5 in ( 64 mm ) Kevlar armor over vital spaces , and earlier ships have been retrofitted with it : Nimitz in 1983 – 1984 , Eisenhower from 1985 – 1987 and Vinson in 1989 . 
 The other countermeasures the ships use are four <unk> SRBOC ( super rapid bloom off @-@ board chaff ) six @-@ barrel <unk> decoy launchers , which deploy infrared Flare ( countermeasure ) and chaff to disrupt the sensors of incoming missiles ; an SSTDS torpedo defense system ; and an AN / SLQ @-@ 25 Nixie torpedo countermeasures system . The carriers also use AN / SLQ @-@ 32 ( V ) Radar jamming and deception systems to detect and disrupt hostile radar signals in addition to the electronic warfare capabilities of some of the aircraft on board . 
 The presence of nuclear weapons on board U.S. aircraft carriers since the end of the Cold War has neither been confirmed nor denied by the U.S. government . As a result of this , as well as concerns over the safety of nuclear power , the presence of a U.S. aircraft carrier in a foreign port has occasionally provoked protest from local people , for example when USS Nimitz docked in Chennai , India , in 2007 . At that time , the Strike Group commander Rear Admiral John Terence Blake stated that : " The U.S. policy is that we do not routinely deploy nuclear weapons on board Nimitz . " 
 In May 2013 , George H.W. Bush conducted the first carrier @-@ borne end @-@ to @-@ end at @-@ sea test of the Surface Ship Torpedo Defense System ( SSTDS ) . The SSTDS combines the passive detection of the Torpedo Warning System ( TWS ) that finds , classifies , and tracks torpedoes with the hard @-@ kill capability of a Countermeasure Anti @-@ Torpedo ( CAT ) , an encapsulated miniature torpedo designed to locate , home in on , and destroy hostile torpedoes . This increases protection against wake @-@ homing torpedoes like the Type 53 that don 't respond to acoustic decoys . The pieces of the SSTDS are engineered to locate and destroy incoming torpedoes in a matter of seconds . Each system includes one TWS and 8 <unk> . Initial operational capability ( IOC ) is planned for 2019 and all aircraft carriers are to be outfitted by 2035 . 
 = = = Carrier air wing = = = 
 In order for a carrier to deploy , it must embark one of ten Carrier Air Wings ( <unk> ) . The carriers can accommodate a maximum of 130 F / A @-@ 18 Hornets or 85 – 90 aircraft of different types , but current numbers are typically 64 aircraft . Although the air wings are integrated with the operation of the carriers they are deployed to , they are nevertheless regarded as a separate entity . As well as the aircrew , the air wings are also made up of support personnel involved in roles including maintenance , aircraft and ordnance handling and emergency procedures . Each person on the flight deck wears color @-@ coded clothing to make his role easily identifiable . 
 A typical carrier air wing can include 12 – 14 F / A @-@ 18E or F Super Hornets as strike fighters ; two squadrons of 10 – 12 F / A @-@ 18C Hornets , with one of these often provided by the U.S. Marine Corps ( VMFA ) , also as strike fighters ; 4 – 6 EA @-@ 6B Prowlers or EA @-@ 18G Growlers for electronic warfare ; 4 – 6 E @-@ 2C or D Hawkeyes for airborne early warning ( AEW ) , C @-@ 2 Greyhounds used for logistics ( to be replaced by MV @-@ 22 Ospreys ) ; and a Helicopter Antisubmarine Squadron of 6 – 8 SH @-@ <unk> and HH @-@ <unk> Seahawks . Aircraft that have previously operated from Nimitz @-@ class carriers include F @-@ 4 Phantoms , RA @-@ 5C Vigilantes , RF @-@ 8G Crusaders , F @-@ 14 Tomcats , S @-@ 3 Vikings , A @-@ 7 Corsair II and A @-@ 6E Intruder aircraft . 
 = = = Flight deck and aircraft facilities = = = 
 The flight deck is angled at nine degrees , which allows for aircraft to be launched and recovered simultaneously . This angle of the flight deck was reduced slightly in relation to previous carriers , as the current design improves the air flow around the carrier . Four steam catapults are used to launch fixed @-@ wing aircraft , and four arrestor wires are used for recovery . The two newest carriers , Ronald Reagan and George H.W. Bush , have only three arrestor wires each , as the fourth was used infrequently on earlier ships and was therefore deemed unnecessary . This CATOBAR arrangement allows for faster launching and recovery as well as a much wider range of aircraft that can be used on board compared with smaller aircraft carriers , most of which use a simpler STOVL arrangement without catapults or arrestor wires . The ship 's aircraft operations are controlled by the air boss from Primary Flight Control or Pri @-@ Fly . Four large elevators transport aircraft between the flight deck and the hangars below . These hangars are divided into three bays by thick steel doors that are designed to restrict the spread of fire . 
 = = = Strike groups = = = 
 When an aircraft carrier deploys , it takes a Strike Group , made up of several other warships and supply vessels which allow the operation to be carried out . The armament of the Nimitz class is made up only of short range defensive weapons , used as a last line of defense against enemy missiles and aircraft . The other vessels in the Strike Group provide additional capabilities , such as long range Tomahawk missiles or the Aegis Combat System , and also protect the carrier from attack . A typical Strike Group may include , in addition to an aircraft carrier : up to six surface combatants , including frigates , guided missile cruisers and guided missile destroyers ( used primarily for anti @-@ aircraft warfare and anti @-@ submarine warfare ) ; one or two attack submarines ( for seeking out and destroying hostile surface ships and submarines ) ; and an ammunition , oiler , and supply ship of Military Sealift Command to provide logistical support . The precise structure and numbers of each type of ship can vary between groups depending on the objectives of the deployment . 
 = = = Design differences within the class = = = 
 While the designs of the final seven ships ( beginning with USS Theodore Roosevelt ) are slightly different from those of the earlier ships , the U.S. Navy considers all ten carriers as a single class . When the older carriers come in for Refueling and Complex Overhaul ( RCOH ) , their nuclear power plants are refueled and they are upgraded to the standards of the later carriers . Other modifications may be performed to update the ships ' equipment . The ships were initially classified only as attack carriers but have been constructed with anti @-@ submarine capabilities since USS Carl Vinson . These improvements include better radar systems and facilities which enable the ships to operate aircraft in a more effective Anti @-@ submarine warfare role , including the fitting of common undersea picture ( CUP ) technology which uses sonar to allow for better assessment of the threat from submarines . The changes included better support for S @-@ 3 Viking ASW patrol planes and SH @-@ <unk> Seahawk helicopters with dipping sonar systems . 
 USS Theodore Roosevelt and later carriers have slight structural differences from the earlier Nimitz carriers such as improved protection for ordnance stored in their magazines . Other improvements include upgraded flight deck ballistic protection , first installed on USS George Washington , and the high @-@ strength low @-@ alloy steel ( <unk> @-@ 100 ) used for constructing ships starting with USS John C. Stennis . More recently , older ships have had their flight decks upgraded with a new non @-@ slip material fitted on new @-@ build ships , to improve safety for both crew members and aircraft . 
 The final carrier of the class , USS George H.W. Bush , was designed as a " transition ship " from the Nimitz class to the replacement Gerald R. Ford class . Bush incorporates new technologies including improved propeller and bulbous bow designs , a reduced Radar cross @-@ section and electronic and environmental upgrades . As a result , the ship 's cost was $ 6 @.@ 2 billion . The earlier Nimitz @-@ class ships each cost around $ 4 @.@ 5 billion . To lower costs , some new technologies and design features were also incorporated into USS Ronald Reagan , the previous carrier , including a redesigned island . 
 = = Ships in class = = 
 The United States Navy lists the following ten ships in the Nimitz class : 
 = = Service history = = 
 = = = 1975 – 1989 = = = 
 One of the first major operations in which the ships were involved was Operation Eagle Claw launched by USS Nimitz in 1980 after she had deployed to the Indian Ocean in response to the taking of hostages in the U.S. embassy in Tehran . Although initially part of the U.S. Atlantic Fleet , Eisenhower relieved Nimitz in this operation after her service in the Mediterranean Sea . Nimitz conducted a Freedom of Navigation exercise alongside the aircraft carrier USS Forrestal in August 1981 in the Gulf of Sidra , near Libya . During this exercise , two of the ship 's F @-@ 14 Tomcats shot down two Libyan aircraft in what became known as the Gulf of Sidra incident . In 1987 , Vinson participated in the first U.S. carrier deployment in the Bering Sea , and Nimitz provided security during the 1988 Olympic Games in Seoul . 
 = = = 1990 – 2000 = = = 
 The two most significant deployments the Nimitz class was involved in during the 1990s were the Gulf War and its aftermath , and Operation Southern Watch in southern Iraq . All active vessels were engaged in both of these to some extent , with Operation Southern Watch continuing until 2003 . However , most carriers in operation in Operation Desert Shield and Operation Desert Storm played supporting roles , with only Roosevelt playing an active part in combat operations . Throughout the 1990s and more recently , Nimitz @-@ class carriers have been deployed as part of humanitarian missions . While deployed in the Gulf War , Lincoln was diverted to the Indian Ocean to participate alongside 22 other ships in Operation Fiery Vigil , evacuating civilians following the eruption of Mt . Pinatubo on Luzon Island in the Philippines . In October 1993 , Lincoln deployed to Somalia to assist UN humanitarian operations there , spending four weeks flying patrols over the area around Mogadishu while supporting U.S. troops during Operation Restore Hope . The same ship also participated in Operation Vigilant Sentinel in the Persian Gulf in 1995 . Roosevelt flew patrols in support of the Kurds over northern Iraq as part of Operation Provide Comfort in 1991 . In 1996 , George Washington played a peacekeeping role in Operation Decisive Endeavor in Bosnia and Herzegovina . In 1999 , Roosevelt was called to the Ionian Sea to support Operation Allied Force alongside other NATO militaries . 
 = = = 2001 – present = = = 
 Harry S. Truman 's maiden deployment was in November 2000 . The carrier 's air wing flew 869 combat sorties in support of Operation Southern Watch , including a strike on Iraqi air defense sites on 16 February 2001 , in response to Iraqi surface @-@ to @-@ air missile fire against United Nations coalition forces . 
 After the 11 September attacks , Carl Vinson and Theodore Roosevelt were among the first warships to participate in Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan . Carl Vinson sailed towards the Persian Gulf intending to support Operation Southern Watch in July 2001 . This changed in response to the attacks , and the ship changed course to travel towards the North Arabian Sea , where she launched the first airstrikes in support of the operation on 7 October 2001 . Following the attacks , John C. Stennis and George Washington participated in Operation Noble Eagle , carrying out homeland security operations off the West Coast of the United States . All active ships have been involved to some extent in Iraq and Afghanistan since that time . This included the invasion in 2003 , as well as providing subsequent support for Operation Iraqi Freedom since then . 
 The carriers have also provided aid after natural disasters ; in 2005 , Abraham Lincoln supported Operation Unified Assistance in Indonesia after the December 2004 tsunami , and Truman provided aid after Hurricane Katrina later in 2005 . The Reagan Carrier Strike Group performed humanitarian assistance and disaster relief operations in the Philippines in June 2008 after Typhoon Fengshen , which killed hundreds from the central island regions and the main island of Luzon . In January 2010 Vinson operated off Haiti , providing aid and drinking water to earthquake survivors as part of the U.S. led Operation Unified Response , alongside other major warships and hospital ship Comfort . In 2013 , the USS Nimitz and other Nimitz class carriers are near Syria . 
 = = = Refueling Complex Overhaul = = = 
 In order to refuel their nuclear power plants , the carriers each undergo a Refueling and Overhaul ( RCOH ) once in their service lives . This is also the most substantial overhaul the ships undergo while in service and involves bringing the vessels ' equipment up to the standards of the newest ships . The ship is placed in dry dock , and essential maintenance is carried out including painting of the hull below the waterline and replacement of electrical and mechanical components such as valves . Because of the large time periods between the ships ' constructions , the armament and designs of the newer ships are more modern than those of the older ships . In RCOH , the older ships are refitted to the standards of the newer ships , which can include major upgrades to the flight deck , aircraft catapults and combat systems as well as other upgrades such as improved radar systems , although precise details can vary significantly between the ships . The improvements normally take around four years to complete . The RCOH for USS Theodore Roosevelt , which began in 2009 , will reportedly cost US $ 2 @.@ 4 billion . Planned Incremental Availability is a similar procedure , although it is less substantial and does not involve refueling of the nuclear power plants . 
 = = = Symbolic and diplomatic roles = = = 
 Because of their status as the largest warships in the U.S. Navy , the deployment of an aircraft carrier can fulfill a symbolic role , not just in terms of a deterrent to an enemy , but often as a diplomatic tool , in strengthening relations with allies and potential allies . The latter of these functions can take place either as a single visit to a country , in which senior naval officers are allowed to observe the operating of the carrier and to interact with its senior officers , or as part of an international task force . This can be in combat operations , such as NATO bombing of Yugoslavia in 1999 , or other deployments involving training , such as Exercise RIMPAC . In addition , carriers have participated in international Maritime security operations , combating piracy in the Persian Gulf and off the coast of Somalia . 
 = = = Accidents and incidents = = = 
 As on most large warships , there have been several incidents involving the death or injury of one or more crew members , although most have involved freak accidents or failures , such as a man overboard as a result of poor weather . One of the highest @-@ profile incidents was on 26 May 1981 , when an EA @-@ 6B Prowler crashed on the flight deck of Nimitz , killing 14 crewmen and injuring 45 others . Forensic testing of the personnel involved showed that several tested positive for marijuana . While this in itself was not found to have directly caused the crash , the findings of the investigation prompted the introduction of mandatory drug testing of all service personnel . 
 In cases of ditched aircraft , pilots have been able to eject safely in several cases . However , fatal aircraft crashes have occurred ; in 1994 , Lt. Kara <unk> , the first female F @-@ 14 Tomcat pilot , was killed while attempting to land on board Abraham Lincoln during a training exercise . 
 Fires have also caused damage to the ships ; in May 2008 , while rotating through to her new homeport at Yokosuka Naval Base in Yokosuka , Japan , George Washington suffered a serious fire which cost $ 70 million in repairs , injured 37 sailors and led to the ship undergoing three months of repairs at San Diego ; this led to its having to miss the 2008 RIMPAC exercises and delayed the final withdrawal from service of USS Kitty Hawk . The fire was caused by unauthorized smoking in an area near improperly stored flammable refrigerant . 
 = = Future = = 
 Nimitz @-@ class carriers were designed to have a 50 @-@ year service life . At the end of the service life , ships will be decommissioned . This process will first take place on Nimitz and is estimated to cost from $ 750 to $ 900 million . This compares with an estimate of $ 53 million for a conventionally powered carrier . Most of the difference in cost is attributed to the deactivation of the nuclear power plants and safe removal of radioactive material and other contaminated equipment . A new class of carriers , the Gerald R. Ford class , is being constructed to replace previous vessels after decommissioning . Ten of these are expected , and the first will enter service in 2016 to replace the previous USS Enterprise ( CVN @-@ 65 ) . Most of the rest of these new carriers are to replace the oldest Nimitz ships as they reach the end of their service lives . The new carriers will have a similar design to George H.W. Bush ( using an almost identical hull shape ) and technological and structural improvements . 
 = Market Forces = 
 Market Forces is a science fiction thriller novel by Richard Morgan . Set in 2049 , the story follows Chris Faulkner as he starts his new job as a junior executive at Shorn Associates , working in their Conflict Investment division where the company supports foreign governments in exchange for a percentage of the country 's gross domestic product . Contracts are awarded , and promotions are given to employees , through driving duels in which combatants race vehicles on empty roads and often kill their opponents . With the Shorn @-@ supported Colombian dictator Echevarria expected to transfer power to his son , who is supported by a competing firm , Chris allies Shorn with a rebel group to overthrow the government , though other executives attempt to sabotage his plans . 
 First published in 2004 by Victor Gollancz Ltd , the book is Morgan 's third novel , the first two being part of the Takeshi Kovacs series . Market Forces satirises corporate practices and globalisation and carries the theme of competition throughout the story . Violence is used as a metaphor for the mechanisms underlying capitalism and assumptions about haves and have @-@ nots are challenged . It won the John W. Campbell Memorial Award for Best Science Fiction Novel in 2005 and was nominated for the Arthur C. Clarke Award . Though book reviewers gave it a mixed reception , Morgan 's descriptive writing and action sequences received praise . 
 = = Background = = 
 Market Forces was science fiction author Richard K. Morgan 's third novel . His first two novels , Altered Carbon ( 2002 ) and Broken Angels ( 2003 ) , were the first two parts of a trilogy later completed with <unk> Furies ( 2005 ) . That Takeshi Kovacs trilogy , hardboiled detective fiction set in the 25th century , gave Morgan a reputation for writing excellent action sequences along with a Philip K. Dick Award . Before the third part of the trilogy was published , Morgan worked on his idea for Market Forces , which he conceived of as a short story , then developed as a film script , then as a novel . At the time , Morgan was 38 years old living in Glasgow , Scotland . He has sold the filming rights to Altered Carbon to Warner Bros. ( he would also sell the rights to Market Forces to Warner Bros. ) allowing him to leave his job as an English teacher at the University of Strathclyde to focus on his writing career . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 2049 , Chris Faulkner is recruited by Shorn Associates , an investment firm in <unk> he befriends Mike Bryant , a fellow junior executive in the " Conflict Investment " division . Conflict Investment provides resources to incumbent or rebel factions in exchange for promised share of the nation 's gross domestic product . CI members often toast to continued " small wars " as their primary source of income for themselves and their investors . 
 Executive advancement in 2049 is not based on merit or politics alone , rather executives can issue challenges to each other which are held on highways emptied of cars and usually fought to the death , in a fashion similar to Mad Max , a source cited as inspiration by the author in the acknowledgements of the book . Chris Faulkner gains recognition and small celebrity for a particularly brutal win over a much older and more seasoned member of his firm , from which he is head @-@ hunted by Shorn to join their team . Within the media landscape , business executives have fame on the order of sports stars or movie actors and their driving duels are analysed and covered as sporting events . Chris ' wife Carla is also his mechanic , a vital role where an executive 's car is the difference between promotion and death . She is not a fan of the way he makes his living , but they have an initially strong relationship . 
 During a night out in the one of the Zones – the cordoned off zone of decaying ghettos surrounding the City of London – Mike introduces Chris to journalist Liz Linshaw , who is also Mike 's former mistress . Before they leave the Zones , Mike brutally executes several gang members who attempt to steal his car . Back at work , Mike brings Chris in to use contacts and analysis from his prior firm to assist into a project regarding propping up the ageing Colombian dictator General Hernan Echevarria . With Shorn 's contract due for renewal they are challenged by competing agencies Nakamura and <unk> . The challenge is settled by a driving duel in which the Shorn team eliminates the two competing teams . Chris ' profile is greatly increased with this victory , including appearances on TV and magazines as the latest star from a line of Shorn executives . As Chris becomes famous for his driving performance , he begins an affair with Liz Linshaw . With Echevarria 's son , Francisco , who is aligned with a competing American firm , preparing to take over , Chris believes that a long @-@ time rebel leader might be a better option than Francisco . Vincente Barranco , the rebel leader chosen by Chris , is signed to a contract with Shorn and brought to London to shop for arms to bring his small force the resources they need to overthrow Hernan before Francisco takes over . However , other Shorn executives sabotage Chris 's efforts by arranging for Barranco to overhear a Shorn executive negotiate with the <unk> . When challenged by Barranco that he is not truly committed to his cause , Chris reacts by spontaneously beating Hernan to death in a conference room . Shorn concocts a coverup and pins Hernan 's death on an otherwise unknown terrorist group . The killing is also concealed from most of Shorn 's employees , but the senior partner of CI agrees that while a completely unorthodox act , it 's the sort of rule bending which is sometimes needed to return the maximum for their clients . While his actions convince Barranco that he is in fact committed to his side , Chris is removed from the Columbia job which is handed over to a senior partner , Hamilton , who takes a more pragmatic view and moves to align with Hernan 's son . 
 As it is clear that the demands of his job are taking a toll on Chris , Carla becomes increasingly uncomfortable with the brutal competition among firms and the violence they incite in other countries . Seeking an escape from Shorn and to save their marriage , Carla , with the help of her father , who lives in the London Zones , and her mother in Sweden , secures a position at the United Nations as an Ombudsman , a sort of outside auditor / investigator who attempts to enforce the UN 's mandate across the world . This position is viewed as honourable but ultimately ineffective as neither the US nor UK recognise the UN 's authority and run roughshod over them in their pursuit of profits . After an initially frosty meeting , Chris ' conditions are agreed on , but with the requirement that he stay in place at Shorn through the end of the current conflict in Cambodia , in which Shorn is backing a rebel leader . 
 As the conflict in Columbia tilts in favour of the son , Hamilton goes outside of the normal chain of command to plan the execution of Barranco and the elimination of the local Shorn representative in a gladiatorial duel . Faulkner finds out about this and barges into a video conference Hamilton is having with Francisco , telling him that he in fact killed his father with his bare hands . He then beats Hamilton and breaks his neck . He is duly captured and placed in a Corporation operated jail . In jail , Chris is offered a choice : be convicted of murder and have his organs harvested after being subject to capital punishment or participate in face @-@ saving ( for Shorn ) farce by saying he had legally issued a challenge to Hamilton for his position in the firm . Conditions of this agreement are steep however as he must drive against Mike Bryant , who he had grown to be truly close with , but who is now completely done with him with revelation of Chris ' affair with Liz Linshaw and Chris ' brutal killings outside of the bounds of the challenge process . The night prior to the challenge , the UN representative returns with the chance for Chris to escape and reunite with his estranged wife , who has left the country . He declines . Mike is the superior driver but using a creative interpretation of challenge rules , Chris forces Mike to drive off a bridge and into the Zones . Chris finds the badly injured Mike and kills him just before a gang , who had watched the duel on television , finds them . The gang beats Chris but he survives when the gang is gunned down by Driver Control authorities , the sanctioning body for duels . The story ends with Chris , as the new senior executive , giving the new dictator Francisco Echevarria 48 hours to flee his country in favour of installing Barranco . 
 = = Style and themes = = 
 Market Forces is a science @-@ fiction thriller set nearly fifty years after its writing featuring a protagonist who fights lethal battles to win contracts for his company and to retain his position within the company . While the story is fictional , the author included a bibliography section that informed the story 's satire of globalisation and modern corporate practices . Morgan extrapolates trends in free market capitalism out fifty years to a point where corporations are unfettered by domestic governments . It is a dystopian vision where large corporations constantly battle to rule entire countries using humans as pawns . The protagonist , Chris Faulkner , can be viewed as a personification of the story 's take on the development of its economic system ; the character is written to be likeable but becomes increasing brutal as he invests himself deeper into the corporate culture . 
 The review in The New York Times compared the corporate culture and market mechanisms that led to the Enron scandal with the fictional background of the novel . The same reviewer compared Market Forces to Robert Stone 's A Flag for Sunrise which also concerns political and social issues but in a fictional Central American country . The story 's use of social commentary is similar to the works of science fiction authors Frederik Pohl and Cyril M. Kornbluth in the 1950s . Book reviewer Nisi Shawl wrote that this story could be part of a subgenre of stories using life @-@ in @-@ a @-@ corporation as a background , along with Eileen Gunn 's " Stable Strategies for Middle Management " , Kelley Eskridge 's " Solitaire " , and Charles Stross ' Accelerando . Morgan 's use of action sequences and car chases led to several comparisons to similar movie sequences , and specifically to Jerry Bruckheimer and Michael Bay movies . 
 = = = Competition = = = 
 The physical violence in the story is a metaphor for the mechanisms behind capitalism . Morgan uses competition as theme throughout novel , punctuated by the " portrayal of a society governed by extreme violence , ruthlessness and with no account for law , morals or humanity " . Violent competition , where the losers die , is the norm and comes in the form of businesses competing for contracts , employees competing for promotions , foreign governments fighting insurgents , and other stand @-@ offs between characters . Non @-@ violent competition is viewed as a novelty or ineffective , like playing chess or publishing opinion essays . The existence of winners and losers and the duality of " haves and the have @-@ nots " are contrasted . By illustrating how the First World exploits the Third World and the corporate executive 's use of the ghetto areas , the novel challenges the idea that the have @-@ nots are there by choice or that they competed and lost . 
 = = Publication and reception = = 
 Market Forces was published by Gollancz in United Kingdom and Del Rey Books in North America . The hardcover was released simultaneously in 2004 along with the ebook and audiobook versions . The audiobook , read unabridged by Simon Vance was published by <unk> Media in CD and mp3 formats . A <unk> version was released by the same publishers in 2007 . The book was awarded the John W. Campbell Memorial Award for Best Science Fiction Novel in 2005 and nominated for the Arthur C. Clarke Award for best science fiction novel first published in the United Kingdom . 
 Numerous reviewers commented on the action sequences and violence with several noting they were better suited to a theatrical version rather than literature . While reviewers variously called it a " high @-@ octane , stomach @-@ churning terror ride " and " turbo @-@ injected with moral ambiguity " , others noted that the action eventually grows tiresome . Reviewers also noted that the " action sequences [ are used to ] keep the critique from becoming preachy " or otherwise too serious . In The San Diego Union @-@ Tribune , the reviewer wrote " As a <unk> , I liked a lot of elements in this novel . On the other hand , I found a lot of the corporate and corp @-@ rat behavior ranged from disturbing to disgusting . " The reviewer in The Mercury concluded , " This is not comfortable or enjoyable bedtime reading . The inventive language , punk dialogue and feverish action create sustained tension throughout ... It 's hell @-@ on @-@ wheels fiction — entertainment that will appeal to many , particularly those who are hot car enthusiasts . " 
 Numerous reviewers commented on Morgan 's writing and story . In The Seattle Times , journalist and science fiction author Nisi Shawl tied the writing quality to the action scenes , " Morgan 's talent for tension @-@ building is matched by the clarity with which he describes the <unk> , rubber @-@ burning , rear @-@ end @-@ ramming , full @-@ contact racing scenes . And both these skills are quietly eclipsed by his word @-@ for @-@ word writing ability . Apt metaphors and similes abound . " However , science fiction critic Robert K. J. <unk> , in The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction , wrote " it 's not his best – it lacks the dense and evocative background of his Takeshi Kovacs books , and Morgan is not as sure @-@ handed with near @-@ future situations and characters – but it takes chances and largely succeeds . " Likewise , in the San Francisco Chronicle the reviewer wrote " In its present form , the novel feels bloated and obvious , despite the sharpness of the descriptive writing and a couple of first @-@ rate fight sequences . With the right artist , Market Forces might still make a compelling — and necessarily shorter — graphic novel . " The Library Journal review ended with a recommendation : " Morgan 's sf suspense belongs in most sf collections . " The reviewer in Booklist concluded " It 's not a particularly pleasant future , but Morgan paints it in broad strokes , drawing us into his future world and making it feel like a natural outgrowth of today 's corporate chicanery . The novel might have been unremittingly bleak if it weren 't for the moral center provided by Faulkner , who is a genuinely likable guy . Fans of Morgan 's gritty , noirish brand of sf will <unk> to this one . " 
 = Antone Davis = 
 Antone Eugene Davis ( born February 28 , 1967 ) is an American former college and professional football player who was an offensive tackle and guard in the National Football League ( NFL ) for seven seasons during the 1990s . He played one year of football for Peach County High School in Fort Valley , Georgia , and was recruited out of high school by the Tennessee Military Institute , for whom he played one year of college football . He earned a full scholarship to the University of Tennessee the following year and started at left guard during his sophomore year in 1988 . He was moved to right offensive tackle before his junior year as a Tennessee Volunteer and earned unanimous All @-@ American honors as a senior in 1990 . He finished as a finalist for the 1990 Outland Trophy as well , and was drafted by the NFL 's Philadelphia Eagles as the eighth overall selection in the 1991 NFL Draft . 
 Davis played for five seasons with the Eagles , who traded two first @-@ round draft picks to pick Davis . In his rookie season in 1991 , he started in fifteen games , missing one start in week seven due to his benching . He started in fifteen games again in 1992 , missing one game due to a knee sprain . Davis started in every game for the Eagles in 1993 at right tackle , but was moved inside to left guard in 1994 following the team 's pick of tackle Bernard Williams in the 1994 NFL Draft . Davis struggled at his new position and was benched again for the final two games of the season . He began the 1995 season as a backup , but injuries forced him to start in the final thirteen games of the season . Considered a draft bust in Philadelphia , Davis signed with the Atlanta Falcons in 1996 and spent two seasons with the team . After his retirement from football , he worked in the food industry as a restaurant owner and manager . He finished as the runner @-@ up on the twelfth season of The Biggest Loser . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Davis grew up as the youngest of eight children in Fort Valley , Georgia , and attended Peach County High School in Fort Valley . His father , Milton Trice , was raised in North Philadelphia , and moved when he was seventeen years old to Georgia . Davis worked many jobs in high school , including work in the high school cafeteria . He had attendance issues that caused him to be held back in ninth grade . He weighed about 300 pounds ( 140 kg ) at the age of fourteen . Unable to play football as a sophomore because of his grades , Davis refocused and brought his grades up . He played football as a junior , but could not play as a senior due to his class graduating the year prior . 
 = = College career = = 
 Davis played college football for one season in 1986 at the Tennessee Military Institute , a preparatory school near Sweetwater , Tennessee , that recruited him out of high school after graduation . He received a full scholarship to the University of Tennessee the next year . Following the 1987 season and the graduation of Tennessee 's two starting offensive guards , Harry Galbreath and John <unk> , Davis was expected to start for the Volunteers at left guard in 1988 as a sophomore . An ankle injury suffered during the season @-@ opener against Georgia on September 3 caused him to miss the next four games , before he was able to return against Alabama on October 15 . Before the start of the 1989 season , Davis was moved to right offensive tackle . In the 1990 season , he helped running back Tony Thompson lead the Southeastern Conference ( SEC ) in rushing with 1 @,@ 261 yards . He was named as a finalist for the Outland Trophy in November 1990 as a senior , but lost out to defensive tackle Russell Maryland from Miami . Davis earned unanimous All @-@ America honors , receiving first @-@ team honors from the Associated Press , United Press International , Walter Camp Football Foundation , American Football Coaches Association , Football Writers Association of America , Scripps – Howard Newspapers , Football News , and The Sporting News . He also earned All @-@ SEC honors . Following the 1990 season , Davis won the Jacobs Blocking Trophy in January 1991 , as the best blocker in the SEC . He played in the Hula Bowl on January 18 , 1991 , for the East squad . 
 Davis earned the University of Tennessee 's Chancellor Citation for his community service efforts during his college career , including his contributions with the " Just Say No " campaign , the American Cancer Society , Big Brothers Big Sisters of America , and the Knoxville Community Parks Association . He graduated from the University of Tennessee with a degree in urban studies in December 1990 . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Philadelphia Eagles = = = 
 = = = = 1991 season = = = = 
 At the NFL Scouting Combine in February 1991 , Davis arrived weighing 338 pounds ( 153 kg ) ( 25 pounds ( 11 kg ) overweight ) . He ran a 5 @.@ 2 @-@ second 40 yard dash , but received criticism for weight issues and his up @-@ and @-@ down personality . He had 26 repetitions in the bench press . Before the draft , analyst Mel Kiper , Jr. said , " Davis has slipped a bit . He 's still a Top 10 pick , but his recent workouts haven 't been good . " John Butler , the Buffalo Bills ' director of player personnel said Davis was " a blueprint tackle , with size and everything else . " 
 Davis was selected by the Philadelphia Eagles as the eighth overall selection in the 1991 NFL Draft , one pick after former Tennessee teammate Charles McRae was selected by the Tampa Bay Buccaneers . It was the first time in NFL history that two former college teammates who played the same position were drafted back @-@ to @-@ back . Davis was the first draft pick by new Eagles head coach Rich Kotite . The Eagles traded up from the 19th pick with the Green Bay Packers to select Davis , giving Green Bay the 19th selection ( which was used on cornerback Vinnie Clark ) and a first @-@ round pick in the 1992 NFL Draft . The pick in 1992 ended up being the 17th selection , and the Packers traded it to the Atlanta Falcons for quarterback Brett Favre on February 10 , 1992 . The Falcons then traded the pick to the Dallas Cowboys ( who used it to select cornerback Kevin Smith ) and received the 19th selection ( used to select running back Tony Smith ) and a fourth round pick ( used to select cornerback Frankie Smith ) . 
 After holding out for 21 days , Davis was signed initially to a contract designed as a temporary compromise in order to get him into training camp on August 5 , 1991 . It was speculated that the reason behind Davis ' holdout and the temporary compromise was that Davis and his agent wanted to see what McRae , who also held out with the Buccaneers , signed for first . Davis was not allowed to practice with the team until he was under contract , thus the compromise contract enabled him to practice while still work to get a long @-@ term deal done . The compromise was a one @-@ year contract with an option for a second year , and Davis received $ 600 @,@ 000 in signing the first contract . He was able to play against the Cincinnati Bengals in the Eagles ' third preseason game on August 10 . Davis was projected to be the Eagles ' starting right offensive tackle for the 1991 season . Davis suffered a sprained ankle while running laps around JFK Stadium and tripping over a goal post support on August 19 . Due to the injury , he was taken out of the preseason game against the Indianapolis Colts on August 23 at halftime by Kotite . The Eagles and Davis finalized a five @-@ year contract worth $ 4 @.@ 6 million on September 6 following the first week of the season . Davis changed his jersey number from 77 to 78 after signing the contract . He had his best game of the season in week four against the Pittsburgh Steelers on September 22 , as Kotite called more run plays to the right side towards the end of the game . Davis had a key block on a Jim McMahon quarterback sneak touchdown and McMahon gave Davis the ball immediately after to spike in celebration . The Eagles were given a five @-@ yard penalty for the spike , however . In a week five game against the Washington Redskins on September 30 , Davis gave up two sacks against defensive end Charles Mann , who received Pro Bowl honors after the season . Davis gave up a total of ten sacks in the first five games of the season . 
 Against the Buccaneers in week six on October 6 , Davis was benched in the third quarter after he was called for three holding penalties and was replaced by Bruce Collie . Collie suffered a knee injury in his second play , and Davis re @-@ entered the game . The day after the game , Kotite said about Davis : " He certainly played poorly yesterday without question . If you 've got eyes you could see that . " Ron Heller moved from left tackle to replace Davis at right tackle the next week against the New Orleans Saints . Daryle Smith , after being waived in training camp , was re @-@ signed to play left tackle . Due to a groin injury suffered by Smith , Davis regained his starting job at right tackle with Heller moving back to left tackle against the San Francisco 49ers in week nine . Davis gave up two sacks against Charles Haley in the game and was called for holding once , but Kotite said Davis improved from his previous start . Davis started in every game at right tackle after his benching in 1991 . Kotite praised Davis after the Giants game on November 4 , saying that he " played very well . " 
 = = = = 1992 season = = = = 
 Davis improved as a blocker in his second season with the Eagles . At the start of training camp in 1992 , Davis vowed to refuse all requests for interviews by the media in an attempt to focus on getting better . In the season @-@ opener against the New Orleans Saints , Davis helped the Eagles lead the NFC in rushing for the week with 186 yards . Against the Washington Redskins in week seven on October 18 , 1992 , he suffered a knee sprain after quarterback Randall Cunningham ran into him . He was listed as doubtful before the following game against the Phoenix Cardinals , and did not play in the game . He was listed as doubtful again before the game against the Dallas Cowboys in week nine . Otho Davis , the team 's head athletic trainer , said Davis was not working hard enough to rehabilitate his knee . Antone Davis was upgraded to questionable two days before the game , and started against the Cowboys on November 1 . In the wild card playoff game against the Saints on January 3 , 1993 , Davis gave up a sack against Rickey Jackson , which caused a Cunningham fumble . Davis started in all 15 games he played during the regular season , and started in both of the team 's playoff games . Pro Football Weekly rated Davis as the 26th @-@ best offensive tackle in the league for the season . 
 = = = = 1993 season = = = = 
 Davis played through a shoulder injury early in the 1993 season . Defensive end Reggie White , who signed with the Green Bay Packers following the 1992 season after spending eight seasons with the Eagles and earned seven Pro Bowl selections , said that he believed he destroyed Davis ' confidence as a rookie and second @-@ year player , as Davis had to go up against White in practice every week . White said " there are some guys who get very discouraged because they can 't block you . I think that was the situation at times with Antone . " Davis , however , disputed White 's statements as the Eagles played against the Packers in the second week of the season . Dave Goldberg , a writer for the Associated Press , named Davis to his " all @-@ unsung " team after his performance against White . Davis started in every game for the Eagles at right tackle in 1993 . 
 = = = = 1994 season = = = = 
 With the Eagles pick of offensive tackle Bernard Williams in the first round of the 1994 NFL Draft , Davis moved inside to play left offensive guard in the 1994 season . Davis was ejected from a week thirteen game against the Atlanta Falcons on November 27 , along with Lester Holmes , for fighting on the field with defensive tackle Pierce Holt of the Falcons . Davis was benched in favor of rookie Joe Panos before a week sixteen game against the New York Giants after committing seven penalties in his previous fourteen starts . Davis played in the final two games of the season . Head coach Rich Kotite was fired after the season . 
 = = = = 1995 season = = = = 
 Under new coach Ray Rhodes , Davis was moved back to right tackle in 1995 . Rhodes said that after looking at the 1994 season 's game footage , he determined Davis ' " best position for [ the Eagles ] is at tackle . " The Eagles signed former Packer Joe Sims on April 14 , 1995 , to compete with Davis for the starting right tackle job . The team reportedly tried to trade Davis in order to move up in the first round of the 1995 NFL Draft , but no team would take their offer . Due to left tackle Bernard Williams ' six game suspension from the NFL , Sims moved over to the left , with Davis staying at right tackle before the preseason . However , due to his performance in training camp , Davis was benched before a preseason game against the Pittsburgh Steelers on August 24 , in favor of Lester Holmes . Holmes suffered a knee injury during the second week of the season and was replaced by Davis . Davis replaced him in week three against the San Diego Chargers and started in the remaining thirteen games of the season and two playoff games thereafter . In a week fourteen game against the Seattle Seahawks , Moe <unk> played in place of Davis for two series in a move , as Rhodes explained , aimed at giving reserve players experience in case of injury . Davis gave up three sacks against Alonzo Spellman of the Chicago Bears in the final regular season game . He gave up seven total sacks in his fourteen regular season starts . Davis suffered a mild concussion in a wild card playoff game against the Detroit Lions after he was kicked in the head . He gave up two sacks against Tony Tolbert in a divisional round playoff loss to the Cowboys . His rookie contract expired following the season and he made $ 1 million for the season . He was considered a draft bust after being taken in the first round in 1991 . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 Davis was not re @-@ signed by the Eagles following the 1995 season and became an unrestricted free agent . He worked out for the Atlanta Falcons on April 25 , 1996 . After disagreeing on the terms of the contract , Davis signed with the Falcons on May 13 and agreed to a two @-@ year contract worth $ 1 @.@ 9 million . The contract contained a $ 200 @,@ 000 signing bonus and a $ 300 @,@ 000 workout bonus to go along with a $ 1 @.@ 4 million base salary , and up to $ 300 @,@ 000 in incentives based on playing time . He began the 1996 season as a backup behind David Richards at right tackle . Davis started in place of the injured Richards for a week five game against the San Francisco 49ers on September 29 . Richards came back from his injury in week six , but he and Davis split playing time in weeks seven and eight against the Houston Oilers and Dallas Cowboys , respectively . Richards was waived on October 23 by the Falcons , who decided to go with Davis at right tackle for the remainder of the year . Davis suffered a right ankle sprain in a week sixteen game against the St. Louis Rams on December 15 . 
 The Falcons proposed a restructured contract to Davis , reportedly worth $ 3 million for three years in March 1997 . After starting the first three games at right tackle in 1997 , Davis was benched in favor of backup Matt Willig on September 18 . Davis did not play in the remaining thirteen games of the season , and was waived by the team on February 11 , 1998 . 
 The Green Bay Packers signed Davis on January 22 , 1999 , reuniting him with new Packers coach Ray Rhodes . His tenure with the Packers was short @-@ lived , however , as Green Bay released him in June . 
 Davis finished his seven @-@ year NFL career with 87 starts in 97 games and recovered a fumble in 1997 . 
 = = After football = = 
 Davis owned a restaurant called " Gridiron Grill " in Clermont , Florida , for a short time after his career ended . He worked as a manager of a Chili 's restaurant prior to going on The Biggest Loser in 2011 , but was fired after his boss requested that he go back to work immediately after returning home for an interim period . As of 2012 , he is married with four children and resides in Murfreesboro , Tennessee . 
 Davis was a contestant on the twelfth season of The Biggest Loser , which premiered on September 20 , 2011 , and ended on December 13 , 2011 . He struggled with his weight after his football career ended , and he weighed 476 pounds ( 216 kg ) before he decided to go on The Biggest Loser . Additionally , he saw several former college and professional teammates die due to their weights , including Reggie White and Harry Galbreath , and decided to seek change . He began the show weighing 447 pounds ( 203 kg ) , and he weighed 245 pounds ( 111 kg ) in the season finale , for a total loss of 202 pounds ( 92 kg ) , or 45 @.@ 19 % , and finished as the runner @-@ up behind John Rhode . 
 The University of Tennessee announced on August 28 , 2012 , that Davis had been hired as the Vol for Life ( VFL ) Coordinator for the school 's football program . 
 = Watch the Throne = 
 Watch the Throne is a collaborative studio album by American rappers Jay @-@ Z and Kanye West , released on August 8 , 2011 , by Roc @-@ A @-@ Fella Records , Roc Nation , and Def Jam Recordings . Before the album , Jay @-@ Z and West had collaborated on their respective singles and with West as a producer on Jay @-@ Z 's work . As longtime friends , they originally sought out to record a five @-@ song EP together , but the project eventually evolved into a full @-@ length album . Recording sessions took place at various locations and began in November 2010 . The album was produced by West , 88 Keys , RZA , Swizz Beatz , Jeff Bhasker , and Mike Dean , among others . 
 Expanding on the dense production style of West 's 2010 album My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy , Watch the Throne incorporates orchestral and progressive rock influences , unconventional samples , and dramatic melodies in its sound . Jay @-@ Z and West 's braggadocio lyrics exhibit themes of opulence , fame , materialism , power , and the burdens of success , as well as political and socioeconomic context . The album expresses other topics such as Jay @-@ Z 's thoughts on fatherhood , West 's reflection on being deemed a social villain , and their legacy as performers . Music writers interpreted the subject matter to concern the rappers ' plight as African Americans struggling with financial success in America . 
 The album produced seven singles , including " H • A • M " , " Otis " , " Lift Off " , " No Church in the Wild " , and the Billboard Hot 100 top five " Niggas in Paris " , which all received music videos . Jay @-@ Z and West promoted the album with the Watch the Throne Tour that spanned October 2011 to June 2012 and became the highest grossing hip @-@ hop concert tour in history . Watch the Throne debuted at number one on the US Billboard 200 chart , selling 436 @,@ 000 copies its first week . While some critics found the album 's lyrical content uninspiring , its production and the rappers ' performances were highly praised . Many critics and publications placed the album in their year @-@ end best @-@ of lists . It also earned Jay @-@ Z and West seven Grammy Award nominations . The album is certified platinum in the US . 
 = = Background = = 
 Jay @-@ Z and Kanye West first worked together on the song " This Can 't Be Life " , from Jay @-@ Z 's 2000 album The Dynasty : Roc La Familia , produced by West , then on Jay @-@ Z 's 2001 album The Blueprint , which showcased West 's distinctive style of hip hop production at the time . West 's early production work on Jay @-@ Z 's music helped raise his profile in the music industry . While originally only viewed as a producer , West eventually was seen as both a viable rapper and producer thanks to the success of his debut album The College Dropout and its singles . West continued to be one of Jay @-@ Z 's main producers on subsequent albums such as The Black Album and Kingdom Come . Jay @-@ Z appeared on Kanye 's first two albums as well , and the two frequently collaborated . Further collaborative work by the two included singles such as " Swagga Like Us " from rapper T.I. ' s Paper Trail , " Run This Town " from Jay @-@ Z 's The Blueprint 3 , and " Monster " from West 's My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy . 
 During the promotional stages of West 's My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy , a remix of the song " Power " surfaced featuring Jay @-@ Z. Following this , West announced on Twitter his intention to drop a five @-@ track EP with Jay @-@ Z , titled Watch the Throne . Also according to the rapper , the track " Monster " was intended for the EP , though that failed to surface . It was later revealed by West that the project had been expanded into a full @-@ length album in an October 2010 interview for MTV . He said in the interview that they planned to record in the south of France . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Recording sessions for the album took place at Avex Recording Studio in Honolulu , Hawaii ; Barford Estate in Sydney , Australia ; Electric Lady Studios ; the Mercer Hotel ; MSR Studios ; and Tribeca Grand Hotel in New York , New York ; Le Meurice in Paris , France ; and Real World Studios in Wiltshire , England . Production began in November 2010 in England and continued during available times in Jay @-@ Z 's and West 's schedules at locations in Australia , Paris , Abu Dhabi , New York City , and Los Angeles . In an interview for Billboard , Jay @-@ Z said that they often recorded in hotel rooms and that the album went through three iterations , as he and West had scaled back from their original musical direction . He noted difficulties in the recording process , including arguments with West regarding their direction . Following the release of lead single , " H • A • M " in January 2011 , Jay @-@ Z stated that the less @-@ than @-@ stellar reception caused a change in the production of the album . Jay @-@ Z announced that it was unlikely that the track would ultimately make the album . The issues at the beginning of production had caused a delay in the release . In an interview for Rolling Stone , Jay @-@ Z discussed their insistence on recording in person and attributed it to the delay in releasing the album , stating " If we were gonna do it , we were gonna do it together . No mailing it in " . 
 The album 's earlier sessions produced a little material that has made the final cut . West had brought a majority of his usual production crew onto the project , the same crew that had assisted in the creation of My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy . One of the main exceptions was producer No I.D. , who felt that the two artists weren 't pushing forward enough with the music . In an interview with Complex , No I.D. commented about the project that " you ’ re going to sell , because you ’ re already big . But you guys are important to push this forward . Push intelligence and decadence and all of the above forward in a creative manner . ” While his advice was acknowledged to a degree , he ultimately had very little part in the finished project . In January 2011 , they regrouped and rented a block of rooms at the Mercer Hotel in New York City and invited a select group of producers and recording artists . Chauncey " Hit @-@ Boy " Hollis , who produced the track " Niggas in Paris " , said of recording at the hotel , " There was music going on in every room . I had a room where I was cranking out beats , and then I ’ d go into the main room with Jay and [ Kanye ] and play beats for them . Kanye is really hands @-@ on . I would come in with a beat and he ’ d be like , ‘ Take this out , slow it down . ’ It would make it sound 100 times better . Jay would then mumble different flows to the beat " . 
 Parts of the album were recorded in New York City 's Tribeca Grand Hotel . Recording artist and producer Ryan Leslie also confirmed his involvement in the recording of Watch the Throne . Producer 88 @-@ Keys reportedly played 20 of his beats to West and Jay , who only eventually used one on the finished album . The Wu @-@ Tang Clan 's RZA , who had worked on West 's previous album , is credited as a producer on the track " New Day " . Watch the Throne was mastered by producer and engineer Mike Dean at the Mercer Hotel . 
 Jay @-@ Z and West worked with several guest recording artists , including Beyoncé , Frank Ocean , and Mr Hudson . " No Church in the Wild " , the last song recorded for the album , was conceived by Jay @-@ Z , West , and the song 's producer 88 @-@ Keys throughout most of June . Producer and recording artist The @-@ Dream sings a verse on the track using <unk> . The song features R & B singer Frank Ocean , who released his debut mixtape nostalgia , ULTRA in early 2011 to critical acclaim . The release of the mixtape interested Jay @-@ Z and West . Jay @-@ Z 's wife Beyoncé recommended the involvement of the singer in particular , who appears on both " No Church in the Wild " and " Made in America . " Ocean admitted that Jay @-@ Z has intentionally intimidated him during recording sessions but declared his enjoyment of working with the two . Ocean mused about the project : 
 “ I rarely do <unk> , so that ’ s just one of the ones you absolutely do . It ’ s like a no @-@ brainer . I didn ’ t really think about any of it . The last thing on my mind was working with artists who I ’ ve held in high esteem for years . [ ... ] I worked with Jay on his solo album before I did the Watch the Throne sessions . The second time I went it was Barry Weiss , Jay , Beyoncé , Kanye , couple other people , it was a pretty heavy room . ” 
 " Lift Off " was recorded in Sydney , Australia . In early May 2011 , rumors arose that " Lift Off " was to feature Bruno Mars who had recorded vocals . It was reported that the song would be released as the lead single from the album . However , Mars never appeared on the song and Knowles sang several lines during the chorus instead . Additional vocalists Elly Jackson , " Uncle " Charlie Wilson , Connie Mitchell , and Justin Vernon provide the hook on " That 's My Bitch . " Swizz Beatz , who produced " Welcome to the Jungle " , also provided background vocals to the track , and Kid Cudi contributed additional vocals to " The Joy " and " Illest Motherfucker Alive , " bonus tracks on the album 's deluxe edition . One of the tracks that was recorded but didn 't make the cut for the album was " Living So Italian . " It apparently sampled Andrea Bocelli 's " Con te partirò " and was described as catchy but for unknown reasons , the song never made it onto the album . 
 In 2013 , Jay @-@ Z released his twelfth studio album Magna Carta ... Holy Grail , in an interview he revealed that two songs on the album were initially recorded for Watch the Throne , the song " Oceans " which features Frank Ocean and the song " Holy Grail " which went on to feature Justin Timberlake ( Although Timberlake 's contribution to the track was not anticipated at the time , until the duo collaborated on Timberlake 's 2013 comeback single " Suit & Tie " and " Murder " from The 20 / 20 Experience and The 20 / 20 Experience 2 of 2 respectively ) . West and Jay @-@ Z argued for four days about having them included on the Watch the Throne , however West eventually relented and the duo recorded " No Church in the Wild " and " Made in America " . In an interview with Zane Lowe , Jay @-@ Z said : " [ There were ] no lyrics on ' Holy Grail ' and I recorded ' Oceans ' and I played those records for Kanye , ” Jay explained . “ And he was like , ' No those have to go on Watch the Throne , ' so we spent four days arguing about those records and I was explaining to him why it wasn 't right for this project and I had a whole idea for making this album called Magna Carta ... Holy Grail , the " Holy Grail " part of the name came after . " 
 = = Music = = 
 Julian Benbow of The Boston Globe writes that the album 's music is as " massive , dour , and relentlessly unconventional " as that of West 's previous 2010 album My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy . Music writer Robert Christgau describes West 's production as " a funkier and less ornate variant of the prog @-@ rap of 2010 's acclaimed My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy " . Music journalist Jody Rosen characterizes the music as " vast , dark and booming , " commenting that West " continues in the sonic vein he introduced in My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy , lacing the songs with rock dynamics , layering his beats with eerie vocal chorales , piling on proggy flourishes . " Conversely , Matthew Cole of Slant Magazine finds West 's " knack for dramatic , melodically sophisticated tracks [ ... ] channeled away from the Olympian scale " of his previous album " and toward the more commercial vein of Jay @-@ Z 's recent work , " which he attributes to West splitting production work with several other producers . On the songs ' structure , Cole states , " every track eschews the standard verse @-@ hook @-@ repeat format in favor of more dynamic material . " 
 Music journalist Alexis Petridis comments that the album incorporates " unlikely samples . " Jon Caramanica of The New York Times writes that its production " can be roughly segmented into three categories , " noting " Southern @-@ inflected tracks " such as " Niggas in Paris " and " H • A • M " , " moody and harsh numbers " like " Who Gon Stop Me " and " Why I Love You " , and " the nostalgia that creeps over much of this album , giving it a sonic through @-@ line and mission statement . " Pitchfork Media 's Tom Breihan perceives " pure orchestral excess " on some of its songs and describes the album 's musical scope as " a tribute to [ West 's ] distinctive taste and sense of style . " An interlude that appears after " No Church in the Wild " , " New Day " and " Welcome to the Jungle " , as well as before " Illest Motherfucker Alive " on the deluxe edition , samples the 1979 song " Tristessa " by Italian jazz @-@ rock fusion band Orchestra <unk> . 
 = = Lyrics = = 
 The album features themes of opulence , fame , materialism , power , and the burdens of success . Jay @-@ Z 's and West 's lyrics include boasts of obscene wealth , grandiosity , and social commentary . Sputnikmusic 's Tyler Fisher describes Watch the Throne as " an album centered around larger @-@ than @-@ life egos . " Robert Christgau notes " regal grandiosity " and " glory " as primary themes on the album . Andy Kellman of Allmusic characterizes much of the album 's lyrical content as " ruthless flaunting of material wealth and carte blanche industry resources . " Ross Green of Tiny Mix Tapes describes it as " luxury rap " , noting Jay @-@ Z 's and West 's " whimsy and braggadocio . " Rob Harvilla of Spin views that their lyrics express elitism , narcissism , " relentless capitalism , " and " smug yet undeniable greatness . " 
 Music critic Greg Kot views that the album is about " mutual admiration " and writes of the rappers ' respective personas , " Jay @-@ Z is about imperious flow , bridging his gritty past life on the streets with his current status as a cultural tastemaker and business mogul . [ ... ] West is more desperate , transparent , awkward , vulnerable . " Music critic Nathan Rabin states that Jay @-@ Z and West " are a study in contrasts : the businessman and the bohemian , the faithful husband and the drugged @-@ up playboy , the walking press release and the loose cannon . Jay @-@ Z is tidy . Kanye is nothing but rough edges . " Jon Caramanica writes similarly , " breaking [ ... ] old barriers is a means to acceptance and stability " for Jay @-@ Z , while " West sounds lonely " with his fame , adding that " For Mr. West every flash of Dionysian extreme is tempered by the realization of its hollowness . " In his article " Brag Like That " for Barnes & Noble , Robert Christgau comments that " Jay @-@ Z is a grown man and Kanye West is not " on the album and elaborates on their lyrics , stating : 
 Both co @-@ kings flaunt their arrogance even by the standards of a genre where braggadocio is the main event , and neither is shy about pretending that the line of succession from Otis Redding and Martin Luther King is paved with their gold . [ ... ] One could venture that maybe Watch the Throne <unk> up the way it does for rhetorical purposes — that one king plays the hero and the other the hedonist , two equally royal hip @-@ hop archetypes . 
 Their lyrics also exhibit political and socioeconomic context , which Jody Rosen denotes as " serious , sober , weighty . " Nitsuh Abebe of New York views that the album is " about the relationship of black American men to wealth , power , and success . [ ... ] a portrait of two black men thinking through the idea of success in America . " He compares it to <unk> <unk> 's 1998 piece Diary of a Victorian Dandy , " in which the artist luxuriates in all the genteel pleasures of the time . " Randall Roberts of the Los Angeles Times notes " musings on the spoils of riches and the chaos that accompanies it , " adding that " [ the ] tension between worshiping the spirit and celebrating the bounty drives Watch the Throne [ ... ] The record questions faith while clinging to heritage and family , places this moment in an historical context , wonders on the mystery , power and confusion of the gilded life — while rolling around in amulets . " Writer Kitty Empire interprets it to be about " black power [ ... ] conceived as a swaggering taunt of achievement , in line with both men 's previous works , which routinely double as shopping guides . [ ... ] [ T ] hey need to humanise all the conspicuous consumption . " Claire Suddath of Time views the rappers ' " bacchanal celebration of the finer things in life " as secondary to the theme of " two men grappling with what it means to be successful and black in a nation that still thinks of them as second class . " 
 = = Songs = = 
 The opening track " No Church in the Wild " features a cinematic production style . Singers Frank Ocean and The @-@ Dream lend their voices to the album 's grim opener , which sets the mood with a gnarled guitar sample . Over the rock @-@ centric , rolling production , both rappers muse over familiar themes of loyalty , sexuality and maternal solidarity . The pop @-@ oriented " Lift Off " features baroque strings and a chorus sung by Beyoncé Knowles , accompanied with synthesizers . The song contains horns and martial drums as Knowles sings , " We gon ' take it to the moon / Take it to the stars . " " Niggas in Paris " incorporates staccato orchestration and fizzing industrial noise , topping it all off with a menacing beat and icy synthesizer notes . The track features an unusual sampling of dialogue from the 2007 film Blades of Glory , notably the " we 're gonna skate to one song and one song only " line . West and Jay @-@ Z 's lyrics frame their rags to riches story on the song . 
 " Otis " samples Otis Redding 's 1966 song " Try a Little Tenderness " , manipulating it into a rhythm track with Redding 's vocals and grunts . The sample is used in a way that is reminiscent to past Kanye productions , like the tracks found on his album The College Dropout . Redding 's vocals are chopped up so thoroughly that his voice serves as a mere melodic riff on the track , with both rappers promptly rapping over it in a braggadocio fashion . " Gotta Have It " , produced by The Neptunes , incorporates chopped @-@ up James Brown vocal samples and Eastern flute melodies . The song contains haunting backing vocals and an accompanying tambourine with the two rappers trading verses with the vocal riff playing over them . Much like " Otis " , the track features sliced @-@ up vocal snippets and an aggressive bass backing , with the two rappings trading lines and making references to the Yung Chris song " <unk> " and other contemporary rap trends . 
 On " New Day " , they address future sons about fame . It references the line " me and the RZA connect " from Raekwon 's 1995 song " Incarcerated <unk> " , which was also produced by RZA . The track incorporates a sample of Nina Simone 's 1965 song " Feeling Good " through an Auto @-@ Tune voice processor . Both rappers discuss their futures as fathers on the track , flowing smoothly over mellow , lightly psychedelic synthesizer tones . Both Justin Vernon and La Roux appear on " That 's My Bitch " , spitting off hooks over a quick , melodic beat , with West at his most abrasive lyrically . On " Welcome to the Jungle " , Jay @-@ Z laments personal losses and overcoming struggles . Sharing the name with a Guns N ' Roses track , Jay describes himself as the " black Axl Rose " over a jittery , treble @-@ heavy Swizz Beatz production . 
 " Who Gon Stop Me " features bombastic production and samples Flux Pavilion 's 2011 song " I Can 't Stop " , reinforced with heavy synthesizer and tone shifts . The song utilizes an often experimental , bass @-@ driven and dub @-@ step influenced style of composition , with West forcefully rapping lines like " this is something like the Holocaust " . " Murder to Excellence " addresses black @-@ on @-@ black crime and limited social mobility for African Americans . Midway through the song the beat switches up , with Kanye musing over the horrors of black @-@ on @-@ black violence in the first half , and Jay @-@ Z delivering equally meditated comments on black excellence on the more choir heavy second half . A sample from <unk> 's " LA LA LA " can be heard on the song . At 5 minutes in length , the complete " Murder to Excellence " is the longest track on the album . 
 " Made in America " has themes of family life and the American Dream , with Jay @-@ Z and West discussing their respective rises to fame , while acknowledging those who helped and inspired them . The song has been described as an understated soft @-@ pop track with influence from Michael Jackson and his 1985 charity single " We Are the World " . Ocean 's hook pays tribute to Martin Luther King , Jr . , Coretta Scott King , Malcolm X , Betty Shabazz and Jesus on one of the album 's more serene tracks . Jay @-@ Z muses on his drug @-@ dealing past with lines like " our apple pie was supplied by Arm & Hammer " , with West 's verse describing his conflict with fame . " Why I Love You " has Jay @-@ Z lamenting betrayal and how his past protégés failed to maintain without him . The track contains a " sledgehammer beat " which is built around French house duo Cassius ' 2010 single " I < 3 U So " . West 's production continues in the sonic vein he introduced in My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy , lacing the song with rock dynamics , layering the beat with eerie vocal chorales in the style of progressive rock songs . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 Watch the Throne was released by Roc @-@ A @-@ Fella Records , Roc Nation , and Def Jam Recordings , Jay @-@ Z 's and West 's respective record labels . On July 4 , 2011 it was made available to pre @-@ order on Life + Times , Jay @-@ Z 's lifestyle webzine , which redirected to Island Def Jam 's website that featured the deluxe version available for $ 16 @.@ 99 , standard CD for $ 13 @.@ 99 , a deluxe digital version for $ 14 @.@ 99 , and standard digital album for $ 11 @.@ 99 . On July 22 , its pre @-@ order was made available on the iTunes Store . Internationally the album was released digitally on August 8 exclusively through iTunes , while its physical release was made available on August 12 . Its deluxe CD edition was sold exclusively by Best Buy through August 23 , when it became available at other retailers . The sales strategy received criticism from other retailers , who accused the labels of giving preferential treatment to iTunes and Best Buy . One of the most anticipated releases in 2011 , Watch the Throne became one of the few major label albums in the Internet age to avoid a leak . 
 On July 7 , 2011 , Jay @-@ Z hosted a private listening session at the Mercer Hotel in New York City , previewing the album 's songs from his MacBook Pro for a select group of reporters and music journalists . It was also exclusive to two teenage fans who had won access to the session for being the first people to pre @-@ order the album through Jay @-@ Z 's Life + Times website . The album 's cover and artwork , both designed by Italian designer Riccardo Tisci , were also premiered at the session . Benjamin Meadows @-@ <unk> of Billboard , who attended the session , said of the previewed material , " The songs were dramatic and boastful , with Jay @-@ Z often taking the lead lyrically , and the collection showcased the differences between the two artists - Jay @-@ Z , the technical marksman , and Kanye , the emotive chest beater . " On August 1 , Jay @-@ Z and West held a listening session for the album at the Rose Center for Earth and Space in New York City 's American Museum of Natural History . The session premiered the album in its entirety and featured attendance from journalists , models , industry types , and recording artists such as Busta Rhymes , 88 @-@ Keys , and Beyoncé Knowles . 
 Jay @-@ Z and West promoted Watch the Throne with a 34 @-@ date , North American concert tour produced by Live Nation , which began on October 29 and concluded on December 18 , 2010 . By the end of 2011 the tour had grossed $ 48 @.@ 3 million making it the highest grossing hip @-@ hop tour and the eighth highest grossing tour of 2011 . By its conclusion , the tour had become the highest grossing concert tour ever by a hip @-@ hop act . 
 = = Singles = = 
 Watch the Throne spawned seven official singles , with varying degrees of success . Following West 's announcement via his Twitter account , " H • A • M " was officially released as a digital download in January 2011 as the lead single . It charted at number 23 on the US Billboard Hot 100 . In July 2011 , " Otis " became the second single when it was premiered on Funkmaster Flex 's Hot 97 radio show and subsequently leaked to the Internet . It was sent to rhythmic contemporary and urban contemporary radio on August 9 . Its cover art was created by Riccardo Tisci . " Otis " reached number 12 on the Hot 100 . A music video for the song was filmed by director Spike Jonze in Los Angeles . Third single " Lift Off " was sent to US urban radio on August 23 of the same year . The track peaked on the US Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles at position 6 . 
 The album 's fourth and fifth singles were released simultaneously ; in September 2011 , " Why I Love You " was sent to US rhythmic radio , and " Niggas in Paris " was sent to both rhythmic and urban radio . " Why I Love You " served as a European @-@ centric single while " Niggas in Paris " was promoted as a domestic single . " Niggas in Paris " peaked at number five on the Hot 100 . " Niggas in Paris " was sent to Top 40 / Mainstream radio on November 8 . By February 2012 , it had reached digital sales of two million in the US . The song was promoted with a music video directed by West himself , featuring concert footage . 
 The sixth single was " Gotta Have It " , which impacted Urban radio on December 6 , 2011 , and Rhythmic radio on January 31 , 2012 . Seventh and final single " No Church in the Wild " impacted Urban radio on March 20 , 2012 . Romain Gavras directed a music video for " No Church " though it featured none of the featured performers . " Gotta Have It " peaked at position 69 on the Hot 100 , with " No Church in the Wild " peaking at 72 . Though not released as a single , " Who Gon Stop Me " peaked at 44 on the chart . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Watch the Throne received generally positive reviews from music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a weighted mean rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 76 , based on 42 reviews . Nathan Rabin of The A.V. Club wrote that " exhilarating messiness and go @-@ for @-@ broke spontaneity infect Jay @-@ Z and push him outside his comfort zone and into a realm of intense emotional reflection . " Pitchfork Media 's Tom Breihan felt that it " works best when Jay and Kanye are just talking about how great they are , " adding that " Kanye is this album 's obvious guiding force ... He displays levels of unequaled audacity . " Claire Suddath of Time called it " a beautifully decadent album by two of hip @-@ hop 's finest artists — men with a lot of things to say and a lot of money to spend . " Neil McCormick of The Daily Telegraph praised West 's " attention to detail " and found their " wit and absurdity [ ... ] entirely suited to the epic scale of productions . " Kitty Empire of The Observer stated , " Some find this sort of branded gloating distasteful , but at their best both rappers can still make you laugh . " 
 Randall Roberts of the Los Angeles Times found its production " captivating " , despite " a relative lack of structural variety within the songs , " and called the album " a cocksure , fiery , smart , if problematic , collaboration that showcases the pair 's distinct lyrical skills . " Julian Benbow of The Boston Globe observed " an undeniable synergy that they embraced for this project . " Slant Magazine 's Matthew Cole praised West 's " powerhouse production " and called it an album " that requires you to tolerate the artists ' self @-@ mythologizing and put up with their sometimes awkward attempts at experimentation . " Despite noting a " lack of thematic consistency , " David Amidon of PopMatters commended " the entire conceit of the album ’ s framework " and added that it " succeeds [ ... ] in giving us both sides of both artists — the braggadocio and the social consciousness — in nearly equal measure . " Allmusic editor Andy Kellman called it " an audacious spectacle of vacuous pomposity as well as one of tremendous lyrical depth . " 
 In a mixed review , Andy Gill of The Independent found their rapping " pretty mediocre " and stated , " Too often here their complacent , back @-@ slapping laxity leaves tracks floundering . " Chicago Tribune writer Greg Kot criticized Jay @-@ Z and West 's " self @-@ regard " , writing that " they urge listeners to ' watch the throne , ' and gaze in awe on their good fortune . " Jody Rosen of Rolling Stone felt that " on a record this ambitious , this sonically bold , it 's a shame two of music 's greatest storytellers don 't extend their gaze beyond their own luxe lives . " Rob Harvilla of Spin commented that " fame and wealth and pissed greatness [ ... ] permeate [ s ] everything " and called the album " garish and glorious , exquisite and exasperating . " Jon Caramanica of The New York Times wrote that " as a whole it 's not totally legible ; there are too many ideas ... an album with several phenomenal moments , even if it doesn ’ t quite add up to a phenomenal album . " Sasha Frere @-@ Jones of The New Yorker stated , " Weed the album down to a healthy ten , and [ it ] doesn 't become either classic or coherent , but it does work as an entertaining document of two wildly creative , not particularly wound @-@ up friends . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Watch the Throne was one of the top @-@ ranked albums in year @-@ end lists by music critics and publications . Q ranked the album number six in its list of the Top 50 Albums of 2011 . Rolling Stone named it the second @-@ best album in its year @-@ end list , commenting that " What could have been a crash @-@ and @-@ burn anticlimax turned out to be as fun as any record in a dog 's age . From the cinematic ' No Church in the Wild ' to the Stax @-@ soul update ' Otis , ' Throne testifies to Kanye West 's talent for beats both iconoclastic and pop @-@ savvy . " Claire Suddath of Time ranked it number three on her top @-@ 10 albums list and called it " a beautifully decadent album " . Chris Richards of The Washington Post ranked it number two on his list and stated , " Instead of blushing over their embarrassment of riches , pop 's most intriguing partnership delivered a self @-@ congratulatory opus that was adventurous enough to remind us that they ’ re rap visionaries first , 1 percent <unk> second . The A.V. Club ranked the it number nine on its year @-@ end list , commenting that " Watch The Throne thrives on the bristling tension between Kanye 's live @-@ wire energy and rule @-@ breaking abandon , and Jay @-@ Z 's innate <unk> . It ’ s an album of the moment — a point underlined by the presence of Frank Ocean on two tracks — yet it has the substance to endure . " Stereogum placed Watch the Throne at number 10 on its list of the " Top 50 albums of 2011 " while Pitchfork Media placed the album at number 21 on its list . In 2012 , Complex named the album one of the classic albums of the last decade . In January 2015 , the album was placed at number 8 on Billboard 's list of " The 20 Best Albums of the 2010s ( So Far ) " . 
 Watch the Throne was nominated for Grammy Awards for Best Rap Album and Best Recording Package , presented at the 54th Grammy Awards in 2012 . It lost the award to West 's My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy , which took home three of the awards for which it was nominated . The song " Otis " was nominated for Best Rap Performance and Best Rap Song , winning the former . " Otis " lost the latter award to West 's Twisted Fantasy single " All of the Lights " . At the 55th Grammy Awards in 2013 , the album received three additional nominations , with the song " Niggas in Paris " winning awards for Best Rap Performance and Best Rap Song , and " No Church in the Wild " winning Best Rap / Sung Collaboration . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 The album debuted at number one on the US Billboard 200 chart , with first @-@ week sales of 436 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . It serves as Jay @-@ Z 's 12th number @-@ one album and West 's fifth number @-@ one album in the US . Its debut week serves as the second highest debut week of 2011 , while its first week digital sales of 321 @,@ 000 downloads serve as the second highest one @-@ week sales tally in digital history . Watch the Throne had the biggest one @-@ week digital tally ever for a rap album and broke the United States iTunes Store 's one @-@ week sales record when it sold nearly 290 @,@ 000 downloads in the first week via the retailer . It reached number one on Billboard 's Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums and Top Rap Albums charts . The album remained at number one on the Billboard 200 and sold 177 @,@ 000 copies in its second week . It sold 94 @,@ 000 copies in its third week . In its fourth week , the album sold 80 @,@ 000 copies . On September 15 , 2011 , Watch the Throne was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , for shipments of one million copies in the US . As of July 2013 , it has sold 1 @,@ 573 @,@ 000 copies , according to Nielsen SoundScan . 
 In Canada , it debuted at number one on the Canadian Albums Chart , selling 25 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . In its second week , it remained at number one on the chart and sold 15 @,@ 900 copies . In addition , Watch the Throne peaked at number one on the Australian Urban Albums Chart , the Norwegian Albums Chart , the Swiss Albums Chart and on the UK R & B Albums Chart . By September 2011 , the album had shipped 35 @,@ 000 copies in Australia . The album peaked at number two on the Australian Albums Chart , the German Albums Chart the Danish Albums Chart , and at number three on both the Scottish Albums Chart and the UK Albums Chart . It debuted within the top 10 on the Belgian Albums Chart , the Dutch Albums Chart , the French Albums Chart , the Irish Albums Chart , the Russian Albums Chart and the New Zealand Albums Chart . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 ^ [ a ] signifies a co @-@ producer . 
 ^ [ b ] signifies an additional producer . 
 ^ [ c ] signifies an additional vocal producer . 
 Sample credits 
 " No Church in the Wild " contains samples from " K @-@ Scope " performed by Phil Manzanera , " Sunshine Help Me " performed by Spooky Tooth and " Don 't Tell a Lie About Me and I Won 't Tell the Truth About You " performed by James Brown . 
 " Niggas in Paris " contains samples from the Rev. W.A. Donaldson recording " <unk> Scene " and dialogue between Will Ferrell and Jon Heder from the film Blades of Glory . 
 " Otis " contains samples from " Try a Little Tenderness " performed by Otis Redding , " Don 't Tell a Lie About Me and I Won 't Tell the Truth About You " performed by James Brown and " Top Billin ' " performed by Audio Two . 
 " Gotta Have It " contains samples from " Don 't Tell a Lie About Me and I Won 't Tell the Truth About You " , " People Get Up and Drive Your Funky Soul " and " My Thang " performed by James Brown . 
 " New Day " contains samples from " Feeling Good " performed by Nina Simone . 
 " That 's My Bitch " contains samples from " Get Up , Get Into It , Get Involved " performed by James Brown and " Apache " performed by Incredible Bongo Band . 
 " Who Gon Stop Me " contains samples from " I Can 't Stop " performed by Flux Pavilion . 
 " Murder to Excellence " contains samples from " La La La " performed by <unk> Twins and " <unk> <unk> Mr. / <unk> " performed by Quincy Jones . 
 " Why I Love You " contains samples from " I Love You So " performed by Cassius . 
 " Primetime " contains samples from " Action " performed by Orange Krush . 
 " The Joy " contains samples from " The <unk> of You ( Live ) " performed by Curtis Mayfield and " Different Strokes " performed by Syl Johnson . 
 The interlude on each of these track was found , after " No Church in the Wild " , " New Day " and " Welcome to the Jungle " , as well as before " Illest Motherfucker Alive " contains samples from " Tristessa " performed by Orchestra <unk> . 
 Additional notes 
 " Lift Off " features additional vocals by Seal , Mr Hudson , Don Jazzy , <unk> and Ricardo Lewis . 
 " Gotta Have It " features additional vocals by Kid Cudi . 
 " That 's My Bitch " features additional vocals by Elly Jackson , Connie Mitchell and Justin Vernon . 
 " Welcome to the Jungle " features additional vocals by Swizz Beatz and Acapella Soul . 
 " Who Gon Stop Me " features additional vocals by Mr Hudson , Swizz Beatz and Verse Simmonds . 
 " Murder to Excellence " features additional vocals by Kid Cudi . 
 " Illest Motherfucker Alive " features additional vocals by Kid Cudi , <unk> and Aude Cardona . 
 " H • A • M " features additional vocals by Aude Cardona and Jacob Lewis Smith . 
 " The Joy " features additional vocals by Kid Cudi , Charlie Wilson and Pete Rock . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits for Watch the Throne adapted from liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Primary line constants = 
 The primary line constants are parameters that describe the characteristics of conductive transmission lines , such as pairs of copper wires , in terms of the physical electrical properties of the line . The primary line constants are only relevant to such lines and are to be contrasted with the secondary line constants , which can be derived from them , and are more generally applicable . The secondary line constants can be used , for instance , to compare the characteristics of a waveguide to a copper line , whereas the primary constants have no meaning for a waveguide . 
 The constants are conductor resistance and inductance , and insulator capacitance and conductance , which are by convention given the symbols R , L , C , and G respectively . The constants are enumerated in terms of per unit length . The circuit representation of these elements requires a distributed element model and consequently calculus must be used to analyse the circuit . The secondary constants of characteristic impedance and propagation constant can be derived in this way . 
 A number of special cases have particularly simple solutions and important practical applications . Low loss cable requires only L and C to be included in the analysis , useful for short lengths of cable . Low frequency applications , such as twisted pair telephone lines , are dominated by R and C only . High frequency applications , such as RF co @-@ axial cable , are dominated by L and C. Lines loaded to prevent distortion need all four elements in the analysis , but have a simple , elegant solution . 
 = = The constants = = 
 There are four primary line constants , but in some circumstances some of them are small enough to be ignored and the analysis can be simplified . These four , and their symbols and units are as follows : 
 R and L are elements in series with the line ( because they are properties of the conductor ) and C and G are elements shunting the line ( because they are properties of the dielectric material between the conductors ) . G represents leakage current through the dielectric and in most cables is very small . The word loop is used to emphasise that the resistance and inductance of both conductors must be taken into account . For instance , if a line consists of two identical wires that have a resistance of 25 <unk> / m each , the loop resistance is double that , 50 <unk> / m . Because the values of the constants are quite small , it is common for manufacturers to quote them per kilometre rather than per metre ; in the English @-@ speaking world " per mile " can also be used . 
 The word " constant " can be misleading since there is some variation with frequency . In particular , R is heavily influenced by the skin effect . Furthermore , while G has virtually no effect at audio frequency , it can cause noticeable losses at high frequency with many of the dielectric materials used in cables due to a high loss tangent . Avoiding the losses caused by G is the reason many cables designed for use at UHF are air @-@ insulated or foam @-@ insulated ( which makes them virtually air @-@ insulated ) . The actual meaning of constant in this context is that the parameter is constant with distance . That is the line is assumed to be homogenous lengthwise . This condition is true for the vast majority of transmission lines in use today . 
 = = Typical values for some common cables = = 
 † Manufacturers commonly omit a value for inductance in their data sheets . Some of these values are estimated from the figures for capacitance and characteristic impedance by <formula> . 
 = = Circuit representation = = 
 The line constants cannot be simply represented as lumped elements in a circuit ; they must be described as distributed elements . For instance " pieces " of the capacitance are in between " pieces " of the resistance . However many pieces the R and C are broken into , it can always be argued they should be broken apart further to properly represent the circuit , and after each division the number of meshes in the circuit is increased . This is shown <unk> in figure 1 . To give a true representation of the circuit , the elements must be made infinitesimally small so that each element is distributed along the line . The infinitesimal elements in an infinitesimal distance <formula> are given by ; 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 It is convenient for the purposes of analysis to roll up these elements into general series impedance , Z , and shunt admittance , Y elements such that ; 
 <formula> and , 
 <formula> 
 Analysis of this network ( figure 2 ) will yield the secondary line constants : the propagation constant , <formula> , ( whose real and imaginary parts are the attenuation constant , <formula> , and phase change constant , <formula> , respectively ) and the characteristic impedance , <formula> , which also , in general , will have real , <formula> , and imaginary , <formula> , parts , making a total of four secondary constants to be derived from the four primary constants . The term constant is even more misleading for the secondary constants as they all usually vary quite strongly with frequency , even if the frequency dependence of the primary constants is ignored . This is because the reactances in the circuit ( <formula> and <formula> ) introduce a dependence on <formula> . It is possible to choose specific values of the primary constants that result in <formula> and <formula> being constant ( the Heaviside condition ) but even in this case there is still <formula> which is directly proportional to <formula> . As with the primary constants , the meaning is that the secondary constants do not vary with distance along the line , not that they are independent of frequency . 
 = = Characteristic impedance = = 
 The characteristic impedance of a transmission line , <formula> , is defined as the impedance looking into an infinitely long line . Such a line will never return a reflection since the incident wave will never reach the end to be reflected . When considering a finite initial length of the line , the remainder of the line can be replaced by <formula> as its equivalent circuit . This is so because the remainder of the line is still infinitely long . Considering just the first section of the equivalent circuit of the line ( this is an L @-@ network consisting of one element each of <formula> and <formula> ) the remainder can be replaced by <formula> . This results in the network shown in figure 3 , which can be analysed for <formula> using the usual network analysis theorems , 
 <formula> 
 which re @-@ arranges to , 
 <formula> 
 Taking limits of both sides 
 <formula> 
 and since the line was assumed to be homogenous lengthwise , 
 <formula> 
 = = Propagation constant = = 
 The ratio of the line input voltage to the voltage a distance <formula> further down the line ( that is , after one section of the equivalent circuit ) is given by a standard voltage divider calculation . The remainder of the line to the right , as in the characteristic impedance calculation , is replaced with <formula> , 
 <formula> 
 Each infinitesimal section will multiply the voltage drop by the same factor . After <formula> sections the voltage ratio will be , 
 <formula> 
 At a distance <formula> along the line , the number of sections is <formula> so that , 
 <formula> 
 In the limit as <formula> , 
 <formula> 
 The second order term <formula> will disappear in the limit , so we can write without loss of accuracy , 
 <formula> 
 and comparing with the mathematical identity , 
 <formula> 
 yields , 
 <formula> 
 From the definition of propagation constant , 
 <formula> 
 Hence , 
 <formula> 
 = = Special cases = = 
 An ideal transmission line will have no loss , which implies that the resistive elements are zero . It also results in a purely real ( resistive ) characteristic impedance . The ideal line cannot be realised in practice , but it is a useful approximation in many circumstances . This is especially true , for instance , when short pieces of line are being used as circuit components such as stubs . A short line has very little loss and this can then be ignored and treated as an ideal line . The secondary constants in these circumstances are ; 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 = = = Twisted pair = = = 
 Typically , twisted pair cable used for audio frequencies or low data rates has line constants dominated by R and C. The dielectric loss is usually negligible at these frequencies and G is close to zero . It is also the case that , at a low enough frequency , <formula> which means that L can also be ignored . In those circumstances the secondary constants become , 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 The attenuation of this cable type increases with frequency , causing distortion of waveforms . Not so obviously , the variation of <formula> with frequency also causes a distortion of a type called dispersion . To avoid dispersion the requirement is that <formula> is directly proportional to <formula> . However , it is actually proportional to <formula> and dispersion results . <formula> also varies with frequency and is also partly reactive ; both these features will be the cause of reflections from a resistive line termination . This is another undesirable effect . The nominal impedance quoted for this type of cable is , in this case , very nominal , being valid at only one spot frequency , usually quoted at 800 Hz or 1 kHz . 
 = = = Co @-@ axial cable = = = 
 Cable operated at a high enough frequency ( VHF radio frequency or high data rates ) will meet the conditions <formula> and <formula> . This must eventually be the case as the frequency is increased for any cable . Under those conditions R and G can both be ignored ( except for the purpose of calculating the cable loss ) and the secondary constants become ; 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 = = = Loaded line = = = 
 Loaded lines are lines designed with deliberately increased inductance . This is done by adding iron or some other magnetic metal to the cable or adding coils . The purpose is to ensure that the line meets the Heaviside condition , which eliminates distortion caused by frequency @-@ dependent attenuation and dispersion , and ensures that <formula> is constant and resistive . The secondary constants are here related to the primary constants by ; 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 = = Velocity = = 
 The velocity of propagation is given by , 
 <formula> 
 Since , 
 <formula> and <formula> 
 then , 
 <formula> 
 In cases where β can be taken as , 
 <formula> 
 the velocity of propagation is given by , 
 <formula> 
 The lower the capacitance the higher the velocity . With an air dielectric cable , which is approximated to with low @-@ loss cable , the velocity of propagation is very close to c , the speed of light in vacuo . 
 = 731 ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " 731 " is the tenth episode of the third season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on December 1 , 1995 . It was directed by Rob Bowman , and written by Frank Spotnitz . " 731 " featured guest appearances by Stephen McHattie , Steven Williams and Don S. Williams . The episode helps explore the series ' overarching mythology . " 731 " earned a Nielsen household rating of 12 , being watched by 17 @.@ 68 million people in its initial broadcast . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In this episode , Mulder risks his life infiltrating a train carrying a human @-@ alien hybrid . Meanwhile , Scully tries to uncover the truth about her abduction . " 731 " is a two @-@ part episode , continuing the plot from the previous episode , " Nisei " . 
 The production of " 731 " involved several stunts , including the explosion of a retired railway car . The episode 's production was successful for two members of the crew — earning director of photography John Bartley an American Society of Cinematographers award nomination for his work , and securing Bowman the job of directing the series ' subsequent film adaptation , The X @-@ Files . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In <unk> , West Virginia , a team of soldiers arrives at an abandoned leprosy research compound , rounding up most of the patients . One patient , Escalante , hides beneath a trapdoor during the arrival and follows the group to a secluded field nearby . He watches as the soldiers shoot the other patients , including apparent alien @-@ human hybrids , into a mass grave . 
 Fox Mulder loses his cell phone after jumping on top of the moving train , losing contact with Dana Scully . When questioned by Scully , X tells her to analyze her implant , saying that it will give her answers about the train and her sister Melissa 's murder . Meanwhile , Mulder enters the train and finds that the secret railcar is quarantined and protected by a security system . He searches for Zama , enlisting the train conductor for help . In Zama 's compartment , they find hand @-@ written journals in Japanese . However , elsewhere on the train , the Red @-@ Haired Man intercepts and strangles Zama . 
 Scully sees Pendrell , who tells her that the implant contains highly advanced technology that can replicate the brain 's memory functions and enable someone to know a person 's very thoughts . The manufacturer of the chip was Zama , who created the implant at the West Virginia compound . Scully travels there , meeting a group of deformed patients who have eluded the " death squads . " Escalante tells her that the patients were experimented on by Zama , who departed long ago ; since then , the death squads have set out to massacre them . Escalante shows her the mass grave but is killed when soldiers arrive to capture Scully . She is brought before the First Elder . 
 Mulder returns to the railcar , seeing its door ajar ; an alien @-@ human test subject is locked in a room inside . The Red @-@ Haired Man attacks Mulder , causing the conductor to lock them both in the car . The Red @-@ Haired Man claims to work for the NSA , and that a bomb in the car was triggered after he gained entry with Zama 's pass code . Mulder doesn 't believe him , but he is called by Scully on the Red @-@ Haired Man 's cell phone . Scully — who is with the First Elder in a similar railcar — tells Mulder that unwitting subjects , including herself , were operated on by Zama in the secret railway , with the alien abduction theory used as a smokescreen . She also confirms that a bomb is in the car and believes that the quarantined patient is infected with hemorrhagic fever . She fears that thousands will die from the disease if the car explodes . Mulder finds the bomb in the ceiling . 
 After the car is disconnected from the rest of the train on a remote rail siding , Mulder questions the Red @-@ Haired Man , who says that the patient is immune to biological warfare . Zama had tried to sneak the patient out of the country , but the government would rather see it destroyed than let their research fall into Japanese hands ; the Red @-@ Haired Man was sent to kill them both . Mulder , however , believes that the patient is an alien @-@ human hybrid . With help from Scully , Mulder successfully unlocks the door of the railcar , but he is knocked unconscious by the Red @-@ Haired Man . As the Red @-@ Haired Man is about to leave , X appears and shoots him . Realizing that the bomb is about to explode and that there is not enough time to both save Mulder and secure the patient , X decides to save Mulder . X exits carrying the still unconscious Mulder shortly before the bomb explodes . 
 After recovering from his injuries , Mulder attempts to find information on the railcar , but he is unable to do so . Scully returns the journal that he found on the car , but Mulder realizes that it is a rewritten substitute . Meanwhile , the real journal is translated in a shadowy room as the Smoking Man watches . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception and writing = = = 
 Writer Frank Spotnitz has claimed that his inspiration for the episode came from having read a New York Times article on the war crimes committed by Unit 731 of the Imperial Japanese Army , after which the episode is named . The unit was responsible for human subject research on both prisoners of war and civilians . Further inspiration was drawn from the films North by Northwest and The Train , which were the basis for the episode 's train @-@ car setting . Spotnitz also noted that the episode offered the writers the opportunity to " set the counter back " for the series ' premise , allowing the character of Scully to still maintain a skeptical standpoint after the events of " Paper Clip " , an earlier third season episode in which the character witnesses a group of aliens . The tagline for this episode was switched to " Apology is Policy . " 
 = = = Filming and post @-@ production = = = 
 The scene at the start of the episode with Duchovny 's character Fox Mulder clinging to the side of the train car was filmed using a harness cabled across the top of the car that was removed digitally during post production . Duchovny performed the stunt himself , without the use of a double . Steven Williams and Duchovny separately recorded the scene in which Williams carries Duchovny from the car before it explodes against a blue screen . The results of this were flipped horizontally to aid the scene 's " composition " , and superimposed over the explosion . Twenty @-@ five masked actors , mostly children , laid over prop bodies for the scene with the mass grave . 
 The producers built train car interiors for the quarantine car where the patient was being kept and the sleeper cars , and floated the train sets on inner tubes to create the feeling of movement . Seven different cameras were used by director Rob Bowman when filming the train car explosion . Forty @-@ five gallons of gasoline and 120 black @-@ powder bombs were used for the effect . The car used had been obtained cheaply from a Vancouver @-@ based rail company , and had been considered scrap due to being bent . After the explosion was recorded , a bell from the train was recovered some distance from the site by the physical effects supervisor Dave Gauthier , who had it polished and engraved with a message for Bowman . 
 Bowman made use of a Steadicam for those scenes featured Mulder inside the train , and kept the character away from the centre of the screen , to accentuate his " paranoid " mindset . This was deliberately contrasted with the concurrent scene featuring Scully , who is speaking to Mulder over a telephone . This was shot using a camera dolly and a " graphically balanced " mise @-@ en @-@ scène , intended to leave the character seeming as " balanced , confident , strong " as " the Rock of Gibraltar " . Bowman , who felt that the finished episode " was really like a movie " , has stated that his cut of the episode impressed series creator Chris Carter enough for Carter to offer Bowman the job of directing the series ' film adaptation . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Jan Delasara , in her book ' " PopLit , PopCult and The X @-@ Files " argues that episodes such as " 731 " and " Nisei " , or the earlier third season episode " Paper Clip " , show the public 's trust in science " eroding " . Delasara proposes that " arrogated " scientists who are " rework [ ing ] the fabric of life " are causing the public 's faith in the scientific method to fade drastically , " a concern ... that is directly addressed by X @-@ Files episodes " . Moreover , she notes that almost all of the scientists portrayed in The X @-@ Files are depicted with a " connection to ancient evil , " with the lone exception being Agent Scully . In " 731 , " and earlier in " Nisei , " the scientists are former Japanese scientists who worked for Unit 731 . In their attempts to create a successful human @-@ alien hybrid , they become the archetypical scientists who " [ go ] too far , " a serious factor that Delasara argues " ' alienates [ the public ] further from science and its practitioners " . 
 Critical opinion has also noted that both parts of the story arc offer an alternative explanation for the events of the series so far , a " less romantic " outcome that paints the ongoing plot as an elaborate hoax to defer attention from the government 's experiments , both military and medical . Reviewer Todd VanDerWerff feels that such an explanation would " speak more to the sadness at the core of the X @-@ Files to have Mulder find his answers and be forced to accept they weren 't what he was looking for " , comparing such a realization to the hero of Don Quixote . This " hoax " plot device would later be revisited in both the fourth season finale " Gethsemane " and the fifth season 's opening two @-@ part episodes " Redux and Redux II " , although to a much lesser degree of effectiveness . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " 731 " premiered on the Fox network on December 1 , 1995 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC Two on October 30 , 1996 . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 12 with a 21 share , meaning that roughly 12 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 21 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . A total of 17 @.@ 68 million viewers watched this episode during its original airing . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " 731 " received mostly positive reviews from critics . Writing for The A.V. Club , reviewer Zack Handlen rated the episode an A , calling it " terrific " . However , Handlen felt that the version of events told to Scully in this episode was perhaps a better explanation for the series ' mythology than its eventual resolution , noting that it might have offered " a conclusion whose emotional impact would 've lived up to the intensity of early mythology episodes " such as this . In a retrospective of the third season in Entertainment Weekly , " 731 " was rated a B. The review noted that the episode was " strangely tension @-@ free " , though it derided Scully 's stubbornness to believe what the series had established as truth . Nick De Semlyen and James White of Empire named it the second " greatest " episode of the series , stating it is " arguably the greatest of The X @-@ Files ' many mythology episodes " and a " high @-@ octane mix of action and intrigue , with the production values and pacing of a Hollywood blockbuster " . 
 Director Rob Bowman called the episode one of his all time favorites . Actor Steven Williams felt that his portrayal of X in this episode helped endear him more to the show 's viewers . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Director of Photography John Bartley earned a nomination for Outstanding Achievement in Cinematography in a Regular Series by the American Society of Cinematographers for his work on this episode . 
