 3rd Battalion , 27th Infantry Regiment 
 Headquarters and Headquarters Company , 3rd Brigade 
 3rd Battalion , 17th Infantry Regiment 
 4th Battalion , 17th Infantry Regiment 
 Headquarters and Headquarters Battery , Division Artillery ( <unk> ) 
 6th Battalion , 6th Field Artillery Regiment ( 18 x M119 105mm towed howitzer ) 
 2nd Battalion , 8th Field Artillery Regiment 
 6th Battalion , 8th Field Artillery Regiment 
 5th Battalion , 15th Field Artillery Regiment ( 24 x M198 155mm towed howitzer ) ( I @-@ Corps Unit - attached to Division ) 
 7th Battalion , 15th Field Artillery Regiment ( I @-@ Corps Unit - attached to Division ) 
 Headquarters and Headquarters Company , Aviation Brigade 
 2nd Squadron , 9th Cavalry Regiment 
 Headquarters and Headquarters Company , Division Support Command ( DISCOM ) 
 7th Medical Battalion 
 7th Supply & Transportation Battalion 
 707th Maintenance Battalion 
 2nd Battalion , 62nd Air Defense Artillery Regiment 
 13th Engineer Battalion 
 127th Signal Battalion 
 107th Military Intelligence Battalion 
 7th Military Police Company 
 = = = National Guard training command and Fort Carson = = = 
 At the end of the Cold War , the US Army considered new options for the integration and organization of active duty , Army Reserve and Army National Guard units in training and deployment . Two division headquarters activated in the active duty component for training National Guard units . The 7th Infantry Division and the 24th Infantry Division headquarters were selected . The subordinate brigades of the divisions did not activate so they could not be deployed as divisions , however their active duty status would allow the headquarters to focus on the national guard units under them full @-@ time . 
 The headquarters company of the 7th Infantry Division ( Light ) formally reactivated on 4 June 1999 , at Fort Carson , Colorado , as the first Active Component / Reserve Component division . The reserve formations that made up the 7th Infantry Division included the 39th Infantry Brigade Combat Team of the Arkansas National Guard , the 41st Infantry Brigade Combat Team of the Oregon National Guard and the 45th Infantry Brigade Combat Team of the Oklahoma National Guard . Fort Carson became the new headquarters for the division . 
 The division headquarters also provided training assistance in preparation for small @-@ scale National Guard operations , Joint Readiness Training Center rotations , leadership training for National Guard commanders , and annual summer training for the three brigades . As a part of this commitment , the 7th Infantry Division headquarters would deploy a command element to serve as higher headquarters for large @-@ scale training and field exercises , evaluating and coordinating the units as they trained . It would also conduct quarterly status checks with the three brigades to discuss readiness and resource issues affecting those units , ensuring that they were at peak performance should they be needed . 
 To expand upon the concept of Reserve component and National Guard components , the First Army activated Division East and Division West , two commands responsible for training reserve units ' readiness and mobilization exercises . Division West , activated at Fort Carson . This transformation was part of an overall restructuring of the US Army to streamline the organizations overseeing training . The Division West took control of reserve units in 21 states west of the Mississippi River , eliminating the need for the 7th Infantry Division headquarters . As such it was subsequently inactivated for the last time on 22 August 2006 at Fort Carson . 
 = = = Inactivation = = = 
 Though it was inactivated , the division was identified as the highest priority inactive division in the United States Army Center of Military History 's scheme based on age , campaign participation credit , and unit decorations . All of the division 's flags and heraldic items were moved to the National Infantry Museum at Fort Benning , Georgia following its inactivation . Should the U.S. Army decide to activate more divisions in the future , the center will most likely suggest the first new division be the 7th Infantry Division , the second be the 9th Infantry Division , the third be the 24th Infantry Division , the fourth be the 5th Infantry Division , and the fifth be the 2d Armored Division .. This proved to be correct with the activation of the 7th Infantry Division Headquarters at FT Lewis Washington . 
 = = = Administrative headquarters reactivation = = = 
 On 26 April 2012 , Secretary of the Army John M. McHugh announced the 7th Infantry Division headquarters would be reactivated at Joint Base Lewis @-@ McChord in October 2012 . The headquarters element of about 250 would not activate any subordinate brigades . Instead , it filled an administrative role as a non @-@ deployable unit . In the announcement , McHugh noted the base is home to I Corps , which until then had directly overseen 10 subordinate brigades on the base , while other bases with similar corps headquarters had active division commands for intermediate oversight . The unit oversees the 2nd and 3rd Brigade Combat Teams of the 2nd Infantry Division , as well as the 17th Field Artillery Brigade , 201st Battlefield Surveillance Brigade , 16th Combat Aviation Brigade , and 555th Engineer Brigade , about 21 @,@ 000 personnel . The mission of the headquarters primarily focuses on making sure soldiers are properly trained and equipped , and that order and discipline is maintained in its subordinate brigades . 
 In the announcement , McHugh denied that the move was made in response to several high @-@ profile misconduct allegations leveled against soldiers from the base in the Afghanistan War such as the <unk> District murders and the Kandahar massacre . Major General Stephen R. Lanza , the Army 's chief of public affairs , was tapped to lead the division . It activated on the base on 10 October 2012 . Lanza became Commanding General of I Corps in 2014 . 
 = = Structure = = 
 7th Infantry Division based at Fort Lewis , Washington 
 1st Stryker Brigade Combat Team , 2nd Infantry Division based at Fort Lewis , Washington 
 Headquarters Company 
 1st Squadron , 14th Cavalry Regiment ( <unk> ) 
 2nd Battalion , 3rd Infantry Regiment ( Stryker ) 
 5th Battalion , 20th Infantry Regiment ( Stryker ) 
 1st Battalion , 23rd Infantry Regiment ( Stryker ) 
 1st Battalion , 37th Field Artillery Regiment 
 23rd Brigade Engineer Battalion 
 296th Brigade Support Battalion 
 2nd Stryker Brigade Combat Team , 2nd Infantry Division based at Fort Lewis , Washington 
 Headquarters Company 
 8th Squadron , 1st Cavalry Regiment ( <unk> ) 
 2nd Battalion , 1st Infantry Regiment ( Stryker ) 
 1st Battalion , 17th Infantry Regiment ( Stryker ) 
 4th Battalion , 23rd Infantry Regiment ( Stryker ) 
 2nd Battalion , 17th Field Artillery Regiment 
 14th Brigade Engineer Battalion 
 2nd Brigade Support Battalion 
 Division Artillery , 2nd Infantry Division based at Fort Lewis , Washington 
 Headquarters and Headquarters Company 
 16th Combat Aviation Brigade 
 Headquarters and Headquarters Company 
 4th Squadron , 6th Cavalry Regiment ( Attack @-@ Reconnaissance ) 
 1st Battalion , 229th Aviation Regiment ( Attack ) 
 2nd Battalion , 158th Aviation Regiment ( Assault ) 
 1st Battalion , 52nd Aviation Regiment ( General Support ) - based in Alaska to support United States Army Alaska 
 46th Aviation Support Battalion 
 17th Field Artillery Brigade 
 Headquarters & Headquarters Battery 
 256th Signal Company 
 Battery F , 26th Field Artillery Regiment ( Target Acquisition ) 
 5th Battalion , 3rd Field Artillery Regiment ( <unk> ) 
 1st Battalion , 94th Field Artillery Regiment ( <unk> ) 
 5th Battalion , 5th Air Defense Artillery Regiment ( Counter Rocket Artillery and Mortar ) - attached battalion of the 31st Air Defense Artillery Brigade 
 308th Brigade Support Battalion ( Brigade ) 
 555th Engineer Brigade 
 Headquarters & Headquarters Company 
 <unk> Engineer Battalion 
 3rd Ordnance Battalion ( EOD ) , operational control : 71st Ordnance Group ( EOD ) 
 110th Chemical Battalion , operational control : 48th Chemical Brigade 
 201st Military Intelligence Brigade 
 Headquarters and Headquarters Company 
 109th Military Intelligence Battalion 
 502nd Military Intelligence Battalion 
 63rd Network Support Company 
 602nd Forward Support Company 
 Associate Unit 
 81st Armored Brigade Combat Team 
 = = Honors = = 
 The 7th Infantry Division was awarded one campaign streamer in World War I , four campaign streamers and two unit decorations in World War II , and ten campaign streamers and two unit decorations in the Korean War , for a total of fifteen campaign streamers and four unit decorations in its operational history . 
 = = = Unit decorations = = = 
 = = = Campaign streamers = = = 
 = The Wolf and the Lion = 
 " The Wolf and the Lion " is the fifth episode of the HBO medieval fantasy television series Game of Thrones , first aired on May 15 , 2011 . It was written by the show creators and executive producers David Benioff and D. B. Weiss , and directed by Brian Kirk . 
 The events of the episode primarily deal with Lord Eddard Stark 's investigations into the death of the previous Hand . In the city of King 's Landing , the Tourney of the Hand comes to an end while the various factions that plot for power are revealed to the viewer . This delicate balance is undone when news arrives that Tyrion Lannister has been arrested by Catelyn Stark . The title of the episode refers to the fact that the Starks , whose sigil is a wolf , may soon be at war with the Lannisters , whose sigil is the lion . 
 With this episode the season hits its halfway mark and the action picks up considerably . Despite being a topic of discussion at King 's Landing , Daenerys and Jorah Mormont do not themselves appear in this episode . Jon Snow and all characters on the Wall are also absent , and Robb Stark does not appear in Winterfell scenes . Accordingly , Emilia Clarke , Iain Glen , Harry Lloyd , Richard Madden and Kit Harington all have their names omitted from the opening titles . The Eyrie appears as a new location between King 's Landing and Winterfell on the opening 's map . 
 First airing viewership increased by approximately 80 @,@ 000 viewers from the previous week 's episode , continuing the series ' upward trend . The episode was also particularly well @-@ received critically , with multiple critics praising the omission of the Wall and Dothraki plotlines giving this episode a relatively more focused feel . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = In the Vale = = = 
 Lady Catelyn Stark ( Michelle Fairley ) leads her entourage east through the Mountains of the Moon to get to the Vale , with Tyrion Lannister ( Peter Dinklage ) as her prisoner . However , they are soon attacked by barbarian tribesmen . During the fight , Tyrion saves Catelyn 's life , attacking and killing a barbarian with a shield . The party arrives at the Eyrie , ruled by Lord Jon Arryn 's widow , Lysa ( Kate Dickie ) , who is also Catelyn 's sister . However , when the two meet for the first time in five years , it becomes apparent that Lysa is mentally unstable and fears the Lannisters ' power . Catelyn also meets her nephew , Robin Arryn ( Lino Facioli ) , the heir to the Eyrie - an eight @-@ year @-@ old boy whom Lysa still breast @-@ feeds . Tyrion is consigned to the Eyrie 's version of a dungeon , the " sky cells , " prison cells with an open wall and slanted floors that slope down to a precipice . Meanwhile Lysa prepares to pass judgment on Tyrion as an accomplice in her husband 's murder . 
 = = = In the North = = = 
 At Winterfell , Theon Greyjoy ( Alfie Allen ) grows jealous of Tyrion after his favorite prostitute Ros ( Esmé Bianco ) taunts him with the judgment that Tyrion is a better lover and from a richer family . Meanwhile , Bran ( Isaac Hempstead @-@ Wright ) is depressed over his paralysis and the fact that his mother left him while he was in a coma . To cheer him up , Maester Luwin ( Donald Sumpter ) decides to teach Bran the Dothraki art of horseback archery . 
 = = = In King 's Landing = = = 
 After Eddard Stark ( Sean Bean ) convinces King Robert ( Mark Addy ) not to join the tourney , the crowd watches a jousting match between the fearsome Ser Gregor " The Mountain " Clegane , brother of the Hound , and Ser Loras Tyrell , the " Knight of Flowers " . The Mountain is a formidable opponent , but Loras cleverly defeats him in the joust by riding a mare in heat , distracting Clegane 's stallion . Furious , Clegane beheads his horse and attempts to kill Loras . Sandor " The Hound " Clegane comes to Tyrell 's rescue and defends him against his brother until Robert orders them to stop . Grateful for being rescued , Loras calls Sandor a hero when he is cheered by the crowd . 
 Later , Varys ( Conleth Hill ) reveals to Ned that Jon Arryn was killed for asking questions , succumbing to a poison called the " Tears of Lys " . He also suggests that Lord Arryn 's former squire , the recently slain Ser Hugh of the Vale , was the poisoner . 
 Meanwhile , Arya ( Maisie Williams ) , as part of her training , chases a cat through the Red Keep and stumbles upon a secret conversation between two men ( Varys and Illyrio ) , who appear to be plotting against the throne . Arya tries to warn her father , but is unable to identify the two plotters and fumbles her words . They are interrupted by the arrival of Yoren ( Francis Magee ) , who informs Ned of his wife 's arrest of Tyrion . 
 The news of Daenerys 's pregnancy reaches the Small Council , delivered by one of Varys 's spies . Fearing a possible invasion by the Targaryen / Dothraki alliance , Robert orders that she and her unborn child , along with Viserys , be assassinated . Ned refuses to obey such a dishonorable order since Robert 's hatred for Targaryens is clouding his judgment and ordering such an assassination will make him no better than the Mad King . When Robert 's mind is clearly made , Ned resigns the office of Hand of the King , much to Robert 's anger . As Robert drinks in sorrow over his fight with Ned , Cersei ( Lena Headey ) visits Robert and he explains why he takes the Dothraki threat seriously . Meanwhile , Robert 's youngest brother Renly ( Gethin Anthony ) is with his lover , Ser Loras . Loras convinces Renly that he should be king because Loras believes that Renly would be a better ruler than either his brothers or nephews . 
 Before he can leave the capital , Littlefinger offers to take Ned to the last person Jon Arryn spoke to before his death . It turns out to be a prostitute , <unk> ( Antonia Christophers ) , the mother of a baby daughter , who is another of Robert 's illegitimate children . Littlefinger reveals Jon Arryn had been searching for Robert 's bastards for an unknown reason . When Ned and his guards try to leave , they are ambushed by Jaime Lannister ( Nikolaj Coster @-@ Waldau ) and his men , who want answers for Tyrion 's arrest . Ned claims responsibility for Tyrion 's arrest , which leads to a brutal fight between his and Jaime 's men . In the end , Ned 's guards are killed , including his captain Jory Cassel ( Jamie <unk> ) , whom Jaime stabs through the eye with a dagger . Ned duels with Jaime but is speared through the leg by one of Jaime 's guards before Stark and Lannister can finish the fight on their own . Jaime knocks out the guard who interrupted the fight and decides to let Ned live but warns that he wants his brother back . Jaime storms away , leaving Ned bleeding in the dirt , who quickly faints . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 " The Wolf and the Lion " was written by the show creators and executive producers David Benioff and D. B. Weiss , based on the book by George R. R. Martin . The episode includes chapters 31 to 36 of the book ( Eddard VII , Tyrion IV , Arya III , Eddard VIII , Catelyn VI , and Eddard IX ) . 
 The adaptation to the screen has continued with the trend of including new scenes to flesh out characters that in the book are only superficially seen through the point of view characters . These include the dialectical confrontation between Littlefinger and Varys , and the conversation between King Robert and Queen Cersei , and the young lovers Renly and Loras . The show 's writers used this opportunity to make explicit Loras and Renly 's ongoing assignations , which were only hinted at in the books . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Finn Jones makes his first appearance as Ser Loras Tyrell , the young jouster known as " The Knight of Flowers . " The casting was one of the first to be announced , being confirmed by author George R. R. Martin in June 2010 after it had been leaked before the contract was to be signed . The actor had initially been considered for the role of Jon Snow when the pilot was being filmed . 
 The new location of the court is also introduced : Scottish actress Kate Dickie was cast as the Lady of the Eyrie , Lysa Arryn , also making her first appearance in this episode . Although Dickie does not resemble the physical description of Lysa given in the books , Martin stated that her acting in the auditions was excellent . The role of her son ( renamed Robin in the series to avoid confusion with King Robert ) went to Lino Facioli , and the knight of the Vale Ser Vardis <unk> was played by Brendan McCormack . 
 Lingerie model Emily Diamond has a role as a prostitute who teases Jory Cassel during the visit to the brothel . Diamond was initially hired as a body double to one of the main stars , but the producers liked her so much that they decided to give her a role . Also appearing in this episode is the casting team 's Robert Sterne , who reprises his cameo role as a page in King 's Landing . 
 = = = Filming locations = = = 
 The interiors for the episode were filmed at The Paint Hall studio . The conclusion of the Tourney of the Hand that had begun in the previous episode continued to be filmed in Shane 's Castle . Production moved to Malta to film many King 's Landing exteriors : the dungeons of the Red Keep where Arya is lost while chasing cats were the dungeons of Fort St Angelo , in the Maltese town of <unk> . 
 For the CGI compositions of the Vale of Arryn , as seen in the establishing shot of the Eyrie and from the sky cells , the visual effects team used images and textures from the Greek rock formations of Meteora . Initially they had been considering the <unk> Mountains in China , but because the landscape base plates were being shot in Ireland , using Meteora was a better option . 
 = = = Choreography = = = 
 In keeping with the transition of the series from exposition to action , each episode shows more fight scenes , and " The Wolf and the Lion " has a large number that had to be choreographed . Fight co @-@ ordinator Buster Reeves designed all the moves and then taught the cast how to make them and give a sense of real aggression . Reeves commented on the ambush by the Hill men as one of the most difficult as he had to show many people fighting on screen at the same time making every one look original and exciting , and also noting how intimidating it could be for the actors to have 20 stuntmen running through their midst with axes and swords . 
 = = = Dedication = = = 
 The episode is dedicated " to the memory of Caroline Lois Benoist , " a 26 @-@ year @-@ old animal trainer who had been working on the production for six months , mainly training the dogs that doubled as the series ' direwolves . She fell ill at her home on 18 December 2010 , a few days after filming had finished , and died on 29 December from swine flu . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The episode 's viewership increased to 2 @.@ 58 million for its first airing , continuing the increasing trend of the last weeks . Combined with its encore , the show was up to 3 @.@ 3 million viewers for the night . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " The Wolf and the Lion " was met with highly positive reception by the critics of the show , and many regarded it as the best episode yet . Maureen Ryan of AOL TV gave it a 90 out of 100 , noting the exceptional work by the cast and excellent writing . Both Todd VanDerWerff and David Sims , from the A.V. Club , rated the episode an " A. " 
 Reviewers agreed that after four episodes presenting the setting and introducing the main characters , the story started to move forward faster and raise the stakes . David Sims considered it " the point at which all of the scheming and conversing and table @-@ setting began to lumber forward and gain some real momentum . " James Poniewozik wrote for Time that the episode " began to let the swords do the talking , " and " while there were some very significant scenes of talk , the dialogue went beyond Westeros History 101 to take the story in some very interesting directions . " IGN 's Matt Fowler wrote that this was " the best episode of the series so far " even though fan @-@ favorite characters like Jon Snow and Daenerys did not appear . 
 Maureen Ryan believed that one of the reasons the episode worked so well because it left out the storylines with the Night 's Watch and the Dothraki and focused in a single location . VanDerWerff agreed , and added that with each episode the writers got bolder in the sense that they added new scenes not included in the book to round out the source material . 
 Other aspects of the show that were highlighted by the critics were the effectiveness of the action scenes and the visuals , especially the views of the Eyrie and its sky cells , and the dragon skulls . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The episode received a 2011 Primetime Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Stunt Coordination . 
 = Thank God I Found You = 
 " Thank God I Found You " is a song by American singer and songwriter Mariah Carey . It features guest vocals from R & B singer Joe and American boy band 98 Degrees . Written and produced by Carey along with Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis , the song was released on January 25 , 2000 , through Columbia Records as the second single from her seventh studio album , Rainbow ( 1999 ) . " Thank God I Found You " is an R & B power ballad that was inspired by a relationship Carey was going through at the time , and lyrically recounts a powerful love relationship in which the protagonist tells her lover " thank God I found you . " 
 " Thank God I Found You " received mixed reviews from contemporary music critics ; some felt it was a great album closer while others deemed it as " un @-@ listenable " and " forgettable " . Nevertheless , the song became Carey 's fifteenth number @-@ one single on the United States Billboard Hot 100 and remained her last chart topping single until 2005 's comeback single " We Belong Together " . The single was later certified Gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . Aside from its peak of number two in Canada , the song achieved moderate international charting , reaching the top ten in the United Kingdom and peaking within the top thirty in Australia , Belgium ( Wallonia ) , France , Germany , the Netherlands , and Switzerland . 
 A music video for " Thank God I Found You " , directed by Brett Ratner , features Carey , Joe , and 98 Degrees performing the song at an outdoor concert . The Make It Last Remix had its own video commissioned , which was shot in a grainy fashion in Hamburg , Germany , and shows Carey and the song 's featured artists performing at a small club . Carey performed the song 's original version and accompanying remix live at the 27th Annual American Music Awards . It was featured on the set @-@ lists of the Rainbow World Tour ( 2000 ) and The Adventures of Mimi Tour ( 2006 ) , with Trey Lorenz serving as the male vocalist . 
 Carey re @-@ recorded her vocals for the song 's main remix titled " Thank God I Found You " ( Make It Last Remix ) , which features vocals from Joe and Carey 's label @-@ mate , rapper Nas . The remix is a remake of Keith Sweat 's song " Make It Last Forever " ( 1988 ) , and incorporates a few verses from the original version of " Thank God I Found You " . DJ Clue produced the remix , transforming it into a slow groove R & B number . In September 2000 , US songwriters Seth Swirsky and Warryn Campbell filed a copyright infringement lawsuit against Carey claiming that " Thank God I Found You " borrowed heavily from the song " One of Those Love Songs " they composed for R & B group Xscape . The court awarded the case in Carey 's favor , not finding sufficient similarities between the two songs . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 Carey and her husband , Tommy Mottola , who was a Sony CEO , separated in 1997 . This resulted in a strained relationship with Sony . By the spring of 1999 , Carey had begun work on her last album of her contract with Columbia Records , titled Rainbow . Her relationship with Sony had affected her collaboration with writing partner Walter Afanasieff , who had worked with her throughout the first half of her career . As a result , she worked extensively with many other songwriters and producers for the album , including the duo Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis , known for their work with Janet Jackson . " Thank God I Found You " was written by Jam and Lewis and co @-@ written by Carey . When Jam and Lewis first started working with Carey , they did not have a definite idea of what Carey expected from them . In an interview with Fred Bronson , Jam and Lewis explained : 
 It wasn 't like Janet [ Jackson ] , where we all grew up together . Mariah had done her own thing and had been very involved with the arranging and production of her records , so we respected that and said , ' What can we do for you ? ' She would fly into town for five or six hours . She 'd get on a plane and fly to whatever was the next thing she was doing . 
 One night , Jam and Lewis received a call from Carey 's assistant telling them that Carey had an idea for a song . She asked them to meet her at the studio later that night , and when they arrived , Carey sang the song 's melody for them . Normally when Carey was composing songs , James " Big Jim " Wright would play the chords . He was not present at the studio that night , so Lewis played the chords for Carey . After composing the melody , Carey recorded her vocals . When Carey requested male singers to sing along with her on the track , Jam and Lewis recruited R & B singer Joe . Although Jam and Lewis wanted to feature K @-@ Ci & JoJo on the song , they dropped the idea because they are signed to a different record label . About the recording , Joe said : 
 She [ Carey ] gave me a call , and she was like , " I would love to do a duet with you . Come by the studio . " When I got there , she played the song for me . I didn 't expect to record the song , but when I heard it , I said , " Man , there 's no way I 'm going to leave this studio without my voice being on that record . " Everything just happened so fast . I didn 't expect for it to be a single or a video . Everything was just great . 
 Jam and Lewis also asked the boy band 98 Degrees to join Carey and Joe on the track , as they wanted male harmonies . Carey talked about the collaboration in an interview with MTV . " It 's like when I was writing ' One Sweet Day ' . It really cried out for a group to be singing with me and for a strong male @-@ female thing in terms of going back and forth , vocally . So you know , we just naturally came together . " The vocals were recorded at Capri Digital Studios , Capri , Italy and Avatar Studios , New York City . The track was mixed by Supa Engineer Duo at Right Track Recording and mastered by Herb Powers . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Thank God I Found You " was produced by Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis , and co @-@ produced by Carey . The song is a moderately @-@ paced R & B power ballad . Arion Berger of Rolling Stone noted that the song also exhibits influences of gospel music . The song carries an upbeat tone , backed by slow " manufactured pop beats " . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by EMI Music Publishing , " Thank God I Found You " is written in the key of B ♭ major . The beat is set in common time , and is set at a tempo of sixty @-@ five beats per minute . The song follows the sequence of B ♭ – F / A – Gm7 – F – E ♭ – F as its chord progression . Carey 's and Joe 's vocals in the song span over two octaves , from the note of D ♭ 4 to the high note of D6 . Composed in verse – chorus – bridge form , the chorus of " Thank God I Found You " is sung in the key of B ♭ major ; Carey also makes use of melisma in the song . The arrangement is similar to Carey 's " One Sweet Day " . Lyrically , the song is an inspirational love song , in which the protagonist thanks God for finding her the perfect partner . According to Carey , it was inspired by the relationship she was in with Latin singer Luis Miguel at that time . She stated that she was telling a story through the song . 
 = = = Remixes = = = 
 Carey re @-@ recorded her vocals for the song 's main remix titled " Thank God I Found You " ( Make It Last Remix ) . The remix is a remake of Keith Sweat 's " Make It Last Forever " ( 1988 ) , and bears few lyrical similarities to the original version of the song . Carey wrote new lyrics for the song , preserving the chorus of the original song . Produced by DJ Clue of Desert Storm Records , the remix is a midtempo tune backed by " R & B @-@ savvy rhythms " over a slow groove . It features vocals from Joe and rapped verses by Columbia Records label @-@ mate Nas . The remix is included on Joe 's third studio album My Name Is Joe ( 2000 ) . Jose F. Promis of Allmusic wrote that he felt the remix seemed unfinished . He added that could have " simply covered the song and kept its integrity intact , instead of meshing it into a sort of half- " Thank God I Found You " / " Make It Last Forever " creation . " However , while reviewing My Name Is Joe , Matt Diehl of Entertainment Weekly picked the track as the best from the album . He wrote " Nas ' grit and Carey 's expert emoting make Joe sing with unexpected feeling . " Derek Ali of Dayton Daily News commended the collaboration , saying " it works out well . " The " Make It Last " remix is featured on Carey 's first remix album The Remixes ( 2003 ) . The Norwegian production team Stargate produced the UK Stargate radio mix . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 " Thank God I Found You " garnered mixed reviews from music critics . Jose F. Promis of Allmusic wrote that the song is " [ a ] lush , classic Carey @-@ styled adult contemporary ballad , with uplifting lyrics and a sea of soaring vocals . " The Austin American @-@ Statesman viewed the song as a " dramatic closer " . Arion Berger of Rolling Stone praised the song 's production and the harmony that 98 Degrees ' contributed . Chuck Campbell of The Daily News was also positive stating the song was a " grandiose " album @-@ closer . Steve Jones of USA Today wrote that Carey excelled in the song . Melissa Ruggieri of the Richmond Times @-@ Dispatch noted that Carey found solace in the song . Anthony Johnson , also of the Richmond Times @-@ Dispatch wrote that the track is a " surefire winner " . However , a few other critics deemed the song as forgettable . Dan DeLuca of The Philadelphia Inquirer dismissed the song as a " colorless quality romance " . Robert Hilburn of Los Angeles Times was also negative in his review , calling it as an " overwrought ballad " and wrote it was un @-@ listenable . Dara Cook of MTV Southeast Asia named the song as " a big @-@ production tragicomedy of hilarious histrionics and absurdly dramatic lyrics . " While reviewing Carey 's compilation The Ballads ( 2009 ) , Chuck Campbell of The Press of Atlantic City wrote that at some point in Carey 's career , the quality her songs got " <unk> " and commented that " Thank God I Found You " is such an example . He went on to say that the song was a " trifle " . In 2005 Andrew Unterberger of Stylus gave a negative review , writing the song was " a sub @-@ par , extremely lazy example of an artist reaching the top spot almost solely on reputation . " He wrote that the song would have been the end of Carey 's career . At the 43rd Grammy Awards held in February 2001 , the song was nominated in the category of the Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals , but lost to B.B. King and Dr. John for " Is You Is or Is You Ain 't My Baby " . At the First BMI Urban Awards , held in 2001 , Jam , Lewis , and Carey received BMI 's Urban Songwriter Award . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , " Thank God I Found You " was released to radio stations as the second single from Rainbow in November 1999 . A physical single was later released on January 25 , 2000 , in the US and on February 28 , 2000 , in the United Kingdom . The issue dated December 11 , 1999 , debuted at number eighty @-@ two on the Billboard Hot 100 — Carey 's lowest debut at the time . On the week dated February 19 , 2000 , the song reached number @-@ one on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart , becoming Carey 's fifteenth number @-@ one single and marked the eleventh consecutive year with a number @-@ one song . It became the second single to surpass the sales of 100 @,@ 000 units in the year 2000 , preceded by Christina Aguilera 's " What a Girl Wants " . It was certified Gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) in February 2000 . By February 2001 the single had sold about 1 @,@ 700 @,@ 000 copies in the US alone . " Thank God I Found You " also reached the top spot on the Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart , marking Carey 's seventh R & B chart topper . It finished at number forty @-@ five on Billboard Hot 100 year @-@ end charts of 2000 . " Thank God I Found You " remained Carey 's last number @-@ one hit in the US until 2005 's " We Belong Together " . In Canada , the single debuted at a position of number two on the Canadian Singles Chart , on the Billboard issue dated February 12 , 2000 . The following week , it descended to number three before retreating down the chart steadily . 
 In Australia , it entered the Australian Singles Chart at its peak of number twenty @-@ seven , on the week dated March 12 , 2000 . The next week it dropped to number forty @-@ seven . In New Zealand , it debuted on the singles chart at a position of number thirty @-@ four , the week dated April 2 , 2000 . The song went down to number thirty @-@ five next week , before dropping to number forty @-@ four . In Europe , " Thank God I Found You " charted in a few countries . In the United Kingdom , the single debuted and peaked at number ten on the UK Singles Chart on the week dated March 11 , 2000 . The single stayed on the chart for ten weeks , including one re @-@ entry at number seventy @-@ one on the week dated May 20 , 2000 . In the Flanders region of Belgium , the song debuted at number forty @-@ seven and peaked at thirty @-@ six . In the Wallonia region , it debuted at number thirty @-@ five and peaked at number twenty @-@ three three weeks after its debut . In France , the single entered the singles chart at number thirty @-@ one , the week dated March 4 , 2000 . The next week it ascended to its peak of number twenty @-@ eight . It stayed on the chart for fifteen weeks . In the Netherlands , " Thank God I Found You " entered the Single Top 100 at number fifty @-@ five , before peaking at number twenty @-@ three the next week . The song also peaked at number twenty @-@ eight in Germany , forty @-@ three in Sweden , thirty @-@ one in Ireland , and at number seventeen in Switzerland . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Thank God I Found You " was filmed by Brett Ratner in Minneapolis . The video is a tape of the performance Carey , Joe , and 98 Degrees gave at the Last Chance Summer Dance summer music concert , organized by 101 @.@ 3 KDWB @-@ FM . It premiered on October 4 , 1999 , on MTV 's Total Request Live ( TRL ) . The video opens with scenes of Carey and Joe in the studio . Carey is with her puppy and talking on a mobile phone . The video shows saturated blue skies and behind @-@ the @-@ scenes footage of Carey carousing with her dog Jack and writing lyrics on a notepad . As the song starts , Carey is shown lying on red sofa , writing the lyrics on the notepad . Then she performs the song on the stage , joined by Joe and 98 Degrees . Additionally , there is a video for the " Make It Last Remix " that features Carey with braids in a nightclub with Joe and Nas . Directed by Sanaa Hamri . The video is grainy ; it was shot at Bar Rosso in Hamburg , Germany on October 16 and 17 , 1999 . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 " Thank God I Found You " was performed a number of times between 2000 and 2005 . Carey opened the 27th Annual American Music Awards , held at the Shrine Auditorium , with a medley of the original and remix versions of the song . After Carey appeared on stage wearing a black skirt with a high slit and sporting a blond and straightened hairstyle , Joe joined her with several male and female back @-@ up dancers , all of whom who wore black outfits . After performing the first verse and chorus , Nas joined the duo on stage for the Make It Last Remix . Later on in the show , she was honored with the " Award of Achievement " for earning a number one single in every year of the 1990s . Vibe commended the performance , writing that it " offered an insight into how a little girl from Long Island , New York became hip hop 's answer to Celine Dion . " In 2000 , Carey performed the song on the Italian television show Quelli che ... il Calcio . 
 Aside from the several televised and the award show performance , Carey included the song on the set @-@ list of her concert tours , starting with the Rainbow World Tour . During the tour , Trey Lorenz , her only male background singer , replaced Joe as the song 's main male vocalist . At the show at Madison Square Garden on April 11 , 2000 , Carey wore a long orange cocktail gown with a long cascading neck line . Lorenz , wearing a black leather sports jacket and matching pants , made another featured appearance on the tour , performing his song " Make You Happy " during an interval of costume changes following the performance . Following the release of her tenth studio effort The Emancipation of Mimi in 2005 , Carey embarked on The Adventures of Mimi Tour in mid 2006 . On several stops of the tour , Carey performed the song as part of the set @-@ list , usually towards the end of the show . Similar to the Rainbow World Tour , Lorenz performed the song alongside Carey instead of Joe . Carey , wearing a midsection @-@ baring turquoise evening gown , introduced the song to the audience by telling of its conception , concept and featured artists , followed by a performance of the song 's remix . 
 = = Lawsuit = = 
 On September 15 , 2000 , US songwriters Seth Swirsky and Warren Campbell filed a lawsuit against Carey at the 9th Circuit for copyright infringement , " reverse passing off " and false designation , claiming that " Thank God I Found You " borrowed heavily from a song they composed called " One of Those Love Songs " . It was recorded by the R & B group Xscape in 1998 for their album Traces of My Lipstick . The lawsuit claimed that Carey wrongfully gave the songwriting credits to Jam and Lewis . Swirsky and Campbell had sold the rights of the song to So So Def Recordings in 1998 . " I 'm a fan of Mariah Carey ; this is nothing personal against her . But I really do believe there 's accountability , and it 's very clear what happened here . I 've never sued anybody before " , Swirsky said . According to the district court , an expert witness ( chair of the Musicology Department at the University of California at Los Angeles ) determined that the songs shared a " substantially similar chorus " . The expert stated that although the lyrics and verse melodies of the two songs were different , the songs ' choruses " shared a ' basic shape and pitch emphasis ' in their melodies , which were played over ' highly similar basslines ' and chord changes , at very nearly the same tempo and in the same generic style . " He noted both the songs had their choruses sung in the key of B ♭ . The expert further remarked that " the emphasis on musical notes " on the two songs was the same , which " contribute [ d ] to the impression of similarity one hears when comparing the two songs . " He presented a series of visual transcriptions of his observations . The transcriptions contained details about the pitch sequence of both the songs ' chorus , melody , and bassline . 
 The district court labeled this evidence as insufficient to survive a motion for summary judgment . It noted the expert 's methodology to be " flawed " and stated that through its own analysis , no instance of substantial similarity was found . The lawsuit was settled in favor of Carey by the US District Judge , who noted that there was no similarity in key , harmonic structure , tempo , or genre between the two songs . 
 The judgement was later reversed and the lawsuit reinstated in 2004 ; Carey and Swirsky settled out of court in 2006 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from Rainbow liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Mass Effect 2 : Kasumi - Stolen Memory = 
 Mass Effect 2 : Kasumi - Stolen Memory is a downloadable content pack developed by BioWare and published by Electronic Arts for the action role @-@ playing video game Mass Effect 2 . It was released on April 6 , 2010 for Microsoft Windows and Xbox 360 . The pack is included in the PlayStation 3 version of Mass Effect 2 , which was released on January 18 , 2011 . Stolen Memory introduces two new missions where the player assumes the role of Commander Shepard , an elite human soldier who must recruit a new squad member named Kasumi Goto and help her steal a graybox that contains important information and memories of her partner . 
 Stolen Memory was announced to be in development at the Game Developers Conference on March 11 , 2010 . It was the first major Mass Effect 2 downloadable content pack that does not require the game 's Cerberus Network , an online downloadable content and news service that enables free bonus content for the main game . The pack received generally mixed reviews from critics , with an aggregate score of 71 out of 100 for the Xbox 360 version at Metacritic . Reviewers mainly criticized the pack 's short length . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Mass Effect 2 is an action role @-@ playing game in which the player controls Commander Shepard . Shepard 's gender , appearance , history and combat @-@ training are determined by the player before the game begins . The game features a variety of quests that the player must complete in order to progress . These quests usually involve the player interacting with characters and fighting enemies in combat missions . During the missions , Shepard is assisted by two AI squad members that the player can indirectly control through orders . Combat takes place in real @-@ time , but the player can pause the action at any time to calmly target enemies and select different powers for the squad members to use . Upon completing a quest , the player is awarded with experience points . If a sufficient amount of experience is obtained , the player can develop powers for both Shepard and the members of the squad . 
 Stolen Memory features both a recruitment mission and a loyalty mission for a new squad member named Kasumi Goto . The recruitment mission involves the player interacting with Kasumi through dialogue options to recruit her . After joining Shepard 's squad , Kasumi can be used throughout the entire rest of the game like any other of the game 's default squad members . The loyalty mission is available immediately after recruiting her and involves exploration and combat . The player must initially engage characters in conversations and explore areas to find a way to infiltrate a vault . Afterwards , the player must fight waves of enemies and defeat a boss . Kasumi is Shepard 's only companion and has the special ability to cloak and appear behind a target to deliver a devastating sneak attack . After completing the mission , Kasumi gains a new ability called Flashbang Grenade , which inflicts minor damage and incapacitates nearby targets . The mission also includes a new weapon and an in @-@ game upgrade that the player can research to enhance several abilities . An achievement is awarded to the player after completing the content . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Mass Effect 2 is set within the Milky Way galaxy during the 22nd century where elite human soldier Commander Shepard must save humanity from an insectoid species known as the Collectors . Shepard is tasked to build and gain the loyalty of a diverse team in order to defeat the enemy in a suicide mission . In Stolen Memory , Shepard is sent to recruit Kasumi Goto , a master thief who is located on a colossal space station that serves as the capital of the galactic community . In return for her help , Kasumi asks Shepard 's help on a heist to infiltrate the vault of a ruthless arms dealer named Donovan Hock . She explains that Hock killed her partner , Keiji Okuda , and stole Okuda 's graybox , a neural implant that stores his memories as well as confidential and sensitive information he acquired in the past . 
 Shepard and Kasumi travel to the planet Bekenstein , where Hock is throwing a party at his mansion for some of the galaxy 's richest people . After getting samples of Hock 's DNA from his private quarters , recording a sample of his voice , and disabling the vault 's defenses , Kasumi and Shepard infiltrate the vault . As Kasumi starts cracking the graybox , the pair is detected and attacked by Hock 's forces . Kasumi and Shepard eventually manage to escape in a shuttle after destroying a gunship piloted by Hock . After the mission , Kasumi accesses the graybox and sees her partner one last time . A hologram of Okuda reveals the data , saying that it would impact humanity 's reputation if made public . He begs her to destroy the data along with his memories . Kasumi has trouble letting him go , showing that their relationship was much more than professional . Shepard can persuade Kasumi to follow Keiji 's wishes or keep the data . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 Mass Effect 2 : Kasumi - Stolen Memory was developed by BioWare and published by Electronic Arts . During development of Mass Effect 2 , Bioware stated that downloadable content was becoming a fundamental part of the company 's overall philosophy . The pack was announced to be in development at the Game Developers Conference on March 11 , 2010 . BioWare remarked that Stolen Memory would have a similar sense to a James Bond mission . The mansion where most of the pack 's events take place was originally suggested to take place on a colony of the in @-@ game alien race Asari before being located on a human planet . It was conceived as " a house in the Hollywood Hills , but with more advanced , Mass Effect @-@ era architecture . " The outfit of the character Kasumi Goto was designed to reflect that of a medieval thief . The character was voiced by Kym Hoy . 
 The pack was released on April 6 , 2010 for Microsoft Windows and Xbox 360 . Like Mass Effect 2 's other downloadable content packs Overlord and Lair of the Shadow Broker , Stolen Memory is freely included in the PlayStation 3 version of the game , which was released on January 18 , 2011 . At the release day , the pack was unavailable for download for a brief period of time due to Xbox Live server issues . Stolen Memory is also the first major Mass Effect 2 downloadable content pack that does not require the game 's Cerberus Network , an online downloadable content and news service that enables free bonus content for the main game . The soundtrack was composed by Sonic Mayhem duo Sascha Dikiciyan and Cris Velasco . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Mass Effect 2 : Kasumi - Stolen Memory received generally mixed reviews , with most critics criticizing the pack 's short length . IGN reviewer Erik Brudvig opined that Stolen Memory " is a great little quest , but for most the ' little ' part will be a sticking point . At roughly an hour in length , this is one download that doesn 't offer a lot of bang for your buck . " Writing for GameSpot , Kevin VanOrd felt that the character of Kasumi is not interesting and that the mission is too short for her character development compared to the squad members of the base game . Similarly , GameCritics reviewer Brad Gallaway criticized the fact that players cannot directly interact with her once the mission is completed . 
 In a more positive review , Dan Whitehead of Eurogamer stated that " Stolen Memory does a good job of justifying itself through enjoyable gameplay and clever storytelling . Short , yes , but also surprisingly sweet . " He also highlighted positively the story and opined that the ending " adds more shading to Kasumi 's flirtatious character " , stating that " the obligatory moral choice at the end is dictated by intimate emotional considerations rather than battlefield pragmatism . " Eduardo Reboucas of Game Revolution criticized the fact that the story does not fit in a post @-@ story scenario , stating that Stolen Memory " is intended to be played as you 're making your way through the suicide mission storyline and not in the aftermath . " 
 GameCritics praised the first part of the loyalty mission , comparing it favorably to Ocean 's Eleven and stating that it is " an unusual and welcome change of pace . " VanOrd credited the fact that players can infiltrate Hock 's private quarters in two different ways , but also admitted that breaking into Hock 's vault " is paced slowly without offering any sense of increasing tension or extended dialogue options to compensate . " Nevertheless , he praised Kasumi 's ability to silently backstab enemies and the combat scenarios for their enemy variety . The final boss battle was said to be predictable but enjoyable and satisfying . VanOrd concluded that " Kasumi - Stolen Memory is still worth a look , but it won 't leave you with any lasting memories of your own . " 
 = Raising of school leaving age in England and Wales = 
 The raising of school leaving age ( often shortened to ROSLA ) is the name given by the government to refer to changes regarding the legal age a child is permitted to leave compulsory education , usually falling under an Education Act . In most countries , the school leaving age often reflects when young people are seen to be mature enough within their society , but not necessarily when they are old enough to be regarded as an adult . 
 In England and Wales , this age has been raised numerous times since the introduction of compulsory education in 1870 . On 1 September 1972 , the age was raised from 15 to 16 , following preparations which began 8 years earlier in 1964 . This increased the legal leaving age from 15 to 16 , leaving a gap year of school leavers who , by law , had to complete an additional year of education from 1973 onwards . 
 There are several reasons why the government may wish to increase the school leaving age , considering it has raised the age numerous times over the 19th and 20th centuries , the last time being in 2015 . With past age <unk> , the reasons given have been focused mainly on generating more skilled labour by providing additional time for students to gain additional skills and qualifications . In recent years , it has become apparent that most 16- to 18 @-@ year @-@ olds are not as motivated to continue their education after completion of their GCSEs , thus increasing the overall unemployment rate , as many are unable to find work . The British government hoped that by making education compulsory up to the age of 17 by 2013 , and 18 by 2015 , it could change this . 
 = = 19th century = = 
 Prior to the 19th century , there were very few schools . Most of those that existed were run by the church , for the church , stressing religious education . In the latter part of the 19th Century , compulsory attendance at school ceased to be a matter for local option , with the introduction of the Elementary Education Act 1870 a milestone in the British school education system . Children had to attend between the ages of 5 and 10 though with some local discretion such as early leaving in agricultural areas . 
 The introduction of the Elementary Education Act 1870 ( applying to England and Wales ) , commonly known as Forster 's Education Act having been drawn up by William Edward Forster , created the concept of compulsory education for children under thirteen , although didn 't insist on compulsory attendance initially , as it only required the provision for education of children up to 10 years of age . In areas where education was considered a problem , elected school boards could be set up . These boards could , at their discretion , create local by @-@ laws , confirmed by Parliament , to require attendance and fine the parents of children who did not attend . There were exemptions for illness , living more than a certain distance ( typically one mile ) from a school , or certification of having reached the required standard ( which varied by board ) which were made mandatory across England and Wales by the 1880 Act . 
 The Elementary Education Act 1880 insisted on compulsory attendance from 5 – 10 years . For poorer families , ensuring their children attended school proved difficult , as it was more tempting to send them working if the opportunity to earn an extra income was available . Attendance Officers often visited the homes of children who failed to attend school , which often proved to be ineffective . Children under the age of 13 who were employed were required to have a certificate to show they had reached the educational standard . Employers of these children who weren 't able to show this were penalised . An act brought into force thirteen years later went under the name of the Elementary Education ( School Attendance ) Act 1893 , which stated a raised minimum leaving age to 11 . Later the same year , the act was also extended for blind and deaf children , who previously had no means of an official education . This act was later amended in 1899 to raise the school leaving age up to 12 years of age . 
 = = 20th century = = 
 The start of the 20th century saw school boards abolished in 1902 and replaced with local education authorities , which are still in use to the present day . 
 = = = The Fisher Act of 1918 = = = 
 The year 1918 saw the introduction of the Education Act 1918 , commonly also known as the Fisher Act as it was devised by Herbert Fisher . The act enforced compulsory education from 5 – 14 years , but also included provision for compulsory part @-@ time education for all 14 to 18 @-@ year @-@ olds . There were also plans for expansion in tertiary education , by raising the participation age to 18 . This was dropped because of the cuts in public spending after World War I. This is the first act which starting planning provisions for young people to remain in education until the age of 18 . The 1918 act was not implemented until a further act of 1921 was passed . 
 = = = Butler 's post @-@ war education changes = = = 
 In 1944 , Rab Butler introduced the Education Act 1944 which amongst other changes , including the introduction of the Tripartite System , included raising the school leaving age to 15 . Although the act should have been brought into effect as from September 1939 , it was not implemented because of the effects of World War II , but was eventually enforced from April 1947 . The Comprehensive school system has since replaced the Tripartite System brought in by this act across most of England . This act also recommended compulsory part @-@ time education for all children until the age of 18 , but was dropped , in similar fashion to the 1918 Act , to cut spending after World War II . 
 = = = = Reasons = = = = 
 Changes in government approaches towards education meant that it was no longer regarded adequate for a child to leave education aged 14 , as that is the age when they were seen to really understand and appreciate the value of education , as well as being the period when adolescence was at its height . It was beginning to be seen as the worst age for a sudden switch from education to employment . Although there were concerns about the effects of having less labour from these children , it was hoped that the outcome of a larger quantity of more qualified , skilled workers would eliminate the deficit problem from the loss of unskilled labour . 
 = = = = Effects = = = = 
 This act introduced the concept of the famous 11 + examination , which determined whether a child would be entitled to schooling in a grammar school , secondary modern or technical college , under the Tripartite System . The examination was devised by Rab Butler , but has since been phased out across the majority of the United Kingdom , with just several boroughs in England and Northern Ireland still using it . League tables published in March 2007 , however , show that existing grammar schools throughout the country are outperforming comprehensive schools . 
 Changes in society and approaches towards education , including equal opportunities , has meant that all children now deserve to have the same education and not singling out those who learn at a slower rate than others , thus every child has the opportunity to gain secondary school level qualifications or similar , regardless of background or intelligence . 
 = = = Leaving age raised to 16 = = = 
 In 1964 , preparations began to raise the school leaving age to 16 . These were delayed in 1968 , and eventually the decision was taken in 1971 that the new upper age limit be enforced from 1 September 1972 onwards . As well as raising the school leaving age in 1972 , the year also saw the introduction of the Education ( Work Experience ) Act , allowing LEAs to organise work experience for the additional final year school students . In some counties around the country , these changes also led to the introduction of middle schools in 1968 , where students were kept at primary or junior school for an additional year , meaning that the number of students in secondary schools within these areas remained virtually constant through the change . In others , more radical changes led to middle schools for pupils aged up to 13 opening in smaller secondary school buildings , with other schools accommodating students over 13 . As of 2010 , there are fewer than 300 middle schools across England , situated in just 22 local education authorities ; the number of remaining middle schools has gradually fallen since the mid @-@ 1980s . 
 = = = = ROSLA Buildings = = = = 
 For many secondary schools around England and Wales in areas without a Middle School , accommodating for the new 5th year students would be a struggle . A popular solution was to provide those schools with a pre @-@ fabricated building ( often referred to as ROSLA Buildings or ROSLA Blocks ) that were in need of additional capacity , providing them with the resources to cope with the new generation of 5th year students . This solution proved popular with many schools across the country , not least due to the low cost involved for materials and construction , but also the speed which these buildings could be erected . Many were supplied by F. Pratten and Co Ltd . 
 The ROSLA Buildings were delivered to schools in self assembly packs , being assembled by a team often within days , regardless of weather conditions . Consequently , they were not intended to stand long @-@ term , though some have proven to have stood much longer than was initially planned . Many ROSLA Buildings shared similar exterior attributes such as their design , with the only difference being the separation of rooms within the building . The room separation within the building was decided upon by senior school management , hence many walls are false from being added in after construction . 
 Although the majority of schools around England and Wales have since replaced the ROSLA Building at their site , there are still numerous schools around the country which are still actively using these buildings . Some schools which still have a standing ROSLA Building that isn 't in use serve for youth centres for the community or are simply derelict . The majority have since been demolished or extensively refurbished . 
 = = = Education Act 1996 = = = 
 Between 1976 and 1997 , the minimum school leaving arrangements were : 
 A child whose sixteenth birthday falls in the period 1 September to 31 January inclusive , may leave compulsory schooling at the end of the Spring term ( the following Easter ) . 
 A child whose sixteenth birthday falls in the period 1 February to 31 August , may leave on the Friday before the last Monday in May . 
 Under section 8 ( 4 ) of the Education Act 1996 , a new single school leaving date was set for 1998 and all subsequent years thereafter . This was set as the last Friday in June in the school year which the child reaches the age of 16 . 
 = = 21st century = = 
 = = = Education and Skills Act 2008 = = = 
 Reports published in November 2006 suggested that Education Secretary Alan Johnson was exploring ways to raise the school leaving age in England to 18 , just over 40 years later than the last rise in 1972 , pointing to the decline in unskilled jobs and the need for young people to be equipped for modern day employment . 
 = = = = Participation Age = = = = 
 A year later , on 6 November 2007 , Prime Minister Gordon Brown unveiled the government 's plans in his Queen 's Speech . The plans included the duty for parents to assist their children in education or training participation until the date of their 18th birthday , as well as detailing proposed moves to reform the apprenticeship system and to improve achievement for children in care . The Education and Skills Act 2008 , when it came into force in the 2013 academic year , initially required participation in some form of education or training until the school year in which the child turned 17 , followed by the age being raised to the young person 's 18th birthday in 2015 . This was referred to as raising the " participation age " to distinguish it from the school leaving age which remains at 16 . To qualify as participation the young person must be in education or training for the equivalent of one day a week ( at a minimum ) . The local council is responsible for ensuring that a suitable place is available . The Act makes similar powers available to the National Assembly for Wales . A spokesperson for the Welsh Assembly indicated that it would want to encourage more young people to stay in education , but without compulsion , so school leavers there are not required to continue with any education or training . 
 = = = = Reasons = = = = 
 Figures were published in June 2006 showing that 76 @.@ 2 % of all young people aged 16 – 18 are already in further education or training , meaning that the rise might only affect around 25 % of young people who may have otherwise sought employment immediately upon finishing compulsory education . This did not specifically state that young people would remain in secondary school , but rather by law be required to continue their education full or part @-@ time , whether that be in sixth form , college or work based training . Around 80 % of 16 @-@ year @-@ olds stay in full @-@ time academic or vocational education , or go on a government @-@ financed training course . In a survey of 859 people , 9 / 10 supported the plans for the age increase . 
 Reports published by the DfES showed that although there are around 70 % of 16 year olds who remain in full @-@ time education , this declines to less than 50 % by the time they reach 18 , with the majority finding unskilled employment and even fewer going into employment where their training has relevance . There is also a small increase in those who become unemployed by the time they reach 18 , which the government hoped to reduce with the act . It is these cases of unemployment which the government believes to be the toughest , whom it classifies as NEET ( Not in Education , Employment or Training ) . In 2006 an additional 7 % of 16 year olds fell into this category and the proportion rose to 13 % among 18 year olds . In practice , only 1 % of young people are classified as NEET during their time aged 16 – 18 , due to churn between training , employment and NEET classification . In 2015 the percentage of 16 @-@ 18 classified as NEET fell to 7 @.@ 5 % , the lowest figure since 2000 . 
 The government believed that the changes were needed because of the collapse in unskilled jobs in the economy , which means that young school leavers at 16 years of age are finding it increasingly more difficult to find employment , consequentially in many cases making them unemployable . Within the last 40 years , the number of unskilled jobs available have more than halved , from 8 million in the 1960s to 3 @.@ 5 in the present day , with predictions of further drops to just 600 @,@ 000 by 2020 due to the increasing demand for skilled labour . This , together with fewer students continuing their further education , increase the difficulty for young school leavers to find work if they were either not able , or chose not to , stay on at school and complete further education . 
 = = = = Opposition = = = = 
 Whilst the government is eager to implement the changes , many oppose the proposal , some on civil liberties grounds . Compulsory school attendance is usually justified by reference to the argument that minors are incapable of making sufficiently reasoned choices . However , the 16 @-@ 18 age group falls into a grey area , being regarded as effectively adult in a number of contexts . Indeed , in some jurisdictions ( e.g. Scotland ) , individuals are considered to reach full maturity at 16 . 
 The proposal of using criminal sanctions to enforce attendance under this new system was opposed by MPs from both the Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats , who believed compulsion and threats were the wrong approach to increasing participation . A spokesperson for the DfES said the proposals were not about " forcing young people to do something they don 't want to " , and that " we are letting young people down if we allow them to leave education and training without skills at the age of 16 . " However , the Prime Minister 's Queen 's Speech in November 2007 , which discussed the raise in school leaving age , suggested that pupils who failed to comply with new laws are to be expected to face fines or community service , rather than custodial sentencing which had previously been proposed . Local Authorities will also be expected to ensure pupils are participating up to 18 years of age . 
 = = = = Effects = = = = 
 The downward trend in the number of unskilled jobs available throughout the country is continuing . The government believes that the extension of compulsory education until the age of 18 will mean many more young people will leave education in a much better position to find skilled employment . Speaking in March 2007 , Chancellor Gordon Brown stated that around 50 @,@ 000 teenagers would be paid a training allowance to sign up to college @-@ based courses , with estimates on the available number of apprenticeships available to double to around 500 @,@ 000 by 2020 , with 80 % being available in England , which will be an increase from the current 250 @,@ 000 apprenticeships available , offered by 130 @,@ 000 employers . 
 Speaking in June 2007 , Barry <unk> , Labour MP and chairman of the Commons education and skills select committee , says that " young people not in education are one of the biggest social problems facing a modern government " . The government is hopeful that the changes will also have an effect on preventing the increase in crime levels , as currently a substantial percentage of young people leaving school are turning to a life of crime , most unable to find suitable work due to lack of skills and qualifications . 
 = Introduction to viruses = 
 A virus is a biological agent that reproduces inside the cells of living hosts . When infected by a virus , a host cell is forced to produce many thousands of identical copies of the original virus at an extraordinary rate . Unlike most living things , viruses do not have cells that divide ; new viruses are assembled in the infected host cell . But unlike still simpler infectious agents , viruses contain genes , which gives them the ability to mutate and evolve . Over 5 @,@ 000 species of viruses have been discovered . 
 The origins of viruses are unclear : some may have evolved from plasmids — pieces of DNA that can move between cells — while others may have evolved from bacteria . A virus consists of two or three parts : genes , made from either DNA or RNA , long molecules that carry genetic information ; a protein coat that protects the genes ; and in some viruses , an envelope of fat that surrounds the protein coat and is used , in combination with specific receptors , to enter a new host cell . Viruses vary in shape from the simple helical and icosahedral to more complex structures . Viruses range in size from 20 to 300 nanometres ; it would take 30 @,@ 000 to 750 @,@ 000 of them , side by side , to stretch to 1 centimetre ( 0 @.@ 39 in ) . 
 Viruses spread in many ways . Just as many viruses are very specific as to which host species or tissue they attack , each species of virus relies on a particular method for propagation . Plant viruses are often spread from plant to plant by insects and other organisms , known as vectors . Some viruses of animals , including humans , are spread by exposure to infected bodily fluids . Viruses such as influenza are spread through the air by droplets of moisture when people cough or sneeze . Viruses such as norovirus are transmitted by the faecal – oral route , which involves the contamination of hands , food and water . Rotavirus is often spread by direct contact with infected children . The human immunodeficiency virus , HIV , is transmitted by bodily fluids transferred during sex . Others , such as the Dengue virus , are spread by blood @-@ sucking insects . 
 Viral infections can cause disease in humans , animals and even plants . However , they are usually eliminated by the immune system , conferring lifetime immunity to the host for that virus . Antibiotics have no effect on viruses , but antiviral drugs have been developed to treat life @-@ threatening infections . Vaccines that produce lifelong immunity can prevent some viral infections . 
 = = Discovery = = 
 In 1884 the French microbiologist Charles Chamberland invented a filter , known today as the Chamberland filter or Chamberland – Pasteur filter , that has pores smaller than bacteria . Thus he could pass a solution containing bacteria through the filter and completely remove them from the solution . In the early 1890s the Russian biologist Dmitri Ivanovsky used this filter to study what became known as the tobacco mosaic virus . His experiments showed that extracts from the crushed leaves of infected tobacco plants remain infectious after filtration . 
 At the same time several other scientists proved that , although these agents ( later called viruses ) were different from bacteria , they could still cause disease , and they were about one hundredth the size of bacteria . In 1899 the Dutch microbiologist Martinus Beijerinck observed that the agent multiplied only in dividing cells . Having failed to demonstrate its particulate nature he called it a " <unk> <unk> <unk> " , a " soluble living germ " . In the early 20th century the English bacteriologist Frederick Twort discovered viruses that infect bacteria , and the French @-@ Canadian microbiologist Félix d 'Herelle described viruses that , when added to bacteria growing on agar , would lead to the formation of whole areas of dead bacteria . Counting these dead areas allowed him to calculate the number of viruses in the suspension . 
 With the invention of the electron microscope in 1931 by the German engineers Ernst Ruska and Max Knoll came the first images of viruses . In 1935 American biochemist and virologist Wendell Meredith Stanley examined the tobacco mosaic virus and found it to be mostly made from protein . A short time later , this virus was separated into protein and RNA parts . A problem for early scientists was that they did not know how to grow viruses without using live animals . The breakthrough came in 1931 , when the American pathologist Ernest William <unk> and Alice Miles Woodruff grew influenza and several other viruses in fertilised chickens ' eggs . Some viruses could not be grown in chickens ' eggs , but this problem was solved in 1949 when John Franklin Enders , Thomas <unk> Weller and Frederick Chapman Robbins grew polio virus in cultures of living animal cells . Over 5 @,@ 000 species of virus have been discovered . 
 = = Origins = = 
 Viruses co @-@ exist with life wherever it occurs . They have probably existed since living cells first evolved . The origin of viruses remains unclear because they do not form fossils , so molecular techniques have been the most useful means of hypothesising how they arose . However , these techniques rely on the availability of ancient viral DNA or RNA but most of the viruses that have been preserved and stored in laboratories are less than 90 years old . Molecular methods have only been successful in tracing the ancestry of viruses that evolved in the 20th century . Three main theories speculate on the origins of viruses : 
 Regressive theory 
 Viruses may have once been small cells that parasitised larger cells . Over time , genes not required by their parasitism were lost . The bacteria rickettsia and chlamydia are living cells that , like viruses , can reproduce only inside host cells . They lend credence to this theory , as their dependence on parasitism is likely to have caused the loss of genes that enabled them to survive outside a cell . 
 Cellular origin theory 
 Some viruses may have evolved from bits of DNA or RNA that " escaped " from the genes of a larger organism . The escaped DNA could have come from plasmids — pieces of DNA that can move between cells — while others may have evolved from bacteria . 
 Coevolution theory 
 Viruses may have evolved from complex molecules of protein and DNA at the same time as cells first appeared on earth and would have depended on cellular life for many millions of years . 
 There are problems with all of these hypotheses : the regressive hypothesis does not explain why even the smallest of cellular parasites do not resemble viruses in any way . The escape hypothesis does not explain the structures of virus particles . The coevolution , or virus @-@ first hypothesis , contravenes the definition viruses , in that they are dependent on host cells . But viruses are recognised as ancient and to have origins that pre @-@ date the divergence of life into the three domains . This discovery has led modern virologists to reconsider and re @-@ evaluate these three classical hypotheses . 
 = = Structure = = 
 A virus particle , also known as a virion , consists of genes made from DNA or RNA which are surrounded by a protective coat of protein called a capsid . The capsid is made of many smaller , identical protein molecules which are called capsomers . The arrangement of the capsomers can either be icosahedral ( 20 @-@ sided ) , helical or more complex . There is an inner shell around the DNA or RNA called the nucleocapsid , which is formed by proteins . Some viruses are surrounded by a bubble of lipid ( fat ) called an envelope . 
 = = = Size = = = 
 Viruses are among the smallest infectious agents , and most of them can only be seen by electron microscopy . Most viruses cannot be seen by light microscopy ( in other words , they are sub @-@ microscopic ) ; their sizes range from 20 to 300 nm . They are so small that it would take 30 @,@ 000 to 750 @,@ 000 of them , side by side , to stretch to one cm . By contrast bacterial sizes are typically around 1 micrometre ( 1000 nm ) in diameter , and the cells of higher organisms a few tens of micrometres . Some viruses such as <unk> and <unk> are relatively large . At around 1 micrometer , these viruses , which infect amoebae , were discovered in 2003 and 2013 . They are around a thousand times larger than influenza viruses and the discovery of these " giant " viruses astonished scientists . 
 = = = Genes = = = 
 Genes are made from DNA ( deoxyribonucleic acid ) and , in many viruses , RNA ( ribonucleic acid ) . The biological information contained in an organism is encoded in its DNA or RNA . Most organisms use DNA , but many viruses have RNA as their genetic material . The DNA or RNA of viruses consists of either a single strand or a double helix . 
 Viruses reproduce rapidly because they have only a few genes compared to humans who have 20 @,@ 000 – 25 @,@ 000 . For example , influenza virus has only eight genes and rotavirus has eleven . These genes encode structural proteins that form the virus particle , or non @-@ structural proteins , that are only found in cells infected by the virus . 
 All cells , and many viruses , produce proteins that are enzymes called DNA polymerase and RNA polymerase which make new copies of DNA and RNA . A virus 's polymerase enzymes are often much more efficient at making DNA and RNA than the host cell 's . However , RNA polymerase enzymes often make mistakes , and this is one of the reasons why RNA viruses often mutate to form new strains . 
 In some species of RNA virus , the genes are not on a continuous molecule of RNA , but are separated . The influenza virus , for example , has eight separate genes made of RNA . When two different strains of influenza virus infect the same cell , these genes can mix and produce new strains of the virus in a process called reassortment . 
 = = = Protein synthesis = = = 
 Proteins are essential to life . Cells produce new protein molecules from amino acid building blocks based on information coded in DNA . Each type of protein is a specialist that usually only performs one function , so if a cell needs to do something new , it must make a new protein . Viruses force the cell to make new proteins that the cell does not need , but are needed for the virus to reproduce . Protein synthesis consists of two major steps : transcription and translation . 
 Transcription is the process where information in DNA , called the genetic code , is used to produce RNA copies called messenger RNA ( mRNA ) . These migrate through the cell and carry the code to ribosomes where it is used to make proteins . This is called translation because the protein 's amino acid structure is determined by the mRNA 's code . Information is hence translated from the language of nucleic acids to the language of amino acids . 
 Some nucleic acids of RNA viruses function directly as mRNA without further modification . For this reason , these viruses are called positive @-@ sense RNA viruses . In other RNA viruses , the RNA is a complementary copy of mRNA and these viruses rely on the cell 's or their own enzyme to make mRNA . These are called negative @-@ sense RNA viruses . In viruses made from DNA , the method of mRNA production is similar to that of the cell . The species of viruses called retroviruses behave completely differently : they have RNA , but inside the host cell a DNA copy of their RNA is made with the help of the enzyme reverse transcriptase . This DNA is then incorporated into the host 's own DNA , and copied into mRNA by the cell 's normal pathways . 
 = = Life @-@ cycle = = 
 When a virus infects a cell , the virus forces it to make thousands more viruses . It does this by making the cell copy the virus 's DNA or RNA , making viral proteins , which all assemble to form new virus particles . 
 There are six basic , overlapping stages in the life cycle of viruses in living cells : 
 Attachment is the binding of the virus to specific molecules on the surface of the cell . This specificity restricts the virus to a very limited type of cell . For example , the human immunodeficiency virus ( HIV ) infects only human T cells , because its surface protein , gp120 , can only react with CD4 and other molecules on the T cell 's surface . Plant viruses can only attach to plant cells and cannot infect animals . This mechanism has evolved to favour those viruses that only infect cells in which they are capable of reproducing . 
 Penetration follows attachment ; viruses penetrate the host cell by endocytosis or by fusion with the cell . 
 <unk> happens inside the cell when the viral capsid is removed and destroyed by viral enzymes or host enzymes , thereby exposing the viral nucleic acid . 
 Replication of virus particles is the stage where a cell uses viral messenger RNA in its protein synthesis systems to produce viral proteins . The RNA or DNA synthesis abilities of the cell produce the virus 's DNA or RNA . 
 Assembly takes place in the cell when the newly created viral proteins and nucleic acid combine to form hundreds of new virus particles . 
 Release occurs when the new viruses escape or are released from the cell . Most viruses achieve this by making the cells burst , a process called lysis . Other viruses such as HIV are released more gently by a process called budding . 
 = = Effects on the host cell = = 
 The range of structural and biochemical effects that viruses have on the host cell is extensive . These are called <unk> effects . Most virus infections eventually result in the death of the host cell . The causes of death include cell lysis ( bursting ) , alterations to the cell 's surface membrane and apoptosis ( cell " suicide " ) . Often cell death is caused by cessation of its normal activity due to proteins produced by the virus , not all of which are components of the virus particle . 
 Some viruses cause no apparent changes to the infected cell . Cells in which the virus is latent and inactive show few signs of infection and often function normally . This causes persistent infections and the virus is often dormant for many months or years . This is often the case with herpes viruses . 
 Some viruses , such as Epstein @-@ Barr virus , often cause cells to proliferate without causing malignancy ; but some other viruses , such as papillomavirus , are an established cause of cancer . When a cell 's DNA is damaged by a virus , and if the cell cannot repair itself , this often triggers apoptosis . One of the results of apoptosis is destruction of the damaged DNA by the cell itself . Some viruses have mechanisms to limit apoptosis so that the host cell does not die before progeny viruses have been produced ; HIV , for example , does this . 
 = = Viruses and diseases = = 
 Common human diseases caused by viruses include the common cold , the flu , chickenpox and cold sores . Serious diseases such as Ebola and AIDS are also caused by viruses . Many viruses cause little or no disease and are said to be " benign " . The more harmful viruses are described as virulent . Viruses cause different diseases depending on the types of cell that they infect . Some viruses can cause lifelong or chronic infections where the viruses continue to reproduce in the body despite the host 's defence mechanisms . This is common in hepatitis B virus and hepatitis C virus infections . People chronically infected with a virus are known as carriers . They serve as important reservoirs of the virus . If there is a high proportion of carriers in a given population , a disease is said to be endemic . 
 There are many ways in which viruses spread from host to host but each species of virus uses only one or two . Many viruses that infect plants are carried by organisms ; such organisms are called vectors . Some viruses that infect animals , including humans , are also spread by vectors , usually blood @-@ sucking insects . However , direct transmission is more common . Some virus infections , such as norovirus and rotavirus , are spread by contaminated food and water , hands and communal objects and by intimate contact with another infected person , while others are airborne ( influenza virus ) . Viruses such as HIV , hepatitis B and hepatitis C are often transmitted by unprotected sex or contaminated hypodermic needles . It is important to know how each different kind of virus is spread to prevent infections and epidemics . 
 = = = Diseases of plants = = = 
 There are many types of plant virus , but often they only cause a loss of yield , and it is not economically viable to try to control them . Plant viruses are often spread from plant to plant by organisms ( vectors ) . These are normally insects , but some fungi , nematode worms and single @-@ celled organisms have been shown to be vectors . When control of plant virus infections is considered economical ( perennial fruits , for example ) efforts are concentrated on killing the vectors and removing alternate hosts such as weeds . Plant viruses are harmless to humans and other animals because they can only reproduce in living plant cells . 
 = = = Bacteriophages = = = 
 Bacteriophages are viruses that infect bacteria and archaea . The International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses officially recognises 28 genera of bacteriophages that belong to 11 families . They are important in marine ecology : as the infected bacteria burst , carbon compounds are released back into the environment , which stimulates fresh organic growth . Bacteriophages are useful in scientific research because they are harmless to humans and can be studied easily . These viruses can be a problem in industries that produce food and drugs by fermentation and depend on healthy bacteria . Some bacterial infections are becoming difficult to control with antibiotics , so there is a growing interest in the use of bacteriophages to treat infections in humans . 
 = = = Host resistance = = = 
 = = = = Innate immunity of animals = = = = 
 Animals , including humans , have many natural defences against viruses . Some are non @-@ specific and protect against many viruses regardless of the type . This innate immunity is not improved by repeated exposure to viruses and does not retain a " memory " of the infection . The skin of animals , particularly its surface , which is made from dead cells , prevents many types of viruses from infecting the host . The acidity of the contents of the stomach destroys many viruses that have been swallowed . When a virus overcomes these barriers and enters the host , other innate defences prevent the spread of infection in the body . A special hormone called interferon is produced by the body when viruses are present , and this stops the viruses from reproducing by killing the infected cell and its close neighbours . Inside cells , there are enzymes that destroy the RNA of viruses . This is called RNA interference . Some blood cells engulf and destroy other virus infected cells . 
 = = = = Adaptive immunity of animals = = = = 
 Specific immunity to viruses develops over time and white blood cells called lymphocytes play a central role . <unk> retain a " memory " of virus infections and produce many special molecules called antibodies . These antibodies attach to viruses and stop the virus from infecting cells . Antibodies are highly selective and attack only one type of virus . The body makes many different antibodies , especially during the initial infection ; however , after the infection subsides , some antibodies remain and continue to be produced , often giving the host lifelong immunity to the virus . 
 = = = = Plant resistance = = = = 
 Plants have elaborate and effective defence mechanisms against viruses . One of the most effective is the presence of so @-@ called resistance ( R ) genes . Each R gene confers resistance to a particular virus by triggering localised areas of cell death around the infected cell , which can often be seen with the unaided eye as large spots . This stops the infection from spreading . RNA interference is also an effective defence in plants . When they are infected , plants often produce natural disinfectants which destroy viruses , such as salicylic acid , nitric oxide and reactive oxygen molecules . 
 = = = = Resistance to bacteriophages = = = = 
 The major way bacteria defend themselves from bacteriophages is by producing enzymes which destroy foreign DNA . These enzymes , called restriction endonucleases , cut up the viral DNA that bacteriophages inject into bacterial cells . 
 = = = Prevention and treatment of viral disease in humans and other animals = = = 
 = = = = Vaccines = = = = 
 Vaccination is a way of preventing diseases caused by viruses . Vaccines simulate a natural infection and its associated immune response , but do not cause the disease . Their use has resulted in the eradication of smallpox and a dramatic decline in illness and death caused by infections such as polio , measles , mumps and rubella . Vaccines are available to prevent over thirteen viral infections of humans and more are used to prevent viral infections of animals . Vaccines may consist of either live or killed viruses . Live vaccines contain weakened forms of the virus , but these vaccines can be dangerous when given to people with weak immunity . In these people , the weakened virus can cause the original disease . Biotechnology and genetic engineering techniques are used to produce " designer " vaccines that only have the capsid proteins of the virus . Hepatitis B vaccine is an example of this type of vaccine . These vaccines are safer because they can never cause the disease . 
 = = = = Antiviral drugs = = = = 
 Over the past 20 years , the development of antiviral drugs has increased rapidly , mainly driven by the AIDS pandemic . Antiviral drugs are often nucleoside analogues , which are molecules very similar , but not identical to DNA building blocks . When the replication of virus DNA begins , some of these fake building blocks are incorporated . As soon as that happens , replication stops prematurely — the fake building blocks lack the essential features that allow the addition of further building blocks . Thus , DNA production is halted , and the virus can no longer reproduce . Examples of nucleoside analogues are aciclovir for herpes virus infections and lamivudine for HIV and hepatitis B virus infections . <unk> is one of the oldest and most frequently prescribed antiviral drugs . 
 Other antiviral drugs target different stages of the viral life cycle . HIV is dependent on an enzyme called the HIV @-@ 1 protease for the virus to become infectious . There is a class of drugs called protease inhibitors , which bind to this enzyme and stop it from functioning . 
 Hepatitis C is caused by an RNA virus . In 80 % of people infected , the disease becomes chronic , and they remain infectious for the rest of their lives unless they are treated . There is an effective treatment that uses the nucleoside analogue drug ribavirin combined with interferon . Treatments for chronic carriers of the hepatitis B virus by a similar strategy using lamivudine and other anti @-@ viral drugs have been developed . In both diseases , the drugs stop the virus from reproducing and the interferon kills any remaining infected cells . 
 HIV infections are usually treated with a combination of antiviral drugs , each targeting a different stage in the virus 's life @-@ cycle . There are drugs that prevent the virus from attaching to cells , others that are nucleoside analogues and some poison the virus 's enzymes that it needs to reproduce . The success of these drugs is proof of the importance of knowing how viruses reproduce . 
 = = Role in ecology = = 
 Viruses are the most abundant biological entity in aquatic environments — there are about one million of them in a teaspoon of seawater — and they are essential to the regulation of saltwater and freshwater ecosystems . Most of these viruses are bacteriophages , which are harmless to plants and animals . They infect and destroy the bacteria in aquatic microbial communities and this is the most important mechanism of recycling carbon in the marine environment . The organic molecules released from the bacterial cells by the viruses stimulate fresh bacterial and algal growth . 
 Microorganisms constitute more than 90 % of the biomass in the sea . It is estimated that viruses kill approximately 20 % of this biomass each day and that there are fifteen times as many viruses in the oceans as there are bacteria and archaea . Viruses are mainly responsible for the rapid destruction of harmful algal blooms , which often kill other marine life . The number of viruses in the oceans decreases further offshore and deeper into the water , where there are fewer host organisms . 
 Their effects are far @-@ reaching ; by increasing the amount of respiration in the oceans , viruses are indirectly responsible for reducing the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere by approximately 3 gigatonnes of carbon per year . 
 Marine mammals are also susceptible to viral infections . In 1988 and 2002 , thousands of harbour seals were killed in Europe by phocine distemper virus . Many other viruses , including <unk> , herpesviruses , adenoviruses and <unk> , circulate in marine mammal populations . 
 = Dunkery Hill = 
 Dunkery Beacon at the summit of Dunkery Hill is the highest point on Exmoor and in Somerset , England . It is also the highest point in southern England outside of Dartmoor . 
 The sandstone hill rises to 1 @,@ 705 feet ( 520 m ) and provides views over the surrounding moorland , the Bristol Channel and hills up to 86 miles ( 138 km ) away . The site has been visited by humans since the Bronze Age , and contains several burial mounds in the form of cairns and bowl barrows . Sweetworthy on the lower slopes is the site of two Iron Age hill forts or enclosures and a deserted medieval settlement . The hill is part of a Site of Special Scientific Interest and National nature reserve . It was in private ownership until the 20th century , when it was donated to the National Trust by Sir Thomas Acland , Colonel Wiggin and Allan Hughes ; a stone cairn was erected at the summit to commemorate the event . 
 = = Location = = 
 Dunkery is composed of Middle Devonian sedimentary rock , ( 393 @.@ 3 ± 2 @.@ 7 million years ago ) known as the Hangman Sandstone Formation . This supports acidic soils . The ridge along the top of the hill is 4 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 8 mi ) long . 
 At 1 @,@ 705 feet ( 520 m ) ordnance datum ( OD ) , the mean height above sea level , Dunkery Beacon is the highest natural point in Somerset , although the tip of the Mendip TV Mast is higher at 1 @,@ 915 feet ( 584 m ) OD . Dunkery is ranked 23rd in the UK in terms of dominance and is a Marilyn , meaning that it is a peak with 150 metres ( 490 ft ) or more of relative height . The nearest higher hill is Yes Tor , 37 miles ( 60 km ) away . John Fry , a character in R. D. Blackmore 's 1869 novel Lorna Doone , calls it the " <unk> place of <unk> " . 
 Dunkery lies just four miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) from the Bristol Channel at Porlock . The shortest route of ascent goes from the car park at Dunkery Gate , and is just 0 @.@ 75 miles ( 1 @.@ 2 km ) long . There are extensive views from the summit , from where the Bristol and English Channel coasts , the Brecon Beacons including Pen Y Fan , Bodmin Moor , Dartmoor , the Severn Bridges and Cleeve Hill 86 miles ( 138 km ) away in Gloucestershire are visible . 
 = = History = = 
 Dunkery Hill was part of the " Royal Forest of Exmoor " , established by Henry II according to the late 13th @-@ century Hundred Rolls . There has been some debate about the origin of the name " Dunkery " and its predecessors " <unk> " and " <unk> " . Eilert Ekwall suggests that it comes from the Welsh din meaning hillfort and <unk> or creag meaning rock . 
 There are several Bronze Age burial mounds at or near the summit . Two of the largest are <unk> How and Robin How , which have been damaged over many years , although plans have been made to restore and protect them . " How " comes from the Norse for burial mound . <unk> How on the northern slope , is more than 22 metres ( 72 ft ) in diameter . On the southeastern slopes are four more cairns , and there are a further two round cairns 390 metres ( 1 @,@ 280 ft ) and 420 metres ( 1 @,@ 380 ft ) southeast of Rex Stile Head . In addition to the cairns are barrows , which also date from the Bronze Age . One bowl barrow on the southeastern spur of the Chains is 12 @.@ 3 metres ( 40 ft ) in diameter . A circular funerary stone mound 850 metres ( 2 @,@ 790 ft ) north of Dunkery Bridge , which is a 1 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) walk from the summit , dates from the Neolithic or Bronze Age . It is approximately 1 @.@ 5 metres ( 4 ft 11 in ) high and 14 metres ( 46 ft ) in diameter . 
 Sweetworthy , on Dunkery Hill 's north @-@ facing slope , is the site of two Iron Age hill forts or enclosures ; one has a single rampart and external ditch , enclosing 0 @.@ 25 hectares ( 0 @.@ 62 acres ) . The rampart is still visible , and the ditch on the east side is used as a trackway . There was a defended settlement above the main site . It is also the site of a deserted medieval settlement , which has been designated an ancient monument . It has been added to the Heritage at Risk register because of the vulnerability to plant growth . 
 In 1918 Sir Thomas Acland leased part of the <unk> with a large part of the Holnicote Estate , for 500 years . Dunkery Hill was put up for sale in 1928 . Labour Party activist and Member of Parliament Margaret Bondfield asked in the House of Commons if the government was willing to have it designated an ancient monument , to preserve it for future generations . She received the reply that although the government was agreeable to having the hill listed there were no funds available for its purchase ; the beacon and surrounding mounds were subsequently designated an ancient monument . The beacon itself , and 960 acres ( 390 ha ) of surrounding land , was donated in 1932 by Colonel W.W. Wiggin . A further 945 acres ( 382 ha ) of nearby land was donated in 1934 by Mrs Hughes in memory of her husband Alan Hughes of Lynch Allerford , Minehead . The donations were commemorated in 1935 with an event when a plaque was attached to the summit memorial cairn . Further parts of the Holnicote Estate , which includes other land donated by the Acland family and others , was given in subsequent years . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 The site is part of the North Exmoor Site of Special Scientific Interest ( SSSI ) , part of the Dunkery & Horner Woods National Nature Reserve and part of the Exmoor Coastal Heaths Special Area of Conservation . 
 The hill is blanketed in heather , which gives it a deep purple colour during the summer . Ling and bell heather , gorse , sessile oak , ash , rowan , hazel , bracken , mosses , liverworts , lichens and ferns all grow on the hill or in surrounding woodland , as well as some unique whitebeam species . Exmoor ponies , red deer , pied flycatchers , wood warblers , lesser spotted woodpeckers , redstarts , dippers , snipe , skylarks and kestrels are some of the fauna to be found on or around the hill and in nearby Horner Woods , home to 14 of the 16 UK bat species and including barbastelle and Bechstein 's bats . 
 = Body of Lies ( film ) = 
 Body of Lies is a 2008 American action spy film directed and produced by Ridley Scott . Set in the Middle East , it follows the attempts of the CIA and Jordanian Intelligence to catch " al @-@ Saleem " , a terrorist . Frustrated by their target 's elusiveness , differences in their approaches strain relations between a CIA operative , his superior , and the head of Jordanian Intelligence . 
 William Monahan 's screenplay , based on the novel of the same name by David Ignatius , examines contemporary tension between Western and Arab societies and the comparative effectiveness of technological and human counter @-@ intelligence methods . The film was shot largely on location in the United States and Morocco , after authorities in Dubai refused permission to film there because of the script 's political themes . The film 's photography sought to emphasize the contrast between the gold and dust of the desert and Arab cities , and the blue and gray of bureaucracy and Washington . Accordingly , they used natural light wherever possible . Marc Streitenfeld arranged the musical score . 
 Scott 's direction and visual style were praised by critics , but they criticized his formulaic handling of the story and use of conventions from the spy genre , such as surveillance shots from high @-@ altitude spy planes . It stars Leonardo DiCaprio , Russell Crowe , and Mark Strong as the three principals were particularly mentioned , including DiCaprio 's involvement with his character , Crowe 's adopted accent and weight gain , and Strong 's urbane sophistication . The film was released in the United States on October 10 , 2008 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Roger Ferris ( Leonardo DiCaprio ) is a CIA case officer in Iraq , tracking a terrorist called Al @-@ Saleem ( Alon Abutbul ) . He meets Nizar , a member of the terrorist organization who is prepared to offer information in return for asylum in America . Despite his boss , Ed Hoffman 's ( Russell Crowe ) objections , Ferris agrees to shelter Nizar . Nizar is used as a pawn to draw out the rest of his cell ; when he is captured , Ferris is forced to shoot him to prevent him from exposing Ferris ' identity . However , furious at Hoffman 's refusal to act on the information Nizar provided , Ferris and his associate Bassam ( Oscar Isaac ) go to search a safe house in Balad , Iraq , of which Nizar had told them . There , Ferris observes men burning records and attempts to bluff his way in , but is exposed . In the ensuing shootout and chase , Ferris and Bassam 's vehicle is hit by an RPG . Ferris and some salvaged discs are rescued by helicopter but Bassam is killed in the explosion . 
 Meanwhile , unknown terrorists plan to follow up off @-@ screen bus bombings in Sheffield with more attacks in Manchester , but blow themselves up when the police arrive at their house . Recovered from his injuries , Ferris is assigned to Jordan to continue searching for Al @-@ Saleem , where he meets with Hani Salaam ( Mark Strong ) , head of the Jordanian General Intelligence Directorate . 
 Hoffman finds an Al @-@ Saleem safe house in Jordan and orders Ferris to watch it . Simultaneously , Hoffman organizes another ' side operation ' via a local agency operative named Skip ( Vince Colosimo ) and that he is to conduct an operation without Ferris ' knowledge . Skip employs the use of an agency asset , Ziyad <unk> , who blows cover to a terrorist from the safe house . As he flees to inform his colleagues of their exposure , Ferris makes chase and kills him in such a place and manner that one might believe the death to be random . Salaam ( via ' back channels ' ) corroborates the acceptance of killing by those whom remain at the safe house ; and Ferris accuses Hoffman of running " side operations " which interfere and ( at least ) undermine operational integrity of primary operation and tells Hoffman to stop . While going to the hospital to receive rabies shots for bites suffered during the pursuit and elimination of the terrorist , Ferris meets a nurse named Aisha ( Golshifteh Farahani ) , and he begins developing romantic feelings for her . The bombers strike again in an Amsterdam flower market , and kill at least 75 people . 
 Having recognized one of the men living in the safe house as former small @-@ time criminal <unk> Karami ( <unk> <unk> ) , Salaam takes Karami into the desert and coerces him into working for Jordanian intelligence , threatening to set him up as a collaborator if he does not co @-@ operate . Hoffman asks Salaam to use Karami , but he refuses , believing a greater return will come later . Unknown to Ferris and Salaam , Hoffman tells Ferris ' CIA subordinate ( Skip ) to follow Karami and kidnap him . Karami escapes and notifies the terrorists in the safe house that it is being watched , and they abandon it . Ferris 's partner is caught and Salaam accuses Ferris of having had knowledge of the move on Karami , and blames Ferris 's duplicity with him for the destruction of the safe house . He exiles Ferris from Jordan . 
 Ferris returns to Hoffman in Washington , and they devise a new plan to find Al @-@ Saleem . Suspecting he is motivated more by pride than ideology , they stage a fake terrorist attack and set up Omar Sadiki ( Ali Suliman ) , an innocent Jordanian architect , as its instigator , hoping Al @-@ Saleem will come out of hiding and attempt to contact him . Al @-@ Saleem sees TV news coverage of the attack and takes the bait . 
 Salaam invites Ferris back to Jordan and shares his suspicions that Omar Sadiki is a terrorist , though Ferris feigns ignorance . Ferris later tries to save Sadiki from being kidnapped by Al @-@ Saleem 's henchmen but fails and sees his partner nearly killed in the subsequent car crash . Under interrogation , Sadiki denies any knowledge of the attack though he is later found beaten and killed . Ferris goes back to his apartment and finds out that Aisha has been kidnapped . He desperately asks Salaam for help , admitting he fabricated Omar Sadiki 's terrorist cell and the attack . Salaam refuses to help because of Ferris earlier having lied to him . 
 Ferris offers himself in exchange to Aisha 's kidnappers , and is brought to the middle of the desert , with Hoffman watching everything via a surveillance drone unmanned aerial vehicle . Ferris is surrounded by a group of SUVs , which circle him to create an obscuring dust cloud before picking him up . The dust cloud blocks Hoffman 's view , so that he cannot determine which of the SUVs , now headed in different directions , is carrying Ferris . Ferris is taken across the border to Syria where he is to be interrogated by Al @-@ Saleem . When Ferris asks Al @-@ Saleem about Aisha , he is told that someone has lied to him and that he has been double @-@ crossed . Ferris tells Al @-@ Saleem that there is an infiltrator ( Karami ) in his organization who works for Ferris , and that , by association , Al @-@ Saleem works for Ferris . Al @-@ Saleem does not believe Ferris , beats him , turns on a video camera and orders his execution . Salaam and his agents arrive at the last moment , saving Ferris ' life . Al @-@ Saleem is shown arrested in his own SUV by Marwan Se @-@ Kia , Hani Salaam 's security officer . 
 Salaam visits Ferris in the hospital and reveals he had faked Aisha 's abduction , and orchestrated Ferris 's capture by Al @-@ Saleem using Karami as a go @-@ between . Having lost the will to fight in this particular ' war ' , Ferris goes off the grid and goes to see Aisha again . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Leonardo DiCaprio as Roger Ferris , a field officer working in CIA 's Near East Division and later CIA Station Chief of Amman , Jordan . 
 Russell Crowe as Ed Hoffman , chief of CIA 's Near East Division and Ferris ' boss . 
 Mark Strong as Hani Salaam , intelligence chief and director of the Jordanian General Intelligence Directorate . 
 Golshifteh Farahani as Aisha , a nurse in Amman and Ferris ' love interest . 
 Oscar Isaac as Bassam , CIA field operative in Iraq and Ferris ' associate . 
 Ali Suliman as Omar Sadiki , a Jordanian architect with very low @-@ profile contact with Al @-@ Qaeda and CIA 's mole to catch Al @-@ Saleem . 
 Alon Abutbul as Al @-@ Saleem , head of an independent terrorist group based in Jordan , aligned with Al @-@ Qaeda . 
 Vince Colosimo as Skip , CIA field operative in Jordan . 
 Simon McBurney as Garland , a computer geek employed by the CIA to instrument black ops . 
 Mehdi <unk> as Nizar , former linguist , Al @-@ Qaeda operative and attempted defector . 
 Michael Gaston as Holiday , Ferris ' predecessor as CIA 's Jordan station chief . 
 <unk> <unk> as Mustafa Karami , former petty criminal @-@ turned @-@ Al @-@ Qaeda operative under Al @-@ Saleem who later became Hani Salaam 's informer . 
 Jamil Khoury as Marwan Se @-@ Kia , GID operative and security officer of Hani Salaam . 
 Lubna <unk> as Cala , Aisha 's sister . 
 Ghali <unk> and Youssef <unk> as Rowley and Yousef , Aisha 's nephews . 
 Ali Khalil as Zayed <unk> , CIA asset in Amman , operating in Hoffman 's secret side operation . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Ridley Scott has made a previous film about the conflict between the Western and Arab civilizations , Kingdom of Heaven ( 2005 ) , set during the Crusades . Body of Lies resumes this theme in the context of modern intelligence operations and terrorism . The film puts two contrasting characters on the same side . Ferris , the CIA man on the ground , is a dedicated Arabist fluent in the language ; he relies on trust , local knowledge and human intelligence . Hoffman , his superior , who is detached at home in Washington , D.C. , and at the CIA in Virginia , is more <unk> : he authorizes deceit , double @-@ crossing , and violence by telephone and without scruple . The New Yorker interpreted him as " an American consumer of advanced technology and vast amounts of food " . 
 Early in the film , Hoffman explains to his superiors that the terrorists ' retreat to pre @-@ tech age communication methods renders useless the high specification tools the CIA uses , and increases the worth of Ferris 's human intelligence methods . They avoid mobile telephones and computers , preferring face @-@ to @-@ face communication and encoded written messages . By contrast , the Americans use sophisticated communication ( Hoffman and Ferris regularly speak on the phone ) and surveillance ( high altitude spy planes offer a different point of view throughout ) technology . David Denby of The New Yorker said that this was Scott 's suggestion that the CIA has the technology but not the human intelligence to properly fight terrorism in the Middle East . Despite Hoffman 's distance , the force and unintended consequences of his schemes are often borne by Ferris . The difference is underlined when Ferris , suffering weakened credibility , injured colleagues and personal risk , is reminded by Hoffman that " we are a results @-@ driven organization " . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In March 2006 , Warner Bros. hired screenwriter William Monahan to adapt the novel Penetration by David Ignatius into a feature film , which would be directed by Ridley Scott . In April 2007 , with the novel re @-@ titled Body of Lies and the film similarly re @-@ titled , actor Leonardo DiCaprio was cast in the lead role . DiCaprio chose to pursue the role because he considered it a throwback to political films in the 1970s such as The Parallax View ( 1974 ) and Three Days of the Condor ( 1975 ) . DiCaprio dyed his hair brown , and wore brown contacts for the role . After DiCaprio was cast , Russell Crowe was courted for a supporting role , to which he formally committed after Monahan 's script was revised by Steve Zaillian , who wrote Scott and Crowe 's American Gangster . Crowe gained 63 pounds to suit his role . The actor said as a result of the film 's exploration of the American government and foreign policy , " I don 't think it will be very popular , but that ’ s never been part of my project choice process . " Mark Strong , who plays Hani Salaam , the head of the Jordanian General Intelligence Directorate ( GID ) ascribed his casting to his performances in the 2005 films Syriana and Oliver Twist . The character <unk> Salaam was modelled after the 2000 – 2005 GID chief Saad <unk> ( 1953 – 2009 ) , whose involvement , according to the original author David Ignatius , in sharply handled interrogations without use of torture , an encounter with a jihadist with his mother on the phone and being called the ' fingernail boss ' were near accurately featured in the film . 
 = = = Location and design = = = 
 Scott sought to film in Dubai in the United Arab Emirates , but the federation 's National Media Council denied the director permission due to the script 's politically sensitive nature . As a result , scenes set in Jordan were instead filmed in Morocco . The shoot took place over sixty @-@ five days from September to December 2007 . It was filmed in the United States and Morocco , where scenes set in ten different countries were filmed . Filming began on September 5 , 2007 at the Eastern Market , Washington , D.C. Practical locations were used throughout ; part of the Capitol Hill neighborhood was converted to resemble a wintry Amsterdam to film a ten- to fifteen @-@ second car bomb explosion . Scenes set in the CIA headquarters in Langley , Virginia were filmed at the National Geographic offices in Gaithersburg , Maryland ; both buildings were set in woodland and " It was eerily similar in terms of architectural style , ... " , said Arthur Max , the production designer , " We were given several empty floors . " Locations in Baltimore also stood in for Manchester , England and Munich , Germany , although the final cut of the movie did not have any scenes that took place in Munich . 
 Production moved to Morocco , where Scott , Max and Alexander Witt , the cinematographer had filmed several times before . Their previous experience meant they " knew every stone in the desert " and they were allowed access to many locations , including the Ministry of Finance , which was dressed as Jordan 's secret service headquarters , Casablanca airport and a military airfield . The basketball stadium in Rabat was used as the U.S. embassy in Jordan : a CIA office set was built inside the stadium , favoured because its design allowed the cameras to shoot both interior and exterior vistas , thus showing the characters looking out on people and tanks passing in the streets . A nine @-@ week shoot also took place at CLA Studios and in the desert around the city of Ouarzazate . 
 = = = Cinematography = = = 
 Body of Lies was Alexander Witt 's first credit as a director of photography ; he had collaborated with Ridley Scott on six feature films previously , beginning as a second unit camera operator on Black Rain ( 1989 ) . He shot the film in the Super 35 format with spherical lenses , and explained that these lenses offer more flexibility for interior and night pictures than the anamorphic alternative . They used Kodak Vision2 500T <unk> instead of Technicolor 's OZ process , which did not perform well in tests in the Moroccan desert . 
 Scott is known for his skill at filming with multiple camera set @-@ ups and Body of Lies used a minimum of three simultaneously . Witt explained the benefits , " Actors like multiple cameras because they ’ re always on @-@ camera , so they ’ re always in character and not wasting time off @-@ camera . " One shot of DiCaprio alone in the desert , for example , still used three cameras : one hand @-@ held above the actor , a second capturing a three @-@ quarter back profile , and the third photographing a close @-@ up through the first cameraman 's legs . Richard <unk> , the gaffer , attributed the success of this difficult approach to Scott 's filmmaking intelligence , " Ridley will stand at the monitors and tell you what 's he 's looking for – he 'll look at four monitors and say , ' I 'm cutting from this to this to this . ' He knows exactly how he will cut it . " 
 In line with the film 's use of practical locations , the photography and design departments worked together to incorporate practical light sources such as " lots of bare bulbs , lots of primitive fixtures " . In the climactic torture scene , filmed in an ancient , windowless prison cell outside of Rabat , they used only diegetic light : two strong torches carried by the actors playing the torturers . It was filmed with three cameras and bounce cards were used to reflect light onto the actors ' faces . Just a little smoke was sprayed in to augment the atmosphere but not dull the contrast . 
 Scott has used many gradations of lens filter in the past , but declined to do so on Body of Lies . One obtains better finesse using the digital intermediate during post @-@ production and does not risk losing light while selecting filters during expensive on @-@ set time . The filmmakers strove for authenticity and realism in the images , and as such little colouration was added after , and the natural contrast of colours between the locations in Washington and Morocco were allowed to show through . 
 In the film , images from unmanned aerial drones show the viewer the point of view of CIA commanders in Washington . These were filmed by John Marzano ( Aerial Director Of Photography ) using a helicopter mounted with a Wescam 35 on the nose of a helicopter , and <unk> 's <unk> surveillance system , hanging from the side . Its 1 – 40 zoom allowed the filmmakers to fly very high and then zoom out of Ferris strolling through a market @-@ place , creating the film 's final shot . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The film score was composed by Marc Streitenfeld , who has now composed music for Ridley Scott for three features . He recorded the orchestral portions of his score at the Eastwood Scoring Stage at Warner Brothers Studios . Of note is the presence of a song in the film named " If the World " , performed by Guns N ' Roses , and taken from their long @-@ delayed Chinese Democracy album . The track plays over the beginning of the end credits , but is not included on the official film soundtrack . Streitenfeld also collaborated with Mike Patton and Serj Tankian on the song " Bird 's Eye " , which was written specially for the musical score of the film . It was not included on the soundtrack album but was released separately as a single . 
 = = = Release = = = 
 The film was commercially released in the United States on October 10 , 2008 . The film has also been purchased by Turner Broadcasting System to screen on the television networks TBS and Turner Network Television . 
 The film was screened on September 30 , 2008 at Michigan Technological University , and October 2 , 2008 at Duke University , New York Film Academy , University of Maryland and University of Virginia . It was also pre @-@ screened on October 3 at Worcester Polytechnic Institute , at Michigan State University , at the University of Michigan , the University of Kansas , East Carolina University , and the University of Chicago on October 7 and at Carnegie Mellon University , Cornell University , Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute , The University at Buffalo , Columbia University , James Madison University , Syracuse University , the University of Colorado , the University of Washington , and Georgia Southern University on October 9 . 
 Warner Home Video released Body of Lies on DVD on February 17 , 2009 . The single @-@ disc region one release included surround sound and subtitles in English , French , and Spanish ; the two @-@ disc special edition included commentaries by the director , <unk> and original novel author , and a behind the scenes documentary ; the Blu @-@ ray edition also included additional commentary on the film 's themes . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Body of Lies received mixed reviews from critics . On Rotten Tomatoes the film has a rating of 54 % , based on 203 reviews , with an average rating of 5 @.@ 8 / 10 . The critical consensus reads , " Body of Lies relies too heavily on the performances of DiCaprio and Crowe to lift it above a conventional espionage thriller . " On Metacritic the film has a score of 57 out of 100 , based on 37 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " . 
 Roger Ebert , writing in the Chicago Sun @-@ Times , awarded the film three out of four stars . He praised the " convincing " acting and " realistic locations and terse dialogue " but questioned the verisimilitude of the story and concluded , " Body of Lies contains enough you can believe , or almost believe , that you wish so much of it weren 't sensationally implausible . " Kenneth Turan reached the same conclusion in the Los Angeles Times , " The skill of top @-@ flight director Ridley Scott and his veteran production team , not to mention the ability of stars Leonardo DiCaprio and Russell Crowe , ensure that this story of spies and terrorism in the Middle East is always crisp and watchable , " he writes , " but as the film 's episodic story gradually reveals itself , it ends up too unconvincing and conventional to consistently hold our attention . " Lou Lumenick in the New York Post writes that , " There 's nothing here we haven 't seen in many other movies " and Lisa Kennedy in the Denver Post summarised : " Body of Lies is an A @-@ list project with B @-@ game results . The movie might be set in the Age of Jihad . But the rules of trust and mistrust are wholly familiar . " 
 Critics observed the film 's adherence to conventions of the spy thriller genre ; Ebert called it " a James Bond plot " and David Denby pointed out the " usual tropes of the genre — surveillance shots from drones , <unk> tearing across the desert , explosions , scenes of torture " but praised Scott 's superior management of space and timing . While Todd McCarthy in Variety praised the initial set @-@ up and conceit of the plot device , he criticised the formulaic approach leading to a " cornball denouement " . A. O. Scott in The New York Times writes that director Scott 's " professionalism is , as ever , present in every frame and scene , but this time it seems singularly untethered from anything like zeal , conviction or even curiosity . " Joe Neumaier writes in the New York Daily News that the film " aims to be up @-@ to @-@ the @-@ moment – yet feels same @-@ old , same @-@ old . " Kennedy called the love story between DiCaprio and Farahani contrived , saying that while DiCaprio seemed more at home in those scenes , it made the film seem " foolish " . Ebert thought the cultural context of their relationship was well established , but that it essentially existed as a convenience of the plot , to set up the unlikely conclusion . Scott would have preferred the psychological tensions linking the three leading men were allowed develop further . 
 Mark Strong 's performance was mentioned by several critics , with Scott calling it " a marvel of exotic suavity and cool insinuation " while Ebert " particularly admired " his aura of suave control . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Body of Lies earned $ 12 @.@ 9 million on its first weekend in theatres in the United States and Canada , 40 % less than expected . This placed it as the third highest earning film that weekend , behind Disney 's Beverly Hills Chihuahua , which turned out to be No. 1 with a take of $ 17 @.@ 5 million in its second week , and Sony / Screen Gems 's Quarantine , which earned $ 14 @.@ 2 million — about $ 2 million more than it cost to make . A Warner Bros. executive said he was disappointed with the film 's opening and attributed it to its controversial storyline , although Body of Lies fared better than previous pictures about the " war on terrorism " such as Rendition , In the Valley of Elah , and Lions for Lambs , which all performed well below studios ' expectations . In a fourteen @-@ week theatrical run in the United States and Canada , the film earned $ 39 million . 
 Outside North America it opened reasonably well . In Australia it was the highest @-@ earning film in its opening weekend of October 9 – 12 , 2008 with $ 2 @,@ 104 @,@ 319 , ahead of Pixar Animation 's Wall @-@ E , which fell to second place , while Beverly Hills Chihuahua held third . In the United Kingdom , the film 's earnings were the second @-@ highest behind Quantum of Solace during November 21 – 23 , its opening weekend . It earned £ 991 @,@ 939 from 393 screens . Overall , while the film grossed only $ 40 million at the North American box office , it has grossed $ 115 @,@ 097 @,@ 286 worldwide . In the United States , contemporary war films have performed relatively poorly . Warner Bros. had hoped the large budget and Scott 's direction could better them , but the film performed relatively poorly compared to his others ; analysts attributed this to the film 's Middle East setting and exploration of terrorism . Brandon Gray pointed out that people read these themes in the news media already , and there is a perception that Hollywood films are biased . 
 = Lemurs ' Park = 
 Lemurs ' Park ( also known locally as Parc de <unk> à Madagascar ) is a small botanical garden and lemur reserve covering 5 ha ( 12 acres ) , and is located 22 km ( 14 mi ) southwest of Antananarivo , Madagascar . It was founded around 2000 by Laurent <unk> and Maxime <unk> . Most of its nine lemur species are free @-@ ranging within the park , which also contains more than 70 of Madagascar 's endemic plant species . The park is open to the public , offering guided tours as well as standard amenities , a gift shop , and a restaurant . Visitors can arrange transportation between downtown Antananarivo and Lemurs ' Park on a private park shuttle . 
 Most of the park 's lemurs were confiscated pets , entrusted to the park by the Ministry of Water and Forests . The lemurs are rehabilitated and bred for reintroduction into the wild . The park also collaborates with Colas Madagascar and TOTAL Madagascar to provide environmental education to local primary school children and to plant native trees as part of a reforestation program . Most of the park 's staff come from the neighboring communities . 
 = = History = = 
 Established around 2000 , Lemurs ' Park is a private , 5 ha ( 12 acres ) botanical park situated next to the <unk> River and between the villages of Fenoarivo and <unk> , 22 km ( 14 mi ) southwest of Antananarivo along Route Nationale 1 ( <unk> ) in the direction of <unk> . It functions as a lemur reserve that gradually reintroduces captive @-@ born lemurs back into nature . The park was founded by Laurent <unk> and Maxime <unk> , the grandson of Pierre <unk> , Founding Director of the Tsimbazaza Zoo ( Parc Botanique et Zoologique de Tsimbazaza ) in Antananarivo . 
 = = Attractions = = 
 The park , which primarily consists of pine forest and bamboo vegetation , contains nearly 6 @,@ 000 trees and more than 70 plant species endemic to Madagascar , all of which are segregated into separate climatic zones throughout the park . Lemurs ' Park also has a vivarium which houses chameleons , radiated tortoises , iguanas and other lizards . 
 The main attraction , for which the park is named , is its free @-@ ranging lemurs . Featured daily feeding times occur every two hours between 10 : 00 a.m. and 4 : 00 p.m. There are nine species , seven of which are active during the day ( diurnal ) and two are active at night ( nocturnal ) . Many of the lemurs are confiscated pets , and the staff work towards rehabilitating them for reintroduction into the wild . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 Confiscated pet lemurs are entrusted to Lemurs ' Park by the Ministry of Water and Forests ( Ministère des eaux et Forêts ) for ex situ conservation . This allows the urban population near Antananarivo to see free @-@ ranging lemurs in a natural environment . In addition to rehabilitation , Lemurs ' Park has also successfully bred Coquerel 's sifakas ( Propithecus coquereli ) since 2007 . 
 Because many of these lemurs have become endangered as a result of deforestation in Madagascar , Lemurs ' Park participates in a reforestation program supported by Colas Madagascar and Total Madagascar . Between December 2008 and May 2013 , approximately 37 @,@ 163 students and 1 @,@ 270 teachers from the public primary schools around Antananarivo have helped plant 170 native trees and participated in environmental education at Lemurs ' Park . For many of the children , this program has allowed them to see free @-@ ranging lemurs for the first time . In total , more than 11 @,@ 000 trees have been planted as part of this collaborative project , including rosewood , Terminalia , and <unk> as of May 2013 . Saplings of endemic plants , including baobabs , from the Madagascar spiny thickets in the southern part of the island have also been transported to the park and planted with the help of Colas . 
 According to the park , the partnership with Colas Madagascar and TOTAL Madagascar has also helped prevent layoffs of its staff during difficult economic times , over 90 % of whom come from the surrounding communities . 
 = = Business details = = 
 Lemurs ' Park ( Parc de <unk> à Madagascar ) is open all year , seven days a week from 9 : 00 a.m. until 5 : 00 p.m. , and the latest admission into the park is at 4 : 15 p.m. As of March 2015 , the admission price was 25 @,@ 000 ariary for adults and 10 @,@ 000 ariary for children ages 4 – 12 , while admission for children under the age of 4 is free . Entrance fees also cover a required tour with a park guide . Stays are limited to 1 hour and 30 minutes . The park provides standard amenities , and has a restaurant that requires 48 @-@ hour advance booking . Between January and April , both the restaurant and gift shop are closed on Mondays . 
 Visits to the park do not require advance booking , although reservations are required to take the park 's minibus from the heart of Antananarivo ( Analakely ) to the facility . The cost of the shuttle includes the admission into the park . The shuttle departs at 9 : 00 a.m. and 2 : 00 p.m. each day . 
 Lemurs ' Park also has a liaison office in Antananarivo that is only open on Monday . 
 = Dreamtime ( book ) = 
 Dreamtime : Concerning the Boundary between Wilderness and Civilization is an anthropological and philosophical study of the altered states of consciousness found in shamanism and European witchcraft written by German anthropologist Hans Peter Duerr . First published in 1978 by <unk> <unk> @-@ und <unk> under the German title of <unk> : Über die Grenze zwischen <unk> und <unk> , it was translated into English by the Hungarian @-@ American anthropologist Felicitas Goodman and published by Basil Blackwell in 1985 . 
 Dreamtime opens with the premise that many of those accused of witchcraft in early modern Christendom had been undergoing visionary journeys with the aid of a hallucinogenic salve which was suppressed by the Christian authorities . Duerr argues that this salve had been a part of the nocturnal visionary traditions associated with the goddess Diana , and he attempts to trace their origins back to the ancient world , before looking at goddesses associated with the wilderness and arguing that in various goddess @-@ centred cultures , the cave represented a symbolic vagina and was used for birth rituals . 
 Later in the book , Duerr looks at ethnographic examples of shamanism , focusing on the shamanic use of hallucinogens and the experiences which such <unk> induce . He argues that " archaic cultures " recognize that a human can only truly understand themselves if they go to the mental boundary between " civilization " and " wilderness " , and that it is this altered state of consciousness which both the shaman and the European witch reached in their visionary journeys . Believing that the modern western worldview failed to understand this process , Duerr criticizes the work of those anthropologists and scientists who had tried to understand " archaic " society through a western rationalist framework , instead advocating a return to " archaic " modes of thought . 
 Dreamtime was a controversial best @-@ seller upon its initial release in West Germany , and inspired academic debate leading to the publication of Der Gläserne Zaun ( 1983 ) , an anthology discussing Duerr 's ideas , edited by Rolf Gehlen and Bernd Wolf . Reviews in the Anglophone world were mixed , with critics describing Dreamtime as unoriginal , factually inaccurate , and difficult to read , but also innovative and well referenced . 
 = = Background = = 
 According to his own account , the idea for writing Dreamtime first came to Duerr when he was in New Mexico in the summer of 1963 . He had spent the day visiting the <unk> Cliff Dwellings and was returning to the Albuquerque Greyhound Bus Station , where he met a <unk> Native yerbatero ( herbalist ) buying a cup of coffee , and struck up a conversation . Duerr asked the yerbatero if he could help him find a Native family living in one of the pueblos north of Santa Fe with whom he could stay , to conduct anthropological research into the nightly dances that took place in the subterranean kivas . The Native told him that if he wanted to find out about the dances in the kivas , then he should go to the Pueblo of Our Lady of the Angels and study at the University of California . Duerr would later relate that this blow to his vanity first provided him with the idea of writing Dreamtime . 
 Duerr presented some of his ideas in a lecture given to the members of a philosophy seminar at the University of Constance in the autumn of 1975 , which he repeated at a housewives ' club in Mannheim . He was " greatly encouraged " in his preparation for the work by the noted English anthropologist E. E. Evans @-@ Pritchard ( 1902 – 1973 ) , who died before its publication . 
 The anthropologist Rik Pinxten noted that Dreamtime was published at a time of new advancements in German anthropology . After a period of intellectual stagnation during the preceding decades , the 1970s saw the rising popularity of the discipline , with a dramatic increase in the number of students enrolling to study ethnography at West German universities . It also saw increasing interdisciplinary collaboration between anthropologists and philosophers , with several scholars arguing that ethnography was relevant to " philosophical analysis " . This increase in philosophical discussion within German anthropology was largely rejected by the " official academic representatives " of the discipline , who believed that it exceeded the " limits of scientific respectability " , but it was nonetheless adopted by Duerr in Dreamtime . 
 = = Publication = = 
 When the book was first published in West Germany in 1978 , it sold hundreds of thousands of copies , becoming a bestseller and arousing both popular and academic interest . According to the American Indologist Wendy Doniger O 'Flaherty , Dreamtime became " the canon of a cult for intellectual former hippies " , dealing as it did with issues such as " drugs , sex , anarchy , [ and ] lurid religions " . British anthropologist Charles Stewart noted that it was popular among members of the <unk> German subculture , and for this reason believed that the book could tell anthropologists " a considerable amount about the strivings of modern German society " . 
 The book was translated into English by Felicitas D. Goodman ( 1914 – 2005 ) , a Hungarian @-@ born American anthropologist who had written several books of her own on the subject of religious trance journeys . Duerr noted that of all the translators he had worked with , Goodman showed the greatest dedication to her work . For the English @-@ language translation , Duerr included a new preface , in which he noted that he had refused to make changes to the original text despite the insistence of the publisher . Explaining his reasoning , he remarked that " a book is not a dishwasher , where it is advisable to change malfunctioning parts . " He accepted that the book had faults , and expressed his hope that the reader would forgive him for leaving them intact in the English translation . In the English @-@ language edition , the main text takes up the first 133 pages of the book , while the footnotes and bibliography occupy the next 324 pages . 
 = = Synopsis and arguments = = 
 Duerr examines the use of flying ointment in early modern witchcraft and draws ethnographic parallels from accused witches among the Shona people of Rhodesia and witchcraft beliefs of the Normanby Archipelago in the South Pacific . He concludes that some of those accused of witchcraft in early modern Europe had applied hallucinogenic ointments to their skin to make themselves believe that they were flying to the so @-@ called witches ' sabbat , a ritual gathering of witches . Noting the apparent lack of recipes for this salve in the witch trial records , Duerr posits the view that the Christian authorities intentionally covered up the existence of hallucinogenic ointments , fearing that their existence would cast doubt on various aspects of the witches ' accounts , including their alleged encounters with the Devil . Duerr maintains that this knowledge might have ultimately led people to cast doubt on even the Devil , a key aspect of early modern Christian cosmology . Although the use of hallucinogenic ointments was not a factor in every witch trial , it was more prevalent in the earlier trials of the Alpine region . Duerr connects its use to the nocturnal visionary traditions associated with the goddess Diana in that region . 
 Duerr then looks into the origins of the nocturnal visionary traditions , beginning with the ancient Greek deity Artemis and her influence on the Roman goddess Diana . In Alpine lore , Diana survived Christianization as the leader of the nocturnal procession . Duerr goes further back into the Palaeolithic , where Venus figurines are interpreted as a " prototype " for the later Greek Artemis , a goddess who was " the unrestrained mistress of animals and plants " . Duerr then describes the relationship between ancient goddesses and caves as a symbol of the female vagina and explores stories involving caves in Greek mythology , Sir Gawain and the Green Knight and Yakut folklore . Duerr proposes that the association between caves and the vagina is global in scope , as societies around the world use caves in rituals symbolizing birth . 
 Various folk traditions across Europe are analyzed , such as the Alpine <unk> , where women broke social conventions by attacking men or engaging in lesbianism . Duerr compares these traditions to the benandanti of early modern Friuli , and to the Livonian werewolf , viewing them as representing the clash between order and chaos . Christian society in the Late Middle Ages began to construe the witch as a creature inside of society rather than outside it , which partly led to the witch trials of the early modern period . Duerr argues that the societies of European Christendom began to increasingly accept female nudity in art and fashion during the Late Middle Ages . 
 Examples in the historical European folk tradition where criminals have been declared to be outside of the law and banished from the community are illustrated . Duerr connects these outsiders to executioners and warriors who were also outside the law because they had entered the world of the dead . Similarly , the witches of the early modern period also left the everyday world , and like the shamans of Siberia experienced their " wild " or " animal aspect " in order to understand their human side . Duerr uses ethnographic examples from around the world to show that many cultures have used hallucinogenic substances to reach states of consciousness beyond ordinary societal boundaries . 
 Duerr provides additional ethnographic examples showing how societal rules were reversed at special times of the year . In shamanic terms , societies which espouse an " archaic mentality " understand who they are by understanding who they are not ; according to Duerr , modern societies fail to understand this concept . Datura , a plant that contains toxic hallucinogens is discussed . The plant was introduced to Europe in the early modern period . Among the Huichol people of central Mexico , shamans have told anthropologists that Datura is used by malevolent witches . Duerr makes note of the anthropologists who have undertaken shamanic experiences with the people they are studying , such as Barbara <unk> and Carlos Castenada , but argues that such ethnographers have failed to truly understand what shamans mean when they describe their experiences as " flying " . In Duerr 's view , shamans learn to evaporate their " ego boundaries " , thereby experiencing themselves in a different way ; it is this feeling that can be described as shamanic flying . Duerr ties these shamanic practices into the werewolves of early modern Europe , arguing that these werewolves did not physically transform into wolves , but that they embraced their " wolf nature " by crossing over the boundary from " civilisation " to " wilderness " . 
 Duerr then offers a philosophical discussion on the nature of reality , criticizing psychiatrists like George Devereux for their beliefs that shamans were mentally ill . Instead he champions the idea that the visionary experiences of shamans should be treated as real rather than illusionary , drawing from the ideas of the philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein to support his argument . The author then examines the role of animals in shamanic visions , paying particular reference to the experiences of the Peruvian anthropologist Carlos Castaneda . Duerr argues that the conversations between the animal and the individual undertaking the vision are neither literal nor delusional , but that the only way to understand this is to situate oneself " on the fence " , between the worlds of civilisation and wilderness . 
 Duerr argues that modern Western society lacks important facets found in " archaic " societies who adhere to shamanic beliefs , and he asserts that the majority of Western anthropologists who have performed ethnographic fieldwork in these cultures have failed to truly understand them . To correct this , Duerr argues that anthropologists must understand that people in such societies take a " mythic perspective " to the world , often comparing objects and places in the material world to objects and places that exist " outside of time " , in the eternal realm of mythology . He connects this with the Indigenous Australian concept of Dreamtime , an otherworld outside of ordinary space and time . 
 Finally , Duerr once again criticises the approach of Western society and its anthropologists to studying " archaic " spiritual beliefs . He asserts that in these " archaic " cultures , people " have a much clearer idea about the fact that we can not be only what we are if at the same time , we are also what we are not , and that we can only know who we are if we experience our boundaries " . He denounces Western scientists and anthropologists for their approaches to the study of such cultures , arguing that they have misrepresented them by attempting to fit them within the Western ideas of objectivity . He argues that in future , anthropologists must reach their own boundaries , and recognize the wilderness of their consciousness before they can truly understand the worldview of " archaic " humans . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Academic reviews = = = 
 Writing in The Journal of Religion , Gail <unk> claimed that Duerr 's Dreamtime had a " maverick whimsy and passion " that stemmed from its argument that Western society had unfairly forced the " otherworld " into " an autistic tyranny of the self " . On a critical note , <unk> believed that despite Duerr 's extensive bibliography , he had failed to understand the " critical context in which the intellectual history of the demonized outsider continues to be examined " , ignoring the ideas put forward by Edward Dudley and Maximilian <unk> in their edited volume The Wild Man Within ( 1972 ) or John Block Friedman in his The Monstrous Races in Medieval Art and Thought ( 1981 ) . In a review published in the journal Forest & Conservation History , Paul <unk> praised Dreamtime , considering it to be a " groundbreaking ethnographic study " that invites the reader to consider what Western society has lost in its over @-@ reliance on science and rationalism . <unk> also commented positively on Goodman 's translation , noting that she had successfully conveyed Duerr 's dry humour and self @-@ deprecating wit . 
 Joseph J. Valadez of the Harvard School of Public Health reviewed Duerr 's Dreamtime for the journal Contemporary Sociology . He felt that the book had brought him to the " edges of [ his ] own logics " , but that this had not been the result of any intellectual argument posed by Duerr ; indeed , he suggested that there were " crucial scholarly weaknesses " that made much of Duerr 's argument suspect . He ultimately felt that because Duerr had refused to correct his factual mistakes for the English translation , the book had left the realms of scholarship and instead become an " obscure cultural artifact " , one which was " represented by the myriad descriptions of cryptic symbols " that are discussed within its pages . Going on to comment on Duerr 's main argument regarding the relationship between Wilderness and Civilization , Valadez also expressed his opinion that Duerr had made a " fundamental error " in assuming that Wilderness is not accessible to everyone " by virtue of genetic heritage . " 
 In the Comparative Civilizations Review journal , Anthony M. Stevens @-@ Arroyo proclaimed that it was easy " to get lost " in Dreamtime , believing that the multitude of ethnographic and historical facts presented by Duerr often distracted from the book 's main arguments . Although praising the book 's contents , Stevens @-@ Arroyo expressed his annoyance at Duerr 's use of humour , believing that it was inappropriate in such a serious work of scholarship . He also remarked that Duerr " practices what he preaches " , noting that the book was something of an apologia for his involvement in the counter @-@ cultural and drug subcultures of the 1960s and his continuing advocacy of the use of mind @-@ altering substances , in the same style as Timothy Leary . Considering the work to be an attack on social convention , he believes that Duerr has made use of mind @-@ altering drugs to cross boundaries into altered states of consciousness and that Dreamtime is his invitation for others to join him . Stevens @-@ Arroyo did praise Goodman 's English translation , but argued that the index was too limited . 
 In a commentary piece for the Journal of the Anthropological Society of Oxford , Charles Stewart expressed his opinion that Dreamtime is best described as " the sort of book that Carlos Castaneda might have written if he were a German philosopher . " He identifies a series of commonalities between Duerr 's work and Castenada 's , claiming that Duerr 's description of his encounter with the Native American yerbatero in the book 's preface is an " allusion " to Castenada 's meeting with Don Juan <unk> , which he described in The Teachings of Don Juan ( 1968 ) . Praising Duerr 's use of source material , Stewart notes that many anthropologists would be critical of using ethnographic data to " construct a moral parable " for Western society , and he went on to question whether it was really necessary for Westerners to return to " archaic " modes of thought . 
 = = = Press reviews = = = 
 The American Indologist Wendy Doniger O 'Flaherty of the University of Chicago published a review of Duerr 's Dreamtime in the New York Times . She expressed her opinion that Duerr had put forward a " bold hypothesis " but that Dreamtime was a " paradigm of borderline academia " , consisting of chapter titles written with " charm and wit " that hid " a mountainous scholarly apparatus – 236 pages of 827 notes , with an 86 @-@ page bibliography of some 2 @,@ 400 titles , to support 133 pages of text . " She also identified multiple influences on Duerr 's thinking , including historian and philosopher of science Paul Feyerabend , the philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein , the historian of religions Mircea Eliade , and the anthropologist Carlos Castenada . 
 Ultimately , Doniger O 'Flaherty was critical of Dreamtime , commenting that " Duerr is attempting to hunt with the hounds and run with the hare , and his book is likely to infuriate both ordinary readers and scholars . " Although initially appearing suitable for the average reader , she felt that most would be put off by the " daunting scholarly apparatus " he had employed , and the " heaviness of the argument " . Believing that the book was difficult to read , she felt that Duerr had hidden his arguments in the footnotes , and that reading the first third of the book was akin to " wandering stoned through the stacks of a very fine European library , browsing in the sections devoted to witchcraft , hallucinogens and orgiastic cults . It is good fun , but it is not for all tastes . " She equally felt that the book would be criticized by academics and other scholars working in the fields of witchcraft history and the history of religion , who would recognize that the book not only contained multiple factual errors , but also that many of Duerr 's arguments were unoriginal , having previously been made by Mircea Eliade and Victor Turner . 
 Writing for the Los Angeles Times , Kenneth Atchity described Duerr 's book as being " outstanding for its weirdness and provocation " despite the fact that its " anthropology is neither original nor precise . " Atchity maintains that Dreamtime offers nothing new except " the energy of its serendipity " , noting similarities with books such as James Frazer 's The Golden Bough ( 1890 ) , Robert Graves ' The White Goddess ( 1948 ) , and the works of Carlos Castenada . Although of the opinion that it contained " patches of brilliant illumination " , Atchity ultimately considered Dreamtime to be an " obscure essay on the human experience . " 
 = = = Wider influence = = = 
 In 1983 , German academics Rolf Gehlen and Bernd Wolf published Der Gläserne Zaun : <unk> zu Hans Peter <unk> " <unk> " ( " The Glass Fence : Essays on Hans Peter Duerr 's Dreamtime " ) , an edited volume of papers discussing Duerr 's work . Duerr 's theories were evaluated by Belgian anthropologist Rik Pinxten in an academic paper entitled " Dreamtime : Relativism and Irrationality in the Work of Hans Peter Duerr " ( 1992 ) , published in the Cognitive Relativism and Social Science volume . Pinxten discussed the role of German anthropology within academia and its influence on philosophy and described Dreamtime as " the most important publication " to emerge from the interaction between the two disciplines . 
 In her study of feminist @-@ orientated Wicca in New Zealand ( 2004 ) , the anthropologist Kathryn Rountree remarked that along with historian Carlo Ginzburg 's <unk> : Deciphering the Witches ' Sabbath ( 1989 ) , Dreamtime offered " perhaps the most detailed investigation so far " of the witches ' sabbath . Similarly , Duerr 's work was referenced by anthropologist Susan Greenwood in her study of the Wiccan and ceremonial magical communities of London , Magic , Witchcraft and the Otherworld ( 2000 ) . 
 According to Dutch historian Willem de <unk> , Dreamtime was responsible for first introducing the 1692 case of <unk> of <unk> , the ' Livonian werewolf ' , to Anglophone scholarship . Prior to this , he noted , scholarly debate on the case had been restricted to German @-@ speaking scholars . Duerr had briefly discussed the case in the chapter " Wild Women and Werewolves " , in which he compared it with various European folk traditions in which individuals broke social taboos and made mischief in public , arguing that they represented a battle between the forces of chaos and order . 
 = Ottoman – Egyptian invasion of Mani = 
 The Ottoman – Egyptian Invasion of Mani was a campaign during the Greek War of Independence that consisted of three battles . The Maniots fought against a combined Egyptian and Ottoman army under the command of Ibrahim Pasha of Egypt . 
 On March 17 , 1821 , the Maniots ( residents of the central peninsula on the southern part of the Peloponnese ) declared war on the Ottoman Empire , preceding the rest of Greece in joining the revolution by about a week . The various Greek forces won a quick string of victories . However , disputes broke out amongst the leaders and anarchy ensued . The Ottomans seized this chance and called for reinforcements from Egypt . The reinforcements came under the command of Ibrahim Pasha , the son of the leader of Egypt , Muhammad Ali . With the Greeks in disarray , Ibrahim ravaged the Peloponnese and after a four months siege he captured the city of Missolonghi in April . He then went back to the Peloponnese and turned his attention in June to Mani . 
 Ibrahim tried to enter Mani from the north @-@ east near <unk> on June 21 , 1826 , but he was forced to stop at the fortifications at Vergas . His army of 7 @,@ 000 men was held off by an army of 2 @,@ 000 Maniots and 500 refugees from other parts of Greece . Despite Egyptian and Ottoman artillery , the outnumbered Maniots managed to hold off the Ottomans . Ibrahim sent 1 @,@ 500 men to attempt a landing near Areopolis and go north to threaten the Maniot rear . This force was initially successful ; however the women and old men of the area fought back and repelled them with heavy losses . When the Egyptians at Vergas heard that Theodoros Kolokotronis was advancing on their rear they retreated . 
 In August , Ibrahim renewed the offensive and he sent a group of regular soldiers down the coast and they reached <unk> before they retreated . Ibrahim sent a force of 8 @,@ 000 men down to Polytsaravo and on the way they destroyed a tower that was opposing them . When they reached Polytsaravo , they were faced by the Maniots in their forts . The Egyptians and the Ottomans were forced to retreat with significant losses . This was the last time Mani was invaded during the War for Independence , as Greece was liberated in 1828 . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 The Greek War of Independence had started on the March 17 , 1821 , when the Maniots declared war on the Ottoman Empire at <unk> . On March 21 , the Maniot army of 2 @,@ 000 men under the command of Petros Mavromichalis which also included Theodoros Kolokotronis , marched from Areopolis and headed for Messenia . The next day , they reached Kalamata , which had an Ottoman garrison and they captured the city on March 23 . 
 The rest of Greece joined the war when Bishop <unk> of Patras declared Greece in rebellion on March 25 . At Kalamata , the Greeks established the Messenian Senate which governed affairs in the southern Peloponnese . Kolokotronis wanted to attack Tripoli but Petros Mavromichalis convinced him to attack the smaller towns first . Petrobey also sent letters to the courts of Europe telling them of the Greeks ' plan . Petrobey finished off the letters by signing it with Petrobey Mavromichalis , Prince and Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief . On April 28 , the Maniot army joined Kolokotronis forces at <unk> . From there they went to Tripoli and started to besiege the city . The city eventually fell on September 23 , 1821 and was sacked by the Greeks . 
 Due to the unrelenting losses and stories of Greek atrocities in Tripolis , the Sultan became desperate and in 1824 he called on his Viceroy in Egypt , Muhammad Ali , to aid him . Ali promised to aid him in return for cession of the island of Crete , Cyprus , as well as making his son Ibrahim Pasha , Pasha of the Peloponnese . After his offer was accepted , Ali sent his son in command of the expedition . Meanwhile , the Greeks were in disarray because of political rivalries which had caused a civil war . Kolokotronis was arrested , his son Panos was killed , and his nephew <unk> forced to flee . 
 Ibrahim used the confusion to land at Methoni in the Peloponnese . From Methoni , Ibrahim started pillaging the Peloponnese and taking many people as slaves . Ibrahim captured Tripolis but was stopped from capturing Nauplion by <unk> Mavromichalis and Dimitrios Ypsilantis . In retaliation , Ibrahim burnt down Argos before returning to Tripoli . Ibrahim decided to go with his army and join Reshid Pasha at Missolonghi in Central Greece . The Egyptians reached the city on December 12 , 1825 and helped the Ottomans with the siege . On April 10 , 1826 , the city fell to the invaders and the city was sacked . 
 = = Battle of Vergas = = 
 Ibrahim sent an envoy to Mani demanding its surrender or else he would pillage it . He received the <unk> reply of : 
 From the few Greeks of Mani and the rest of Greeks who live there to Ibrahim Pasha . We received your letter in which you try to frighten us saying that if we don 't surrender , you 'll kill the Maniots and plunder Mani . That 's why we are waiting for you and your army . We , the inhabitants of Mani , sign and wait for you . 
 Ibrahim , furious with the response , ordered an attack on northwestern Mani from Kalamata on June 23 , 1826 . Under his command was a force of 7 @,@ 000 men , a mixture of infantry and cavalry . The invaders were forced to stop at the fortifications of the Maniots at Vergas near <unk> . Defending the walls were 2 @,@ 000 Maniot soldiers and 500 Greek refugees . 
 The Egyptian artillery failed to breach the walls , so Ibrahim decided to launch two ships with cannons and have them bombard the Maniot defences from the sea . He also combined this attack with infantry assaults , however these failed as the invaders were driven back from the walls eight times . The attacks lasted for a few more days before the Egyptians and Ottomans were forced to retreat when news arrived that Kolokotronis was approaching their rear with 2 @,@ 000 men . The Maniots chased the Egyptians up to Kalamata before withdrawing . Ibrahim lost 2 @,@ 500 men at Vergas and the Greek losses are unknown . 
 = = Battle of <unk> = = 
 During the Battle of Vergas , Ibrahim decided to attack the Maniots from the rear . His plan was to send a small fleet with a few soldiers to land at the Bay of Diros , 2 kilometers south of Areopolis . The aim of this was to capture the unguarded <unk> , which cut the communication lines of the defenders at Vergas and demoralize them as well . He would then be able to attack the Maniots from the rear and control the mountain passes to eastern Mani and <unk> . Authors Peter Greenhalgh and Edward <unk> describe this plan as excellent . 
 On June 23 , he sent a small fleet carrying 1 @,@ 500 to land at the Bay of Diros and to capture Areopolis . Aid came from other villages . On June 26 , the surviving Egyptians were rescued by Ibrahim 's fleet from the beach and those who were not rescued had to swim to the ships or be killed by the Maniots . This battle cost Ibrahim 1 @,@ 000 men and he was forced to retreat from Mani after being defeated at Vergas . 
 = = Battle of Polytsaravo = = 
 After his retreat from Mani due to the defeats at Vergas and Diros Pasha renewed his offensive in August . Ibrahim 's army was led by a Laconian from <unk> named Bosinas who had assistance from the Egyptian fleet . On August 27 , he reached <unk> in an attempt to take a safe path through the mountains . Before he reached the town of Polytsaravos , his army of 8 @,@ 000 Egyptians was delayed by Theodoros Stathakos and his family of thirteen men who refused to let the invaders past their tower . Bosinas tried to negotiate with Stathakos . Stathakos , feigning surrender , told Bosinas to come and take his family 's guns . As Bosinas came to retrieve the guns , the Stathakos family killed him . In retaliation , the Egyptians used their two cannons and blew up the tower . 
 The Egyptians then proceeded towards the town of Polytsaravos and reached it on August 28 . Awaiting them there were 2 @,@ 000 Maniots behind their fortifications . The Maniots had chosen Polytsaravos as their position of defence as it was on high ground and was surrounded by rocky slopes . This would have meant that the Egyptians could have been stopped before they arrived at the town . As part of their defence plan the villages sent all the women and children to the mountains before improving the fortifications . As the Egyptians arrived at the walls , the Maniots sallied out and caught the Egyptians by surprise . The Egyptians , suffering losses , withdrew from Mani and back into the Laconian plain . The Egyptians had lost 400 men during the battle and the Maniots only lost 9 . This was the last invasion launched against Mani . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Even though this campaign is overshadowed by other battles of the revolution , it was one of the most important . The <unk> stopped the Egyptians and Ibrahim Pasha who had not been defeated this decisively before . The women who defeated the Egyptians at Diros have been given the name of ' The Amazons of Diros ' . This was the last invasion of Mani as Ibrahim abandoned any ideas of conquering it . On the April 26 , 1827 the Turkish navy bombarded <unk> with over 1 @,@ 700 cannonballs hitting the town . 
 In 1827 , the combined fleets of France , England and Russia defeated the combined Ottoman – Egyptian fleet in the Battle of Navarino . In 1828 , under the terms of the Treaty of Constantinople , Greece became an independent state which was recognized by the Ottomans in 1829 . When Ioannis <unk> was made president of Greece , he had Petros <unk> imprisoned . The Mavromichalis ' reacted by assassinating <unk> in Nauplion as he went to church . The Maniots continued causing trouble and defeated two Bavarian armies King Otto sent against them before they were subdued only after some of the leaders were bribed . This ended the Maniots ' independence and they were forced to pay taxes . 
 = La Peau de chagrin = 
 La Peau de chagrin ( French pronunciation : ​ [ la po də <unk> ̃ ] , The Magic Skin or The Wild Ass 's Skin ) is an 1831 novel by French novelist and playwright Honoré de Balzac ( 1799 – 1850 ) . Set in early 19th @-@ century Paris , it tells the story of a young man who finds a magic piece of shagreen that fulfills his every desire . For each wish granted , however , the skin shrinks and consumes a portion of his physical energy . La Peau de chagrin belongs to the Études philosophiques group of Balzac 's sequence of novels , La Comédie humaine . 
 Before the book was completed , Balzac created excitement about it by publishing a series of articles and story fragments in several Parisian journals . Although he was five months late in delivering the manuscript , he succeeded in generating sufficient interest that the novel sold out instantly upon its publication . A second edition , which included a series of twelve other " philosophical tales " , was released one month later . 
 Although the novel uses fantastic elements , its main focus is a realistic portrayal of the excesses of bourgeois materialism . Balzac 's renowned attention to detail is used to describe a gambling house , an antique shop , a royal banquet , and other locales . He also includes details from his own life as a struggling writer , placing the main character in a home similar to the one he occupied at the start of his literary career . The central theme of La Peau de chagrin is the conflict between desire and longevity . The magic skin represents the owner 's life @-@ force , which is depleted through every expression of will , especially when it is employed for the acquisition of power . Ignoring a caution from the shopkeeper who offers him the skin , the protagonist greedily surrounds himself with wealth , only to find himself miserable and decrepit at the story 's end . 
 La Peau de chagrin firmly established Balzac as a writer of significance in France . His social circle widened significantly , and he was sought eagerly by publishers for future projects . The book served as the catalyst for a series of letters he exchanged with a Polish baroness named Ewelina Hańska , who later became his wife . It also inspired <unk> Klebe 's opera Die <unk> Wünsche . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1830 Honoré de Balzac had only begun to achieve recognition as a writer . Although his parents had persuaded him to make his profession the law , he announced in 1819 that he wanted to become an author . His mother was distraught , but she and his father agreed to give him a small income , on the condition that he dedicate himself to writing , and deliver to them half of his gross income from any published work . After moving into a tiny room near the Bibliothèque de l 'Arsenal in Paris , Balzac wrote for one year , without success . Frustrated , he moved back to his family in the suburb of <unk> and borrowed money from his parents to pursue his literary ambitions further . He spent the next several years writing simple potboiler novels , which he published under a variety of pseudonyms . He shared some of his income from these with his parents , but by 1828 he still owed them 50 @,@ 000 francs . 
 He published for the first time under his own name in 1829 . Les Chouans , a novel about royalist forces in Brittany , did not succeed commercially , but it made Balzac known in literary circles . He achieved a major success later the same year when he published La Physiologie du mariage , a treatise on the institution of marriage . Bolstered by its popularity , he added to his fame by publishing a variety of short stories and essays in the magazines Revue de Paris , La Caricature , and La Mode . He thus made connections in the publishing industry that later helped him to obtain reviews of his novels . 
 At the time , French literary appetites for fantastic stories had been whetted by the 1829 translation of German writer E. T. A. Hoffmann 's collection Fantastic Tales ; the gothic fiction of England 's Ann Radcliffe ; and French author Jules Janin 's 1829 novel L <unk> Mort et la Femme <unk> ( The Dead Donkey and the <unk> Woman ) . Although he planned a novel in the same tradition , Balzac disliked the term " fantastic " , referring to it once as " the vulgar program of a genre in its first flush of newness , to be sure , but already too much worn by the mere abuse of the word " . 
 The politics and culture of France , meanwhile , were in upheaval . After reigning for six controversial years , King Charles X was forced to abdicate during the July Revolution of 1830 . He was replaced by Louis @-@ Philippe , who named himself " King of the French " ( rather than the usual " King of France " ) in an attempt to distance himself from the Ancien Régime . The July Monarchy brought an entrenchment of bourgeois attitudes , in which Balzac saw disorganization and weak leadership . 
 = = Writing and publication = = 
 The title La Peau de chagrin first appeared in print on 9 December 1830 , as a passing mention in an article Balzac wrote for La Caricature under the pseudonym Alfred <unk> . His scrapbook includes the following note , probably written at the same time : " L <unk> d 'une <unk> qui <unk> la vie . Conte oriental . " ( " The invention of a skin that represents life . Oriental story . " ) One week later , he published a story fragment called " Le Dernier Napoléon " in La Caricature , under the name " Henri B ... " . In it , a young man loses his last Napoleon coin at a Parisian gambling house , then continues to the Pont Royal to drown himself . During this early stage , Balzac did not think much of the project . He referred to it as " a piece of thorough nonsense in the literary sense , but in which [ the author ] has sought to introduce certain of the situations in this hard life through which men of genius have passed before achieving anything " . Before long , though , his opinion of the story improved . 
 By January 1831 Balzac had generated enough interest in his idea to secure a contract with publishers Charles Gosselin and Urbain <unk> . They agreed on 750 copies of an octavo edition , with a fee of 1 @,@ 125 francs paid to the author upon receipt of the manuscript – by mid @-@ February . Balzac delivered the novel in July . 
 During the intervening months , however , he provided glimpses of his erratic progress . Two additional fragments appeared in May , part of a scheme to promote the book before its publication . " Une <unk> " , published in the Revue des deux mondes , describes an orgiastic feast that features constant bantering and discussion from its bourgeois participants . The other fragment , " Le Suicide d 'un poète " , was printed in the Revue de Paris ; it concerns the difficulties of a would @-@ be poet as he tries to compensate for his lack of funds . Although the three fragments were not connected into a coherent narrative , Balzac was excerpting characters and scenes from his novel @-@ in @-@ progress . 
 The novel 's delayed publication was a result of Balzac 's active social life . He spent many nights dining at the homes of friends , including novelist Eugène Sue and his mistress Olympe Pélissier , as well as the feminist writer George Sand and her lover Jules <unk> . Balzac and Pélissier had a brief affair , and she became the first lover with whom he appeared in public . Eventually he removed himself from Paris by staying with friends in the suburbs , where he committed himself to finishing the work . In late spring he allowed Sand to read a nearly @-@ finished manuscript ; she enjoyed it and predicted it would do well . 
 Finally , in August 1831 , La Peau de chagrin : Conte <unk> was published in two volumes . It was a commercial success , and Balzac used his connections in the world of Parisian periodicals to have it reviewed widely . The book sold quickly , and by the end of the month another contract had been signed : Balzac would receive 4 @,@ 000 francs to publish 1 @,@ 200 additional copies . This second edition included a series of twelve other stories with fantastic elements , and was released under the title Romans et contes philosophiques ( Philosophical Novels and Stories ) . A third edition , rearranged to fill four volumes , appeared in March 1833 . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 La Peau de chagrin consists of three sections : " Le Talisman " ( " The Talisman " ) , " La Femme sans cœur " ( " The Woman without a Heart " ) , and " L 'Agonie " ( " The Agony " ) . The first edition contained a Preface and a " <unk> " , which were excised from subsequent versions . A two @-@ page Epilogue appears at the end of the final section . 
 " Le Talisman " begins with the plot of " Le Dernier Napoléon " : A young man named Raphaël de Valentin wagers his last coin and loses , then proceeds to the river Seine to drown himself . On the way , however , he decides to enter an unusual shop and finds it filled with curiosities from around the world . The elderly shopkeeper leads him to a piece of shagreen hanging on the wall . It is inscribed with " Oriental " writing ; the old man calls it " Sanskrit " , but it is imprecise Arabic . The skin promises to fulfill any wish of its owner , shrinking slightly upon the fulfillment of each desire . The shopkeeper is willing to let Valentin take it without charge , but urges him not to accept the offer . Valentin waves away the shopkeeper 's warnings and takes the skin , wishing for a royal banquet , filled with wine , women , and friends . He is immediately met by acquaintances who invite him to such an event ; they spend hours eating , drinking , and talking . 
 Part two , " La Femme sans cœur " , is narrated as a flashback from Valentin 's point of view . He complains to his friend Émile about his early days as a scholar , living in poverty with an elderly landlord and her daughter Pauline , while trying fruitlessly to win the heart of a beautiful but aloof woman named Foedora . Along the way he is tutored by an older man named Eugène de Rastignac , who encourages him to immerse himself in the world of high society . Benefiting from the kindness of his landladies , Valentin maneuvers his way into Foedora 's circle of friends . Unable to win her affection , however , he becomes the miserable and destitute man found at the start of " Le Talisman " . 
 " L 'Agonie " begins several years after the feast of parts one and two . Valentin , having used the talisman to secure a large income , finds both the skin and his health dwindling . He tries to break the curse by getting rid of the skin , but fails . The situation causes him to panic , horrified that further desires will hasten the end of his life . He organizes his home to avoid the possibility of wishing for anything : his servant , Jonathan , arranges food , clothing , and visitors with precise regularity . Events beyond his control cause him to wish for various things , however , and the skin continues to recede . Desperate , the sickly Valentin tries to find some way of stretching the skin , and takes a trip to the spa town of Aix @-@ les @-@ Bains in the hope of recovering his vitality . 
 With the skin no larger than a periwinkle leaf , he is visited by Pauline in his room ; she expresses her love for him . When she learns the truth about the shagreen and her role in Raphaël 's demise , she is horrified . Raphaël cannot control his desire for her and she rushes into an adjoining room to escape him and so save his life . He pounds on the door and declares both his love and his desire to die in her arms . She , meanwhile , is trying to kill herself to free him from his desire . He breaks down the door , they consummate their love in a fiery moment of passion , and he dies . 
 = = Style = = 
 Although he preferred the term " philosophical " , Balzac 's novel is based upon a fantastic premise . The skin grants a world of possibility to Valentin , and he uses it to satisfy many desires . Pressured into a duel , for example , he explains how he need neither avoid his opponent 's gunshot nor aim his own weapon ; the outcome is inevitable . He fires without care , and kills the other man instantly . Elsewhere , the supernatural qualities of the skin are demonstrated when it resists the efforts of a chemist and a physicist to stretch it . 
 This inclusion of the fantastic , however , is mostly a framework by which the author discusses human nature and society . One critic suggests that " the story would be much the same without it " . Balzac had used supernatural elements in the potboiler novels he published under noms de plume , but their presence in Peau de chagrin signaled a turning point in his approach to the use of symbolism . Whereas he had used fantastic objects and events in earlier works , they were mostly simple plot points or uncomplicated devices for suspense . With La Peau de chagrin , on the other hand , the talisman represents Valentin 's soul ; at the same time , his demise is symbolic of a greater social decline . Balzac 's real foci in the 1831 novel are the power of human desire and the nature of society after the July Revolution . French writer and critic Félicien Marceau even suggests that the symbolism in the novel allows a purer analysis than the individual case studies of other Balzac novels ; by removing the analysis to an abstract level , it becomes less complicated by variations of individual personality . As an everyman , Valentin displays the essential characteristics of human nature , not a particular person 's approach to the dilemma offered by the skin . 
 In his Preface to the novel 's first edition , Balzac meditates on the usefulness of fantastic elements : " [ Writers ] invent the true , by analogy , or they see the object to be described , whether the object comes to them or they go toward the object ... Have men the power to bring the universe into their brain , or is their brain a talisman with which they abolish the laws of time and space ? " Critics agree that Balzac 's goal in La Peau de chagrin was the former . 
 = = = Realism = = = 
 The novel is widely cited as an important early example of the realism for which Balzac became famous . Descriptions of Paris are one example : the novel is filled with actual locations , including the Palais Royal and the Notre Dame Cathedral . The narration and characters allude repeatedly to art and culture , from Gioachino Rossini 's opera Tancredi to the statue of Venus de Milo . 
 The book 's third paragraph contains a long description of the process and purpose behind the ritual in gambling houses whereby " the law <unk> you of your hat at the outset . " The atmosphere of the establishment is described in precise detail , from the faces of the players to the " greasy " wallpaper and the tablecloth " worn by the friction of gold " . The emphasis on money evoked in the first pages – and its contrast with the decrepit surroundings – mirrors the novel 's themes of social organization and economic materialism . 
 The confluence of realist detail with symbolic meaning continues when Valentin enters the antique shop ; the store represents the planet itself . As he wanders about , he tours the world through the relics of its various epochs : " Every land of earth seemed to have contributed some stray fragment of its learning , some example of its art . " The shop contains a painting of Napoleon ; a Moorish <unk> ; an idol of the Tartars ; portraits of Dutch <unk> ; a bust of Cicero ; an Ancient Egyptian mummy ; an Etruscan vase ; a Chinese dragon ; and hundreds of other objects . The panorama of human activity reaches a moral fork in the road when the shopkeeper leads Valentin to Raphael 's portrait of Jesus Christ . It does not deter him from his goal , however ; only when he finds the skin does Valentin decide to abort his suicidal mission . In doing so , he demonstrates humanity favoring ego over divine salvation . 
 = = = Opening image = = = 
 At the start of the novel , Balzac includes an image from Laurence Sterne 's 1759 novel Tristram Shandy : a curvy line drawn in the air by a character seeking to express the freedom enjoyed " whilst a man is free " . Balzac never explained his purpose behind the use of the symbol , and its significance to La Peau de chagrin is the subject of debate . In his comprehensive review of La Comédie humaine , Herbert J. Hunt connects the " serpentine squiggle " to the " sinuous design " of Balzac 's novel . Critic Martin Kanes , however , suggests that the image symbolizes the impossibility of language to express an idea fully . This dilemma , he proposes , is directly related to the conflict between will and knowledge indicated by the shopkeeper at the start of the novel . 
 = = Themes = = 
 = = = Autobiography = = = 
 Balzac mined his own life for details in the first parts of La Peau de Chagrin , and he likely modeled the protagonist Raphaël de Valentin on himself . Details recounted by Valentin of his impoverished living quarters are autobiographical allusions to Balzac 's earliest days as an author : " Nothing could be uglier than this garret , awaiting its scholar , with its dingy yellow walls and odor of poverty . The roofing fell in a steep slope , and the sky was visible through chinks in the tiles . There was room for a bed , a table , and a few chairs , and beneath the highest point of the roof my piano could stand . " Although they allow for a degree of embellishment , biographers and critics agree that Balzac was drawing from his own experience . 
 Other parts of the story also derive from the author 's life : Balzac once attended a feast held by the Marquis de Las <unk> , who planned to launch a newspaper – the same situation in which Valentin finds himself after expressing his first wish to the talisman . Later , Valentin visits the opera armed with a powerful set of glasses that allow him to observe every flaw in the women on stage ( to guard against desire ) . These may also have been drawn from Balzac 's experience , as he once wrote in a letter about a set of " divine " opera glasses he ordered from the Paris Observatory . 
 More significant is the connection between the women in the novel and the women in Balzac 's life . Some critics have noted important similarities between Valentin 's efforts to win the heart of Foedora and Balzac 's infatuation with Olympe Pélissier . A scene in which Valentin hides in Foedora 's bedroom to watch her undress is said to come from a similar situation wherein Balzac secretly observed Pélissier . It 's probable that Pélissier was not the model for Foedora , however , since she accepted Balzac 's advances and wrote him friendly letters ; Foedora , by contrast , declares herself outside the reach of any interested lover . Critics agree that the " Woman without a Heart " described in the novel is a composite of other women Balzac knew . The character of Pauline , meanwhile , was likely influenced by another of Balzac 's mistresses , Laure de Berny . 
 = = = <unk> , <unk> , and savoir = = = 
 At the start of the book , the shopkeeper discusses with Valentin " the great secret of human life " . They consist of three words , which Balzac renders in capital letters : <unk> ( " to will " ) , <unk> ( " to be able " ) , and <unk> ( " to know " ) . Will , he explains , consumes us ; power ( or , in one translation , " to have your will " ) destroys us ; and knowledge soothes us . These three concepts form the philosophical foundation of the novel . 
 The talisman connects these precepts to the theory of vitalism ; it physically represents the life force of its owner , and is reduced with each exercise of the will . The shopkeeper tries to warn Valentin that the wisest path lies not in exercising his will or securing power , but in developing the mind . " What is folly " , he asks Valentin , " if not an excess of will and power ? " Overcome with the possibilities offered by the skin , however , the young man throws caution to the wind and embraces his desire . Upon grabbing the talisman , he declares : " I want to live with excess . " Only when his life force is nearly depleted does he recognize his mistake : " It suddenly struck him that the possession of power , no matter how enormous , did not bring with it the knowledge of how to use it ... [ he ] had had everything in his power , and he had done nothing . " 
 The will , Balzac cautions , is a destructive force that seeks only to acquire power unless tempered by knowledge . The shopkeeper presents a foil for Valentin 's future self , offering study and mental development as an alternative to consuming desire . Foedora also serves as a model for resistance to the corruption of will , insofar as she seeks at all times to excite desire in others while never giving in to her own . That Valentin is happiest living in the material squalor of his tiny garret – lost in study and writing , with the good @-@ hearted Pauline giving herself to him – underscores the irony of his misery at the end of the book , when he is surrounded with the fruits of his material desire . 
 = = = Society = = = 
 The novel extrapolates Balzac 's analysis of desire from the individual to society ; he feared that the world , like Valentin , was losing its way due to material excess and misguided priorities . In the gambling house , the orgiastic feast , the antique shop , and the discussions with men of science , Balzac examines this dilemma in various contexts . The lust for social status to which Valentin is led by Rastignac is emblematic of this excess ; the gorgeous but unattainable Foedora symbolizes the pleasures offered by high society . 
 Science offers no panacea . In one scene , a group of doctors offer a range of quickly formulated opinions as to the cause of Valentin 's feebleness . In another , a physicist and a chemist admit defeat after employing a range of tactics designed to stretch the skin . All of these scientific approaches lack an understanding of the true crisis , and are therefore doomed to fail . Although it is only shown in glimpses – the image of Christ , for example , painted by Valentin 's namesake , the Renaissance artist Raphael – Balzac wished to remind readers that Christianity offered the potential to temper deadly excess . After failing in their efforts to stretch the skin , the chemist declares : " I believe in the devil " ; " And I in God " , replies the physicist . 
 The corruption of excess is related to social disorganization in a description at the start of the final section . Physically feeble though living in absolute luxury , Raphaël de Valentin is described as retaining in his eyes " an extraordinary intelligence " with which he is able to see " everything at once " : 
 That expression was painful to see ... It was the inscrutable glance of helplessness that must perforce consign its desires to the depths of its own heart ; or of a miser enjoying in imagination all the pleasures that his money could procure for him , while he declines to lessen his hoard ; the look of a bound Prometheus , of the fallen Napoleon of 1815 , when he learned at the <unk> the strategical blunder that his enemies had made , and asked for twenty @-@ four hours of command in vain ... 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 The novel sold out immediately after going on sale , and was reviewed in every major Parisian newspaper and magazine . In some cases Balzac wrote the reviews himself ; using the name " Comte Alex de B — " , he announced that the book proved he had achieved " the stature of genius " . Independent reviews were less sweeping , but also very positive . Poet Émile Deschamps praised the rhythm of the novel , and the religious commentator Charles Forbes René de Montalembert indicated approvingly that it highlighted the need for more spirituality in society as a whole . Although some critics chastised Balzac for reveling in negativity , others felt it simply reflected the condition of French society . German writer Johann Wolfgang von Goethe declared it a shining example of the " incurable corruption of the French nation " . Critics argue about whether Goethe 's comments were praise for the novel or not . 
 This storm of publicity caused a flurry of activity as readers around France scrambled to obtain the novel . Balzac 's friend and La Caricature editor Charles <unk> wrote to the author one week after publication : " there is no getting hold of La Peau de chagrin . Grandville had to stop everything to read it , because the librarian sent round every half @-@ hour to ask if he had finished . " Friends near and far wrote to Balzac indicating their similar difficulties in locating copies . The second edition was released one month later , and it was followed by parodies and derivative works from other writers . Balzac 's friend Théophile Gautier included a comical homage in his 1833 story collection Les Jeunes @-@ France when , during a recreation of the feast from Balzac 's novel , a character says : " This is the point at which I 'm supposed to pour wine down my waistcoat ... It says so in black and white on page 171 of La Peau de chagrin ... And this is where I have to toss a 100 @-@ <unk> coin in the air to see whether or not there 's a God . " 
 The novel established Balzac as a prominent figure in the world of French literature . Publishers fought among themselves to publish his future work , and he became a mainstay on the list of invitation for social functions around Paris . Balzac took pride in his novel 's success , and declared to the editor of the journal L 'Avenir that " Elle est donc le point de départ de mon ouvrage " ( " This is the point of departure for my body of work " ) . Consistently popular even after his death , La Peau de chagrin was republished nineteen times between 1850 and 1880 . 
 When he developed his scheme for organizing all of his novels and stories into a single sequence called La Comédie humaine , Balzac placed La Peau de chagrin at the start of the section called Études philosophiques ( " Philosophical Studies " ) . Like the other works in this category – including the similarly autobiographical Louis Lambert ( 1832 ) – it deals with philosophy and the supernatural . But it also provides a bridge to the realism of the Études des mœurs ( " Study of Manners " ) , where the majority of his novels were located . 
 = = = L 'Étrangère = = = 
 The popularity of the novel extended to Ukraine , where a baroness named Ewelina Hańska read about Balzac 's novels in newspapers she received from Paris . Intrigued , she ordered copies of his work , and she read them with her cousins and friends around Volhynia . They were impressed by the understanding he showed toward women in La Physiologie du mariage , but felt that La Peau de chagrin portrayed them in a cruel and unforgiving light . Hańska wrote a letter to Balzac , signed it as L 'Étrangère ( " The Stranger " ) , and mailed it from Odessa on 28 February 1832 . 
 With no return address , Balzac was left to reply in the Gazette de France , with the hope that she would see the notice . She did not , but wrote again in November : " Your soul embraces centuries , monsieur ; its philosophical concepts appear to be the fruit of long study matured by time ; yet I am told you are still young . I would like to know you , but feel I have no need to do so . I know you through my own spiritual instinct ; I picture you in my own way , and feel that if I were to actually set eyes upon you , I should instantly exclaim , ' That is he ! ' " 
 Eventually she revealed herself to him , and they began a correspondence that lasted for fifteen years . Although she remained faithful to her husband Wacław , Mme. Hańska and Balzac enjoyed an emotional intimacy through their letters . When the baron died in 1841 , the French author began to pursue the relationship outside the written page . They wed in the town of Berdychiv on 14 March 1850 , five months before he died . 
 = = = Recurring characters = = = 
 Because it was among the first novels he released under his own name , Balzac did not use characters in La Peau de chagrin from previous works . He did , however , introduce several individuals who resurfaced in later stories . Most significant of these is Eugène de Rastignac , the older gentleman who tutors Valentin in the vicious ways of high society . Thirty pages into the writing of his 1834 novel Le Père Goriot , Balzac suddenly crossed out the name he had been using for a character – <unk> – and used Rastignac instead . The relationship between teacher and student in La Peau de chagrin is mirrored in Le Père Goriot , when the young Rastignac is guided in the ways of social realpolitik by the incognito criminal Vautrin . 
 Balzac used the character Foedora in three other stories , but eventually wrote her out of them after deciding on other models for social femininity . In later editions of La Peau de chagrin , he changed the text to name one of the bankers " <unk> " , whom he had introduced in L <unk> rouge ( 1831 ) . He also used the name Horace Bianchon for one of the doctors , thus connecting the book to the famous physician who appears in thirty @-@ one stories in La Comédie humaine . So vividly had the doctor been rendered that Balzac himself called out for Bianchon while lying on his deathbed . 
 The use of recurring characters lends Balzac 's work a cohesion and atmosphere unlike any other series of novels . It enables a depth of characterization that goes beyond simple narration or dialogue . " When the characters reappear " , notes the critic Samuel Rogers , " they do not step out of nowhere ; they emerge from the privacy of their own lives which , for an interval , we have not been allowed to see . " Although the complexity of these characters ' lives inevitably led Balzac to make errors of chronology and consistency , the mistakes are considered minor in the overall scope of the project . Readers are more often troubled by the sheer number of people in Balzac 's world , and feel deprived of important context for the characters . Detective novelist Arthur Conan Doyle said that he never tried to read Balzac , because he " did not know where to begin " . 
 = = = Influence = = = 
 Balzac 's novel was adapted for the libretto of <unk> Klebe 's 1959 opera Die <unk> Wünsche ( The Deadly Wishes ) . 1977 – 1978 the German composer Fritz Geißler composed Das <unk> after a libretto by Günther <unk> . In 1989 – 1990 the Russian composer Yuri <unk> wrote the ballet L ’ Os de chagrin ( The <unk> Bone ) , based on Balzac 's text , which included an opera @-@ interlude of the same name . In 1992 a biographic pseudo @-@ documentary in the form of an opera @-@ film based on his opera L <unk> de Chagrin ( « <unk> <unk> » , ru ) was released . 
 The novel has also been cited as a possible influence on Oscar Wilde for his 1890 novel The Picture of Dorian Gray , although this hypothesis is rejected by most scholars . The protagonist , Dorian Gray , acquires a magical portrait that ages while he remains forever youthful . 
 Russian literature specialist Priscilla Meyer maintains in her book How the Russians Read the French , that both La Peau de Chagrin and Pere Goriot were extensively paralleled , subverted and inverted , by Dostoevsky in Crime and Punishment . 
 In 1960 Croatian animator Vladimir <unk> made an animated short entitled <unk> <unk> ( The Piece of <unk> Leather ) inspired by Balzac 's novel . 
 Toward the end of his life , Austrian psychoanalyst Sigmund Freud felt a special connection to Balzac 's novel , since he believed that his world was shrinking like Valentin 's talisman . Diagnosed with a fatal tumor , Freud resolved to commit suicide . After re @-@ reading La Peau de chagrin , he said to his doctor : " This was the proper book for me to read ; it deals with shrinking and starvation . " The next day , his doctor administered a lethal dose of morphine , and Freud died . 
 In 2011 French director Marianne <unk> staged an adaptation of La Peau de Chagrin in London 's Holland Park . 
 = 2011 Helmand Province incident = 
 The 2011 Helmand Province incident was the killing , on 15 September 2011 , of an injured Taliban insurgent by Royal Marines . Three Royal Marines , known during their trial as Marines A , B , and C , were anonymously tried by court @-@ martial . On 8 November 2013 , Marines B and C were acquitted , but Marine A was found guilty of the murder of the Afghan combatant , in contravention of section 42 of the Armed Forces Act 2006 . This made him the first British soldier to be convicted of a battlefield murder whilst serving abroad since the Second World War . 
 On 5 December , Lord Chief Justice Lord Thomas and two other High Court judges lifted the existing anonymity order on Marine A , allowing him to be named as Sergeant Alexander Wayne Blackman . On 6 December , Blackman was sentenced to life imprisonment with a minimum term of 10 years , and dismissed with disgrace from the British Armed Forces . On 22 May 2014 , the Court of Appeal reduced his minimum term to 8 years . 
 On 19 December 2013 , the anonymity order on Marines B and C was also lifted by the Court , and they were named as Corporal Christopher Glyn Watson and Marine Jack Alexander Hammond . 
 On 28 October 2015 , the Ministry of Defence banned a large number of serving soldiers from attending a rally in support of Sergeant Blackman , saying that the event was a ' political protest ' . However , lawyers representing the rally organisers stated that was not the case , rather , the event was ' a show of support to one of our fellow Royal Marines and not a ' political protest . ' A related online government petition raised over 100 @,@ 000 signatures calling for Sergeant Blackman 's immediate release stating that the soldier had been condemned for defending his country . Within hours of the MOD 's decision Michael Fallon , Minister for Defence , put out a government statement saying that the UK would maintain military operations in Afghanistan for the foreseeable future . 
 = = Murder = = 
 The incident took place in Helmand Province during Operation Herrick 14 , part of the British effort in the War in Afghanistan . Blackman , of 42 Commando , Royal Marines , was part of a Marine patrol that came across an Afghan fighter in a field wounded by Apache Helicopter gunfire . Blackman ordered the Afghan to be moved out of sight of the British Persistent Ground Surveillance System , a camera on a balloon above British Forward Operating Base <unk> , Helmand , covering the area Blackman 's patrol had been sent to . Video evidence played at the Marines ' subsequent trial shows some of the patrol dragging the man across the field and then kicking him . Blackman ordered Marine B and C to stop administering first aid to the insurgent and eventually shot the man in the chest with a 9 mm pistol , saying : " Shuffle off this mortal coil , you cunt . It 's nothing you wouldn 't do to us . " He then added : " I just broke the Geneva Convention . " 
 = = Criminal trial and sentencing = = 
 After the 15 September incident , Blackman continued with his tour of duty , leaving Helmand Province in late October 2011 . On 13 October 2012 , at the decision of the Service Prosecution Authority , Marines A – E were charged with the murder of the unnamed Afghan insurgent . The lead came after British civilian police discovered suspicious video footage on a serviceman 's laptop . Marines D and E had charges against them dropped on 5 February 2013 . Marines A , B and C first appeared in court in August 2013 , where they entered a not @-@ guilty plea . The military trial of Marines A , B and C , protected from view in court behind a screen because of an anonymity order , began on 23 October 2013 and lasted two weeks . Their court @-@ martial board ( equivalent to a jury in the civilian justice system ) was seven members strong , instead of the five used for less serious cases . 
 The verdict ( 8 November 2013 ) and sentence ( 6 December 2013 ) were both delivered at the Military Court Centre in Bulford , Wiltshire . The judge advocate ( the civilian judge heading up the panel at a court @-@ martial ) was Judge Advocate General Jeff Blackett . The verdict carried with it a mandatory life sentence , so it was only in the judge advocate 's and court @-@ martial board 's power to decide on the minimum sentence once the board had found Blackman guilty . He was sentenced to a minimum of 10 years in prison . On 22 May 2014 , at the Courts Martial Appeal Court , its most senior judge , Lord Chief Justice Lord Thomas , upheld the life sentence , but reduced Blackman 's minimum term to 8 years . 
 = = <unk> orders = = 
 Running in parallel to the Marines ' criminal trial were legal proceedings relating to the anonymity of the defendants . In the autumn of 2012 , Judges Advocate <unk> and Blackett issued anonymity orders for the Marine defendants due to the risk that , once named , the defendants would become targets for terrorists . The move had been opposed by elements of the UK media . A lawyer for the Press Association argued that anonymity orders should not be issued in this case because , firstly , British military award recipients named in the media had not been previously targeted ; and , secondly , that the names of those British service personnel investigated following the death of Baha Mousa had not been similarly protected . The 2012 anonymity orders were upheld at the beginning of the trial in October 2013 . The order was lifted for Blackman ( hitherto Marine A ) on 5 December 2013 by the High Court . The most senior figure involved in that verdict was Lord Chief Justice Lord Thomas . The same ruling had it that the identities of Marines B and C also be revealed unless they submit an appeal to the Supreme Court . No such appeal was lodged within the set deadline , and so , on 19 December 2013 , Marine B was named as Corporal Christopher Glyn Watson and Marine C was named as Marine Jack Alexander Hammond . The anonymity of Marines D and E was upheld on 19 December " pending any further order by the Judge Advocate General " . 
 Jeff Blackett also restricted public access to the evidence used at the trial , releasing on 8 November stills , audio clips and transcripts from the serviceman 's video that was played to the court @-@ martial board , but ruling that the full video itself not be released , since doing so " would increase the threat of harm to British service personnel . " On 5 December 2013 , the Court Martial Appeal Court upheld the earlier decisions prohibiting the release of the video footage of the attack and some of the stills from it . The Court stated , however , that the prohibition was to prevent the material being used for radicalisation , rather than it posing a risk to the life of the defendants . 
 = = Reactions = = 
 The legal proceedings relating to the Marines garnered widespread British public and media attention . 
 Reacting to Marine A 's guilty verdict , Royal Marines Brigadier Bill Dunham called the murder a " shocking and appalling aberration " that was " not consistent with the ethos , values and standards of the Royal Marines " , but was nevertheless an " isolated incident " . General Sir Mike Jackson said he was " saddened " by the case . 
 Marine A 's guilty verdict led to a showing of public support for the Marine , with people creating social media groups and online petitions alternately asking that he be given a lenient sentence and calling for his <unk> Daily Telegraph supported one Change.org petition for leniency . 
 When Blackman was sentenced to 10 years , General Sir Nick Houghton called his actions a " heinous crime " and commented that " murder is murder " . By contrast , Blackman 's commanding officer , Lieutenant Colonel Simon Chapman , 42 Commando , said in a letter read to the court that Blackman had had a " momentary ... lapse of judgment " and was " not a bad man " , and added that Blackman had his " full support " . Blackman himself said in a statement that he was " devastated " and " very sorry for any damage caused to the Royal Marines " . 
 In September 2015 Colonel Oliver Lee , commanding officer of 45 Commando , resigned in protest of Blackman 's treatment . 
 = Thomas Wilcher = 
 Thomas Wilcher is a high school athletic coach and teacher who was previously a National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) Division I track and field national champion in the indoor 55 m hurdles and a three @-@ time NCAA All @-@ American in track and field for the University of Michigan . Wilcher was also a running back for the Michigan Wolverines football team from 1983 – 1986 . In his redshirt senior year , he was a member of the Big Ten Conference football champion team as well as a 110 m hurdles Big Ten individual champion . 
 In high school , Wilcher was a Michigan High School Athletic Association ( MHSAA ) record @-@ setting hurdler and four @-@ time All @-@ American . As an athlete , he is a ten @-@ time MHSAA track and field champion and a two @-@ time Michigan High School Track and Cross Country Athlete of the Year award winner . He was also a Junior Olympics champion in the 110 m hurdles and an All @-@ state and All @-@ American tailback in football . He was also an All @-@ City swimmer . 
 As of 2013 , Wilcher is the head coach for the football team and the boys ' track & field team as well as the physical education teacher at Cass Technical High School in Detroit . As a boys ' track coach , he is a three @-@ time MHSAA team track and field champion , and his school has also twice been the MHSAA runner up . In his role as a football coach , he is the current MHSAA Division 1 champion and a former Detroit Free Press Coach of the Year , who once convinced Vernon Gholston , the 2007 Big Ten Conference Defensive lineman of the year and 2008 NFL Draft sixth overall pick , to try playing football and to return to the sport after quitting . His 2010 and 2013 teams advanced to the MHSAA semifinals and 2011 and 2012 teams won back @-@ to @-@ back Division 1 championship games . 
 = = High school = = 
 At Detroit Central High School , in track and field , he was a four @-@ time All @-@ American , ten @-@ time MHSAA champion ( three @-@ time team , four @-@ time relay , three @-@ time individual ) and Michigan High School Track and Cross Country Athlete of the Year award winner in both 1981 and 1982 . He led Detroit Central to three consecutive state MHSAA Class A championships as a team from 1980 – 1982 . As a sophomore in 1980 , he was the anchor of the Class A state champion 4 × 440 yard relay race team . As a junior in 1981 , he won the MHSAA Class A 120 @-@ yard ( 110 m ) high hurdles , as well as participated on the 4 × 440 and 4 × 110 MHSAA champions . As a senior , he won both the low hurdles ( 300 m ) and high hurdles ( 110 m ) as well as participated on the state champion 4 × 100 meter MHSAA champions . His time of 13 @.@ 5 in the 110 metre hurdles was the state all class record from 1981 – 1986 and continues to be tied for the second fastest time in state high school history . His 1982 time of 13 @.@ 6 seconds continues to be the fastest 110 meter hurdles time ever run at the MHSAA state championship meet . Although not officially recognized as a record due to metric conversions from yards to meters , the 1982 time of 41 @.@ 7 in the 4 × 100 is considered indistinguishable from the official record and is described as a notable performance according to state records . 
 Nationally , he was the number one ranked scholastic high hurdler as a junior as well as the number one ranked long ( low ) hurdler as a senior and was undefeated by high school athletes in both years in the respective events . As a junior , he won the 1981 AAU Junior Olympic Games in the high hurdles ( By some accounts he was an AAU Junior champion in 1982 ) . As a senior , he won the International Prep and Golden West low hurdle races . He was timed as fast as 13 @.@ 48 seconds and 13 @.@ 28 ( wind @-@ aided ) . In addition to his track accolades , he was an All @-@ state and All @-@ American tailback and All @-@ City swimmer . 
 Some sources regard his 13 @.@ 2 time in the 1982 AAU Junior Olympic Men 110 Meter Hurdles Young event a national record as of May 2013 . As of 2009 , the AAU considered it to be the national record . However , as of 2013 , AAU regarded Booker <unk> 's July 27 , 2008 13 @.@ 41 time to be the junior Olympic record for the newly named 17 @-@ 18 division ( which was said to be formerly known as the Young division ) . 
 = = College = = 
 Wilcher was recruited to the University of Michigan by Thomas E. Moss , Sr. , the former Deputy Chief of Police for the Detroit Police Department . In 1986 , he won the NCAA indoor 55 meter hurdles Championship , and he placed fifth in the NCAA outdoor 110 m hurdles with a time of 13 @.@ 57 , earning both indoor and outdoor track & field All @-@ American honors . He had also placed third in the outdoor 110m hurdles in 1985 earning All @-@ American honors . In 1987 , he was the outdoor Big Ten Conference 110 meter hurdles champion and earned first team All @-@ Big Ten honors . Wilcher holds numerous Michigan Wolverines records in the high hurdles including both the team indoor 60 meters ( converted ) , team outdoor 110 meters , and Michigan indoor track building records . Wilcher 's personal best and team record time of 13 @.@ 52 seconds in the 110 meter hurdles came at the 1985 Penn Relays where he was also the event champion . He was the Big Ten winter sports athlete of the week in January 1986 for his hurdling performance . 
 In February 1985 , Wilcher was involved in an altercation stemming from an intramural basketball game . Thomas Wilcher incurred penalties of 72 hours of public service deferred sentence , US $ 429 court costs and restitution in Ann Arbor District Court . 
 Wilcher , who wore # 27 as a 6 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) 185 @-@ pound ( 84 kg ; 13 @.@ 2 st ) Wolverine , redshirted as a true freshman in 1982 and played <unk> in his second and third seasons . He earned varsity letters in football as a redshirt junior and redshirt senior for coach Bo Schembechler . He totaled 758 yards ( 693 m ) rushing and eight touchdowns as a tailback in the same backfield as Jamie Morris . However , he never caught a pass . In his final season , he totaled 397 rushing yards and six touchdowns . That year , he was a member of the 1986 Big Ten Conference football champions who went on to the 1987 Rose Bowl , but accumulated no statistics in the Rose Bowl . He accumulated statistics in eleven of the thirteen games played and started twice . He had also started one game in 1985 . In his best games , he rushed for 104 yards ( 95 m ) and a touchdown on 16 carries in a 34 – 3 win against the South Carolina Gamecocks football team on September 21 , 1985 , and he rushed for two touchdowns and 74 yards ( 68 m ) in Morris ' absence in a 34 – 17 win against the Wisconsin Badgers football team on October 4 , 1986 . His touchdowns were the first two in what became Schembechler 's 200th victory . On September 27 , 1986 , his seven @-@ yard ( 6 m ) touchdown run cemented a homecoming victory against the Florida State Seminoles football team by putting the team up 20 – 10 with 1 : 27 remaining . 
 After graduating , Wilcher competed for the University of Chicago Track Club while training for the United States Olympic Trials for the 1988 Summer Olympic Games . On May 8 , 1988 he won the Jesse Owens Classic with a 110 @-@ meter high hurdles time of 13 @.@ 70 . At the Olympic Trials on July 23 , 1988 at Indiana University Track and Field Stadium , his second @-@ round heat included Arthur Blake , Jack Pierce , and Greg Foster who placed first , second and third respectively as well as Tony Dees . 
 = = Coaching = = 
 Wilcher is the current football head coach at Cass Technical High School in Detroit , where entering the 2011 MHSAA semifinals , the team had compiled a 99 – 56 ( .639 ) record and competed in the MHSAA Class @-@ A playoffs ten times since he became head coach in 1997 . He was the 1998 Detroit Free Press High School Football Coach of the Year , with his Detroit City Class @-@ A runner @-@ up team . At Cass , some of his athletes have included Vernon Gholston , and Marko Cooper , who was 1999 All @-@ USA second team . One of the first star players he coached ( as an assistant coach ) was future Michigan Wolverines @-@ leading rusher and NFL @-@ athlete Clarence Williams . In 2007 , Joseph Barksdale was the Detroit News ' No. 1 Blue Chip Prospect , Parade All @-@ American , U.S. Army All @-@ American Bowl Participant ( East Roster ) , USA Today All @-@ USA High School First Team , The ESPN.com 150 , Rivals.com Top 100 for 2007 , Scout.com Hot 100 for 2007 , and SuperPrep All @-@ American . The 2010 team went 12 – 1 and lost 24 – 21 in the MHSAA Division I semifinals , when they fumbled on the 6 @-@ yard line on second @-@ and @-@ 4 with less than a minute remaining . The 2011 team won the state Division 1 championship by 49 – 13 margin against Detroit Catholic Central High School at Ford Field with a freshman quarterback , <unk> Campbell , who also plays basketball and runs track . The 2012 team won the third consecutive district championship and qualified for the state Division I championships . The 2012 team defended their championship by defeating Detroit Catholic Central High School 36 – 21 at Ford Field in a rematch of the prior year 's state championship match . In 2013 , Detroit Catholic Central upset Cass Tech in the state semifinals by a 28 – 0 score . The following year , Saline High School upset Cass Tech in the state semifinals 30 – 15 . 
 Wilcher is also the Cass boys ' track and field coach . The team won the MHSAA Class A track and field championships in 1994 , 1995 , and 1996 under Wilcher . The team was state runner up in the MHSAA Lower Peninsula Division 1 Championships in 2001 and 2002 . Among the track athletes he has trained are NCAA All @-@ American Pierre Vinson , and current Michigan Wolverine , Nick <unk> . 
 = = = Vernon Gholston = = = 
 Vernon Gholston did not play football at Cass until his sophomore year and did not play on defense ( at linebacker ) until his senior year . Gholston did not even see himself as a football player when he was in high school , yet he has gone on to become an Ohio State Buckeyes football defensive end , the 2007 Big Ten Conference Defensive lineman of the year and the sixth overall selection in the 2008 NFL Draft . According to Gholston , " It was between periods and I was going to my next class . . . .He thought I was actually somebody ’ s father walking down the hall . He asked me whom was I looking for . I was like , ' Nobody . I go here . ' He really couldn 't believe it . He kind of grabbed me at that point and put me on the team . " 
 A similar , although more <unk> , story of the recruitment of Gholston has been told by Wilcher : " He was walking down the hall with a Bible in his hands , " Wilcher said . " He was already built like a grown man ; he was all cut up ( like a bodybuilder ) . I asked him , ' Can I help you sir ? ' He looked around to see who I was talking to . I said , ' Are you looking for a student ? ' He said , ' No , I go here . ' He said he was a freshman . I thought he was lying . " When the defensive coordinator kicked Gholston off the team for being too soft , Wilcher went to his house and dragged him back into the program : " I told him I didn 't care if he wasn 't tough enough , he was going to play football for me , " Wilcher said . " I knew that he had desire to play . My only regret is that I didn 't put him at running back . I didn 't know how fast he was . " 
 = = Head coaching record = = 
 source : 
 = = Personal = = 
 He and his wife Crystal had a son Kishon and daughters Kaila and Kiersten . As of November 2013 Kishon is a redshirt sophomore cornerback for the Toledo Rockets . Kaila was the 2012 Detroit Public School League champion in the 300 meter dash . 
 = Typhoon Krovanh ( 2003 ) = 
 Typhoon Krovanh , known in the Philippines as Typhoon Niña , was a moderate tropical cyclone that caused a swath of damage stretching from the Philippines to Vietnam in August 2003 . The fifteenth named storm and sixth typhoon in the western Pacific that year , Krovanh originated from a tropical disturbance within the monsoon trough on August 13 . Despite rather favorable conditions , the initial tropical depression did not intensify significantly and degenerated into a remnant low on August 18 . However , these remnants were able to reorganize and the system was reclassified as a tropical cyclone a day later . Intensification was rather rapid upon the storm 's reformation – the depression reached tropical storm status on August 20 and then typhoon intensity two days later . Shortly after , Krovanh made landfall on Luzon at peak intensity with winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . The typhoon emerged into the South China Sea as a much weaker tropical storm , though it was able to restrengthen over warm waters . Once again at typhoon intensity , Krovanh clipped Haiyan before moving over the Leizhou Peninsula on its way to a final landfall near Cẩm Phả , Vietnam on August 25 . Quick weakening due to land interaction occurred as Krovanh moved across northern Vietnam , where the storm met its demise the following day . 
 Krovanh first struck the Philippines , resulting in heavy rainfall and displacing approximately 1 @,@ 000 families . The flooding caused severe damage and killed one person . Krovanh 's effects were much more severe in China . In Hong Kong , eleven people were injured and isolated flooding occurred as a result of the typhoon 's outer rainbands . However , Guangdong Province , Hainan Province , and Guangxi were the Chinese regions most extensively impacted . The typhoon brought record wind gusts into Guangxi . In those three regions combined , 13 @,@ 000 homes were estimated to have collapsed and a large swath of farmland was damaged . Two people were killed in China and economic losses approximated at ¥ 2 @.@ 1 billion ( US $ 253 million ) . Due to its positioning and track , of all areas in Vietnam only the country 's more northern regions were impacted by Krovanh . Flash flooding occurred in those regions , and 1 @,@ 000 homes were flattened . One person was killed and five others were injured in Vietnam . Overall , the typhoon was responsible for the deaths of four persons . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origin of Typhoon Krovanh can be traced back to an area of persistent convection well east of Chuuk State on August 13 . Over the course of the day the disturbance gradually consolidated within favorable atmospheric conditions , and at 1800 UTC that day the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) assessed the system to have organized sufficiently to be classified as a tropical depression . Shower activity was suppressed by a nearby upper @-@ level low for much of the storm 's early existence ; however , at 0600 UTC on August 15 , the system was classified by the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) as a tropical depression . The depression tracked northwestward under the influence of a nearby ridge . Strengthening and development of the tropical cyclone was very minimal over the next few days , and on August 18 , both tracking agencies discontinued monitoring the system due to the lack of an identifiable low @-@ level circulation center . 
 Redevelopment of the disturbance was a possibility following its degeneration , and on August 19 , convection once again increased , prompting the JTWC to resume monitoring the system as a tropical depression at 0900 UTC , with the JMA following suit nine hours later . Due to slight wind shear , the depression 's circulation center remained slightly displaced from the stronger convection . At 0600 UTC on August 20 , the JTWC determined that the disturbance had intensified to reach tropical storm status . Upon the 1200 UTC upgrade to such an intensity by the JMA , the tropical cyclone was assigned the name Krovanh . Subsequently following reclassification , Krovanh began to quickly intensify as it tracked in a somewhat southwest bearing . By August 21 , the tropical storm had begun to develop a banding eye feature . At 0600 UTC that day , the JMA upgraded Krovanh to severe tropical storm intensity , whilst the JTWC indicated that the storm intensified into a typhoon . On August 22 , the JMA reassessed Krovanh as a typhoon and determined that the storm had reached its peak intensity with winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . Meanwhile , the JTWC analyzed the storm to have peaked with one @-@ minute sustained winds of 165 km / h ( 105 mph ) ; this was followed by the storm making landfall on Luzon , just north of Palanan , Isabela , at 1115 UTC later that day . 
 Land interaction during Krovanh 's passage of Luzon significantly weakened the cyclone , and upon the system 's reemergence into the South China Sea by 2000 UTC on August 22 , Krovanh was classified as only a tropical storm by the JMA . Redevelopment was rather rapid following emergence , and just four hours later the storm was redesignated as a severe tropical storm . On August 24 , the storm began to develop tight banding and reformed its prior banding eye feature , which later organized into a well defined eye . Later that day Krovanh clipped the northeastern coast of Hainan before crossing the Leizhou Peninsula on August 25 . During this time , the JMA upgraded Krovanh back to typhoon intensity and indicated that the storm was reaching a secondary peak in strength . The JTWC indicated a similar development as the typhoon traversed the Gulf of Tonkin . However , according to the JMA , Krovanh waned into a severe tropical storm shortly before the storm made its final landfall on Cẩm Phả , Vietnam at approximately 1500 UTC on August 25 . Over land , Krovanh deteriorated rapidly , and both agencies ceased monitoring the system on August 26 while it was well northwest of Hanoi . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 = = = China = = = 
 As Krovanh was approaching the Philippines , Taiwan 's Central Weather Bureau cautioned the residents of the island against strong winds and warning ships in the Bashi Channel . After the typhoon entered the South China Sea , sea warnings were issued for areas offshore Hainan . Additional warnings were issued and expanded as Krovanh moved closer to the Chinese coast . In preparation for the storm , shipping routes across the Qiongzhou Strait were suspended , while security measures for river dykes and reservoirs were strengthened in both Hainan and Guangdong . In Hong Kong , the Hong Kong Observatory issued a Standby Signal No. 1 on August 23 , which was upgraded to a Strong Wind Signal No. 3 at around noon the following day . All warning signals in Hong Kong were discontinued on August 25 . In Guangzhou , 15 flights were cancelled in anticipation of Krovanh , stranding 500 passengers . 
 In Hong Kong , Krovanh 's outer rainbands brought squally weather , coupled with strong winds . Rainfall in the Hong Kong area peaked at 232 mm ( 9 @.@ 13 in ) on High Island , Hong Kong , much of which occurred on August 25 . Other rainfall totals of at least 70 mm ( 2 @.@ 75 in ) were measured over a majority of the country . Gusts peaked at 144 km / h ( 89 mph ) on Cheung Chau . The strong winds and gusts uprooted trees and caused scaffolding at an estate to collapse . In the province , 11 people were injured due to effects from Krovanh . A ferry service and four bus routes were temporarily suspended following the storm . 
 Guangdong and Hainan provinces , as well as Guangxi , were the regions of China most heavily impacted by Krovanh . In Zhanjiang , Guangdong , two people were killed . Economic losses from western Guangdong alone amounted to ¥ 1 @.@ 2 billion ( US $ 144 million ) . In Hainan , heavy rainfall was reported , peaking at 394 mm ( 15 @.@ 51 in ) in Jinjiang . Roughly 1 @,@ 700 homes collapsed and 16 reservoirs were contaminated and destroyed . Widespread power outages occurred , impacting several neighborhoods . Strong winds also toppled coconut palms . Direct economic losses in the province totaled ¥ 683 million ( US $ 82 million ) . Beihai City was the city most severely affected in Guangxi . Beginning on August 25 , the entire population of Beihai temporarily suffered a water shortage . In the city alone , losses reached ¥ 988 million ( US $ 119 million ) . In <unk> Island , a weather station reported a wind gust of 190 km / h ( 119 mph ) ; this would be the strongest wind gust reported in Guangxi since 1982 . Overall , a total of 13 @,@ 000 residences collapsed and 140 @,@ 000 ha ( 350 @,@ 000 acres ) of farmland were impacted across China . The total economic loss was in excess of ¥ 2 @.@ 1 billion ( US $ 253 million ) . 
 = = = Elsewhere = = = 
 Striking Luzon in the Philippines on August 22 , Krovanh brought heavy precipitation . Rainfall in the Philippines peaked at 342 mm ( 13 @.@ 46 in ) in Dagupan . Other high rainfall totals included 263 mm ( 10 @.@ 35 in ) in Baguio and 203 mm ( 7 @.@ 99 in ) in Iba , Zambales . The flooding rains displaced 1000 families on the archipelago and killed a girl . Although full damage reports were never released , damages were estimated at ₱ 4 @.@ 3 million ( US $ 73 @,@ 000 ) and of " severe extent " . 
 Typhoon Krovanh was the strongest tropical cyclone to affect Vietnam in 2003 . One person was killed in <unk> <unk> after their house collapsed . Hundreds of other homes were unroofed and traffic was halted . Trees were also uprooted and power outages resulted from strong winds , particularly in Quảng Ninh Province . Heavy rains triggered flash flooding in northern Vietnam . Five additional persons were injured by flying debris . About 1 @,@ 000 homes in Vietnam were flattened by the storm . 
 = A Love Surreal = 
 A Love Surreal is the third studio album by American neo soul singer Bilal , released on February 26 , 2013 , by eOne . He recorded the album for five months at various studios with most of the recording crew from his 2010 album Airtight 's Revenge , including producer Shafiq Husayn , drummer Steve McKie , and pianist Robert Glasper . Bilal wrote and produced most of the album , which he titled in reference to his unreleased album Love for Sale and John Coltrane 's 1965 album A Love Supreme . 
 A Love Surreal explores different stages of love in a cycle of slow @-@ burning songs that Bilal deliberately wrote for female listeners . Its songs eschew the personal and societal themes of Airtight 's Revenge in favor of upbeat songs about cultivating a romance and meditative laments on its dissolution . Bilal wanted to make the album sound multidimensional and drew on the surrealist art of Salvador Dalí for inspiration . 
 Bilal premiered the album 's music in his performance at World Cafe Live in Philadelphia . Its lead single " Back to Love " was released on December 11 , 2012 . A Love Surreal received universal acclaim from music critics , who praised Bilal 's expressive singing , clever songwriting , and mellow musical style . 
 = = Background = = 
 After writing his 2010 album Airtight 's Revenge with themes intended for male listeners , Bilal wrote A Love Surreal for female listeners with lyrics about love . He described writing the album as a surrealistic exploration of love . He was inspired by the surrealism of Spanish painter Salvador Dalí , after viewing a 2005 Salvador Dalí exhibit at the Philadelphia Museum of Art . He also drew on the shelving of his unreleased album Love for Sale , which inspired A Love Surreal 's title . He elaborated on the inspiration behind the album in an interview for Okayplayer : 
 Bilal was motivated to sign with eOne by the artistic freedom they had given fellow recording artist Dwele . The album 's title was also inspired by John Coltrane 's 1965 album A Love Supreme . 
 = = Recording = = 
 After preparing it on his Logic recording software , Bilal recorded A Love Surreal in five months , which he said was the fastest he had recorded an album . Recording sessions for the album took place at Brooklyn Recording and Breeding Grounds Studio in Brooklyn , New York ; <unk> Music and Lamont Caldwell 's Bedroom in Clifton , New Jersey ; Pine Studios in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania ; and Prime Rib Productions and The Krusty Lab in Los Angeles , California . He recorded his vocals at a beach @-@ side studio in Los Angeles . 
 Bilal originally intended to record A Love Surreal as an extended play when he entered the studio , but , according to him , " it was just so easy that the music started to flow ... by the fifth day we were like ' damn , we made a mistake and wrote five extra songs " . He worked with most of the recording crew from Airtight 's Revenge and produced 10 of the album 's 14 songs . Bilal viewed that his role as a producer had progressed from his 2001 debut 1st Born Second to A Love Surreal , which he felt best conveyed his vision for the album 's sound . 
 Bilal recorded the song " Butterfly " with Robert Glasper , a friend of his since college who had played on each of his albums . Bilal had previously worked with Glasper on the latter 's 2012 album Black Radio . For the song " Back to Love " , Bilal originally programmed the music 's drums on his Logic , but decided to record them live after bringing in other musicians at Pine Studios in Philadelphia . While recording " Astray " , he persuaded his drummer to play in the parking lot and record him live , which he recalled in an interview for The Huffington Post : " I just had this feeling in my head like , ' man , I want this shit to feel big ! ' And when I would park my car in the parking lot , the acoustics in there made you feel like was a Catholic church with all of the sounds echoing off of everything . " 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 The album comprises a cycle of slow @-@ burning songs about different stages of love , including infatuation , seduction , romance , estrangement , longing , renewal , and existential peace . Bilal 's intimate lyrics address love 's ephemeral nature and how to sustain happiness . It veers between danceable , upbeat songs about cultivating a new romance and bluesy , meditative songs about how romances dissolve . In contrast to Airtight 's Revenge , A Love Surreal deals more with feelings of lust and flirting rather than personal and societal issues . 
 The album is also lighter and mellower musically than its predecessor , and deemphasizes electronics in its production . The songs feature subtle melodic hooks , muted drum programming , glimmering keyboards , sparse indie rock guitars , and defined jazz piano . Evan Rytlewski of Paste observes unconventional applications of jazz throughout A Love Surreal , but characterizes it as a neo soul album due to its " heady , post @-@ Dilla hip @-@ hop thump and periodic psychedelic drift " . The songs are interspersed with long instrumental sections during which Bilal croons wordlessly , while doubling and tripling his voice . His singing veers between a soulful baritone and supple falsetto . Bilal 's sense of melody and harmony is informed by past operatic and jazz training , and his reverence for atmospheric psychedelic soul albums . 
 The album 's opening series of songs have straightforward lyrics . On " Back to Love " , Bilal flatters his date 's shoes and is backed by a bubbling funk groove . The song draws on the music of Prince , while the jazz guitar licks of " Winning Hand " draw on Steely Dan . " Climbing " has a rugged beat and a lyrical allusion to The Notorious B.I.G. ' s 1993 song " Party and Bullshit " . The middle section of the album explores broader emotions and themes of loss and lament . " Slipping Away " is a slow @-@ building meditation on loss , with sentimental music backing the narrator 's plea to a departing love . On the slow burning pop rock song " Lost for Now " , he comes to terms with being alone and leaves town , but finds salvation in " a smile that changes everything " as the song closes with a shimmer of cymbal . The stark ballad " Butterfly " is built around Bilal 's soaring falsetto and Glasper 's rippling piano . Its music explores jazz , and also features dreamy Moog accents . The album closes with lyrics about the promise of tomorrow : " Woke up this morning to the sound of a bluebird singing / Suddenly I knew just where to begin / Something so simple / How can it speak so loud to me ? " 
 = = Promotion = = 
 On December 6 , 2012 , Bilal released a free mixtape , The <unk> , on his Facebook page . " Back to Love " was released as the lead single from A Love Surreal on December 11 , 2012 . On January 8 , 2013 , a music video for the song was released online . Bilal premiered " West Side Girl " through his SoundCloud page on February 5 . He performed the album for the first time at World Cafe Live in Philadelphia on February 13 . A Love Surreal was released by eOne on February 26 , 2013 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 A Love Surreal received universal acclaim from music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 82 , based on 11 reviews . Allmusic 's Andy Kellman gave it four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half out of five stars and wrote that , although he has improved as a producer and songwriter , Bilal " remains supernaturally skilled and creative " as a vocalist , " swooping , diving , wailing , and sighing , all with complete command . " Phillip Mlynar of Spin said that the album " pleasingly " reveals Bilal 's production and songwriting skills , which he called " savvy " . Paste magazine 's Evan Rytlewski viewed it as his " mellowest , most unhurried album by a distance , yet it 's no less compelling for that lighter touch " , and asserted that , " for the first time in his career , Bilal no longer sounds like an artist with entirely too much to prove ; he 's just a great singer , backed by great players he puts to good use on a set of sticky , deceptively inventive songs " . Steve Jones of USA Today gave the album four out of four stars and wrote that " it 's time that the mainstream paid way more attention " to Bilal . 
 In her review for NPR , Ann Powers said that A Love Surreal " cultivates the stratospheric vibe " of Coltrane 's A Love Supreme and that Bilal 's ambition is " grounded in fierce intelligence and a commitment to letting stories unfold all the way to their sometimes sorrowful , sometimes orgasmic end . " Ken Capobianco of The Boston Globe called it " bracingly good " , " compelling music " that allows Bilal 's " falsetto to bring the intimate lyrics to life . " Jon Pareles , writing for The New York Times , said that his " full @-@ fledged " voice " needs no studio aid " and that the songs " tease and insinuate " with " meanderings [ that ] lead somewhere . " In a less enthusiastic review , Pitchfork Media 's Jayson Greene called it a " joy " to listen to Bilal " warp his voice into improbable shapes " , although he felt the album lacks any prominent melodies . Mikael Wood of the Los Angeles Times gave the album two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half out of four stars and felt that it lingers at the end with a series of slow jams and " atmospheric clutter " , even though its best songs " warrant the increased attention . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 • ( co . ) Co @-@ producer 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Curse of the Colonel = 
 Curse of the Colonel ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> no Noroi ) refers to an urban legend regarding a reputed curse placed on the Japanese Kansai @-@ based Hanshin Tigers baseball team by deceased KFC founder and mascot Colonel Harland Sanders . 
 The curse was said to be placed on the team because of the Colonel 's anger over treatment of one of his store @-@ front statues , which was thrown into the Dōtonbori River by celebrating Hanshin fans following their team 's victory in the 1985 Japan Championship Series . As is common with sports @-@ related curses , the Curse of the Colonel was used to explain the team 's subsequent 18 @-@ year losing streak . Some fans believed the team would never win another Japan Series until the statue had been recovered . They have appeared in the Japan Series three times since then , losing in 2003 , 2005 and 2014 . 
 Comparisons are often made between the Hanshin Tigers and the Boston Red Sox , who were said to be under the Curse of the Bambino until they won the World Series in 2004 and whose fans are also known for celebrating via destruction of property . The " Curse of the Colonel " has also been used as a bogeyman threat to those who would divulge the secret recipe of eleven herbs and spices that result in the unique taste of his chicken . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1985 Japan Series = = = 
 The Hanshin Tigers are located in Kansai , the second largest metropolitan area in Japan . They are considered the eternal underdogs of Nippon Professional Baseball , in opposition to the Yomiuri Giants of Tokyo , who are considered the kings of Japanese baseball . The devoted fans flock to the stadium no matter how badly the Tigers play in the league . 
 In 1985 , much to the nation 's surprise , the Hanshin Tigers faced the Seibu Lions and took their first and only victory in the Japan Series , largely due to the efforts of star slugger Randy Bass , an American playing for the team . 
 The fan base went wild , and a riotous celebration gathered at Ebisu Bridge in Dōtonbori , Osaka . There , an assemblage of supporters yelled the players ' names , and with every name , a fan resembling a member of the victorious team leaped from the bridge into the waiting canal . However , lacking someone to imitate MVP Randy Bass , the rabid crowd seized a plastic statue of Colonel Sanders ( like Bass , the Colonel had a beard and was not Japanese ) from a nearby KFC and tossed it off the bridge as an effigy . 
 According to the urban legend , this impulsive maneuver cost the team greatly , beginning the Curse of the Colonel , which states that the Tigers will not win the championship again until the statue is recovered . Subsequently , numerous attempts have been made to recover the statue , often as part of a variety TV show . Most of the statue was recovered in March 2009 . 
 = = = 18 @-@ year losing streak = = = 
 After their success in the 1985 series , the Hanshin Tigers began an 18 @-@ year losing streak placing last or next @-@ to @-@ last in the league . Brief rallies in 1992 and 1999 brought hope to fans , but they were soon followed with defeat . 
 During this time attempts were made to recover the statue , including sending divers down and dredging the river , but they all failed . Fans apologized to the store manager , but the statue remained in the canal and the Tigers " cursed " . 
 = = = 2002 World Cup = = = 
 Although the leap into Dōtonbori canal and the Curse of the Colonel is usually associated only with a Hanshin Tigers victory , in 2002 , when Japan beat Tunisia in the World Cup , some 500 fans jumped into the canal as a celebration , in spite of heavy police security . 
 In addition , a Colonel Sanders statue was taken from the storefront of a KFC in nearby <unk> , and its hands were cut off supposedly in imitation of Sharia law . 
 = = = 2003 Central League = = = 
 In 2003 , the Tigers had an unexpectedly strong season . Their chief rivals , the Yomiuri Giants , lost their star player Hideki Matsui to the New York Yankees , while the Tigers saw the return of pitcher Hideki Irabu back to NPB after playing with the Texas Rangers . The Tigers won the Central League to qualify for the Japan Series , and many newspapers speculated that the Curse of the Colonel had finally been broken . The Tigers lost the Japan Series , this time to the Fukuoka Daiei Hawks , so the curse is presumably intact . 
 Fans were enthusiastic about winning the Central League , and repeated the celebratory leap into Dōtonbori Canal . However , instead of the individual leapers representing the players , over 5 @,@ 300 fans plunged into the canal . 
 Many KFC outlets in Kobe and Osaka moved their Colonel Sanders statues inside until the series was over to protect them from rabid Tigers fans . The newly replaced Colonel Sanders statue in the Dōtonbori KFC branch was bolted down to prevent a repeat of the incident . 
 = = = = Death in the canal = = = = 
 For 24 @-@ year @-@ old Hanshin Tigers fan Masaya <unk> , the 2003 celebration was a tragedy . He drowned in the canal , with all reports being that he had been shoved in by the revelers . To prevent future incidents , the Osaka city council ordered the construction of a new <unk> bridge beginning in 2004 , which will make it more difficult for fans to take the celebratory leap should the Curse of the Colonel be broken and the Tigers win again . 
 = = = Recovery of statue = = = 
 The Colonel was finally discovered in the Dōtonbori River on March 10 , 2009 . Divers who recovered the statue at first thought it was only a large barrel , and shortly after a human corpse , but Hanshin fans on the scene were quick to identify it as the upper body of the long @-@ lost Colonel . The right hand and lower body were found next day , but the statue is still missing its glasses and left hand . It is said that the only way the curse can be lifted is by returning his long @-@ lost glasses and left hand . 
 The statue was later recovered ( with replacement of new glasses and hand ) and returned to the KFC Japan . As the KFC branch that the statue originally belongs to no longer existed , the statue was now placed in the branch near Koshien Stadium . 
 = Max Payne 2 : The Fall of Max Payne = 
 Max Payne 2 : The Fall of Max Payne is a third @-@ person shooter video game developed by Remedy Entertainment and published by Rockstar Games . The game is a sequel to Max Payne and is followed by the game Max Payne 3 . 
 In Max Payne 2 , the player controls Max Payne , a DEA agent for the New York City Police Department ( NYPD ) . Reinstated after the events of the previous game , he reunites with Mona Sax , they set out to resolve a conspiracy of death and betrayal . 
 Video game critics gave Max Payne 2 highly positive reviews . Praise focused on its action and story , while criticism targeted its short length . Despite the positive reception , the game sold poorly , leading Rockstar Games ' parent company Take @-@ Two Interactive to cite Max Payne 2 's sales as a cause for the company 's <unk> finances of 2004 . Max Payne 2 received several industry awards , including Outstanding Art Direction at the Golden Satellite Awards 2004 , and Editors ' Choice Awards from GamePro , IGN , and GameSpy . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Max Payne 2 is a third @-@ person shooter , in which the player assumes the role of Max Payne , but also plays as Mona Sax in a few levels . Initially , the player 's weapon is a 9mm pistol . As they progress , players access other weapons including other handguns , shotguns , submachine guns , assault rifles , sniper rifles , and hand @-@ thrown weapons . To move the game along , the player is told what the next objective is through Max 's internal monologue , in which Max iterates what his next steps should be . 
 When first played , the game offers one difficulty level that is adjusted automatically if the game is too difficult for the player . For example , if the player 's character dies too many times , the enemies ' artificial intelligence is made less effective , while more health in the form of painkillers is made available . After completing the game once , other difficulty levels are unlocked . Two special game modes are also activated : New York Minute and Dead Man Walking . In New York Minute , the player is given a score based on the time taken to complete each level . The Dead Man Walking mode places Max in one of five scenarios , in which he must survive for as long as possible while fighting off endlessly respawning enemies . 
 Max Payne 2 allows the player to enable bullet time , a mode that slows time , while still allowing the player to aim in real @-@ time , to give the player more time to determine what they want to do . In this mode , the screen 's color changes to a sepia tone to act as a visual cue . When in use , the bullet time meter will decrease until it is either empty or the player disables bullet time mode . The meter will eventually increase when not in use , but can be replenished quickly by killing enemies . To simulate the bullet time effect , Max can also execute a shoot @-@ dodge maneuver . When the maneuver is performed , Max jumps in a direction specified by the player , and although Bullet Time is activated while Max is in mid @-@ air , this will not deplete the bullet time meter . The combat system has been improved for Max Payne 2 ; the player can now arm Max with a secondary weapon such as a grenade or Molotov cocktail , and when near an enemy , Max can perform a melee attack . AI players occasionally come to Max 's aid , although their death does not affect the gameplay or story . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Two years after the events of the first game , Max Payne has been reinstated as a detective in the NYPD . While investigating a series of murders by a group of hitmen known as the Cleaners , Max encounters Mona Sax , who was assumed dead at the end of the previous game . While following her lead , Mona is eventually arrested because of her crimes . She is taken in to the police station , despite Max 's protests . While at the station , Max overhears his new partner , Valerie Winterson , talking on the phone about Mona . Suddenly , the station is attacked by hitmen looking for Mona . Mona breaks out of her cell , and after fighting off the hitmen , Max and Mona begin hunting down the people responsible for the attack . Their search leads them to a construction site , where he and Mona defend themselves against the same hitmen . After their foes leave , Winterson arrives and holds Mona at gunpoint . Mona claims that Max 's partner is there to kill her , while Winterson claims that she is simply trying to arrest a fleeing fugitive . After several moments of consideration , Max fatally shoots Winterson , allowing Mona to escape . Before she dies , Winterson shoots Max , leading to his hospitalization . 
 After Max leaves the hospital , he finds Mona , and together , they begin to look for answers . When Max is kidnapped by his old associate , Vladimir Lem , head of the Russian mob , he learns that the Cleaners work for Lem , who used them to eliminate competition to his businesses . Max then learns that Lem is part of the secretive Inner Circle ; Senator Alfred Woden , the leader of the Inner Circle , had ensured that the charges against Max were dropped at the end of the last game . Lem plans to kill Woden and gain control of the Inner Circle . Max also learns that Mona is a hired gun for Woden , with orders to kill Lem and himself . Finally , Max discovers that Winterson was Lem 's mistress ; to avenge her death , Lem shoots Max and leaves him for dead in a burning building . Mona rescues Max , and together , they go to Woden 's mansion to save him from Lem . 
 At the mansion , Mona knocks Max to the ground in an attempt to follow her orders to kill him , but discovers that her feelings for him keep her from doing so . Lem then shoots Mona , after realizing that she will not kill Max . Woden then appears in a wheelchair , and lunges at Lem ; Woden is killed during the ensuing struggle . Max and Lem then fight while the mansion burns around them . Eventually , Lem is killed and Max returns to Mona 's side as the police arrive , and she dies in his arms . 
 The alternative ending is unlocked on the highest difficulty of the game . In it , Mona Sax survives . As to its canonical merit , Mona Sax ' survival is neither confirmed or debunked in the series ' third installment , or its attached graphic novels . 
 = = Development = = 
 Take @-@ Two Interactive issued a press release on December 5 , 2001 that announced its acquisition of the Max Payne franchise from Remedy Entertainment and Apogee Software for US $ 10 million in cash and 970 @,@ 000 shares of common stock , and its plans to release Max Payne 2 . On May 22 , 2002 , Take @-@ Two announced that they agreed to pay up to $ 8 million as incentive payments to Apogee Software and Remedy Entertainment to develop Max Payne 2 . On September 3 , 2003 , Take @-@ Two officially announced a release date of October 15 , 2003 for the game . 
 Originally modeled in Max Payne after the game 's writer Sam Lake , Max 's appearance was remodeled after professional actor Timothy Gibbs for Max Payne 2 ; James McCaffrey returned as the voice of Max . The game 's plot was written by Lake , who decided to write it as a film noir love story , as he felt that it suited Max 's persona the best . Lake hoped that the story would break new ground , noting , " At least it 's a step into the right direction . I 'd like nothing better than to see new and unexpected subject matters to find their way to games and stories told in games . " Lake remarked that basic , archetypal film noir elements found in many classics of the genre " can go a long way " when telling a story , and gave examples that included a hostile , crime @-@ ridden city ; a story that takes place late at night with heavy rain ; and a cynical , hard @-@ boiled detective down on his luck . Lake considered writing a sequel to Max Payne an " art of it 's [ sic ] own " . Since the setting and characters were already established , Lake decided that the primary goal of the sequel was " to keep what 's good and fix what was not so good " , and to take the story in surprising directions . The screenplay for the sequel ended up being three times longer than the one for Max Payne . Lake predicted that the more complex story would add to the game 's replay value . 
 The story , sometimes told through in @-@ game dialogue , is pushed forward with comic panels that play during cut scenes . The developers found comic panels to be more effective and less costly to use in the cut scenes than fully animated cinematics . They also noted that comic panels forced the player to interpret each panel for themselves , and " the nuances are there in the head of the reader [ ... ] it would be much harder to reach that level with in @-@ game or even prerendered cinematics . " The developers also found it easier to reorganize the comic panels if the plot needed to be changed while developing the game . 
 Max Payne 2 uses the same game engine as the one used in Max Payne , but with several significant upgrades . Even though the game only supports DirectX 8 @.@ 1 , the graphics in Max Payne 2 mimic those generated by DirectX 9 by making optimal use of effects such as reflection , refraction , shaders , and ghosting . The developers considered one particular scene in which effects are used well : When Max has lucid dreams , the screen appears fuzzy and out of focus . Since Max Payne , the polygon count ( the number of polygons rendered per frame ) has been increased , which smooths out the edges of character models . In addition , characters have a much greater range of expressions . Previously , Max had only one expression available ; in Max Payne 2 , he often smirks and moves his eyebrows to react to different scenarios . 
 The game uses the Havok physics engine , which the developers chose because it was " hands @-@ down the best solution to our needs " . They found that a dedicated physics engine was vital to create Max 's combat scenes , which Max Payne was known for , " with increased realism and dramatic , <unk> action " . The physics engine made several situations seem more realistic . For example , when in combat , the player can take cover behind boxes ; however , when enemy bullets impact the boxes , they will topple over , in which case the player will have to find another suitable object to use for cover . When an enemy is hidden behind a wall divider , the player can throw a grenade next to it to send the cover flying through the air , rendering the enemy unprotected . The Havok engine was tweaked to make weapons , bombs , and Molotov cocktails act more naturally , and the audio was updated to make them sound more realistic . The new physics engine allowed for certain actions that could not happen in Max Payne ; boxes can be moved and follow the laws of gravitation , and explosion detonations make enemy bodies fall realistically . 
 The bullet time mode that Max Payne was known for was improved ; the developers referred to it as " version 2 @.@ 0 " . The mode , which allows Max to move in slow motion to react and kill enemies more easily , was enhanced to give Max a refill of a portion of the Bullet Time gauge , as well as slowing down the passage time even further , as Max moves further " into the zone " with each consecutive kill . This was done to encourage players to aggressively dive head @-@ on into dangerous situations rather than crouching at a safe distance and waiting for enemies to come to them . A new reload animation was also introduced , which , when Max reloads while in Bullet Time , allows him to duck to avoid bullets , spin around to survey the combat situation , and briefly pause to give the player a moment to think of a strategy . Development tools were made available for Max Payne 2 by Rockstar Games and Remedy Entertainment to allow players to create modifications for the game . Modifications can perform several functions , such as the ability to add new weapons , skills , perspectives , surroundings , and characters . 
 Music composers <unk> <unk> and Kimmo <unk> returned to compose the game 's soundtrack . It features cello performances by Apocalyptica member <unk> <unk> . The game 's end credits feature the song " Late Goodbye " by the band Poets of the Fall , the lyrics of which were based on a poem by Sam Lake . It was their first single and reached # 14 on the Finnish Singles Chart as well as # 1 on Radio <unk> 's Top 30 chart . It is referenced many times in the game , usually by characters singing or humming it . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Max Payne 2 was released by Rockstar Games for Microsoft Windows on October 15 , 2003 , for Xbox on November 25 , 2003 , for PlayStation 2 on December 2 , 2003 , for Steam on January 4 , 2008 , and as an Xbox Original on April 24 , 2009 . It was critically acclaimed by reviewers . Praise focused on its action and story , while criticism targeted its length , which was considered short . Despite a positive reception , Max Payne 2 sold poorly , leading Rockstar Games ' parent company Take @-@ Two Interactive to cite the " continued disappointing sales of Max Payne 2 : The Fall of Max Payne " as one of the causes for the company 's <unk> sales for 2004 . Max Payne 2 was the recipient of several industry awards , including Outstanding Art Direction at the Golden Satellite Awards 2004 ; Editors ' Choice Awards from GamePro , IGN , GameSpy , and GameSpot ; and Game of the Month from Game Informer . 
 Steve Polak of the Australian The Daily Telegraph , who enjoyed the first Max Payne game , also praised Max Payne 2 , calling it an " outstanding " game that " keeps alive the sense of atmosphere and engaging gunplay @-@ oriented action that was so exciting in the first release . " He lauded the game for better production values compared to the first game , including its more polished story , more professional scripts , and better acting and graphics . The complexity of Max 's character was a welcomed element by Polak , who found that games often created heroes that were simplistic . The Sydney Morning Herald 's Dan Toose described the game 's experience as " brutal , yet beautiful gun @-@ blazing gaming " . 
 Jon Minifie of The New Zealand Herald appreciated the game 's story , calling it an " entertainingly dark third @-@ person shooter with a well @-@ crafted , noir storyline " . In particular , Minifie praised Remedy for what he deemed a successful port of the game to consoles , especially for the Xbox , noticing that the version features visuals that look similar to those on the PC . However , he found that the PlayStation 2 port was only " an okay job " that resulted in quality that was " considerably less easy on the eye " , and asserted that it is outperformed by more powerful platforms . The Sunday Times 's Steven Poole observed that Max Payne 2 does " exactly the same [ things as the first game ] , only better . " He found that enemies react convincingly to damage taken from bullets , thanks to the physics engine . Ultimately , however , Poole described the game as " entertaining but not earth @-@ shattering " . 
 The Toronto Sun 's Steve Tilley , who believed that Remedy did a " killer job " on Max Payne 2 , felt that the company kept what was great about the previous game , " while everything else has been tweaked , overhauled and juiced up " . He was a fan of the Bullet Time from the first game , and therefore appreciated seeing it return in the sequel , with " even more impressive " visuals . Tilley found that the game 's " lifelike physics engine " was easily its best aspect , and noted that while playing the game , he threw a grenade across a room , which resulted in an explosion that sent enemies flying through the air in a realistic fashion . In addition , Tilley applauded Remedy for listening to fan complaints and resolving issues from the previous game , including improved dream sequences in Max Payne 2 . He was , however , disappointed with the general linearity of the game , and noted that players who are not interested in film noir themes will not enjoy them in Max Payne 2 . Concluding , Tilley commented that the game " has enough polish , cinematic flair and outright mayhem to thrill those who like their Sopranos with a dash of John Woo and a touch of Frank Miller . " 
 The game 's action was praised by several reviewers . GameZone called it cinematic and action @-@ packed , noting that the final scene was worthy of the big screen . Similarly , GameSpy described the action as " adrenaline @-@ pumping " , and considered it comparable to what was available in film . The story was both applauded and criticized . Tom McNamara of IGN enjoyed playing in the film noir setting and believed that it adds dramatic depth to Max and Mona 's story , " somehow [ making ] what 's going on more important and interesting . <unk> havoc is nice , but it 's great to also have a love interest complicating things , and Mona Sax is definitely up to the task . " However , he was turned off by some of the " hammy " dialogue . In contrast , 1UP.com cited the final boss as an ending that inadequately completed an otherwise excellent game , and the Sunday Times ' Poole called the story " pungently cheesy " . Max Payne 2 's length disappointed critics , including GameSpot and IGN , which complained about the short story . Toose of the Sydney Morning Herald was also critical of the short single @-@ player experience , but found that the higher difficulty levels and special " survivor " modes helped improve the game 's replay value . 
 = Sophie Blanchard = 
 Sophie Blanchard ( 25 March 1778 – 6 July 1819 ) was a French aeronaut and the wife of ballooning pioneer Jean @-@ Pierre Blanchard . Blanchard was the first woman to work as a professional balloonist , and after her husband 's death she continued ballooning , making more than 60 ascents . Known throughout Europe for her ballooning exploits , Blanchard entertained Napoleon Bonaparte , who promoted her to the role of " Aeronaut of the Official Festivals " , replacing André @-@ Jacques Garnerin . On the restoration of the monarchy in 1814 she performed for Louis XVIII , who named her " Official Aeronaut of the Restoration " . 
 Ballooning was a risky business for the pioneers . Blanchard lost consciousness on a few occasions , endured freezing temperatures and almost drowned when her balloon crashed in a marsh . In 1819 , she became the first woman to be killed in an aviation accident when , during an exhibition in the Tivoli Gardens in Paris , she launched fireworks that ignited the gas in her balloon . Her craft crashed on the roof of a house and she fell to her death . She is commonly referred to as Madame Blanchard and is also known by many combinations of her maiden and married names , including Madeleine @-@ Sophie Blanchard , Marie Madeleine @-@ Sophie Blanchard , Marie Sophie Armant and Madeleine @-@ Sophie Armant Blanchard . 
 = = Biography = = 
