 = = = Early life and career = = = 
 Sophie Blanchard was born Marie Madeleine @-@ Sophie Armant to Protestant parents at Trois @-@ Canons , near La Rochelle . Little is known of her life before her marriage to Jean @-@ Pierre Blanchard , the world 's first professional balloonist . The date of her marriage is unclear ; sources quote dates as early as 1794 or 1797 , but most state 1804 , the year of her first ascent . Blanchard had abandoned his first wife , Victoire Lebrun , and their four children to travel round Europe pursuing his ballooning career , and she later died in poverty . Variously described as Blanchard 's " small , ugly , nervous wife " , " small with sharp bird @-@ like features " and later as " small and beautiful " , Sophie was more at home in the sky than on the ground , where her nervous disposition meant she was easily startled . She was terrified of loud noises and of riding in carriages , but was fearless in the air . She and her husband were in an accident on a joint flight in 1807 ( her 11th ascent , possibly his 61st ) , in which they crashed and he sustained a head injury . The shock apparently left her mute for a while . 
 Sophie made her first ascent in a balloon with Blanchard in Marseilles on 27 December 1804 . The couple faced bankruptcy as a result of Blanchard 's poor business sense , and they believed a female balloonist was a novelty that might attract enough attention to solve their financial problems . She described the feeling as an " incomparable sensation " ( " sensation incomparable " ) . Sophie made a second ascent with Blanchard and for her third ascent on 18 August 1805 , she flew solo from the garden of the Cloister of the Jacobins in Toulouse . 
 She was not the first woman balloonist . On 20 May 1784 , the Marchioness and Countess of Montalembert , the Countess of <unk> and a Miss de Lagarde had taken a trip on a tethered balloon in Paris . Neither was she the first woman to ascend in an untethered balloon : in Blanchard 's time , Citoyenne Henri , who had made an ascent with André @-@ Jacques Garnerin in 1798 , was widely credited with that ballooning first , although the honour actually belonged to Elizabeth <unk> . <unk> , an opera singer , had made an ascent to entertain Gustav III of Sweden in Lyon on 4 June 1784 , fourteen years before Citoyenne Henri . Blanchard was , however , the first woman to pilot her own balloon and the first to adopt ballooning as a career . 
 In 1809 , her husband died from injuries sustained when he fell from his balloon in the Hague after suffering a heart attack . After his death , Sophie continued to make ascents , specialising in night flights , often staying aloft all night . 
 = = = Solo career = = = 
 Sophie conducted experiments with parachutes as her husband had , parachuting dogs from her balloon , and as part of her entertainments she launched fireworks and dropped baskets of pyrotechnics attached to small parachutes . Other <unk> were making names for themselves by demonstrating parachute jumps from the baskets of balloons , in particular the family of André @-@ Jacques Garnerin , whose wife , daughter and niece all performed regularly . His niece , <unk> Garnerin , was Blanchard 's chief rival as a female aeronaut , and it was rare for a suitable event to lack a performance by one or the other . Blanchard may have given some demonstrations of parachuting herself , but her primary interest was in ballooning . 
 The couple had still been in debt at the time of Blanchard 's death , so to minimise her expenses Sophie was as frugal as possible in her choice of balloon . She used a hydrogen @-@ filled gas balloon ( or <unk> ) , as it allowed her to ascend in a basket little bigger than a chair , and there was no requirement for the volume of material necessary for a hot air balloon . A hydrogen balloon also freed her from having to tend a fire to keep the craft airborne . Because she was small and light , she was able to cut back on the amount of gas used to inflate the balloon . Sophie had used , or at least owned , a hot air balloon ; Colonel Francis <unk> recorded in his memoirs that she sold it to him in 1811 for £ 40 . 
 She became a favourite of Napoleon , and he appointed her to replace André @-@ Jacques Garnerin in 1804 . Garnerin had disgraced himself by failing to control the balloon that he had sent up to mark Napoleon 's coronation in Paris ; the balloon eventually drifted as far as Rome , where it crashed into the Lago di <unk> and became the subject of many jokes at Napoleon 's expense . The title given to her by Napoleon is unclear : he certainly made her " Aeronaut of the Official Festivals " ( " <unk> des Fêtes <unk> " ) with responsibility for organising ballooning displays at major events , but he may have also made her his Chief Air Minister of Ballooning , in which role she is reported to have drawn up plans for an aerial invasion of England . 
 She made ascents for Napoleon 's entertainment on 24 June 1810 from the Champ de Mars in Paris and at the celebration mounted by the Imperial Guard for his marriage to Marie @-@ Louise of Austria . On the birth of Napoleon 's son , Blanchard took a balloon flight over Paris from the Champs de Mars and threw out leaflets proclaiming the birth . She performed at the official celebration of his baptism at the Château de Saint @-@ Cloud on 23 June 1811 , with a firework display launched from the balloon , and again at the " <unk> de l <unk> " in Milan on 15 August 1811 . She made an ascent in bad weather over the Campo Marte in Naples to accompany the review of the troops by Napoleon 's brother @-@ in @-@ law Joachim Murat , the King of Naples , in 1811 . When Louis XVIII entered Paris on 4 May 1814 after being restored to the French throne , Blanchard ascended in her balloon from the Pont Neuf as part of the triumphal procession . Louis was so taken with her performance that he dubbed her " Official Aeronaut of the Restoration " . 
 Known throughout Europe , Blanchard drew large crowds for her ascents . In Frankfurt she was apparently the cause of the poor reception of Carl Maria von Weber 's opera Silvana on its opening night , 16 September 1810 : the people of the city flocked to see her demonstration while only a few attended the opera 's debut . She gave many displays in Italy . In 1811 she travelled from Rome to Naples , splitting the journey in half with a stop after 60 miles ( 97 km ) , and later ascended again from Rome to a height of 12 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 660 m ) where she claimed that she fell into a profound sleep for a while before landing at Tagliacozzo . In the same year she again lost consciousness after having to ascend to avoid being trapped in a hailstorm near Vincennes . She spent 14 ½ hours in the air as a result . Sophie crossed the Alps by balloon , and on a trip to Turin on 26 April 1812 the temperature dropped so low that she suffered a nose bleed and icicles formed on her hands and face . She almost died on 21 September 1817 when , on a flight from Nantes ( her 53rd ) , she mistook a marshy field for a safe landing spot . The canopy of her balloon became caught in a tree which caused the chair to tip over ; Blanchard , entangled in the rigging , was forced into the water of the marsh and would have drowned had not help arrived soon after her landing . <unk> with Marie Thérèse de <unk> who was attempting to run a shelter for " fallen women " ( La <unk> ) in Bordeaux , she offered to donate the proceeds from one of her ascents to the venture . De <unk> refused the offer on the grounds that she could not be the cause of another risking their life . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 On 6 July 1819 , while making an ascent to start a display over the Tivoli Gardens in Paris , her hydrogen @-@ filled balloon caught fire and Blanchard , entangled in the surrounding net , fell to her death . She was reported to be unusually nervous before starting this ascent . 
 Blanchard had performed regularly at the Tivoli Gardens , making ascents twice a week when she was in Paris . She had been warned repeatedly of the danger of using fireworks in her exhibitions . This display was to be a particularly impressive one with many more pyrotechnics than usual , and it appears that the warnings had made an impression on her . Some spectators implored her not to make the ascent , but others , eager to see the show , urged her on . One report suggested that she finally made up her mind and stepped into her chair with the words " <unk> , ce sera pour la dernière fois " ( " Let 's go , this will be for the last time " ) . 
 At about 10 : 30 p.m. ( accounts differ as to the exact time ) , Blanchard began her ascent , carrying a white flag and wearing a white dress and a white hat topped with ostrich plumes . The wind was blowing strongly , and it appears the balloon struggled to rise . By shedding ballast Blanchard managed to get some lift , but the balloon brushed through the trees as it ascended . Once she had cleared the treetops Blanchard began the display by waving her flag . The balloon was illuminated by baskets containing " Bengal fire " , a slow @-@ burning , coloured pyrotechnic . 
 A few moments after beginning the display , and while still ascending , the balloon was seen to be in flames . Some reports say that the balloon momentarily disappeared behind a cloud and that when it reappeared it was on fire — whatever the circumstances , the gas in the balloon was burning . Blanchard began to descend rapidly , but the balloon , caught in the wind , continued to move off from the pleasure gardens even as it went down . Some spectators thought these events were part of the show and applauded and shouted their approval . The balloon had not risen very high and , although the escaping gas was burning , the gas within the balloon maintained sufficient lift for a while to prevent the craft plummeting directly to the ground . By rapidly shedding ballast Blanchard was able to slow the descent . Most reports say she appeared to be calm during the descent , but she was said to be wringing her hands in despair as the craft approached the ground . Rumours later circulated that she had gripped the chair of her craft so tightly that " several arteries had <unk> through the effort . " 
 Just above the rooftops of the Rue de Provence the balloon 's gas was exhausted , and the craft struck the roof of a house . It was thought likely that she would have survived had that been the end of the incident , but the ropes holding the chair to the body of the balloon may have burnt through , or the impact may have thrown her forwards , with the result that Blanchard , trapped in the netting of the balloon , pitched over the side of the roof into the street below . John Poole , an eyewitness , described her final moments : 
 There was a terrible pause , then Mme Blanchard caught up in the netting of her balloon , fell with a crash upon the slanting roof of a house in the Rue de Provence , and then into the street , where she was taken up a shattered corpse . 
 Some reports credit her with crying out " À moi ! " ( " help " , or literally , " to me " ) , as she struck the roof . Although the crowds rushed to her assistance and attempts were made to save her , she had either died instantly , from a broken neck , or at most ten minutes later . 
 The most likely cause of the accident seemed to be that the fireworks attached to her balloon had been knocked out of position by a tree as she ascended ; possibly the balloon was heavily loaded and failed to rise quickly enough . When she had lit the fuses the fireworks headed towards the balloon instead of away from it ; one of them burned a hole in the fabric , igniting the gas . One man reportedly spotted the problem and shouted to her not to light the fuses , but his cries were drowned out by the cheering of the crowd . Later reports suggested she had left the gas valve open , allowing sparks to ignite the gas and set fire to the balloon , or that her balloon was of poor construction and allowed gas to escape throughout the ascent . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Norwich Duff , who had witnessed Blanchard 's ascent and the accident , recorded : 
 The effect of so shocking an accident on the minds of several thousand people assembled for amusement , and in high spirits , may easily be imagined ... 
 On hearing she had died , the proprietors of the Tivoli Gardens immediately announced that the admission fees would be donated for the support of her children , and some spectators stood at the gates appealing to the citizens of Paris for donations . The appeal raised 2 @,@ 400 francs , but after the collection it was discovered that she had no surviving children , so the money was used instead to erect a memorial , topped with a representation of her balloon in flames , above her grave in Père Lachaise Cemetery . Her tombstone was engraved with the epitaph " <unk> de son art et de son <unk> " ( " victim of her art and intrepidity " ) . The remainder of the money , about 1 @,@ 000 francs , was donated to the Lutheran Église des <unk> which Blanchard had attended . Though not rich , at the time of her death she had cleared the debts left to her by her husband and was financially secure . Each of her ascents had cost her around 1 @,@ 000 francs , not including the cost of maintenance of the balloon . In her will she left property worth between 1 @,@ 000 and 50 @,@ 000 francs to the daughter of some acquaintances . In total , she had made 67 balloon ascents . 
 The story of her death was recounted throughout Europe . Jules Verne mentioned her in Five Weeks in a Balloon and , in The Gambler , Fyodor Dostoevsky likened the thrill of committing oneself in gambling to the sensation that Blanchard must have felt as she fell . For others , her death proved a cautionary tale , either as an example of a woman exceeding her station ( as with Grenville Mellen , who said that it proved " a woman in a balloon is either out of her element or too high in it " ) or as the price of vanity for attempting such spectacular shows . Charles Dickens commented " The jug goes often to the well , but is pretty sure to get cracked at last " . With the advent of powered flight , ballooning and Blanchard 's story were relegated to the margins of aviation history . A novel inspired by Blanchard 's story , Linda Donn 's The Little <unk> , was published in 2006 . 
 = Pilot ( Smash ) = 
 " Pilot " is the pilot episode of the television series Smash , which premiered on NBC in the United States on February 6 , 2012 . The episode was written by series creator Theresa Rebeck and was directed by Michael Mayer . The show revolves around a group of characters who come together to put on a Broadway musical based on the life of Marilyn Monroe . The episode featured a mix of original songs and cover songs , the former being written by series composers Marc Shaiman and Scott Wittman . 
 In the episode , world @-@ renowned songwriting duo Julia Houston ( Debra Messing ) and Tom Levitt ( Christian <unk> ) are inspired to create a new Broadway musical on the life of Marilyn Monroe — instantly attracting the attention of tenacious producer Eileen Rand ( Anjelica Huston ) and brilliant yet temperamental director Derek Wills ( Jack Davenport ) . As the four search for their leading lady , veteran actress Ivy Lynn ( Megan Hilty ) becomes obsessed with winning them over and native Iowan waitress Karen Cartwright ( Katharine McPhee ) becomes desperate to make her theatrical dreams a reality . 
 The series received a large amount of promotion before its premiere and several ads were put into the commercial breaks for Super Bowl XLVI which aired on NBC . The episode was also released online before its original American broadcast . The episode was viewed by an estimated 11 @.@ 44 million viewers and received a 3 @.@ 8 rating / 10 share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 , making it the highest @-@ rated NBC drama series premiere in four years and the third highest new drama debut of the 2011 – 12 television season . Despite this , viewership between the first and second half @-@ hour dropped , significantly . The episode received positive reviews from critics and was named among the best pilots of the aforesaid television season . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Noted songwriting duo Julia Houston ( Debra Messing ) and Tom Levitt ( Christian <unk> ) get inspiration for a new Broadway show after Tom 's personal assistant Ellis Tancharoen ( Jaime Cepero ) reveals his love for Marilyn Monroe . The two decide to cut a demo with Broadway veteran Ivy Lynn ( Megan Hilty ) which Ellis videotapes . He sends the tape to his mother who uploads it online . Julia and Tom grow angry towards this , fearing that theater critic Michael Riedel will write a harsh review of the song . They decide to fire Ellis , until they learn Riedel loved the song and approved of the idea of a Marilyn Monroe musical . They rehire Ellis and they quickly receive interest from producer Eileen Rand ( Anjelica Huston ) , who brings on director Derek Wills ( Jack Davenport ) , who had a strained relationship with Tom . Derek demands to audition for the main role while Tom wants Ivy to play Marilyn . Meanwhile , a waitress named Karen Cartwright ( Katharine McPhee ) , who came from a small town in Iowa to make her theatrical dreams a reality hears the original demo song and decides to audition . Karen makes a good impression on the producers , leading to both Karen and Ivy getting a callback . Later on , Derek calls Karen to have a meeting at his loft late at night . 
 At Derek 's loft , he tells Karen he needs to see " everything you 've got , " a come @-@ on that momentarily panics Karen . Derek accuses her of playing the innocent and pretending not to know why she was invited to the director 's loft in the middle of the night . She retreats to the bathroom and gathers her nerves . When she comes back , she is in nothing but his shirt and , singing " Happy Birthday , Mr. President " as Marilyn , she climbs into his lap , straddling him , then pulls away and says " not gonna happen " . The next day , Karen and Ivy go to their callback singing " Let Me Be Your Star " , which closes out the episode . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception and writing = = = 
 Development began in 2009 at Showtime by then @-@ Showtime entertainment president Robert Greenblatt and Steven Spielberg , from an idea by Spielberg , who had been working on the concept for years . The original concept was that each season would follow the production of a new musical , if any of them were " stage @-@ worthy " , Spielberg would make them into an actual Broadway musical . The series was mainly inspired by The West Wing and Upstairs , Downstairs . Spielberg hired Theresa Rebeck to create the series after watching her play , " The Understudy " and receiving a recommendation from executive producers Craig Zadan and Neil Meron . Before the series could be produced , Greenblatt was named chairman of NBC Entertainment after Comcast took control of newly rechristened NBCUniversal . Greenblatt brought the series with him and NBC ordered production of a pilot in January 2011 for the 2011 – 12 television season . The pilot reportedly cost $ 7 @.@ 5 million to produce . The series was then picked up for the first season on May 11 , 2011 for 15 episodes . 
 The pilot episode was written by series creator Theresa Rebeck . She joined the series when it was initially going to be on Showtime . Due to the change in networks , 20 minutes worth of material was taken from the pilot and put into the following episodes , due to the timeslot . Also , the language and explicitness of the show was toned down . While initially coming up with characters , she decided to give some characters two jobs on the musical , for example Derek Wills is both the director and choreographer . This was done in order " to keep the creative team from sprawling " and in order to gain a larger audience . Despite this , she also said she wasn 't forced to make the series any more " mainstream " . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 The first cast onto the series was Debra Messing , with her role initially being the lead character , according to <unk> Smash marks the first regular television role for Anjelica Huston , who normally appears in films . She cited , in an interview with The Huffington Post , that the script , the cast and producers for the series were the reason she joined it , saying she 'd " be a fool not to participate " . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The episode features both original and cover songs sung on @-@ screen by the characters . The original songs were written by Marc Shaiman and Scott Wittman . Executive producers Zadan and Meron immediately suggested the two composers to the series after signing onto the series . The pilot episode features three original songs ( " Never Give All the Heart " , " The National Pastime " , and " Let Me Be Your Star " ) , and a cover of Christina Aguilera 's " Beautiful " , the choice for the latter being used to extend the show 's brand to iTunes . Three singles were released from the episode : " Beautiful " sung by McPhee , " The National Pastime " sung by Hilty , and " Let Me Be Your Star " sung by McPhee and Hilty . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ broadcast feedback and marketing = = = 
 Before the series had premiered , some media critics stated that the series had potential to become a ratings hit and possibly raise NBC from being the fourth highest @-@ rated network out of five . Greenblatt has also stated that he has high hopes for the series . In order to make it more likely the series will be a success , NBC picked the series up for 15 episodes and opted to hold the show for mid @-@ season in order to pair it up with the hit reality show The Voice on Monday nights . Despite this , other media critics have said unless the series receives a rating above a 3 @.@ 0 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , it will be considered a failure , and only two other NBC series ranked above a 3 @.@ 0 rating at the time ; Fear Factor and The Office . The series has also been put on Monday nights against CBS , with Monday featuring Two and a Half Men , one of the highest @-@ rated shows of the season . Also , musical shows have a known record for failures , like Cop Rock . 
 NBC used several forms of advertising to promote the series , airing several promos on sister channels like E ! and Bravo . There were also several ads for the series during Super Bowl XLVI , which aired on NBC . Due to the already positive buzz surrounding the show , NBC offered early viewings of the pilot on different platforms . For example , from January 15 through January 30 , 2012 , it was screened on select flights of American Airlines . Also , from January 23 to February 6 , 2012 , it was also streamed online at NBC.com and <unk> . The marketing price has been put as high as $ 22 million , although NBC Entertainment marking president Len <unk> has denied this , saying it cost less than $ 10 million . 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The pilot episode originally aired on NBC in the United States on February 6 , 2012 . The episode was seen by 11 @.@ 44 million viewers and received a 3 @.@ 8 rating / 10 share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . This means that it was seen by 3 @.@ 8 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 10 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . It initially began with a 4 @.@ 2 rating , but dropped to a 3 @.@ 4 rating in the second half @-@ hour . Despite the drop in ratings , the episode ranked first in its timeslot , defeating the CBS police procedural drama , Hawaii Five @-@ 0 and the ABC comedy @-@ drama television series , Castle . The episode also ranked as the highest @-@ rated drama series premiere for NBC since Life . It was also the third @-@ highest @-@ rated new drama debut of the 2011 – 2012 television season , behind Once Upon a Time and Touch , and delivered the biggest 10 p.m. rating of any drama in this television season . The program also had the highest 18 @-@ 49 rating and viewership for an NBC series in the time @-@ slot since November 2008 . " Pilot " was the twelfth most @-@ watched scripted show for the week of broadcast among adults aged 18 – 49 and seventeenth among overall viewers . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The pilot episode has received positive reviews from critics . Review aggregator Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 of reviews from mainstream critics , calculated a score of 79 based on 32 reviews . In June 2011 , Smash was one of eight honorees in the " Most Exciting New Series " category at the Critics ' Choice Television Awards , voted by journalists who had seen the pilots . Matt Mitovich of TVLine called the cast " pretty damn perfect " and complimented the musical numbers . Mary McNamara of the Los Angeles Times called the show a " triumph " and also went on to say that the creator Theresa Rebeck as well as her team , " have managed to capture the grand and sweeping gesture that is musical theater and inject it with the immediate intimacy of television . " In The Chicago Tribune she also compared the episode to Glee and A Chorus Line . Maureen Ryan of The Huffington Post called it one of the strongest new shows of the season . Another Huffington Post writer Karen <unk> praised the writing and the creativity of the series . She also complemented the New York City setting of the series saying " you feel as if you 're walking down noisy and beloved Times Square with the characters " . Tim Goodman from The Hollywood Reporter called the episode an " Excellent , a bar @-@ raiser for broadcast networks " and called it superior to Glee . He also praised writing and acting for the series , comparing it to the quality of a cable television series . 
 HitFix reviewer Alan Sepinwall complemented the series for its cast and music , but said that he didn 't understand the hype towards the series . He also criticized the battle for the main @-@ role of Marilyn for the musical , writing that " the show keeps trying to position Karen and Ivy as equally @-@ deserving of the part , when Hilty very thoroughly outclasses McPhee whenever the production numbers start " . Despite this , he called the pilot , " smart and slick " , and that he would keep on watching future episodes . He ultimately gave the episode a B. In a podcast with Sepinwall and fellow HitFix writer Dan Feinberg , the two were very negative towards Jaime Cepero 's performance as Ellis Tancharoen , with Sepinwall comparing it to a failed version of " All About Eve " . They also criticized the writing for Messing 's character , Julia Houston and Hilty 's character , Ivy Lynn . Entertainment Weekly writer Ken Tucker praised Messing 's performance calling her " funny and charming " and a dialed down version of her Will and Grace character Grace Adler . He later went on to criticize the storyline between McPhee and Hilty , believing that Hilty was " obviously superior " to McPhee and that the storyline felt " strained " . He also went on to write that he hoped the series became a ratings success . Tanner Stransky , also of Entertainment Weekly , ranked the pilot episode as the 8th best television episode of 2012 saying , " After we watched the subsequent 14 episodes of Smash with a mixture of fascination and dismay ( seriously , did Debra Messing ’ s Julia wear a men ’ s pajama top to meet her lover ? ) , it was difficult to recall that the pilot was positively magical . But it was . In fact , that episode @-@ ending performance of ” Let Me Be Your Star ” ( featuring dueling divas Megan Hilty and Katharine McPhee ) was among TV ’ s most watchable and gleeful three minutes of the year . Rare is the series whose high @-@ water mark is its pilot , and Smash is a shining example . " 
 David Wiegand of The San Francisco Chronicle , gave the program a rave review and saying that , " [ It 's so ] good you can 't help wondering why no one thought of it before , a compelling mix of credible real @-@ life melodrama with a fictionalized approximation of what it takes to get a Broadway show from the idea stage to opening night . Robert Bianco of USA Today wrote that " Unless you 're allergic to musicals in general and Broadway in particular , you should find that a compelling central story , a strong cast , an out @-@ of @-@ the @-@ procedural @-@ mold premise and some rousing , roof @-@ raising numbers more than compensate for any lingering problems . " He ultimately gave it three and a half stars out of four . The A.V. Club reviewer Noel Murray praised the cast and Eileen 's divorce storyline . He mainly criticized the staging and arrangement of the musical numbers saying they threatened the realism of the show and wrote they weren 't completely " <unk> " . He ultimately gave the episode a B. Another A.V. Club reviewer Todd VanDerWerff criticized the series for not avoiding clichés but also wrote " the show is so damned sincere about how much it embraces the clichés of the backstage Broadway story that those inclined to like this sort of thing — and I 'm very much one of them — will forgive it some of these excesses " . He also criticized the adoption storyline . Despite this , he went on to compare the series to Hill Street Blues , ER and The West Wing . 
 = = Accolades = = 
 Smash won a 2012 Primetime Emmy Award for Josh <unk> for choreography . The choreography for " The National Pastime " song in this episode was one of the routines that were part of the show 's submission in the Choreography category . 
 = Katharine Hepburn = 
 Katharine Houghton Hepburn ( May 12 , 1907 – June 29 , 2003 ) was an American actress . Known for her fierce independence and spirited personality , Hepburn was a leading lady in Hollywood for more than 60 years . She appeared in a range of genres , from screwball comedy to literary drama , and she received four Academy Awards for Best Actress — a record for any performer . In 1999 , Hepburn was named by the American Film Institute as the greatest female star of Classic Hollywood Cinema . 
 Raised in Connecticut by wealthy , progressive parents , Hepburn began to act while studying at Bryn Mawr College . After four years in the theatre , favorable reviews of her work on Broadway brought her to the attention of Hollywood . Her early years in the film industry were marked with success , including an Academy Award for her third picture , Morning Glory ( 1933 ) , but this was followed by a series of commercial failures which led her to be labeled " box office poison " in 1938 . Hepburn masterminded her own comeback , buying out her contract with RKO Radio Pictures and acquiring the film rights to The Philadelphia Story , which she sold on the condition that she be the star . In the 1940s , she was contracted to Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer , where her career focused on an alliance with Spencer Tracy . The screen @-@ partnership spanned 25 years and produced nine movies . 
 Hepburn challenged herself in the latter half of her life , as she regularly appeared in Shakespearean stage productions and tackled a range of literary roles . She found a niche playing middle @-@ aged spinsters , such as in The African Queen ( 1951 ) , a persona the public embraced . Three more Oscars came for her work in Guess Who 's Coming to Dinner ( 1967 ) , The Lion in Winter ( 1968 ) , and On Golden Pond ( 1981 ) . In the 1970s , she began appearing in television films , which became the focus of her career in later life . She remained active into old age , making her final screen appearance in 1994 at the age of 87 . After a period of inactivity and ill health , Hepburn died in 2003 at the age of 96 . 
 Hepburn famously shunned the Hollywood publicity machine and refused to conform to society 's expectations of women . She was outspoken , assertive , athletic , and wore trousers before it was fashionable for women to do so . She married once , as a young woman , but thereafter lived independently . A 26 @-@ year affair with her co @-@ star Spencer Tracy was hidden from the public . With her unconventional lifestyle and the independent characters she brought to the screen , Hepburn epitomized the " modern woman " in the 20th @-@ century United States and is remembered as an important cultural figure . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Hepburn was born in Hartford , Connecticut , on May 12 , 1907 , the second of six children . Her parents were Thomas Norval Hepburn ( 1879 – 1962 ) , a urologist at Hartford Hospital , and Katharine Martha Houghton ( 1878 – 1951 ) , a feminist campaigner . Both parents fought for social change in the US : Thomas Hepburn helped establish the New England Social Hygiene Association , which educated the public about venereal disease , while the elder Katharine headed the Connecticut Woman Suffrage Association and later campaigned for birth control with Margaret Sanger . As a child , Hepburn joined her mother on several " Votes For Women " demonstrations . The Hepburn children were raised to exercise freedom of speech and encouraged to think and debate on any topic they wished . Her parents were criticized by the community for their progressive views , which stimulated Hepburn to fight against barriers she encountered . Hepburn said she realized from a young age that she was the product of " two very remarkable parents " , and credited her " enormously lucky " upbringing with providing the foundation for her success . She remained close to her family throughout her life . 
 The young Hepburn was a tomboy who liked to call herself Jimmy , and cut her hair short like a boy 's . Thomas Hepburn was eager for his children to use their minds and bodies to the limit , and taught them to swim , run , dive , ride , wrestle , and play golf and tennis . Golf became a passion of Katharine 's ; she took daily lessons and became very adept , reaching the semi @-@ final of the Connecticut Young Women 's Golf Championship . She loved swimming in Long Island Sound , and took ice @-@ cold baths every morning in the belief that " the <unk> the medicine , the better it was for you . " Hepburn was a fan of movies from a young age , and went to see one every Saturday night . She would put on plays and perform for her neighbors with friends and siblings for 50 cents a ticket to raise money for the Navajo people . 
 On April 3 , 1921 , while visiting friends in Greenwich Village , Hepburn discovered the body of her adored older brother , Tom , dead from an apparent suicide . He had tied a sheet around a beam and hanged himself . The Hepburn family denied it was suicide and maintained that Tom 's death must have been an experiment that had gone wrong . The incident made the teenage Hepburn nervous , moody , and suspicious of people . She shied away from other children , dropped out of Oxford School , and began receiving private tutoring . For many years she used Tom 's birthday ( November 8 ) as her own . It was not until her 1991 autobiography , Me : Stories of My Life , that Hepburn revealed her true birth date . 
 In 1924 Hepburn gained a place at Bryn Mawr College . She attended the institution primarily to satisfy her mother , who had studied there , and recalled disliking the experience . It was the first time she had been in school for several years , and she was self @-@ conscious and uncomfortable with her classmates . She struggled with the scholastic demands of university , and once was suspended for smoking in her room . Hepburn was drawn to acting , but roles in college plays were conditional on good grades . Once her marks had improved , she began performing regularly . She performed the lead role in a production of The Woman in the Moon in her senior year , and the positive response it received cemented Hepburn 's plans to pursue a theatrical career . She graduated with a degree in history and philosophy in June 1928 . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Breaking into theatre ( 1928 – 32 ) = = = 
 Hepburn left university determined to become an actress . The day after graduating , she traveled to Baltimore to meet Edwin H. Knopf , who ran a successful stock theatre company . Impressed by her eagerness , Knopf cast Hepburn in his current production , The <unk> . She received good reviews for her small role , and the Printed Word described her performance as " arresting " . She was given a part in the following week 's show , but her second performance was less well received . She was criticized for her shrill voice , and so left Baltimore to study with a voice tutor in New York City . 
 Knopf decided to produce The Big Pond in New York and appointed Hepburn the understudy to the leading lady . A week before opening , the lead was fired and replaced with Hepburn , which gave her a starring role only four weeks into her theatre career . On opening night , she turned up late , mixed her lines , tripped over her feet , and spoke too quickly to be comprehensible . She was immediately fired , and the original leading lady rehired . Undeterred , Hepburn joined forces with the producer Arthur Hopkins and accepted the role of a schoolgirl in These Days . Her Broadway debut came on November 12 , 1928 , at the Cort Theatre , but reviews for the show were poor and it closed after eight nights . Hopkins promptly hired Hepburn as the lead understudy in Philip Barry 's play Holiday . In early December , after only two weeks , she quit to marry Ludlow Ogden Smith , a college acquaintance . She planned to leave the theatre behind , but began to miss the work and quickly resumed the understudy role in Holiday , which she held for six months . 
 In 1929 , Hepburn turned down a role with the Theatre Guild to play the lead in Death Takes a Holiday . She felt the role was perfect , but again she was fired . She went back to the Guild and took an understudy role for minimum pay in A Month in the Country . In the spring of 1930 , Hepburn joined a theatre company in Stockbridge , Massachusetts . She left halfway through the summer season , and continued studying with a drama tutor . In early 1931 , she was cast in the Broadway production of Art and Mrs. Bottle . She was released from the role after the playwright took a dislike to her , saying " She looks a fright , her manner is objectionable , and she has no talent " , but then rehired when no other actress could be found . It went on to be a small success . 
 Hepburn appeared in a number of plays with a summer stock company in <unk> , Connecticut , and she proved to be a hit . During the summer of 1931 , Philip Barry asked her to appear in his new play , The Animal Kingdom , alongside Leslie Howard . They began rehearsals in November , Hepburn feeling sure the role would make her a star , but Howard disliked the actress and again she was fired . When she asked Barry why she had been let go , he responded , " Well , to be brutally frank , you weren 't very good . " This unsettled the self @-@ assured Hepburn , but she continued to look for work . She took a small role in an upcoming play , but as rehearsals began she was asked to read for the lead in the Greek fable The Warrior 's Husband . 
 The Warrior 's Husband proved to be Hepburn 's breakout performance . Biographer Charles Higham states that the role was ideal for the actress , requiring an aggressive energy and athleticism , and she enthusiastically involved herself with its production . The play opened March 11 , 1932 , at the <unk> Theatre on Broadway . Hepburn 's first entrance called for her to leap down a narrow stairway with a stag over her shoulder , wearing a short silver tunic . The show ran for three months , and Hepburn received positive reviews . Richard Garland of the New York World @-@ Telegram wrote , " It 's been many a night since so glowing a performance has brightened the Broadway scene . " 
 = = = Hollywood success ( 1932 – 34 ) = = = 
 A scout for the Hollywood agent Leland Hayward spotted Hepburn 's appearance in The Warrior 's Husband , and asked her to test for the part of Sydney Fairfield in the upcoming RKO film A Bill of Divorcement . Director George Cukor was impressed by what he saw : " There was this odd creature , " he recalled , " she was unlike anybody I 'd ever heard . " He particularly liked the manner in which she picked up a glass : " I thought she was very talented in that action . " Offered the role , Hepburn demanded $ 1 @,@ 500 a week , a large amount for an unknown actress . Cukor encouraged the studio to accept her demands and they signed Hepburn to a temporary contract with a three @-@ week guarantee . RKO head David O. Selznick recounted that he took a " tremendous chance " in casting the unusual actress . 
 Hepburn arrived in California in July 1932 , at 25 years old . She starred in A Bill of Divorcement opposite John Barrymore , but showed no sign of intimidation . Although she struggled to adapt to the nature of film acting , Hepburn was fascinated by the industry from the start . The picture was a success and Hepburn received positive reviews . Mordaunt Hall of The New York Times called her performance " exceptionally fine ... Miss Hepburn 's characterization is one of the finest seen on the screen " . The Variety review declared , " Standout here is the smash impression made by Katharine Hepburn in her first picture assignment . She has a vital something that sets her apart from the picture galaxy . " On the strength of A Bill of Divorcement , RKO signed the actress to a long @-@ term contract . George Cukor became a lifetime friend and colleague — he and Hepburn made ten films together . 
 Hepburn 's second film was Christopher Strong ( 1933 ) , the story of an aviatrix and her affair with a married man . The picture was not commercially successful , but Hepburn 's reviews were good . Regina Crewe wrote in the Journal American that although her mannerisms were grating , " they compel attention , and they fascinate an audience . She is a distinct , definite , positive personality . " Hepburn 's third picture confirmed her as a major actress in Hollywood . For playing aspiring actress Eva Lovelace — a role intended for Constance Bennett — in Morning Glory , she won an Academy Award for Best Actress . She had seen the script on the desk of producer Pandro S. Berman and , convinced that she was born to play the part , insisted that the role be hers . Hepburn chose not to attend the awards ceremony — as she would not for the duration of her career — but was thrilled with the win . Her success continued with the role of Jo in the film Little Women ( 1933 ) . The picture was a hit , one of the film industry 's biggest successes to date , and Hepburn won the Best Actress prize at the Venice Film Festival . Little Women was one of Hepburn 's personal favorites and she was proud of her performance , later saying , " I defy anyone to be as good [ as Jo ] as I was " . 
 By the end of 1933 Hepburn was a respected film actress , but she yearned to prove herself on Broadway . Jed Harris , one of the most successful theatre producers of the 1920s , was going through a career slump . He asked Hepburn to appear in the play The Lake , which she agreed to do for a low salary . Before she was given leave , RKO asked that she film Spitfire ( 1934 ) . Hepburn 's role in the movie was Trigger Hicks , an uneducated mountain girl . It is widely considered one of her worst films , and Hepburn received poor reviews for the effort . She kept a picture of Hicks in her bedroom throughout her life to " [ keep ] me humble . " 
 The Lake previewed in Washington , D.C. , where there was a large advance sale . Harris 's poor direction had eroded Hepburn 's confidence , and she struggled with the performance . Despite this , Harris moved the play to New York without further rehearsal . It opened at the Martin Beck Theatre on December 26 , 1933 , and Hepburn was roundly panned by the critics . Dorothy Parker quipped , " She runs the gamut of emotions all the way from A to B. " Already tied to a ten @-@ week contract , she had to endure the embarrassment of rapidly declining box office sales . Harris decided to take the show to Chicago , saying to Hepburn , " My dear , the only interest I have in you is the money I can make out of you . " Hepburn refused , and paid Harris $ 14 @,@ 000 to close the production instead . She later referred to Harris as " hands @-@ down the most diabolical person I have ever met " , and claimed this experience was important in teaching her to take responsibility for her career . 
 = = = Career setbacks ( 1934 – 38 ) = = = 
 After the failure of Spitfire and The Lake , RKO cast Hepburn in The Little Minister ( 1934 ) , based on a Victorian novel by James Barrie , in an attempt to repeat the success of Little Women . There was no such recurrence , and the picture was a commercial failure . The romantic drama Break of Hearts ( 1935 ) with Charles Boyer was poorly reviewed and also lost money . After three forgettable films , success returned to Hepburn with Alice Adams ( 1935 ) , the story of a girl 's desperation to climb the social ladder . Hepburn loved the book and was delighted to be offered the role . The film was a hit , one of Hepburn 's personal favorites , and gave the actress her second Oscar nomination . She received the second most votes , after winner Bette Davis . 
 Given the choice of her next feature , Hepburn decided to star in George Cukor 's new project , Sylvia Scarlett ( 1935 ) , which paired her for the first time with Cary Grant . Her hair was cut short for the part , as her character masquerades as a boy for much of the film . Critics disliked Sylvia Scarlett and it was unpopular with the public . She next played Mary Stuart in John Ford 's Mary of Scotland ( 1936 ) , which met with a similarly poor reception . A Woman Rebels ( 1936 ) followed , a Victorian era drama where Hepburn 's character defied convention by having a child out of wedlock . Quality Street ( 1937 ) also had a period setting , this time a comedy . Neither movie was popular with the public , which meant she had made four unsuccessful pictures in a row . 
 Alongside a series of unpopular films , problems arose from Hepburn 's attitude . She had a difficult relationship with the press , with whom she could be rude and provocative . When asked if she had any children , she snapped back , " Yes I have five : two white and three colored . " She would not give interviews and denied requests for autographs , which earned her the nickname " Katharine of Arrogance " . The public was also baffled by her boyish behavior and fashion choices , and she became a largely unpopular figure . Hepburn sensed that she needed to leave Hollywood , so she returned east to star in a theatrical adaptation of Jane Eyre . It had a successful tour , but , uncertain about the script and unwilling to risk failure after the disaster of The Lake , Hepburn decided against taking the show to Broadway . Towards the end of 1936 , Hepburn vied for the role of Scarlett O 'Hara in Gone with the Wind . Producer David O. Selznick refused to offer her the part because he felt she had no sex appeal . He reportedly told Hepburn , " I can 't see Rhett Butler chasing you for twelve years . " 
 Hepburn 's next feature , Stage Door ( 1937 ) , paired her with Ginger Rogers in a role which mirrored her own life — that of a wealthy society girl trying to make it as an actress . Hepburn was praised for her work at early previews , which gave her top billing over Rogers . The film was nominated for Best Picture at the Academy Awards , but it was not the box @-@ office hit RKO had hoped for . Industry pundits blamed Hepburn for the small profit , but the studio continued its commitment to resurrecting her popularity . She was cast in Howard Hawks ' screwball comedy Bringing Up Baby ( 1938 ) , where she played a flighty heiress who loses a leopard while trying to woo a palaeontologist ( Cary Grant ) . She approached the physical comedy of the film with confidence , and took tips on comedic timing from her costar Walter Catlett . Bringing Up Baby was acclaimed by critics , but it was nevertheless unsuccessful at the box office . With the genre and Grant both hugely popular at the time , biographer A. Scott Berg believes the blame lay with moviegoers ' rejection of Hepburn . 
 After the release of Bringing up Baby , the Independent Theatre Owners of America included Hepburn on a list of actors considered " box office poison " . Her reputation at a low , the next film RKO offered her was Mother Carey 's Chickens , a B movie with poor prospects . Hepburn turned it down , and instead opted to buy out her contract for $ 75 @,@ 000 . Many actors were afraid to leave the stability of the studio system at the time , but Hepburn 's personal wealth meant she could afford to be independent . She signed on for the film version of Holiday ( 1938 ) with Columbia Pictures , pairing her for the third time with Grant , to play a stifled society girl who finds joy with her sister 's fiancé . The comedy was positively reviewed , but it failed to draw much of an audience , and the next script offered to Hepburn came with a salary of $ 10 @,@ 000 — less than she had received at the start of her film career . Reflecting on this change in fortunes , Andrew Britton writes of Hepburn , " No other star has emerged with greater rapidity or with more ecstatic acclaim . No other star , either , has become so unpopular so quickly for so long a time . " 
 = = = Revival ( 1939 – 42 ) = = = 
 Following this decline in her career , Hepburn took action to create her own comeback vehicle . She left Hollywood to look for a stage project , and signed on to star in Philip Barry 's new play , The Philadelphia Story . It was tailored to showcase the actress , with the character of socialite Tracy Lord incorporating a mixture of humor , aggression , nervousness , and vulnerability . Howard Hughes , Hepburn 's partner at the time , sensed that the play could be her ticket back to Hollywood stardom and bought her the film rights before it even debuted on stage . The Philadelphia Story first toured the United States , to positive reviews , and then opened in New York at the Schubert Theatre on March 28 , 1939 . It was a big hit , critically and financially , running for 417 performances and then going on a second successful tour . 
 Several of the major film studios approached Hepburn to produce the movie version of Barry 's play . She chose to sell the rights to Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer ( MGM ) , Hollywood 's number one studio , on the condition that she be the star . As part of the deal she also received the director of her choice , George Cukor , and picked James Stewart and Cary Grant ( to whom she ceded top @-@ billing ) as co @-@ stars . Before filming began , Hepburn shrewdly noted , " I don 't want to make a grand entrance in this picture . <unk> ... think I 'm too la @-@ di @-@ da or something . A lot of people want to see me fall flat on my face . " Thus the film began with Grant knocking the actress flat on her backside . Berg describes how the character was crafted to have audiences " laugh at her enough that they would ultimately sympathize with her " , which Hepburn felt was crucial in " recreating " her public image . The Philadelphia Story was one of the biggest hits of 1940 , breaking records at Radio City Music Hall . The review in Time declared , " Come on back , Katie , all is forgiven . " Herb Golden of Variety stated , " It 's Katharine Hepburn 's picture ... The perfect conception of all flighty but characterful Main Line socialite gals rolled into one , the story without her is almost inconceivable . " Hepburn was nominated for her third Academy Award for Best Actress , and won the New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actress . 
 Hepburn was also responsible for the development of her next project , the romantic comedy Woman of the Year about a political journalist and sports journalist whose relationship is challenged by her independence . The idea for the film was proposed to her by Garson Kanin in 1941 , who recalled how Hepburn contributed to the script . She presented the finished product to MGM and demanded $ 250 @,@ 000 — half for her , half for the authors . Her terms accepted , Hepburn was also given the director and co @-@ star of her choice , George Stevens and Spencer Tracy . Released in 1942 , Woman of the Year was another success . Critics praised the chemistry between the stars , and , says Higham , noted Hepburn 's " increasing maturity and polish " . The World @-@ Telegram commended two " brilliant performances " , and Hepburn received a fourth Academy Award nomination . During the course of the movie , Hepburn signed a star contract with MGM . 
 = = = Slowing in the 1940s ( 1942 – 49 ) = = = 
 In 1942 , Hepburn returned to Broadway to appear in another Philip Barry play , Without Love , which was also written with the actress in mind . Critics were unenthusiastic about the production but with Hepburn 's popularity at a high it ran for 16 sold @-@ out weeks . MGM was eager to reunite Tracy and Hepburn for a new picture , and settled on Keeper of the Flame ( 1942 ) . A dark mystery with a propaganda message on the dangers of fascism , the film was seen by Hepburn as an opportunity to make a worthy political statement . It received poor notices but was a financial success , confirming the popularity of the Tracy – Hepburn pairing . 
 Since Woman of the Year , Hepburn had committed to a romantic relationship with Tracy and dedicated herself to helping the star , who suffered from alcoholism and insomnia . Her career slowed as a result , and she worked less for the remainder of the decade than she had done in the 1930s — notably by not appearing on @-@ stage again until 1950 . Her only appearance in 1943 was a cameo in the morale @-@ building wartime film Stage Door Canteen , playing herself . She took an atypical role in 1944 , playing a Chinese peasant in the high @-@ budget drama Dragon Seed . Hepburn was enthusiastic about the film , but it met with a tepid response and she was described as miscast . She then reunited with Tracy for the film version of Without Love ( 1945 ) , after which she turned down a role in The Razor 's Edge to support Tracy through his return to Broadway . Without Love received poor reviews , but a new Tracy – Hepburn picture was a big event and it was popular on release , selling a record number of tickets over Easter @-@ weekend 1945 . 
 Hepburn 's next film was <unk> ( 1946 ) , a film noir with Robert Taylor and Robert Mitchum that was poorly received . A fourth film with Tracy came in 1947 : a drama set in the American Old West entitled The Sea of Grass . Similarly to Keeper of the Flame and Without Love , a lukewarm response from critics did not stop it from being a financial success both at home and abroad . The same year , Hepburn portrayed Clara <unk> Schumann in Song of Love . She trained intensively with a pianist for the role . By the time of its release in October , Hepburn 's career had been significantly affected by her public opposition to the growing anti @-@ communist movement in Hollywood . Viewed by some as dangerously progressive , she was not offered work for nine months and people reportedly threw things at screenings of Song of Love . Her next film role came unexpectedly , as she agreed to replace Claudette Colbert only days before shooting began on Frank Capra 's political drama State of the Union ( 1948 ) . Tracy had long been signed to play the male lead , and so Hepburn was already familiar with the script and stepped up for the fifth Tracy – Hepburn picture . Critics responded positively to the film and it performed well at the box @-@ office . 
 Tracy and Hepburn appeared onscreen together for a third consecutive year in the 1949 film Adam 's Rib . Like Woman of the Year , it was a " battle of the sexes " comedy and was written specifically for the duo by their friends Garson Kanin and Ruth Gordon . A story of married lawyers who oppose each other in court , Hepburn described it as " perfect for [ Tracy ] and me " . Although her political views still prompted scattered picketing at theatres around the country , Adam 's Rib was a hit , favorably reviewed and the most profitable Tracy – Hepburn picture to date . The New York Times critic Bosley Crowther was full of praise for the film and hailed the duo 's " perfect compatibility " . 
 = = = Professional expansion ( 1950 – 52 ) = = = 
 The 1950s saw Hepburn take on a series of professional challenges , and stretch herself further than at any other point in her life at an age when most other actresses began to retreat . Berg describes the decade as " the heart of her vast legacy " and " the period in which she truly came into her own . " In January 1950 , Hepburn ventured into Shakespeare , playing Rosalind in As You Like It . She hoped to prove that she could play already established material , and said , " It 's better to try something difficult and flop than to play it safe all the time . " It opened at the Cort Theatre in New York to a capacity audience , and was virtually sold out for 148 shows . The production then went on tour . Reviews for Hepburn varied , but she was noted as the only leading @-@ lady in Hollywood who was performing high @-@ caliber material onstage . 
 In 1951 , Hepburn filmed The African Queen , her first movie in Technicolor . She played Rose Sayer , a prim spinster missionary living in German East Africa at the outbreak of World War I. <unk> Humphrey Bogart , The African Queen was shot mostly on location in the Belgian Congo , an opportunity Hepburn embraced . It proved a difficult experience , however , and Hepburn became ill with dysentery during filming . Later in life , she released a memoir about the experience . The movie was released at the end of 1951 to popular support and critical acclaim , and gave Hepburn her fifth Best Actress nomination at the Academy Awards . The first successful film she had made without Tracy since The Philadelphia Story a decade earlier , it proved that she could be a hit without him and fully reestablished her popularity . 
 Hepburn went on to make the sports comedy Pat and Mike ( 1952 ) , the second film written specifically as a Tracy – Hepburn vehicle by Kanin and Gordon . She was a keen athlete , and Kanin later described this as his inspiration for the film : " As I watched Kate playing tennis one day ... it occurred to me that her audience was missing a treat . " Hepburn was under pressure to perform several sports to a high standard , many of which did not end up in the film . Pat and Mike was one of the team 's most popular and critically acclaimed films , and it was also Hepburn 's personal favorite of the nine films she made with Tracy . The performance brought her a nomination for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy . 
 In the summer of 1952 , Hepburn appeared in London 's West End for a ten @-@ week run of George Bernard Shaw 's The Millionairess . Her parents had read Shaw to her when she was a child , which made the play a special experience for the actress . Two years of intense work had left her exhausted , however , and her friend Constance Collier wrote that Hepburn was " on the verge of a nervous breakdown " . Widely acclaimed , The Millionairess was brought to Broadway . In October 1952 it opened at the Shubert Theatre , where despite a lukewarm critical response it sold out its ten @-@ week run . Hepburn subsequently tried to get the play adapted into a film : a script was written by Preston Sturges , and she offered to work for nothing and pay the director herself , but no studio picked up the project . She later referred to this as the biggest disappointment of her career . 
 = = = <unk> and Shakespeare ( 1953 – 62 ) = = = 
 Pat and Mike was the last film Hepburn completed on her MGM contract , making her free to select her own projects . She spent two years resting and traveling , before committing to David Lean 's romantic drama Summertime ( 1955 ) . The movie was filmed in Venice , with Hepburn playing a lonely spinster who has a passionate love affair . She described it as " a very emotional part " and found it fascinating to work with Lean . At her own insistence , Hepburn performed a fall into a canal and developed a chronic eye infection as a result . The role earned her another Academy Award nomination and has been cited as some of her finest work . Lean later said it was his personal favorite of the films he made , and Hepburn his favorite actress . The following year , Hepburn spent six months touring Australia with the Old Vic theatre company , playing Portia in The Merchant of Venice , Kate in The Taming of the Shrew , and Isabella in Measure for Measure . The tour was successful and Hepburn earned significant plaudits for the effort . 
 Hepburn received an Academy Award nomination for the second year running for her work opposite Burt Lancaster in The Rainmaker ( 1956 ) . Again she played a lonely woman empowered by a love affair , and it became apparent that Hepburn had found a niche in playing " love @-@ starved spinsters " that critics and audiences enjoyed . Hepburn said of playing such roles , " With Lizzie Curry [ The Rainmaker ] and Jane Hudson [ Summertime ] and Rosie Sayer [ The African Queen ] — I was playing me . It wasn 't difficult for me to play those women , because I 'm the maiden aunt . " Less success that year came from The Iron Petticoat ( 1956 ) , a reworking of the classic comedy <unk> , with Bob Hope . Hepburn played a cold @-@ hearted Soviet pilot , a performance Bosley Crowther called " horrible " . It was a critical and commercial failure , and Hepburn considered it the worst film on her resume . 
 Tracy and Hepburn reunited on screen for the first time in five years for the office @-@ based comedy Desk Set ( 1957 ) . Berg notes that it worked as a hybrid of their earlier romantic @-@ comedy successes and Hepburn 's spinster persona , but it performed poorly at the box @-@ office . That summer , Hepburn returned to Shakespeare . Appearing in Stratford , Connecticut , at the American Shakespeare Theatre , she repeated her Portia in The Merchant of Venice and played Beatrice in Much Ado About Nothing . The shows were positively received . 
 After two years away from the screen , Hepburn starred in a film adaptation of Tennessee Williams ' controversial play Suddenly , Last Summer ( 1959 ) with Elizabeth Taylor and Montgomery Clift . The movie was shot in London , and was " a completely miserable experience " for Hepburn . She clashed with director Joseph L. Mankiewicz during filming , which culminated with her spitting at him in disgust . The picture was a financial success , and her work as creepy aunt Violet Venable gave Hepburn her eighth Oscar nomination . Williams was pleased with the performance , writing , " Kate is a playwright 's dream @-@ actress . She makes dialogue sound better than it is by a matchless beauty and clarity of diction " . He wrote The Night of the Iguana ( 1961 ) with Hepburn in mind , but the actress , although flattered , felt the play was wrong for her and declined the part , which went to Bette Davis . 
 Hepburn returned to Stratford in the summer of 1960 to play Viola in Twelfth Night and Cleopatra in Antony and Cleopatra . The New York Post wrote of her Cleopatra , " Hepburn offers a highly versatile performance ... once or twice going in for her famous mannerisms and always being fascinating to watch . " Hepburn herself was proud of the role . Her repertoire was further improved when she appeared in Sidney Lumet 's film version of Eugene O 'Neill 's Long Day 's Journey Into Night ( 1962 ) . It was a low @-@ budget production , and she appeared in the film for a tenth of her established salary . She called it " the greatest [ play ] this country has ever produced " and the role of morphine @-@ addicted Mary Tyrone " the most challenging female role in American drama " , and felt her performance was the best screen work of her career . Long Day 's Journey Into Night earned Hepburn an Oscar nomination and the Best Actress Award at the Cannes Film Festival . It remains one of her most praised performances . 
 = = = Success in later years ( 1963 – 70 ) = = = 
 Following the completion of Long Day 's Journey Into Night , Hepburn took a break in her career to care for ailing Spencer Tracy . She did not work again until 1967 's Guess Who 's Coming to Dinner , her ninth film with Tracy . The movie dealt with the subject of interracial marriage , with Hepburn 's niece , Katharine Houghton , playing her daughter . Tracy was dying by this point , suffering the effects of heart disease , and Houghton later commented that her aunt was " extremely tense " during the production . Tracy died 17 days after filming his last scene . Guess Who 's Coming to Dinner was a triumphant return for Hepburn and her most commercially successful picture to that point . She won her second Best Actress Award at the Oscars , 34 years after winning her first . Hepburn felt the award was not just for her , but was also given to honor Tracy . 
 Hepburn quickly returned to acting after Tracy 's death , choosing to preoccupy herself as a remedy against grief . She received numerous scripts and chose to play Eleanor of Aquitaine in The Lion in Winter ( 1968 ) , a part she called " fascinating " . She read extensively in preparation for the role , in which she starred opposite Peter O 'Toole . Filming took place in <unk> Abbey in the south of France , an experience she loved despite being — according to director Anthony Harvey — " enormously vulnerable " throughout . John Russell Taylor of The Times suggested that Eleanor was " the performance of her ... career " , and proved that she was " a growing , developing , still surprising actress " . The movie was nominated in all the major categories at the Academy Awards , and for the second year running Hepburn won the Oscar for Best Actress ( shared with Barbra Streisand for Funny Girl ) . The role , combined with her performance in Guess Who 's Coming to Dinner , also received a British Academy Film Award ( BAFTA ) for Best Actress . Hepburn 's next appearance was in The Madwoman of Chaillot ( 1969 ) , which she filmed in Nice immediately after completing The Lion in Winter . The picture was a failure critically and financially , and reviews targeted Hepburn for giving a misguided performance . 
 From December 1969 to August 1970 , Hepburn starred in the Broadway musical Coco , about the life of Coco Chanel . She admitted that before the show , she had never sat through a theatrical musical . She was not a strong singer , but found the offer irresistible and , as Berg puts it , " what she lacked in euphony she made up for in guts " . The actress took vocal lessons six times a week in preparation for the show . She was nervous about every performance , and recalled " wondering what the hell I was doing there . " Reviews for the production were mediocre , but Hepburn herself was praised and Coco was popular with the public — with its run twice extended . She later said Coco marked the first time she accepted that the public was not against her , but actually seemed to love her . Her work earned a Tony Award nomination for Best Actress in a Musical . 
 = = = Film , television , and theatre ( 1971 – 83 ) = = = 
 Hepburn stayed active throughout the 1970s , focusing on roles described by Andrew Britton as " either a devouring mother or a batty old lady living [ alone ] " . First she traveled to Spain to film a version of Euripides ' The Trojan Women ( 1971 ) alongside Vanessa Redgrave . When asked why she had taken the role , she responded that she wanted to broaden her range and try everything while she still had time . The movie was poorly received , but the Kansas City Film Critics Circle named Hepburn 's performance the best from an actress that year . In 1971 she signed on to star in an adaptation of Graham Greene 's Travels with My Aunt , but was unhappy with early versions of the script and took to rewriting it herself . The studio disliked her changes , so Hepburn abandoned the project and was replaced with Maggie Smith . Her next film , an adaptation of Edward Albee 's A Delicate Balance ( 1973 ) directed by Tony Richardson , had a small release and received generally unfavorable reviews . 
 In 1973 , Hepburn ventured into television for the first time , starring in a production of Tennessee Williams ' The Glass Menagerie . She had been wary of the medium but it proved to be one of the main television events of the year , scoring high in the Nielsen ratings . Hepburn received an Emmy Award nomination for playing wistful Southern mother Amanda Wingfield , which opened her mind to future work on the small screen . Her next project was the television movie Love Among the Ruins ( 1975 ) , a London @-@ based Edwardian drama with her friend Laurence Olivier . It received positive reviews and high ratings , and earned Hepburn her only Emmy Award . 
 Hepburn made her only appearance at the Academy Awards in 1974 , to present the Irving G. Thalberg Memorial Award to Lawrence Weingarten . She received a standing ovation , and joked with the audience , " I 'm very happy I didn 't hear anyone call out ' It 's about time ' . " The following year , she was paired with John Wayne in the western Rooster Cogburn , a sequel to his Oscar @-@ winning film True Grit . Echoing her African Queen character , Hepburn again played a deeply religious spinster who teams up with a masculine loner to avenge a family member 's death . The movie received mediocre reviews . Its casting was enough to draw some people to the box office , but it did not meet studio expectations and was only moderately successful . 
 In 1976 , Hepburn returned to Broadway for a three @-@ month run of Enid Bagnold 's play A Matter of Gravity . The role of eccentric Mrs. Basil was deemed a perfect showcase for the actress , and the play was popular despite poor reviews . It later went on a successful nationwide tour . During its Los Angeles run , Hepburn fractured her hip , but she chose to continue the tour performing in a wheelchair . That year , she was voted " Favorite Motion Picture Actress " by the People 's Choice Awards . After three years away from the screen , Hepburn starred in the 1978 film Olly Olly Oxen Free . The adventure comedy was one of the biggest failures of her career — the screenwriter James Prideaux , who worked with Hepburn , later wrote that it " died at the moment of release " and referred to it as her " lost film " . Hepburn claimed the main reason she had done it was the opportunity to ride in a hot @-@ air balloon . The television movie The Corn Is Green ( 1979 ) , which was filmed in Wales , followed . It was the last of ten films Hepburn made with George Cukor , and gained her a third Emmy nomination . 
 By the 1980s , Hepburn had developed a noticeable tremor , giving her a permanently shaking head . She did not work for two years , saying in a television interview , " I 've had my day — let the kids scramble and sweat it out . " During this period she saw the Broadway production of On Golden Pond , and was impressed by its depiction of an elderly married couple coping with the difficulties of old age . Jane Fonda had purchased the screen rights for her father , actor Henry Fonda , and Hepburn sought to play opposite him in the role of quirky Ethel Thayer . On Golden Pond was a success , the second @-@ highest grossing film of 1981 . It demonstrated how energetic the 74 @-@ year @-@ old Hepburn was , as she dived fully clothed into <unk> Lake and gave a lively singing performance . The movie won her a second BAFTA and a record fourth Academy Award . Homer Dickens , in his book on Hepburn , notes that it was widely considered a sentimental win , " a tribute to her enduring career . " 
 Hepburn also returned to the stage in 1981 . She received a second Tony nomination for her portrayal in The West Side Waltz of a septuagenarian widow with a zest for life . Variety observed that the role was " an obvious and entirely acceptable version of [ Hepburn 's ] own public image . " Walter Kerr of The New York Times wrote of Hepburn and her performance , " One mysterious thing she has learned to do is breathe unchallengeable life into lifeless lines . " She hoped to make a film out of the production , but nobody purchased the rights . Hepburn 's reputation as one of America 's best loved actors was firmly established by this point , as she was named favorite movie actress in a survey by People magazine and again won the popularity award from People 's Choice . 
 = = = Focus on television ( 1984 – 94 ) = = = 
 In 1984 , Hepburn starred in the dark @-@ comedy Grace Quigley , the story of an elderly woman who enlists a hitman ( Nick Nolte ) to kill her . Hepburn found humor in the morbid theme , but reviews were negative and the box @-@ office was poor . In 1985 , she presented a television documentary about the life and career of Spencer Tracy . The majority of Hepburn 's roles from this point were in television movies , which did not receive the critical praise of her earlier work in the medium but remained popular with audiences . With each release , Hepburn would declare it her final screen appearance , but she continued to take on new roles . She received an Emmy nomination for 1986 's Mrs. Delafield Wants to Marry , then two years later returned for the comedy Laura Lansing Slept Here , which allowed her to act with her grandniece , Schuyler Grant . 
 In 1991 , Hepburn released her autobiography , Me : Stories of my Life , which topped best @-@ seller lists for over a year . She returned to television screens in 1992 for The Man Upstairs , co @-@ starring Ryan O 'Neal , for which she received a Golden Globe nomination . In 1994 she worked opposite Anthony Quinn in This Can 't Be Love , which was largely based on Hepburn 's own life , with numerous references to her personality and career . These later roles have been described as " a fictional version of the typically feisty Kate Hepburn character " and critics have remarked that Hepburn was essentially playing herself . 
 Hepburn 's final appearance in a theatrically released film , and her first since Grace Quigley ten years earlier , was Love Affair ( 1994 ) . At 86 years old , she played a supporting role alongside Annette Bening and Warren Beatty . It was the only film of Hepburn 's career , other than the cameo appearance in Stage Door Canteen , in which she did not play a leading role . Roger Ebert noted that it was the first time she had looked frail , but that the " magnificent spirit " was still there and said her scenes " steal the show " . The New York Times made similar observations as they reflected on the actress 's final big @-@ screen appearance , stating that " if she moved more slowly than before , in demeanor she was as game and modern as she had ever been " . Hepburn filmed one final role in the television movie One Christmas ( 1994 ) , for which she received a Screen Actors Guild Award nomination at 87 years old . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Public image and character = = = 
 Hepburn was known for being fiercely private , and would not give interviews or talk to fans for much of her career . She distanced herself from the celebrity lifestyle , uninterested in a social scene she saw as tedious and superficial , and she wore casual clothes that went strongly against convention in an era of glamour . She rarely appeared in public , even avoiding restaurants , and once wrestled a camera out of a photographer 's hand when he took a picture without asking . Despite her zeal for privacy , she enjoyed her fame , and later confessed that she would not have liked the press to ignore her completely . The protective attitude thawed as she aged ; beginning with a two @-@ hour @-@ long interview on The Dick Cavett Show in 1973 , Hepburn became increasingly open with the public . 
 Hepburn 's relentless energy and enthusiasm for life is often cited in biographies , while a headstrong independence became key to her celebrity status . This self @-@ assuredness meant she could be controlling and difficult ; her friend Garson Kanin likened her to a schoolmistress , and she was famously blunt and outspoken . Katharine Houghton commented that her aunt could be " maddeningly self @-@ righteous and bossy " . Hepburn confessed to being , especially early in life , " a me me me person " . She saw herself as having a happy nature , reasoning " I like life and I 've been so lucky , why shouldn 't I be happy ? " A. Scott Berg knew Hepburn well in her later years , and said that while she was demanding , she retained a sense of humility and humanity . 
 The actress led an active private life , reportedly swimming and playing tennis every morning . In her eighties she was still playing tennis regularly , as indicated in her 1993 documentary All About Me . She also enjoyed painting , which became a passion later in life . When questioned about politics , Hepburn told an interviewer , " I always just say be on the affirmative and liberal side . Don 't be a ' no ' person . " The anti @-@ communist attitude in 1940s Hollywood prompted her to political activity , as she joined the Committee for the First Amendment . Her name was mentioned at the hearings of the House Un @-@ American Activities Committee but Hepburn denied being a communist sympathizer . Later in life , she openly promoted birth control and supported abortion . She practiced Albert Schweitzer 's theory of " Reverence for Life " , but did not believe in religion or the afterlife . In 1991 , Hepburn told a journalist , " I 'm an atheist , and that 's it . I believe there 's nothing we can know except that we should be kind to each other and do what we can for other people . " Her public declarations of these beliefs led the American Humanist Association to award her the Humanist Arts Award in 1985 . 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 Hepburn 's only husband was Ludlow Ogden Smith , a socialite @-@ businessman from Philadelphia whom she met while a student at Bryn Mawr . The couple married on December 12 , 1928 , when she was 21 and he was 29 . Hepburn had Smith change his name to S. Ogden Ludlow so that she would not be known as " Kate Smith " , which she considered too plain . She never fully committed to the marriage and prioritized her career . The move to Hollywood in 1932 cemented the couple 's estrangement , and in 1934 , she traveled to Mexico to get a quick divorce . Hepburn often expressed her gratitude toward Smith for his financial and moral support in the early days of her career , and in her autobiography called herself " a terrible pig " for exploiting his love . The pair remained friends until his death in 1979 . 
 Soon after moving to California , Hepburn began a relationship with her agent , Leland Hayward , although they were both married . Hayward proposed to the actress once they had each divorced but she declined , later explaining , " I liked the idea of being my own single self . " They were involved for four years . In 1936 , while she was touring Jane Eyre , Hepburn began a relationship with entrepreneur Howard Hughes . She had been introduced to him a year earlier by their mutual friend Cary Grant . Hughes wished to marry her , and the tabloids reported their impending nuptials , but Hepburn was too focused on resurrecting her failing career . They separated in 1938 , when Hepburn left Hollywood after being labeled " box office poison " . 
 Hepburn stuck to her decision not to remarry , and made a conscious choice not to have children . She believed that motherhood should be a full @-@ time commitment , and said it was not one she was willing to make . " I would have been a terrible mother , " she told Berg , " because I 'm basically a very selfish human being . " She felt she had partially experienced parenthood through her much younger siblings , which fulfilled any need to have children of her own . Rumors have existed since the 1930s that Hepburn may have been a lesbian or bisexual , which she often joked about . In 2007 , William J. Mann released a biography of the actress in which he argued this was the case . In response to this speculation about her aunt , Katharine Houghton said , " I 've never discovered any evidence whatsoever that she was a lesbian . " 
 = = = = Spencer Tracy = = = = 
 The most significant relationship of Hepburn 's life was with Spencer Tracy , her co @-@ star in nine films . In her autobiography she wrote , " It was a unique feeling that I had for [ Tracy ] . I would have done anything for him . " Lauren Bacall , a close friend , later wrote of how " blindingly " in love Hepburn was with the actor . The relationship has subsequently received much publicity , and it is often cited as one of Hollywood 's legendary love affairs . Meeting when she was 34 and he was 41 , Tracy was initially wary of Hepburn , unimpressed by her dirty fingernails and suspecting that she was a lesbian , but Hepburn said she " knew right away that I found him irresistible . " Tracy remained married throughout their relationship ; although he and his wife Louise had been living separate lives since the 1930s , there was never an official split and neither party pursued a divorce . Hepburn did not interfere , and never fought for marriage . 
 With Tracy determined to conceal the relationship with Hepburn from his wife , it had to remain private . They were careful not to be seen in public together , and maintained separate residences . Tracy was an alcoholic and was frequently depressed ; Hepburn described him as " tortured " , and she devoted herself to making his life easier . Reports from people who saw them together describe how Hepburn 's entire demeanor changed when around Tracy . She mothered and obeyed him , and Tracy became heavily dependent on her . They often spent stretches of time apart due to their work , particularly in the 1950s when Hepburn was largely abroad for career commitments . 
 Tracy 's health declined significantly in the 1960s , and Hepburn took a five @-@ year break in her career to care for him . She moved into Tracy 's house for this period , and was with him when he died on June 10 , 1967 . Out of consideration for Tracy 's family , she did not attend his funeral . It was only after Louise Tracy 's death , in 1983 , that Hepburn began to speak publicly about her feelings for her frequent co @-@ star . In response to the question of why she stayed with Tracy for so long , despite the nature of their relationship , she said , " I honestly don 't know . I can only say that I could never have left him . " She claimed to not know how he felt about her and that they " just passed twenty @-@ seven years [ sic ] together in what was to me absolute bliss . " 
 = = = Final years and death = = = 
 Hepburn stated in her eighties , " I have no fear of death . Must be wonderful , like a long sleep . " Her health began to deteriorate not long after her final screen appearance . In the winter of 1996 she was hospitalized with pneumonia . By 1997 she had become very weak , was speaking and eating very little , and it was feared she would die . She showed signs of dementia in her final years . In May 2003 , an aggressive tumor was found in Hepburn 's neck . The decision was made not to medically intervene , and she died on June 29 , 2003 , at the Hepburn family home in Fenwick , Connecticut . She was 96 years old and was buried in Cedar Hill Cemetery in Hartford . Hepburn requested that there be no memorial service . 
 Hepburn 's death received considerable public attention . Many tributes were held on television , and newspapers and magazines dedicated issues to the actress . American president George W. Bush said Hepburn " will be remembered as one of the nation 's artistic treasures . " In honor of her extensive theatre work , the lights of Broadway were dimmed for the evening of July 1 , 2003 . In 2004 , in accordance with Hepburn 's wishes , her belongings were put up for auction with Sotheby 's in New York City . The event garnered $ 5 @.@ 8 million , which Hepburn willed to her family . 
 = = Performances : technique and analysis = = 
 According to reports , Hepburn was not an instinctive actor . She liked to study the text and character carefully beforehand , making sure she knew them thoroughly , and then to rehearse as much as possible and film multiple takes of a scene . With a genuine passion for the industry she committed heavily to each role and insisted on learning any necessary skills and performing stunts herself . She was known to learn not only her own lines but also those of her costars . Commenting on her motivation , Stanley Kramer said , " Work , work , work . She can work till everyone drops . " Hepburn involved herself in the production of each of her films , making suggestions for the script and stating her opinion on everything from costumes to lighting to camerawork . 
 The characters Hepburn played were , with very few exceptions , wealthy and intelligent , and often strong and independent . These tough characters tended to be humbled in some form and revealed to have a hidden vulnerability . Garson Kanin described what he called " the formula for a Hepburn success : A high @-@ class , or stuck @-@ up ... girl is brought down to earth by an earthy type , or a lowbrow ... or a cataclysmic situation . It seems to have worked time and time again . " Due to this repeated character arc , Britton sees Hepburn as embodying the " contradictions " of the " nature and status of women " , as the strong females she depicts are eventually " restored to a safe position within the status quo " . Film critic Molly Haskell has commented on the importance of this to Hepburn 's career : with an intimidating presence , it was necessary that her characters " do some kind of self @-@ abasement , to stay on the good side of the audience . " 
 Hepburn is one of the most celebrated American actresses , but she has also been criticized for a lack of versatility . Her on @-@ screen persona closely matched her own real personality , something Hepburn admitted herself . In 1991 she told a journalist , " I think I 'm always the same . I had a very definite personality and I liked material that showed that personality . " Playwright and author David <unk> has said , " Picture Katharine Hepburn in every movie she ever starred in and ask yourself if she 's not playing , essentially , the same part over and over ... Icon or no icon , let 's not confuse a truly fascinating and unique woman with a superior actress . " Another repeated criticism is that her demeanor was too cold . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Hepburn is considered an important and influential cultural figure . Ros Horton and Sally Simmons included her in their book Women Who Changed The World , which honors 50 women who helped shape world history and culture . She is also named in Encyclopædia Britannica 's list of " 300 Women Who Changed the World " , Ladies Home Journal 's book 100 Most Important Women of the 20th century , Variety magazine 's " 100 Icons of the Century " , and she is number 84 on VH1 's list of the " 200 Greatest Pop Culture Icons of All Time " . In 1999 , the American Film Institute named Hepburn the " greatest American screen legend " among females . 
 Regarding Hepburn 's film legacy , broadcaster Sheridan Morley said she " broke the mold " for women in Hollywood , where she brought a new breed of strong @-@ willed females to the screen . Film academic Andrew Britton wrote a monograph studying Hepburn 's " key presence within classical Hollywood , a consistent , potentially radical disturbance " , and pinpoints her " central " influence in bringing feminist issues to the screen . Maryann <unk> <unk> has claimed that Hepburn 's performances fostered a " decisiveness toward a new vision of women . " 
 Off screen , Hepburn lived in a manner ahead of her time ; she thus came to symbolize the " modern woman " and played a part in changing attitudes towards the gender . Horton and Simmons write , " Confident , intelligent and witty , four @-@ time Oscar winner Katharine Hepburn defied convention throughout her professional and personal life ... Hepburn provided an image of an assertive woman whom [ females ] could watch and learn from . " After Hepburn 's death , film historian Jeanine Basinger stated , " What she brought us was a new kind of heroine — modern and independent . She was beautiful , but she did not rely on that . " Mary McNamara , an entertainment journalist and reviewer for the Los Angeles Times wrote , " More than a movie star , Katharine Hepburn was the patron saint of the independent American female . " She was not universally revered by feminists , however , who were angered by her public declarations that women " cannot have it all , " meaning a family and a career . 
 Hepburn 's legacy extends to fashion , where she was a pioneer for wearing trousers at a time when it was radical for a woman to do so . She contributed towards making trousers acceptable for women , as fans began to imitate her clothing . In 1986 she received a lifetime achievement award from the Council of Fashion Designers of America in recognition of the influence she played in women 's fashion . 
 A number of Hepburn 's films have become classics of American cinema , with four of her pictures ( The African Queen , The Philadelphia Story , Bringing Up Baby , and Guess Who 's Coming to Dinner ) featured on the American Film Institute 's list of the 100 Greatest American Films of all time . Adam 's Rib and Woman of the Year were included in the AFI 's list of the Greatest American Comedies . Her clipped , patrician voice is considered one of the most distinctive in film history . [ Sample , from Stage Door ( 1937 ) ] 
 = = = Memorials = = = 
 Hepburn has been honored with several memorials . The Turtle Bay community in Manhattan , New York City , where she maintained a residence for over 60 years , dedicated a garden in her name in 1997 . After Hepburn 's death in 2003 , the intersection of East 49th Street and 2nd Avenue was renamed " Katharine Hepburn Place " . Three years later Bryn Mawr College , Hepburn 's alma mater , launched the Katharine Houghton Hepburn Center . It is dedicated to both the actress and her mother , and encourages women to address important issues affecting their gender . The center awards the annual Katharine Hepburn Medal , which " recognizes women whose lives , work and contributions embody the intelligence , drive and independence of the four @-@ time @-@ Oscar @-@ winning actress " . The Katharine Hepburn Cultural Arts Center was opened in 2009 in Old Saybrook , Connecticut , the location of the Hepburn family beach home which she loved and later owned . The building includes a performance space and a Katharine Hepburn museum . 
 The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences library and the New York Public Library hold collections of Hepburn 's personal papers . Selections from the New York collection , which documents Hepburn 's theatrical career , were presented in a five @-@ month exhibition , Katharine Hepburn : In Her Own Files , in 2009 . Other exhibitions have been held to showcase Hepburn 's career . One Life : Kate , A Centennial Celebration was held at the National Portrait Gallery in Washington from November 2007 to September 2008 . Kent State University exhibited a selection of her film and theatre costumes from October 2010 to September 2011 in Katharine Hepburn : Dressed for Stage and Screen . Hepburn has also been honored with her own postal stamp as part of the " Legends of Hollywood " stamp series . In 2015 , the British Film Institute held a two @-@ month retrospective of Hepburn 's work . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Hepburn is the subject of a one @-@ woman play , Tea at Five , written by Matthew Lombardo . The first act features Hepburn in 1938 , after being labeled " box office poison " , and the second act in 1983 , where she reflects on her life and career . It was first performed in 2002 at the Hartford Stage . Hepburn has been portrayed in Tea at Five by Kate Mulgrew , Tovah Feldshuh , Stephanie Zimbalist , and Charles Busch . Feldshuh also appeared as Hepburn in The Amazing Howard Hughes , a 1977 television movie , while <unk> Ann Taylor later portrayed her in The Scarlett O 'Hara War ( 1980 ) . In Martin Scorsese 's 2004 biopic of Howard Hughes , The Aviator , Hepburn was portrayed by Cate Blanchett , who won the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress for her performance . This marked the first instance where the portrayal of an Academy Award @-@ winning actress was turned into an Academy Award @-@ winning role . 
 In 2014 , two Hepburn biopics were announced to be in development . The first deals with her relationship with Spencer Tracy , and the second covers her early years in Hollywood ( based on William Mann 's account ) . 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 Hepburn won four Academy Awards , the record number for a performer , and a total of 12 Oscar nominations for Best Actress — a number surpassed only by Meryl Streep . Hepburn also holds the record for the longest time span between first and last Oscar nominations , at 48 years . She received two awards and five nominations from the British Academy Film Awards , one award and six nominations from the Emmy Awards , eight Golden Globe nominations , two Tony Award nominations , and awards from the Cannes Film Festival , Venice Film Festival , the New York Film Critics Circle Awards , the People 's Choice Awards , and others . Hepburn was inducted into the American Theater Hall of Fame in 1979 . She also won a Lifetime Achievement Award from the Screen Actors Guild in 1979 and received the Kennedy Center Honors , which recognize a lifetime of accomplishments in the arts , in 1990 . 
 Hepburn was recognized by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences for the following performances : 
 6th Academy Awards ( 1934 ) : Best Actress , win , for Morning Glory 
 8th Academy Awards ( 1936 ) : Best Actress , nomination , for Alice Adams 
 13th Academy Awards ( 1941 ) : Best Actress , nomination , for The Philadelphia Story 
 15th Academy Awards ( 1943 ) : Best Actress , nomination , for Woman of the Year 
 24th Academy Awards ( 1952 ) : Best Actress , nomination , for The African Queen 
 28th Academy Awards ( 1956 ) : Best Actress , nomination , for Summertime 
 29th Academy Awards ( 1957 ) : Best Actress , nomination , for The Rainmaker 
 32nd Academy Awards ( 1960 ) : Best Actress , nomination , for Suddenly , Last Summer 
 35th Academy Awards ( 1963 ) : Best Actress , nomination , for Long Day 's Journey into Night 
 40th Academy Awards ( 1968 ) : Best Actress , win , for Guess Who 's Coming to Dinner 
 41st Academy Awards ( 1969 ) : Best Actress , win , for The Lion in Winter ( shared with Barbra Streisand for Funny Girl ) 
 54th Academy Awards ( 1982 ) : Best Actress , win , for On Golden Pond 
 = = Filmography and theatre credits = = 
 During her 66 @-@ year career , Hepburn appeared in 44 feature films , 8 television movies , and 33 plays . Her movie career covered a range of genres , including screwball comedies , period dramas , and adaptations of works by top American playwrights . She appeared on the stage in every decade from the 1920s to the 1980s , performing plays by Shakespeare and Shaw , and a Broadway musical . 
 Select filmography : 
 Select theatre roles : 
 = Move ( MercyMe song ) = 
 " Move " is a song by Christian rock band MercyMe . Written by MercyMe and Dan Muckala , " Move " is a dance @-@ rock song with a sound similar to that of pop rock band Maroon 5 . The theme of the song 's lyrics is perseverance through adversity . Released on May 23 , 2011 as the third single from MercyMe 's 2010 album The Generous Mr. Lovewell , " Move " was received with positive critical reviews , especially for the arrangement of the song . " Move " attained success as a single , peaking atop Billboard magazine 's Christian Songs , Hot Christian AC , and Christian AC Indicator charts , as well as at No. 6 on the Billboard Christian CHR chart and No. 20 on the Billboard Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Move " was written by MercyMe and Dan Muckala . It was produced by Brown Bannister and Muckala , and was recorded by F. Reid Shippen at Sonic Ranch in El Paso , Texas . Overdubs were recorded by Muckala , Bannister , and Billy Whittington at <unk> Sound and <unk> Studio . The song was mixed by Shippen at Robot Lemon in Nashville , Tennessee and was mastered by Ted Jensen at Sterling Sound in New York . 
 " Move " is a dance @-@ rock song with a length of two minutes and fifty @-@ eight seconds . It is set in the key of A minor and has a tempo of 100 beats per minute , with a vocal range spanning from G4 @-@ G5 . The musical feel of " Move " has been compared to that of Maroon 5 , particularly their songs " This Love " and " Makes Me Wonder " . Lyrically , the song is about perseverance through adversity , with the narrator singing that he will “ move to a different drum no matter what life brings " . The song does not directly mention God . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 " Move " received generally positive reviews . Allmusic reviewer Jared Johnson called the song " as relevant as anything MercyMe have ever done " . Roger Gelwicks of Jesus Freak Hideout described " Move " as " an upbeat rocker complete with an infectious handclap beat " . Andy Argyrakis of Today 's Christian Music described the song as " foot stomping " , and Kevin Davis of Christian Music Review commented that the song " has a fantastic rock @-@ dance arrangement like ' This Love ' by Maroon 5 " . Tris McCall of The Star @-@ Ledger was more negative in his review , commenting that the song " sounds so much like Maroon 5 that it ’ s almost embarrassing " , and that " in a music industry governed by sanity , the two songwriters [ Adam Levine of Maroon 5 and Bart Millard of MercyMe ] would sing shoulder to shoulder and reach a common audience " . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 " Move " debuted at No. 41 on the Hot Christian Songs chart for the chart week of May 28 , 2011 , and advanced to No. 30 in its second chart week . " Move " advanced to No. 20 in its fourth chart week and to No. 9 in its tenth chart week . The song advanced to No. 5 in its twelfth chart week and spent two more weeks on the chart before advancing to No. 1 . " Move " spent a total of nine consecutive weeks atop the Christian Songs chart before dropping to No. 2 , supplanted by Casting Crowns ' " Courageous " . The song spent a total of three consecutive weeks at the No. 2 spot before falling to No. 3 . " Move " dropped to No. 6 in its twenty @-@ ninth chart week , and fell to No. 9 in its thirtieth and final week on the chart . In all , " Move " spent a total of thirty weeks on the chart , nine of them at No. 1 . 
 " Move " has also peaked at No. 1 on the Hot Christian AC chart , No. 1 on the Christian AC Indicator chart , No. 6 on the Christian CHR chart , and No. 20 on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 chart , which is equivalent to No. 120 on the Billboard Hot 100 . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Weekly charts = = = 
 = = = Year @-@ end charts = = = 
 = Thomas Cubitt ( British Army officer ) = 
 General Sir Thomas Astley Cubitt , KCB , CMG , DSO ( 9 April 1871 – 19 May 1939 ) was a British Army officer of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries , who commanded a division in the First World War and in retirement served as Governor of Bermuda . 
 Cubitt was the youngest son of a family of rural gentry in Norfolk , who joined the Royal Artillery in 1891 . He requested colonial service , and spent five years in Africa , where he was involved in the creation of the West African Frontier Force and served in a number of campaigns in northern Nigeria . Shortly before the outbreak of the First World War , he was appointed as Deputy Commissioner in Somaliland , where he mounted a series of campaigns against the Dervish State . 
 He requested a transfer to the Western Front in 1916 , and commanded an infantry battalion and a brigade before being promoted to take command of 38th ( Welsh ) Division in early 1918 . He led the division until the Armistice , with marked success . Following the war , he held a series of peacetime commands in Germany , Egypt , and England , before being made Governor of Bermuda in 1931 . He held this position until 1936 , when he retired . 
 = = Family background = = 
 Born at Great Yarmouth on 9 April 1871 , Thomas was the third son of Major Frank Astley Cubitt and his wife Bertha , daughter of Captain Thomas Blakiston of the Royal Navy . The family resided at Thorpe Hall in Norwich , with an estate at <unk> , near Great Yarmouth . Major Cubitt came from a family of rural gentry , and had attended Rugby and Jesus College , Cambridge before entering the British Army in 1853 as an ensign in the 5th Regiment of Foot . He saw service in the Indian Mutiny before returning to England to act as adjutant to volunteer battalions of the Norfolk Regiment , and retired from the Army in 1889 . He later served as a Justice of the Peace and chair of the local district council . 
 Cubitt 's eldest brother , Bertram Blakiston ( b . 1862 ) , attended Balliol College , Oxford before entering the civil service ; he would later serve as the private secretary to the Conservative politicians Edward Stanhope , Secretary of State for War , in 1890 @-@ 91 , and St John Brodrick , Under @-@ Secretary of State for War , in 1896 @-@ 98 . He was knighted in 1920 . The middle brother , Julian Francis ( b . 1869 ) studied at Selwyn College , Cambridge , but does not appear to have had an active public career . Their one sister , Helen , married a German economist , Dr. Moritz Julius Bonn , in 1903 . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Thomas Cubitt attended Haileybury , as his brother Julian had done , but rather than attend university he studied at the Royal Military Academy , Woolwich , before being commissioned into the Royal Artillery in 1891 . After service in India , and a course at the Staff College , Camberley , he requested a transfer to a colonial posting . He was sent to West Africa in 1898 , and appointed as commander of the artillery in the Northern Nigeria Protectorate on its formation in 1900 , alongside a promotion to Captain . Whilst in Nigeria , he was closely involved in the formation of the Nigeria Regiment in the West African Frontier Force . He saw active duty in a number of expeditions between 1900 and 1903 , including as Staff officer to Colonel George <unk> in the January 1901 expedition to defeat the Emir of <unk> , and culminating in the command of a battalion of mounted infantry during the Kano @-@ Sokoto campaign of 1903 . For his service in Africa , he was mentioned in despatches several times ( including 31 August 1901 ) , promoted to the brevet rank of Major on 21 March 1901 , and awarded the Distinguished Service Order ( DSO ) . 
 He returned to regimental duties in the United Kingdom in 1905 , and from 1908 to 1911 he served as a Brigade Major in Ireland with 3rd Cavalry Brigade . 
 = = First World War = = 
 In July 1914 , Cubitt was appointed Deputy Commissioner and Officer Commanding for the Somaliland Protectorate ; after the disastrous Battle of <unk> <unk> , the colonial administration was seeking to restore British control over the inland areas of the Protectorate . Cubitt planned and commanded a series of operations through the winter of 1914 @-@ 15 , destroying several Dervish forts . Shortly after he arrived in Somaliland , the First World War had broken out , and once the winter campaign was over he requested to be transferred to Europe ; the request was granted , but it took until early 1916 for him to be replaced and make his way home . For his services in Africa , he was appointed a Companion of the Order of St Michael and St George and a Companion of the Bath , and promoted to brevet Colonel . 
 Cubitt turned down the opportunity of a staff posting on the Western Front to request a front @-@ line command , and briefly commanded the 8th ( Service ) Battalion of the Lincolnshire Regiment in early 1917 before assuming command of 57th Brigade in April . The brigade saw service at Messines and Ypres in 1917 , and in the Spring Offensive of early 1918 . He was then appointed to take command of 38th ( Welsh ) Division in late May or early June 1918 , after its previous commander , Charles Blackader , had fallen ill . 
 An officer in one of the 38th 's infantry battalions , who met Cubitt in early June , shortly after he took command , described him as " a very large and fierce @-@ looking major @-@ general , with two rows of ribbons , and a gleam in his eye " , who proceeded to interrogate a subaltern about the exact type and position of his unit 's trench latrines , apparently something of a pet topic . A " fire @-@ eater with a marvellous flow of language " , it was Cubitt 's manner of speech , more than anything else , which made an impact on his contemporaries ; a front @-@ line officer in 1918 described watching him , during the October offensive , clearing a traffic jam with merely " a magnificent gush of language " . A colleague from his early days in the Artillery described him as a " perpetual joy to the soldier 's world ... because of his picturesque language , which never gave offence because it was so absolutely natural and so aptly fitted the occasion " , but under some circumstances it proved less suitable . Following a failed raid in 1918 , he visited the offending battalion and harangued the officers collectively for some time , before demanding that they " damn well had to do the raid over again , and damn well see that [ they ] made a proper job of it , or , by God , damn well go on raiding until [ they ] damn well did . " To the officers on the receiving end , already tired and dissatisfied , this was seen as a " contemptible exhibition " for a senior officer to make . 
 Regardless of his personal style , Cubitt was credited by Douglas Haig with achieving the desired results . The 38th Division had mounted a successful but very costly attack in April 1918 ; under his command , it mounted two further major operations , at the Battle of Albert in August and Battle of Cambrai in October . Both were successful , with the division demonstrating flexibility , improvisation , and a highly effective tactical doctrine . The division 's performance at Cambrai was sufficiently good to rank it as one of the most effective British divisions during the Hundred Days Offensive . 
 = = Postwar career = = 
 Cubitt remained with the 38th Division until the end of the war , and in March 1919 was transferred to command 3rd Infantry Brigade in the British Army of the Rhine . Shortly afterwards , in August , he was posted to take over the demobilising 54th ( East Anglian ) Division in Egypt , remaining with them until October , when the final units sailed for England . 
 In 1920 , he was appointed to command the Presidency and Assam District in eastern India . The same year , he married Mary <unk> ( née Wood ) , the widow of an officer in the Norfolk Regiment . He returned to England in 1924 , remaining on half @-@ pay until he took command of the 53rd ( Welsh ) Division , a Territorial Army formation , in 1927 . In 1928 , he transferred to the command of the 2nd Division , a regular formation , and was promoted to Lieutenant @-@ General in 1930 . In 1931 , he was knighted and appointed Governor of Bermuda , holding the post for five years before retiring in 1936 . He was promoted to full General in 1935 , and from 1931 to his death held the ceremonial position of colonel commandant of the Royal Artillery . 
 Cubitt died on 19 May 1939 , leaving an estate of £ 19 @,@ 000 . 
 = The Boat Race 1927 = 
 The 79th Boat Race took place on 2 April 1927 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . Oxford 's crew was marginally heavier than their opponents , and saw five participants return with Boat Race experience , compared to Cambridge 's four . Umpired for the first time by former Oxford rower Charles Burnell , Cambridge won by three lengths in a time of 20 minutes 14 seconds . It was the first race in the history of the event to be broadcast live on BBC Radio . The victory took the overall record in the event to 40 – 38 in Oxford 's favour . The inaugural Women 's Boat Race was contested this year , with Oxford securing the victory . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities ; it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and , as of 2014 , broadcast worldwide . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1926 race by five lengths , with Oxford leading overall with 40 victories to Cambridge 's 37 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . This year also saw the inaugural running of the Women 's Boat Race , between female crews from the two universities . 
 Oxford were coached by H. R. Baker ( who rowed for the Dark Blues in the 1908 and 1909 races ) , G. C. Bourne ( who had rowed for the university in the 1882 and 1883 races ) , R. C. Bourne ( who had rowed four times between 1909 and 1912 ) and P. C. Mallam ( a Dark Blue from 1921 to 1924 inclusive ) . Cambridge were coached by William Dudley Ward ( who had rowed in 1897 , 1899 and 1900 races ) , Francis Escombe and David Alexander Wauchope ( who had rowed in the 1895 race ) . For the first year the umpire was Charles Burnell , who had rowed for Oxford in the 1895 , 1896 , 1897 and 1898 races . 
 It was the first time that the progress of the race was broadcast on BBC Radio from the umpire 's launch Magician . Poet J. C. Squire and Olympic gold medallist and former Oxford rower Guy Nickalls provided the commentary , with transmission equipment on the boat weighing in excess of 1 @,@ 000 pounds ( 450 kg ) , and using a number of specially built reception points along the course . It was the second live outdoor commentary ever broadcast , the first being the England versus Scotland match of the 1927 Five Nations Championship . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crew weighed an average of 12 st 8 @.@ 625 lb ( 79 @.@ 9 kg ) , 2 @.@ 25 pounds ( 1 @.@ 0 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Cambridge 's boat contained four participants with Boat Race experience , including cox J. A. Brown who was steering the Light Blues for the fourth consecutive year . Oxford saw five members of the previous year 's crew return , including E. C. T. Edwards and James Douglas Wishart Thomson , both of whom were rowing for the third time in the event . Cambridge 's Australian number six J. B. Bell and his opposite number , American Howard T. Kingsbury of Yale University , were the only non @-@ British participants registered in the race . 
 According to author and former Oxford rower George Drinkwater , neither crew could " be classed in a very high standard " , claiming Cambridge 's selection was poor and Oxford 's coaches indecisive . Ten days before the race , Oxford 's W. S. Llewellyn was struck down by German measles and was replaced by A. M. Hankin who was placed at stroke . 
 = = Race = = 
 Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station , handing the Middlesex side of the river to Cambridge . In a strong wind and " big spring tide " , Burnell started the race at 1 : 30 p.m. After a level start , Oxford held a canvas @-@ length lead by the time the crews passed Craven Steps , but the Light Blues levelled the race using the advantage of the bend in the river at Craven Cottage . The crews passed the Mile Post level whereupon Oxford retook the lead , slightly out @-@ rating their opponents and passed below Hammersmith Bridge with a half @-@ length advantage . Nearly clear by The Doves pub , the Dark Blues ran into strong wind and rough water and Cambridge started to reduce their lead . 
 A lead of one @-@ third of a length at Chiswick Steps was soon overhauled by the Light Blues who were almost clear at Barnes Bridge . They rowed on to win " comfortably " by three lengths in a time of 20 minutes 14 seconds . It was Cambridge 's fourth consecutive victory and their eighth win in nine races , and took the overall record in the event to 40 – 38 in Oxford 's favour . Following the race , the tide was so high that spectators were forced to wade through water that was knee @-@ deep . 
 Oxford won the inaugural women 's race by 15 seconds despite not rowing together ; the crews were not permitted to compete side @-@ by @-@ side , that style of competition being considered " unladylike " . 
 = SMS Juan de Austria = 
 SMS Juan de Austria was the third member of the Kaiser Max class built for the Austrian Navy in the 1860s . Her keel was laid in October 1861 at the Stabilimento Tecnico Triestino shipyard ; she was launched in July 1862 , and was completed in 1863 . She carried her main battery — composed of sixteen 48 @-@ pounder guns and fifteen 24 @-@ pounders — in a traditional broadside arrangement , protected by an armored belt that was 110 mm ( 4 @.@ 3 in ) thick . 
 Juan de Austria saw action at the Battle of Lissa in July 1866 . There she was heavily engaged in the center of the melee ; she traded broadsides with the Italian ironclad Re di Portogallo and was hit three times by the turret ship Affondatore , though she received little damage . After the war , Juan de Austria was modernized slightly in 1867 to correct her poor seakeeping and improve her armament , but she was nevertheless rapidly outpaced by naval developments in the 1860s and 1870s . Obsolescent by 1873 , Juan de Austria was officially " rebuilt " , though in actuality she was broken up for scrap , with only her armor plate , parts of her machinery , and other miscellaneous parts being reused in the new Don Juan d 'Austria . 
 = = Design = = 
 Juan de Austria was 70 @.@ 78 meters ( 232 ft 3 in ) long between perpendiculars ; she had a beam of 10 m ( 32 ft 10 in ) and an average draft of 6 @.@ 32 m ( 20 ft 9 in ) . She displaced 3 @,@ 588 metric tons ( 3 @,@ 531 long tons ; 3 @,@ 955 short tons ) . She had a crew of 386 . Her propulsion system consisted of one single @-@ expansion steam engine that drove a single screw propeller . The number and type of her coal @-@ fired boilers have not survived . Her engine produced a top speed of 11 knots ( 20 km / h ; 13 mph ) from 1 @,@ 900 indicated horsepower ( 1 @,@ 400 kW ) . She could steam for about 1 @,@ 200 nautical miles ( 2 @,@ 200 km ; 1 @,@ 400 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 Juan de Austria was a broadside ironclad , and she was armed with a main battery of sixteen 48 @-@ pounder muzzle @-@ loading guns and fifteen 24 @-@ pounder 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) rifled muzzle @-@ loading guns . She also carried a single 12 @-@ pounder gun and a six @-@ pounder . The sides of ship 's hull were sheathed with wrought iron armor that was 110 mm ( 4 in ) thick and extended from bow to stern . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Juan de Austria was built by the Stabilimento Tecnico Triestino ( STT ) shipyard . She was laid down in October 1861 , and her completed hull was launched on 26 July 1862 . Fitting @-@ out work was completed the following year and she was commissioned into the Austrian fleet . She proved to be very wet forward , owing to her open bow , and as a result , tended to handle poorly . In June 1866 , Italy declared war on Austria , as part of the Third Italian War of Independence , which was fought concurrently with the Austro @-@ Prussian War . Rear Admiral Wilhelm von Tegetthoff brought the Austrian fleet to Ancona on 27 June , in an attempt to draw out the Italians , but the Italian commander , Admiral Carlo Pellion di Persano , refused to engage Tegetthoff . 
 = = = Battle of Lissa = = = 
 On 16 July , Persano took the Italian fleet , with twelve ironclads , out of Ancona , bound for the island of Lissa , where they arrived on the 18th . With them , they brought troop transports carrying 3 @,@ 000 soldiers . Persano then spent the next two days bombarding the Austrian defenses of the island and unsuccessfully attempting to force a landing . Tegetthoff received a series of telegrams between 17 and 19 July notifying him of the Italian attack , which he initially believed to be a feint to draw the Austrian fleet away from its main bases at Pola and Venice . By the morning of the 19th , however , he was convinced that Lissa was in fact the Italian objective , and so he requested permission to attack . As Tegetthoff 's fleet arrived off Lissa on the morning of 20 July , Persano 's fleet was arrayed for another landing attempt . The latter 's ships were divided into three groups , with only the first two able to concentrate in time to meet the Austrians . Tegetthoff had arranged his ironclad ships into a wedge @-@ shaped formation , with Juan de Austria on his right flank ; the wooden warships of the second and third divisions followed behind in the same formation . 
 While he was forming up his ships , Persano transferred from his flagship , Re d 'Italia , to the turret ship Affondatore . This created a gap in the Italian line , and Tegetthoff seized the opportunity to divide the Italian fleet and create a melee . He made a pass through the gap , but failed to ram any of the Italian ships , forcing him to turn around and make another attempt . Juan of Austria initially attempted to follow Tegetthoff 's flagship , Erzherzog Ferdinand Max , but quickly lost contact with her in the ensuing melee . Juan of Austria became surrounded by Italian vessels , prompting her sister Kaiser Max to come to her aid . Juan of Austria thereafter engaged Re di Portogallo for around half an hour before shifting targets back to Affondatore . The latter scored three hits on Juan of Austria 's unarmored bow , but they caused little damage . The first passed directly through the ship without exploding , the second struck the belt armor and failed to penetrate , and the third hit her quarter deck . 
 By this time , Re d 'Italia had been rammed and sunk and the coastal defense ship Palestro was burning badly , soon to be destroyed by a magazine explosion . Persano broke off the engagement , and though his ships still outnumbered the Austrians , he refused to counter @-@ attack with his badly demoralized forces . In addition , the fleet was low on coal and ammunition . The Italian fleet began to withdraw , followed by the Austrians ; Tegetthoff , having gotten the better of the action , kept his distance so as not to risk his success . As night began to fall , the opposing fleets disengaged completely , heading for Ancona and Pola , respectively . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 After returning to Pola , Tegetthoff kept his fleet in the northern Adriatic , where it patrolled against a possible Italian attack . The Italian ships never came , and on 12 August , the two countries signed the Armistice of Cormons ; this ended the fighting and led to the Treaty of Vienna . Though Austria had defeated Italy at Lissa and on land at the Battle of Custoza , the Austrian army was decisively defeated by Prussia at the Battle of Königgrätz . As a result , Austria , which became Austria @-@ Hungary in the Ausgleich of 1867 , was forced to cede the city of Venice to Italy . 
 Juan de Austria was rebuilt in 1867 , particularly to correct her poor sea @-@ keeping . Her open bow was plated over and she was rearmed with twelve 7 @-@ inch ( 178 mm ) muzzle @-@ loaders manufactured by Armstrong and two 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) 4 @-@ pounder guns . By 1873 , the ship was obsolescent and had a thoroughly @-@ rotted hull , so the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy decided to replace the ship . Parliamentary objection to granting funds for new ships forced the navy to resort to subterfuge to replace the ship . Reconstruction projects were routinely approved by the parliament , so the navy officially " rebuilt " Juan de Austria and her sister ships . In reality , only some parts of the engines , armor plate , and other miscellaneous parts were salvaged from the ships . Juan de Austria was dismantled at the STT shipyard beginning in December 1878 . The new ironclads were given the same names of the old vessels in an attempt to conceal the deception . 
 = Tropical Depression One ( 1988 ) = 
 Tropical Depression One was the wettest tropical cyclone in Cuba since Hurricane Flora of 1963 . The first tropical cyclone of the 1988 Atlantic hurricane season , the system developed on May 30 from an area of disturbed weather in the northwestern Caribbean Sea . The tropical depression headed northeastward , making landfall in La Habana Province , Cuba without intensifying . Crossing Cuba , the depression became very disorganized as it emerged into the Straits of Florida and degenerated into an open trough on June 2 . Although only a tropical depression , the system flooded central and western Cuba with over 40 inches ( 1000 mm ) of rain , causing 37 fatalities , damage to over 1 @,@ 000 houses , and the evacuation of about 65 @,@ 000 residents . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On May 31 , Tropical Depression One developed in the western Caribbean Sea , a day before the start of the Atlantic hurricane season . The depression moved northeastward , passing just northwest of Isla de la Juventud before striking the Cuban mainland south of Havana . As it crossed the country , its strongest rainfall was east of the center , and the depression failed to intensify beyond winds of 30 mph ( 45 km / h ) . The National Hurricane Center never expected it to strengthen further , due to unfavorable wind shear . After a hurricane hunters flight could not detect a circulation , The depression degenerated into an open trough east of Florida on June 2 . 
 = = Impact and aftermath = = 
 While crossing Cuba , the depression dropped heavy rainfall , affecting the provinces of Cienfuegos , Villa Clara , Sancti Spíritus , Camagüey , and Ciego de Ávila . The precipitation peaked at 40 @.@ 35 in ( 1 @,@ 025 mm ) in Cienfuegos Province , of which 34 @.@ 13 in ( 867 mm ) fell in one day . At the time , it was the second highest rainfall total in the country , only behind Hurricane Flora in 1963 , although Hurricane Dennis in 2005 later surpassed the depression . Rainfall reached 22 @.@ 76 in ( 578 mm ) in Cienfuegos and 21 @.@ 90 in ( 556 mm ) in Sancti Spíritus . 
 The heavy rainfall caused flooding in Camagüey that damaged about 5 @,@ 700 houses and destroyed 200 . The flooding also damaged 15 schools and hospitals , as well as several crop buildings . The floods left widespread areas without electricity or communications . Six bridges were destroyed in central and western Cuba , which , in addition to damaged roads and rail lines , severely disrupted the country 's transportation infrastructure . A total of 131 roads were unpassable due to the flooding , and 55 rail lines were damaged . The flood waters prompted officials to evacuate 65 @,@ 000 residents in low lying areas , including using helicopters and amphibious vehicles . A tornado was reported in the city of Camagüey , destroying five Soviet planes and several buildings . By the day after the depression dissipated , the Cuban government reported nine deaths , although the death toll was later finalized at 37 . The depression also killed thousands of livestock . Following the severe flooding , the Red Cross sent aid to the victims of Tropical Depression One in Cuba . The Red Cross had sent medical units , tents , blankets , and other necessary item to the victims by plane . Overall about 90 @,@ 000 people were affected . 
 With most of the rainfall occurring east of the center , the depression did not produce significant precipitation in Florida . Precipitation of around 1 in ( 25 mm ) spread across the Miami area , peaking at 3 @.@ 18 in ( 81 mm ) in Pompano Beach . 
 = Fallout Shelter = 
 Fallout Shelter is a free @-@ to @-@ play mobile simulation video game developed by Bethesda Game Studios , with assistance by Behaviour Interactive , and published by Bethesda Softworks . Part of the Fallout series , it was released worldwide for iOS devices in June 2015 , for Android devices in August 2015 , and for Microsoft Windows in July 2016 . The game tasks the player with building and managing their own Vault , a fallout shelter . 
 Upon release , Fallout Shelter received mostly positive reviews . Critics enjoyed the game 's extension of the Fallout universe , the core gameplay , and its visual style . Common criticisms included the game 's lack of depth , its use of unnecessary microtransactions , and its lack of an ending . The game grossed $ 5 @.@ 1 million in microtransaction sales in the first two weeks after its release . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 In Fallout Shelter , players build and manage their own Vault as an overseer – the leader and coordinator of their vault . Players guide and direct the citizens of the Vault , and need to keep them happy through meeting their needs such as power , food , and water . They rescue dwellers from the wasteland and assign them to different resource @-@ generating buildings in the vault , using the SPECIAL statistics system from the other Fallout games . Each character 's SPECIAL profile affects their ability to generate different resources , and their statistics can be increased by training them in rooms devoted to each stat . The dwellers can level up over time , increasing their health , and can be given new items and weapons to help with various tasks . The number of dwellers can be increased by waiting for new dwellers from the wasteland to arrive , or by pairing a male and a female dweller in living quarters to produce babies . 
 Balancing resources such as food , water , and power is an important aspect of the game . Many different rooms can be built in the vault , providing different items or stat bonuses . Players are not required to spend money in order to accelerate long timers or processes , instead having the option to instantly complete tasks at the risk of catastrophic failures – such as fires or " <unk> " infestations . Players are sometimes rewarded with lunchboxes that contain rewards , such as items or resources , which can purchased separately through microtransactions . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 In a 2009 interview with Engadget , while talking about a possible Fallout game for iOS , Bethesda 's Todd Howard said that the world of Fallout was " unique enough that it could translate to any platform " , revealing that several designs of an iOS Fallout game were pitched and rejected . On November 5 , 2009 John Carmack , who at that time worked for id Software , said that while it 's nothing official yet , he had an internal proof of concept made for a Fallout iPhone game . Carmack said that he will likely be personally involved in making the game , although at the time he was working on other projects . He added that " at the very least I 'm going to be providing code . " 
 Fallout Shelter was announced by Bethesda during its press conference at the Electronic Entertainment Expo on June 14 , 2015 , where it was confirmed the game is a free @-@ to @-@ play title that would be released for iOS the same day . It was developed in a partnership with Behaviour Interactive , and was built using the Unity game engine . The game was also released for Android devices on August 13 , 2015 . 
 According to Pete Hines , vice president of Bethesda , the game is inspired by other video games like Little Computer People , Progress Quest , XCOM , SimCity and FTL : Faster Than Light . 
 Update 1 @.@ 6 along with the PC version of the game was announced at Bethesda 's press conference before Electronic Entertainment Expo 2016 held on June 12 , 2016 . Both of them were revealed to be coming in July . The PC version was released alongside the update on July 14 . 
 = = = Updates = = = 
 On June 30 , 2015 , the game added a character from Fallout 4 as a dweller for the first time . Preston Garvey , the leader of Commonwealth Minutemen , was added as a reward available from lunchboxes , along with his Laser Musket weapon , which can be equipped by other Vault dwellers . On July 10 , 2015 , the game received its first update which fixed some issues while adding a new " Photo Mode " feature that allows players to capture and share images of their Vault . On August 13 , a major update was launched for the iOS version , alongside the release of the Android version , adding mole rats and <unk> as new enemies . It also added a new feature where raiders would now begin to steal caps , instead of only stealing resources as before , and a robot butler named " Mister Handy " only available through lunchboxes . 
 On October 15 , the game received update 1 @.@ 2 that added cloud saving , survival mode , Russian language support and Piper , a character from Fallout 4 available only for iOS version through lunchboxes . The update added a statistics page , ability to skip tutorial and a new gameplay feature where dwellers can loot equipment from dead raiders . Later in October , the game received a Halloween @-@ themed update that added Halloween @-@ themed room decorations and outfits . The update removed the limit introduced in the previous update on number of dwellers that can be sent to explore the Wasteland . 
 On November 22 , the game received a Thanksgiving @-@ themed update . The update added Thanksgiving @-@ themed outfits and decorations . On December 10 , the game received update 1 @.@ 3 which added new features like pets including Dogmeat , ability to evict vault @-@ dwellers , a Sell All function for clearing out the inventory at once and new pickup lines and conversations for vault @-@ dwellers . The update also added snow and Christmas @-@ themed decorations . 
 In March 2016 , update 1 @.@ 4 was released which added a crafting system , new rooms , a new card in lunchboxes containing junk used in crafting , new pets and a barbershop . Update 1 @.@ 5 was released in April 2016 , adding new customization options for vault dwellers along with ability to scrap unwanted items and support for 3D Touch . Update 1 @.@ 6 released on July 14 , 2016 adding a quest system and 2 new items in the shop . Additionally the combat system was also tweaked in the update . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Fallout Shelter received " mixed " reviews , according to video game review aggregator Metacritic . 
 Reviewers generally enjoyed the gameplay , though criticized its lack of depth . Harry Slater from Pocket Gamer stated , " It 's not exactly the most exciting post @-@ apocalyptic game out there , but if casual is your bag there 's a lot to like here . " Chris Carter from Destructoid wrote , " I don 't want to play it every day forever and ever , but it 's definitely worth the time I invested in it . " Justin Davis of IGN remarked " Fallout Shelter is desperately in need of a set of endgame goals or resource sinks to look forward to . " 
 The visuals also gained some praise . Daniel Tack of Game Informer summarized the visuals as " flavorful in the iconic Vault Boy aesthetic . " Chris Carter remarked that " visually , Fallout Shelter is far more impressive than most resource @-@ management games on the market " . Jason Faulkner of Gamezebo found the graphics " impressive " , writing " not only are the cute little vault dwellers presented in sharp , Fallout @-@ faithful style , but the vault itself is quite stunning . " 
 Reviewers had mixed opinions about the game 's inclusion of microtransactions . Jeb Haught of Game Revolution opined , " when I add the micro @-@ transaction advantage to the post apocalyptic mix , the result puts a sour taste in my mouth " . Daniel Tack claimed that " the cash shop option in this free @-@ to @-@ play game is completely unobtrusive and unnecessary " . In contrast , Justin Davis says that " virtually every other gameplay element must be earned the old @-@ fashioned mobile way – by just waiting around . " 
 Fallout Shelter became the most popular free iOS application in the U.S. and UK within a day of its release , and the most popular iOS game on June 26 , 2015 . By June 12 , 2016 , Fallout Shelter had over 50 million players . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 On the day of its release , Fallout Shelter became the third @-@ highest grossing game in the iOS App Store . By July 16 , 2015 , two weeks after release , the game earned $ 5 @.@ 1 million in microtransaction sales . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 = New York State Route 20SY = 
 New York State Route 20SY ( NY 20SY ) was a state highway in the vicinity of Syracuse , New York , in the United States . It connected U.S. Route 20 ( US 20 ) to downtown Syracuse via Skaneateles , Camillus , Manlius , and Cazenovia in Onondaga County and Madison County . The highway began at an intersection with US 20 and NY 321 in the village of Skaneateles and ended at a junction with US 20 , NY 20N , and NY 92 near the village of Cazenovia . Most of NY 20SY overlapped another route ; however , two sections of NY 20SY — one in the town of Camillus and another near the village of Fayetteville — were not concurrent with another highway . 
 NY 20SY was assigned in 1951 , overlapping parts of the pre @-@ existing NY 321 , NY 5 , NY 92 , and NY 20N , a more southerly alternate route of US 20 in the Syracuse area . Both NY 20N and NY 20SY were removed c . 1962 . The two independent sections of NY 20SY near Camillus and Fayetteville eventually became part of NY 321 and NY 92 , respectively . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = West of Syracuse = = = 
 NY 20SY began at an intersection with US 20 ( East Genesee Street ) and NY 321 ( State Street ) in the village of Skaneateles . The route proceeded northward , overlapping NY 321 through the lakeside village and into the surrounding town of Skaneateles , where it became State Street Road . Once in Skaneateles , the surroundings became mostly rural ahead of an intersection with the Old Seneca Turnpike . The highway continued on , turning to the northeast as the highway entered the town of Elbridge . 
 In Elbridge , NY 20SY and NY 321 followed a more east – west routing as it passed through the town and intersected NY 368 . The route progressed eastward , intersecting with <unk> Road ( County Route <unk> or CR <unk> ) as it passed into the town of Camillus . Just east of the town line , NY 20SY and NY 321 split at an intersection with Forward Road , with NY 321 following Forward Road eastward and NY 20SY proceeding north on modern NY 321 to an intersection with NY 5 ( West Genesee Street ) . NY 20SY turned eastward here , joining NY 5 as both highways headed toward the village of Camillus . 
 West of Camillus , NY 5 and NY 20SY passed to the north of the West Hill Golf and Croquet Club before veering to the southeast as the highway approached the village of Camillus and the edge of a valley surrounding Ninemile Creek that contains the village . Upon reaching the lip of the valley , NY 5 and NY 20SY descended northeastward into both the valley and the village . Here , NY 5 and NY 20SY met the northern terminus of NY 174 and NY 321 before exiting the valley and entering an area of Camillus known as Fairmount . 
 = = = Syracuse = = = 
 Routes 5 and 20SY proceeded eastward through the primarily residential neighborhood of Fairmount to an intersection with NY 173 ( South Onondaga Road ) in eastern Fairmount . The routes continued on , passing through the town of Geddes before entering the city of Syracuse . In Syracuse , the two routes followed West Genesee Street and West Erie Boulevard into the downtown district , where NY 5 and NY 20SY intersected NY 48 at the intersection of West Erie Boulevard and West Genesee Street and US 11 at the junction of Erie Boulevard and State Street . 
 East of State , NY 20SY continued to follow NY 5 through the eastern part of Syracuse . The two routes met the southern terminus of NY 433 at Midler Avenue before passing north of LeMoyne College and exiting the city of Syracuse . Upon crossing into the town of DeWitt , Routes 5 and 20SY curved southward toward the hamlet of DeWitt , situated at the junction of NY 5 and NY 92 . Both NY 5 and NY 20SY turned east onto NY 92 , joining the route for just over 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) to the vicinity of Fayetteville . While NY 5 and NY 92 continued east into Fayetteville , NY 20SY turned southeast onto High Bridge Road . 
 = = = East of Syracuse = = = 
 The High Bridge Road portion of NY 20SY largely served as a southwestern bypass of Fayetteville . NY 20SY proceeded southeast from NY 5 and NY 92 , crossing into the town of Manlius and passing over Limestone Creek at a point known as High Bridge . Just northwest of the village of Manlius , NY 20SY intersected NY 92 at what is now the junction of NY 92 and NY 257 . The two routes converged once more , following Fayette Street into the village of Manlius . In the village center , NY 20SY and NY 92 intersected Seneca Street , which carried the overlapping routes of NY 20N and NY 173 . NY 20SY and NY 92 joined NY 20N and NY 173 here , creating a four @-@ route overlap that lasted for two blocks through the village 's business district to the junction of Washington and Seneca Streets . Here , NY 173 split from the overlap , following Seneca Street ( the old Seneca Turnpike ) eastward while the other three highways veered southeast onto Washington Street . 
 NY 20N , NY 20SY , and NY 92 exited the village , paralleling Limestone Creek as the highway headed southeastward through rural portions of the towns of Manlius and Pompey . As Cazenovia Road , the route served <unk> and Oran , two small creekside hamlets in the town of Pompey . Roughly 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) southeast of Manlius , Limestone Creek and the three @-@ route overlap split , with the creek proceeding south through a valley known as Pompey Hollow and the highway continuing into Madison County and the town of Cazenovia within . 
 In Cazenovia , the road became known as Syracuse Road and began to follow a more southerly alignment as it turned ahead of Cazenovia Lake . NY 20N , NY 20SY , and NY 92 gradually approached the lake and ultimately followed the western lakeshore as the roadway approached the village of Cazenovia . The three routes never actually reached the village , however , as all three designations ended at an intersection with US 20 ( the Cherry Valley Turnpike ) 0 @.@ 25 miles ( 0 @.@ 40 km ) west of the village limits and 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) west of the village center . 
 = = History = = 
 NY 20SY was assigned in 1951 as an alternate route of US 20 in the Syracuse area . While US 20 bypassed the city of Syracuse to the south , NY 20SY veered north to serve Downtown Syracuse and the eastern and western suburbs of the city . It was the second alternate route of US 20 near Syracuse ; the first , NY 20N , was also a northern alternate route of US 20 but it followed a more southerly routing than NY 20SY . Most of NY 20SY was concurrent to other , pre @-@ existing state highways in the Syracuse area , namely NY 321 , NY 5 , NY 92 , NY 173 , and NY 20N . NY 5 was assigned in 1924 ; NY 92 , NY 173 , and NY 321 were assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York ; and NY 20N was assigned c . 1938 . 
 While most of NY 20SY was concurrent with at least one other state highway , there were two segments where NY 20SY followed an independent routing . One was in the town of Camillus , where NY 20SY followed a previously unnumbered highway between NY 321 and NY 5 ; the other was southwest of the village of Fayetteville , where NY 20SY used a previously unnumbered highway to bypass the village while NY 92 passed through it . 
 When NY 20SY was first assigned , it entered downtown Syracuse on NY 5 and followed NY 5 and US 11 through downtown before leaving the area on NY 92 . It was realigned by 1954 to follow only NY 5 through downtown . The route left its original alignment at the junction of US 11 and NY 5 in downtown Syracuse and rejoined it at the western terminus of the NY 5 / NY 92 overlap in DeWitt . 
 Both NY 20N and NY 20SY were removed c . 1962 . The independent section of NY 20SY that bypassed Fayetteville became a realignment of NY 92 upon the removal of NY 20SY . The other independent section in Camillus became a realignment of NY 321 in the late 1980s . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = A Very Glee Christmas = 
 " A Very Glee Christmas " is the tenth episode of the second season of the American musical television series Glee , and the thirty @-@ second episode overall . It was written by series co @-@ creator Ian Brennan , directed by Alfonso Gomez @-@ Rejon , and premiered on Fox on December 7 , 2010 . It served as the mid @-@ season finale of season two — nearly two months elapsed before the next episode was aired — and featured Artie ( Kevin McHale ) trying to keep his girlfriend Brittany 's ( Heather Morris ) belief in Santa Claus intact , and Sue ( Jane Lynch ) rigging the faculty Secret Santa gift exchange so she gets all the gifts , though she later becomes a Grinch when the gifts are repossessed . 
 The episode features seven songs , two of which come from the television special How the Grinch Stole Christmas ! . The creators of Glee received permission from the estate of Dr. Seuss for the use of characters from How the Grinch Stole Christmas ! , but were not allowed to use them in promotional photographs . Most of the songs featured in the episode had been released on Glee : The Music , The Christmas Album four weeks prior to airing , including " Baby , It 's Cold Outside " , which debuted at number fifty @-@ seven on the Billboard Hot 100 after the episode aired , despite not having been released separately as a single . " Welcome Christmas " , the other song to chart after the episode aired , was the only song from the episode not on the album , but it was released as a single , and it debuted at number thirty @-@ seven on the Canadian Hot 100 . 
 The episode received generally positive reviews from critics , most of whom seemed to have judged it with different criteria from their normal because it was a holiday episode , while the music fared somewhat better , especially the rendition of " Baby , It 's Cold Outside " as a duet between Kurt ( Chris Colfer ) and Blaine ( Darren Criss ) , which was extensively praised . Upon its initial airing , this episode was viewed by a hair under 11 @.@ 07 million American viewers and received a 4 @.@ 4 / 13 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic . The total viewership and ratings for this episode were down from the previous episode , " Special Education " , which was watched the week before by over 11 @.@ 68 million American viewers and received a 4 @.@ 6 / 13 rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The William McKinley High School faculty hold a Secret Santa gift exchange , but cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) tampers with the selection process to ensure that she receives all the gifts . Glee club director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) sends the club , New Directions , to carol around the school to raise money for a local homeless charity , but they are met with abuse from students and staff alike , and return empty @-@ handed . At Dalton Academy in Westerville , Ohio , former New Directions member Kurt Hummel ( Chris Colfer ) sings a duet of " Baby , It 's Cold Outside " with his friend Blaine Anderson ( Darren Criss ) to help him rehearse it for the Kings Island Christmas Spectacular . Will visits Kurt to seek his advice on a gift for Sue , and Kurt reveals that he has fallen in love with Blaine . 
 Glee club co @-@ captain Rachel Berry ( Lea Michele ) twice attempts to make amends with her estranged boyfriend Finn Hudson ( Cory Monteith ) , who is still upset that she cheated on him with his best friend Puck ( Mark Salling ) , and he officially ends their relationship . Club member Artie Abrams ( Kevin McHale ) discovers that his girlfriend Brittany Pierce ( Heather Morris ) still believes in Santa Claus , and encourages the other members to visit a Christmas grotto to help reinforce her belief . To Artie 's dismay , Brittany asks the grotto 's Santa to restore Artie 's ability to walk , which he agrees to do . Hoping to maintain her faith , Artie convinces football coach Shannon Beiste ( Dot @-@ Marie Jones ) to go to Brittany 's house dressed as Santa and explain that this particular wish cannot be granted . Santa 's visit is not a success , and Brittany loses her Christmas spirit , but she later finds a gift for Artie underneath her Christmas tree — a <unk> mobility device that allows him to stand and walk with the assistance of forearm crutches — which he demonstrates for the glee club . As Brittany tells the group that it must have come from Santa , Coach Beiste secretly observes the demonstration and smiles . 
 Will and the other faculty members discover Sue 's deception and reclaim their gifts with the intention of donating them to the homeless charity . Incensed , Sue dresses as the Grinch , with her favorite cheerleader Becky Jackson ( Lauren Potter ) as Max , and steals back the presents while she vandalizes the choir room 's Christmas decorations . The club members are stunned by the theft and destruction , but Will encourages them to give a private performance for the faculty , which proves successful and garners many charitable donations . Sue overhears their performance of " Welcome Christmas " , and she comes to regret her actions . She returns the presents to Will at his apartment , and brings the New Directions members to decorate a new Christmas tree and spread holiday cheer . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by series co @-@ creator Ian Brennan and directed by Alfonso Gomez @-@ Rejon . The creators of Glee received permission from the estate of Dr. Seuss for the use of characters from How the Grinch Stole Christmas ! , but were not allowed to use them in promotional photographs . 
 Recurring characters in this episode include glee club members Mike Chang ( Harry Shum , Jr . ) , Sam Evans ( Chord Overstreet ) and Lauren Zizes ( Ashley Fink ) , school bullies Dave Karofsky ( Max Adler ) and Azimio ( James Earl ) , football coach Shannon Beiste , cheerleader Becky Jackson ( Lauren Potter ) , and Blaine , lead singer of the Dalton Academy Warblers . 
 " A Very Glee Christmas " features cover versions of seven Christmas songs : " The Most Wonderful Day of the Year " from Rudolph the Red @-@ Nosed Reindeer , performed by New Directions ; " We Need a Little Christmas " from Mame , with Amber Riley on lead vocals ; Frank Loesser 's " Baby , It 's Cold Outside " , sung by Criss and Colfer ; " Merry Christmas Darling " by The Carpenters , sung by Michele , " Last Christmas " by Wham ! , sung by Michele and Monteith ; and " Welcome Christmas " from How the Grinch Stole Christmas ! , also by New Directions . Another song from How the Grinch Stole Christmas ! is heard in the episode — an arrangement of " You 're a Mean One , Mr. Grinch " , soundtracked by k.d. lang , and with the lyric " Mister Grinch " modified to " Sue the Grinch " . " Last Christmas " had been released previously as a charity single in late 2009 , and is included on Glee : The Music , The Christmas Album . " Welcome Christmas " was released as a single , available for digital download , separately from the album , which otherwise includes all remaining tracks and six additional songs not heard in the episode ; a different version of " You 're a Mean One , Mr. Grinch " was recorded for the album , which featured Morrison along with lang and used the original " Mister Grinch " lyric . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " A Very Glee Christmas " was first broadcast on December 7 , 2010 in the United States on Fox . It earned a 4 @.@ 4 / 13 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic , and received a hair under 11 @.@ 07 million American viewers during its initial airing . It won the 18 – 49 demographic against an NCIS rerun on CBS , Minute to Win It on NBC , the A Charlie Brown Christmas special on ABC , and One Tree Hill on CW . The total viewership and ratings for this episode were down from those of the previous episode , " Special Education " , which was watched by over 11 @.@ 68 million American viewers and received a 4 @.@ 6 / 13 rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic upon first airing on television on November 30 , 2010 . 
 In Canada , 2 @.@ 37 million viewers watched the episode , which ranked fifth for the week . This was a slight increase over the 2 @.@ 32 million viewers who watched the " Special Education " the previous week , though it had ranked second in that week . In Australia and the UK , the episode aired after Christmas , in the new year . The episode 's Australian broadcast , on February 7 , 2011 , drew 769 @,@ 000 viewers , which made Glee the seventeenth most @-@ watched program of the night ; it failed to place in the top fifty in the weekly viewership rankings . Here , viewership registered a steep 23 % fall from the previous episode , " Special Education , which attracted 1 @.@ 02 million viewers when it aired on January 31 , 2011 , and ranked twenty @-@ seventh for the week . In the UK , the episode was watched by 2 @.@ 20 million viewers ( 1 @.@ 89 million on E4 , and 315 @,@ 000 on E4 + 1 ) , which made it the most @-@ watched show on cable for the week , but the lowest @-@ viewed episode of the season so far , and down over 15 % from " Special Education " in the previous week , which received 2 @.@ 60 million viewers . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The episode received generally positive reviews from critics , most of whom seemed to have judged it on different criteria from their normal because it was a holiday episode . The Atlantic 's Kevin Fallon may have called it " sickly <unk> " , but maintained " that 's exactly what you want at Christmas " . His colleague Patrick Burns wrote , " Holiday episodes tread a dangerous line between sweet and saccharine , but this episode splits the difference perfectly . " The title of the article they wrote with Meghan Brown , " Glee Does Christmas : Cheesy but Charming " , found echoes in other reviews : both Amy Reiter of The Los Angeles Times and Anthony Benigno of the Daily News also thought the episode was quite cheesy , but Benigno characterized it as " the good kind of cheese ; the kind you 'll eat for <unk> before grandma and grandpa bring out the roast beef on Christmas dinner " , and Reiter 's bottom line was that it " may not have been the most wonderful episode of the year , but it did feature moments that twinkled and shined like the lovingly trimmed family tree . " Time 's James Poniewozik was less enthusiastic when he noted that Glee delivered an episode " that touched on all the requisite holiday bases but that felt perfunctory " , and added that it was " generally ho @-@ ho @-@ hum " . Robert Canning of IGN gave it a " great " 8 out of 10 , but stated that " the episode as a whole was lacking just a bit to turn it into an absolute classic " , and The A.V. Club 's Todd VanDerWerff gave the episode a " B − " and wrote , " I guess I 'd say that I thought the episode worked moment @-@ to @-@ moment , without working as an overall narrative " , but also stated that it was " positively filled with stupid moments " . 
 Joel Keller of AOL TV wrote that " the linchpin of the hour was Brittany 's belief in Santa Claus . " The New York Post 's Jarett Wieselman called it " adorably realized by actress Heather Morris " , and Canning said she " perfectly played up Brittany 's innocence and joy surrounding everything Santa " . Brown was less enthusiastic , and wrote that she was tiring of the " look how dumb yet kind @-@ hearted Brittany is " plots . Keller approved of the Artie and Brittany coupling , and said it was " way more fun to watch than Rachel and Finn and all their angst " , and Canning felt that the episode 's heart was Artie working to keep Brittany from becoming disillusioned about Santa . He also wrote , " shining in this storyline was Dot Jones as Coach Bieste . Her scene as Santa , and then her knowing expression as she watched Artie walk , were the best moments of the episode . " Burns agreed : " Coach Bieste 's performance as the Santa Claus bearer of harsh reality was quite moving . It 's nice to see her get to show her acting chops and refreshing to see her character 's vulnerability . " Poniewozik also agreed , and said Jones " has been remarkable " , " taking every ridiculous moment Glee has thrown at her and finding the true emotion at the core of the absurdity , which is what Glee at its best does . " However , he was disappointed by how the storyline played out : " it didn 't feel right that after the story the episode built around Brittany , it then felt that we needed to see Artie on his feet for it to be a truly happy ending . " 
 Bobby Hankinson of the Houston Chronicle was critical of the " really tedious Rachel / Finn back and forth " , and Canning wrote that the " only thing that really dragged the episode down was Rachel trying to win Finn back " . Keller asked rhetorically , " Do we still care about Rachel and Finn at this point ? " , and later stated , " nice as ' Last Christmas ' was , I 'm glad Finn didn 't fall for it . " Benigno noted that Finn 's few lines in the episode really counted . 
 Critics had widely divergent views of Sue 's storyline . Keller wrote , " They made Sue Sylvester into a cartoon character . " Though he called Sue 's destruction of the choir room " a fun little parody to watch " , he added , " in the grand scheme of what was a pretty damn good episode , it was too much of a distraction " , and worried that the role of Sue was becoming " a big fat joke " . While Canning also noted the shift in tone " from despicable Sue to cartoony evil Sue " , he enjoyed her " attempt to hijack Secret Santa " , and said it was " another fun reason to love to hate Sue Sylvester " . Hankinson felt that the Grinch was " the perfect touchstone for the heartless Ms. Sylvester and Jane Lynch 's lanky frame made the physical humor ( think gliding around the base of the tree on her belly ) really sing . " Poniewozik called Sue 's transformation " pretty amusing to watch " , admitted that he doubted he would " have been able to resist the urge to put the rangy Jane Lynch in that classic role " and called Brittany as Cindy Lou Who " unexpected , clever and surprisingly touching " . Several reviewers commented favorably on Becky playing Max , including Canning , who wrote " it was all worth it to realize Becky is and always will be the Max to Sue 's Grinch " , and Entertainment Weekly 's Tim Stack declared , " I totally love how Becky is becoming Sue ’ s little minion . It ’ s both adorable and hilarious . " 
 = = = Music and performances = = = 
 The episode 's musical performances received generally good marks , though some more than others . Canning described it as " an average song selection " , and wrote : " There are literally thousands of holiday songs to choose from and the ones sung in ' A Very Glee Christmas ' could have used some more of Santa 's magic . " Some reviewers commented on the songs themselves rather than the performances , including Wham ! ' s " Last Christmas " , which Canning described as " a terrible song in any season " , while Jen Harper of BuddyTV stated that she loved Wham ! 
 Benigno called " The Most Wonderful Day of the Year " a " perfectly pleasant opening that the <unk> sing while they decorate their tree " . Canning deemed it " the episode 's most successful song " and added that it " would have been a great tone setter if the rest of the episode hadn 't focused on heartbreak , hate and <unk> " . Harper said that the song " got the episode off on the right holiday foot " , and Stack gave it a " B " and wrote that its performance " almost felt like the beginning of a real holiday musical . It was a little cheesy but also kind of charming and sweet . " The next song , " We Need a Little Christmas " , Benigno declared " fun but too short " . He added , " If there 's one thing this number teaches us , it 's that Mercedes is being woefully misused on this show and can carry a number as well , if not better than she can finish one . " Stack said that the " little taste " included in the show " sounded promising " , and Harper " totally loved this song " . 
 Kurt and Blaine 's duet on " Baby , It 's Cold Outside " received many more reviews than the other songs , and the greatest praise . Wieselman called it his " far and away favorite " song of the episode . Stack declared it the " complete and total highlight of the episode and one of the best moments of the second season " . He gave it an " A + " . Hankinson said it was the show 's " best musical number " , and described it as " well @-@ performed , sweet and wonderfully choreographed " ; he added : " It was bold , without being gimmicky " . The Atlantic 's Meghan Brown and Patrick Burns were both enthusiastic : Brown said " Kurt 's sweetly sexy duet with Blaine was near @-@ perfect " and " the vocals and choreography gave Chris Colfer and Darren Criss a real chance to shine " , while Burns called it " adorable " . Erica Futterman of Rolling Stone wrote that it was " full of sweet harmonies and has an ideal undercurrent of romantic tension " , though Harper " wasn 't feeling any chemistry between them " ; she felt the performance was " a little overacted " , but noted that " their voices seem to like each other " . Benigno was also less enthusiastic ; he gave the song a " B − " and felt there was " something missing " from the rendition : " these two could have sang this number in their sleep and it kind of sounds like they did " . 
 Rachel 's performance of " Merry Christmas , Darling " had a good reception , but with caveats . Futterman wrote that " she nails the sentiment with her restrained take — but we 'd love to move past Rachel 's phase of singing Lite @-@ FM ballads while watching everyone in bliss around her " . <unk> called it " nice and fun " and Michele 's voice " still a thing of wonder " , and he gave the song an " A − " , but added he was weary of " Rachel In Anguish Face " . Stack gave it a " B " and said Michele " did a great job as usual " , but noted it wasn 't a favored holiday song . Of the reviewers who actually discussed Rachel and Finn 's performance of " Last Christmas " , both Benigno and Stack were enthusiastic and gave grades of " B + " and " A − " respectively . The former called it " one of the more fun songs " in the episode , and the latter described the performance as " really fun and had great production design " . Futterman felt that Michele 's vocals were " a bit diva @-@ esque for the simple pop tune " , but noted that there were " sweet moments " . 
 Of the two songs from How the Grinch Stole Christmas ! featured in the episode , the first , a voiceover vocal of " You 're a Mean One , Mr. Grinch " sung by k.d. lang , based on a version of the song by artist Aimee Mann , as Sue wreaks havoc on the choir room , confused some reviewers , who thought that it was sung by Lynch herself . Benigno was one of these , though he said it was " thoroughly enjoyable " , gave the song a " B + " , and approved of the change in lyrics from " Mr. Grinch " to " Sue the Grinch " . Harper also approved of the change , and admitted she thought Lynch had sung it until Google set her straight . Futterman called the song a " weirdly fitting moment " that " nevertheless fell a bit short of being fully realized " . The second song , " Welcome Christmas " , was welcomed by reviewers : Benigno described it as " really , really lovely " and gave it an " A " . Harper cheered , and noted that the song " was sung very much like a real glee club , without people getting to showboat individually " . Futterman characterized it as a " note @-@ perfect performance " , and wrote : " The layered harmonies and simple sentiment — ' Christmas will always be , just so long as we have glee ! ' — tie the episode up with a bow , smoothing out the bumps that came before it . " 
 = = = Chart history = = = 
 Most of the Christmas songs featured in the episode had been released on Glee : The Music , The Christmas Album four weeks prior to airing . There were two exceptions : " Welcome Christmas " did not appear on the album but was released as a single , and " Last Christmas " , which was on the album but had originally been released as a charity single a full year before the episode aired . The top song from the show on the Billboard Hot 100 was neither of these : " Baby , It 's Cold Outside " debuted at number fifty @-@ seven once the episode aired , despite not having been released separately as a single ; it had jumped from number one hundred thirty to number twenty @-@ seven on Billboard 's Digital Song chart that same week , and debuted at number fifty @-@ three on the Canadian Hot 100 . " Welcome Christmas " debuted at number fifty @-@ nine on the Hot 100 , and at number thirty @-@ seven on the Canadian Hot 100 . " Last Christmas " , when it charted in December 2009 , debuted at number sixty @-@ three on the Hot 100 , and number sixty @-@ two on the Canadian Hot 100 , but in December 2010 reappeared at number thirty @-@ five on the Digital Songs chart alongside " Baby , It 's Cold Outside " , " Welcome Christmas " , and two other songs from the episode . The album itself reached number three on the Billboard 200 chart ; it sold over one million copies , and was certified platinum . 
 = Blackburn Meadows = 
 Blackburn Meadows is an area of land just inside the Sheffield city border at Tinsley . It became the location of the main sewage treatment works for the city in 1884 , and is now one of the largest treatment works in Britain . The treatment process was rudimentary , with sludge being removed to ponds and then to drying beds , after which it was used as manure or transferred by rail to a tip at Kilnhurst . The works progressively expanded to improve the quality of effluent discharged to the River Don and was a pioneer in the use of bio @-@ aeration , following experiments by the works manager during the First World War . This process became known as the " Sheffield System " , and was demonstrated to visitors from Great Britain and abroad . Despite these improvements , ammonia levels in the river below the works were high , and fish populations did not survive . 
 The works had its own internal standard gauge railway for over 100 years , which used three steam and three diesel locomotives over the course of its existence , until its replacement by road vehicles in the 1990s . During the 1926 general strike , the locomotives hauled trains over the main line , delivering wagons to Kilnhurst tip under a special dispensation . By the 1960s , the Sheffield sewer system was inadequate for the volume of effluent produced , and the Don Valley Interceptor Sewer was tunnelled beneath the city to the works , enabling 26 storm sewage overflows into the river to be shut down . Water quality was further improved by a new treatment process installed in 1992 to reduce ammonia levels , enabling fish stocks to be re @-@ established in the lower River Don . Subsequent improvements have been made so that the works complies with the Waste Incineration Directive and the Freshwater Fish Directive . The works was inundated by flood water on 25 June 2007 , when the Don burst its banks , but was recommissioned in just 18 days . 
 A power station was operational on the southern part of the site from 1921 , supplying electricity to the steel works of the Lower Don Valley . Although it closed in the 1970s , two of its cooling towers which were designed by L. G. <unk> and Partners in 1937 , remained until 2008 , as demolition was difficult because of their proximity to Tinsley Viaduct , which carries the M1 motorway across the Don valley . Following extensive upgrading of the treatment works , to improve the quality of discharges to the river still further , the sludge beds became redundant , and have been turned into a nature reserve , providing habitat for migrating birds . 
 = = Sewage Treatment Works = = 
 Blackburn Meadows is the lowest point within Sheffield City Council area . The River Don flows out of the city under Templeborough railway bridge past a benchmark set at 96 feet ( 29 @.@ 27 m ) above sea level . The meadows therefore formed a good site for a sewage treatment works , and Blackburn Meadows works was opened in 1886 . It is located on a site to the north of the Don , and to the east of Tinsley Viaduct . In 2006 it was claimed to be the second largest treatment works in the United Kingdom , processing 79 million gallons ( 360 @,@ 000 m3 ) of effluent each day , with only the works at Leeds processing more . 
 = = = History = = = 
 As the population of Sheffield increased , Sheffield Corporation bought 23 acres ( 9 @.@ 3 ha ) of land at Blackburn Meadows , on which to build a sewage treatment works . In August 1884 , William <unk> and Son won the contract for its construction , which was overseen by Thomas West , who acted as Clerk of Works . 100 feet ( 30 m ) of standard gauge railway track connected the <unk> to a junction with the Manchester , Sheffield and Lincolnshire Railway . <unk> had completed their work by January 1886 , and although £ 2 @,@ 462 had been spent on extras , their final bill came to £ 23 @,@ 933 , which was £ 27 cheaper than the original contract value . Savings were made by using concrete for the foundations and bottoms of tanks , rather than brick and puddle clay . 
 By mid @-@ 1886 , the works was complete , and the Mayor , J. W. Pye @-@ Smith Esq , officially opened it on 2 June . The event was witnessed by members of the Council , and by invited guests , which included a representative from the London Metropolitan Board of Works . Reports at the time indicated that the sewage passed through catch pits by gravity , allowing solids to settle , which were removed weekly . Milk of lime was then added as it flowed through mixing channels , after which it entered rectangular settling tanks . Next it passed on to a number of precipitating tanks , each holding 50 @,@ 000 imperial gallons ( 230 m3 ) , where after 30 minutes of settling , it passed over aerating weirs . Finally it ran through coke filters and was discharged into the river . Around 100 long tons ( 100 t ) of sludge was removed from the precipitating tanks each day , to be pumped into ponds . Once the water had drained off , it was moved to drying beds , and was then used as manure by farmers , or was taken by rail to a tip at Kilnhurst , near Rotherham . Initially , there were 30 precipitating tanks and 60 aerating or filtering tanks . 
 The railway also developed , with the acquisition of 250 yards ( 230 m ) of portable track and six tipping wagons in 1889 , a steam crane later the same year , and more wagons in 1891 and 1892 . The first locomotive arrived in 1898 , after its purchase from the Yorkshire Engine Company . It was an 0 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 saddle tank , which had been built in 1875 for use as a contractor 's engine , and had been refurbished by the manufacturer . A maintenance contract for the wagons lapsed in 1900 , as the men at the works had become proficient at repairs . 
 In parallel with the construction of the works , trunk sewers were built to convey sewage from the city to the works . These was a major programme of expansion to the sewer network in 1910 , to ensure that it could cope with the expected volumes of effluent produced . Because British sewers are also expected to handle rainwater , a series of storm sewage overflows were provided , which resulted in diluted sewage being discharged into the River Don in times of heavy rainfall . 
 = = = Expansion = = = 
 The quality of the effluent discharged into the Don was soon giving rise to concern , as the treatment process was unsatisfactory . An act of Parliament was obtained in 1900 , which allowed Sheffield Corporation to buy an additional 105 acres ( 42 ha ) , on which contact beds would be built , so that the effluent could be better treated before discharge . The initial plan was costed at £ 367 @,@ 355 , which was reduced to £ 270 @,@ 369 when secondary contact beds were removed from the scheme . The Local Government Board approved the plans on 13 May 1905 , paving the way for the construction of a biological treatment system , instead of the system using lime . Logan and Hemmingway , who were contractors based at Nottingham , won the initial contract for excavations , and also the subsequent one for the construction of six settling tanks , 24 contact tanks , and Jordan bridge , which would carry the internal railway line over the River Don Navigation . The contract was worth £ 41 @,@ 046 , and further contracts followed , which included £ 36 @,@ 500 for 36 more contact beds and three settling tanks , £ 5 @,@ 000 for excavating 40 @,@ 000 cubic yards ( 31 @,@ 000 m3 ) of earth , and £ 36 @,@ 484 for storm beds and other work , which was subsequently raised to £ 39 @,@ 184 , so that they could pay their workers at the same rate as Sheffield Corporation paid their own workmen . 
 The Lord Mayor opened the first part of the new works on 28 October 1909 , and Sheffield Council increased the amount of land they owned for sewage treatment to 226 @.@ 5 acres ( 91 @.@ 7 ha ) by buying another 81 acres ( 33 ha ) , on which contact beds could be constructed if required at a later date . Discharges to the river were still of poor quality , and a secondary treatment process was designed , although its implementation was delayed by the onset of the First World War . However , John Haworth became works manager in 1914 , and began to experiment with ways to treat the effluent . A continuous narrow channel was constructed within a tank , and paddles were used to agitate the liquid . This allowed it to become oxygenated , which supported bacteria , allowing them to digest the sewage . The process was called bio @-@ aeration , but became known as the " Sheffield System " , and a steady stream of people came to inspect the works , both from local authorities in Great Britain and from overseas . Many of the contact beds were converted to use the new system between 1922 and 1927 . The treatment process significantly reduced the biochemical oxygen demand of the effluent discharged to the river , but was not good at removing ammonia , which was a major contributor to the poor water quality of the river below the works , and the destruction of the fish populations . The effluent regularly contained more than 20 mg / l of ammonia , which resulted in levels of over 10 mg / l in the river . Few fish can survive in concentrations of over 2 mg / l . 
 In 1915 , the Corporation had made enquiries about purchasing a second @-@ hand steam engine , approaching six locomotive manufacturers , but eventually acquired a new 0 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 saddle tank from Peckett and Sons Ltd , which was built at their Bristol works in 1918 . The original engine became a spare , but was hired out to the Blackburn Meadows power station in March 1936 . A year later it was condemned by the insurance company , and was sold for scrap to Maden and McKee Ltd , who were based in Liverpool . A replacement was sought , and a third 0 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 saddle tank , made by Hudswell Clarke in 1914 , was bought from the Olympia Oil and Cake Company at Selby . It was coupled into a goods train , and arrived at the works in July 1937 . At the works , as at Selby , it carried the name Olympia , painted on the tanks . The Peckett was overhauled by the Yorkshire Engine Company at Meadow Hall Works between 1945 and 1946 . Because there was a statutory obligation to keep the treatment works operational , a special dispensation was obtained during the 1926 general strike , to allow this engine to run over the main line , delivering wagons to Kilnhurst tip . Kilnhurst tip eventually became full , and in January 1948 , regular tipping operations ceased , after a new tip at Thrybergh opened . Tipping continued at Kilnhurst sporadically , until it was closed in 1959 . During its operational life up to 1948 , 2 @,@ 917 @,@ 480 tons of sewage sludge was dumped at the site , and following closure , it was sold to the National Coal Board in 1961 . 
 = = = Modernisation = = = 
 The entire works was upgraded between 1956 and 1969 , in five distinct phases . The plan was announced in January 1956 , and was expected to cost £ 1 million . The first phase was the construction of a filter pressing plant , for which the main contractor was Norwest Construction Co Ltd , while the actual presses and other plant were supplied by S. H. Johnson and Co Ltd . This phase was completed in 1962 , and was officially opened by the Lord Mayor on 14 May 1963 . The second phase consisted of a preliminary treatment plant , a storm sewage separation plant , and metering of the flows within the plant . This was completed in 1965 . The third phase was split into two parts , which initially involved the building of new primary sedimentation tanks . Once these were operational in 1969 , the old sedimentation tanks were converted to become temporary storm sewage tanks . This fourth phase was called phase 3b , and was completed in 1970 . The final phase was the construction of a sludge incinerator , which was completed in 1969 and meant that the pressed sewage cake did not have to be taken to Thrybergh to be dumped . 
 The railway was also upgraded at this time . Thomas Ward Ltd supplied replacement track in 1955 , and a new 0 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 diesel electric shunter was ordered from Ruston and Hornsby Ltd in 1959 . It was delivered from Lincoln on a low @-@ loader in 1960 , and was so successful that a second engine of the same type was ordered the following year . The Hudswell Clarke steam engine was cut up on site in 1962 , but the Corporation wrote to Peckett 's to see if they would convert the Peckett engine to diesel hydraulic transmission . Peckett 's declined , and so the engine was converted at the works , by cutting off the boiler and saddle tank , and fitting a Perkins diesel engine removed from a crane . It was completed on 12 May 1962 , and worked well , although it spent most of its subsequent life working at Thrybergh tip . It returned to Blackburn Meadows in 1967 , and was cut up later that year . A prototype steel side @-@ tipping wagon was ordered from Robert Hudson Ltd of Leeds in 1955 , and a further 22 followed in 1957 , to replace the original wooden wagons . Charles Roberts and Co Ltd of Wakefield supplied 12 more in 1958 , and a further 35 in 1961 , with Hudsons supplying the final 6 in 1963 . 
 In 1976 , a new diesel shunting locomotive , made by Thomas Hill of Rotherham was purchased . It was built at Kilnhurst , and driven along the ex @-@ Great Central Railway line from there to the works . The first Ruston and Hornsby engine was partially dismantled , and eventually cut up in January 1978 . The connection between the works and the British Rail network was cut in 1984 , and the system became one of a very small number of isolated standard gauge railways . By 1986 , the track layout had been simplified , and the track across Jordan bridge had been lifted . When rail operation ceased in the 1990s , one of the Hudson tipping wagons went to the National Railway Museum at Shildon , and the Thomas Hill engine , after several changes of ownership , is now located on the Peak Rail preserved railway at Matlock . 
 By the 1960s , the Sheffield sewers were inadequate for the volume of effluent , and overflowed into the river during periods of light rainfall and sometimes when there was no rainfall . Some of them had been in use for 80 years , and inspection revealed that major reconstruction was required . The solution adopted was to tunnel the Don Valley Interceptor Sewer through the Carboniferous rock beneath the existing sewers . Work began of the first phase in 1979 , when 1 @.@ 33 miles ( 2 @.@ 14 km ) of 18 @-@ foot ( 5 @.@ 5 m ) tunnel were built from the works to a drop shaft in Hawke Street . A new pumping station was required at Blackburn Meadows , and this phase was completed in July 1983 . Over the next decade , four further phases were completed , involving the tunnelling of 1 @.@ 39 miles ( 2 @.@ 24 km ) of sewer with a diameter of 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) to a drop shaft near Furnival Road , a new sewer from Furnival Road to the Whitbread Brewery with another from the Sheaf Valley sewer to the central bus station , extension of the Don Valley sewer to Gilpin Street , and finally extension from Gilpin Street to Livesey Street in Hillsborough . As a result of this work , the capacity of the sewers was greatly increased , and 26 storm sewage overflows were closed , resulting in significant improvement to water quality in the river . 
 = = = Improvements = = = 
 In 1992 , the problem of ammonia levels in the final effluent was addressed by the construction of a system using anoxic zones and diffuse air activated sludge treatment . This dramatically reduced ammonia levels , and was the most significant factor in the re @-@ establishment of fish stocks in the lower River Don . In 1990 , the outdated filter <unk> and incineration plant were replaced by a new sludge @-@ dewatering plant and a fluidized @-@ bed incinerator . The new plant made the old sludge beds , situated to the east of the River Don and on the island formed by the Don and the Holmes Cut , redundant , and these have now become a nature reserve . Further improvements to the process were completed by 2005 . These included an upgrade to the wet scrubbing system , in order to remove heavy metals and acid gases such as sulphur dioxide , hydrogen chloride and hydrogen fluoride from the flue gases produced by the incinerator , and the addition of a tertiary adsorption filter , which removes mercury and dioxins . The improvements were designed to ensure that the plant met the standards set out in the Waste Incineration Directive . 
 The outflow from the works , which passes under the River Don Navigation and joins the river beside Jordans weir , has in the past been a major contributor to the pollution of the River Don , but some £ 70 million has been invested in upgrading the plant , to ensure that discharges to the river meet the requirements of the Freshwater Fish Directive . In dry weather , the outfall discharges 30 million gallons ( 136 @,@ 000 m3 ) of treated water each day , more than doubling the flow in the river at this point . 
 The works was shut down on 25 June 2007 , after the Don burst its banks , and the entire site was engulfed by several feet of water . It remained submerged for over a week , with much of the equipment suffering catastrophic damage . Once the water subsided , imaginative ways had to be found to return it to operation within a reasonable time . The analyser which measures emissions from the incinerator plant had been completely destroyed , and in order to mitigate a 16 @-@ week delivery time , the manufacturers removed one from a training centre at Telford , and it was hired by Yorkshire Water until a new unit could be supplied . The plant was recommissioned and operational just 18 days after its inundation . 
 In 2012 , a contract for the construction of a <unk> anaerobic digestion facility was awarded , including the construction of buildings and various other pieces of equipment required for the treatment of sludge . <unk> anaerobic digestion enables the breaking down of biodegradable materials using micro @-@ organisms under moderate temperatures . The new sludge treatment facility enables the recycled sludge to be used on neighbouring farmlands as manure , and also enables Yorkshire Water to generate <unk> of renewable energy using combined heat and power units . 
 = = Power Station = = 
 In 1921 , Sheffield Corporation built a coal @-@ fired power station on spare land at the south west corner of Blackburn Meadows . At the time there was no national grid , and the steelworks which occupied much of the Lower Don Valley needed additional electrical power . The chosen site was close to the steel works , was near the river , which supplied cooling water , and was well @-@ served by railway lines , to deliver coal . The station was modified between 1937 and 1942 , when its capacity was increased to 72 Megawatts , and remained operational until the 1970s . When the rest of the power station was demolished in the 1980s , two of its seven cooling towers were left standing due to their close proximity to the M1 motorway , and the risk that their demolition might cause Tinsley Viaduct to be damaged . The 250 @-@ foot ( 76 m ) towers were hyperbolic in shape , and were designed by L. G. <unk> and Partners , who had also been responsible for the first such towers erected at Liverpool in 1925 . The Blackburn Meadows towers were built between 1937 and 1938 . English Heritage considered whether they should be designated as listed structures , but ruled against it because the internal cooling structures had been removed , and there was no context for them , as the rest of the station no longer existed . On 24 August 2008 , at 3 am , the two landmark towers were finally demolished with explosives , without damaging the motorway . 
 = = Nature Reserve = = 
 In 1993 Sheffield City Council negotiated with Yorkshire Water and leased an unused part of the former sewage works for 99 years , at an annual rent of one peppercorn , to enable it to be reclaimed and turned into a nature reserve . In order to manage the project , a consortium was formed , with representation from Sheffield City Council , Sheffield Wildlife Trust , South Yorkshire Forest and Yorkshire Water . It now provides habitat for migrating birds , for which it is an area of European significance . The Wildlife Trust run an active programme of school education visits . In 2005 the City Council exercised an option to increase the size of the reserve by taking over additional land from Yorkshire Water . 
 = Washington State Route 432 = 
 State Route 432 ( SR 432 ) is a 10 @.@ 32 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 16 @.@ 61 km ) state highway in the U.S. state of Washington , serving the cities of Longview and Kelso in Cowlitz County . The highway travels east along the Columbia River from an intersection with SR 4 in West Longview through the Port of Longview and the termini of SR 433 and SR 411 in Longview . SR 432 crosses the Cowlitz River on a divided highway and ends at an interchange with Interstate 5 ( I @-@ 5 ) in Kelso . SR 432 was established during the 1964 highway renumbering as SR 832 , replacing a branch of Primary State Highway 12 ( PSH 12 ) that had been routed through Longview and Kelso since 1937 . SR 432 was established in 1968 and originally routed on Nichols Boulevard within Longview and was re @-@ aligned onto its current route in 1991 after the opening of Industrial Way . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 432 begins at an intersection with the Ocean Beach Highway , signed as SR 4 , in West Longview in Cowlitz County . The two @-@ lane highway travels southeast as Willow Grove Connection Road and Industrial Way around Mount Solo and into the city of Longview . The four @-@ lane SR 432 parallel to a Columbia and Cowlitz Railway line and the Columbia River through the Port of Longview and intersects the northern terminus of SR 433 , which travels on Oregon Way and the Lewis and Clark Bridge to Rainier , Oregon . The highway turns northeast onto 3rd Avenue and crosses a BNSF rail line before it intersects the Tennant Way divided highway and the southern terminus of SR 411 in a partial cloverleaf interchange . The SR 432 designation travels onto four @-@ lane Tennant Way grade @-@ separated highway and continues southeast , parallel to a BNSF rail yard , before intersecting Dike Road in a partial cloverleaf interchange and crossing over the Cowlitz River into Kelso . The highway travels south of Southwest Washington Regional Airport and intersects Talley Way in a partial cloverleaf interchange before intersecting I @-@ 5 . The partial cloverleaf interchange , nicknamed the Longview Wye , serves as the eastern terminus of SR 432 while the roadway continues south as the Old Pacific Highway . 
 Every year , the Washington State Department of Transportation ( WSDOT ) conducts a series of surveys on its highways in the state to measure traffic volume . This is expressed in terms of average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) , which is a measure of traffic volume for any average day of the year . In 2011 , WSDOT calculated that the busiest section of SR 432 is the bridge over the Cowlitz River , serving 30 @,@ 000 vehicles , while the least busy section is the western terminus at SR 4 in West Longview , serving 3 @,@ 500 vehicles . The entire route of SR 432 is designated as an Intermodal Connector within the National Highway System , a highway system that includes roadways important to the national economy , defense , and mobility ; and as a Highway of Statewide Significance by WSDOT , which includes highways that connect major communities in the state of Washington . SR 432 forms part of the Seattle to Portland Bicycle Classic , serving as the link between Longview and the Lewis and Clark Bridge via 3rd Avenue on the 202 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 325 km ) bicycle race held annually . 
 = = History = = 
 SR 432 has been part of the Washington state highway system since 1937 , when it was designated as a branch of PSH 12 . The Longview – Kelso branch of PSH 12 traveled 5 @.@ 47 miles ( 8 @.@ 80 km ) east from an intersection with the Ocean Beach Highway , signed as PSH 12 and U.S. Route 830 ( US 830 ) , onto Nichols Boulevard around Lake Sacajawea and Tennant Way in Longview and crossed the Cowlitz River to Kelso , where the highway ended at an intersection with the Pacific Highway , signed as PSH 1 and US 99 . The Longview – Kelso branch of PSH 12 was replaced by SR 832 during the 1964 highway renumbering and existed until US 830 was decommissioned in 1967 , as SR 432 was established as an auxiliary route of SR 4 before the highway system was codified in 1970 . SR 432 was re @-@ aligned onto its present route , Industrial Way , in 1991 to end at SR 4 in West Longview and to serve the Port of Longview . The eastern terminus of SR 432 , an interchange with I @-@ 5 nicknamed the Longview Wye , was reconstructed by WSDOT beginning in December 2009 . WSDOT removed the northwest loop ramp , which connected Old Pacific Highway to southbound I @-@ 5 , and replaced it with an improved interchange with Talley Way that opened on October 28 , 2011 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Cowlitz County . 
 = Sky Ferreira = 
 Sky Tonia Ferreira ( born July 8 , 1992 ) is an American singer , songwriter , model , and actress . As a teenager , Ferreira began uploading videos on Myspace of herself singing songs she had written , which led to her discovery by producers Bloodshy & Avant and an eventual recording contract with Parlophone in 2009 . She released her first extended play , As If ! , in 2011 , which combined elements of electropop and dance music . Ferreira 's second extended play Ghost ( 2012 ) , however , incorporated pop with more stripped @-@ down song structures and featured collaborations with Jon Brion and Shirley Manson , as well as the critically acclaimed track " Everything Is Embarrassing " , which she composed with Dev Hynes . 
 After multiple delays and disputes with her record label , Ferreira 's debut studio album Night Time , My Time was released on October 29 , 2013 , and marked a departure from her former style , incorporating more experimental indie rock with synthpop elements . The album was preceded by its lead single " You 're Not the One " . That year , she ventured into the film industry after appearing in Eli Roth 's The Green Inferno and garnered media attention after being arrested for drug possession . She was exposed to a mainstream audience after having been announced as an opening act for the international Bangerz Tour , headlined by Miley Cyrus , which began on February 14 , 2014 . 
 Ferreira 's earlier work incorporated elements of dance @-@ pop , while her recent projects experiment with acoustic , new wave and primarily indie rock musical styles . Her lyrical content originally incorporated themes of rebellion and teenage romance , and has since evolved to discuss personal insecurities and more mature romantic themes . Outside of her work in the entertainment industry , she has modeled for several brands and magazines , including serving as the spokeswoman for the hair care brand Redken in 2014 . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = Early life and career beginnings = = = 
 Sky Tonia Ferreira was born on July 8 , 1992 in Venice Beach , Los Angeles , California . About her mixed background , Ferreira has stated that “ My dad is Brazilian and Portuguese and my mom is Native American . It ’ s funny because I came out looking like , pretty white . ” 
 Ferreira was largely raised by her grandmother , who had been Michael Jackson 's personal hairstylist for over 30 years . She commented , saying : " I was raised around him , I always saw him [ and ] had holidays with him and stuff like that " , adding that she was unaware of his fame until she was 13 years old . Ferreira expressed interest in singing as a child and , with Jackson 's encouragement , Ferreira 's grandmother enrolled her in opera lessons . Ferreira has stated that she was sexually assaulted in her adolescence twice , firstly involving a neighbor , and secondly in an incident that involved a stranger who had broken into her home . In an interview with Rookie , Ferreira said : " I ’ ve never said anything [ about this publicly ] because I don ’ t want it to define me , but I feel like it 's appropriate to say something [ here ] . People feel like it defines you , and it doesn 't . It ’ s really unfortunate and disgusting and traumatizing , but it doesn 't make you who you are . " Ferreira dropped out of high school after completing her sophomore year . 
 Ferreira later began maintaining a Myspace profile where she uploaded demo versions of self @-@ written tracks . Shortly before her 15th birthday , she wrote a letter to producers Bloodshy & Avant requesting that they offer a recording contract to her , which she says happened " kind of right off the bat " after they came across her profile . In 2009 , she was signed to Parlophone , and began finalizing the debut studio album that she says was first begun when she was 14 years old . In 2010 , she ventured into the film and modelling industries after starring in the independent film Putty Hill and appearing in the magazines Dazed & Confused and Interview . 
 = = = 2011 – 12 : As If ! and Ghost = = = 
 After releasing the tracks " 17 " and " One " , the latter having peaked at number 64 on the UK Singles Chart , Ferreira announced that her debut studio album would be released on January 11 , 2011 . Its planned lead single " Obsession " had first appeared on the compilation album Now That 's What I Call Music ! 35 in 2010 , and peaked at number 37 on the U.S. Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs chart . These plans never came to fruition , and were substituted for the extended play ( EP ) As If ! and its lead single " Sex Rules " that March . A writer for MuuMuse spoke favorably of her " vocal and musical versatility " and commended the project as a " rock solid 5 @-@ track collection of next @-@ level crunchy pop cuts . " During this time , Ferreira was featured in the advertising campaign for the Calvin Klein " CK One " product line alongside Cassie Ventura . The following year , she was photographed by Ellen von Unwerth for the cover of Vs . , and appeared in the Adidas " Originals " commercial with rappers Big Sean and Snoop Dogg . 
 In November 2011 , Ferreira announced that her debut studio album would be released in 2012 , with a lead single planned to precede its release that February . She was later revealed to have been working with Jon Brion , Greg Kurstin , and Shirley Manson on the project . In early 2012 , Ferreira revealed Wild at Heart as the title of her record , and confirmed " 24 Hours " and " Swamp Girl " for its track listing . " Lost in My Bedroom " , described by Ferreira as " the most electro pop [ song ] on the album " , surfaced online that March . After releasing the music video for the track " Red Lips " in June , she stated that she renamed the record I 'm Not Alright . 
 With her debut studio album still unreleased , Ferreira announced that her second extended play Ghost would be released in October . It respectively peaked at numbers 8 and 71 on the U.S. Billboard Top Heatseekers and Alternative Albums component charts to the Billboard 200 . Its lead single " Everything is Embarrassing " was described by Katherine St. Asaph of Pitchfork Media as the track where Ferreira " could well have her breakout moment " , complimenting it for beginning with " snappy , crisply sung dance @-@ pop about long @-@ awaited moments " and eventually transitioning into " what should be a buoyant chorus " . In her debut television performance , Ferreira performed the track on Late Night with Jimmy Fallon in January 2013 . The previously leaked track " Lost in My Bedroom " was included on Ghost , and was featured on an episode of ABC 's Grey 's Anatomy in December . 
 = = = 2013 – 14 : Night Time , My Time and support touring = = = 
 In June 2013 , Ferreira starred in the short film IRL playing Angel , which has been described as " an eye @-@ opening look into the reality of young life in New York " . That month , she again renamed her debut studio album I Will , and stated that it would be released " later this summer " . She noted that it would be composed of " ten up @-@ tempo songs , all still pretty electronic , although for some reason it comes across more pop @-@ rocky live . " It was again renamed Night Time , My Time , and announced to be released on October 29 , 2013 by Capitol Records . Upon its release , it received favorable reviews from music critics ; at Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 79 , which indicates " generally favorable reviews " , based on 30 reviews . Rolling Stone listed it as the fifth @-@ best debut album of 2013 , noting its potent blending of synthpop elements with a more grunge @-@ inspired indie rock sound . The album was also listed as the 25th best overall album of the year by Complex . The record debuted at number 45 on the U.S. Billboard 200 . " You 're Not the One " was released as the lead single from Night Time , My Time on September 24 , 2013 . 
 In September , Ferreira starred as Kaycee in the independent film The Green Inferno . In the early morning of September 14 , she and her boyfriend , DIIV frontman Zachary Cole Smith , were arrested at a traffic stop in Saugerties , New York for drug possession . Ferreira , who was in possession of ecstasy tablets , was arrested on drug possession and resisting arrest ; Smith was in possession of heroin . She bailed herself out of $ 1 @,@ 500 with her American Express credit card . In October , Ferreira cancelled the final week of her tour with Vampire Weekend after sustaining a hemorrhage to her vocal cords , which she later added was caused by a vocal node that was repeatedly misdiagnosed as laryngitis . In November , Ferreira and Icona Pop were announced as the opening acts for Miley Cyrus ' Bangerz Tour , which began on February 14 , 2014 . Later that month , she released her third extended play , Night Time , My Time : B @-@ Sides Part 1 . In December , Ferreira was announced as the spokeswoman for hair care brand Redken . 
 On February 20 , 2014 , during the third performance opening for the Bangerz Tour , Ferreira fell and split open her shin onstage . After completing the performance , Ferreira was taken by ambulance to an Anaheim hospital and treated with 60 stitches . As a result of the injury , she was forced to temporarily pull out of support for the tour , but returned shortly after . On November 20 , 2014 , while on her North American tour , Ferreira debuted a new track called " Guardian " . 
 = = = 2015 – present : Masochism and upcoming film roles = = = 
 On July 16 , 2014 , Ferreira announced via Twitter that she was working on her second album . She described the sound of the album as " more aggressive " and is working with Ariel Rechtshaid and Justin Raisen , with whom she produced Night Time , My Time , as well as Bobby Gillespie and Andrew Innes of Scottish band Primal Scream . Ferreira also expressed the wish to collaborate with <unk> . She also appeared in the 2016 comedy @-@ drama film Elvis & Nixon , directed by Liza Johnson , and has joined the cast of The Trust , which stars Nicolas Cage and Elijah Wood , and is directed by Benjamin and Alex Brewer . 
 Following fan speculation , Ferreira confirmed on April 7 that her upcoming second studio album will be titled Masochism . On May 12 , 2015 , the singer announced that she would be releasing a film co @-@ written and directed by her frequent collaborator Grant Singer accompanied by a new single with the album scheduled to be released later in the year . Jimmy Choo revealed on June 4 that Ferreira would be the face of their newest fragrance named " Illicit " . She collaborated with Primal Scream on the song " Where the Light Gets In " , which was released on February 1 , 2016 as the lead single from the band 's eleventh studio album , <unk> . On April 25 , 2016 , it was announced that Ferreira will star in the 2017 sequel to David Lynch 's 1990s television series Twin Peaks . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 Ferreira is primarily a synthpop singer , but her earlier work incorporated elements of dance @-@ pop and electropop , most notably seen in tracks from As If ! and Ghost , this one also included elements of acoustic and new wave . Her lyrical content originally incorporated themes of rebellion and teenage romance ; Andrew Unterberger from Popdust opined that " 17 " " plays the girl @-@ gone @-@ wild tale as a near @-@ horror story , clearly meant to shock and upset " , while noting that " One " " instead features a robo ’ d out Sky bemoaning the breakdown of connection in a relationship , and her own inability to feel anything as a result . " As her career progressed , Ferreira more frequently experimented with elements of indie rock , which were commonly heard in her first album Night Time , My Time . 
 Julianne Escobedo <unk> from Rolling Stone wrote that Ferreira 's " songs are catchy , but they ’ re also thickly glazed with fuzz and synths , evoking influences like Suicide , Siouxsie Sioux and the krautrock group Harmonia " . Karolina Ramos from The GW Hatchet compared Ferreira to New Zealand recording artist Lorde , both of whom she felt " tackle contemporary love , desire and insecurity with depth , composure and frankness . " She compared her musical style to 1980s pop music , and noted that " her throaty , sultry vocals call to mind Lana del Rey , abandoning brightness and vivacity for a colder tone . Still , Ferreira can drop the edge , with gentler tracks like " Sad Dream " showcasing her vocal range and seldom @-@ observed softness . " Andrew Unterberger stated that " through a variety of singles , EPs , guest features and live appearances , Sky has proven herself one of the most talented singers , creative songwriters and savvy collaborators currently working in the genre " , but blamed " bad marketing , label disputes and her own perfectionism " for the extended delay of Night Time , My Time ; he also stated that the repeated renaming of the record itself " should give you some idea of the musical identity issues she ’ s suffered over the years . " 
 After establishing a friendship with recording artist Miley Cyrus in 2013 , Gregory E. Miller from New York Post noted that the media and general public would continue " following her every move " . Ferreira commented that " [ Miley ’ s ] obviously way bigger and all eyes [ are ] on her , but I feel like we ’ re kind of going through a similar thing where everyone ’ s trying to say that we ’ re trying to make ourselves objects , but really , everyone else is making it more like that — sensationalizing sex and reading into things . It ’ s nice to have someone that gets it . " Ferreira had also generated a minor controversy after appearing topless on the cover for Night Time , My Time , to which she responded " there ’ s nothing about that photo that ’ s pornographic ; we came on this earth nude . " Ferreira is also a feminist , which has influenced her work ; she has said " I feel like I ’ m doing a bad job of being a feminist if I ’ m not making someone angry . " 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 Ferreira has cited Madonna , Prince , Fiona Apple , Gwen Stefani , Alice Cooper , Nancy Sinatra , Cat Power , Hole , Elliott Smith , Carly Simon , Françoise Hardy , Kate Bush , Britney Spears , and the Runaways as musical influences . 
 = = Philanthropy = = 
 In July 2014 , Ferreira performed at the Music Hall of Williamsburg in New York City to benefit the David Lynch Foundation . Ferreira announced that the funds raised would " go towards Transcendental Meditation ( TM ) programs for at @-@ risk students ; veterans with PTSD ; women who are survivors of domestic violence ; American Indians suffering from diabetes ; the homeless and incarcerate . " Of her own practice she said , " TM sort of saved my life . " 
 = = Discography = = 
 Night Time , My Time ( 2013 ) 
 Masochism ( 2016 ) 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = Tours = = 
 Opening act 
 Bangerz Tour ( 2014 ) 
 = Zaprešić = 
 Zaprešić ( pronounced [ <unk> ] ) is a city in Zagreb County in Croatia . Its population is 19 @,@ 644 inhabitants for the city proper , and over 51 @,@ 000 for its seven @-@ municipality metropolitan area . Zaprešić is the third @-@ largest , and most densely populated division of the county . It is located northwest of the Croatian capital Zagreb , and near the Slovenian border . It is centered on plains north of the Sava River , and is bordered by Medvednica Mountain to the east , and the Marija Gorica Hills to the west . 
 The first human settlement in , and near Zaprešić dates from the Neolithic , and several Roman roads were constructed in the area . The first records of the modern town date from 1334 . Since that date , the town 's history includes being a part of a feudal estate to operating the first meat packaging plant in Croatia . However , it was not formally established as a city until 1995 . The city is governed by a mayor , a city government of seven members ( upper house ) , and a city council of twenty one ( lower house ) . The current ruling party is the Croatian Democratic Union ( HDZ ) , and the current mayor is Željko Turk . Zaprešić has its own fire department , but police coverage is provided by the city of Zagreb . <unk> <unk> Zaprešić manages all utilities except electricity . Tap water in Zaprešić is of high quality . 
 Due to its many rail , and road transport corridors , Zaprešić has been dubbed the " northwestern gate to Zagreb County " . It lies directly next to the A2 highway connecting Zagreb to Central Europe . It also is adjacent to the main railway leading northwest out of Zagreb . Centered on the tertiary sector , the city 's economy is booming due to a large population influx . 
 Zaprešić 's educational facilities range from kindergartens to centers of higher education . The city is home to four elementary schools , one high school , and two universities . The Zaprešić metropolitan area contains six castles that together make up what is known as the " palace path . " The town also has a museum and an art gallery . The most popular sport in the region is football , and the local team is NK Inter Zaprešić , a member of the First Football League of Croatia . Other sports are also present in Zaprešić , and the city is home to a golf resort . 
 = = History = = 
 The first records of human inhabitants in the Zaprešić metropolitan area date back to the Neolithic , evident through stone axes found in Brdovec , and axes from the Copper Age found in Marija Gorica . <unk> culture traces were uncovered in the area of Sveti Križ . The Romans left their imprints on Zaprešić in the form of the Siscia – <unk> – Emona road , which followed Sava River on its left bank through the Zaprešić area , passing near modern settlements . 
 After a lack of records from the first millennium , Zaprešić again became known in the late 11th century . In 1094 , following the formation of the Zagreb Diocese , <unk> , an advisor of the Croato – Hungarian King Ladislav I , was granted land west and east of the Medvednica Mountain to protect the newly formed diocese . Zaprešić became part of the Susedgrad – Stubica manor , the second @-@ biggest estate in the Croato @-@ Hungarian Zagreb County . In 1334 , the parish church of St. Peter was founded in Zaprešić , marking the first evidence of the modern settlement of Zaprešić . The settlement developed rapidly , which is attributed to its position on important trade and transit routes . This was corroborated by the route of the first railway in Croatia , which passes through Zaprešić . 
 During 15th and 16th centuries , refugees from Lika came to Zaprešić to escape the Ottomans . Some of these refugees were the so @-@ called Brdovec Franciscans , for whom Lord <unk> of Susedgrad built an abbey in Marija Gorica . The refugees brought the <unk> accent , which was preserved for a long time in some small Zaprešić communities , although the Zaprešić area has historically been <unk> Kajkavian ( <unk> being [ e ] or [ ɛ ] rather than [ i ] ) . The area was hit hard by the 1573 peasant revolt , led by Matija <unk> , who , according to historian Ivan <unk> <unk> , managed the estate of Jablanovec , part of modern Zaprešić . One of the revolt leaders was Ilija Gregorić , a resident of Marija Gorica . 
 Two years later , the large manor of Susedgrad and Stubica started to disperse into many small estates owned by low @-@ level members of the nobility . Dozens of simple diocesan curia houses serve as a reminder of this nobility . After the First World War , the oldest meat industry in Croatia , the <unk> <unk> <unk> , was founded . 
 Zaprešić was formally established for the first time in 1952 , when the Municipality of Zaprešić ( Croatian : <unk> Zaprešić was formed . The municipality operated as part of the Zagreb kotar and later City of Zagreb . The City of Zaprešić ( Grad Zaprešić ) was incorporated on 30 November 1995 . On that day , parts of the surrounding municipalities of Pušća , and Hruševec Kupljenski ( which was disbanded , leaving only a namesake settlement ) and the City of Zagreb were incorporated into a new City of Zaprešić . The settlement of <unk> came under the jurisdiction of Zaprešić on 17 January 1997 . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Zaprešić is a part of the metropolitan area of Croatia 's capital and largest city , Zagreb . It is located 18 kilometres ( 11 mi ) northwest of Zagreb , lying near the confluence of the Krapina River , and the Sava River . The small Lužnica River marks the western city border of Zaprešić . The Zaprešić metropolitan area consists of Zaprešić and seven surrounding municipalities : Brdovec , Bistra , <unk> , Jakovlje , Luka , Marija Gorica , and Pušća . It is formed by the northwestern part of Zagreb County , bordered on the south by the Sava River , on the east by Zagreb , and the Medvednica Mountain , and on the west by the Sutla River , and the Slovenian border . According to the official website , three distinct geographic areas make up the Zaprešić area : the western part of the Medvednica Mountain , the Marija Gorica Hills and the plains that lie between . The western part of the Medvednica Mountain is fairly lightly inhabited , with no settlements except at the base of the mountain . These include the Bistra municipality and the Zaprešić settlement of Jablanovec . The Marija Gorica Hills are located mainly in the Marija Gorica municipality between the rivers of Krapina , and Sutla . The third area , the plains , is the area where the Zaprešić itself is located . Zaprešić has a lake , Lake Zajarki , situated between the town and the Sava River in the south . It is colloquially known as <unk> ( Croatian word for excavator ) . The lake is currently still used as a gravel pit , although it is a known destination for Zaprešić swimmers and beach goers . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 According to the 2011 census , the town of Zaprešić has 25 @,@ 223 inhabitants , 19 @,@ 644 of whom live in the Zaprešić settlement ( <unk> ) . This makes Zaprešić urban area at 1 @,@ 036 inhabitants per square kilometer ( 2 @,@ 683 per square mile ) the most densely populated in the whole of Zagreb County . The town is administratively divided into nine settlements , the largest of which is also called Zaprešić , covering a third of the town 's area . The metropolitan area of Zaprešić had 54 @,@ 640 inhabitants in 2011 , an increase from 51 @,@ 040 inhabitants in 2001 . About 96 % of inhabitants are Croats and 98 @.@ 3 % speak Croatian as their mother tongue . The sex ratio is 90 @.@ 63 men to 100 women , and the median age is 39 @.@ 9 years , which makes Zaprešić one of the younger towns in Zagreb County . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Due to its accessible location with favorable conditions for expansion , and a very high net migration , and population growth rates ( estimated to be 29 persons per 1 @,@ 000 per year ) , Zaprešić is expecting an economic boom . Despite the ongoing financial crisis that hit many cities in Croatia , including the capital , the town operates without loans and expects a yearly budget increase in the range of 20 to 30 percent . The tertiary sector is dominant with mainly retailing , and hospitality , and a smaller presence of tourism , as well as souvenir manufacturing ) and financial services . The secondary sector is also present with ceramic industry ( Inker ) , metalworking ( <unk> Nova , <unk> , and <unk> <unk> ) and chemical industry ( Messer Croatia <unk> , <unk> ) . The primary sector mainly consists of agriculture , and is expected to continue shrinking . There are currently 3 @,@ 040 hectares ( 7 @,@ 512 acres ) of arable land for agricultural use , but the town 's general urban plan anticipates an economic shift will lower the amount of agricultural use to 930 hectares ( 2 @,@ 298 acres ) by 2015 , thus speeding the process of suburbanization started by the expansion of Zagreb . The future of Zaprešić 's economy is seen in the development of small , and mid @-@ sized businesses , tourism , and food @-@ related industries . The city income tax rate is 12 percent . The city budget in 2008 amounted to HRK 198 million . 
 The Shopping City Zagreb ( also called West Gate Shopping Center ) is a shopping mall planned to create a major job demand in the Zaprešić region . Located next to the Krapina River and A2 highway , the center will serve 2 @.@ 3 million residents in the Zagreb region . It will also be the largest in the Zagreb metropolitan area with 100 @,@ 000 square meters ( 1 @,@ 080 @,@ 000 sq ft ) of gross leasable area . Construction started in late 2007 . It was opened in October 2009 . 
 = = Culture and media = = 
 Zaprešić 's cultural heritage includes a series of six historic castles and palaces known as " the palace path " ( Croatian : <unk> <unk> ) : Lužnica mansion , <unk> palace , <unk> mansion , <unk> family mansion , Jakovlje palace , and Novi Dvori . Of these , <unk> and <unk> are in the zeroth category of cultural heritage preservation of UNESCO , Lužnica is in the first category of the Croatian Ministry of Culture , and <unk> and Novi Dvori are in the second category of the Ministry of Culture . Jakovlje palace is not involved in any cultural preservation program . Novi Dvori ( also known as Novi Dvori <unk> – New Jelačić Palace ) is known for being the residence of Josip Jelačić , one of the most famous Croatian bans . However , before that it was inhabited by five families ( the last one being <unk> ) after its construction in 1611 as a simple two @-@ story house . It remains a well @-@ preserved example of a manorial estate . The palace was left to the state in 1934 by Josip Jelačić 's nephew and nieces . 
 The town is home to the Museum of Matija <unk> ( opened in 1984 ) , a gallery of works by the renowned painter . It is located in the former granary of Novi Dvori . The art gallery <unk> , that opened in 1991 , has held exhibitions of works by many important Croatian artists , such as Franjo <unk> , Ivan <unk> , Drago <unk> , Davor Vuković ( a native of Zaprešić ) and Krešimir <unk> . The Zaprešić main library , " Ante Kovačić " , is a part of the association of Zagreb City Libraries ( Croatian : <unk> Grada <unk> , <unk> ) , and has 5 @,@ 541 members with access to 78 @,@ 385 books . Albin <unk> , an employee of Baron Levin Rauch , founded the first library in Zaprešić area in 1921 in Brdovec . A more recent library was founded in 1958 , and moved to its present location in 1986 . 
 Zaprešić contains the ornithological reserve Zaprešić @-@ Sava , which is located south of the city , at Lake Zajarki . The reserve is covered mainly with woods and thick low vegetation , and criss @-@ crossed by fluvial marshes . Zaprešić operates a hunting office , which is made of eight clubs : Zaprešić , Kuna , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> ( offices in Luka , and Bistra ) and <unk> . A radio station operates in Zaprešić : Radio Zaprešić ( also known as Round Wave Station Zaprešić , Croatian : <unk> <unk> Zaprešić ) . The station broadcasts a FM signal at 96 @.@ 0 and 99 @.@ 5 MHz , 24 hours each weekday . It was founded on 15 January 1987 . The local monthly newspaper <unk> Kaj has its seat in the nearby settlement of <unk> in the Brdovec municipality . 
 = = Sports and recreation = = 
 Organized sports in Zaprešić started in 1926 , with the first football match between unregistered teams from Zaprešić and <unk> Marof . The football club NK Sava ( now called NK Inter Zaprešić ) was soon formed in 1929 . There are 20 sport clubs and associations in Zaprešić , and the most popular ones are association football , basketball , handball , bowling , tennis , table tennis , chess , cycling , taekwondo , and bocce . Zaprešić is the home to several influential sports clubs , such as NK Inter Zaprešić ( football ) , KK Fortuna Zaprešić ( basketball ) , RK Zaprešić ( handball ) , KK Zaprešić ( bowling ) and others . NK Inter Zaprešić currently plays in Croatian Second Football League . It is currently the best @-@ placed football club in the county . Most of the sports clubs in Zaprešić are members of the Town of Zaprešić Sports Society ( Croatian : <unk> <unk> <unk> Grada Zaprešića ) . The main sports venue is the <unk> Zaprešić ( Sports and Recreation Center Zaprešić ) , which encompasses a football stadium and a gym . There are other sports courts in Hruševec Kupljenski , Ivanec , Jablanovec , Kupljenovo , and <unk> . NK Inter Zaprešić 's home stadium is <unk> Zaprešić , located in the northwest part of the town and handling up to 5 @,@ 528 visitors . 
 The 140 @-@ hectare ( 346 @-@ acre ) golf resort " Novi dvori " was opened on 16 October 2004 , with Prime Minister Ivo Sanader being the first to tee off . However , as of 2009 , only a few parts are in use , with a 27 @-@ hole course currently under construction . Nine of these holes will be reserved for practice and eighteen for tournament play . The center operates a driving range with two practice courses of different sizes , and an area to practice putting green play . One practice course is sheltered from weather conditions and the whole golf course has night lighting . In terms of normal play , three par 3 holes are currently operational and friendly par 9 tournaments are often held at the course . The course also has other amenities , such as a restaurant and the proximity to the Novi Dvori palace . When the construction ends , the golfers will have access to a conference room , a business center , a fitness club , a sauna , and a massage parlor . 
 = = Government = = 
 Despite the settlement of Zaprešić 's long history , only with the founding of the Town of Zaprešić on 30 November 1995 did it have its own elected representatives . The towns administration includes two tiers of power : a mayor and a city council . The city council is elected each four years . The mayor ( Croatian : <unk> ) has executive power . He is elected directly by the voters . Current Mayor is Željko Turk ( Croatian Democratic Union — HDZ , elected in 2006 , re @-@ elected 2009 and 2013 ) , whose <unk> are Damir <unk> and Alan <unk> . Zaprešić is part of the 1st Croatian electoral district , which consists of western Zagreb , and the Zaprešić metropolitan area . 
 The city council ( Croatian : <unk> vijeće ) has the legislative power over the town . It represents the residents of Zaprešić and manages city budget , and it is composed of twenty one members with one presiding and two vice @-@ presiding members . 
 = = Education = = 
 The Town of Zaprešić provides education ranging from pre @-@ school to higher education . These include four registered kindergartens ( stationed on seven locations ) , four elementary schools , one high school , and one college . Elementary schools located in Zaprešić include Antun Augustinčić , Ljudevit Gaj , and Kupljenovo elementary schools , and a branch of the Bistra elementary school from the Bistra municipality . The Ban Josip Jelačić High School is located on the Franjo Tuđman Square in the northwestern part of the town . Zaprešić has a college for business and management , named after the Croatian historian and theologian Baltazar Adam <unk> , and located in the town center on Novak Street . The open university in Zaprešić ( Croatian : <unk> <unk> <unk> Zaprešić ) offers various courses in languages , computer science , and musical instruments , as well as vocational training . 
 = = Infrastructure = = 
 Zaprešić is covered mostly by the postal code " <unk> Zaprešić " , and Croatian Mail operates four post offices in the city : in Ivanec <unk> , Lužnica , <unk> and Zaprešić . The city proper overlaps with the areas of postal codes " <unk> Donja Pušća " ( <unk> ) , " <unk> Kupljenovo " ( Hruševec Kupljenski , Kupljenovo , <unk> ) and " <unk> Donja Bistra " ( Jablanovec ) . Zaprešić has its own police station , PP Zaprešić , a Zagreb County branch of the City of Zagreb Police Department responsible for all of the Zaprešić metropolitan area . Fire coverage is provided by the City of Zaprešić Fire Department ( Croatian : <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> Zaprešića ) , which also serves the complete seven @-@ municipality metropolitan area . There are six volunteer fire brigades in Zaprešić proper , all members of the Zaprešić Firefighting Community ( Croatian : <unk> zajednica Grada Zaprešića ) . Zaprešić also has a municipal court . 
 All utilities except electricity are managed by <unk> <unk> Zaprešić ( English : Utility company Zaprešić ) . Zaprešić 's electricity is , as in the rest of Croatia , provided by Hrvatska elektroprivreda , and distributed by Elektra Zagreb , a company managing access to electricity in Zagreb , and Zagreb County . Zaprešić receives tap water from underground water reserves through a water pump in the settlement of <unk> . The water from the water pump is of drinking quality . However , local factories Pliva , and <unk> produce waste water , which is released into the Sava River through the <unk> @-@ Pliva @-@ Zaprešić water treatment plant . Before the construction of the treatment plant , the polluted water was piped into the <unk> Creek , endangering the tap water quality . Possible consequences of releasing waste water into the Sava will be dealt with by the construction of the Zajarki water purification system for screening the used water . The ecological problem is multiplied by the fact that the utility company received only 400 requests to clean septic tanks in 2007 , although most households in the relatively rural surroundings of Zaprešić use septic systems . There are plans of constructing four hydroelectric power plants around Zagreb with one being in Zaprešić ( HE Zaprešić , also known as HE Podsused ) as a part of a system of exploiting natural resources of the Sava River . 
 = = Transport = = 
 The town is a major transport hub for the area of Zagreb County and Zagreb itself . It is thus known as the " northwestern gate to Zagreb County . " The Zagreb bypass , and the tolled A2 highway ( Zagreb – Macelj , toward Austria ; part of European Route E59 , and pan @-@ European corridor Xa ) pass through the eastern part of Zaprešić , providing Zaprešić with highway access at a cloverleaf interchange . The State Route D225 is a major arterial road in Zaprešić . It forms the Pavao <unk> and Marshal Tito Streets , leading west towards Brdovec , Marija Gorica and Slovenia , and east towards western Zagreb , Jablanovec , and Stubica . According to the current city <unk> plan , the traffic on the D225 will be re @-@ routed through two city bypasses along the northern and western railway lines to clear the center of Zaprešić of 25 @,@ 000 daily commuters driving on a two @-@ lane road . 
 Mass transit provides intra @-@ city and inter @-@ city connections in form of bus and rail . Zaprešić is a major railway intersection , with railways leading west to Slovenia ( Corridor X ) , north to Zabok , and Kumrovec ( Corridor Xa ) and east to the main regional railway hub Zagreb . Croatian Railways services the Zaprešić train station with major interstate trains going to the west , but also with the suburban line <unk> Marof – Zagreb Main Station – Dugo Selo . The town is serviced by two bus companies : the regional <unk> <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ) and local Meštrović <unk> . <unk> operates line 172 to Zaprešić , which starts at the <unk> bus terminal in Zagreb and runs every 8 to 15 minutes during day , and at irregular intervals during the night . Lines 176 and 177 run to the Zaprešić suburban municipality of Bistra . Meštrović <unk> , the main intra @-@ city bus company of Zaprešić , operates bus lines connecting Zaprešić and all municipalities in its metropolitan area . 
 Zaprešić lies along the left bank of the Sava River , but it does not have any bridges that would connect the town to Samobor , on the other bank , as the nearest bridge is the Podsused bridge , located in the Podsused – <unk> district of Zagreb . However , two ferries connect Zaprešić with the roads in <unk> and <unk> Otok , small villages near Samobor . The widest river in the area , the Sava River , used to be navigable up to Krško , Slovenia in Roman times . However , it is , as of 2009 , navigable only up to Rugvica , leaving Zaprešić with no more possibility of river transport . The city does not have a port on any of its rivers . 
 To establish better transport capabilities , and create a solid ground for the emerging air sports that are already available in the town ( e.g. hang gliding or paragliding ) , an airport is planned northeast of the city , between the Krapina River and the railroad . The land at this location is unused , uninhabited , and administratively selected for sports and recreation . The arrangement of the runways , taxiways , air traffic control building , hangar , and other necessary buildings have already been determined . The airport is intended to serve primarily as a sports airport , for teaching flying , and for charter flights . As of January 2009 the date when the construction starts had not yet been announced . 
 = = Notable inhabitants = = 
 A known historical resident of Zaprešić was Count Josip Jelačić of <unk> ( 1801 – 59 ) , the Ban of Croatia from 1848 until his death . Although born in Novi Sad , Serbia ( then Croatia ) , he received an estate in Zaprešić together with his title . He is responsible for abolishing serfdom in Croatia in 1848 , but also for an infamous suppression of Croatian intelligentsia , and the Illyrian movement during his reign under the orders of Baron Alexander von Bach , and Emperor Franz Joseph I. A statue of Jelačić riding a horse was constructed by Anton Dominik <unk> , and placed on the Zagreb 's central square , Ban Jelačić Square . The statue has been repeatedly removed , and reinstated during changes in political power and orientation in Croatia , from monarchist , through ultra @-@ nationalist , and communist , up to democratic . After the Croatian declaration of independence , marking the start of the democratic era , the statue was returned to the square , and Zaprešić credits Jelačić with a major arterial road named in his honor . 
 Baltazar Adam <unk> ( 1715 – 78 ) , a historian , theologian , legal expert , and a canon in Zagreb , lived in what became the Zaprešić metropolitan area . Actually born in <unk> , Brdovec , he was the rector of the Croatian language course in Vienna . He wrote 757 books in Latin , and the Kajkavian dialect of Croatian . 
 The Illyrian movement of Slavic independence in Croatia can also be traced to Zaprešić through two of its citizens : Ivan <unk> ( 1826 – 71 ) , publicist from <unk> , Brdovec , editor of Vijenac and <unk> , secretary of Matica hrvatska , and a member of Sabor , the Croatian parliament ; and Pavao <unk> ( 1806 – 62 ) , a poet , a priest , and an important member of the Illyrian movement from <unk> . Ante Kovačić ( 1854 – 89 ) from Marija Gorica lived in the aftermath of the Illyrian movement , but nevertheless became a fruitful writer . His most important work is U <unk> ( English : In the Registry ) , a novel following the life of Ivica <unk> , a peasant who is raised in a village and goes to live in a large city . 
 Zaprešić 's recent history includes several known Croatian public figures , such as Matija <unk> ( 1898 – 1990 ) , a Croatian naïve painter who lived in Zaprešić from 1953 until his death . He was a co @-@ founder of the Croatian Society of Naïve Painters . An art gallery with his works was opened in Zaprešić in 1987 . This art gallery changed to a museum in 2000 . Other well @-@ known inhabitants include Davor <unk> ( b . 1964 ) , the frontman of <unk> Pop . Although he was born in Karlovac , he is a resident of Zaprešić ; Davor Vuković ( b . 1951 ) , a painter and poet from Herceg Novi , residing in Zaprešić ; and Mira Vlahović , an opera singer . Vlahović sang at the Croatian National Theater . The music scene in Zaprešić includes Connect , a hip hop band formed in Zaprešić . Connect is the creator of the Croatian football hip hop hymn " Samo je <unk> " . 
 = Star Trek VI : The Undiscovered Country = 
 Star Trek VI : The Undiscovered Country is a 1991 American science fiction film . It is the sixth feature film based on Star Trek , a sequel to 1989 's Star Trek V : The Final Frontier and the last film featuring the entire cast of the original series . After the destruction of the moon Praxis leads the Klingon Empire to pursue peace with their long @-@ time adversary the Federation , the crew of the USS Enterprise must race against unseen conspirators with a militaristic agenda . 
 The sixth film in the series was initially planned as a prequel to the original series , with younger actors portraying the crew of the Enterprise while attending Starfleet Academy , but the idea was discarded because of negative reaction from the original cast and the fans . Faced with producing a new film in time for Star Trek 's 25th anniversary , Nicholas Meyer , the director of Star Trek II : The Wrath of Khan , and Denny Martin Flinn wrote a script based on a suggestion from Leonard Nimoy about what would happen if " the Wall came down in space " , touching on the contemporary events of the Cold War . 
 Principal photography took place between April and September 1991 . The production budget was smaller than anticipated because of the critical and commercial disappointment of The Final Frontier . Because of a lack of sound stage space on the Paramount lot , many scenes were filmed around Hollywood . Meyer and cinematographer Hiro Narita aimed for a darker and more dramatic mood , subtly altering sets originally used for the television series Star Trek : The Next Generation . Producer Steven @-@ Charles Jaffe led a second unit that filmed on an Alaskan glacier that stood in for a Klingon gulag . Cliff Eidelman produced the film 's score , which is intentionally darker than previous Star Trek offerings . 
 The film was released in North America on December 6 , 1991 . The Undiscovered Country garnered positive reviews , with publications praising the lighthearted acting and facetious references . The film performed strongly at the box office . It posted the largest opening weekend gross of the series before going on to earn $ 96 @,@ 888 @,@ 996 worldwide . The film earned two Academy Award nominations , for Best Makeup and Best Sound Effects , and is the only Star Trek movie to win the Saturn Award for Best Science Fiction Film . A special collectors ' edition DVD version of the film was released in 2004 , to which Meyer had made minor alterations . Star Trek creator Gene Roddenberry died shortly before the movie 's premiere , just days after viewing the film . The film marked the final appearance together of the original series ' cast . 
 = = Plot = = 
 As a Klingon moon , Praxis , explodes without warning , the starship USS Excelsior , commanded by Captain Hikaru Sulu , is struck by the shock wave and its crew discovers that much of the moon has been obliterated . The loss of their key energy production facility and the destruction of the Klingon homeworld 's ozone layer throws the Klingon Empire into turmoil . No longer able to maintain a hostile footing , the Klingons sue for peace with their longstanding enemy , the United Federation of Planets . Accepting the proposal before the Klingons revert to a more belligerent approach , Starfleet sends the USS Enterprise @-@ A to meet with the Klingon Chancellor , Gorkon , and escort him to negotiations on Earth . Enterprise 's captain , James T. Kirk , whose son David was murdered by Klingons years earlier , opposes the negotiations and resents his assignment . 
 After a rendezvous between Enterprise and Gorkon 's battlecruiser they continue towards Earth , with the crews sharing a tense meal aboard Enterprise . Later that night , Enterprise appears to fire on the Klingon ship with a pair of photon torpedoes , disabling the artificial gravity aboard the Klingon vessel . During the confusion , two figures wearing Starfleet suits and gravity boots beam aboard the Klingon ship and grievously wound Gorkon before beaming away . Kirk surrenders to avoid a fight , and beams aboard the Klingon ship with Doctor Leonard McCoy to attempt to save Gorkon 's life . The chancellor dies , and Gorkon 's chief of staff , General Chang , puts Kirk and McCoy on trial for his assassination . The pair are found guilty and sentenced to life imprisonment on the frozen asteroid Rura Penthe . Gorkon 's daughter , Azetbur , becomes the new chancellor , and continues diplomatic negotiations ; for reasons of security , the conference is relocated and the new location is kept secret . While several senior Starfleet officers want to rescue Kirk and McCoy , the Federation president refuses to risk full @-@ scale war . Azetbur likewise refuses to invade Federation space , stating that only Kirk and McCoy will pay for her father 's death . 
 Kirk and McCoy arrive at the Rura Penthe mines and are befriended by a shapeshifter named Martia , who offers them an escape route ; in reality , it is a ruse to make their arranged deaths appear accidental . Once her betrayal is revealed , Martia transforms into Kirk 's double and fights him , but she is killed by the prison guards to silence any witnesses . Just before the prison warden reveals who set them up , Kirk and McCoy are beamed aboard Enterprise by Captain Spock , who had assumed command and undertaken an investigation in Kirk 's absence . Determining that Enterprise did not fire the torpedoes but that the assassins are still aboard , the crew begins looking for them . The two assassins are found dead , but Kirk and Spock trick their accomplice into believing they are still alive . When the culprit arrives in Sickbay to finish off the assassins , Kirk and Spock discover that the killer is Spock 's protégé , Valeris . To discover the identity of the conspirators , Spock initiates a forced mind @-@ meld , and learns that a group of Federation , Klingon , and Romulan officers plotted to sabotage the peace talks , fearing the changes their success might bring ( the titular " undiscovered country " ) , and Chang is one of the conspirators . The torpedoes that struck Gorkon 's cruiser came from a prototype Bird of Prey that can fire while cloaked , and hovered just below Enterprise at the time of the assassination . 
 The crew contacts Sulu , who informs them the conference is being held at Camp Khitomer . Both ships head for the talks as fast as they can . As Enterprise nears the planet , Chang 's cloaked Bird of Prey moves to intercept . With Enterprise unable to track his ship 's position , Chang inflicts severe damage on Enterprise and then Excelsior . At the suggestion of Uhura , the Enterprise 's communication officer , Spock and McCoy modify a photon torpedo to home in on the exhaust emissions of Chang 's vessel , using equipment originally intended to study gaseous anomalies . The torpedo impact reveals Chang 's location , and Enterprise and Excelsior destroy the Bird of Prey with a volley of torpedoes . Crew from both ships beam to the conference and halt an attempt on the Federation president 's life . Kirk pleads for those present to continue the peace process . Having saved the peace talks , Enterprise is ordered back to Earth by Starfleet Command to be decommissioned , but the crew decide to take their time on the return voyage . As Enterprise cruises towards a nearby star , Kirk proclaims that though this mission is the final cruise of Enterprise under his command , others will continue their voyages . 
 = = Cast = = 
 The Undiscovered Country 's cast includes the final group @-@ appearance of the major characters from the original television series , and new actors and characters . Casting director Mary Jo Slater loaded the film with as many Hollywood stars as the production could afford , including a minor appearance by Christian Slater , her son , as an Excelsior officer ; Cinefantastique considered the cameo a likely attempt to lure younger audiences . Meyer was interested in casting actors who could project and articulate feelings , even through alien makeup . Producer Ralph Winter said , " We were not looking for someone to say ' Okay , I 'll do it ' , but people who were excited by the material [ ... ] and would treat it as if it was the biggest picture ever being made . " 
 William Shatner plays Captain James T. Kirk ; Shatner felt that though dramatic , the script made Kirk look too prejudiced . Kirk 's second @-@ in @-@ command , the Vulcan Spock , is portrayed by Leonard Nimoy . DeForest Kelley plays Leonard McCoy , the chief medical officer of the Enterprise ; Kelley 's appearance as the doctor in The Undiscovered Country was to be his last . With Leonard Nimoy the film 's executive producer , the 71 @-@ year @-@ old Kelley was paid US $ 1 million for the role , assuring a comfortable retirement for the veteran actor . Kelley and Shatner shot their prison scenes over the course of six to eight nights ; the two actors got to know each other better than they ever had . 
 Other members of the Enterprise crew include James Doohan as chief engineer Montgomery Scott , Walter Koenig as navigator Pavel Chekov , and Nichelle Nichols as Uhura , the communications officer . Uhura was supposed to give a dramatic speech in Klingon during the film , but midway through production the element was scrapped and a scene where Uhura is speaking garbled Klingon , surrounded by books , was added for extra humor . Nichols protested the scene , wondering why there were still books in the 23rd century , but accepted the change since it would be the last Star Trek film she would appear in . Nichols was more uncomfortable with some of the dialogue 's racial undertones . Her character was originally to speak the line , " Guess who 's coming to dinner , " as the Klingons arrive on the Enterprise , but refused to say the part and it was given to Koenig 's character instead . Nichols also refused to say the line " yes , but would you like your daughter to marry one [ a Klingon ] " , and it was dropped from the film altogether . George Takei also returned as former helmsman Hikaru Sulu , though his character is now commander of the USS Excelsior , which includes former Enterprise yeoman Janice Rand ( again played by Grace Lee Whitney ) as a communications officer . 
 Kim Cattrall plays Valeris , the Enterprise 's new helmsman and the first Vulcan to graduate at the top of her class at Starfleet Academy . Valeris becomes the protégé of Captain Spock , who intends her to be his replacement . Initially , the character of Saavik , who appeared in the second through fourth Star Trek films , was intended to be the traitor , but Gene Roddenberry objected to making a character loved by fans into a villain . Cattrall was unwilling to be the third actress to play Saavik ( a part she had originally auditioned for ) , but accepted the role when she became a different character . Cattrall chose the Eris element of the character 's name , for the Greek goddess of strife , which was <unk> by the addition of the " Val " at the behest of director Nicholas Meyer . Cinefantastique reported that during filming , Cattrall participated in a photo shoot on the empty Enterprise bridge , where she wore nothing but her Vulcan ears . The story claimed Nimoy personally ripped up all of the photographs and negatives when he learned about the unauthorized photo session , because he feared harm to the franchise if it ever came to light . 
 The main Klingons are portrayed by Christopher Plummer as Chang , David Warner as Gorkon , and Rosanna DeSoto as Azetbur . Plummer and Shatner had performed together in various productions in Montreal . Meyer wrote the role for Plummer , who was initially reluctant to accept it . The role of Gorkon was initially offered to Jack Palance . Warner had appeared in Meyer 's first film , the 1979 science @-@ fiction film Time After Time , and had played a human ambassador in The Final Frontier . The actor 's make @-@ up was made to resemble Abraham Lincoln , as another way of humanizing the otherwise alien Klingon leader . When filming his character 's death , a large lamp exploded and rained down in pieces on Warner and Kelley ; one heavy piece barely missed striking Warner 's head , which Kelley was sure would have killed him . 
 Iman plays the role of Martia , a shapeshifting alien on the prison planet Rura Penthe who leads Kirk and McCoy into a trap . When Flinn originally developed the character , he had in mind a space pirate which he described as the " dark side of Han Solo " . Flinn imagined an actress like Sigourney Weaver in the role , who was " as different as night and day " from Iman . Meyer described Martia as " Kirk 's dream woman " , and when the makeup artists learned Iman was cast for the role they decided to enhance her graceful bird @-@ like appearance with feathers . Yellow contact lenses completed the look . 
 Other Starfleet officers include Brock Peters as Fleet Admiral Cartwright , a high @-@ ranking officer in Starfleet who vehemently protests Klingon entry into Federation space . Peters had previously appeared as Cartwright in Star Trek IV : The Voyage Home . Director Nicholas Meyer chose Peters for Star Trek VI partly based on his acting as the wrongly convicted black man Tom Robinson in To Kill a Mockingbird . Meyer thought that Cartwright 's vitriolic speech would be particularly chilling and meaningful coming from the mouth of a recognized minority . The content of the speech was so repugnant to Peters that he was unable to deliver it in one take . Peters later went on to play Joseph Sisko , father of Benjamin Sisko in the series Star Trek : Deep Space Nine . John Schuck also reprised his Voyage Home role as a Klingon ambassador . Kurtwood Smith appeared as the Federation President . René Auberjonois plays Colonel West , the would @-@ be assassin of the Federation President . Meyer was a friend of Auberjonois and offered him a chance to cameo months before filming . His part was cut from the theatrical version but reinstated on home video . Auberjonois would later portray security chief Odo on the series Star Trek : Deep Space Nine . Also , in a nod to the Next Generation series , Michael Dorn plays Colonel Worf , an ancestor of his Worf character who defends Kirk and McCoy at their trial . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The Final Frontier , the previous film in the series , was a critical and financial disappointment ; the cast and crew were worried that the franchise would not be able to recover from the blow . With the looming 25th anniversary of the original series in 1991 , producer Harve Bennett revisited an idea Ralph Winter had for the fourth film : a prequel featuring young versions of Kirk and Spock at Starfleet Academy . The prequel was designed to be a way of keeping the characters , if not the actors , in what was called " Top Gun in outer space " . Bennett and The Final Frontier writer David Loughery wrote a script entitled The Academy Years , where Dr. Leonard McCoy talks about how he met Kirk and Spock while addressing a group of Academy graduates . The script shows Kirk and Spock 's upbringing , their meeting McCoy and Montgomery Scott at the Academy and defeating a villain before parting ways . The script would have established that George Kirk , James T. Kirk 's father , was a pilot who went missing — presumed dead — during a warp experiment with Scott . The script is set before the " enlightenment " of the Federation ; slavery and racism are common , with Spock being bullied because he is the only Vulcan student . Nurse Christine Chapel cameos in the script 's climax . 
 Actor James Doohan claimed that Paramount chief Frank Mancuso had fired Bennett following negative reaction from the core cast , Roddenberry , and fans . Bennett claimed that after he rewrote the script to include Shatner and Nimoy , Paramount had still rejected it and that he decided it was time he left the franchise . He said , " My term was up . I was offered $ 1 @.@ 5 million to do Star Trek VI and I said ' Thanks , I don 't want to do that . I want to do the Academy . ' " Actor Walter Koenig approached Mancuso with a new script outline codenamed " In Flanders Fields " ; in it , the Romulans join the Federation and go to war with the Klingons . The Enterprise crew , except Spock , are forced to retire for not meeting fitness tests . When Spock and his new crew are captured by a monstrous worm @-@ like race of aliens ( which Koenig described as " things that the monsters in Aliens evolved from " ) , the old crew must rescue them . In the end , all of the characters except McCoy and Spock die . 
 Mancuso asked Leonard Nimoy to conceive the new film to serve as a swan song for the original cast . Nimoy , Mark Rosenthal and Lawrence Konner suggested Kirk meeting Jean @-@ Luc Picard , but Star Trek : The Next Generation 's producers refused to end their show . Nicholas Meyer , who directed The Wrath of Khan and co @-@ wrote The Voyage Home was also approached for an idea for the sixth film , but had none . Ralph Winter was brought on to the project as producer shortly after Bennett 's departure , and said Paramount 's mandate was to produce a 25th anniversary film that would not cost a lot of money . 
 Nimoy visited Meyer 's house and suggested , " [ What if ] the wall comes down in outer space ? You know , the Klingons have always been our stand @-@ ins for the Russians ... " Meyer recalled that he replied " ' Oh , wait a minute ! Okay , we start with an intergalactic Chernobyl ! Big explosion ! We got no more Klingon Empire ... ! ' And I just spilled out the whole story ! " The story deliberately included references to the contemporary political climate ; the character of Gorkon was based on Mikhail Gorbachev , while the assassination storyline was Meyer 's idea . He thought it was plausible that the Klingon leader who turned soft towards the enemy would be killed like similar peacemakers throughout history : Anwar El Sadat , Gandhi , and Abraham Lincoln . Nimoy 's hiring of Meyer was not only beneficial because Meyer knew the material and could write fast ( having produced The Wrath of Khan 's screenplay in twelve days ) , but if Meyer was to direct it would offset any acrimony from Shatner , whose ire would have been aroused if Nimoy returned to direct his third Star Trek feature after The Search for Spock and The Voyage Home . Meyer said that when he started work on the screenplay it did not occur to him that he would direct the film . Meyer 's wife was the first person to suggest that he should direct . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Meyer and his friend Denny Martin Flinn wrote the screenplay by the nascent means of e @-@ mail ; Meyer lived in Europe while Flinn was based in Los Angeles . The pair worked out a system where Flinn would write all day and then send the draft to Meyer , who would read and make revisions . The script constantly changed because of demands made not only by the core cast , but also the supporting players . Flinn was aware that the film would be the last to feature the cast of the original television series , so he wrote an opening that embraced the passage of time . In the opening , each of the crew was to be rounded up out of unhappy retirement for one final mission . 
 Flinn recalled that " the scenes demonstrated who [ the characters ] were and what they did when they weren 't on the Enterprise . [ ... ] It added some humanity to the characters . In early drafts , Spock plays Polonius in a Vulcan version of Hamlet , while Sulu drives a taxicab in an overcrowded metropolis . The revised opening featured Captain Sulu bringing his friends out of their retirement : Spock 's whereabouts are classified ; Kirk was to have married Carol Marcus ( played by Bibi Besch in The Wrath of Khan ) , the mother of his late son , leading a settled life before a special envoy arrives at his door . McCoy is drunk at a posh medical dinner ; Scott is teaching Engineering while the Bird of Prey from The Voyage Home is pulled from San Francisco Bay ; Uhura hosts a call @-@ in radio show and is glad to escape ; and Chekov is playing chess at a club . 
 The opening was rejected as too expensive to film ; Flinn mentioned the exotic locales would have pushed the budget to $ 50 million . While they tried to hold on to the opening as long as they could , Paramount threatened to cancel pre @-@ production unless a few million dollars were cut from the budget . 
 The script was finished by October 1990 , five months after Nimoy was approached to write the story . Several months were spent working out the budget ; because of the disappointing box office returns of The Final Frontier , Paramount wanted to keep the sixth film 's budget approximately the same as the previous installment , although the script called for space battles and new aliens . Shatner , Nimoy , and Kelley 's salaries were cut with the understanding that they would share in box office profits . Meyer estimated that almost two months were spent fighting with the studio about the budget . " To some degree , almost every area of the production was affected by the cuts — but the script was the one thing that did not become a casualty , " Meyer said . The original budget hovered around $ 41 million . While not expensive for a Hollywood production , this would have presented a risk due to Star Trek films ' niche audience and lower international appeal . The final budget came in at $ 27 million . 
 Star Trek 's creator , Gene Roddenberry , who wielded significant influence despite his ill health , hated the script . Meyer 's first meeting with Roddenberry resulted in Meyer storming out of the room within five minutes . As with Meyer 's previous Star Trek film ( The Wrath of Khan ) , the script had strong military overtones , with a naval theme present throughout . Far from being idealized , the characters were shown as bigoted and flawed . In contrast to Roddenberry 's vision of the future , Meyer thought there was no evidence that bigotry would disappear by the 23rd century . When Roddenberry protested about the <unk> of Saavik , Meyer replied that " I created Saavik . She was not Gene 's . If he doesn 't like what I plan on doing with her , maybe he should give back the money he 's made off my films . Maybe then I 'll care what he has to say . " After the stormy first meeting , a group including Meyer , Roddenberry , and producer Ralph Winter discussed the revised draft . Roddenberry would voice his disapproval of elements of the script line by line , and he and Meyer would square off about them while Winter took notes . Overall , the tone of the meeting was conciliatory , but the producers ultimately ignored many of Roddenberry 's concerns . By February 13 , 1991 , the film was officially put into production with the agreement it would be in theaters by the end of the year . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 As he had when he directed The Wrath of Khan , Meyer attempted to modify the look of Star Trek to fit his vision . Cinematographer Hiro Narita 's previous work had been on effects films such as The Rocketeer , where he had time and money to make a lavish period fantasy ; with The Undiscovered Country , he was constantly under time and budgetary pressures . Though Narita confessed that he knew nothing about Star Trek , Meyer replied that he did not want him to have any preconceived notions about the look of the series . 
 Effects supervisor Scott Farrar said that Narita did a " good job of keeping [ the set ] dark . When you get into a stage situation of aluminum walls and shiny metal , it can be a problem . But by keeping the light down , you see a little less and it becomes more textural . Hiro was very keen to avoid that over @-@ bright stage look . " The budget meant that many of the Enterprise sets were redresses of those used in Star Trek : The Next Generation . Meyer and production designer Herman Zimmerman were only able to make minor adjustments to these sets , as the television series was still in production at the time of filming . 
 The set used for Spock 's quarters was the same as the one for Kirk 's , but with the addition of a central column . The set was being used at the time for Data 's room in The Next Generation , and had originally been built as Kirk 's quarters for Star Trek : The Motion Picture in 1979 . The transporter room set was also reused from The Next Generation , with alterations that included the addition of a glowing pattern along the transporter 's walls inspired by one of Zimmerman 's sweaters ; the set had previously been used on The Final Frontier . The galley was the set used for Deanna Troi 's office , while the Federation president 's office was a redesign of the Ten @-@ Forward lounge , the exterior doors to which accidentally retained their USS Enterprise @-@ D markings . Alien costumes in the Rura Penthe prison were reused from The Next Generation 's premiere episode , " Encounter at Farpoint " . The Excelsior bridge was a redress of Enterprise 's command center , with consoles taken from the battle bridge of the Enterprise @-@ D to convey the impression that the Excelsior was a more advanced ship . 
 Meyer had never been happy with the brightly lit corridors and feel of the Enterprise , a dissatisfaction that extended to his work on The Wrath of Khan . For The Undiscovered Country , Meyer wanted the Enterprise interiors to feel grittier and more realistic ; the metal was worn around the edges to look used without looking beat up . Narita 's plans to transform the look of the Enterprise on a scale not seen since The Wrath of Khan were complicated by the necessary use of existing sets . 
 The corridors were reduced in width and included angled bulkhead dividers , with exposed conduits added to the ceiling to convey a claustrophobic feel reminiscent of the submarine film The Hunt for Red October . Narita changed the bright , smooth look of the Enterprise bridge that had been created by Zimmerman for The Final Frontier by lighting the set as <unk> as possible . " I didn 't want to use too much smoke on the Enterprise , because I didn 't want it to end up looking too much like the Klingon starship . For that reason I decided to keep the look of the Enterprise pretty clean , but with a little more <unk> lighting , " Narita said . Meyer acknowledged that had he been the creator of the franchise , " I would have probably designed a much more claustrophobic world because it 's much more dramatic . " 
 The director was insistent that panel labels contain descriptive instructions that might be found on a starship , rather than made @-@ up gibberish , <unk> , or gag text . Designer Michael Okuda had finished a schematic of the Enterprise 's decks when Nimoy pointed out he had misspelled " reclamation " ; while Okuda was fairly certain no one else would notice the single spelling error on the print , he had to fix it . Meyer also made a contentious decision to feature a kitchen in the film , a move that attracted fan controversy . Although the original series mentioned a galley in the episode " Charlie X " , only machines able to synthesize food had been shown before . 
 = = = Props and models = = = 
 Paramount made a decision early on to use existing ship models for filming , meaning the old models — some more than a decade old — had to be refurbished , adapted , and reused . As some ships had not been examined for some time , electrical problems had developed . The Klingon cruiser first seen in 1979 's The Motion Picture was altered to suggest an important flagship , with a flared design applied to the underside of the vessel . Effects supervisor William George wanted to make it distinct from the earlier ships , since it was one of the few models that could be altered : " We did some research into military costuming , and came up with the concept that when these ships return victorious from battle , the Klingons build some sort of <unk> onto their wings or paint a new stripe on . " The model was repainted brown and red and etched with brass . 
 Despite representing a new vessel , the Enterprise @-@ A was the same model that had been used since 1979 . Poorly regarded by earlier effects artists because of its complicated wiring and bulk , the Enterprise 's hairline cracks were <unk> and sanded down , and the internal circuitry was redone . The new model 's running lights were matched to similar intensities , saving the effects artists time because the lights would look correct with only a single pass , instead of three passes required previously ( for the sensor dome , running lights , and window lights ) . One unfortunate byproduct of the fixes was the loss of the model 's distinctive pearlescent finish . The elaborate sheen was never visible on screen ( lighting schemes prevented reflections while filming so the ship could be properly inserted into effects shots ) and so when the model was repainted with conventional techniques the effect was lost . The Bird of Prey had been damaged from work in The Voyage Home , where the ship was supposed to fly around the sun . To suggest singes , the model had been painted with black @-@ tinged rubber cement , with the expectation that this application would rub off . The cement instead sat on the model and baked itself to the model surface , and had to be scrubbed off . 
 Greg Jein , best known as the builder of the alien mothership from Close Encounters of the Third Kind , was called on to build props for the film . Jein was a longtime Star Trek fan who had constructed the props for The Final Frontier , but was forced to remake props that had since mysteriously disappeared . Jein added references to the original television series and other science fiction franchises throughout the prop designs ; the Rura Penthe warden 's staff contained parts of a spaceship from Buck Rogers , while the <unk> was detailed with a prop from Buckaroo Banzai . Elements from The Final Frontier were modified and reused ; a medical implement from the film became Chekov 's blood tester , and the assault phasers first seen in The Final Frontier became standard issue . Gorkon 's staff was intended to be a massive bone from an alien creature he had killed , with the designs shaped out of green foam and approved by Meyer . Two copies were strong enough to support David Warner 's weight ; another two were designed to be light enough to be hung from wires for the zero gravity scenes . Since the Klingon phasers were redesigned for the third film , the original holsters no longer fit the weaponry ; as a result , no Klingons had ever been seen drawing a phaser . Meyer was adamant about having the actors be able to <unk> their weapons , so the existing pistols had to be redesigned . The Klingon sniper rifle was broken into sections , with parts modeled from real weapons . 
 = = = Makeup = = = 
 The Klingons received the first major revision in design since their appearance in The Motion Picture . Dodie Shepard designed new red and black uniforms for Chancellor Gorkon and his staff , as it was judged that it would be unseemly for the chancellor to wear common warrior garb . Another concern was that there was not enough of designer Robert Fletcher 's The Motion Picture uniforms for all the Klingons in the film . While the important Klingons were given multi @-@ layered prosthetics and unique head ridges , background characters wore ready @-@ made masks , with minor touch @-@ ups on the eyes and mouth . Since it was important for the actors ' expressions to be visible through the makeup , the appliances were made thin using the latest glues and paints . Transforming an actor into a Klingon took three and a half hours . Hairstylist Jan Alexander designed braids and jewelry that suggested a tribal people with a long and treasured heritage . 
 The main reason for the diversity of Klingon designs , hairstyles , and appliances stemmed from the fact that there were more Klingons featured than in all the previous films combined . Eighteen unique designs were used for the main characters , with another thirty " A " makeups , forty " B " foam latex makeups , and fifty polyurethane plastic masks for background extras . Makeup artist Richard Snell was in charge of the principal Klingon actors ' appliances . The designs for the foreheads came from Snell 's own ideas and co @-@ workers , but the actors were also allowed input into their character 's appearances . Christopher Plummer requested his character 's forehead have more subdued spinal ridges than Klingons in previous films , to look unique and to humanize his character . During makeup tests , Snell was about to apply Plummer 's wig when the actor muttered that he wanted no wig , with Chang 's small amount of hair swept back into a warrior 's topknot . 
 Snell worked through several nights to redesign the back of Chang 's head and add more detail . This design change meant only Plummer 's front could be photographed during the first few days of filming while the makeup department created appliances to cover the back of his head . Azetbur , portrayed by Rosanna DeSoto , was initially conceived as barbaric , but Meyer insisted on a more refined look . Like Plummer , DeSoto requested more subdued ridges , and the result was , according to artist Kenny Myers , a " very regal woman who just happened to be Klingon " . 
 The design changes forced Kenny Myers to abdicate his other makeup job , that of Warner 's Gorkon , to Margaret <unk> . Gorkon 's appearance was of special concern to Meyer , who had two specific role models : Ahab and Abraham Lincoln . " [ Meyer ] loves to play the classics , " Kenny Myers explained , " and incorporating these two images was really genius on his part . He wanted there to be uncertainty about Gorkon 's true intentions . Did he want peace , or was there something sinister in his mind ? From his appearance , it was impossible to tell if he was friend or foe . <unk> , there were aspects of both . " 
 Along with Klingon cosmetics , makeup supervisor Michael J. Mills was kept busy preparing the large number of other aliens called for in the script . Mills and his team created the largest makeup endeavor ever seen in a Star Trek film until then ; custom makeup was applied to 22 principal actors , and as many as 126 prosthetic makeups each day . Because the alien creatures played such an important role in the film , there was a concerted push to provide enough money to the makeup department to make sure the complex work was finished . According to Mills , " [ if ] we could prove to [ Ralph Winter ] that we needed something to get the shot done , then we 'd have it . " The makeup lab employed a staff of 25 and produced over 300 prosthetics , from Klingon foreheads to Vulcan and Romulan ears . Work on the many extras began as early as one o 'clock in the morning to be ready for the eight o 'clock call . 
 The large , hulking form the shapeshifter Martia assumes while on the surface of Rura Penthe was dubbed " The Brute " by the production team . The creature 's Yeti @-@ like appearance was based on a Smithsonian cover of a marmoset . Also created for the Rura Penthe shoot was a frozen Klingon with a horrified expression . Makeup artist Ed French found a spare Klingon headpiece in Richard Snell 's possession and attached it to his own head . A cast of his tortured expression was used as the foundation for the dummy used on location . The designers used striking colors and new techniques for some of the aliens ; ultraviolet pigments were used to create a particularly hostile alien that fights Kirk in Rura Penthe . 
 As it was intended to be Nimoy 's last portrayal of Spock , the actor was adamant that his appearance be faithful to the original 1960s Fred Phillips and Charlie Schram design of the character . Mills consulted photos from the original television series as reference , and created five ear <unk> before Nimoy was satisfied . The result was tall ears with the tips pointing forward — considerably different from Richard Snell 's swept @-@ back look for The Voyage Home . The character of Valeris was designed to be more ivory @-@ hued than Spock 's yellow tone , with sleeker eyebrows and a severe haircut favored by Meyer . " We went to great pains to establish that this is the way a Vulcan woman — a sexy Vulcan woman — would look , " said Mills . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography took place between April 16 , 1991 and September 27 , 1991 , using a mix of fixed sets and on @-@ location footage . The production suffered from a lack of available set space because of shortages ; the Starfleet Headquarters set was actually built a few blocks away from Paramount Pictures at the Hollywood Presbyterian Church . Meyer copied a technique used during filming of Citizen Kane , where the filmmakers let the set fall into darkness to save money on construction . The film was shot in Super 35 instead of anamorphic format , because of the former 's greater flexibility in framing and lens selection , larger depth of field , and faster lenses . 
 Because of budget cuts , plans for filming were constantly revised and reduced , but sometimes this proved to be an asset rather than a hindrance . Meyer would often say that " art thrives on restrictions " , and Zimmerman agreed , saying that the design and filming created a rich environment that supported and enhanced the action . 
 The dinner scene was shot in a revamped version of the Enterprise @-@ D 's observation lounge . Along the wall are portraits of historical figures including Abraham Lincoln , Spock 's father Sarek ( Mark Lenard ) , and an unnamed Andorian ambassador . The food prepared for the scene was colored blue so it would look alien . None of the actors wanted to eat the unappetizing dishes ( especially after they grew ripe under hot studio lights ) , and it became a running joke among the crew during filming to make them sample their food . 
 Because of the multiple angles and takes required for a single mouthful of food , Meyer offered a bounty of $ 20 per every shot of a character eating . For Shatner , the incentive was enough that he became the only cast member to consume purple @-@ dyed squid . The shoot lasted several days because of what Plummer called the " horror " of filming the dinner . 
 The Klingon courtroom where Kirk and McCoy are sentenced was designed like an arena , with high walls and a central platform for the accused . Originally planned for construction on the largest soundstage , cutbacks in location footage for Rura Penthe forced a smaller set to be constructed . Sixty @-@ six Klingons were used for the scene , with six actors in custom makeups and an additional fifteen in " A @-@ level " makeup ; the high quality designs were used for the Klingons in the first row of the stands , while those actors to the rear used masks . 
 The illusion of endless rows of Klingons was created by brightly lighting the accused in the center of the room with a bright blue light , then letting the rest of the set fall into shadow . To give the set a larger appearance , a shot from high above the courtroom was created using miniatures . Inspired by a scene in Ben @-@ Hur , matte supervisor Craig Barron used two hundred commercially available Worf dolls sent by Ralph Winter . Angry Klingons were created by rocking the dolls back and forth with motors , waving sticks lit by twelve @-@ volt light bulbs dyed red . The resulting courtroom miniature was ten feet long . 
 Flinn conceived the penal colony Rura Penthe as on an arid , undeveloped world with odorous aliens ; Meyer suggested that it be turned into an ice world instead . The exterior shots of Martia , Kirk , and McCoy traveling across the frozen wastes were filmed on top of a glacier in Alaska , forty minutes east of Anchorage . Because of budget and time constraints , the second unit was tasked with getting the footage . The location was accessible only by helicopter , and was scouted months before filming began . 
 The main problem the crew faced was the cold ; in the morning , the temperatures peaked at around − 22 ° F , while by mid @-@ afternoon it often dropped to − 50 ° . The stuntmen , dressed in woolen costumes , were in danger of catching pneumonia . Ice caverns producer Jaffe had scouted partially melted before filming ; with only two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ third days of time to film , the crew had to do the best they could . Batteries drained after minutes of filming in the cold , and the lack of snow was compensated by dropping fake precipitation into the scene by helicopter . 
 Scenes featuring the main characters at Rura Penthe were filmed on a soundstage . Massive fans blew dusty fake snow that , according to Shatner , got into " every orifice " , as well as into the camera . Creating a fake blizzard was challenging ; two types of plastic snow were mixed together to provide flakes and powdery accumulation . Camera magazines were changed off the stage so that there was no chance the snow could get into the film ; crewmembers found the snow in their socks for weeks afterwards . 
 The underground prison was shot in real caves left by mining at Griffith Park , in the Bronson Canyon , previously used as the Batcave and in the 1930s Flash Gordon serial . Shots of the interior of the mine were captured at night so it appeared like the setting was underground . Since Narita and his crew weren 't allowed to drill holes for lights in mine shafts , illumination had to come from practical lights that appeared to be part of the set . The elevator descent into the bowels of the mine was simulated by pasting fake rocks to a canvas being cranked in the background of the scene . While Zimmerman believed Shatner would hate the fight between Kirk and his doppelgänger , the actor enjoyed the theatrical sequence , and contributed to the choreography with his knowledge of judo and karate . 
 The battle above Khitomer was one of the last sequences to be shot , which proved fortuitous as the bridge of the Enterprise was damaged by the simulated sparks and explosions . The officer 's mess set was blown up for a sequence where the Enterprise 's hull is compromised by a torpedo . When the set was rebuilt for use on The Next Generation , the forward wall was rebuilt and redesigned . While the Khitomer conference interior and exteriors were filmed at the Brandeis @-@ <unk> Institute in California , the window from which Colonel West prepares to assassinate the president was a separate set built at Paramount . Footage from Brandeis , matte paintings , and the backlot were combined to create an open outdoor view . 
 The division of labor for shooting the starship models was decided early on by effects cameramen Peter Daulton and Pat Sweeney . There was an equal amount of work if one crew did all the Enterprise shots and another did the Bird of Prey , Klingon cruiser and Excelsior shots , so the cameramen flipped to decide who worked on which models . Old and new techniques were applied to shooting the models . To make sure the vessels were seamlessly inserted into star fields in post @-@ production , the crew filmed second passes in overexposed yellow light , which reduced light spillage onto the bluescreen backdrop . The yellow overcast was removed by filtration in the optical process , with the result being a clean edge around the ships . 
 Using a technique pioneered on Back to the Future Part II , another shot with a different lighting scheme was filmed . By combining separate key light and fill light passes , optical effects could generate any amount of contrast they wanted without causing spillage . Because Paramount continued to add new shots to the busy schedule and tight budget , some elements were flipped for reuse , including the star fields and a shot of the Bird of Prey firing . Whenever possible , the ships were filmed from below to reinforce the nautical theme , with their movements intended to remind the audience of galleons or other large seafaring vessels . 
 The approach to Spacedock was filmed from below the station model , which Bill George found visually interesting and appropriate . He felt that the tracking of a shuttle from the planet evoked 2001 : A Space Odyssey . The shuttle used in the scene was the only new model created for the film . It measured twelve inches and was fabricated in less than a week . The shot of the Enterprise leaving Spacedock was difficult to produce because the interior dock miniature had disappeared . Stock footage from The Voyage Home was used for one shot to compensate . Since the only other shot needed was the Enterprise 's point of view leaving Spacedock through the doors , it was the only section recreated for the film . 
 The last scene in the film was arranged for the last day of filming . Initially , the language was supposed to be more somber and classical , but Meyer made some last minute changes . Flinn said that Meyer " was in an optimistic mood " , and the director suggested that Kirk quote Peter Pan for the last lines : " Second star to the right , and straight on ' til morning . " Emotions ran high as the last shots of the cast were captured ; Shatner said , " By the time we finished the last scene , which extended longer than we expected , there was a sense of irritation . We raised a glass of champagne , but everybody was actually a little antsy . " 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 The majority of the visual effects were created by Industrial Light & Magic ( ILM ) under the supervision of Scott Farrar ( who served as visual effects cameraman on the first three Star Trek films ) and animator Wes Takahashi . After receiving the script , ILM created storyboards for the effects sequences before meeting Meyer and producers Winter and Steven @-@ Charles Jaffe to discuss the planned scenes . These discussions began before the film was greenlit . ILM 's initial cost estimates were over Paramount 's budget , so to save money the filmmakers redesigned some shots and outsourced some to other companies . 
 Elements of the zero gravity scenes were handled by Pacific Data Images , while phaser beams and transporter effects were generated by Visual Concept Engineering , an offshoot of ILM that had contributed to The Wrath of Khan and The Final Frontier . Despite the overall count of effects shots being dropped from over 100 to 51 , the project was still large , and required virtually the entire ILM staff to complete . Farrar 's goal was to economize the remaining effects ; if three shots were similar , they would try to tell the story with only one . Cheap animatics provided Meyer with placeholders to cut into the film and avoid costly surprises . Stock footage from previous films were used whenever possible , but it was often infeasible to do so ; as the original USS Enterprise had been destroyed in The Search for Spock , all shots of the USS Enterprise @-@ A had to feature the updated ship registry . 
 ILM 's computer graphics division was responsible for creating three sequences , including the explosion of Praxis . Meyer 's idea for the effect was influenced by The Poseidon Adventure ; Farrar used imagery of an immense wave hitting the Poseidon to inform the scale of their shock wave . The department built on a lens flare simulation to create a plasma burst composed of two expanding disc shapes with swirling detail texture mapped to the surface . 
 Farrar settled on the preliminary look of the wave , and graphics supervisor Jay Riddle used Adobe Photoshop on a Macintosh to establish the final color scheme . Initially the team thought they would be able to use the same methods to create the wave that hits the Excelsior , but found that it did not convey the scale of the wave — in Riddle 's words , " this thing had to look really enormous . " The shot was created by manipulating two curved pieces of computer geometry , expanding them as they approached the camera 's view . Textures that changed every frame were added to the main wave body and over the top of it to give the impression of great speed . Motion control footage of the Excelsior was then scanned into the computer system and made to interact with the digital wave . ILM 's " Praxis effect " shockwave became a common feature in science fiction films depicting the destruction of large objects . 
 Meyer came upon the idea of having assassins in special boots kill a weightless Gorkon after searching for a novel way to " blow away " the character in space that had not been seen before . The final sequence married physical effects and stuntwork with computer graphics . Responsibility for shooting the live action footage fell to the second unit under Jaffe 's direction . While the sequence read well on paper , there was not enough time or money to do the effects " the right way " — for example , shooting the actors on a bluescreen and then inserting them into the Klingon corridors . 
 Jaffe noted that the low @-@ tech method of suspending actors by wires helped the final effect , because as photographed by John Fante , few wires had to be removed digitally in post @-@ production ; sets were constructed so that the harsh lighting obscured wires , and entire sets were constructed on their sides so that by pulling actors up and down on the rotated sets , the characters appeared to float sideways . These sets were on gimbals so that the movement of the actors and sets created a floating effect . The shot of two Klingons killed and thrown back down a corridor by phaser blasts was simulated by positioning the camera at the bottom of a corridor set . The set was placed on its end in the tallest soundstage at Paramount , so that the camera looked up towards the ceiling . In this position , the wires were hidden by the actors as they ascended the corridor . 
 The blood that spurts out of the Klingon 's wounds was created using computer generated imagery ; the animators had to make sure that the blood floated in a convincing manner while still looking interesting and not too gory . The effects artist looked at NASA footage of floating globules of water to inform the physics of the blood particles . Initially , the blood was to be colored green , but the filmmakers realized that McCoy had referred to Spock as green @-@ blooded . 
 The final color was violet , a color Meyer disliked but had to go ahead with , because his first choice — red — would almost certainly earn the film an " R " rating from the MPAA . The initial killing of the Klingon in the transporter room as the assassins beam aboard was the testing ground for tweaking the color of the blood and how it would move around the room . Most of the blood droplets were " <unk> " , groups of spheres smoothed together by computer , creating a continuous shape . The further apart the spheres , the more the shape could stretch and even break apart . The phasers used in the scene and throughout the film were redesigned versions of earlier models and were first used in The Final Frontier . The props featured blue lights that turned on when the trigger was pressed , so effects artists knew when to add the phaser beam effects . 
 For the zero gravity sequences , the ILM team matched Visual Concepts Engineering 's phaser blasts by hand @-@ painting the effect in Photoshop . ILM also did minor <unk> to the scenes as required , adding clothing tears where the phaser blasts hit the actors and adding the hazy Klingon atmosphere to the computer @-@ rendered objects . These zero gravity scenes were the most expensive sequences to complete . 
 Rura Penthe was created with a mixture of on @-@ set and location shots , along with an establishing sequence created by Matte World . The characters were shot on a San Francisco beach , with a white plastic underfoot . Sun elements were layered onto the shot along with a double @-@ exposed snow effect . Additional passes were made on <unk> clouds with lights behind them to create a lightning storm underway in the background . 
 Martia was not the first shapeshifter on Star Trek , but the character was the first to be created using computer @-@ generated digital morphing technology . The effects , dubbed " morfs " , were more advanced revisions of the technology used for films such as Terminator 2 : Judgment Day . Animator John Berton attempted new , more complicated morfs , including moving the camera and morphing two characters talking ; special care had to be taken to line up the characters properly in plate photography . Martia becomes Kirk while talking , requiring similar line deliveries from Iman and Shatner ; Farrar supervised the set photography for the morfs and had the actors speak their lines in sync via a loudspeaker . 
 Kirk 's fight scene with Martia in the form of Kirk was mostly filmed with a double dressed in similar clothes ; in the majority of the shots the camera allowed only one of the combatants ' faces to be seen . When Kirk talked with his double directly , two separate takes of Shatner facing opposite directions were combined , with the camera motion carefully controlled so that the resulting image looked realistic . 
 For the final space battle , Bill George redesigned the photon torpedoes to have a hotter core and larger flare , because he felt that the weapons in earlier films looked " too pretty " . The torpedoes also moved like guided missiles rather than cannonballs . George told Farrar that he had always wanted to see something penetrate the thin saucer section of the Enterprise , so a replica of the saucer was recreated and blown up ; the model was hung upside down so that the explosion could be flipped to approximate the zero gravity effects . Rather than destroy the Bird of Prey model in the climax , pyrotechnic footage was reduced and placed in the appropriate locations to simulate rippling explosions throughout the vessel . 
 A special " pyro model " was created from a rubber cast of the Bird of Prey and exploded instead , with a lap dissolve making the transition from the motion control ship to the pyro vessel . ILM knew that there was already footage of Chang reacting to the torpedo hit , but knew Meyer was unhappy with the result . Using footage of Plummer as reference , the effects team created a dummy that was detonated in the same position . Steve Jaffe said , " [ Editor ] Ron Roose and I pored through the footage to find what amounted to three usable frames that we could use to tell the audience ' we got him ! ' " 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Meyer 's original plan for the score was to adapt Gustav Holst 's orchestral suite The Planets . The plan proved unfeasibly expensive , so Meyer began listening to demo tapes submitted by composers . Meyer described most of the demos as generic " movie music " , but was intrigued by one tape by a young composer named Cliff Eidelman . Eidelman , then 26 , had made a career in composing for ballets , television , and film , but despite work on fourteen features , no film had been the hit needed to propel Eidelman to greater fame . 
 In conversations with Eidelman , Meyer mentioned that since the marches that accompanied the main titles for the previous Star Trek films were so good , he had no desire to compete with them by composing a bombastic opening . He also felt that since the film was darker than its predecessors , it demanded something different musically as a result . He mentioned the opening to Igor Stravinsky 's The Firebird as similar to the foreboding sound he wanted . Two days later Eidelman produced a tape of his idea for the main theme , played on a synthesizer . Meyer was impressed by the speed of the work and the close fit to his vision . Meyer approached producer Steven Charles @-@ Jaffe with Eidelman 's CD , which reminded Jaffe of Bernard Herrmann ; Eidelman was given the task of composing the score . 
 Eidelman 's previous project had been creating a compilation of music from the past five Star Trek films , and he consciously avoided taking inspiration from those scores . " [ The compilation ] showed me what to stay away from , because I couldn 't do James Horner [ composer for The Wrath of Khan and The Search for Spock ] as well as James Horner , " he said . Since he was hired early on in production , Eidelman had an unusually long time to develop his ideas , and he was able to visit the sets during filming . While the film was in early production Eidelman worked on electronic drafts of the final score , to placate executives who were unsure about using a relatively unknown composer . 
 Eidelman stated that he finds science fiction the most interesting and exciting genre to compose for , and that Meyer told him to treat the film as a fresh start , rather than drawing on old Star Trek themes . Eidelman wanted the music to aid the visuals ; for Rura Penthe , he strove to create an atmosphere that reflected the alien and dangerous setting , introducing exotic instruments for color . Besides using percussion from around the world , Eidelman treated the choir as percussion , with the Klingon language translation for " to be , or not to be " ( " <unk> <unk> , <unk> " ) being repeated in the background . Spock 's theme was designed to be an ethereal counterpart to the motif for Kirk and the Enterprise , aimed at capturing " the emotional gleam in the captain 's eye " . Kirk 's internal dilemma about what the future holds was echoed in the main theme : " It 's Kirk taking control one last time and as he looks out into the stars he has the spark again [ ... ] But there 's an unresolved note , because it 's very important that he doesn 't trust the Klingons . He doesn 't want to go on this trip even though the spark is there that overtook him . " For the climactic battle , Eidelman starts the music quietly , building the intensity as the battle progresses . 
 The soundtrack was released on December 10 , 1991 through MCA Records and features thirteen tracks of score with a running time of forty @-@ five minutes . In 2005 , a bootleg copy of the soundtrack also surfaced with thirty @-@ six tracks of score and a running time of nearly seventy minutes . Intrada Records released a two @-@ disc set in 2012 . The first disc is made up of the complete score and four extra cues . The second disc contains the material from the original MCA release . 
 = = Themes = = 
 The Undiscovered Country 's Cold War allegory and references to literary history were recognized among researchers and cultural historians . According to scholar Larry Kreitzer , The Undiscovered Country has more references to William Shakespeare than any other Star Trek work until at least 1996 . The title itself alludes to Hamlet , Act III , Scene 1 . Meyer had originally intended The Wrath of Khan to be called The Undiscovered Country . Whereas the undiscovered country referred to in Hamlet ( and its intended meaning in The Wrath of Khan ) is death , Star Trek VI 's use of the phrase refers to a future where Klingons and humans coexist in peace . 
 A phrase from The Tempest is mentioned by Gorkon as representing the new galactic order , that of a " brave new world " . Chang recites most of the lines from Shakespeare used in the film , including quotes from Romeo and Juliet and Henry IV , Part 2 in his parting words to Kirk after dinner . During Kirk 's trial , Chang also mocks Kirk with lines from Richard II . The final battle above Khitomer contains seven references to five of Shakespeare 's plays . Two references are drawn from the title character 's lines in King Henry V ( " Once more unto the breach " / " The game 's afoot " ) , while two more quotations are from Julius Caesar ( " I am as constant as the Northern Star " / " Cry ' havoc ! ' and let slip the dogs of war " ) . There is a single reference to Prospero from The Tempest ( " Our revels now are ended " ) , and Chang shortens the wronged Shylock 's speech from The Merchant of Venice : " Tickle us , do we not laugh ; prick us , do we not bleed ; and wrong us , shall we not revenge ? " 
 The final lines spoken by Chang before he is obliterated by torpedo fire are lifted from Hamlet 's famous soliloquy : " to be , or not to be ... " Flinn was initially unsure about the numerous classical quotations , but when Plummer was cast , Meyer enthusiastically added more . He said , " Whether it 's pretentious or not , I think it depends on how it 's used . [ ... ] I don 't quite agree with using too much of that sort of thing , but once you get Plummer , suddenly it 's working . " 
 Scholars have noted that the Klingons , not humans , are the ones who quote Shakespeare ; Gorkon claims at one point in the film that " You have not experienced Shakespeare until you have read him in the original Klingon . " Translating Shakespeare into Klingon proved problematic because Marc Okrand had not created a verb for " to be " when he developed the language . Shakespeare scholar Paul A. Cantor argues that this association is appropriate — the warlike Klingons find their literary matches in the characters Othello , Mark Antony , and Macbeth — but that it also reinforces a claim that the end of the Cold War means the end of heroic literature such as Shakespeare 's . Meyer said the idea for having the Klingons claim Shakespeare as their own was based on Nazi Germany 's attempt to claim the Bard as German before World War II . According to Kay Smith , the use of Shakespeare has meaning in itself and also derives new meaning ( underscoring cultural politics in the film ) by its <unk> in a new form . 
 The association of General Chang with the politics of the Munich Agreement that involved attempted appeasement of Nazi Germany are brought up twice in the film . The first is with Chang with other Klingon officials at a dinner with Kirk and Federation officers , where Chang declares that the Klingon Empire needs " breathing room " , to which Kirk responds by imitating Spock 's earlier quoting of Hamlet , saying that Chang 's reference is " Earth , Hitler , 1938 " . Later when Kirk confronts Chang 's warship , Chang mocks the historic British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain who attempted to appease Hitler ; with Chang saying that there will be " no peace in our time " . 
 A major theme of the film is change , and people 's response to that change . Meyer considered Valeris and Chang " frightened people , who are frightened of change " , who cling to old ways despite the changing world . He hoped that the fictionalization of a current events story allowed for an objective look at the issues , rather than being blinded by personal bias . At the beginning of the film , Kirk operates under a similar bias , calling the Klingons " animals " and putting him at odds with Spock . The Vulcan sees the Gorkon peace initiative as logical , responding to the sudden change in the status quo in a collected manner ; he even opens the peace dialog at the behest of his father . 
 Kirk , meanwhile , is willing to " let them ( the Klingons ) die " , unwilling to listen to Spock 's words because of his biased understanding . Kirk undergoes a transformation through the film by way of his incarceration ; realizing that his hatred is outmoded he allows for a cleansing that restores his son to him in some way . 
 While Star Trek in general features few overt references to religion , there is a clear recognition that a laying aside of past hurts is necessary for peace , similar to the concept of shalom in Judaism . Shatner regretted that Kirk 's angst at being outmoded was minimized in the final print . A scene where Spock asks Kirk if they have grown so old and inflexible they have outlived their usefulness had two meanings : it was as much Nimoy asking Shatner as it was their characters . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Release = = = 
 The Undiscovered Country was released in North America on December 6 , 1991 . The film was initially planned for release a week later on December 13 . To promote the film and the 25th anniversary of Star Trek , Paramount held marathon screenings of the previous five films in 44 select U.S. and Canadian cities . The 12 @-@ hour showings also included footage of The Undiscovered Country . The day before the film 's release , the core cast was inducted into Grauman 's Chinese Theatre , and signed their names on Hollywood Boulevard . Nimoy , who had earlier requested $ 1 million to cameo on The Next Generation , appeared in the two @-@ part episode " Unification " that aired during November 1991 to increase interest in the feature film . The previous five films were released in collectors ' box sets with new packaging ; retailers were offered the chance to photograph their retail setups for a chance to win an expenses @-@ paid tour of The Next Generation 's set and tickets to an advance screening of The Undiscovered Country . 
 Roddenberry did not live to see the film 's release , dying of heart failure on October 24 , 1991 . Before the film 's release he viewed a near @-@ final version of The Undiscovered Country , and according to the film 's producer and Kelley 's biographer , approved a final version of the film . In contrast , Nimoy and Shatner 's memoirs report that after the screening he called his lawyer and demanded a quarter of the scenes be cut ; the producers refused , and within 48 hours he was dead . Paramount considered spending close to $ 240 @,@ 000 to send Roddenberry 's ashes into space — a move that had the backing of fans — but decided against it ; his remains would make it into space along with 22 others in 1997 . The film 's opening included a note to Roddenberry 's memory ; at early showings , the crowds of Star Trek fans applauded loudly . While the producers had begun work on the film anticipating it as the last film , by the premiere it was obvious the film would make money and that a Star Trek VII would soon be in the works . The cast was split on the possibility of a sequel ; Shatner , Nimoy and Kelley said that the film would be their last , while the supporting cast strongly lobbied for another film . The consensus was for the next film to star the cast of The Next Generation . The seventh Star Trek feature , Star Trek Generations ( 1994 ) , would blend the old and new cast . 
 The Undiscovered Country opened in 1 @,@ 804 theaters in North America and grossed $ 18 @,@ 162 @,@ 837 in its opening weekend ; the showing was a record for the film series and was the top @-@ grossing film of the weekend . The film grossed $ 74 @,@ 888 @,@ 996 in North America , for a total of $ 96 @,@ 888 @,@ 996 worldwide . The Undiscovered Country 's strong showing was one of the big successes of 1991 , a year in which the film industry experienced disappointing box office results overall . The film was nominated in the Sound effects editing and Makeup categories at the 64th Academy Awards . The film also won a Saturn Award for best science fiction film , making it the only Star Trek film to win the award . The film 's novelization by J.M. Dillard was also a commercial success , reaching the Publishers Weekly mass market paperback bestsellers list . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The Undiscovered Country received a much kinder reception from reviewers and audiences than The Final Frontier . Critics approved of the blend of humor and adventure in the film . Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reported that 83 % of critics have given the film positive reviews , based upon a sample of 48 , with an average score of 6 @.@ 8 / 10 . 
 The Herald Sun reported that " those who found The Final Frontier weighed down by emotional gravity and over @-@ the @-@ top spiritualism [ welcomed ] the follow @-@ up with its suspense , action and subtle good humor . " The dialogue and banter was considered a positive and defining aspect of the film ; Janet Maslin of The New York Times said that " Star Trek VI is definitely colorful , but even more of its color comes from conversation , which can take some amusingly florid turns . " Critic Hal Hinson commented that Meyer " [ is ] capable of sending up his material without cheapening it or disrupting our belief in the reality of his yarn , " and called the one @-@ liners an organic part of the film 's " jocular , tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek spirit " . Susan Wloszczyna of USA Today said that with Meyer directing , " this last mission gets almost everything right — from the nod to late creator Gene Roddenberry to in @-@ jokes about Kirk 's rep as an alien babe magnet . " 
 The acting of the main cast was conflictingly received . Lloyd Miller of the St. Petersburg Times said the characters " return to their original roles with a vigor and wit unseen in earlier episodes of the film series " . Rob Salem of The Toronto Star quipped that though the actors looked silly on occasion , this was a benefit ; " as their capacity for action has diminished , their comedic talents have blossomed [ ... ] they have all become masters of self @-@ deprecating self @-@ parody . " The Boston Globe 's Matthew Gilbert called the actors ' performances " photocopies " of previous films : " Shatner and Nimoy are respectable , but lack energy . There 's nowhere else to go with their roles , and they know it . DeForest Kelley is oddly out of it . " Plummer and Warner 's portrayals of their Klingon characters were well @-@ received ; Maslin commented that " whenever a skilled actor [ ... ] manages to emerge from behind all this [ makeup ] with his personality intact , it 's a notable accomplishment . " The other supporting characters received similar praise ; H.J. Kirchhoff , writing for The Globe and Mail , said that the guest stars joined the " family fun " of the film as " zesty , exotic and colorful good guys and bad guys " . A Cinefantastique retrospective review considered the film to have the finest guest stars ever assembled for a Star Trek film . 
 The Cold War allegory and the whodunit aspects of the film were less positively received . Mary <unk> of the Sydney Morning Herald considered the comparisons to real @-@ world situations timely , and praised the plot for exploring the reactions of those who have invested themselves in a life of belligerence . David Sterritt of The Christian Science Monitor felt that the film veered away from the intriguing Cold War allegory premise to unsatisfying results . Instead of maintaining suspense , The Washington Times 's Gary Arnold noted the Rura Penthe sideplot offered " scenic distraction without contributing significantly to the whodunit crisis [ ... ] The crime itself has a promising ' closed @-@ room ' aspect that never gets elaborated adequately [ ... ] You look forward to a cleverly fabricated solution . " Arnold felt that instead of developing this mystery , the filmmakers defused the potential for suspense by shifting away from the search of the Enterprise . Brian Lowry of Variety felt Rura Penthe dragged down the film 's pace , and that Meyer paid so much attention to one @-@ liners that there was a lack of tension in the film , a complaint echoed by John Hartl of the Seattle Times . 
 The special effects were alternately lauded and criticized ; USA Today called them " just serviceable " , though Wloszczyna 's review for the paper said the Klingon assassination sequence was " dazzling " , with " fuchsia blood spilling out in Dalí @-@ esque blobs " . Desson Howe , writing for The Washington Post 's Weekend section , said that " the Klingons ' spilled blood floats in the air in eerily beautiful purplish globules ; it 's space @-@ age Sam Peckinpah . " Maslin considered some effects garish , but appreciated the filmmakers ' tirelessness " in trying to make their otherworldly characters look strange " . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The Undiscovered Country was released on VHS and in widescreen and pan and scan formats on Laserdisc in June 1992 ; the release added a few minutes of new footage to the film . Because of a trend in supermarket video sales and rentals , Paramount offered rebates for the home video release of The Undiscovered Country through boxes of Kellogg 's Frosted Mini @-@ <unk> . The Laserdisc version of the film was the tenth highest @-@ selling video during 1992 . The home video cut was later released for the film 's 1999 DVD debut . 
 As with the other nine Star Trek films , The Undiscovered Country was re @-@ released on DVD as a Special Edition in 2004 . Meyer , who stated he dislikes director 's cuts , nevertheless found " a couple of moments that I thought were not clear " , and re @-@ edited them as " I suddenly saw how to make them clear . " Among the elements added for home video were a briefing with the Federation president where Admiral Cartwright and Colonel West unveil their plan for rescuing Kirk and McCoy , and a scene where Spock and Scott inspect the torpedoes . Some shots were reordered or replaced , with wide @-@ angle shots replacing close angles and vice versa . The special features included a commentary track with Meyer and Flinn , featurettes detailing the special effects , production , and historical inspiration of the film , and a tribute to actor DeForest Kelley . 
 The film 's original theatrical cut was released on Blu @-@ ray Disc in May 2009 to coincide with the new Star Trek feature , along with the other five films featuring the original crew in Star Trek : Original Motion Picture Collection . The Undiscovered Country was remastered in 1080p high @-@ definition from the 2000 DVD transfer . The film , like the others in the set , features 7 @.@ 1 Dolby TrueHD audio . The disc also contains a new commentary track by Star Trek screenwriters Larry <unk> and Ira Steven Behr . 
 = Sean Combs = 
 Sean John Combs ( born November 4 , 1969 ) , also known by his stage names Puff Daddy , Puffy , Diddy , and P. Diddy , is an American hip hop recording artist , record producer , entrepreneur and actor . He was born in Harlem and grew up in Mount Vernon , New York . He worked as a talent director at Uptown Records before founding his label Bad Boy Entertainment in 1993 . His debut album No Way Out ( 1997 ) has been certified seven times platinum and was followed by successful albums such as Forever ( 1999 ) , The Saga Continues ... ( 2001 ) , and Press Play ( 2006 ) . In 2009 Combs formed the musical group Diddy – Dirty Money and released the critically well @-@ reviewed and commercially successful album Last Train to Paris ( 2010 ) . 
 Combs has won three Grammy Awards and two MTV Video Music Awards , and is the producer of MTV 's Making the Band . His non @-@ music business ventures include the clothing lines Sean John and " Sean by Sean Combs " – for which he earned a Council of Fashion Designers of America award – a movie production company , and two restaurants . In 2015 Forbes estimated Combs ' net worth at $ 735 million . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Sean John Combs was born in a public housing project in Harlem , New York City , and brought up in Mount Vernon , New York . His mother , Janice ( Smalls ) , was a model and teacher 's assistant and his father , Melvin Earl Combs , was an associate of convicted New York drug dealer Frank Lucas . At age 33 , he was shot to death while sitting in his car on Central Park West , when Combs was a child . 
 Combs graduated from the Roman Catholic Mount Saint Michael Academy in 1987 . He played football for the academy , and his team won a division title in 1986 . Combs said that he was given the nickname " Puff " as a child , because he would " huff and puff " when he was angry . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = 1990 – 96 : Career beginnings = = = 
 After dropping out of Howard University in 1990 , after two years as a business major , Combs became an intern at New York 's Uptown Records . While talent director at Uptown , he helped develop Jodeci and Mary J. Blige . In his college days Combs had a reputation for throwing parties , some of which attracted up to a thousand participants . In 1991 , Combs promoted an AIDS fundraiser with Heavy D held at the City College of New York ( CCNY ) gymnasium , following a charity basketball game . The event was oversold , and a stampede occurred in which nine people died . 
 In 1993 , after being fired from Uptown , Combs established his new label Bad Boy Entertainment as a joint venture with Arista Records , taking then @-@ newcomer The Notorious B.I.G. with him . Both The Notorious B.I.G. and Craig Mack quickly released hit singles , followed by successful LPs , particularly The Notorious B.I.G. ' s Ready to Die . Combs signed more acts to Bad Boy , including Carl Thomas , Faith Evans , 112 , Total , and Father MC . The Hitmen , his in @-@ house production team , worked with Jodeci , Mary J. Blige , Usher , Lil ' Kim , TLC , Mariah Carey , Boyz II Men , SWV , Aretha Franklin , and others . Mase and The Lox joined Bad Boy just as a widely publicized rivalry with the West Coast 's Death Row Records was beginning . Combs and The Notorious B.I.G. were criticized and parodied by Tupac Shakur and Suge Knight in songs and interviews during the mid @-@ 1990s . During 1994 – 1995 , Combs produced several songs for TLC 's <unk> , which finished the decade as number 25 on Billboard 's list of top pop albums of the decade . 
 = = = 1997 – 98 : " Puff Daddy " and No Way Out = = = 
 In 1997 , under the name Puff Daddy , Combs recorded his first commercial vocal work as a rapper . His debut single , " Can 't Nobody Hold Me Down " , spent 28 weeks on the Billboard Hot 100 chart , peaking at number one . His debut album , No Way Out , was released on July 1 , 1997 , through Bad Boy Records . Originally titled Hell up in Harlem , the album underwent several changes after The Notorious B.I.G. was killed on March 9 , 1997 . Several of the label 's artists made guest appearances on the album . No Way Out was a significant success , particularly in the United States , where it reached number one on the Billboard 200 in its first week of release , selling 561 @,@ 000 copies . The album produced five singles : " I 'll Be Missing You " , a tribute to The Notorious B.I.G. , was the first rap song to debut at number one on the Billboard Hot 100 ; it remained at the top of the chart for eleven consecutive weeks and topped several other charts worldwide . Four other singles ; " Can 't Nobody Hold Me Down " , " It 's All About the Benjamins " , " Been Around the World " , and " Victory " , were also released . Combs collaborated with Jimmy Page on the song " Come with Me " for the 1998 film Godzilla . 
 The album earned Combs five nominations at the 40th Grammy Awards in 1998 , winning the Grammy Award for Best Rap Album . On September 7 , 2000 , the album was certified septuple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America for sales of over 7 million copies . In 1997 , Combs was sued for landlord neglect by Inge Bongo . Combs denied the charges . By the late 1990s , he was being criticized for watering down and overly commercializing hip hop , and for using too many guest appearances , samples , and interpolations of past hits in his new songs . 
 = = = 1999 – 2000 : Forever and Club New York = = = 
 In April 1999 Combs was charged with assault as a result of an incident with Steve Stoute of Interscope Records . Stoute was the manager for Nas , with whom Combs had filmed a video earlier that year for the song " Hate Me Now " . Combs was concerned that the video , which featured a shot of Nas and Combs being crucified , was blasphemous . He asked for the video to be pulled , but after it aired on MTV on April 15 , Combs visited Stoute 's offices and injured Stoute . Combs was charged with second @-@ degree assault and criminal mischief , and was sentenced to attend an anger management class . 
 Forever , Combs ' debut solo studio album , was released by Bad Boy Records on August 24 , 1999 , in North America , and in the UK on the following day . It reached number two on the Billboard 200 and number one on the Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums chart , where it remained for one week before being knocked off by Mary J. Blige 's fourth album , Mary . The album received positive to mixed reviews from music critics and spawned three singles that have charted on the Billboard charts . It peaked at number four on the Canadian Albums Chart , Combs ' highest @-@ charting album in that country . 
 On December 27 , 1999 , Combs and his then @-@ girlfriend Jennifer Lopez were at Club New York in Manhattan when gunfire broke out . After a police investigation , Combs and fellow rapper Shyne were arrested for weapons violations and other charges . Combs was charged with four weapons @-@ related charges and bribing his driver , <unk> <unk> , to claim ownership of his gun . 
 With a gag order in place , the highly publicized trial began . Combs ' attorneys were Johnnie L. Cochran Jr. and Benjamin Brafman . Combs was found not guilty on all charges ; Shyne was convicted on five of his eight charges and sentenced to ten years in prison . Combs and Lopez broke up shortly after . A lawsuit filed by <unk> , who said he suffered emotional damage after the shooting , was settled in February 2004 . Lawyers for both sides , having agreed to keep the settlement terms secret , said that the matter was " resolved to the satisfaction of all parties " . 
 = = = 2001 – 04 : " P. Diddy " and The Saga Continues = = = 
 Combs changed his stage name from " Puff Daddy " to " P. Diddy " in 2001 . The gospel album , Thank You , which had been completed just before the beginning of the weapons trial , was released that March . He appeared as a drug dealer in the film Made and starred with Halle Berry and Billy Bob Thornton in Monster 's Ball ( both in 2001 ) . He was arrested for driving on a suspended license in Florida . Combs began working with a series of unusual ( for him ) artists . For a short period of time , he was the manager of Kelis ; they have a collaboration titled " Let 's Get Ill " . He was an opening act for ' N Sync on their Spring 2002 Celebrity Tour , and he signed California @-@ based pop girl group Dream to his record label . Combs was a producer of the soundtrack album for the film Training Day ( 2001 ) . 
 In June 2001 , Combs ended Bad Boy Entertainment 's joint venture with Arista Records , gaining full control of Bad Boy , its catalogue , and its roster of artists . The Saga Continues ... , released on July 10 in North America , was the last studio album released by the joint venture . The album reached number two on the Billboard 200 and the Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums charts , and was eventually certified as Platinum . It is the only studio album under the P. Diddy name , and the first album by Sean Combs not to feature any guest appearances by Jay @-@ Z or Lil Kim . Combs was executive producer of the reality TV show Making the Band , which appeared on MTV from 2002 to 2009 . The show involved interviewing candidates and creating musical acts that would then enter the music business . Acts that got their start this way include Da Band , <unk> Kane , Day26 , and Donnie Klang . 
 In 2003 Combs ran in the New York City Marathon , raising $ 2 million for the educational system of the city of New York . On March 10 , 2004 he appeared on The Oprah Winfrey Show to discuss the marathon , which he finished in four hours and eighteen minutes . In 2004 Combs headed the campaign " Vote or Die " for the 2004 presidential election . On February 1 , 2004 , Combs ( as P. Diddy ) performed at the Super Bowl XXXVIII halftime show . 
 = = = 2005 – 09 : " Diddy " and Press Play = = = 
 On August 16 , 2005 , Combs announced on Today that he was altering his stage name yet again ; he would be calling himself " Diddy " . Combs said that fans didn 't know how to address him , which led to confusion . In November 2005 , London @-@ based musical artist and DJ Richard <unk> , who had been performing under the name " Diddy " since 1992 – nine years before Combs started using even " P. Diddy " – sought an injunction in the High Court of Justice in London . He accepted an out @-@ of @-@ court settlement of £ 10 @,@ 000 in damages and more than £ 100 @,@ 000 in costs . Combs can no longer use the name Diddy in the UK , where he is still known as P. Diddy . An assault charge against Combs filed by Michigan television host Rogelio Mills was resolved in Combs ' favor in 2005 . 
 Combs starred in the 2005 film Carlito 's Way : Rise to Power . He played Walter Lee Younger in the 2004 Broadway revival of A Raisin in the Sun and the television adaptation that aired in February 2008 . In 2005 Combs sold half of his record company to the Warner Music Group . He hosted the 2005 MTV Video Music Awards and was named one of the 100 Most Influential People of 2005 by Time magazine . He was mentioned in the country song " Play Something Country " by Brooks & Dunn : the lyricist says he " didn 't come to hear P. Diddy " , which is rhymed with " something <unk> ' from the city . " 
 In 2006 , when Combs refused to release musician Mase from his contractual obligations to allow him to join the group G @-@ Unit , 50 Cent recorded a dis song , " Hip @-@ Hop " . The lyrics imply that Combs knew the identity of The Notorious B.I.G. ' s murderer . The two later resolved the feud . 
 Combs released his first album in four years , Press Play , on October 17 , 2006 , on the Bad Boy Records label . The album , featuring guest appearances by many popular artists , debuted at number one on the U.S. Billboard 200 chart with sales of over 173 @,@ 009 . Its singles " Come to Me " and " Last Night " both reached the top ten of the Billboard Hot 100 . The album became available to preview on MTV 's The Leak on October 10 , 2006 , a week before being sold in stores . Press Play received mixed to positive reviews from critics , and was certified Gold on the RIAA ratings . On September 18 , 2007 , Combs teamed up with 50 Cent and Jay @-@ Z for the " Forbes I Get Money Billion Dollar Remix " . 
 In March 2008 the Los Angeles Times claimed that The Notorious B.I.G. and Combs orchestrated the 1994 robbery and shooting of Tupac , substantiating the claim with supposed FBI documents ; the newspaper later retracted the story , acknowledging that the documents had been fabricated . Dexter Isaac , an associate of record management executive Jimmy Henchman , confessed in 2012 that he shot Tupac on Henchman 's orders . 
 In June 2008 Combs ' representative denied rumors of another name change . Combs ventured into reality television in August 2008 with the premiere of his VH1 series I Want to Work for Diddy . After the season finale of Making The Band 4 , Combs said he would be heading back into the studio to record his next album . In an interview with The Daily Mail , he said , " I had Christina Aguilera on my last album , but it 's all about Leona Lewis on my next . " He appeared — credited under his real name — in two episodes of Season 7 of CSI : Miami : " Presumed Guilty " and " Sink or Swim " , in the role of lawyer Derek Powell . 
 = = = 2010 – 13 : Dirty Money and acting = = = 
 Combs created a rap supergroup in 2010 known as The Dream Team . The group consists of Combs , Rick Ross , DJ Khaled , Fat Joe , Busta Rhymes , Red Café , and Fabolous . Combs made an appearance at comedian Chris Gethard 's live show in January 2010 at the Upright Citizens Brigade Theatre in New York City . In June 2010 Combs played a role ( credited as Sean Combs ) in the comedy film Get Him to the Greek , as Sergio Roma , a record company executive . An Entourage series representative announced that Combs would guest star on an episode during the 2010 season . 
 Last Train to Paris was released by Combs ' group Diddy – Dirty Money on December 13 , 2010 . The release was preceded by four singles " Angels " , " Hello Good Morning " , " Loving You No More " , and " Coming Home " , which experienced mixed success on the Billboard Hot 100 . " Coming Home " was the most successful of the songs , peaking at number twelve on the U.S. Hot 100 , number four in the UK , and number seven in Canada . On March 10 , 2011 Diddy – Dirty Money performed " Coming Home " live on American Idol . 
 On April 18 , 2011 , Combs appeared in season one of Hawaii Five @-@ 0 , guest starring as an undercover NYPD detective . In November 2012 Combs appeared in an episode of the eighth season of the American sitcom It 's Always Sunny in Philadelphia . 
 = = = 2014 – present : MMM ( Money Making Mitch ) and No Way Out 2 = = = 
 On February 26 , 2014 , Combs premiered " Big Homie " , featuring Rick Ross and French Montana , as the first single from his mixtape MMM ( Money Making Mitch ) , which was originally scheduled to be released that year . The song was released for digital download on March 24 , and two days later the trailer for the music video was released . The full version of the music video was released on March 31 . Combs is using his former stage name Puff Daddy for the album . MMM was released as a free mixtape album of 12 tracks on November 4 , 2015 . In 2014 Puff and Guy Gerber announced that their joint album 11 11 will be available for free download . A new single called " <unk> Get Loose " featuring Combs and Pharrell Williams was released on June 29 , 2015 . 
 In July 2015 , Bad Boy Entertainment artist <unk> told the press that she is collaborating with Combs on what she describes as his last album , titled No Way Out 2 , a sequel to his 1997 debut . She describes the music as unique : " The mindset is to just be classic and to be epic . And to really live up to that ... we know it 's a tall order , but we welcome the challenge . " In April 2016 , Combs announced that after this last album and tour , he plans to retire from the music industry to focus on acting . 
 = = Business career = = 
 Fortune magazine listed Combs at number twelve on their top 40 of entrepreneurs under 40 in 2002 . Forbes Magazine estimates that for the year ending May 2012 , Combs earned $ 45 million , ranking him fifteenth among musicians . In 2015 his estimated net worth was $ 735 million . 
 = = = Sean John = = = 
 In 1998 , Combs started a clothing line , Sean John . It was nominated for the Council of Fashion Designers of America ( CFDA ) award for <unk> Designer of the Year in 2000 , and won in 2004 . The clothing line became the subject of controversy in 2003 , when the National Labor Committee revealed that factories producing the clothing in Honduras were violating Honduran labor laws . Among the accusations were that workers were subjected to body searches and involuntary pregnancy tests . Bathrooms were locked and access tightly controlled . Employees were forced to work overtime and were paid sweatshop wages . Charles Kernaghan of the National Labor Committee told The New York Times that " Sean Puff Daddy obviously has a lot of clout , he can literally do a lot overnight to help these workers . " 
 Combs responded with an extensive investigation , telling reporters " I 'm as pro @-@ worker as they get " . On February 14 , 2004 , Kernaghan announced that improvements had been implemented at the factory , including adding air conditioning and water purification systems , firing the most abusive supervisors , and allowing the formation of a labor union . In late 2006 , the department store Macy 's removed Sean John jackets from their shelves when they discovered that the clothing was made using dog fur ( from a species called raccoon dog ) . Combs had not known the jackets were made with dog fur , but as soon as he was alerted , he had production stopped . 
 In November 2008 , Combs added a men 's perfume called " I Am King " to the Sean John brand . The fragrance , dedicated to Barack Obama , Muhammad Ali , and Martin Luther King , featured model Bar Refaeli in its advertisements . 
 = = = Other ventures = = = 
 In addition to his clothing line , Combs owned two restaurants called Justin 's , named after his son . The original New York location closed in September 2007 ; the Atlanta location closed in June 2012 . He is the designer of the Dallas Mavericks alternate jersey . In October 2007 Combs agreed to help develop the Cîroc vodka brand for a 50 percent share of the profits . Combs acquired the <unk> clothing line from Liz Claiborne for $ 20 million on October 21 , 2008 . Combs has a major equity stake in Revolt TV , a television network that also has a film production branch . It began broadcasting in 2014 . In February 2015 , Combs teamed up with actor Mark Wahlberg and businessman Ronald Burkle of Yucaipa Companies to purchase a majority holding in <unk> , a calorie @-@ free beverage for athletes . John Cochran , former president of Fiji Water , is CEO of the company . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Family = = = 
 Combs is the father of six children . His first child , Justin , was born in 1993 to his high @-@ school sweetheart , designer Misa Hylton @-@ <unk> . Justin attends UCLA on a football scholarship . Combs had an on @-@ again , off @-@ again relationship with Kimberly Porter , which lasted from 1994 to July 2007 . He adopted and raised Quincy ( born 1991 ) , Porter 's son from a previous relationship with singer / producer Al B. Sure . Together they had son Christian ( born 1998 ) and twin daughters D <unk> Star and Jessie James ( born December 21 , 2006 ) . Five months before the birth of his twins , his daughter Chance was born to Sarah Chapman . He took legal responsibility for Chance in October 2007 . 
 Combs ' sons Quincy and Justin both appeared on MTV 's My Super Sweet 16 . Combs threw Quincy a celebrity @-@ studded party and gave him two cars as his sixteenth birthday present . For Justin 's sixteenth birthday , Combs presented him with a $ 360 @,@ 000 Maybach car , complete with chauffeur . 
 Combs owns a home in Alpine , New Jersey , which he purchased for a reported $ 7 million . 
 = = = Charity work and honors = = = 
 Combs founded Daddy 's House Social Programs , an organization to help inner city youth , in 1995 . Programs include tutoring , life skills classes , and an annual summer camp . Along with Jay @-@ Z , he pledged $ 1 million to help support victims of Hurricane Katrina in 2005 , and donated clothing from his Sean John line to victims . He has donated computers and books to New York schools . 
 Chicago Mayor Richard M. Daley named October 13 , 2006 , as " Diddy Day " in honor of Combs ' charity work . In 2008 Combs was honored with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame . 
 In 2014 , Combs received an honorary doctorate from Howard University , where he served as the keynote speaker for its 146th commencement ceremony . In his speech , Combs acknowledged that his experiences as a Howard student positively influenced his life . 
 = = = Wardrobe style = = = 
 Combs describes his wardrobe style as " swagger , timeless , diverse " . On September 2 , 2007 , Combs held his ninth annual " White Party " , at which guests are limited to an all @-@ white dress code . The White Party , which has also been held in St. Tropez , was held in his home in East Hampton , Long Island . Combs stated , " This party is up there with the top three that I 've thrown . It 's a party that has legendary status . It 's hard to throw a party that lives up to its legend . " 
 = = = Legal troubles = = = 
 On June 22 , 2015 , Combs was arrested for assault with a deadly weapon by the University of California , Los Angeles Police Department . He was accused of assaulting one of his son 's football coaches after witnessing the coach yell at his son . His son , Justin Combs , plays football for the UCLA Bruins . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 No Way Out ( 1997 ) 
 Forever ( 1999 ) 
 The Saga Continues ... ( 2001 ) 
 Press Play ( 2006 ) 
 Last Train to Paris ( 2010 ) 
 MMM ( 2015 ) 
 No Way Out 2 ( 2016 ) 
 = = Filmography = = 
 Made ( 2001 ) 
 Monster 's Ball ( 2001 ) 
 2005 MTV Video Music Awards ( 2006 ) 
 Seamless ( 2005 ) 
 Carlito 's Way : Rise to Power ( 2005 ) 
 A Raisin in the Sun ( 2008 ) 
 Get Him to the Greek ( 2010 ) 
 Draft Day ( 2014 ) 
 Muppets Most Wanted ( 2014 ) 
 = = Accolades = = 
 = = = NAACP Image Awards = = = 
 2009 , Outstanding Actor in a Television Movie , Mini @-@ Series or Dramatic Special , A Raisin in the Sun ( Winner ) 
 = = = BET Awards = = = 
 2007 , Best Male Hip Hop Artist ( Nominated ) 
 = = = MTV Video Music Awards = = = 
 = = = Grammy Awards = = = 
 = = = Rolling Stone 's 500 Greatest Albums of All Time ( albums executive produced by Sean Combs ) = = = 
 = Tommy ( album ) = 
 Tommy is the fourth studio album by the English rock band The Who , a double album first released in May 1969 . The album was mostly composed by guitarist Pete Townshend as a rock opera that tells the story about a deaf , dumb and blind boy , including his experiences with life and his relationship with his family . 
 Townshend came up with the concept of Tommy after being introduced to the work of Meher Baba , and attempted to translate Baba 's teachings into music . Recording on the album began in September 1968 , but took six months to complete as material needed to be arranged and re @-@ recorded in the studio . Tommy was acclaimed upon its release by critics , who hailed it as the Who 's breakthrough . Its critical standing diminished slightly in later years ; nonetheless , several writers view it as an important and influential album in the history of rock music . The Who promoted the album 's release with an extensive tour , including a live version of Tommy , which lasted throughout 1969 and 1970 . Key gigs from the tour included appearances at Woodstock , the 1969 Isle of Wight Festival , the University of Leeds , the Metropolitan Opera House and the 1970 Isle of Wight Festival . The live performances of Tommy drew critical praise and rejuvenated the band 's career . 
 Subsequently , the rock opera developed into other media , including a Seattle Opera production in 1971 , an orchestral version by Lou Reizner in 1972 , a film in 1975 , and a Broadway musical in 1992 . The original album has sold 20 million copies and has been inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame . It has been reissued several times on CD , including a remix by Jon Astley in 1996 , a deluxe Super Audio CD in 2003 , and a super deluxe box set in 2013 , including previously unreleased demos and live material . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Tommy has never had a definitive plot , but the following synopsis was published following the original album 's release . 
 British Army Captain Walker goes missing during an expedition and is believed dead ( " Overture " ) . His widow , Mrs. Walker , gives birth to their son , Tommy ( " It 's a Boy " ) . Years later , Captain Walker returns home and discovers that his wife has found a new lover . The Captain murders this man in an altercation as Tommy watches . Tommy 's mother convinces him that he did not see or hear the incident and must never tell anyone about it ; as a result , he becomes deaf , dumb , and blind to the outside world ( " 1921 " ) . Tommy now relies on his sense of touch and imagination , developing a fascinating inner psyche ( " Amazing Journey / Sparks " ) . 
 A quack claims his wife can cure Tommy ( " The Hawker " ) , while Tommy 's parents are increasingly frustrated that he will never find religion in the midst of his isolation ( " Christmas " ) . They begin to neglect him , leaving him to be tortured by his sadistic " Cousin Kevin " and molested by his uncle Ernie ( " Fiddle About " ) . The Hawker 's drug addicted wife , " The Acid Queen , " gives Tommy a dose of LSD , causing a hallucinogenic experience that is expressed musically ( " Underture " ) . 
 As Tommy grows older , he discovers that he can feel vibrations sufficiently well to become an expert pinball player ( " Pinball Wizard " ) . His parents take him to a respected doctor ( " There 's a Doctor " ) , who determines that the boy 's disabilities are psychosomatic rather than physical . Tommy is told by the Doctor to " Go to the Mirror ! " , and his parents notice he can stare at his reflection . After seeing Tommy spend extended periods staring at a mirror in the house , his mother smashes it out of frustration ( " Smash the Mirror " ) . This removes Tommy 's mental block , and he recovers his senses , realising he can become a powerful leader ( " Sensation " ) . He starts a religious movement ( " I 'm Free " ) , which generates fervor among its adherents ( " Sally Simpson " ) and expands into a holiday camp ( " Welcome " / " Tommy 's Holiday Camp " ) . However , Tommy 's followers ultimately reject his teachings and leave the camp ( " We 're Not Gonna Take It " ) . Tommy retreats inward again ( " See Me , Feel Me " ) with his " continuing statement of wonder at that which encompasses him " . 
 = = Background = = 
 Townshend had been looking at way of progressing beyond the standard three minute pop single format since 1966 . Co @-@ manager Kit Lambert shared Townshend 's views and encouraged him to develop musical ideas , coming up with the term " rock opera " . The first use of the term was applied to a suite called " Quads " , set in a future where parents could choose the sex of their children . A couple want four girls but instead receive three girls and a boy , raising him as a girl anyway . The opera was abandoned after writing a single song , the hit single , " I 'm a Boy " . When the Who 's second album , A Quick One ran short of material during recording , Lambert suggested that Townshend should write a " mini @-@ opera " to fill the gap . Townshend initially objected , but eventually agreed to do so , coming up with " A Quick One , While He 's Away " , which joined short pieces of music together into a continuous narrative . During 1967 , Townshend learned how to play the piano and began writing songs on it , taking his work more seriously . That year 's The Who Sell Out included a mini @-@ opera in the last track , " Rael " , which like " A Quick One ... " was a suite of musical segments joined together . 
 By 1968 , Townshend was unsure about how the Who should progress musically . The group were no longer teenagers , but he wanted their music to remain relevant . His friend , International Times art director Mike McInnerney , told him about the Indian spiritual mentor Meher Baba , and Townshend became fascinated with Baba 's values of compassion , love and introspection . The Who 's commercial success was on the wane after the single " Dogs " failed to make the top 20 , and there was a genuine risk of the band breaking up . Live performances remained strong , and the group spent most of the spring and summer touring the US and Canada but their stage act relied on Townshend smashing his guitar or Moon demolishing his drums , which kept the group in debt . Townshend and Lambert realised they needed a larger vehicle for their music than hit singles , and a new stage show , and Townshend hoped to incorporate his love of Baba into this concept . He decided that the Who should record a series of songs that stood well in isolation , but formed a cohesive whole on the album . He also wanted the material performed in concert , to counteract the trend of bands like the Beatles and the Beach Boys , whose studio output was not designed for live performance . 
 In August 1968 , Townshend gave an important interview to Rolling Stone 's Jann Wenner . He talked about a new rock opera , which had the working title of Deaf , Dumb and Blind Boy , and described the entire plot in great detail , which ran to 11 pages . Who biographer Dave Marsh subsequently said the interview described the narrative better than the finished album . Townshend later regretted publishing so much detail , as he felt it forced him to write the album according to that blueprint . The rest of the Who , however , were enthusiastic about the idea , and let him have artistic control over the project . 
 = = Recording = = 
 The Who started recording the album at IBC Studios on 19 September 1968 . There was no firm title at this point , which was variously referred to as Deaf , Dumb and Blind Boy , Amazing Journey , Journey into Space , The Brain Opera and Omnibus . Townshend eventually settled on Tommy because it was a common British name , and a nickname for soldiers in World War I. Lambert took charge of the production , with Damon Lyon @-@ Shaw as engineer . Sessions were block booked from 2pm – 10pm , but recording often spilled over into the early morning . 
 The album was recorded onto eight track tape , which allowed various instruments to be overdubbed . Townshend used several guitars in the studio , but made particular use of the Gibson J @-@ 200 acoustic and the Gibson SG . As well as their usual instruments , Townshend played piano and organ and bassist John Entwistle doubled on french horn . Keith Moon used a new double bass drum kit owned by roadie Tony Haslam , after Premier had refused to loan him any more equipment due to continual abuse . Though Townshend wrote the majority of the material , the arrangements came from the entire band . Singer Roger Daltrey later said that Townshend often came in with a half @-@ finished demo recording , adding " we probably did as much talking as we did recording , sorting out arrangements and things . " Townshend asked Entwistle to write two songs ( " Cousin Kevin " and " Fiddle About " ) that covered the darker themes of bullying and abuse . " Tommy 's Holiday Camp " was Moon 's suggestion of what religious movement Tommy could lead . Moon got the songwriting credit for suggesting the idea , though the music was composed and played by Townshend . A significant amount of material had a lighter style than earlier recordings , with greater prominence put on the vocals . Moon later said , " It was , at the time , very un @-@ <unk> . A lot of the songs were soft . We never played like that . " 
 Some of the material had already been written for other projects . " Sensation " was written about a girl Townshend had met on the Who 's tour of Australia in early 1968 , " Welcome " and " I 'm Free " were about peace found through Meher Baba and " Sally Simpson " was based on a gig with the Doors which was marred by violence . Other songs had been previously recorded by the Who and were recycled ; " It 's A Boy " was derived from " Glow Girl " , an out @-@ take from The Who Sell Out , while " Sparks " and " Underture " re @-@ used and expanded one of the instrumental themes in " Rael " . " Amazing Journey " was , according to Townshend , " the absolute beginning " of the opera and summarised the entire plot . " The Hawker " was a cover of Mose Allison 's " Eyesight to the Blind " . A cover of Mercy Dee Walton 's " One Room Country Shack " was also recorded but was scrapped from the final track listing as Townshend could not figure out a way to incorporate it in the plot . 
 Recording at IBC was slow , due to a lack of a full plot and a full selection of songs . The group hoped that the album would be ready by Christmas , but sessions dragged on . Melody Maker 's Chris Welch visited IBC studios in November and while he was impressed with the working environment and the material , the project still did not have a title and there was no coherent plotline . The Who 's US record company got so impatient waiting for new product that they released the compilation album Magic Bus : The Who on Tour which received a scathing review from Greil Marcus in Rolling Stone over its poor selection of material and misleading name ( as the album contained studio recordings and was not live ) . 
 The Who took a break from recording at the end of 1968 to tour , including a well received appearance at The Rolling Stones Rock and Roll Circus on 10 December . They resumed sessions at IBC in January 1969 , block booking Monday to Thursday , but had to do gigs every weekend to stop going further into debt . A major tour was booked for the end of April , and the group 's management insisted that the album would have to be finished by then , as it had been well over a year since The Who Sell Out . Lambert wrote a script , Tommy ( 1914 – 1984 ) which he professionally printed , and gave copies to the band , which helped them focus the storyline , and also decide to make the album a double . The group were still coming up with new material ; Lambert insisted that the piece should have a proper overture , while Townshend wrote " Pinball Wizard " so that Nik Cohn , a pinball fan , would give the album a favourable review in the New York Times . Lambert wanted an orchestra to appear on the album , but Townshend was strongly against the idea , and time and budget constraints meant it could not happen anyway . 
 By March 1969 , some songs had been recorded several times , yet Townshend still thought there were missing pieces . Entwistle had become fed up with recording , later saying " we had to keep going back and rejuvenating the numbers ... it just started to drive us mad . " The final recording session took place on 7 March , the same day that " Pinball Wizard " was released as a single . The group started tour rehearsals and promotional activities for the single and Lambert went on holiday in Cairo . The mixing was left to Lyon @-@ Shaw and assistant engineer Ted Sharp , who did not think IBC was well suited for the task . The album overshot its April deadline , as stereo mastering continued into the end of the month . 
 = = Release = = 
