 Tommy was finally released on 17 May 1969 in the US , and 23 May in the UK , due to delays with the cover . The original double album was configured with sides 1 and 4 on one disc , and sides 2 and 3 on the other , to facilitate record changers . 
 The album was commercially successful , reaching No. 2 in the UK album charts , and No. 4 in the US . It sold 200 @,@ 000 copies in the first two weeks in the US alone , and was awarded a gold record for sales of 500 @,@ 000 on August 18 . " Pinball Wizard " , " I 'm Free " and " See Me , Feel Me " were released as singles and received airplay on the radio . " Pinball Wizard " reached the top 20 in the US and the top five in the UK . " See Me , Feel Me " reached the top 20 in the US and " I 'm Free " reached the top 40 . An EP of selections from the album was planned to be released in the UK in November 1970 , but was withdrawn . As of 2012 , Tommy has sold 20 million copies worldwide . 
 When it was released , critics were split between those who thought the album was a masterpiece , the beginnings of a new genre , and those that felt it was exploitative . The album had a hostile reception with the BBC and certain US radio stations , with Tony Blackburn describing " Pinball Wizard " as " distasteful " . Nevertheless , BBC Radio 1 received an advance copy of the album at the start of May and gave the material its first airplay on Pete Drummond 's show on 3 May . Townshend promoted the album 's release with interviews in which he attempted to explain the plotline . Unfortunately , because it fundamentally dealt with the abstract concept of Baba 's spiritual precepts , the interviews often gave confusing and contradicting details . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The initial critical reaction to Tommy was positive . Chris Welch , writing for Melody Maker , went to the press launch show at Ronnie Scott 's and although the volume left his ears ringing for 20 hours , he concluded " we wanted more . " Disc and Music Echo ran a front @-@ page headline saying " Who 's Tommy : A Masterpiece " . Critics and fans were confused by the storyline , but Lambert pointed out this made Tommy no less confusing than the operas of Richard Wagner or Giacomo Puccini a century earlier . 
 In a 1969 column for The Village Voice , music critic Robert Christgau said that , apart from The Mothers of Invention 's We 're Only in It for the Money , Tommy is the first successful " extended work " in rock music , but Townshend 's parodic side is more " profound and equivocal " than Frank Zappa . He praised Townshend for deliberately constructing the album so that each song can be enjoyed individually and felt that he is determined to " give his audience what it wants without burying his own peculiarity " . Albert Goldman , writing in Life magazine , said that The Who play through " all the kinky complications " of the narrative in a hard rock style that is the antithesis of most contemporary " serious " rock . Goldman asserted that , based on innovation , performance , and " sheer power " , Tommy surpasses anything else in studio @-@ recorded rock . Christgau named Tommy the best album of 1969 in his year @-@ end list for Jazz & Pop magazine . 
 According to music journalist Richie Unterberger , Tommy was hailed by contemporary critics as the Who 's breakthrough , but its critical standing diminished slightly in the subsequent decades , because of its occasionally pretentious concept and flimsy songs that functioned as devices to " advance the rather sketchy plot . " Christgau wrote in 1983 , " Tommy 's operatic pretensions were so transparent that for years it seemed safe to guess that Townshend 's musical ideas would never catch up with his lyrics . " In his review for AllMusic , Unterberger said that , despite its slight flaws , the album has " many excellent songs " permeated with " a suitably powerful grace " , while Townshend 's ability to devise a lengthy narrative introduced " new possibilities to rock music . " Uncut wrote that the album " doesn 't quite realise its ambitions , though it achieves a lot on the way " , and felt it was not as well developed as their later album , Quadrophenia . Mark Kemp , writing in The Rolling Stone Album Guide ( 2004 ) , felt that " in retrospect , Tommy isn 't quite the masterpiece it was originally hyped to be " , suggesting The Who Sell Out was better , though because of Townshend , it produced several " bona fide classic songs " . 
 In 1998 , the album was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame for " historical , artistic and significant value " . In 2003 , Rolling Stone magazine ranked Tommy number 96 on its list of the 500 greatest albums of all time . The album is one of several by the Who to appear in 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . 
 According to music critic Martha Bayles , Tommy did not mix rock with classical music , as its " rock opera " title may have suggested , but instead was " dominated by the Who 's mature style : ponderous , rhythmically monotonous hard rock " . Bayles argued that it was more acceptable to audiences than the art rock " concoctions " of the time because of the cultural climate during the late 1960s : " Tommy was considered more authentic , precisely because it consists of hard rock , rather than doctored @-@ up Mussorgsky ... and avoids the typical <unk> themes of art rock ( fairy @-@ tale bliss and apocalyptic angst ) in favor of the more up @-@ to @-@ date subject of popular culture itself . " High Fidelity magazine also characterized the Who 's album as a " reasonably hard @-@ rock version " of the opera . 
 Marsh thought the problem with the album 's narrative is that there isn 't enough transitional material provided by the lyrics . There are no stage directions , no cast , and narration is restricted to key phrases ( such as " Tommy can you hear me ? " ) Key problems included an unclear explanation of what Tommy didn 't hear or see in " 1921 " , how or why he plays pinball , why " Smash the Mirror " leads into " I overwhelm as I approach you " ( the opening line in " Sensation " ) , why Tommy tells his followers in " We 're Not Gonna Take It " they cannot drink or smoke but can play pinball , and what the " you " is in " Listening to you , I get the music " . 
 = = Editions and cover art = = 
 = = = Original edition = = = 
 Tommy was originally released as a two @-@ LP set with artwork designed by McInnerney , which included a booklet including lyrics and images to illustrate parts of the story . The cover is presented as part of a triptych @-@ style fold @-@ out cover , and the booklet contained abstract artwork that outlined the story . Although the album included lyrics to all the songs , indicating individual characters , it did not outline the plot , which led to a concert programme being prepared for shows , that carried a detailed synopsis . 
 Townshend thought McInnerney , a fellow follower of Baba , would be a suitable choice to do the cover . As recording was near completion , McInnerney received a number of cassettes with completed songs and a brief outline for the story , which he immediately recognised as being based on Baba 's teachings . He wanted to try and convey the world of a deaf , dumb and blind boy , and decided to " depict a kind of breaking out of a certain restricted plane into freedom . " The finished cover contained a blue and white web of clouds , a fist punching into the black void to the left of it . The inner triptych , meanwhile , showed a hand reaching out to light and a light shining in a dark void . Townshend was too busy finishing the recording to properly approve the artwork , but Lambert strongly approved of it , and said it would work . The final step was for record company approval , who decided the cover was more sensible than The Who Sell Out , though making one concession that pictures of the band should appear on the cover . These were added to the web on the front . 
 = = = Reissues = = = 
 Tommy was first released on CD in 1984 as a two disc set . Mobile Fidelity Sound Lab subsequently released a special single @-@ disc edition of the album in 1990 , featuring an alternate take of " Eyesight to the Blind " and a low volume extensive break on the glass in " Smash The Mirror " . It was also remastered by Erick <unk> for single disc release in 1993 . 
 MCA released a newly remastered version on single disc in 1996 , which had been remixed by Jon Astley . Astley was able to access the original 8 track tapes and bring out instruments that had been buried , such as the guitar in " Christmas " , the French Horn in " Sparks " , the cymbals in " The Acid Queen " and the organ in " We 're Not Gonna Take it " . This release came with McInnerney 's complete artwork and a written introduction by Richard Barnes . 
 In 2003 Tommy was made available as a deluxe two @-@ disc hybrid Super Audio CD with a 5 @.@ 1 multi @-@ channel mix . The remastering was done under the supervision of Townshend and also includes related material not on the original album , including " Dogs @-@ Part 2 " ( the B @-@ Side to " Pinball Wizard " ) , " Cousin Kevin Model Child " and " Young Man Blues " , plus demos for the album and other unreleased songs that were dropped from the final running order . 
 In 2013 , a super deluxe version of Tommy was released as a 3 @-@ CD / Blu @-@ ray disc box set . As well as the original album , the package includes additional demos , and a live performance mostly taken from the Who 's show at the Capital Theatre , Ottawa , Canada on 15 October 1969 . The live disc was significant , as it debunked a long @-@ standing myth that the tapes for the tour were burned in preference for the Leeds University show in February 1970 that made up Live at Leeds . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 The Who had planned to perform Tommy live since starting the project . The group spent April 1969 rehearsing a live version of the show at the Hanwell Community Centre in Ealing including a final run down of the entire stage piece on 23 April . The running order was changed , and four songs ( " Cousin Kevin " , " Underture " , " Sensation " and " Welcome " ) were dropped entirely . Townshend later said the group " did the whole thing from start to finish and that was when we first realized we had something cohesive and playable . " Daltrey 's voice had improved substantially since the group 's early tours , and they realised their new live act could completely change their career . 
 After a few warm up gigs towards the end of April , the group gave a preview concert to the press at Ronnie Scotts , London on 1 May . Realising the opera 's narrative was difficult to understand , Townshend explained a synopsis of the story , before the Who played Tommy all the way through at full stage volume . The next day , the group flew out to New York to start the US tour , with the first gig on 9 May at the Grande Ballroom , Detroit . At the end of May , the group played four nights at the Kinetic Playground , Chicago , and they noticed the audience would all stand up at the same time , and stay standing . This indicated that live performances of Tommy had a significant positive response . 
 The group continued to play large halls in the US , organised by tour promoter Frank Barsalona , and generally avoided festivals , but made an important exception with the Woodstock Festival on 16 August . After spending all night arguing with Barsalona , the band agreed to perform at Woodstock for $ 12 @,@ 500 . The festival ran late and the Who did not take to the stage until the early morning of 17 August . During " Pinball Wizard " , Abbie Hoffman took to the stage to protest about the imprisonment of John Sinclair before being kicked offstage by Townshend , while during " See Me , Feel Me " , the sun rose , almost as if on cue . Two weeks later , the group played the second Isle of Wight Festival , using one of the largest live <unk> available . Though media attention was on Bob Dylan playing his first major live concert since 1966 , the Who stole the show . Townshend later said , " We know that the stage act we had , with Tommy in it , would work under any circumstances , because it had worked many times on tour . " 
 Tommy remained in the Who 's live set through the rest of the year and into 1970 . In October 1969 , The Who played six shows at the Fillmore East , where Leonard Bernstein praised them for their new music . The group 's show on 14 December at the Coliseum Theatre , London , was filmed for a possible future Tommy feature . Lambert was keen for Tommy to be taken seriously and wanted the Who to perform at opera houses . In June 1970 , the group performed two shows at the Metropolitan Opera House , which was the first time Townshend announced the show as being the " last Tommy ever " . The group made a second trip to the Isle of Wight , appearing at the 1970 festival on 29 August , before an audience of 600 @,@ 000 . The last live performance for 1970 was at The Roundhouse , London on 20 December . Townshend said " This is the very last time we 'll play Tommy on stage " , to which Moon promptly cried , " Thank Christ for that ! " 
 Public reaction to the Who 's concerts that included Tommy was overwhelmingly positive . The touring helped keep the album in the public eye , and cleared the band 's debts . Several live recordings of Tommy from the Who 's 1969 – 70 tours have been released . A complete performance is available on the 2002 Deluxe Edition of the live album Live at Leeds , recorded on 14 February 1970 . The second Isle of Wight performance is available on Live at the Isle of Wight Festival 1970 , released in 1996 . The Coliseum Theatre gig is available on the 2007 video release At Kilburn 1977 + Live at the Coliseum . Portions of the Woodstock performance of Tommy were released on the Woodstock film and later on The Kids Are Alright . The complete show was recorded , but has never been officially released . 
 The Who continued to play a smaller selection of Tommy live in subsequent tours throughout the 1970s . They revived Tommy as a whole for its twentieth anniversary during their 1989 reunion tour , reinstating the previously overlooked " Cousin Kevin " and " Sensation " but still omitting " Underture " and " Welcome " . Recordings from this tour can be found on the Join Together live album and the Tommy and Quadrophenia Live DVD . The Los Angeles version of this show featured Phil Collins as Uncle Ernie , Patti LaBelle as the Acid Queen , Steve Winwood as the Hawker , Elton John as the Pinball Wizard and Billy Idol as Cousin Kevin . 
 = = Other incarnations = = 
 = = = 1970 Les Grands Ballets Canadiens = = = 
 In 1970 Ferdinand Nault of the Montreal ballet group Les Grands Ballets Canadiens created the first dance @-@ based adaptation of Tommy . The ballet performance toured New York in April 1971 , which included a light show and accompanying films by the Quebec Film Bureau . 
 = = = 1971 Seattle Opera production = = = 
 In 1971 , the Seattle Opera under director Richard Pearlman produced the first ever fully staged professional production of Tommy at Seattle 's Moore Theater . The production included Bette Midler playing the role of the Acid Queen and Mrs. Walker , and music by the Syracuse , New York band Comstock , Ltd . 
 = = = London Symphony Orchestra version = = = 
 On 9 December 1972 , entrepreneur Lou Reizner presented a concert version of Tommy at the Rainbow Theatre , London . There were two performances that took place on the same evening . The concerts featured the Who , plus a guest cast , backed by the London Symphony Orchestra conducted by David Measham . The concerts were held to promote the release of Reizner 's new studio recording of this symphonic version of Tommy . 
 The album and concerts featured an all @-@ star cast , including Graham Bell ( as The Lover ) , Maggie Bell ( as The Mother ) , Sandy Denny ( as The Nurse ) , Steve Winwood ( as The Father ) , Rod Stewart ( as The Local Lad ) , Richie Havens ( as The Hawker ) , Merry Clayton ( as The Acid Queen ) and Ringo Starr ( as Uncle Ernie ) . Townshend played some guitar , but otherwise the music was predominantly orchestral . Richard Harris played the role of the specialist on the record , but he was replaced by Peter Sellers for the stage production . The stage show had a second run on 13 and 14 December 1973 with a different cast including David Essex , Elkie Brooks , Marsha Hunt , Vivian Stanshall , Roy Wood , and Jon Pertwee . 
 The orchestral version was also performed twice in Australia on 31 March 1973 at Melbourne 's Myer Music Bowl and on 1 April at Sydney 's Randwick Racecourse . Moon appeared as Uncle Ernie ( in Melbourne only ) , Graham Bell as the Narrator , with local stars Daryl Braithwaite ( as Tommy ) , Billy Thorpe , Doug Parkinson , Wendy <unk> , Jim Keays , Broderick Smith , Colleen Hewett , Linda George , Ross Wilson , Bobby Bright , Ian Meldrum ( as Uncle Ernie in Sydney ) , and a full orchestra . The Melbourne concert was videotaped , then televised by Channel 7 on 13 April 1973 . 
 = = = 1975 film = = = 
 In 1975 Tommy was adapted as a film , produced by expatriate Australian entrepreneur Robert Stigwood and directed by British auteur Ken Russell . The movie version starred Daltrey as Tommy , and featured the other members of the Who , plus a supporting cast that included Ann @-@ Margret as Tommy 's mother , Oliver Reed as " the Lover " , with appearances by Elton John , Tina Turner , Eric Clapton , Arthur Brown , and Jack Nicholson . Russell insisted on having a known cast , though Townshend wanted people who could sing the material , and was particularly disappointed at not being allowed to cast Stevie Wonder as the Pinball Wizard . In several cinemas , the film supported a multi @-@ track soundtrack billed as <unk> sound , which placed speaker banks in the four quadrants of the house and directly behind the centre of the screen . 
 Townshend also oversaw the production of a soundtrack album , on which the unrecorded orchestral arrangements Lambert had envisaged for the original Tommy LP were realised by the extensive use of synthesizer . He started work on the soundtrack album immediately after the Who 's 1973 US tour in December , and worked on it almost continuously for the next four months . As well as the Who , the film 's music track and the original soundtrack LP also employed several session musicians including Caleb Quaye , Ronnie Wood , Nicky Hopkins , Chris Stainton , and longtime Who associate John " Rabbit " Bundrick . Due to Moon 's commitments with the filming of Stardust , Kenney Jones ( who would take over as the Who 's drummer after Moon 's death in 1978 ) played drums on much of the soundtrack album . 
 " Pinball Wizard " was a major hit when released as a single . This sequence in the film depicts Elton being backed by the Who ( dressed in pound @-@ note suits ) ; the band portrayed the Pinball Wizard 's band for filming , but on the music track and soundtrack album , the music was performed entirely by him and his regular touring band . Most of the extras were students at Portsmouth Polytechnic and were paid with tickets to a Who concert after filming wrapped . 
 The film and its soundtrack album featured six new songs , all written by Townshend , and an alteration to the running order compared to the original album . The CD reissue of the film soundtrack also included an additional Overture . 
 = = = Broadway musical = = = 
 In 1991 , Townshend broke his wrist in a cycling accident and could not play guitar . Looking for alternative work while recuperating , he responded to a request from the PACE Theatrical Group for the rights to a Broadway musical adaptation of Tommy . The group introduced him to La Jolla Playhouse director Des McAnuff , and the pair began to develop the musical together . It opened at La Jolla in summer 1992 , and was an immediate commercial success . Townshend wrote a new song , " I Believe My Own Eyes " , to explain the relationship between Tommy 's parents , but otherwise tried to be faithful to the music on the original album . 
 The musical had a mixed response from critics , while Daltrey and Entwistle thought the show was too passive . Anthony DeCurtis , writing in Rolling Stone , said the orchestra drummer had " the thankless task of having to reproduce Keith Moon 's parts " . Townshend and McAnuff rewrote parts of the musical when it moved from La Jolla to Broadway , to show a darker side for the title character . McAnuff won a Tony Award in 1993 for Best Director , while Wayne Cilento won the award for Best Choreographer . The Broadway run lasted from 1993 to 1995 . McAnuff revisited Tommy during the 2013 season of the Stratford Shakespeare Festival . 
 = = = Bluegrass = = = 
 In 2015 , bluegrass band The <unk> released a cover of the album , arranged by Jim Rea and produced by Louis Jay Meyers . The group have informed Townshend and Daltrey in order to get official blessing . The performance of the bluegrass version has been critically praised , with Rolling Stone marking the <unk> appearance at South by Southwest one of the " 50 Best Things We Saw At SXSW 2015 " . Townshend met with the group after the band 's May 2015 performance in Nashville . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = = Standard editions = = = 
 All songs written and composed by Pete Townshend , except where noted . 
 Though later released as a single , " See Me , Feel Me " was not a track in its own right on the original album , and is included as the latter half of " We 're not Gonna Take It " . 
 = = = Deluxe editions = = = 
 2003 rerelease bonus disc 
 The first twelve tracks are out @-@ takes and demos and the last five are stereo @-@ only demos . 
 " I Was " – 0 : 17 
 " Christmas " ( Outtake 3 ) – 4 : 43 
 " Cousin Kevin Model Child " – 1 : 25 
 " Young Man Blues " ( Version one ) ( Allison ) – 2 : 51 
 " Tommy Can You Hear Me ? " ( Alternate version ) – 1 : 59 
 " Trying to Get Through " – 2 : 51 
 " Sally Simpson " ( Outtake ) – 4 : 09 
 " Miss Simpson " – 4 : 18 
 " Welcome " ( Take two ) – 3 : 44 
 " Tommy 's Holiday Camp " ( Band 's version ) – 1 : 07 
 " We 're Not Gonna Take It " ( Alternate version ) – 6 : 08 
 " Dogs ( Part Two ) " ( Moon ) – 2 : 26 
 " It 's a Boy " – 0 : 43 
 " Amazing Journey " – 3 : 41 
 " Christmas " – 1 : 55 
 " Do You Think It 's Alright " – 0 : 28 
 " Pinball Wizard " – 3 : 46 
 2013 reissue live disc 
 " Overture " ( Including Introduction ) – 7 : 00 
 " It 's A Boy " – 0 : 39 
 " 1921 " – 2 : 29 
 " Amazing Journey " – 5 : 07 
 " Sparks " – 2 : 49 
 " The Hawker ( Eyesight To The Blind ) " – 1 : 54 
 " Christmas " – 3 : 11 
 " The Acid Queen " – 3 : 30 
 " Pinball Wizard " – 2 : 47 
 " Do You Think It 's Alright ? " – 0 : 21 
 " Fiddle About " – 1 : 12 
 " Tommy , Can You Hear Me ? " – 0 : 55 
 " There 's A Doctor " – 0 : 24 
 " Go To The Mirror ! " – 3 : 12 
 " Smash The Mirror " – 1 : 10 
 " Miracle Cure " – 0 : 12 
 " Sally Simpson " – 4 : 01 
 " I 'm Free " – 2 : 12 
 " Tommy 's Holiday Camp " – 0 : 48 
 " We 're Not Gonna Take It " – 3 : 28 
 " See Me , Feel Me " – 7 : 51 
 All tracks are from the Capitol Theatre , Ottawa , Canada , 15 October 1969 , except for " I 'm Free " , " Tommy 's Holiday Camp " , " We 're Not Gonna Take It " and " See Me , Feel Me " which are from Swansea City Football Club , 12 June 1976 . 
 = = Sales chart performance = = 
 Album 
 Singles 
 = = Sales certifications = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The Who 
 Roger Daltrey – Vocals and harmonica 
 John Entwistle – Bass , French horn and vocals 
 Keith Moon – Drums 
 Pete Townshend – Guitar , keyboards and vocals 
 = Taylor v. Illinois = 
 Taylor v. Illinois , 484 U.S. 400 , is a United States Supreme Court decision in which the Court held that defense witnesses can be prevented from testifying under certain circumstances , even if that hurts the defense 's case . Taylor was the first case to hold that there is no absolute bar to blocking the testimony of a surprise witness , even if that is an essential witness for the defendant , a limitation of the broad right to present a defense recognized in Washington v. Texas . 
 Taylor was the first Compulsory Process Clause case since Washington v. Texas to provide a specific limitation on the right of defendants to force their witnesses to testify . In that case , the Court construed a defendant 's right very broadly in his ability to present a defense . Here , however , the Court restricted that ability to comply with court rules , especially if those rules were of equal consequence upon both the prosecution and the defense . This decision was reached over the dissent of three Justices , all of whom felt a defendant 's case should not be limited based on an error solely by the defendant 's attorney to list appropriate witnesses . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = History of discovery rules = = = 
 Discovery procedures for defendants began with adoption of state laws in the 1920s . In the following decades , courts began instituting new procedures . In 1962 , for example , the California Supreme Court ordered reciprocal discovery rules , without an initial law requiring it . However , a series of problems surfaced with this judicially imposed system . Not only did both sides refuse to share intended testimony , but no ' alibi notice rule ' was fashioned , leading to an unworkable position for both sides . In 1974 , the California Supreme Court ordered the legislature to create the discovery system , ending the state 's experiment with judicial discovery rule @-@ making . 
 In 1970 , the United States Supreme Court first set down principles in terms of the constitutionality of discovery rules . In Williams v. Florida , the Court held that Florida 's ' notice @-@ of @-@ alibi ' rule did not violate the Fifth Amendment . While the rule in Williams was reciprocal , it was not for another three years before the Court mandated that discovery rules had to be reciprocal as a general principle . The decision articulated the " two @-@ way street " approach , that " trials be run as a ' search for truth ' " without either side maintaining " ' poker game ' secrecy for its own witnesses " . 
 Along with these decisions that were specific to the discovery process , the Supreme Court broadened the general constitutional rights for defendants in the 1967 ruling of Washington v. Texas . In Washington , the Court incorporated the Compulsory Process Clause against the states , holding that " the Constitution is violated by arbitrary rules that prevent whole categories of defense witnesses from testifying " . Despite this , the Court did not rule specifically on whether the preclusion sanction was appropriate , instead applying the constitutional standard for an absolutist state law . Over the next few decades , the Supreme Court rejected attempts to review the sole constitutionality of a preclusion sanction . 
 = = = Taylor 's trial = = = 
 On August 6 , 1981 , Ray Taylor was arrested for the murder of Jack Bridges in a fight in Chicago . In advance of the trial , the prosecutor submitted a request for all the defense witnesses in the case . The defense attorney for Taylor provided a list of four individuals , which did not include witnesses Alfred Wormley and Pam <unk> . When the defendant tried to introduce these witnesses on the second day of the trial , the trial judge sanctioned the defense for failing to put the witness names on the original list provided to the prosecution . Therefore , it ruled the two unlisted witnesses would not be allowed to testify . The trial judge was specifically frustrated that the witness , Wormley , was known to the defense prior to trial , but was hidden away from the prosecution . 
 A jury convicted Taylor of the murder charge and the Illinois Appellate Court affirmed . It held that when " discovery rules are violated , the trial judge may exclude the evidence which the violating party wishes to introduce " . The Appellate Court 's ruling further gave the trial judge discretion in the appropriate remedy in such a case – whether to exclude entirely the ' surprise ' witnesses . 
 Taylor sought a writ of certiorari to the United States Supreme Court to review his case , which was accepted . 
 = = Opinion of the Court = = 
 Justice John Paul Stevens wrote the opinion , which affirmed the decision of the Illinois Appellate Court , and upheld Taylor 's conviction . He began by addressing the position of the state of Illinois , who argued that there is never a Compulsory Process Clause concern when preclusion of a witness is used as a discovery sanction . The Court had held the converse view , Stevens wrote that " few rights are more fundamental than that of an accused to present witnesses in his own defense " . This strong footing of Sixth Amendment values forced the Court to reject the State 's absolutist argument . 
 At the same time though , the Court rejected the defendant 's broad claim that there could never be preclusion of a defense witness . Stevens wrote that " [ t ] he Compulsory Process Clause provides [ the defendant ] with an effective weapon , but it is a weapon that cannot be used irresponsibly " . The whole adversarial process would be destroyed , Stevens argued , if either side could simply refuse to follow the basic rules of the Court . There are " countervailing public interests " which weigh against the absolute defense position . 
 The broader idea embedded in the opinion was the idea that willful misconduct of an attorney lowers the truthfulness of proffered testimony . In the instant case , the Court held that a trial judge could hold the " presumption " that a new witnesses ' testimony is perjured due to " a pattern of discovery violations " . The pattern in Taylor 's case was a series of two amendments to the witness list done in bad faith . " It would demean the high purpose of the [ Clause ] to construe it as encompassing an absolute right to an automatic continuance or mistrial " , Stevens wrote . 
 As the misconduct of the judge towards the defense counsel did not implicate the Sixth Amendment 's Compulsory Process Clause , there was no need to disrupt the lower courts ' decisions . Further , even though the defendant was harmed by the defense counsel error , Stevens wrote that such an argument could not excuse the counsel 's fault . 
 Despite the rejection of Taylor 's constitutional position , the Court did create the framework for a balancing test for lower courts to use in handling future discovery preclusion questions . A trial court must balance the defendant 's interest in a robust defense with the ( i ) state 's interest in ' efficient ' justice , ( ii ) state 's interest in excluding evidence lacking integrity , ( iii ) state 's interest in a strong judicial authority with followed rules , and ( iv ) the prosecution interest in avoiding prejudice due to a defendant 's discovery violation . 
 = = = Brennan 's dissent = = = 
 Justice Brennan 's dissenting opinion was joined by Justices Marshall and Blackmun . Brennan argued that the " Court 's balancing test creates a conflict of interest in every case involving a discovery violation " such that a better approach would be to hold that the " Compulsory Process Clause per se bars discovery sanctions that exclude criminal defense evidence " . 
 Brennan quoted at length from Washington v. Texas , a 1967 case which announced broad rights for defendants to present a defense . " The exclusion of criminal defense evidence undermines the central <unk> aim of our criminal justice system " , Brennan opined , " because it deliberately distorts the record at the risk of misleading the jury into convicting an innocent person " . He went on to argue that simple preclusion of a defense witness was too extreme a penalty for a discovery violation , to the point that it " subverts criminal justice by basing convictions on a partial presentation of the facts " . 
 = = = Blackmun 's dissent = = = 
 Justice Blackmun wrote a separate one @-@ paragraph long dissenting opinion . He stressed that " the State 's legitimate interests might well occasion a result different from what should obtain in the factual context of the present case " . 
 = Rudolf Vrba = 
 Rudolf " Rudi " Vrba ( 11 September 1924 – 27 March 2006 ) escaped from the Auschwitz concentration camp in German Nazi @-@ occupied Poland on 10 April 1944 , at the height of the Holocaust , and co @-@ wrote a report containing the most detailed information available at the time about the mass murder taking place inside the camp . 
 Originally from Slovakia , Vrba and fellow escapee Alfréd Wetzler fled Auschwitz three weeks after German forces invaded Hungary and began deporting its Jewish population to the camp . The 60 pages of information the men dictated to Jewish officials when they arrived in Slovakia on 24 April , which included that arrivals were being gassed and not resettled as expected , became known as the Vrba – Wetzler report . While it confirmed material in earlier reports from Polish and other escapees , historian Miroslav Kárný writes that it was unique in its " unflinching detail . " 
 There was a delay of several weeks before the report was distributed widely enough to gain the attention of governments . Mass transports of Hungary 's Jews to Auschwitz began on 15 May 1944 at a rate of 12 @,@ 000 people a day . Most went straight to the gas chambers . Vrba argued until the end of his life that the deportees would have refused to board the trains had they known they were not being resettled . His position is generally not accepted by Holocaust historians . 
 Throughout June and into July 1944 , material from the Vrba – Wetzler and earlier reports appeared in newspapers and radio broadcasts in the United States and Europe , particularly in Switzerland , prompting world leaders to appeal to Hungarian regent Miklós Horthy to halt the deportations . On 7 July 1944 he ordered an end to them , possibly fearing he would be held responsible after the war . By then 437 @,@ 000 Jews had been deported , constituting almost the entire Jewish population of the Hungarian countryside , but another 200 @,@ 000 in Budapest were saved . 
 = = Early life and arrest = = 
 Vrba was born Walter Rosenberg in <unk> , Czechoslovakia . ( He took the name Rudolf Vrba in April 1944 after his escape , and changed his name legally after the war . ) His parents , Elias Rosenberg and Helena Rosenberg ( née <unk> ) , the latter from <unk> , Slovakia , owned a steam sawmill in <unk> , near <unk> , Slovakia . 
 Because he was a Jew , Vrba was excluded at age 15 from the gymnasium ( high school ) in Bratislava , and went to work as a labourer . There were restrictions in Slovakia on Jews ' education , housing and travel , and they were required to wear a yellow badge . Available jobs went first to non @-@ Jews . 
 In 1942 the Slovak authorities announced that Jews were to be sent to " reservations " in Poland , starting with the young men . Then aged 17 , Vrba decided instead to join the Czechoslovak Army in England . At the Hungarian border the guards handed him back to the Slovak authorities , who in turn sent him to the <unk> transition camp , a holding camp for Jews awaiting deportation . He managed to escape briefly , but was caught by a policeman who , Vrba wrote , became suspicious when he saw that Vrba was wearing two pairs of socks . 
 = = Auschwitz = = 
 = = = Auschwitz I = = = 
 Vrba was deported on 15 June 1942 to the Majdanek concentration camp , a Nazi @-@ German camp in Poland , and on 30 June was sent to Auschwitz I , the administrative centre of the Auschwitz camps , where he was housed in Block 4 . He was assigned to work in the <unk> in Auschwitz II @-@ Birkenau , the extermination camp , which lay two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half miles ( 4 km ) away from the main camp . Property from new inmates was taken to storage facilities <unk> I and II there , and repackaged , much of it to be sent to Germany . 
 The facilities occupied several dozen barracks in the Big sector of Auschwitz II . The prisoners called the barracks Canada I and Canada II , because they contained food , clothes and medicine . It was thanks to this access that Vrba was able to stay healthy . 
 The work included sorting through the arrivals ' property on the <unk> at Auschwitz II , where trains carrying Jews arrived , and removing the dead from the trains . Some new prisoners were selected to work as slave labour , but most went straight to the gas chamber . Vrba worked there from 18 August 1942 until 7 June 1943 . In 1985 he told Claude Lanzmann , for the documentary film Shoah , that he had seen around 200 trains arrive during those 10 months . 
 = = = Auschwitz II = = = 
 From 15 January 1943 Vrba was housed in Block 16 of Auschwitz II , where he continued to work in the " Canada " facility , now tattooed as prisoner no . <unk> . He tried to remember the numbers he saw arriving and the place of origin of each transport . Many had brought clothes for different seasons , as well as utensils , suggesting they believed the stories about resettlement . This strengthened Vrba 's conviction that he had to escape . 
 In June 1943 he was given the job of registrar in the quarantine section at Birkenau sector B II , which allowed him to speak to deportees selected as slave labour . He had his own office with a desk , chair and bunk bed . From the window he could see the lorries driving towards the gas chambers , and estimated that 10 percent of each transport was selected to work and the rest killed . By April 1944 he calculated that 1 @,@ 750 @,@ 000 Jews had been killed , a figure higher than that accepted by historians , but which decades later he insisted was accurate . 
 = = = Hungarian Jews = = = 
 On 15 January 1944 a Polish <unk> told Vrba , according to the latter 's memoir , that a million Hungarian Jews would soon arrive at Auschwitz , and that a railway line was being built straight to the crematoria . Vrba said he also overheard SS guards discuss how they would soon have Hungarian salami . When Jews from the Netherlands arrived , he wrote , they brought cheese , French Jews halva and Greek Jews olives , and now it was Hungarian salami . Although Vrba is clear that he overheard these conversations , and that warning the Hungarian community was one of the motives for his escape , there is no mention of Hungarian Jews in the Vrba – Wetzler report . The discrepancy has led several historians , including Miroslav Kárný and Randolph L. Braham , to dispute Vrba 's later recollections , though not the report itself . 
 = = = Escape = = = 
 In Birkenau Vrba found an acquaintance from Trnava , Alfréd Wetzler ( prisoner no . <unk> ) , who was working in the mortuary . The men hatched an escape plan , and on 7 April 1944 , with the help of two other prisoners , they hid inside a pile of wood stacked between the inner and outer perimeter fences , sprinkling the area with tobacco soaked in gasoline to fool the dogs . According to Kárný , at 20 : 33 that evening SS @-@ Sturmbannführer Fritz <unk> , the Birkenau commander , learned by teleprinter that two Jews were missing . 
 The men hid for three nights and throughout the fourth day . They knew from escape attempts by others that the guards would keep searching for three days . Wetzler wrote in his memoir that they tied strips of flannel across their mouths and tightened them whenever they felt a tickle in their throats . At 9 pm on 10 April , they crawled out of the wood pile and headed south toward Slovakia 80 miles ( 130 km ) away , walking parallel to the <unk> river . 
 = = Vrba – Wetzler report = = 
 = = = Writing the report = = = 
 The men crossed the Polish @-@ Slovakian border on 21 April 1944 . They went to see a local doctor in <unk> , Dr. Pollack , someone Vrba knew from his time in the first transit camp . Pollack had a contact in the Slovak Judenrat ( Jewish Council ) , which was operating an underground group known as the " Working Group , " and arranged for them to send people from their headquarters in Bratislava to meet the men . Pollack was distressed to learn the probable fate of his parents and siblings , who had been deported in 1942 . 
 Vrba and Wetzler spent the night in <unk> in the home of a relative of the rabbi Leo Baeck , and the next day , 24 April , met the chairman of the Jewish Council , Dr. Oscar Neumann , a German @-@ speaking lawyer . Neumann placed the men in different rooms in a former old people 's home and interviewed them separately over three days . Vrba writes that he began by drawing the inner layout of Auschwitz I and II , and the position of the ramp in relation to the two camps . He described the internal organization of the camps , how Jews were being used as slave labour for Krupp , Siemens , IG Farben and <unk> , and the mass murder in gas chambers of those who had been chosen for Sonderbehandlung , or " special treatment . " 
 The report was written and re @-@ written several times . Wetzler wrote the first part , Vrba the third , and the two wrote the second part together . They then worked on the whole thing together , re @-@ writing it six times . Neumann 's aide , Oscar Krasniansky , an engineer and stenographer who later took the name Oskar Isaiah <unk> , translated it from Slovak into German with the help of Gisela Steiner . They produced a 40 @-@ page report in German , which was completed by Thursday , 27 April 1944 . Vrba wrote that the report was also translated into Hungarian . The original Slovak version was not preserved . 
 = = = Content = = = 
 The report contained a detailed description of the geography and management of the camps , and of how the prisoners lived and died . It listed the transports that had arrived at Auschwitz since 1942 , their place of origin , and the numbers " selected " for work or the gas chambers . Kárný writes that the report provides details known only to prisoners , including , for example , that discharge forms were filled out for prisoners who were gassed , indicating that death rates in the camp were actively falsified . 
 It also contained sketches and information about the layout of the gas chambers . In a sworn deposition for the trial of SS @-@ Obersturmbannführer Adolf Eichmann in 1961 , and in his book I Cannot Forgive ( 1964 ) , Vrba said that he and Wetzler obtained the information about the gas chambers and crematoria from Sonderkommando Filip Müller and his colleagues who worked there . Müller confirmed this in his Eyewitness Auschwitz ( 1979 ) . Auschwitz scholar Robert Jan van Pelt wrote in 2002 that the description contains errors , but that " given the conditions under which information was obtained , the lack of architectural training of Vrba and Wetzlar [ sic ] , and the situation in which the report was compiled , one would become suspicious if it did not contain errors . ... Given the circumstances , the composite ' crematorium ' reconstructed by two escapees without any architectural training is as good as one could expect . " The report offered the following description : 
 At present there are four crematoria in operation at <unk> , two large ones , I and II , and two smaller ones , III and IV . Those of type I and II consist of 3 parts , i.e. , : ( A ) the furnace room ; ( B ) the large halls ; and ( C ) the gas chamber . A huge chimney rises from the furnace room around which are grouped nine furnaces , each having four openings . Each opening can take three normal corpses at once and after an hour and a half the bodies are completely burned . This corresponds to a daily capacity of about 2 @,@ 000 bodies . Next to this is a large " reception hall " which is arranged so as to give the impression of the antechamber of a bathing establishment . It holds 2 @,@ 000 people and apparently there is a similar waiting room of the floor below . From there a door and a few steps lead down into the very long and narrow gas chamber . The walls of this chamber are also camouflaged with simulated entries to shower rooms in order to mislead the victims . This roof is fitted with three traps which can be hermetically closed from the outside . A track leads from the gas chamber to the furnace room . 
 The gassing takes place as follows : the unfortunate victims are brought into hall ( B ) where they are told to undress . To complete the fiction that they are going to bathe , each person receives a towel and a small piece of soap issued by two men clad in white coats . They are then crowded into the gas chamber ( C ) in such numbers there is , of course , only standing room . To compress this crowd into the narrow space , shots are often fired to induce those already at the far end to huddle still closer together . 
 When everybody is inside , the heavy doors are closed . Then there is a short pause , presumably to allow the room temperature to rise to a certain level , after which SS men with gas masks climb on the roof , open the traps , and shake down a preparation in powder form out of tin cans labeled " <unk> " " For use against vermin , " which is manufactured by a Hamburg concern . It is presumed that this is a " <unk> " mixture of some sort which turns into gas at a certain temperature . After three minutes everyone in the chamber is dead . No one is known to have survived this ordeal , although it was not uncommon to discover signs of life after the primitive measures employed in the Birch Wood . The chamber is then opened , aired , and the " special squad " carts the bodies on flat trucks to the furnace rooms where the burning takes place . Crematoria III and IV work on nearly the same principle , but their capacity is only half as large . Thus the total capacity of the four <unk> and gassing plants at <unk> amounts to about 6 @,@ 000 daily . 
 = = = Distribution = = = 
 The dates on which the report was passed to certain individuals has become a matter of importance within Holocaust historiography . This is partly because there is a question as to what the Hungarian government knew about the gas chambers before it facilitated the mass deportations , which began on 15 May 1944 , and partly because Vrba alleged that lives were lost because the report was not distributed quickly enough by Jewish leaders , particularly Rudolf Kastner of the Budapest Aid and Rescue Committee . 
 Israeli historian Yehuda Bauer writes that Oscar Krasniansky of the Jewish Council , who translated the report into German from Slovak as Vrba and Wetzler were writing and dictating it , gave conflicting statements after the war . In the first , he said he had handed the report to Kastner on 26 April 1944 during the latter 's visit to Bratislava , but Bauer writes that the report was not finished until 27 April . In another statement , he said he had given it to Kastner on 28 April in Bratislava , but Hansi Brand , an Aid and Rescue Committee worker who was in a relationship with Kastner , said that Kastner was not in Bratislava until August . Bauer writes that it is nevertheless clear from Kastner 's post @-@ war statements that he had early access to the report , though perhaps not in April as Krasniansky claimed . Randolph L. Braham writes that Kastner had a copy by 3 May when he visited <unk> ( Cluj ) , his home town . Kastner 's reasons for not making the document public are unknown , but Vrba believed until the end of his life that Kastner withheld it in order not to jeopardize negotiations between the Aid and Rescue Committee and Adolf Eichmann , the SS officer in charge of the transport of Jews out of Hungary . 
 = = = Deportations continue = = = 
 <unk> Rosin ( prisoner no . <unk> ) and Czesław Mordowicz ( prisoner no . <unk> ) escaped from Auschwitz on 27 May 1944 and arrived in Slovakia on 6 June , the day of the Normandy landings . Hearing about the invasion of Normandy and believing the war was over , they got drunk to celebrate , using dollars they had smuggled out of Auschwitz . They were promptly arrested for violating the currency laws , and spent eight days in prison before the Jewish Council paid their fines . 
 Rosin and Mordowicz already knew Vrba and Wetzler . Vrba wrote that anyone who survived more than a year in Auschwitz was a senior member of the " old hands Mafia , " and all were known to each other . On 15 June Rosin and Mordowicz were interviewed by Oscar Krasniansky , the engineer who had translated the Vrba – Wetzler report into German . They told him that , between 15 and 27 May 1944 , 100 @,@ 000 Hungarian Jews had arrived at Birkenau , and that most were killed on arrival , apparently with no knowledge of what was about to happen to them . Vrba concluded that the report had been suppressed . 
 = = = Deportations halted = = = 
 Braham writes that the report was taken to Switzerland by Florian <unk> of the Romanian Legation in Bern and given to George Mantello , a Jewish businessman from Transylvania who was working as the first secretary of the El Salvador consulate in Geneva . It was thanks to Mantello that the report received , in the Swiss press , its first wide coverage . According to David <unk> , Mantello asked for the help of the Swiss @-@ Hungarian Students ' League to make 50 mimeographed copies of the Vrba – Wetzler and two shorter Auschwitz reports ( jointly known as the Auschwitz Protocols , which by 23 June 1944 he had distributed to the Swiss government and Jewish groups . The students made thousands of other copies , which were passed to other students and MPs . 
 On 19 June Richard <unk> of the Jewish Agency in Geneva , who had received a copy of the report from Mantello , wrote to the Jewish Agency in Jerusalem to say that they knew " what has happened and where it has happened , " and reported the Vrba – Wetzler figure that 90 per cent of Jews arriving at Birkenau were being killed . Vrba and Oscar <unk> met Vatican Swiss legate Monsignor Mario Martilotti at the Svätý <unk> monastery on 20 June . Martilotti had seen the report and questioned Vrba about it for six hours . 
 As a result of the coverage in the Swiss press , details began to appear elsewhere , including the New York Times and BBC World Service . Daniel Brigham , the New York Times correspondent in Geneva , published a story on 3 July 1944 , " Inquiry <unk> Nazi Death Camps , " and on 6 July a second , " Two Death Camps Places of Horror ; German Establishments for Mass Killings of Jews Described by Swiss . " Braham writes that several appeals were made to Horthy , including by the Swiss government , President Franklin D. Roosevelt , Gustaf V of Sweden and , on 25 June , Pope Pius XII , possibly after Martilotti passed on the report . On 26 June Richard <unk> of the Jewish Agency in Geneva sent a telegram to England calling on the Allies to hold members of the Hungarian government personally responsible for the killings . The cable was intercepted by the Hungarian government and shown to Prime Minister <unk> <unk> , who passed it to Horthy . Horthy ordered an end to the deportations on 7 July and they stopped two days later . 
 That the Germans were using gas chambers was confirmed on 23 July , when the Majdanek concentration camp near Lublin , Poland , was captured by Soviet soldiers , with its gas chambers intact and 820 @,@ 000 shoes . Auschwitz itself was liberated by the 28th and 106th corps of the 1st Ukrainian Front of the Red Army on 27 January 1945 . Van Pelt writes that the SS learned the lesson of Majdanek and tried to destroy some of the evidence , but the Red Army nevertheless found what was left of four crematoria , as well as 5 @,@ 525 pairs of women 's shoes and 38 @,@ 000 pairs of men 's , 348 @,@ 820 men 's suits , 836 @,@ 225 items of women 's clothing , large numbers of toothbrushes , glasses and dentures , and seven tons of hair . 
 = = Vrba 's allegations = = 
 = = = " Blood for goods " proposals = = = 
 The timing of the report 's distribution remains a source of controversy . For reasons that remain unclear it was not distributed widely until several weeks after Vrba 's escape in April . Between 15 May and 7 July 1944 , 437 @,@ 000 Hungarian Jews ( 12 @,@ 000 a day ) were sent by train to Auschwitz . Vrba believed they would have run or fought had they known they were being sent to their deaths . 
 He alleged that the report had been withheld deliberately by Rudolf Kastner and the Jewish @-@ Hungarian Aid and Rescue Committee in Budapest in order not to jeopardize complex , and ultimately futile , negotiations with Adolf Eichmann . Eichmann had suggested that the committee arrange an exchange of up to one million Jews for money and trucks from the US or UK , the so @-@ called " blood for goods " proposal . Vrba wrote later that the Jewish communities in Slovakia and Hungary had placed their trust either in secular Zionist leaders such as Kastner , or in Orthodox Jewish leaders . The Nazis were aware of this , Vrba wrote , which is why they lured those members of the community into negotiations , supposedly designed to lead to the release of Jews . He maintained that the Nazis intended only to placate the Jewish leadership to avoid panic , which would have slowed down the transports . 
 = = = Kastner train = = = 
 The Aid and Rescue Committee 's first meeting with Eichmann was on 25 April 1944 . On 28 April the first trainload of Hungarian Jews left for Auschwitz , although not as part of the mass transports . At around the same time Kastner is believed to have received a copy of the Vrba – Wetzler report , though possibly in German and not yet translated . 
 Vrba alleged that Kastner failed to distribute the report in order not to jeopardize the Eichmann deal , but acted on it privately by arranging for a trainload of 1 @,@ 684 Hungarian Jews to escape to Switzerland on the Kastner train , which left Budapest on 30 June . According to John Conway , the escaping party consisted of " themselves , their relatives , a coterie of Zionists , some distinguished Jewish intellectuals , and a number of wealthy Jewish entrepreneurs . " Other scholars dispute this emphasis . Ladislaus <unk> writes that the party also included over 200 children under 14 , many of them orphans , and hundreds of ordinary people such as teachers and nurses . Yehuda Bauer argues that Kastner put his own family on the train to show the other passengers that it was safe , and that in any event he could hardly be expected to exclude his family . 
 The allegations against Kastner became part of a libel case in Jerusalem in 1954 , after <unk> Gruenwald , an Israeli hotelier , accused him in a self @-@ published pamphlet of being a Nazi collaborator . Because Kastner was by then a senior Israeli civil servant , the Israeli government sued Gruenwald . Although Kastner was later exonerated by the Supreme Court , the lower court ruled against the government , and Kastner was assassinated in March 1957 as a result of the ensuing publicity . 
 = = = Response = = = 
 Bauer writes that , by the time the Vrba – Wetzler report was prepared , it was already too late for anything to alter the Nazis ' deportation plans . He cautions about the need to distinguish between the receipt of information and its " internalization " – the point at which information is deemed worthy of action – arguing that this is a complicated process : " During the Holocaust , countless individuals received information and rejected it , suppressed it , or rationalized about it , were thrown into despair without any possibility of acting on it , or seemingly internalized it and then behaved as though it had never reached them . " Bauer argues that Vrba 's " wild attacks on Kastner and on the Slovak underground are ahistorical and simply wrong from the start ... " Vrba , in response , alleged that Bauer was one of the Israeli historians who had downplayed Vrba 's role in Holocaust historiography in order to defend the Israeli establishment . 
 = = After the report = = 
 = = = Resistance activities = = = 
 After he handed his information to the Slovakian Jewish Council in April 1944 , Vrba said Krasniansky had assured him that the report was in the right hands . Vrba and Wetzler spent the next six weeks in <unk> Mikuláš , and continued to make and distribute copies of their report whenever they could . The Slovak Judenrat gave Vrba papers in the name of Rudolf Vrba , showing that he was a " pure Aryan " going back three generations , and supported him financially to the tune of 200 Slovak crowns a week , equivalent to an average worker 's salary , and as Vrba wrote , " sufficient to sustain me in an illegal life in Bratislava . " On 29 August 1944 the Slovak Army rose up against the Nazis and the reestablishment of Czechoslovakia was announced . Vrba joined the Czechoslovak partisan units in September 1944 , and was later awarded the Czechoslovak Medal of Bravery . 
 = = = After the war = = = 
 In the summer of 1944 he met a childhood friend Gerta ; they married ( she took the surname Vrbová , the female version of Vrba ) and had two daughters , though the marriage failed shortly thereafter . The couple moved to Prague in 1945 , where Vrba attended the Prague Technical University . In 1951 he received his doctorate in chemistry and biochemistry ( Dr. Tech . Sc . ) for a thesis entitled " On the metabolism of butyric acid . " This was followed by post @-@ doctoral research at the Czechoslovak Academy of Science , where he received his <unk> in 1956 . 
 In 1958 Vrba received an invitation to an international conference in Israel , and while there he defected . He worked for the next two years at the Weizmann Institute of Science in Rehovot . He said later that he could not continue to live in Israel because the same men who had , in his view , betrayed the Jewish community in Hungary were now in positions of power there . He decided in 1960 to move instead to England , and became a British citizen in 1966 . In England he worked for two years in the Neuropsychiatric Research Unit in Carshalton , Surrey , and seven years for the British Medical Research Council . 
 On 11 May 1960 Eichmann was captured by the Mossad in Buenos Aires and taken to Jerusalem to stand trial . Vrba contacted Alan <unk> of the Daily Herald in the UK , and his story was published in five installments over one week in March 1961 , on the eve of Eichmann 's trial . Vrba submitted a statement in evidence against Eichmann to the Israeli Embassy in London , and with <unk> 's help wrote his memoir , I Cannot Forgive ( 1964 ) , republished as Escape from Auschwitz ( 1964 ) and I Escaped from Auschwitz ( 2002 ) . He also gave evidence at one of the Frankfurt Auschwitz trials in 1964 . 
 = = = Move to Canada , Zündel trial and death = = = 
 Vrba moved to Canada in 1967 , where he worked for the Medical Research Council of Canada from 1967 to 1973 . He became a Canadian citizen in 1972 . From 1973 to 1975 he was a research fellow at Harvard Medical School , focusing on cancer research , where he met his second wife , Robin . They returned to Vancouver , where she became a real @-@ estate agent and he an associate professor of pharmacology at the University of British Columbia . He worked there until the early 1990s , publishing over 50 research papers on the chemistry of the brain , diabetes and cancer . 
 Vrba testified in January 1985 at the seven @-@ week trial in Toronto of Holocaust denier Ernst Zündel , which ended with Zündel 's conviction for knowingly publishing false material about the Holocaust . Vrba acknowledged that several passages in I Cannot Forgive ( 1964 ) were based on secondhand accounts . According to his deposition for Eichmann 's trial in 1961 , he obtained his information about the gas chambers and crematoria from Sonderkommando Filip Müller and others who worked there , something that Müller confirmed in 1979 . Zündel 's lawyer , Doug Christie , accused Vrba of lying about Auschwitz and asked whether he had seen anyone gassed . Vrba replied that he had watched people being taken into the buildings and had seen SS officers throw in gas canisters after them : 
 Therefore , I concluded it was not a kitchen or a bakery , but it was a gas chamber . It is possible they are still there or that there is a tunnel and they are now in China . Otherwise , they were gassed . 
 Vrba died of cancer on 27 March 2006 in Vancouver . He was survived by his first wife , Gerta , his second wife , Robin , his daughter , Zuza Vrbová Jackson , and his grandchildren , Hannah and Jan. He was pre @-@ deceased by his elder daughter , Dr. Helena Vrbová . His wife made a gift of his papers to the Franklin D. Roosevelt Library in New York . Vrba 's fellow escapee , Alfréd Wetzler , died in Bratislava , Slovakia , on 8 February 1988 . Wetzler was the author of Escape From Hell : The True Story of the Auschwitz Protocol ( 2007 ) , first published as <unk> Dante <unk> ( 1963 ) under the pseudonym Jozef <unk> . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Documentaries , books = = = 
 Several documentaries have told Vrba 's story , including Genocide ( 1973 ) , directed by Michael Darlow for ITV in the UK ; Auschwitz and the Allies ( 1982 ) , directed by Rex <unk> and Martin Gilbert for the BBC ; and Shoah ( 1985 ) , directed by Claude Lanzmann . He was featured in Witness to Auschwitz ( 1990 ) , directed by Robin Taylor for the CBC in Canada ; Auschwitz : The Great Escape ( 2007 ) for the UK 's Channel Five ; and Escape From Auschwitz ( 2008 ) for PBS in the United States . 
 Vrba featured in an essay by George Klein , the Hungarian @-@ Swedish biologist , " The Ultimate Fear of the Traveller Returning from Hell , " in Klein 's Pietà ( 1992 ) , and was the focus of Ruth Linn 's Escaping Auschwitz ( 2004 ) . An academic conference was held in New York in April 2011 to discuss the impact of the Vrba – Wetzler and other Auschwitz reports , resulting in a book , The Auschwitz Reports and the Holocaust in Hungary ( 2011 ) , edited by Randolph L. Braham and William <unk> Heuvel and published by Columbia University Press . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 In 1998 , at the instigation of Ruth Linn , the University of Haifa awarded Vrba an honorary doctorate . He received the Order of the White Double Cross , 1st class , from the Slovakian government in 2007 . British historian Martin Gilbert supported an unsuccessful campaign in 1992 to have Vrba awarded the Order of Canada . 
 The Czech One World festival annually presents the " Rudolf Vrba Award " for original documentaries that draw attention to an unknown theme about human rights . The award was established in Vrba 's name by Mary Robinson , then United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights , and Václav Havel , then President of the Czech Republic . 
 = = = Discrepancies = = = 
 Several historians have argued that Vrba embellished his later accounts , though not the Vrba – Wetzler report itself . He wrote in his memoir in 1963 that he had overheard SS officers in Auschwitz discuss how a new area was being constructed and that they would soon have " Hungarian salami ... by the ton , " allegedly a reference to the imminent arrival of Hungarian Jews , but he did not mention this in his report in April 1944 . Although Vrba maintained that warning the Hungarian community was one of the motives for his escape , the report said : " Work is now proceeding on a still larger compound which is to be added later on to the already existing camp . The purpose of this extensive planning is not known to us . " It also stated : " When we left on April 7 , 1944 we heard that large convoys of Greek Jews were expected . " 
 Miroslav Kárný wrote in 1998 : 
 It is generally accepted that at the time Vrba and Wetzler were preparing their escape , it was known in Auschwitz that annihilation mechanisms were being perfected in order to kill hundreds of thousands of Hungary 's Jews . It was this knowledge , according to Vrba , that became the main motive for their escape . ... But in fact , there is no mention in the Vrba and Wetzler report that preparations were under way for the annihilation of Hungary 's Jews . ... If Vrba and Wetzler considered it necessary to record rumors about the expected arrival of Greece 's Jewish transports , then why wouldn 't they have recorded a rumor – had they known it – about the expected transports of hundreds of thousands of Hungary 's Jews ? 
 Kárný argues that , long after the war was over , Vrba wanted to testify about the deportations out of a sense of longing , to force the world to face the magnitude of the Nazis ' crimes . The suspicion is that this led to a degree of embellishment in later accounts . In a later edition of his memoirs , Vrba responded that he is certain the reference to the imminent Hungarian deportations was in the original Slovakian version of the Vrba – Wetzler report , some of which he wrote by hand , but which did not survive . He wrote that he recalled Oscar Krasniansky of the Slovakian Jewish Council , who translated the report into German , arguing that only actual deaths should be recorded , and not speculation , to lend the report maximum credibility . Vrba speculated that this was the reason Krasniansky omitted the references to Hungary from the German translation , which was the version that was copied around the world . 
 = = = Survivor versus expert discourse = = = 
 Vrba was criticized in 2001 in a collection of articles in Hebrew , Leadership under <unk> : The Working Group in Slovakia , 1942 – 1944 , by a group of leading Israeli historians with ties to the Slovak community , including Yehuda Bauer , Hanna <unk> , Gila <unk> and Livia Rothkirchen . The introduction by Giora Amir describes as " a bunch of <unk> , pseudo @-@ historians and historians " those who , like Vrba , argue that the Slovakian Jewish Council may have collaborated with the Nazis by concealing what was happening in Auschwitz . Amir writes that the " baseless " accusation was given credence when the University of Haifa awarded an honorary doctorate " to the head of these <unk> , Peter [ sic ] Vrba . " Amir continues : 
 The heroism of this person , who together with the late Alfréd Wetzler , was among the first to escape from Auschwitz , is beyond doubt . But the fact that , just because he was an Auschwitz prisoner endowed with personal heroism , he has crowned himself as knowledgeable to judge all those involved in the noble work of rescue , and accuse them falsely , deeply disturbs us , the Czech community . 
 The criticism of Vrba stems from the tension between what Ruth Linn calls survivor and expert discourse . Bauer referred to Vrba 's memoir as " not a memoir in the usual sense , " alleging that it " contains excerpts of conversations of which there is no chance that they are accurate and it has elements of a second @-@ hand story that does not necessarily correspond with reality . " When writing about himself and his personal experiences , Vrba 's account is an important and true one , Bauer wrote , but he also argued that Vrba was not justified in seeing himself as an expert on Holocaust history . Vrba often dismissed the opinion of historians . Regarding the numbers killed at Auschwitz , he said that Bauer and historian Raul Hilberg did not know enough about the history of Auschwitz . 
 Linn argued in 2004 that certain Israeli historians had misrepresented Vrba 's story . Vrba believed they had sought to erase his story from Holocaust historiography because of his views about Kastner and the Hungarian Judenrat , some of whom went on to hold prominent positions in Israel . Linn wrote that Vrba 's and Wetzler 's names are omitted or their contribution minimized in Hebrew textbooks : standard histories refer to the escape by " two young Slovak Jews , " " two chaps , " or " two young people , " and represent Vrba and Wetzler as emissaries of the Polish underground in Auschwitz . Vrba 's book was not translated into Hebrew until 1998 , 35 years after its publication in English . Ruth Linn arranged for the first publication of Vrba ' memoirs and the Vrba @-@ Wetzler Report in Hebrew by the Haifa University Press , after it was rejected by Yad Vashem . Prior to this date , there was no English or Hebrew version there of the Vrba – Wetzler report , an issue the museum attributed to lack of funding . There was a Hungarian translation , but it did not note the names of its authors and , Linn wrote , could be found only in a file that dealt with Rudolf Kastner . 
 In 2005 Uri Dromi of the Israel Democracy Institute responded that there were at least four Israeli books on the Holocaust that mention Vrba , and that Wetzler 's testimony is recounted at length in Livia Rothkirchen 's <unk> <unk> Slovakia ( " The Destruction of Slovakian Jewry " ) , published by Yad Vashem in 1961 . Linn , who cites Rothkirchen his her book , responded that most books mentioning Vrba were published after the publication of his memoirs in 1998 ( Linn 's response to Dromi ) , and that earlier mentions were minimal and failed to relate to the Hebrew version of the Vrba @-@ Wetzler report . Robert <unk> , head librarian at Yad Vashem and author of the entry on the " Auschwitz Report " in Encyclopedia of the Holocaust , said of the Vrba controversy in 2005 : " There are people who come into the subject from a certain angle and think that they 've uncovered the truth . A historian who deals seriously with the subject understands that the truth is complex and multifaceted . " 
 = = Selected works = = 
 = Goldcrest = 
 The goldcrest ( Regulus regulus ) is a very small passerine bird in the kinglet family . Its colourful golden crest feathers gives rise to its English and scientific names , and possibly to it being called the " king of the birds " in European folklore . Several subspecies are recognised across the very large distribution range that includes much of Eurasia and the islands of Macaronesia . Birds from the north and east of its breeding range migrate to winter further south . 
 This kinglet has greenish upper @-@ parts , whitish under @-@ parts , and has two white wingbars . It has a plain face contrasting black irises and a bright head crest , orange and yellow in the male and yellow in the female , which is displayed during breeding . It superficially resembles the firecrest , which largely shares its European range , but the latter 's bronze shoulders and strong face pattern are distinctive . The song is a repetition of high thin notes , slightly higher @-@ pitched than those of its relative . Birds on the Canary Islands are now separated into two subspecies of the goldcrest , but were formerly considered to be a subspecies of the common firecrest or a separate species , Regulus teneriffae . 
 The goldcrest breeds in coniferous woodland and gardens , building its compact , three @-@ layered nest on a tree branch . Ten to twelve eggs are incubated by the female alone , and the chicks are fed by both parents ; second broods are common . This kinglet is constantly on the move as it searches for insects to eat , and in winter it is often found with flocks of tits . It may be killed by birds of prey or carry parasites , but its large range and population mean that it is not considered to present any significant conservation concerns . 
 = = Description = = 
 The goldcrest is the smallest European bird , 8 @.@ 5 – 9 @.@ 5 cm ( 3 @.@ 3 – 3 @.@ 7 in ) in length , with a 13 @.@ 5 – 15 @.@ 5 cm ( 5 @.@ 3 – 6 @.@ 1 in ) wingspan and a weight of 4 @.@ 5 – 7 @.@ 0 g ( 0 @.@ 16 – 0 @.@ 25 oz ) . It is similar in appearance to a warbler , with olive @-@ green upper @-@ parts , buff @-@ white underparts , two white wing bars , and a plain face with conspicuous black irises . The crown of the head has black sides and a narrow black front , and a bright crest , yellow with an orange centre in the male , and entirely yellow in the female ; the crest is erected in display , making the distinctive orange stripe of the male much more conspicuous . The small , thin bill is black , and the legs are dark flesh @-@ brown . Apart from the crest colour , the sexes are alike , although in fresh plumage , the female may have very slightly paler upper @-@ parts and greyer underparts than the adult male . The juvenile is similar to the adult , but has duller upper @-@ parts and lacks the coloured crown . Although the tail and flight feathers may be retained into the first winter , by then the young birds are almost indistinguishable from adults in the field . The flight is distinctive ; it consists of whirring wing @-@ beats with occasional sudden changes of direction . Shorter flights while feeding are a mix of dashing and fluttering with frequent hovering . It moves restlessly among foliage , regularly creeping on branches and up and down trunks . 
 = = = Identification = = = 
 The goldcrest is usually easily distinguished from other small birds in its range , but poor views could possibly lead to confusion with the common firecrest or yellow @-@ browed warbler . The adult common firecrest has a distinguishing face pattern showing a bright white supercilium ( eyebrow ) and black eye @-@ stripe , and the juvenile usually shows enough of this face pattern to be readily distinguished from the plain @-@ faced goldcrest . The yellow @-@ browed warbler has a yellowish supercilium and pale crown stripe , so also shows a different head pattern . The ruby @-@ crowned kinglet , an American Regulus species and a potential vagrant in Europe , could be more difficult to distinguish . It has a plain face like its Old World cousin , but the male has a red crest without any yellow or a black border . Female and juvenile ruby @-@ crowned kinglets lack the ruby @-@ red crown patch , but compared with the similarly crestless juvenile goldcrest , the American bird is larger in size , has an obvious whitish eyering , and yellowish wing bars . 
 = = Voice = = 
 The typical contact call of the goldcrest is a thin , high @-@ pitched zee given at intervals of 1 – 4 seconds , with all the notes at the same pitch . It sometimes has a more clipped ending , or is delivered more rapidly . The call is higher and less rough than that of the firecrest . The song of the male goldcrest is a very high , thin double note cedar , repeated 5 – 7 times and ending in a flourish , <unk> @-@ cedar @-@ cedar @-@ cedar @-@ <unk> @-@ see @-@ pee . The entire song lasts 3 – 4 seconds and is repeated 5 – 7 times a minute . This song , often uttered while the male is foraging , can be heard in most months of the year . There is also a subdued rambling subsong . Male goldcrests sometimes show a territorial response to recordings of the songs or calls of the common firecrest , but the reverse is apparently not true , since the songs of the common firecrest are simpler in construction than those of its relatives . 
 The songs of mainland goldcrests vary only slightly across their range and consist of a single song type , but much more divergence has occurred in the isolated Macaronesian populations . Not only are there variations between islands and within an island , but individual males on the Azores can have up to three song types . The dialects on the Azores fall into two main groups , neither of which elicited a response from male European goldcrests in playback experiments . There are also two main dialect groups on the Canary islands , a widespread group similar to the European version , and another that is restricted to the mountains of Tenerife . The song variations have been used to investigate the colonisation pattern of the Macaronesian islands by goldcrests , and identified a previously unknown subspecies . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The kinglets are a small group of birds sometimes included in the Old World warblers , but frequently given family status , especially as recent research shows that despite superficial similarities , they are phylogenetically remote from the warblers . The names of the family , Regulidae , and its only genus , Regulus , are derived from the Latin regulus , a diminutive of rex , a king . The goldcrest was first described by Linnaeus in his Systema Naturae in 1758 as Motacilla regulus ( characterised as [ Motacilla ] <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> , medio <unk> ) . It was moved to the warbler genus Sylvia by English naturalist John Latham in 1790 , and to its current genus by French zoologist Georges Cuvier in 1800 . 
 The relationships of the flamecrest or Taiwan firecrest ( Regulus <unk> ) of Taiwan have also been a source of much debate . It is sometimes viewed as a race of firecrest , but its territorial song resembles those of the Himalayan races of goldcrest , and genetic data show that it is the closest relative of that species , and , despite its alternative name , only distantly related to the firecrest . The flamecrest diverged from the goldcrest 3 @.@ 0 – 3 @.@ 1 mya ( million years ago ) . 
 = = = Subspecies = = = 
 = = = = Continental Eurasia = = = = 
 Several subspecies of the goldcrest have been described . In continental Eurasia , there are nine generally accepted and very similar subspecies , differing only in details such as plumage shade . At the genetic level , the two Central Asian forms , R. r. sikkimensis and R. r. himalayensis , are very close to each other , and have differentiated only in the recent past , but they diverged from the western subspecies around 2 @.@ 8 mya . 
 R. r. regulus ( Linnaeus , 1758 ) . Breeds in most of Europe ; this is the nominate subspecies . 
 R. r. himalayensis ( Bonaparte , 1856 ) . Breeds in the Himalayas ; it is similar to the nominate subspecies , but slightly paler above and with whiter underparts . 
 R. r. japonensis ( Blakiston , 1862 ) . Breeds in Eastern Asia , including Japan , Korea , China and Siberia ; it is greener and has darker upper @-@ parts than the nominate form , and has broad white wingbars . 
 R. r. tristis ( <unk> , 1892 ) . Breeds in China and Central Asia , wintering in northeastern Afghanistan . Records of this race from Ladakh claimed by Meinertzhagen are considered to be fraudulent . It is distinctive , with the black edges to the crest largely absent . The crown of the male is yellower than in other forms , and the underparts are much duller and greyer . 
 R. r. <unk> ( <unk> , 1904 ) . Breeds in Russia and Central Asia , and is paler above than the nominate subspecies . 
 R. r. yunnanensis ( Rippon , 1906 ) . Breeds in the Eastern Himalayas , Burma and China ; it is like R. r. sikkimensis , but darker overall with dark green upper @-@ parts and darker buff underparts . 
 R. r. hyrcanus ( Zarudny , 1910 ) . Breeds only in Iran ; it is like R. r. <unk> , but slightly darker . 
 R. r. <unk> ( Loudon , 1911 ) . Breeds in Eastern Europe , the Caucasus and Central Asia . It is paler above than the nominate subspecies , and greyish @-@ green rather than olive . 
 R. r. sikkimensis ( Meinertzhagen R. & Meinertzhagen A. , 1926 ) . Breeds in India and China . It is darker than R. r. himalayensis , and greener than the nominate subspecies . 
 = = = = The Atlantic islands = = = = 
 Two groups of goldcrest taxa are found on the Atlantic islands of Macaronesia . Birds on the Canary Islands are ancient colonists , whereas those on The Azores are of more recent origin . There are no goldcrests on Madeira , where the Madeira firecrest is the only Regulus species . 
 The Canary Islands were colonised in two waves . The first step was the occupation of Tenerife and La Gomera 1 @.@ 9 – 2 @.@ 3 million years ago , followed by a separate invasion of El Hierro and La Palma 1 @.@ 3 – 1 @.@ 8 mya . 
 Birds from the Canary Islands are particularly distinctive having a black forehead , pink @-@ buff underparts and a darker closed wing , and have been sometimes treated either as a subspecies of the common firecrest or as a different Regulus species altogether . They were sometimes called the Tenerife goldcrest , no matter which of the islands they lived on ; however , a 2006 study of the vocalisations of these birds indicate that they actually comprise two subspecies of the goldcrest that are separable on voice ; R. r. teneriffae occurring on Tenerife and the newly described subspecies , R. r. <unk> , the western Canary Islands goldcrest , occurring on the smaller islands of La Palma and El Hierro . 
 Tenerife goldcrest R. r. teneriffae ( <unk> , 1883 ) . Found only on Tenerife , Canary Islands ; it is a distinctive , small subspecies with a black forehead and pink @-@ buff underparts . 
 Western Canary Islands goldcrest R. r. <unk> ( <unk> et al , 2006 ) . Resident on La Palma and El Hierro , Canary Islands . 
 Differences in songs , genetics and morphology suggests that the Azores were colonised in a single invasion in the late Pleistocene , about 100 @,@ 000 years ago . It is likely that the initial colonisation was of the easternmost islands , with a subsequent spread to the central and western island groups from the western caldera of São Miguel , where both eastern and western song types are found . 
 Sao Miguel Goldcrest R. r. <unk> ( <unk> , 1883 ) . Found only on São Miguel , Azores ; it is like R. r. inermis , except the underparts are more olive @-@ buff . 
 Western Azores goldcrest R. r. inermis ( Murphy & Chapin , 1929 ) . Resident on Flores , Faial , Terceira , São Jorge and Pico , Azores ; its upper @-@ parts are a darker olive @-@ green than those of the nominate form , and the underparts are also darker . 
 Santa Maria goldcrest R. r. <unk> ( Vaurie , 1954 ) . Found only on Santa Maria Island ( Azores ) ; it is paler than other Azores subspecies and whitish below . 
 = = = Fossils = = = 
 There are a few Pleistocene ( 2 @.@ 6 million to 12 @,@ 000 years BP ) records from Europe of extant Regulus species , mostly goldcrests or unidentifiable to species . The only fossil of an extinct Regulus is a left ulna from 2 @.@ 6 – 1 @.@ 95 mya in Bulgaria , which was identified as belonging to an extinct species , Regulus bulgaricus . The goldcrest lineage diverged from this apparent ancestor of the common firecrest in the Middle Pleistocene . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The goldcrest breeds in mature lowland and mountain coniferous woodlands , mainly up to 3 @,@ 000 m ( 9 @,@ 800 ft ) , and occasionally to 4 @,@ 800 m ( 15 @,@ 700 ft ) . It uses spruce , larch , Scots pine , silver fir and mountain pine , and in man @-@ made landscapes also introduced conifers such as douglas fir . Breeding densities of up to 591 pairs per square km ( 1 @,@ 530 pairs per square mile ) have been recorded in Norway spruce in Ireland , and goldcrests constituted over 60 % of all birds found in Welsh Douglas fir and Norway spruce plantations . Broad @-@ leaved woods are used , only when some spruce or firs are also present . Sites such as parks and cemeteries are used only when they offer suitable conifers that are not otherwise locally available . The height and nature of any undergrowth is irrelevant . Unlike more specialised birds such as the Eurasian nuthatch and the Eurasian treecreeper , both of which forage on tree trunks , the kinglets do not need large woodlands , and their population density is independent of forest size . Once breeding is over , this species will readily move into deciduous trees and shrubs , heathland and similar more open habitats . 
 The Tenerife subspecies occurs in the mountain region previously occupied by laurisilva , but now dominated by tree heaths . It is common only in that habitat , becoming rare in pine forest , where it occurs only where tree @-@ heath is also available . 
 The goldcrest has a huge range in Eurasia , breeding from Macaronesia to Japan . It is common in middle and northern temperate and boreal latitudes of Europe , between the 13 – 24 ° C ( 55 – 75 ° F ) July isotherms , and thus predominantly in cooler climates than the firecrest . Further east it occurs discontinuously through southern Siberia to Sakhalin and Japan , in the Tian Shan mountains , northern Iran , and from the Himalayas east to central China . 
 This species has bred in Iceland since about 1999 , and was widespread by 2004 , although numbers are affected by hard winters . Breeds occurs intermittently in the Faroes . The goldcrest has occurred as a vagrant in Jordan and Morocco . 
 This species is partly migratory , northernmost populations deserting their breeding areas in winter . Birds winter in Europe and Asia south of the breeding range . Birds in northern Fennoscandia and Russia vacate their territories between late August and early November , with most leaving in late September to mid @-@ October as the first cold weather arrives . Adverse conditions may lead to disorientation , large numbers gathering on ships on overcast or wet nights . Large influxes include 15 @,@ 000 birds on the Isle of May in October 1982 , and nearly 21 @,@ 000 birds through a single site in Latvia during September and October 1983 . Spring migration is complete by late March on the Mediterranean islands , but continues to late April or early May in northern Europe . The spring passage is much lighter than in autumn , suggesting high mortality on migration . 
 A study in the Baltic region showed that northern goldcrests were more likely to migrate , and increased their body mass beforehand ; non @-@ migratory southern birds did not increase their fat reserves . The travel speed of migrating goldcrests increased for those leaving later in the autumn , and was greater for the northernmost populations . Migration was faster on routes that crossed the Baltic Sea than on coastal routes , and the birds with the largest fat reserves travelled at the highest speeds . The ability to lay down fat is adversely affected in this tiny bird by poor health . In Hungary , goldcrests stopping temporarily on migration were mostly found in scrub , including blackthorn , hawthorn and pear , which provided some protection from sparrowhawks . Females migrated slightly earlier than males , but overall there were more males , with an average sex ratio of 1 @.@ 6 : 1 . Goldcrests can fly 250 – 800 km ( 160 – 500 mi ) in one day , although they keep at a lower level in heavy headwinds . This is a tame and inquisitive bird , and tired migrants will land near or on humans , sometimes searching for food on their clothing . 
 The North Atlantic oscillation is an atmospheric phenomenon affecting the weather in Western Europe . When the atmospheric pressure variations in the North Atlantic are large , the springs in Europe are warmer . This brings forward the northward migration of those bird species ( including the goldcrest ) that winter mainly within western or southern Europe . A general climatic change resulting in more frequent positive North Atlantic oscillation events has led to earlier spring migration of these short @-@ distance migrants since the 1980s . The warmer spring weather brings on plant growth , thus preparing the habitat for returning migrants . The effect is greatest in western and central Europe . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 The goldcrest is monogamous . The male sings during the breeding season , usually while foraging rather than from a perch . It has a display involving bowing its head towards another bird and raising the coloured crest . Firecrests will sometimes defend their territories against goldcrests , but the amount of actual competition between the species may not be very great . A Spanish study suggested that territorial conflicts between species , and other phenomena like males singing mixed or alternating songs , were most frequent when one species locally far outnumbered the other ; in other circumstances , the two species learned to ignore each other 's songs . However , in very small areas of conifers it is rare for the goldcrest and the firecrest to share territories ; either one or the other is present , but not both . A male goldcrest will defend his territory against either species , sometimes including some firecrest phrases in his song . 
 The goldcrest 's nest is a well @-@ insulated cup @-@ shaped structure built in three layers . The nest 's outer layer is made from moss , small twigs , cobwebs and lichen , the cobwebs also being used to attach the nest to the thin branches that support it . The middle layer is moss , which is lined by an inner layer of feathers and hair . The nest is larger , shallower and less compact than that of the firecrest , with an internal diameter of about 9 @.@ 0 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) , and is constructed by both sexes , although the female does most of the work . It is often suspended from a hanging branch , usually at no great height , although Eric Simms reported nests at heights from 1 @.@ 0 – 22 m ( 3 @.@ 3 – 72 @.@ 2 ft ) . One pair built their nest just 1 @.@ 0 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) above that of a sparrowhawk . 
 Laying starts at the end of April into early May . The eggs are whitish with very indistinct buff , grey or brown markings at the broad end . The eggs are 14 mm × 10 mm ( 0 @.@ 55 in × 0 @.@ 39 in ) and weigh 0 @.@ 8 g ( 0 @.@ 028 oz ) , of which 5 % is shell . The clutch size in Europe is typically 9 – 11 eggs , but ranges from 6 – 13 . The eggs are piled up in the nest and the female keeps the eggs warm with her brood patch and also by putting her warm legs into the middle of the pile between the eggs . Within a clutch the size of eggs increases gradually and the last laid egg may be 20 % larger than the first egg . Second clutches , which are common , are laid usually while the first nest still has young . The male builds the second nest , then feeds the young in the first nest while the female is incubating in the second ; when the first brood has fledged , he joins the female in feeding the second brood . The female goldcrest is not normally fed by her mate while incubating . She is a tight sitter , reluctant to leave the nest when disturbed , and has been recorded as continuing to attend the nest when it has been moved , or even when it is being held . The eggs are maintained at 36 @.@ 5 ° C ( 97 @.@ 7 ° F ) , the female regulating the temperature of the eggs by varying the time spent sitting . She leaves the nest more with increasing air temperature , and incubates more tightly when the light intensity is lower early and late in the day . The female incubates the eggs for 16 to 19 days to hatching , and broods the chicks , which fledge in a further 17 to 22 days later . Both parents feed the chicks and fledged young , and in very hot weather , the female has been noted as taking drops of water to her chicks in her bill . This species becomes sexually mature after one year , and has an annual adult mortality of over 80 percent giving a life expectancy of around eight months , which is the shortest for any bird apart from a few Coturnix species . There are nonetheless records of an individual surviving to 4 years 10 months , and even a report of a bird ringed in Winchester in 1989 and found dead in Morocco 7 years 7 months later . 
 Although their ranges overlap substantially , hybridisation between goldcrests and firecrests seems to be prevented by differences in courtship rituals and different facial patterns . Even in aviary studies in which a female goldcrest was given an artificial eyestripe to facilitate mating with a male firecrest , the chicks were never raised by the mixed pair , and appeared to be poorly adapted compared to the parent species . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 All Regulus species are almost exclusively insectivorous , preying on small arthropods with soft cuticles , such as springtails , aphids and spiders . They also feed on the cocoons and eggs of spiders and insects , and occasionally take pollen . All species will catch flying insects while hovering . Although the similarly sized goldcrest and firecrest are often found together , there are a number of factors that minimise direct competition for food . Goldcrests prefer smaller prey than common firecrests . Although both will take trapped insects from spider webs on autumn migration , firecrests will also eat the large orb @-@ web spiders ( on rare occasions kinglets have been found stuck in a spider web , either unable to move or dead ) . 
 The goldcrest takes a wide variety of prey , especially spiders , caterpillars , bugs , springtails and flies . Larger prey such as oak bush crickets and <unk> moths may sometimes be taken . Flying insects are taken in hovering flight but not normally pursued ; there is a record of a goldcrest attacking a large dragonfly in flight , only to be dragged along by the insect before releasing it unharmed . Goldcrests will occasionally feed on the ground among leaf @-@ litter with tits . Non @-@ animal food is rare , although goldcrests have been seen drinking sap from broken birch twigs together with tits and nuthatches . 
 The goldcrest feeds in trees , frequently foraging on the undersides of branches and leaves . This is in contrast to the common firecrest , which mainly exploits the upper surface of branches in coniferous habitat and of leaves in deciduous trees . In winter , flocks of goldcrests cover a given distance at only one @-@ third of the speed of common firecrests , taking the smallest prey items ignored by their relative . The differences in behaviour are facilitated by subtle morphological differences ; firecrests have broader bills with longer rictal bristles ( which protect a bird 's eye from food items it is trying to capture ) , and these features reflect the larger prey taken by the species . The firecrest 's less forked tail may reflect its longer episodes of hovering while hunting . Firecrests forage more often while on foot , and have a foot better adapted for perching , whereas the goldcrest 's longer hind toe reflects its habit of moving vertically along branches while feeding . It also has deep furrows in the soles of its feet capable of gripping individual needles , while firecrests have a smoother surface . The goldcrest has much the same range and habitat preference as the common chiffchaff , and there is some evidence that high breeding densities of the kinglet depress the population of the warbler , although the converse is not true . There is no evidence that the species compete for territories , and in any case the chiffchaff is 50 % heavier than the goldcrest . Nevertheless , there are 1 @.@ 5 million breeding pairs of goldcrests in Finland , compared with 0 @.@ 4 million breeding pairs of chiffchaffs , and only the kinglet has increased in numbers as the area of spruce woodland in the country has expanded . The goldcrest may be out @-@ competing the warbler for food , especially as the larger bird faces more competition from other insectivores , including other Phylloscopus warblers . Both birds occur in similar forests , but the chiffchaff is found within 100 m ( 330 ft ) of the forest edge , with the goldcrest breeding deeper in the woodland . Nevertheless , there is no conclusive evidence that the decline of the chiffchaff subspecies Phylloscopus collybita abietinus in parts of Finland is due to competition with the willow warbler and goldcrest . 
 Outside the breeding season , small groups of goldcrests maintain exclusive winter feeding territories , which they defend against neighbouring groups . As they roam around their territory , they frequently join loose flocks of other wanderers such as tits and warblers . This kinglet , like other species that prefer mixed @-@ species foraging flocks in winter , hunts over a greater range of heights and vegetation types than when feeding alone . For species that tend to feed in flocks , foraging success while in a flock was about twice that for solitary birds . A consequence of feeding in a flock is that foraging sites may be restricted to avoid competition with other species . In a Swedish study , coal tits and goldcrests foraged in the outer foliage , while the larger willow and European crested tits used the inner canopy . In sites where the numbers of willow and crested tits was artificially reduced , goldcrests and coal tits extended their foraging to include the inner canopy , but did not do so where the larger tits were retained . In some areas , wintering birds have developed the habit of coming to feeding stations and bird tables to take fat , sometimes with warblers such as the common chiffchaff and blackcap . 
 = = = Winter survival = = = 
 Several small passerine species survive freezing winter nights by inducing a lower metabolic rate and hypothermia , of a maximum of 10 ° C ( 18 ° F ) below normal body temperature , in order to reduce energy consumption overnight . However , in freezing conditions , it may be that for very small birds , including the tiny goldcrest , the energy economies of induced hypothermia may be insufficient to counterbalance the negative effects of hypothermia including the energy required to raise body temperature back to normal at dawn . Observations of five well @-@ fed birds suggest that they maintain normal body temperatures during cold nights by metabolising fat laid down during the day , and that they actually use behavioural thermoregulation strategies , such as collective roosting in dense foliage or snow holes to survive winter nights . Two birds roosting together reduce their heat loss by a quarter , and three birds by a third . During an 18 ‑ hour winter night , with temperatures as low as − 25 ° C ( − 13 ° F ) in the north of its range , goldcrests huddled together can each burn off fat equivalent to 20 % of body weight to keep warm . 
 Migrating birds rely largely on stored fat and they also metabolise protein as a supplementary source of energy . Those with a relatively large amount of fat , may make stops during migration of only 1 – 2 days ; although they have lost weight since commencing their journey , they have enough energy reserves to reach the wintering areas . The proportion of migrating males increases as they travel south through Europe . There is competition within the species even during migration , and the larger and more aggressive males may get more food . Their death rate is therefore lower than that of the females both on the southward migration , and in resident populations . 
 = = Predators and parasites = = 
 Throughout the goldcrest 's range , the main predator of small woodland birds is the Eurasian sparrowhawk , which has a diet consisting of up to 98 % of birds . Merlins , tawny and long @-@ eared owls also hunt goldcrests . The erratic movements and flights of small woodland birds , which are vulnerable to attack while away from cover , may help to confuse their predators . The goldcrest has only very rarely been recorded as a host of the common cuckoo , a widespread European brood parasite . 
 The goldcrest is a host of the widespread moorhen flea , Dasypsyllus gallinulae , and of the louse Philopterus <unk> . The <unk> mite <unk> frenatus has been found on the eastern goldcrest subspecies , R. r. japonensis in Japan , and at the other end of the range in birds of the nominate subspecies on the Faroes and in Spain . These lice move over the host 's body , and have strong mouthparts that pierce the host 's skin so that they can feed on blood , and sometimes feather material . A number of feather mites have been recorded in the genus Regulus ; these mites live on fungi growing on the feathers . The fungi found on the plumage may feed on the keratin of the outer feathers or on feather oil . 
 = = Status = = 
 The goldcrest has a large range , estimated at 13 @.@ 2 million km2 ( 5 @.@ 1 million mi2 ) and a total population estimated at 80 – 200 million individuals , and it is therefore classed as least concern on the IUCN Red List . There was some northward range expansion in Scotland , Belgium , Norway , and Finland during the 20th century , assisted by the spread of conifer plantations . The population is currently stable , although there may be temporary marked declines in harsh winters . 
 Although dense conifer growth can provide shelter for roosting at night , losses in hard winters can be heavy . In a Finnish study , only one @-@ tenth of the wintering goldcrest population , which mainly fed on spiders , survived to spring . Each group roamed within a defined winter territory , and their winter survival depended on the density of the food supply . For these northern birds there is a trade off between staying put and risking starvation , or facing the perils of migration . Even in somewhat milder regions , where over @-@ wintering is normal , exceptionally cold winters can cause such heavy losses that breeding populations take several years to recover . In 1930 , the English ornithologist Thomas Coward wrote : 
 Until the severe winter of 1916 – 17 the Goldcrest was abundant and widespread , nesting in all the wooded portions of our islands ; in 1920 it could have little more than an obituary notice , for the nesting stock was practically " wiped out . " ... and for some years , even as a winter visitor , the Goldcrest remained rare , absent from most of its nesting haunts . It is , however , now fully re @-@ established . 
 Conversely , populations can expand rapidly after a series of mild winters . In lowland Britain , there was an increase of 48 % following the 1970 / 71 winter , with many pairs spreading into deciduous woodlands where they would not normally breed . 
 = = In culture = = 
 Aristotle ( 384 – 322 BC ) and Pliny ( 23 – 79 AD ) both wrote about the legend of a contest among the birds to see who should be their king , the title to be awarded to the one that could fly highest . Initially , it looked as though the eagle would win easily , but as he began to tire , a small bird that had hidden under the eagle 's tail feathers emerged to fly even higher and claimed the title . Following from this legend , in much European folklore the wren has been described as the " king of the birds " or as a flame bearer . However , these terms were also applied to the Regulus species , the fiery crowns of the goldcrest and firecrest making them more likely to be the original bearers of these titles , and , because of the legend 's reference to the " smallest of birds " becoming king , the title was probably transferred to the equally tiny wren . The confusion was probably compounded by the similarity and consequent interchangeability of the Greek words for the wren ( βασιλεύς basileus , " king " ) and the crests ( <unk> <unk> , " kinglet " ) . In English , the association between the goldcrest and Eurasian wren may have been reinforced by the kinglet 's old name of " gold @-@ crested wren " . 
 This tiny woodland bird has had little other impact on literature , although it is the subject of Charles Tennyson Turner 's short poem , " The Gold @-@ crested Wren " , first published in 1868 . An old English name for the goldcrest is the " woodcock pilot " , since migrating birds preceded the arrival of Eurasian woodcocks by a couple of days . There are unfounded legends that the goldcrest would hitch a ride in the feathers of the larger bird , and similar stories claimed that owls provided the transport . Suffolk fishermen called this bird " herring <unk> " or " tot o 'er seas " because migrating goldcrests often landed on the rigging of herring boats out in the North Sea . 
 = Passing ( novel ) = 
 Passing is a novel by American author Nella Larsen , first published in 1929 . Set primarily in the Harlem neighborhood of New York City in the 1920s , the story centers on the reunion of two childhood friends — Clare Kendry and Irene Redfield — and their increasing fascination with each other 's lives . The title and central theme of the novel refer to the practice of racial " passing ; " Clare Kendry 's passing as white with her white husband , John ( Jack ) Bellew , is its most significant depiction in the novel , and a catalyst for the tragic events . 
 Larsen 's exploration of race was informed by her own mixed racial heritage and the increasingly common practice of racial passing in the 1920s . Praised upon publication , the novel has since been celebrated in modern scholarship for its complex depiction of race , gender and sexuality . As one of only two novels by Larsen , Passing has been significant to her ranked at the forefront of several literary canons and has been the subject of considerable scholarly criticism . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Biographical context = = = 
 As early as 1925 , Nella Larsen had decided that she wanted to be among the " New Negro " writers who were receiving considerable attention at the time . Initially writing short stories that were sold early in 1926 to a ladies magazine , she was rumored that year to be writing a novel . In a letter to her friend Carl Van Vechten , she acknowledges that " it is the awful Truth . But , who knows if I 'll get through with the damned thing . Certainly not I. " In April 1927 , Larsen and her husband Elmer Imes moved from Jersey City , New Jersey to Harlem in order to be closer to this cultural phenomenon . The following year , Larsen published her first novel Quicksand with New York @-@ based publisher Knopf , and its favorable critical reception encouraged her ambitions to become known as a novelist . She published only these two novels ( including Passing ) and some short stories . 
 = = = Historical context = = = 
 The 1920s in the United States was a period marked by considerable anxiety and discussion over the crossing of racial boundaries — the so @-@ called " color line " between blacks and whites — exacerbated by the Great Migration , in which hundreds of thousands of blacks left the rural south for northern and midwestern cities where , together with new waves of immigrants , they changed the social makeup . The practice of persons crossing the color line and attempting to claim recognition in another racial group different from the one they were believed to belong to was known as " passing , " even when it was based on a person 's ancestry . As many African Americans had European ancestry in varying proportions , some appeared visibly European . The US history of slavery as a racial caste , together with the imposition of the " one @-@ drop rule " in the early 20th century , were used by whites to try to harden racial lines that were more fluid in history ; at any time , the concept of race was " historically contingent . " Although the exact numbers of people who passed is , for obvious reasons , not known , many estimates were made at the time ; the sociologist Charles S. Johnson ( 1893 – 1956 ) calculated that 355 @,@ 000 blacks had passed between 1900 and 1920 . 
 A significant precedent for Larsen 's depiction of Clare Kendry 's and Jack Bellew 's relationship was the 1925 legal trial known as the " Rhinelander Case " ( or Rhinelander v. Rhinelander ) . Wealthy , white Leonard Kip Rhinelander sued his wife , Alice Beatrice Jones , for annulment and fraud ; urged by his family , he alleged that she had failed to inform him of her " colored " blood . The case was also about status and class , as he had met her when she was working as a domestic . She contended that her mixed race was obvious and she had never denied it . Although the jury eventually returned a verdict for Alice , it came at a devastating social cost for both parties ; intimate exchanges between the couple were read out in court , and Alice Rhinelander was forced to partially disrobe in front of the jury in the judge 's chambers in order for them to assess the darkness of her skin . Larsen refers to this case near the end of the novel , when Irene wonders about the consequences of Jack discovering Clare 's racial status : “ What if Bellew should divorce Clare ? Could he ? There was the Rhinelander case ” . The case received substantial coverage in the press of the time , and Larsen could assume that it was common knowledge to her readers . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 The story is written as a third person narrative from the perspective of Irene Redfield , a light @-@ skinned black woman who lives in the Harlem neighborhood of New York City . Part One of the book , titled " Encounter , " opens with Irene receiving a letter from Clare Kendry , causing her to recall a past chance encounter she had with her at the roof restaurant of the Drayton Hotel in Chicago , during a brief stay in the city . The women grew up together but lost touch when Clare 's white father died and she was taken to live with her two paternal white aunts . Irene learns that Clare " passes " for white , living primarily in Europe with her unsuspecting , rich , white husband and their daughter . Although Irene tries to avoid further engagement with Clare , she later visits Clare for tea along with another childhood friend , Gertrude Martin . Toward the end of the visit , Clare 's husband John ( Jack ) Bellew arrives . Unaware that all three women are black , Jack expresses some very racist views and makes the women uneasy . However , the women play it off in an effort to maintain Clare 's secret identity . Afterward , Irene and Gertrude decide that Clare 's situation is too dangerous for them to continue associating with her . Irene receives a letter of apology from Clare but destroys it and goes on with her life with her husband , Brian , and two sons . 
 Part Two of the book , " Re @-@ encounter , " returns to the present , with Irene having received this new letter from Clare . After Irene ignores Clare 's letter , Clare visits in person so Irene reluctantly agrees to see her . When it is brought up that Irene serves on the committee for the " Negro Welfare League " ( NWL ) Clare invites herself to their upcoming dance , despite Irene 's advising against it for fear that Jack will find out . Clare attends the dance and enjoys herself without her husband finding out , which encourages her to continue spending time in Harlem . Irene and Clare resume their childhood companionship , and Clare frequently visits Irene 's home . 
 The third and final part of the novel begins before Christmas , as Irene 's relationship with her husband has become increasingly fraught . Aware of her friend 's appeal , Irene becomes convinced that her husband is having an affair with Clare . During a shopping trip with her visibly black friend <unk> Freeland , Irene encounters Jack , who becomes aware of her — and by extension , Clare 's — racial status . Irene considers warning Clare about Jack 's new @-@ found knowledge but decides against it , worried that the pair 's divorce might encourage her husband to leave her for Clare . Later , Clare accompanies Irene and Brian to a party hosted by <unk> . The gathering is interrupted by Jack , who accuses Clare of being a " damned dirty nigger ! " Irene rushes to Clare , who is standing by an open window . Suddenly , Clare falls out of the window from the top floor of the building to the ground below , where she is pronounced dead by the guests who eventually gather at the site . Whether she has fallen accidentally , was pushed by Irene or Bellew , or committed suicide , is unclear . The book ends with Irene 's fragmented anguish at Clare 's death . 
 = = Themes = = 
 = = = Race and the " Tragic <unk> " = = = 
 Passing has been described as " the tragic story of a beautiful light @-@ skinned mulatto passing for white in high society . " The tragic mulatto ( also " mulatta " when referring to a woman ) is a stock character in early African @-@ American literature . Such accounts often featured the light @-@ skinned offspring of a white slaveholder and his black slave , whose mixed heritage in a race @-@ based society means she is unable to identify or find a place with either blacks or whites . The resulting feeling of exclusion was portrayed as variably manifested in self @-@ loathing , depression , alcoholism , sexual perversion , and attempts at suicide . 
 On the surface , Passing conforms to this stereotype in its portrayal of Clare Kendry , whose passing for white has tragic consequences ; however , the book resists the conventions of the genre , as Clare refuses to feel the expected anguish at the betrayal of her black identity and socializes with blacks for the purposes of excitement rather than racial solidarity . Scholars have more generally considered Passing as a novel in which the major concern is not race . For instance , Claudia Tate describes the issue as " merely a mechanism for setting the story in motion , sustaining the suspense , and bringing about the external circumstances for the story 's conclusion . " 
 = = = Homosexuality = = = 
 Scholars have identified a homoerotic subtext between Irene and Clare , centered on the erotic undertones in Irene 's descriptions of Clare and appreciation of her beauty . In this interpretation , the novel 's central metaphor of " passing " under a different identity " occurs at a surprisingly wide variety of levels , " including sexual . The apparently sexless marriage between Brian and Irene — e.g. , their separate bedrooms and identification as co @-@ parents rather than sexual partners — allows Larsen to " flirt , if only by suggestion , with the idea of a lesbian relationship between [ Clare and Irene ] " . With Irene considered " an unreliable narrator " , she is portrayed as mistaken about events and her interpretations of them . The character of her husband Brian has been subject to a similar interpretation : Irene 's labeling of him as queer and his oft @-@ expressed desire to go to Brazil — a country then widely thought to be more tolerant of homosexuality than the United States — are given as evidence . It is also shown that Brazil is considered to be a place with more relaxed ideas about race . 
 = = = Identity = = = 
 The 1920s witnessed violent attempts to establish and regulate social and racial boundaries , and there was a great deal of national discourse on the so @-@ called " color line " . Larsen , however , challenged the traditional ideologies of identity politics at the time ; her " nuanced handling of Clare 's passing and Irene 's ' allegiance ' demonstrates that ideologies which conceptualize race as an ethics , whether originating in black pride or white racism , vary enormously , depending in large part , upon whether they attempt an answer to ... ' what race is . ' " Rather than reflect that rigid views of race that were prevalent and resulting in violence and deaths , Larsen portrays race as fluid , identity politics as complex . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Passing was published in April 1929 by Knopf in New York City . Sales of the book were modest — Knopf produced three small print runs each under 2 @,@ 000 copies . While early reviews were primarily positive , it received little attention beyond New York City . Reviewers writing for mostly black audiences praised the book much more than reviewers writing for mostly white audiences . Comparing it to Larsen 's previous novel Quicksand , Alice Dunbar @-@ Nelson 's review in The Washington Eagle began by declaring that " Nella Larsen delights again with her new novel " . Writer and scholar W. E. B. Du Bois hailed it as the " one of the finest novels of the year " , and believed that its limited success was due to its treating a " forbidden subject " : the marriage of a white man to a mixed @-@ race girl who did not reveal her ancestry . 
 A common criticism of the novel is that it ends too suddenly , without a full exploration of the issues . Mary <unk> , writing in the New York Telegram , said that " Larsen didn 't solve the problem [ of passing ] . Knocking a character out of a scene doesn 't settle a matter . " An anonymous reviewer for the New York Times Book Review similarly concluded that " the most serious fault with the book is its sudden and utterly unconvincing close " , but otherwise considered it an effective treatment of the topic . On the other hand , Dunbar @-@ Nelson found that the ending confirmed to the reader that " you have been reading a masterpiece all along . " 
 In modern scholarship , Larsen is recognized as one of the central figures in the African @-@ American , feminist and modernist canons , a reputation that is based on her two novels — Passing and Quicksand — and some short stories . As of 2007 , Passing is the subject of more than two hundred scholarly articles and more than fifty dissertations , which offer a range of critical interpretations . It has been hailed as a text helping to " create a modernist psychological interiority ... challenging marriage and middle @-@ class domesticity , complexly interrogating gender , race , and sexual identity , and for redeploying traditional tropes — such as that of the tragic mulatta — with a contemporary and critical twist " . However , literary critic Cheryl A. Wall summarizes the critical response to Passing as less favorable than to Larsen 's first novel Quicksand . On the one hand the significance of sexual jealousy in the story has been seen to detract from the topic of racial passing ; conversely , even if racial passing is accurately treated in the novel , it is considered a historically specific practice , and therefore Passing appears dated and trivial . 
 = Help at Any Cost = 
 Help at Any Cost : How the Troubled @-@ Teen Industry Cons Parents and Hurts Kids is a non @-@ fiction book by Maia Szalavitz analyzing the controversy surrounding the tough love behavior modification industry . The book was published February 16 , 2006 , by Riverhead Books . Szalavitz focuses on four programs : Straight , Incorporated , a copy of the Straight Inc. program called KIDS , North Star wilderness boot camp , and the World Wide Association of Specialty Programs and Schools . She discusses the background , history and methodology of the troubled @-@ teen industry , including techniques drawn from attack therapy and Synanon . She uses first @-@ person accounts and court testimony in her research , and states that no evidence exists proving that these programs are effective . The book also includes advice for parents and an appendix with additional resources on how to get responsible help for teenagers . 
 The book received positive reviews in academic journals , literary journals , and in the media . Psychologist Steve K. D. Eichel reviewed the book for Cultic Studies Review and called it a " must read " , psychologist and psychiatrist Robert John McAllister described it as " an excellent and informative book on the subject of the ' troubled @-@ teen industry ' " in his book Emotions : Mystery Or Madness , and a review in Psychology Today described Szalavitz 's work as " a meticulously reported and thoughtful investigation " . The book also received positive reviews in Publishers Weekly , Booklist , and Newsday . The book later led to an investigation into the troubled @-@ teen industry by the United States House Committee on Education and Labor of the United States House of Representatives , and Representative George Miller held hearings on the matter in October 2007 and April 2008 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Teenagers have been participating in tough love behavior modification programs since the 1960s . Many of these programs take place in the wilderness in the style of military recruit training ( also known as boot camps ) and the teenagers are subjected to rigid discipline , including mandatory marches , physical abuse , solitary confinement , and deprivation of food and sleep . These programs have little to no oversight from the United States federal or state governments . Teenagers ' claims of abuse at these facilities have not been investigated because the programs are not regulated . 
 = = Author = = 
 Maia Szalavitz is a senior fellow at the Statistical Assessment Service ( <unk> ) , a media watchdog organization which monitors news coverage of statistics and science . She has served as a researcher for journalist Bill Moyers , a part @-@ time contributor to Psychology Today , and has written articles for The New York Times , The Washington Post , Reason , and The American Prospect . Szalavitz is the co @-@ author of Recovery Options : The Complete Guide with Joseph <unk> , and The Boy Who Was Raised As a Dog with Bruce D. Perry . 
 = = Contents = = 
 In Help at Any Cost Szalavitz investigates the teen rehabilitation industry and focuses on four programs : Straight , Incorporated , a copy of the Straight Inc. program called KIDS of Bergen County , North Star wilderness boot camp , and the World Wide Association of Specialty Programs and Schools . Some of these programs cost parents over US $ 2 @,@ 000 per month . She discusses the history of the troubled @-@ teen industry and its origins in a controversial group founded in 1958 called Synanon . Synanon claimed that it could cure addiction to heroin , and its methodologies such as attack therapy , forced confessions , and imposed powerlessness spread throughout the United States . After a rattlesnake was placed in the mailbox of an attorney suing Synanon , the group 's founder was convicted of conspiracy to commit murder . Synanon later went bankrupt , but Szalavitz maintains that it influenced organizations related to the troubled @-@ teen industry . 
 Szalavitz notes that according to a 2004 statement released by the National Institutes of Health , teen programs using " fear and tough treatment " are not successful and evidence shows that they can worsen existing behavioral problems . Many of the children that enter these programs suffer from mental illness , and already have a history of prior trauma and abuse . Szalavitz uses first @-@ person accounts from teenagers that participated in these programs , and asserts that the programs have potentially serious negative consequences , including post @-@ traumatic stress and deaths . 
 An emotional story in the book recounts the death of 16 @-@ year @-@ old Aaron Bacon . Bacon suffered from a treatable ulcer , and died after being out in the wilderness in Utah for weeks while in the care of the group North Star . Bacon lost 23 pounds ( 10 kg ) in 20 days , but was called " gay " and a " faker " when he complained of abdominal pain , and was punished by North Star supervisors — his sleeping bag and food were taken away from him . The individuals responsible for Bacon were charged with negligent homicide , but did not serve any jail time . 
 In addition to these first @-@ person accounts , she also incorporates court reports and testimony in her research . Szalavitz highlights controversial practices used by these tough love teen industry programs which the Geneva Convention banned as being too extreme for prisoners of war . She states that there is no evidence that any of the programs are effective . Portions of the book are addressed to parents and provide resources and advice on how to select better choices instead of programs in the tough love teen industry , and the book includes an appendix aimed at educating parents on how to find help for their teenagers . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In his book Emotions : Mystery Or Madness , psychologist and psychiatrist Robert John McAllister highly recommended Help at Any Cost , and called it " an excellent and informative book on the subject of the ' troubled @-@ teen industry ' " , and " important reading for any parent who is considering sending a teenager to a tough love program , a boot camp , or a wilderness program . " In a review of the book in Library Journal , Linda Beck commented : " This book is excellent owing to its whistle @-@ blowing approach : it exposes an unregulated industry and alerts adults to the severe harm inflicted by these ' schools . ' " She called the book " chilling " and " Highly recommended for public libraries . " 
 In a review in Mother Jones , Nell Bernstein highlighted the sources given for parents at the back of the book , commenting : " Help at Any Cost winds up with an appendix that helpfully outlines " evidence based " alternatives to the tough @-@ love approach . " Steve Weinberg of the St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch gave the book a positive review , and described <unk> as " a talented , relentless investigator " . He noted : " Her outrage surfaces frequently as children die , as once @-@ loving families are atomized and as troubled @-@ teen entrepreneurs escape criminal prosecution while using legal maneuvers to prevail in civil court lawsuits seeking damages " , and characterized Help at Any Cost as " an important book about an industry that sometimes helps troubled youth but causes harm way too often . " 
 A review in Psychology Today called the book " An alarming exposé of the burgeoning business of boot camps and drug rehab centers that promise to reform troubled teens " , and described Szalavitz 's work as " a meticulously reported and thoughtful investigation " . Vanessa Bush of Booklist characterized the book as " a revealing , at times horrifying look at the troubled @-@ teen industry . " Publishers Weekly noted : " With a useful appendix discussing when and how to get responsible help for a troubled teen , this book , filled with first @-@ person accounts , should be required reading in Parenting 101 " , calling the work " a courageous — if horrifying — study of the tough @-@ love industry " . 
 Karen <unk> , author of The Stuff of Life , gave the book a positive review in Newsday , writing : " Maia Szalavitz 's brisk investigation of America 's so @-@ called " tough love " treatment programs , which bill themselves as the last hope for out @-@ of @-@ control , drug @-@ taking teens , would be the stuff of a bad TV movie , if it weren 't so smart , well @-@ researched and even @-@ handed . " Mark Sauer of The San Diego Union @-@ Tribune noted : " Some of the stories reveal physical and psychological abuse that rivals tales from Iraq 's Abu Ghraib Prison . " 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Help at Any Cost succeeded in bringing attention to deaths related to medical neglect and child abuse in the troubled @-@ teen industry . On October 10 , 2007 , the United States House Committee on Education and Labor of the United States House of Representatives held a full committee investigative hearing chaired by Representative George Miller on " Cases of Child Neglect and Abuse at Private Residential Treatment Facilities " . The Government Accountability Office presented findings from an investigation into the troubled @-@ teen industry , and parents of teens who died under care of these organizations testified at the hearing . Maia Szalavitz attended the hearing as well . 
 After the book 's publication , Szalavitz continued to write about the controversy surrounding the troubled @-@ teen industry for Statistical Assessment Service , The New York Times , The Washington Post , Reason , and The American Prospect . The House Committee on Education and Labor held additional hearings on the matter on April 24 , 2008 , again chaired by Representative George Miller . 
 = I Don 't Remember = 
 " I Don 't Remember " is a song by Australian alternative rock band Powderfinger , from the album Dream Days at the Hotel Existence . It made its radio debut on 9 July 2007 on Australian radio stations , and was subsequently released as a single and digital download on 4 August 2007 in Australia , 3 September 2007 in New Zealand , and 13 August 2007 in the United States . 
 The song was written by Powderfinger lead singer Bernard Fanning , and influenced by bassist John Collins . The riff was then developed by guitarist Ian Haug . The song is about reconciling difficulties and arguments , rather than shifting the blame . 
 " I Don 't Remember " was lauded by some reviewers , who appreciated its energy , while other reviewers were more critical , dubbing it an " advertisement song " . The music video also received critical acclaim , especially for the parodies it contained . Despite the reviews , the single charted poorly , reaching number 42 on the ARIA Singles Chart . 
 = = Background , writing , and recording = = 
 The song was written by the band 's lead singer , Bernard Fanning , following a night he spent drinking with bassist John Collins towards the end of the recording phase of Dream Days at the Hotel Existence . The song was written by Fanning on guitar , but he later wrote the main riff on piano , which was then converted into a lead guitar riff performed by Ian Haug . The guitars for the song are all tuned down one step ; while the guitar finger positioning is played as though in the key of C major , the detuning brings the key of the song down to Bb , with the song leading off with Bb 's relative minor , G minor . During the recording phase , Fanning suggested " softening " the main riff by returning it to the piano , and even recorded this concept ; however this piano version did not end up in the final album mix , nor was it included as a B @-@ side on the single . 
 " I Don 't Remember " was recorded in Los Angeles during pre @-@ production for Dream Days at the Hotel Existence . It contains a simple acoustic riff , similar to several songs on previous albums including Vulture Street . While recording the song in January 2007 , Fanning said in an interview that : 
 It 's a song about making mistakes and trying to reconcile what they were — but then in the end , in the wash up — it doesn 't really matter whose fault it was , as long as it gets reconciled . 
 This meaning was also evident in the song 's lyrics . In the second line , Fanning states that " I made a mistake that I 'll never surpass " , before explaining that it does not matter whose fault it is , in saying " I know you needed someone to take the fall / I know you needed someone to blame it on " . In the second verse , Fanning again reiterates that he feels pain in the mistake that was made , when he says " I found my heart and it broke like glass / I made that mistake that I 'll never surpass " . 
 John Collins said of the song : 
 I hope the song sounds exciting , without sounding ... big rock ? Without sounding country , and sound interesting , ' cause I think that the basis of the song if you play it on the acoustic is there , and it 's up to us [ Powderfinger ] to stuff it up now . 
 When Powderfinger first played the song to Benmont Tench , who would feature in a piano role throughout the album , he remarked that it reminded him of Buffalo Springfield , who was an inspiration of Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers . Fanning replied that " we were thinking more of the Heartbreakers " , indicating the musical style intended in " I Don 't Remember " , but also paying homage to Tench , whom the band would work with extensively . Tench performed with the band on the album version of the song . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " I Don 't Remember " was made by Fifty Fifty Films , who had previously collaborated with the band on the videos for " Like a Dog " , " ( Baby I 've Got You ) On My Mind " , and " Lost and Running " , all nominated for ARIA Awards . 
 The music video starts on a school bus with children playing and throwing things , and features a young boy who then selects the track " I Don 't Remember " on his iPod and closes his eyes . He then dreams about a school concert for a band called " Littlefinger " , a parody of the band for which he is the lead singer " Bernie " , a parody of Bernard Fanning . The band and audience are composed of primary school students . Children are seen offering a chocolate milk called <unk> , a take on Milo , and a camera crew for " Channel [ Z ] " and reporter " Su @-@ Mi " . This is a parody of Yumi Stynes , a presenter from Australian music station Channel V. The end of the clip shows that it was a dream being had by the student who played the lead singer for " Littlefinger " . 
 Many elements of " I Don 't Remember " ' s video received positive critical response for the usage of children in it . Kathy McCabe of The Daily Telegraph summarised critical feelings towards the video , by suggesting in her review that " [ maybe ] bands should get kids to play them in videos forever " . 
 = = = Parodies = = = 
 Powderfinger portrayed as " Littlefinger " . 
 Yumi Stynes portrayed as " Su @-@ Mi " . 
 Channel V portrayed as " Channel Z " . 
 News Ltd portrayed as " News Unlimited " on a T @-@ shirt . 
 Big Day Out portrayed as " Little Day Out " . 
 A sign posted says " <unk> ! Jackson sleeping " , a parody of Australian band Sleepy Jackson . 
 Milo portrayed as " Smilo " . 
 Silverchair portrayed as " Hi Chair " on a T @-@ shirt . 
 Wolfmother portrayed as " <unk> " on a T @-@ shirt . 
 Tony Mott , an Australian concert photographer is portrayed as " Tony Mop " on a T @-@ shirt with the actor also holding a SLR camera . 
 Cocaine and cigarettes portrayed as children 's candies Wizz Fizz and <unk> . 
 = = Response = = 
 In his review of Dream Days at the Hotel Existence , Herald Sun HiT journalist Cameron Adams claimed that " I Don 't Remember " was more of an advertisement style song , similar to " Lost and Running " , the first single released from the album . Adams stated that " ' I Don 't Remember ' is not the next single without reason — it does everything you expect a Powderfinger single to , perhaps a more appropriate ' ad ' for this album . " Sputnikmusic contributor James Bishop described " I Don 't Remember " as unoriginal , but at the same time said that it proved Powderfinger " haven 't forgotten how to write a good song " . 
 Allmusic reviewer Clayton Bolger , however , described it positively as a " stadium anthem " and stating that it was a good example of the " trademarks of classic Powderfinger " showcased on the album . The review labeled the song a " pick " . Web Wombat 's review of the album also treated the song positively , dubbing it " classic Powderfinger . " Reviewer Andrew <unk> from CitySearch Brisbane stated that the song is " a smoothly emotive jangle @-@ rock tune with a purposeful chorus and Fanning 's inimitable vocal " , though provides mixed reviews when compared with other songs by the group , noting that " It 's no eerie ballad like ' The Day You Come ' , nor does it have ' Like a Dog ' ' s snarl , nor ' On My Mind ' ' s pub rock shudder . " 
 " I Don 't Remember " was performed regularly on the Across the Great Divide Tour , generally with positive responses . FasterLouder reviewer <unk> stated that " The new songs are excellent live ; I Don 't Remember has more energy than its recorded counterpart ( Lost and Running ) " , following by praising the album and performance as a whole . 
 = = = Chart history = = = 
 " I Don 't Remember " entered the Australian Singles Chart at # 43 , then slid to # 47 in its second week , but then reached its pinnacle position of # 42 in its third week . It then remained in the charts for the following three weeks in the upper forties , and then dropped off the chart . It was released as a single in New Zealand and the United States also , but failed to chart , despite moderate airplay in New Zealand . " I Don 't Remember " charted at # 66 on the Triple J Hottest 100 , 2007 . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = = CD single = = = 
 " I Don 't Remember " – 3 : 41 
 " Who Really Cares ( Featuring the Sound of Insanity ) " – ( live at Brisbane Powerhouse ) 
 " My Kind of Scene " – ( live at Brisbane Powerhouse ) 
 = = = iTunes digital download = = = 
 " I Don 't Remember " – 3 : 41 
 " Black Tears " ( Live ) – ( early release exclusive ) 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = 6B ( Fringe ) = 
 " 6B " is the 14th episode of the third season of the American science fiction drama television series Fringe , and the 57th episode overall . In the episode , the fringe team investigates mysterious deaths at an apartment building , the result of a merging between the prime and parallel universes ; while there , they encounter a woman who claims to be able to see the ghost of her deceased husband . 
 Story editors Glen Whitman and Robert Chiappetta co @-@ wrote " 6B " , while cinematographer Thomas Yatsko directed . The episode featured appearances from recurring actors Ryan McDonald and Seth Gabel as well as one @-@ time guest stars Phyllis Somerville and Ken Pogue . The episode first aired in the United States on February 18 , 2011 on the Fox network , and was watched by an estimated 4 @.@ 1 million viewers . Television critics gave the episode generally mixed reviews . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Six partygoers simultaneously fall to the sidewalk outside the Rosencrantz apartment building in Brooklyn , apparently having jumped from a seventh floor balcony along with the balcony 's furniture . When the Fringe team investigates , Peter ( Joshua Jackson ) and Walter ( John Noble ) determine by the location of the bodies that they seem to have fallen through the balcony , as if it momentarily ceased to exist . From other stories of strange phenomena occurring throughout the building , Walter concludes that the same cracks in reality that have harmed the parallel universe are starting to appear in the prime one , with the building occupying a weak spot between universes . 
 Peter and Olivia ( Anna Torv ) are sent by Walter to observe the building as he monitors seismic equipment from the lab . Peter and Olivia go to a bar while waiting , where Olivia tries to kiss Peter but becomes uncomfortable , knowing of the influence of her parallel universe doppelganger , Fauxlivia ( Torv ) , on Peter . Her emotional reaction triggers her ability to see once again the " shimmer " around Peter that marks him as a native of the parallel universe . She excuses herself and steps outside for some fresh air , followed by Peter . Olivia notices a similar glow emanating from the windows of apartment 6B in the Rosencrantz building , owned by the widow Mrs. Alice Merchant ( Phyllis Somerville ) . When Olivia and Peter enter the apartment , Olivia ( but not Peter ) can see a shimmering figure that Alice claims is the ghost of her late husband Derek ( Ken Pogue ) . Walter surmises that the figure is a parallel Derek seen across a crack between the universes . If the crack widens , Walter predicts they would see occurrences of the same singularities that have plagued the parallel universe , and suggests the use of the same amber @-@ like compound they had previously recovered ( " The Ghost Network " ) to limit the damage . With Massive Dynamic 's resources , they are able to recreate the amber and a release system to encase the building , but hold it in reserve as a last resort only . 
 Olivia suggests the possibility that the effect is due to quantum entanglement between Alice in the prime universe and Derek in the parallel one . Alice previously told Olivia that Derek died recently from trying to replace a faulty fuse after they flipped a coin to decide who would replace it , and Walter surmises that the parallel universe Alice died in a similar fashion due to a different outcome of the coin flip . Alice 's connection to the parallel universe Derek is causing the crack . As the building starts to exhibit the initial signs of a singularity and Broyles ( Lance Reddick ) prepares to release the amber , Olivia and Peter attempt to persuade Alice that the man she sees is not really her husband . Alice does not believe them until Derek starts to refer to their children . Alice , who is childless , realizes Peter and Olivia are telling the truth ; the connection is broken and the effects on the building ebb away . 
 Though they did not need to deploy the amber , Walter realizes how close he was to making the same decisions that Walternate ( Noble ) , Walter 's doppelganger in the parallel universe , had to make to save his universe ; Nina ( Blair Brown ) helps to counsel him . Meanwhile , Olivia and Peter attempt to reconcile and rekindle their relationship . Though still cautious about moving forward , Olivia and Peter kiss and head to the bedroom upstairs at the Bishops ' home . 
 In the parallel universe , Fauxlivia and Lincoln ( Seth Gabel ) investigate reports of a Fringe event in the Rosencrantz building , and speak with Derek , who tells them he has not noticed anything out of the ordinary . The two leave , and Derek is left paging sadly through a photo album filled with pictures of him and his late wife and their daughters . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was co @-@ written by story editors Glen Whitman and Robert Chiappetta , while being directed by cinematographer and Fringe director of photography Thomas Yatsko . The last credit Whitman and Chiappetta received was for the season 's sixth episode , " 6955 kHz " . Yatsko last directed the second season episode " White Tulip " . Alluding to the week the episode broadcast , executive producer Jeff Pinkner called " 6B " " our Valentine ’ s Day episode . It ’ s all different versions of a love story . " 
 While filming , first assistant director Brian Giddens summarized the episode as " the fringe team [ finding ] out there 's been an accident on a balcony " . The focus of " 6B " centered on the idea of ghosts , which was affirmed by actor Joshua Jackson , who called it " a Fringe ghost story " . Referring to the episode 's intensity level , Jackson noted that " on a scale of chile peppers , I 'd say it 's high <unk> " . Pinkner remarked that " 6B " and the following episode " Subject 13 " would " tell deep and meaningful sides of the Olivia and Peter story . One in the present [ " 6B " ] and one in the past [ " Subject 13 ] . " 
 The episode guest starred Phyllis Somerville , known for her recent work on the Showtime series The Big C that ended in her character 's death . Somerville expressed hope that the science fiction nature of Fringe would convince The Big C writers to hire her back , commenting " maybe I can get those sci @-@ fi folks to hook me up with a good gadget that will allow Marlene to come back to life and bug Laura Linney some more . " " 6B " featured recurring guest actors Ryan McDonald and Seth Gabel as Massive Dynamic scientist Brandon Fayette and Agent Lincoln Lee , respectively . The episode also featured one @-@ time guest star Ken Pogue as Alice 's husband Derek . 
 As with other Fringe episodes , Fox released a science lesson plan in collaboration with Science Olympiad for grade school children , focusing on the science seen in " 6B " , with the intention of having " students learn about spectroscopy and how it can be used to determine certain characteristics of things . " 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Some critics believed that the name of the apartment building , as well as Walter 's coin tosses coming up heads , are references to the 1966 tragicomedy Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead , which in turn derives from the characters of Rosencrantz and Guildenstern , two minor characters in Shakespeare 's Hamlet . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " 6B " was watched by an estimated 4 @.@ 1 million viewers on its first broadcast , earning a ratings share of 1 @.@ 5 , up 7 percent from the previous week 's episode . It led other shows in the same timeslot by more than 20 percent for the 18 @-@ 34 adult viewership market , and second only to Kitchen Nightmares for the night . Three days of time shifted viewing increased the 18 @-@ 49 adult rating to 2 @.@ 3 , a 52 percent increase from its previous rating of 1 @.@ 5 . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Entertainment Weekly staff writer Ken Tucker thought it was not " the best Fringe episode " , primarily because of " its Twilight Zone construction , with a supernatural event serving as a big , obvious metaphor for ... the rift between lovers ( Peter and Olivia ; the elderly couple Alice and Derek ) " . Tucker disliked Olivia 's return to " season @-@ one @-@ Olivia poker @-@ faced <unk> " and also " <unk> [ ied ] about the imbalance between the series ’ romantic , family , and mythology ingredients " . Andrew Hanson from the Los Angeles Times felt that the episode 's emphasis on emotions ( instead of plain science ) was " turning its back on the science that made [ Fringe ] great " . Hanson also wished the parallels between Walter and Walternate 's decisions had been explored further . 
 The A.V. Club 's Noel Murray graded the episode a B- , explaining that , despite the " nice moments ( including a strong start and a sweet finish ) " , the plot was minimal and there were many moments he was exasperated with the Peter @-@ Olivia relationship . For Murray , the episode was " saved " by its small touches , such as when Alice is finally convinced the ghost is not her husband when he mentions " the girls miss you " . 
 In her 2011 book Into the Looking Glass : Exploring the Worlds of Fringe , author Sarah Clarke Stuart found parallels between the episode and the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami , which occurred several weeks after " 6B " aired . Items of comparison included the " cracks " in the universe and shifting tectonic plates , and the " vortex " and the tsunami swallowing up entire villages . Clarke Stuart noted that " because of its destabilizing character , the natural world is often depicted as the antagonist in science fiction and adventure narratives " like Fringe . 
 = Manny Ramirez = 
 Manuel <unk> " Manny " Ramírez <unk> ( born May 30 , 1972 ) is a Dominican @-@ American professional baseball outfielder who played in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) for parts of 19 seasons . He played with the Cleveland Indians , Boston Red Sox , Los Angeles Dodgers , Chicago White Sox , and Tampa Bay Rays before playing one season in the Chinese Professional Baseball League . Ramírez is recognized for having had great batting skill and power . He was a nine @-@ time Silver Slugger and was one of 25 players to hit 500 career home runs . His 21 grand slams are third all @-@ time , and his 29 postseason home runs are the most in MLB history . He appeared in 12 All @-@ Star Games , with a streak of eleven consecutive games beginning in 1998 that included every season that he played with the Red Sox . 
 Ramirez was born in Santo Domingo , Dominican Republic . When he was 13 years old , he moved to New York City with his parents , <unk> and Aristides . He attended George Washington High School and became a baseball standout . A wide variety of coaches and scouts took notice of Ramirez 's talent , especially his batting strength . He was drafted by the Cleveland Indians in the 1991 MLB draft . He made his MLB debut on September 2 , 1993 . 
 In 1994 , Ramirez became a powerhouse hitter , batting .269 hitting , 17 home runs , and 60 runs batted in ( RBIs ) . That year , he finished second in voting for the Rookie of the Year Award . The following season , he played his first MLB All @-@ Star Game . He led the Indians to three more playoff stints in 1996 , 1997 , and 1998 , including an appearance in the 1997 World Series . In 1999 , Ramirez set the Indians ' single @-@ season RBIs record with 165 RBIs in 1999 . In 2000 , he signed with the Boston Red Sox . During his time in Boston , Ramirez and his teammate David Ortiz were allegedly among a group of 104 major league players who tested positive for performance @-@ enhancing drugs during 2003 . He led the Red Sox to World Series Championships in 2004 and 2007 . In 2008 , Ramirez was traded to the Los Angeles Dodgers in a three @-@ way trade deal with the Red Sox , Dodgers , and Pirates . He was named National League ( NL ) Player of the Month in August 2008 and was fourth in the voting for the 2008 NL MVP Award , behind Albert Pujols , Ryan Howard and Ryan Braun . 
 In 2009 Ramirez was suspended 50 games for violating baseball 's drug policy by taking human chorionic gonadotropin ( hCG ) , a women 's fertility drug that is often taken after steroids . In the spring of 2011 , Ramirez was informed by MLB of another violation of its drug policy , which would result in a 100 @-@ game suspension . He chose to retire on April 8 rather than face a 100 @-@ game suspension . 
 In September 2011 , Ramirez wished to be reinstated and in December he agreed with the league to a reduced 50 @-@ game suspension . He signed a deal with the Oakland Athletics in February 2012 and was eligible to play May 30 , 2012 . On June 15 , Ramirez was released . He played with the EDA Rhinos for the 2012 – 13 offseason . On July 3 , 2013 , Ramirez signed a minor league deal with the Texas Rangers . He was released on August 13 due to his decreased batting power and speed . On May 25 , 2014 , he signed a minor league deal with the Chicago Cubs to be a coach / part @-@ time player for the AAA Iowa Cubs . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Ramirez was born in Santo Domingo , Dominican Republic and spent thirteen years living there . As a child , Ramirez was obsessed with baseball . When he was eight years old , his grandmother got him a Dodgers uniform with the number 30 on the back , which he considers to be one of his most prized possessions . In 1985 , he moved to the Washington Heights , Manhattan , a neighborhood of New York City , with his parents . He would often play ball at the nearby Snake Hill , the same place Lou Gehrig played during his childhood . Despite living just a short distance from Yankee Stadium , Ramirez rooted for the Toronto Blue Jays and would come watch games when the Blue Jays were in town . 
 Ramirez attended George Washington High School from 1987 to 1991 , leaving at the age of 19 years without graduating . During his time on the team , GWHS was seeing a large increase in the number of immigrants . This was apparent , as GWHS 's baseball team was composed entirely of Dominicans . As a youth , Ramirez preferred to not be the center of attention and was often very modest . 
 During his time at GWHS , he led his team to three straight division championships . He was a three @-@ time all @-@ city selection in baseball , and as a high school senior was named New York City Public School Player of the Year in 1991 , hitting for a <unk> batting average with 14 home runs in 22 games . He was inducted into the New York City Public School Athletic Hall of Fame in 1999 . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Minor leagues = = = 
 The Cleveland Indians selected Ramirez with the 13th pick of the 1991 draft and assigned him to the Rookie @-@ level Burlington Indians for his professional debut . He was named the Appalachian League MVP and was selected by Baseball America as short @-@ season Player of the Year while slugging 19 homers and driving in 63 runs in 59 games , while leading the league in slugging and total bases . 
 With the Single @-@ A Kinston Indians in 1992 , Ramirez battled injuries but still hit .278 with 23 homers and 93 RBIs in 81 games and was named as the number three prospect and the " Most Exciting Player in the Carolina League " by Baseball America . In 1993 , Ramirez was named " Minor League Player of the Year " by Baseball America while hitting .333 with 31 homers and 145 RBIs in 129 combined games with the Double @-@ A Canton – Akron Indians and Triple @-@ A Charlotte Knights . 
 = = = Cleveland Indians ( 1993 – 2000 ) = = = 
 = = = = 1993 – 1994 = = = = 
 Ramirez made his major league debut on September 2 , 1993 against the Minnesota Twins , going hitless in four at bats as the designated hitter . The following day , when the Indians took on the New York Yankees , Ramirez went 3 for 4 with his first two home runs , with many of Ramirez 's family and friends in attendance at Yankee Stadium . His first career homer was against <unk> Pérez . 
 In 1994 , his first full season in the majors , Ramirez had a strong start to the season , hitting six home runs during the month of April . Despite a weak start to May , he rebounded in the latter half of the month , finishing the month with a .300 batting average . During the season , the Indians were chasing the Chicago White Sox for first place in the American League Central ( AL Central ) division all the way until the end of the season . However , the team fell short of qualifying for the playoffs and their season ended in August due to the 1994 MLB strike . Ramirez finished second in the Rookie of the Year award voting after batting .269 with 17 home runs and 60 RBIs in 91 games . 
 = = = = 1995 – 1997 = = = = 
 Ramirez 's breakout season came in 1995 , when he batted .308 with 31 home runs and 107 RBIs . In July , he was selected to his first All @-@ Star Game and won his first career Silver Slugger Award following the season . That year , the Indians reached the postseason , and Ramirez hit two home runs in the 1995 American League Championship Series against the Mariners , which the Indians won in six games . The Indians then took on the Atlanta Braves in the World Series , and Ramirez batted .222 with one home run in the Indians ' six @-@ game loss . In December 1995 , Ramirez agreed to a $ 10 @.@ 15 million , four @-@ year contract . 
 Ramirez continued to hit well in 1996 , batting .309 with 33 home runs and 112 RBIs . The Indians again reached the playoffs , and Ramirez batted .375 with 2 home runs in the Indians ' loss to the Orioles in the 1996 American League Division Series . In 1997 , Ramirez 's contact continued to improve , though his power dipped slightly , as he hit .328 with 26 home runs and 88 RBIs . This year , the Indians again reached the World Series , and Ramirez batted .154 with two home runs as the Indians lost to the Florida Marlins in seven games . 
 = = = = 1998 – 2000 = = = = 
 In 1998 , Ramirez experienced a great increase in power , batting .294 with 45 home runs and 145 RBIs . He was selected to his second All @-@ Star Game , in which he recorded a sacrifice fly . Ramirez batted .357 with 2 home runs during the ALDS versus the Red Sox , which the Indians won in four games . In the ALCS against the Yankees , Ramirez batted .333 with two home runs , but the Indians lost in six games . Following the season , Ramirez came in sixth place for the AL MVP . 
 Ramirez began the 1999 season on a hot streak , hitting .337 with 7 home runs in the month of April . Ramirez 's hot hitting continued , as he batted .364 in May and reached the All @-@ Star break with 25 home runs . On September 30 , 1999 Ramirez set the Indians ' single @-@ season record for RBIs at 164 , beating Hal <unk> 's 1936 record of 162 . He finished the season with 165 RBIs in 1999 , the highest total by any player since Jimmie Foxx ( 1938 ) . That season , he was third in the voting for the American League MVP award . 
 In 2000 , Ramirez was limited to 118 games due to injuries , but recorded a career @-@ high .351 batting average , along with 38 home runs and 122 RBIs . His return is believed to have started a major comeback that led the Indians to a final record of 90 – 72 and cut the number of games they were behind the leader of the AL Central , the Chicago White Sox , from 11 @.@ 5 games down to 7 @.@ 5 games in just a month . Because of his return , Robbie Alomar , Omar Vizquel , and Kenny Lofton all started getting better pitches to hit , which also significantly increased their batting averages . Despite the comeback , the Indians failed to make the postseason , finishing 5 games behind the White Sox in the AL Central . 
 = = = Boston Red Sox ( 2001 – 2008 ) = = = 
 = = = = 2001 – 03 = = = = 
 In November 2000 , the Indians offered Ramirez a seven @-@ year , $ 119 million contract . While this would have made Ramirez the highest @-@ paid player in baseball , the deal was rejected by Ramirez and his agent , Jeff <unk> , who were seeking a ten @-@ year , $ 200 million contract . Ramirez was reportedly pursued by the New York Yankees and Seattle Mariners , but in December agreed to an eight @-@ year , $ 160 million deal with the Boston Red Sox , with $ 20 million options for 2009 and 2010 , pushing the total value of the contract to $ 200 million for 10 years . 
 Ramirez immediately delivered for the Red Sox , hitting .408 in April 2001 . His final season stats were a .306 batting average with 41 home runs and 125 RBI . On June 23 , Ramirez hit two monstrous home runs against the Toronto Blue Jays at Fenway Park , with the second one hitting the very top of the light tower in left field . Its length was officially listed at 501 feet , second @-@ longest by a Red Sox player in Fenway Park 's history , just short of Ted Williams ' 1946 record of 502 feet . 
 Ramirez only played in 120 games in 2002 due to a hamstring injury that put him on the disabled list ( DL ) from mid @-@ May to the end of June . Despite this , Ramirez won the AL batting title , hitting .349 , and his <unk> slugging percentage was second in the league behind Jim Thome 's .677 . Ramirez hit his 300th career home run on August 26 against the Angels ' Ramón Ortiz . It was the first of two home runs of the night for Ramirez , as he went 5 @-@ for @-@ 5 overall . 
 In the summer of 2003 , Ramirez missed several games with pharyngitis . He was spotted in a bar ( in the hotel where he lived ) with a close friend , Yankees infielder Enrique Wilson , when Ramirez was supposedly too ill to play in the Yankees series . Boston manager Grady Little benched him for one game . Despite his strong play in the 2003 postseason , the Red Sox lost to the Yankees in a seven @-@ game showdown in the ALCS . In that series , he was at the center of a bench @-@ clearing brawl . Roger Clemens threw high and inside and Manny charged the mound . The new Red Sox ownership and management , trying to rid themselves of his massive contract , put Ramirez on irrevocable waivers , thus making him available to any team willing to assume the remainder of his contract . However , all 29 other teams passed on the opportunity to claim Ramirez . 
 According to the New York Times , in 2003 Ramirez tested positive for performance @-@ enhancing drugs from the " survey " drug test , in which MLB players were tested to see if drugs were being used . Players faced no penalties or sanction for testing positive . 
 = = = = 2004 = = = = 
 In 2004 , Ramirez led the AL in home runs ( 43 ) , slugging percentage ( <unk> ) and OPS ( 1 @.@ 009 ) ; he finished second in errors committed as a left fielder ( 7 ) , third in RBIs ( 130 ) , fourth in doubles ( 44 ) and total bases ( 348 ) , sixth in on @-@ base percentage ( .397 ) , eighth in walks ( 82 ) , tenth in runs ( 108 ) , and posted a .308 batting average . He also led the AL in salary , at $ 22 @.@ 5 million . 
 In addition , Ramirez and David Ortiz became the first pair of AL teammates to hit 40 home runs , have 100 RBIs , and bat .300 since the Yankees ' Babe Ruth and Lou Gehrig in 1931 . Together they hit back @-@ to @-@ back home runs six times , tying the major league single @-@ season mark set by the Detroit Tigers ' Hank Greenberg and Rudy York and later matched by the Chicago White Sox 's Frank Thomas and Magglio Ordóñez . 
 In the 2004 Major League Baseball All @-@ Star Game , Ramirez hit a two @-@ run home run off Roger Clemens in the top of the first inning , giving his teammates a 3 – 0 lead . Ramirez , Derek Jeter ( with a single ) , Ichiro Suzuki ( with a double ) and Iván Rodríguez ( with a triple ) became the first All @-@ Star quartet to hit for the cycle during the same inning . His season was capped off by being named the MVP of the World Series as the Red Sox won their first title since 1918 . 
 = = = = 2005 – 06 = = = = 
 On May 15 , Ramirez hit his 400th home run off Gil Meche of the Seattle Mariners . On July 5 , Ramirez hit his 20th career grand slam — and his third of the season — off Chris Young of the Texas Rangers . On defense , however , he tied for the lead among all major league left fielders in errors , with 7 . 
 Off the field , this season was one of much conflict for Ramirez . Persistent trade rumors ( generally involving the New York Mets ) dogged him all season . After the Red Sox were eliminated in the first round of that year 's playoffs by the eventual World Series champion Chicago White Sox , Ramirez once again expressed a wish to be traded . This included a threat to not show up for spring training if his latest demand was not met by Red Sox GM Theo Epstein . Toward this end , in December 2005 , Ramirez put his Ritz @-@ Carlton condominium up for sale . 
 Trade rumors circulated with Ramirez possibly going to the Baltimore Orioles or the New York Mets , but no deal was reached . By January 5 , 2006 , Ramirez changed his mind , stating that he was dropping the demand . His agents , in turn , insisted their client was still open to a trade . 
 On June 10 , Ramirez became the 31st player in history to hit 450 home runs , with a solo home run off Francisco Cordero of the Texas Rangers . Three weeks later , on July 1 , he collected his 2000th hit . Beginning in mid @-@ July , he had a 28 @-@ game hitting streak , including 12 multi @-@ hit games , 8 HR , and 28 RBIs , but then missed 28 games from mid @-@ August on with soreness in his right knee . 
 = = = = 2007 – 08 = = = = 
 On April 22 , 2007 , Ramirez was the first of four Red Sox batters to homer in consecutive at bats in a game against the New York Yankees , tying a league record . All of the home runs were against Chase Wright . On April 29 , Ramirez became the fifth player to hit 50 career home runs against the Yankees . 
 Ramirez finished with a .296 batting average , 20 home runs , and 88 RBIs . His season was cut short when he strained his left oblique in late August during a Yankees series , but he did return to the lineup for the final homestand of the season . In 2007 , he had the highest fielding percentage ( <unk> ) among left fielders in the AL , tied for second in the major leagues ; he was ranked sixth @-@ highest in range factor of all AL left fielders , 1 @.@ 72 , 16th in both leagues , but had the lowest zone rating among MLB left fielders with 100 + games ( <unk> ) . He made two errors during the 2007 season in left field , and tied for fifth overall in the major leagues in assists from left field . 
 In the postseason , Ramirez hit a walk @-@ off three @-@ run home run in Game 2 of the American League Division Series against the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim . In the fourth inning of the series ' final game , Ramirez combined with teammate David Ortiz to hit back @-@ to @-@ back home runs off pitcher Jered Weaver . The home run tied him with Bernie Williams for first place all @-@ time in postseason home runs . On October 13 , Ramirez hit his 23rd postseason home run , passing Williams for the most all @-@ time . He helped the Red Sox to reach and win the 2007 World Series , where they swept the Colorado Rockies . In the 2007 postseason , Ramirez batted .348 with 4 home runs and 16 RBIs . 
 On May 31 , 2008 , Ramirez hit his 500th home run , against Baltimore Orioles pitcher Chad Bradford at Camden Yards in the seventh inning on the first pitch . He became the 24th player in MLB history to do so . He joined two other Red Sox players , Jimmie Foxx and Ted Williams , in the exclusive home run club . 
 A heated altercation between Ramirez and teammate Kevin Youkilis took place on June 5 , during a game at Fenway Park against the Tampa Bay Rays . The Boston Globe speculated that Youkilis was angry that Ramirez has been slow to join a bench @-@ clearing brawl earlier in the game . The altercation may have also been caused by Ramirez objecting to what he believed was excessive complaining by Youkilis about the strike zone , as well as the first baseman 's penchant for sometimes throwing his helmet in frustration after making an out . Before the fifth inning , Ramirez was caught on <unk> cameras taking a swing at Youkilis . Ramirez and Youkilis yelled at each other and had to be separated by teammates , coaches , and training staff . Youkilis headed out to the field still yelling at Ramirez , while Ramirez was escorted into the tunnel leading to the clubhouse by bench coach Brad Mills and trainer Paul Lessard . 
 Later in the season , during a series with the Houston Astros , Ramirez had a physical altercation with elderly Red Sox traveling secretary Jack McCormick . The two were arguing over McCormick 's inability to fill Ramirez 's large game @-@ day request for 16 tickets to the game in Houston . Ramirez pushed the 64 @-@ year @-@ old McCormick to the ground after telling him " Just do your job . " The two were quickly separated and Ramirez later offered a public apology but did not apologize to McCormick in person until 2014 . The matter was dealt with internally , and Ramirez was fined $ 10 @,@ 000 – 15 @,@ 000 . 
 On July 25 , after sitting out one game against the Seattle Mariners with a sore knee , Ramirez was slated to start against the Yankees . Several minutes before the game , however , he informed manager Terry Francona , through a bench coach , that he would not be playing . During the series Ramirez was directed to an area hospital for MRIs on both his knees ; the results showed no damage . When back in action , Ramirez frequently failed to run out ground balls . Assuming that this was due to his displeasure about his contract situation , many Red Sox fans and reporters , including Dan Shaughnessy of the Boston Globe , called for Ramirez to be traded . 
 = = = Los Angeles Dodgers ( 2008 – 10 ) = = = 
 On July 31 , 2008 , Ramirez was traded to the Los Angeles Dodgers in a three @-@ way deal . The Boston Red Sox acquired outfielder Jason Bay and minor league infielder Josh Wilson , and the Pittsburgh Pirates got infielder Andy LaRoche and pitching prospect Bryan Morris from the Dodgers and outfielder Brandon Moss and pitcher Craig Hansen from the Red Sox . Ramirez had always worn uniform number 24 , but the Dodgers retired that number in honor of Hall of Fame manager Walter Alston . Ramirez instead chose to wear number 99 with the Dodgers . 
 Ramirez was named the NL Player of the Month for August 2008 . He hit .415 ( 44 @-@ for @-@ 106 ) with seven doubles , nine home runs , 25 RBIs and 21 runs scored during the month . He finished the season with the Dodgers hitting a .396 batting average , 17 home runs , and 53 RBI . 
 Ramirez finished the season with 37 home runs and 121 runs batted in . Among all major leaguers , he finished third in batting average , second in slugging percentage , and third in OPS . With Ramirez in the line @-@ up , the Dodgers won the NL West , then swept the Chicago Cubs in a division series before losing the NLCS to the eventual World Series winner Philadelphia Phillies in five games . During the playoffs , Ramirez hit .520 with 4 home runs , 2 doubles , 11 walks and 10 RBIs . 
 Ramirez was fourth in the voting for the 2008 NL MVP award , with 138 points , behind Albert Pujols , Ryan Howard , and Ryan Braun . After the Dodgers lost in the playoffs , Ramirez was asked about his future . " Gas is up , and so am I " , was his reply , indicating that he expected to be valued highly in the free agent market . After long and contentious negotiations that dragged into the start of spring training , Ramirez signed a two @-@ year $ 45 million contract with Los Angeles on March 4 . 
 = = = = 2009 = = = = 
 On May 7 , 2009 , Ramirez was suspended 50 games for violating the Joint Drug Prevention and Treatment Program established by MLB and the MLB Players Association in 2004 . In the announcement by MLB , Ramirez was suspended for unspecified violation of the agreement section <unk> Shortly afterward , Ramirez stated that a physician had unknowingly prescribed a banned medication . After consulting with the players association , Ramirez waived his right to challenge the suspension . According to an ESPN report , the drug used by Ramirez was human chorionic gonadotropin ( hCG ) , a women 's fertility drug typically used by steroid users to restart their body 's natural testosterone production as they come off a steroid cycle . It is similar to <unk> , the drug Jason Giambi and others used as clients of BALCO . Testing revealed artificial testosterone , too . As a condition for returning from the suspension , Ramirez was subject to three additional drug tests per year in addition to the minimum of two per player . 
 During his suspension , Ramirez was allowed to work out at the Dodgers ' facilities and he trained with Dodger coach Manny Mota . To get back into shape he was allowed a short rehab stint in the minor leagues . Ramirez played two games with the AAA Albuquerque Isotopes , where his appearance led to record crowds for the Isotopes . He played several games with the Single @-@ A Inland Empire 66ers , homering in his first at @-@ bat with the 66ers . Ramirez returned from his suspension and reclaimed his starting role with the Dodgers on July 3 against the San Diego Padres . 
 On July 21 , Ramirez hit his 537th career home run , passing Mickey Mantle for 15th place on the all @-@ time home run list . On July 30 , The New York Times reported that Ramirez tested positive for performance @-@ enhancing drugs during Major League Baseball 's 2003 survey testing . Ramirez , a member of the Boston Red Sox at the time , was among 104 major league players to test positive . 
 = = = = 2010 = = = = 
 On April 10 , 2010 , Ramirez recorded his 2,500th career base hit with an infield single against the Florida Marlins . On April 18 against the San Francisco Giants , Ramirez hit his <unk> career home run to tie Mike Schmidt for the 14th place on the all @-@ time home run list . He hit his 549th to pass Schmidt on May 28 against the Colorado Rockies . On June 19 , he hit a home run in his second game back at Fenway Park . 
 In 2010 , Ramirez had three separate stints on the disabled list . When he returned from the third trip on August 21 , he apparently had lost his starting job to Scott <unk> . As a pinch hitter , he was ejected on August 29 by home plate umpire Gary <unk> one pitch into his at @-@ bat for arguing a strike call . That appearance was his final one in a Dodger uniform . 
 = = = Chicago White Sox ( 2010 ) = = = 
 Ramirez was claimed on waivers by the Chicago White Sox . The Dodgers awarded Ramirez to the White Sox on August 30 , receiving no prospects , but with the White Sox assuming the $ 3 @.@ 8 million remaining on Ramirez 's salary . He hit .261 with only one home run in his 24 games with the White Sox and then became a free agent at the conclusion of the season . 
 = = = Tampa Bay Rays ( 2011 ) = = = 
 On January 21 , 2011 , Ramirez agreed to a one @-@ year , $ 2 million deal with the Tampa Bay Rays , while the Rays also signed his former Red Sox teammate Johnny Damon in a package deal suggested by agent Scott Boras . 
 The 38 @-@ year @-@ old Ramirez abruptly retired on April 8 , 2011 , after batting <unk> ( 1 @-@ for @-@ 17 ) in just five games . Ramirez reportedly tested positive for a banned performance @-@ enhancing drug in his spring training drug test . His first sample , or A sample , was retested and again returned a positive result . Ramirez filed a notice to appeal , and a second sample , or B sample , was tested under observation by Ramirez ' representatives . When the B sample also tested positive , he dropped the appeal and told MLB that he would immediately retire . 
 MLB issued a statement that Ramirez had been informed of an issue under the Joint Drug Prevention and Treatment program , and chose to retire rather than continue with the appeal process . Ramirez was facing a 100 @-@ game suspension , which would still apply if Ramirez decided to return to the MLB in the future . Neither Ramirez nor the players association issued a statement about the sudden retirement . Ramirez apparently did not personally inform the Rays about his decision . The team announced that they had been informed of his retirement by the MLB Commissioner 's Office . 
 = = = Reinstatement = = = 
 In September 2011 , reports surfaced that Ramirez was planning on playing in the Dominican Winter League for the Cibao Eagles . In a statement , the team said that Ramirez hoped to motivate other MLB stars to play in the country . However , the MLB Commissioner 's Office issued a statement that since the Dominican League is affiliated with MLB , Ramirez would not be eligible to play without first serving his mandated suspension . 
 Upon hearing that his plans to play in the winter league would not work , Ramirez decided to formally request reinstatement with MLB and that he was willing to serve his 100 game suspension for the second violation of the drug policy . He stated that he was not prepared for retirement and that he will be available for any MLB team and if none show interest , then he will " play in Japan or some other place . " 
 On December 4 it was announced that Ramirez had formally filed the papers with the league to be reinstated to baseball and that an agreement had been reached between MLB and the Players Association that he would only need to serve a 50 game suspension instead of the original 100 games . 
 = = = Oakland Athletics ( 2012 ) = = = 
 On February 20 , 2012 , Ramirez signed a minor league contract with the Oakland Athletics . The deal called for a $ 500 @,@ 000 salary if he made the MLB roster . However , he needed to serve the 50 @-@ game suspension before he could play for the team . He was eligible to play again on May 30 , 2012 , when his suspension was completed . With the Sacramento River Cats he hit .302 in 17 games , but had no homers and only a .349 slugging percentage . On June 15 , Ramirez requested and was given his outright release by the Athletics . 
 = = = EDA Rhinos ( 2013 ) = = = 
 Ramirez played in the Dominican Professional Baseball League during the 2012 – 13 offseason , registering a <unk> OPS for the Águilas <unk> . He signed with the newly renamed EDA Rhinos of the Chinese Professional Baseball League in Taiwan for the 2013 season . He made his debut on March 27 against Brother Elephants . In 49 games , Ramirez batted .352 with eight home runs and 43 RBIs , placing him in the top three in all categories . On June 19 , 2013 , Ramirez opted out of his contract with the Rhinos , stating that he wanted to be closer to his family . 
 = = = Texas Rangers ( 2013 ) = = = 
 Ramirez signed a minor league deal on July 3 , 2013 with the Texas Rangers . He was assigned to the Round Rock Express of the Class AAA Pacific Coast League ( PCL ) . After noticing a decrease in Ramirez ' bat speed , which resulted in a lack of power , the Rangers released Ramirez on August 13 . 
 = = = Chicago Cubs ( 2014 ) = = = 
 Ramirez signed a minor league deal with the Chicago Cubs on May 25 , 2014 , to serve as a player @-@ coach for the Iowa Cubs , Chicago 's Class AAA affiliate in the PCL . Ramirez hit a two @-@ run home run in his first Iowa home game at Principal Park on June 30 , 2014 . Cubs prospects <unk> Alcántara and Javier Báez credited Ramirez for his help with their swings . Baez also viewed Ramirez as a good mentor because of how Ramirez comforted him after the loss of his uncle . On August 23 , Ramirez sustained a knee injury . A week later , Iowa manager Marty Pevey announced that Ramirez was going to Arizona for an MRI . With only four games left in Iowa 's season , Pevey said that Ramirez was no longer going to coach and play for the team . Pevey said that he was uncertain as to what Ramirez would do next season , as he thought that Ramirez disliked the travel associated with Class AAA baseball . 
 On February 24 , 2015 , the Cubs announced that Ramirez was hired as a batting consultant , and that he would split time between Chicago and AAA Iowa . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 On May 11 , 2004 , Ramirez missed a Red Sox game to become an American citizen . He entered the next game running onto the field to a standing ovation while carrying a small American flag held in his hand . He planted the flag in the left outfield corner of the field , in the shadow of the Green Monster , where it remained for the entire game . 
 Ramirez has three sons . Manny Ramirez , Jr . ( born 1995 ) is his son from a previous relationship , while he had <unk> " Manny " Ramirez ( born 2003 ) and Lucas Ramirez ( born February 2006 ) with his wife Juliana . As of August 2015 , he and his family reside in Weston , Florida . 
 Ramirez has often attracted attention on and off the field for his quirky behavior and attitude . These incidents are colloquially known as " Manny Moments " or more commonly , " Manny Being Manny " . Instances of this behavior include inducing his Red Sox teammates , including Ellis Burks , to drink alcohol which he had spiked with Viagra , wearing Oakley <unk> while playing the outfield , disappearing through a door in the Green Monster and selling his barbecue grill on eBay . The first known documented usage of the phrase " Manny Being Manny " is attributed to then @-@ Indians manager Mike Hargrove , quoted in a 1995 Newsday article . 
 = = Career highlights = = 
 Honors 
 12x All @-@ Star ( 1995 , 1998 – 2008 ) 
 9x Silver Slugger Award ( 1995 , 1999 – 2006 ) 
 2x Hank Aaron Award ( 1999 , 2004 ) 
 World Series MVP Award ( 2004 ) 
 Member of Major League Baseball 's Latino Legends Team 
 Led League 
 League Top @-@ Ten 
 Career rankings on All @-@ Time lists ( as of April 8 , 2011 , when he retired ) 
 Post @-@ season 
 2x World Series Champion ( Boston , 2004 , 2007 ) 
 Tied with Pete Rose for longest LCS hitting streak ( 15 ) 
 Other 
 9 straight seasons of at least 30 HRs and 100 RBIs ( 1998 – 2006 , tied for 3rd @-@ longest in history ) 
 27 @-@ game hitting streak in 2006 
 Hit 500th home run on May 31 , 2008 , vs. Baltimore Orioles off Chad Bradford . 
 = = Miscellaneous = = 
 Ramirez was featured on the cover of the EA Sports video game MVP Baseball 2005 . 
 = The Other Woman ( 2014 film ) = 
 The Other Woman is a 2014 American comedy film directed by Nick Cassavetes and written by Melissa Stack . The film stars Cameron Diaz , Leslie Mann , Kate Upton and Nikolaj Coster @-@ Waldau , with Nicki Minaj , Taylor Kinney and Don Johnson in supporting roles . The film follows three women — Carly ( Diaz ) , Kate ( Mann ) , and Amber ( Upton ) — who are all romantically involved with the same man , Mark ( Coster @-@ Waldau ) . After finding out about each other , the trio decide to take revenge on Mark . 
 Development of The Other Woman began in January 2012 , when 20th Century Fox hired Stack to write the script , based on the original idea from 1996 comedy The First Wives Club . Casting was done between November 2012 and June 2013 . Filming began on April 29 , 2013 , in New York City , in locations including Manhattan , Long Island , The Hamptons , Dockers Waterside Restaurant on Dune Road in Quogue and The Bahamas , and it concluded on August 27 , 2013 . Aaron Zigman composed the score and <unk> Productions produced the film . 
 The film was released on April 25 , 2014 , in the United States , and distributed worldwide by 20th Century Fox . It received negative reviews , with criticism primarily focusing on the film 's script , directing , acting , and plot . The film has been a box office success , becoming number one at the box office during its opening weekend and grossing over $ 196 million worldwide against a budget of $ 40 million . It was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray on July 29 , 2014 , and earned more than $ 13 million in home media sales . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Carly , an attorney , has just started a relationship with Mark , a man she had sex with eight weeks prior . She is upset when Mark tells her he has to go out of town but decides to go over to his house to seduce him . She is horrified to meet Mark 's wife , Kate , whom she 'd assumed to be Mark 's housekeeper . While initially hostile , the two women befriend one another . Kate then discovers that he is seeing another woman , whom she initially believes to be Carly , but both she and Carly discover that Mark is seeing a third woman , Amber . 
 Carly and Kate travel to the beach , where Kate has a run @-@ in with Amber , and the two women inform her that Mark has been cheating on all of them . All three women then decide to take revenge on him together . They spike Mark 's drinks with estrogen to swell his nipples and a laxative to cause him to defecate heavy diarrhea ; and add hair @-@ removal cream into his shampoo . In the course of carrying out of their pranks , they discover that Mark has been embezzling money from various companies at his workplace . Meanwhile , Carly begins to connect romantically with Kate 's brother Phil . In addition , Amber confides to Carly that she is seeing someone else as well . However , their camaraderie begins to fall apart when Kate finds herself falling in love with Mark again after an investor 's dinner . Carly exposes Mark 's fraud , upsetting Kate . 
 Later , when Mark goes to the Bahamas on a supposed business trip , Kate decides to follow him there and expose him . She finds Carly and Amber at the airport , who explain what Mark has been up to – using Kate as the owner of the companies he defrauded , which if discovered , would result in her going to prison . She also finds out that Mark has been seeing yet another woman : someone he has met on this trip . This , and the possibility of facing prison , motivate Kate to take action with the help of Carly 's legal expertise . 
 When Mark returns from vacation , he visits Carly at her office . He is locked in the clear glass conference room by Carly 's assistant and friend , Lydia , and is shocked to see all three women sitting together . They proceed to confront him with his infidelities and embezzlement . With Carly as her attorney , Kate presents divorce papers and a list of their assets . She reveals that she has returned the embezzled money to the companies , which saves him from prison time and leaves Mark bankrupt , much to his shock and hysterical outrage . Additionally , his business partner Nick arrives and fires Mark . In his anger and rush to leave , he smashes into the glass office . Severely injured with ripped clothes , Mark excuses himself from the women . He then finds his car being towed away and earns a punch in the face from Carly 's father , Frank . Appreciating Kate 's honesty , Nick offers her the chance to take over Mark 's job . 
 In the film 's epilogue , Carly and Phil fall in love , and the couple are expecting a child ; Amber marries Frank ; and Kate works as a CEO with Mark 's former business partners , with the company making a profit under her leadership . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Cameron Diaz as Carly Whitten , an attorney who finds out that her boyfriend Mark is already married and has another girlfriend . 
 Leslie Mann as Kate King , a housewife who discovers that her husband Mark is cheating on her with two women . 
 Kate Upton as Amber , an Amazon swimsuit supermodel , Mark 's second girlfriend . 
 Nikolaj Coster @-@ Waldau as Mark King , a wealthy businessman who is cheating on his wife Kate and two girlfriends Carly and Amber , at the same time . 
 Nicki Minaj as Lydia , Carly 's assistant . 
 Taylor Kinney as Phil , Kate 's brother who becomes romantically involved with Carly 
 Don Johnson as Frank Whitten , Carly 's father who dates women half his age . 
 David Thornton as Nick 
 Olivia <unk> as Raven @-@ Haired Beauty and one of Mark 's conquest in the Caribbean . 
 Radio Man ( Craig Castaldo ) as himself 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 On January 16 , 2012 , it was announced that 2007 Black Listed screenwriter Melissa Stack was hired by 20th Century Fox to write an untitled female revenge comedy , which Julie Yorn would produce through <unk> Productions . The film 's script was described as the original idea from the 1996 film The First Wives Club , but with younger leads . The film 's title was revealed to be The Other Woman on November 13 . In January of the following year , Nick Cassavetes signed on to direct the film . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 On November 13 , 2012 , TheWrap reported that Cameron Diaz was in talks for the lead role . Diaz 's representative also revealed that actress Kristen Wiig was under consideration for the wife role . As of March 13 , 2012 , Leslie Mann and Nikolaj Coster @-@ Waldau were in talks to join the film , while Diaz was confirmed for her role . On April 15 , Kate Upton joined the film . The same day , Taylor Kinney was announced to be in talks for a role . In April , Nicki Minaj signed on to make her feature film debut . On June 5 , Don Johnson also joined the film to play Diaz 's character 's father . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 In March 2013 , the shooting was set to begin late @-@ spring or early summer 2013 in New York . Later it was told that the production would begin in May 2013 . Principal photography for the movie began on April 29 , 2013 and filming was completed by August 27 , 2013 . Much of filming took place in parts of New York , including Long Island , The Hamptons , and Westhampton Beach . In the late @-@ June , some scenes were also shot in Chinatown and at Dockers Waterside Restaurant on Dune Road Quogue . From July 18 – 23 , filming took place in New Providence , where Nassau , The Bahamas was used as the filming location . The Atlantis Paradise Island was also used as the shooting location . Isola <unk> and <unk> Bar at Mondrian Hotel in SoHo , Manhattan was used for the scene in which the women met for a celebration toast at the end of the film . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The Other Woman 's music was composed by Aaron Zigman , who was reportedly set to score the film on May 31 , 2013 . The film featured songs from various artists including Etta James , Ester Dean , Morcheeba , Cyndi Lauper , Britt Nicole , Patty Griffin , Lorde , Keyshia Cole and Iggy Azalea . 
 = = Release = = 
 On March 31 , 2014 , the film had a world premiere in Amsterdam , and the next day on April 1 , it had a UK premiered at Curzon Mayfair Cinema in London . The film later had a US premiere on December 21 in Westwood , California . 
 On March 25 , 2014 , Fox appealed the R @-@ rating , which Motion Picture Association of America gave the film for sexual references . However the studio wanted a PG @-@ 13 rating . So on April 9 , the MPAA 's rating appeals board took back the R and gave the film with a PG @-@ 13 ; the sources confirmed that there were no changes made to get the film PG @-@ 13 . The Other Woman was released on April 25 in the United States . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The film was a box office hit earning over five times its production costs . The Other Woman opened at number 1 in North America on April 25 , 2014 in 3 @,@ 205 theaters debuting atop the weekend box office with earnings of $ 24 @.@ 7 million across the three days . The film has grossed $ 83 @,@ 911 @,@ 193 in America and $ 112 @,@ 870 @,@ 000 in other countries for a worldwide total of $ 196 @,@ 781 @,@ 193 . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The Other Woman was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray on July 29 , 2014 . The Blu @-@ ray edition features the Gag Reel , " Giggle Fit , " Gallery and deleted scenes . In the United States , the film has grossed $ 9 @,@ 592 @,@ 336 from DVD sales and $ 4 @,@ 163 @,@ 463 from Blu @-@ ray sales , making a total of $ 13 @,@ 755 @,@ 799 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The Other Woman received negative reviews from critics . On film aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes , it has a rating of 23 % , based on 145 reviews , with an average rating of 4 @.@ 2 / 10 . The site 's critical consensus reads , " The Other Woman definitely boasts a talented pedigree , but all that skill is never fully brought to bear on a story that settles for cheap laughs instead of reaching its empowering potential . " Another website , Metacritic , gave the film an average score of 39 out of 100 , based on 35 critics , indicating " generally unfavorable reviews " . 
 Justin Chang of Variety said , " Beneath the wobbly pratfalls and the scatological setpieces , there 's no denying the film 's mean @-@ spirited kick , or its more @-@ than @-@ passing interest in what makes its women tick . " The Hollywood Reporter 's critic Todd McCarthy said , " It would have helped if director Nick Cassavetes had something resembling a sure hand at comedy . " Ignatiy Vishnevetsky of The A.V. Club gave the film grade C- , saying " All of a sudden , a spotted Great Dane squats in the middle of a Manhattan apartment and out <unk> several gleaming , glistening CGI turds . It 's one of those cases where a Hollywood movie inadvertently summarizes itself in a single shot . " Michael Phillips of Chicago Tribune gave the film two and a half stars out of four , saying " Line to line , it 's fresher than any number of guy @-@ centric " Hangover " <unk> affairs , despite director Cassavetes ' lack of flair for slapstick . " The Boston Globe 's Ty Burr gave the film one out of four stars and said , " It 's " The First Wives Club " rewritten for younger , less demanding audiences , or a " 9 to 5 " with absolutely nothing at stake . " Stephanie Zacharek of The Village Voice said , " The Other Woman doesn 't give these actresses much to do except look ridiculous , if not sneaky and conniving . " 
 Michael Sragow of Orange County Register gave the film grade C , saying that film is " a coarse , rickety comedy . " Richard Corliss wrote For the magazine Time , " All three women are less watchable and amusing than Nicki Minaj as Carly 's legal assistant Lydia . " Film critic Stephen Holden of The New York Times said that the film is " so dumb , lazy , clumsily assembled and unoriginal , it could crush any actor forced to execute its leaden slapstick gags and mouth its crude , humorless dialogue . " James Berardinelli of ReelViews wondered , " Has it come to this for director Nick Cassavetes ? " , comparing his negatively to that of his father , John Cassavetes . Berardinelli elaborated , " what a comedown to find him in charge of such an unfocused , unfunny , <unk> @-@ obsessed ' comedy . ' " Christy Lemire of <unk> gave the film two out of four stars and said , " While " The Other Woman " raises some thoughtful questions about independence , identity and the importance of sisterhood , ultimately it would rather poop on them and then throw them through a window in hopes of the getting the big laugh . " Wesley Morris of Grantland said , " No one knows which takes are funny and which aren 't . More than once , all three women , especially poor Upton , are caught looking like they don 't know what they 're doing . " 
 Bilge Ebiri of the magazine New York said , " You can 't shake the feeling that in a just world , all these women – even Kate Upton – would have better material than this . " Connie Ogle of The Miami Herald gave the film three out of four stars and called the film a " goofy , ridiculous , with more gross @-@ out humor than is strictly necessary but still funny . It falls into the category of Girlfriend Films – as in , go with your girlfriends and leave your date / partner / spouse at home with the PlayStation or the NBA playoffs . " Colin Covert of Star Tribune gave the film three out of four stars , saying " It 's an escapist women 's empowerment comedy like many others , but elevated by the simple virtue of being , for most of its length , very , very funny . " Ann Hornaday of The Washington Post gave the film one and a half stars out of four , saying " A movie as generic and forgettable as the sofa @-@ size art on its characters ' walls . " Linda Holmes wrote for NPR , calling the film " a conceptually odious , stupid @-@ to @-@ the @-@ bone enterprise ... " Betsy Sharkey of Los Angeles Times gave the advice to guys to " Step away from the vehicle , because The Other Woman is out of control and intent on running down a certain kind of male . " 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 = New Jersey Route 33 = 
 Route 33 is a state highway in the US state of New Jersey . The highway extends 42 @.@ 03 miles ( 67 @.@ 64 km ) , from Trenton at an intersection with U.S. Route 1 and Route 129 to an intersection with Route 71 in Neptune Township . The speed limit on Route 33 differs in zones . The highest is 55 mph ( 85 km / h ) in Zone 9 . There are several intersections on 33 with future developments . 
 Route 33 begins in Trenton on a two @-@ lane road . It passes through central Mercer County , joining northbound U.S. Route 130 in Robbinsville Township . It leaves the U.S. highway in East Windsor and becomes a local town road into the borough of Hightstown . It turns east again as it passes the east end of the Hightstown Bypass , where it becomes a divided arterial with four lanes as it makes its way through Monmouth County toward the shore . Around Freehold , it becomes a freeway . It then crosses the Garden State Parkway 's Exit 100 in Tinton Falls and Route 18 in Neptune . Here , it is locally known as <unk> Avenue . Route 33 ends at Route 71 in Neptune . It has two concurrencies along the route , one with Route 34 and the second with US 130 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 On its way across central New Jersey , Route 33 traverses three counties : Mercer , Middlesex , and Monmouth . Beginning in Trenton as Greenwood Avenue , Route 33 is a two @-@ lane road , with one lane in each direction . Once it merges with U.S. Route 130 in Robbinsville Township , Route 33 has two lanes in each direction . After crossing into East Windsor Township , Route 33 veers off and becomes a local road going into Hightstown . After passing through the center of town , Route 33 again enters East Windsor Township where it becomes an avenue with a total of at least four lanes , with two lanes in each direction underneath the Turnpike overpass . Before leaving Mercer County , the road intersects with an interchange at Route 133 that provides access to Exit 8 of the New Jersey Turnpike ( I @-@ 95 ) . Route 33 then crosses into Monroe Township , where it is slowly becoming a residential access road for new communities . It then continues into Millstone Township as a rural avenue . Continuing into Manalapan Township , the avenue again becomes a residential access road . At the ramp for Route 33 Business , the avenue turns into a freeway bypass , known as the Freehold Bypass . Route 33 bypasses Freehold Borough to the south staying within Freehold Township . Within Freehold Borough , Route 33 Business is the original alignment of Route 33 before the bypass was built . 
 The bypass of Freehold is the partial alignment of what would have been a Route 33 freeway from Neptune to Trenton . As time went on , a scaled @-@ back version of just a bypass was agreed upon . The western start of the freeway is just east of County Route 527 , and was built from Route 33 Business to U.S. Route 9 in the 1970s . The next section was built from U.S. Route 9 across Route 79 to Halls Mill Road ( County Route 55 ) , and this remained its terminus from the late 1980s until January 17 , 2003 , when the final leg of the bypass was opened . East of Halls Mills Road , it is a two @-@ lane freeway with a westbound entrance at Howell Road , and full access from Fairfield Road . 
 The Howell Road eastbound exit ramp has been closed since the bypass opened because of safety concerns . The interchange was originally planned to be a partial cloverleaf , but residents near Howell Road were concerned by sprawl and forced the New Jersey Department of Transportation ( NJDOT ) to scale back the plans . Instead , a diamond interchange was built . This forced drivers wishing to head northbound on Howell Road to make a left turn , which proved to be dangerous because of the limited sight distance caused by the overpass . Now because the NJDOT does not want to pay to fix the problem , the exit has been barricaded since the freeway 's extension was opened . The ramp has guardrails blocking access and the NJDOT intends to bulldoze what is left . 
 Passing the Fairfield exit , it crosses over Business 33 and the two roads merge as a two @-@ lane road . Route 33 passes along the southern section of the Naval Weapons Station Earle and then becomes a residential access road . The road then runs concurrent with Route 34 and becomes a divided four @-@ lane avenue as it travels into Wall Township . Routes 33 / 34 come upon a roundabout and they both split as Route 33 continues east thru a rural section into Tinton Falls . It goes past the intersection with Route 66 , past the interchange with the Garden State Parkway , across the highway and into Neptune Township . The road passes through suburban and rural sections until it comes upon the interchange with Route 18 . Immediately past the exit , Route 33 borders Neptune City on the south and Neptune Township on the north for a brief stretch before completely re @-@ entering Neptune Township . After it crosses Route 35 , the avenue ends and becomes a two @-@ lane road for a brief stretch . Route 33 then ends at Route 71 , just west of Ocean Grove . 
 = = History = = 
 Route 33 originally was part of the 1920s New Jersey Route 1 in parts of the road south of Hightstown , and Route 7 from Hightstown to its terminus at Route 71 . Both roads were changed into Route 33 in the 1927 New Jersey state highway renumbering . 
 Route 33 was originally planned as a freeway from U.S. Route 1 in Trenton across New Jersey to Route 18 in Neptune . However , in 1967 , the NJDOT scaled back proposals to the current seven @-@ mile ( 11 km ) Freehold Bypass . The bypass from near County Route 527 in Manalapan to Halls Mills Road in Freehold was completed and opened in segments from 1971 to 1988 ; however , the remainder of the bypass east to Fairfield Road in Howell was not completed until 2003 . The project cost $ 33 @.@ 7 million in 2003 USD . 
 For such a small freeway , the Route 33 bypass has more abandoned segments than any other state freeway in New Jersey . Comparatively , Routes 15 , 18 , 21 and 24 each only have one abandoned portion to them . Here are the three segments on Route 33 , in eastbound order . 
 The cloverleaf ramp from Route 79 southbound to Route 33 freeway eastbound has been mostly destroyed , to make way for a new reverse jughandle for U.S. Route 9 northbound to Schanck Road . The merging part of the ramp still remains abandoned along the right side of the eastbound freeway . 
 The original alignment for the freeway east of Halls Mills Road ( CR 55 ) can be seen now as an NJDOT maintenance shed . The new alignment curves to the left after the interchange , in order to avoid what the NJDOT believed to be a suspected ( but never identified ) turtle bog habitat . The pavement is accessible from the eastbound on @-@ ramp , but is fenced off . 
 Howell Road was never given access from Route 33 eastbound and thus the ramp still remains barricaded off , slowly decaying . 
 Up until late 1988 , Route 33 westbound ran underneath US 130 , then merged with 130 's southbound lanes . This was because Route 33 ran alongside some railroad tracks at that point , and a massive overpass carried US 130 over both . ( Route 33 eastbound also ascended the bridge approach about halfway before branching off like an exit ramp — a sign with flashing lights read " Hightstown , Shore Points " at the fork . ) But this Hightstown – Windsor rail segment was actually abandoned back in the 1960s . So by 1989 , the bridge over Route 33 and the trackbed was removed , with its approaches flattened to grade . Route 33 now meets US 130 at the north end of the multiplex with a traffic signal . 
 At the southern end of the 33 / 130 multiplex , where Route 33 heads west , an old and narrow bridge used to carry the highway over the aforementioned railroad tracks . In 2009 , this overpass was leveled to grade and replaced with a new wide and linear roadway for 33 . No railroad grade crossing has been built , as the Robbinsville – Windsor rail segment is out of service . 
 Until 2003 , the 33 / 130 junction in Robbinsville was configured as an at @-@ grade wye interchange , employing curved ramps for the directional movements . The junction has since been modified to a signalized intersection with ordinary turning lanes . It has also been converted from a T @-@ intersection to a 4 @-@ way , with the construction of a new road on the southeast side of US @-@ 130 . 
 On December 31 , 2006 , the Turnpike Authority released its proposals regarding Interchange 8 . The old Interchange 8 was to be demolished and replaced with a new interchange . The new Exit 8 would end at the intersection with Route 33 , Milford Road , and the 133 bypass ( on the east side of the expressway , instead of the west ) . This new Exit 8 would grant direct access to the bypass ( without going through any traffic lights ) , as well as to 33 , using grade @-@ separated interchanges . The new toll gate was to feature a total of 10 lanes at the new facility . The new interchange opened in January 2013 . 
 = = Future = = 
 There are many future developments for Route 33 . Heavy traffic and recent studies hint at a possible widening of Route 33 all the way to Route 34 in Wall Township , however this is still only in the proposal phase . Monmouth County is performing a corridor study on Route 33 to determine if any action should happen . There is a planned Route 33 bypass of Robbinsville Township that will run from Washington Boulevard and link up with U.S. Route 130 at South Gold Drive . The former alignment of Route 33 will likely become a Main Street for the new Washington Town Center . Route 33 is being widened from Route 35 to Route 71 in Neptune to provide a center turning lane as well as shoulders . Signals will be modified to provide proper movements . 
 Monmouth County recently gave a tour to DOT officials , stressing the need to improve the <unk> Road exit off the Route 33 freeway . They also wanted the intersection with Business 33 to be rebuilt . County officials believe that both projects would help with future traffic flow emanating from the planned Freehold Raceway Mall connector road . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = = Business route = = 
 Route 33 Business is a short state highway in New Jersey that is the original alignment of Route 33 before a freeway was built as a bypass of Freehold . This business route stretches 6 @.@ 89 miles ( 11 @.@ 09 km ) through Manalapan Township , Freehold Township , Freehold Borough and Howell Township . The highway holds the distinction of being the only business route state highway in all of New Jersey . 
 Route 33 Business begins at the interchange with Route 33 , its parent route , in Manalapan Township , New Jersey . A short distance after , the interchange from Route 33 eastbound merges into Route 33 Business , and the route passes to the south of Monmouth Battlefield State Park and enters Freehold Township . Soon after entering the borough of Freehold , Route 33 Business interchanges with U.S. Route 9 . Route 33 Business turns to the southeast , passing to the north of Freehold Raceway . A short distance later , Route 33 Business intersects at a traffic light with New Jersey Route 79 ( South Street ) in downtown Freehold . At the intersection with Fairfield Road , Route 33 Business enters the interchange with Route 33 and the freeway , where the designation terminates . 
 Route 33 Business originates as an alignment of Route 33 , designated across the state in the 1927 New Jersey state highway renumbering as a replacement to Routes 1 and 7 , which were assigned in the 1920s . The route remained intact for several decades , continuing as the proposals for the crosstown Route 33 Freeway during the 1960s were drawn up . The new Route 33 Freeway was to be 39 miles ( 63 km ) long , starting at U.S. Route 1 in Trenton , crossing through Princeton and into Hightstown , where it would connect with the current @-@ day New Jersey Route 133 , heading eastward , where it would connect with the unbuilt Driscoll Expressway in Freehold . The freeway would continue , interchanging with the Garden State Parkway near Exit 100 in Neptune and terminate at the Route 18 freeway in Neptune . However , the next year , the New Jersey Department of Transportation had to scale down the project to a new bypass of Freehold , and prevent the congestion of traffic through the borough . Design studies began that year , and the entire bypass was constructed during the 70s and 80s , with most of the freeway finished in 1988 . This new bypass was designated as Route 33 Bypass from 1965 until Route 33 was re @-@ aligned off the local roads onto the new freeway in 1990 , which at that time , Route 33 Business was designated on the former alignment . 
 Major intersections 
 The entire route is in Monmouth County . 
 = = Related routes = = 
 Route 133 
 = The Time Is Now ( Millennium ) = 
 " ' The Time Is Now " is the twenty @-@ third episode of the second season of the American crime @-@ thriller television series Millennium . It premiered on the Fox network on May 15 , 1998 . The episode was written by Glen Morgan and James Wong , and directed by Thomas J. Wright . " The Time Is Now " featured guest appearances by Kristen Cloke and Glenn Morshower . 
 In this episode , Millennium Group profiler Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) confronts the onset of an apocalyptic viral outbreak , dealing with the duplicity of the Group 's foreknowledge of , and preparation for , such an event . 
 The episode 's script went through several variations , taking shape after series creator Chris Carter suggested killing off the character of Catherine Black ( Megan Gallagher ) . The episode has earned positive responses from critics , and was seen by approximately 4 @.@ 8 million households during its initial broadcast . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Continuing from " The Fourth Horseman " , several Millennium Group members in biohazard suits clear out a house full of bodies , victims of a viral outbreak ; outside , dozens of bird corpses litter the ground . 
 Group member Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) returns home with his wife Catherine ( Megan Gallagher ) and daughter Jordan ( Brittany Tiplady ) . Black realizes that the family home holds painful memories and decides to find somewhere else to settle ; the post that day contains a deed from his late father , who had left him a cabin in the woods . Later , Blacks meets with Richard Gilbert ( Glenn Morshower ) , who is trying to convince Black to join his corporate security firm . Black reaffirms his commitment to the Group , however , Gilbert warns that their lives may be threatened by the Group 's activities . The next day , Black learns that Gilbert died in a car accident ; he believes the vehicle may have been tampered with . 
 Later , fellow Group member Peter Watts ( Terry O 'Quinn ) tells Black that he has uncovered computer files from the Group , indicating that a virus discovered by bio @-@ weapons scientists in the Soviet Union has been living dormant in bird species since the end of the Cold War , and may now be making a resurgence in the United States . Watts reveals that a vaccine has been developed by the Group , but only in sufficient quantities for its members ; Watts and Black have already been inoculated without having realized at the time . Black tells Watts to locate Lara Means ( Kristen Cloke ) , another Group member , as he hopes to keep them safe in the cabin until the crisis resolves . 
 Watts arrives at Means ' home , but is confronted by other Group members and assaulted . Means is inside , experiencing a prolonged hallucination . She considers suicide , instead writing something and sealing it in an envelope . Black finds her home , accompanied by paramedics who take her away . She gives Black the envelope — containing a phial of vaccine — and he thanks her , unable to discover what happened to Watts . 
 Black takes his family to the woodland cabin , where he and Catherine decide that the dose of vaccine should be given to Jordan . Black and Catherine discuss how they would handle infection ; Catherine asks to be euthanized , Black states he would wander off to die alone . That night , Catherine wakes up , experiencing symptoms of the disease . She quietly leaves the cabin and walks into the forest . The next morning , Black wakes up , and finding blood on Catherine 's pillow , realizes she has gone . He cradles his daughter as the screen flashes images of the collapse of society , interspersed with video noise . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Time Is Now " was written by frequent collaborators Glen Morgan and James Wong . The duo would pen a total of fifteen episodes throughout the series ' run . The pair had also taken the roles of co @-@ executive producers for the season . " The Time Is Now " was directed by Thomas J. Wright , who helmed a total of twenty @-@ six episodes across all three seasons . Wright would also go on to direct " Millennium " , the series ' crossover episode with its sister show The X @-@ Files . 
 The episode 's script went through several different versions before a final plot was decided upon , as Morgan and Wong believed the series would not be renewed for a third season and wished to write a suitable ending . The decision to kill off the character of Catherine Black was based on a suggestion by Chris Carter , the series ' creator . Morgan and Wong discussed the idea with actress Megan Gallagher , who felt that it was an interesting decision to have Catherine give her life after seeing Frank Black sacrifice so much for their family throughout the previous episodes . The idea of depicting an apocalyptic scenario as being the result of a virus came from Morgan 's research into possible end @-@ of @-@ the @-@ world scenarios , and was influenced by the outbreak of bovine spongiform encephalopathy in the United Kingdom . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " The Time Is Now " was first broadcast on the Fox network on May 15 , 1998 . The episode earned a Nielsen rating of 4 @.@ 9 during its original broadcast , meaning that 4 @.@ 9 percent of households in the United States viewed the episode . This represented approximately 4 @.@ 8 million households , and left the episode the seventy @-@ second most @-@ viewed broadcast that week . 
 " The Time Is Now " received positive reviews from critics . The A.V. Club 's Todd VanDerWerff rated the episode — along with the preceding episode " The Fourth Horseman — an " A " . VanDerWerff felt that it " may be one of the four or five best cinematic depictions of the end of the world ever filmed " , praising the uncommon approach of depicting the world ending , rather than just showing the aftermath . Bill Gibron , writing for DVD Talk , rated the episode 5 out of 5 . Gibron felt that the two @-@ part episodes were " a one @-@ two punch that many dramatic series would die for " , finding the conclusion to have been effectively hinted at throughout the season . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated " The Time Is Now " five stars out of five . Shearman felt that the episode would have been " the best end to the show imaginable " , had the series not produced a third season . He considered the episode 's writing and conclusion to have been a brave decision , potentially alienating its viewers but producing " a thrilling and unforgettable piece of television " ; he also considered the season as a whole to be less consistent but more daring than the first season . 
 = Reşadiye @-@ class battleship = 
 The Reşadiye class was a group of two dreadnought battleships ordered by the Ottoman Empire from Britain in the 1910s . The design for the ships was based on the British King George V @-@ class battleships , although it incorporated several significant improvements . They carried the same 13 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 340 mm ) main battery guns as the British ships , but their secondary battery consisted of 6 @-@ inch ( 150 mm ) guns , compared to the British vessels ' 4 @-@ inch ( 100 mm ) pieces . The first ship , Reşadiye , was laid down in 1911 and completed in August 1914 , shortly after the outbreak of World War I ; she was seized by the British Royal Navy and commissioned as HMS Erin . The second ship , Fatih Sultan Mehmed , had only been ordered in April 1914 and little work had been done by the start of the war , so she was quickly broken up for scrap . 
 Erin served with the Grand Fleet for the duration of the war , and saw action at the Battle of Jutland on 31 May – 1 June 1916 . She holds the dubious distinction of being the only British capital ship engaged in the battle to not fire its main battery . The vessel served briefly as the flagship of The Nore in 1919 , but her career was cut short by the Washington Naval Treaty of 1922 . She was scrapped under the terms of the treaty in 1922 – 23 . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Ottoman Navy had languished since the 1870s , the result of decades of little funding for new ships , poor maintenance of existing vessels , and no serious training regimen . Efforts to modernize the fleet had occurred in fits and starts during the period , including the failed attempt to build the pre @-@ dreadnought Abdül Kadir in the 1890s , and a major reconstruction program launched in the aftermath of the Greco @-@ Turkish War of 1897 , which had highlighted the poor condition of the fleet . Starting in 1909 , the Ottoman government began to seriously look for warships to purchase from foreign shipbuilders to counter the growing strength of the Greek Navy , particularly the armored cruiser Georgios Averof . As a stopgap measure , two German Brandenburg @-@ class battleships , Barbaros Hayreddin and Turgut Reis , were purchased in 1910 . 
 The Ottoman government then began looking for newer vessels to buy in late 1911 , and first contacted Armstrong Whitworth about the possibility of acquiring the dreadnought Rio de Janeiro , then under construction for the Brazilian Navy , along with Minas Geraes , which had been commissioned into the Brazilian fleet in 1910 . These deals fell through , so the Ottomans contacted Vickers to order two new battleships . Douglas Gamble , who had previously served as a naval adviser to the Ottoman government , prepared two designs , the first of which was ordered as Mehmed <unk> V ; during construction , this ship was renamed Reşadiye . A second ship , to be named Fatih Sultan Mehmed , was ordered in April 1914 . 
 Ordering the Reşadiye class started a significant naval arms race between the Ottoman Empire and Greece . The Greek Navy ordered the battleship Salamis in 1912 in response , which prompted the Ottomans to resume their bid for Rio de Janeiro . The contract to purchase the ship , to be renamed Sultân Osmân @-@ ı Evvel , was signed in January 1914 . This in turn provoked the Greeks to order a second battleship , Vasilefs Konstantinos , which required a third Ottoman battleship to be ordered ; this was the second Reşadiye @-@ class ship , Fatih Sultan Mehmed . 
 = = Design = = 
 The design for the Reşadiye was based on the contemporary British King George V class , with some improvements that had been incorporated into the subsequent Iron Duke class then under construction . Compared to the British ships , the <unk> carried their amidships main battery turret one deck higher , which improved its ability to be fired in heavier seas . They also carried a heavier secondary battery , composed of 6 in ( 150 mm ) guns instead of the 4 in ( 100 mm ) weapons in the King George V class . The hull was shorter and wider than the British ships , which improved her turning radius , but the lower displacement forced compromises in armor protection and coal capacity . 
 = = = General characteristics and machinery = = = 
 The Reşadiye design was 525 feet ( 160 m ) long between perpendiculars and 559 ft 6 in ( 170 @.@ 54 m ) long overall . The ships had a beam of 28 ft 10 in ( 8 @.@ 79 m ) , with a designed displacement of 23 @,@ 000 metric tons ( 23 @,@ 000 long tons ; 25 @,@ 000 short tons ) . In service , Erin displaced 22 @,@ 780 t ( 22 @,@ 420 long tons ; 25 @,@ 110 short tons ) normally and up to 25 @,@ 250 t ( 24 @,@ 850 long tons ; 27 @,@ 830 short tons ) at full load . Erin was completed with a single tripod mast atop the conning tower , fitted with a spotting top to aid in gun @-@ laying . She had a crew of 1 @,@ 070 officers and enlisted men . 
 The ships were powered by four Parsons steam turbines , with steam provided by fifteen Babcock & Wilcox mixed coal and oil @-@ fired water @-@ tube boilers . The boilers were trunked into a pair of closely spaced funnels directly aft of the conning tower . The engines were rated at 26 @,@ 500 shaft horsepower ( 19 @,@ 800 kW ) for a top speed of 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) . Erin carried 2 @,@ 120 t ( 2 @,@ 090 long tons ; 2 @,@ 340 short tons ) of coal and 710 t ( 700 long tons ; 780 short tons ) of fuel oil , and she had a cruising radius of 5 @,@ 100 nautical miles ( 9 @,@ 400 km ; 5 @,@ 900 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 = = = Armament and armor = = = 
 As designed , the Reşadiye class was armed with a main battery of ten 13 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 340 mm ) 45 @-@ caliber guns and sixteen 6 in ( 150 mm ) 50 @-@ caliber guns , and four 21 in ( 530 mm ) torpedo tubes . The 13 @.@ 5 in guns were the Mark VI type manufactured by Armstrong Whitworth , and they were mounted in five twin turrets , all on the centerline . The first two were in a superfiring pair forward , one amidships directly aft of the funnels , and the last two were in another superfiring pair , aft of the rear conning tower . The 6 in guns were mounted individually in casemates along the upper deck , eight to each beam . The torpedo tubes were submerged in the hull , two on each side of the ship . As completed , a number of smaller guns were added to Erin , including six 6 @-@ pounder 57 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) guns and two 76 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) Mk I anti @-@ aircraft guns . 
 The ships were protected with an armored belt that was 12 in ( 300 mm ) thick in the central portion , and reduced to 4 in ( 100 mm ) on either end of the ship . The transverse bulkheads that connected the ends of the belt were 8 in ( 200 mm ) thick . Horizontal protection consisted of an armored deck that was 3 in ( 76 mm ) thick over the central part of the ship , where it covered the ammunition magazines and machinery spaces , and reduced to 1 @.@ 5 in ( 38 mm ) thick elsewhere . The forward conning tower had 12 in thick sides . The main battery gun turrets had 11 in ( 280 mm ) thick faces , while the barbettes that supported them had 10 in ( 250 mm ) thick sides , with the lower section behind the main belt reduced to 3 in . 
 = = Ships = = 
 The first ship of the class , Reşadiye , was ordered on 8 June 1911 . Work stopped in 1912 following the start of the First Balkan War due to the probability that the Ottoman government would run out of funds . Work resumed in May 1913 following the conclusion of the conflict . The second ship , Fatih Sultan Mehmed , was ordered on 29 April 1914 in response to the Greek order for Vasilefs Konstantinos in early 1914 . The British government ordered work to stop in late July 1914 , as a result of the growing tensions that culminated in the outbreak of World War I on the 28th ; what material that had been assembled was dismantled on the slipway in August . 
 There is some confusion over the number and name of ships that were part of the Reşadiye class . Some sources report Reşadiye and Mehmed <unk> V as having been different ships ; these were in fact the same vessel , ordered originally under the latter name . Similarly , Fatih Sultan Mehmed is sometimes listed as <unk> or Fatih . Another ship , <unk> @-@ i <unk> , is sometimes reported to have been ordered in 1911 and cancelled in 1912 , though according to Bernd <unk> and Ahmet <unk> in their authoritative The Ottoman Steam Navy , the Ottomans initially only had ordered one vessel . 
 = = Service history = = 
 By 21 July 1914 , the British had postponed delivery of Reşadiye and Sultan Osman @-@ ı Evvel as tensions flared in Europe following the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand on 28 June . This action prompted a protest by Djemal Pasha , the Ottoman naval minister , via France , in the hopes of securing the ships ' delivery . A transport ship carrying crews for the two battleships departed Constantinople on 4 August , only to be recalled on 7 August after the Ottoman government was informed that the dreadnoughts would not be delivered . First Lord of the Admiralty Winston Churchill ordered the Royal Navy to detain the two ships on 29 July and prevent Ottoman naval personnel from boarding them ; two days later , British sailors boarded the ships and formally seized them . Since Britain was not yet at war , these actions were illegal ; the British government nevertheless determined to present the Ottomans with a fait accompli . On 3 August , the British ambassador to the Ottoman Empire informed the government that Britain had seized the ships . 
 Reşadiye and Sultan Osman @-@ ı Evvel were then pressed into British service . Reşadiye was completed that month and commissioned as HMS Erin , with Sultan Osman @-@ ı Evvel entering service as HMS Agincourt . In September , Erin joined the 2nd Battle Squadron of the Grand Fleet , where she served for the duration of the conflict . She took part in the Battle of Jutland on 31 May & 1 June 1916 . There , she was the fourth ship in the British line of battle , along with her three surviving King George V @-@ class half @-@ sisters . She did not fire her main battery during the battle , the only British capital ship not to do so during the engagement ; her secondary battery fired only six shells . 
 In 1917 , fire control directors were installed , and she received flying off platforms atop her forward superfiring and amidships turrets . After the end of the war , Erin was assigned to the Nore Reserve and served as its flagship . Her postwar career was cut short by the Washington Naval Treaty , signed in February 1922 , which mandated significant draw downs in naval strength for the signatories . The Royal Navy had originally intended to keep Erin as a training ship under the terms of the treaty , but a change of plans led to HMS Thunderer taking her place as the training ship , which meant that Erin had to be scrapped . The ship was sold for scrap in December 1922 , and subsequently broken up by the ship breaking firm Cox and Daniels , which finished scrapping Reşadiye in 1923 . 
 = Skåneland = 
 Skåneland ( Swedish ) or Skånelandene ( Danish ) is a region on the southern Scandinavian peninsula . It includes the Swedish provinces of Blekinge , Halland and Scania . The Danish island of Bornholm is sometimes also included . Skåneland has no official recognition or function and the term is not in common usage . Equivalent terms in English and Latin are " the Scanian provinces " and " Terrae <unk> " respectively . 
 The provinces making up Skåneland were part Denmark from at least the 9th century , sometimes referred to as the " Eastern Provinces " ; since a 12th @-@ century civil war , Denmark has been a kingdom with a single king . The provinces were part of the territory ceded to Sweden in 1658 under the Treaty of Roskilde , but after an uprising on Bornholm , that island was returned to Denmark in 1660 , under the Treaty of Copenhagen . The last ( and thereby current ) peace treaty between Sweden and Denmark , of which Skåneland is a main issue , was signed on 3 July 1720 in Stockholm . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The name Skåneland is first recorded in print in the year 1719 It is unclear what area is meant . Later ( 1751 ) Carl Linnaeus uses it , meaning the province of Scania . The modern use of the denomination as a short form for De <unk> <unk> ( " The Scanian provinces " ) , for the combined area of the provinces of Blekinge , Halland and Scania , was launched by the Swedish historian and <unk> Martin Weibull in <unk> till <unk> historia ( six volumes ) 1868 @-@ 73 in order to illuminate the common Danish history of Scania , Blekinge , and Halland . 
 The term is mostly used in historical contexts and not in daily speech . In Danish , Skånelandene is used more often . The terms have no political implications as the region is not a geopolitical entity but a cultural region , without officially established political borders . In some circumstances , the term Skåneland , as opposed to the terms <unk> and Skånelandene , can also be used as a figure of speech for the province Scania . 
 Weibull used the term as a combined term for the four provinces where the Scanian Law had its jurisdiction , as well as the area of the archdiocese of Lund until the Reformation in 1536 , later the Danish Lutheran diocese of Lund . This form of Skåneland was then used in the regional historical periodical <unk> <unk> för Skåneland , beginning in 1901 , published by Martin 's son , Lauritz Weibull . 
 = = Administration = = 
 An earlier administrative and political function of the area was to serve as a core area for one of the three provincial things that together elected the king of Denmark . The first Danish administrative sub @-@ <unk> occurred as part of the centralization process , when the area became divided into administrative units called hundreds ( <unk> in Danish ) . The hundreds were possibly based on older , already existing units , but the establishment of the new form of hundreds was prompted by an increase in royal power during the High Middle Ages . These differed from the provincial thing areas in that they were not local communities joined under a governing assembly but top @-@ down regional divisions established to ensure royal authority . These medieval Danish hundreds were used to implement military obligations and to expedite the collection of renders due to the king in the provinces . They were first established in Jutland , where they replaced previous administrative units called <unk> . According to some scholars , they were introduced in Skåneland possibly as early as the 11th century . 
 In the 13th century , a new fiscal system was introduced and the hundreds were gradually included into larger administrative units called len , with a castle serving as the administrative center . This new administrative development was a result of the increased power of the aristocracy . In each len , a noble man was put in charge , with the title <unk> . 
 Each of the four provinces of Skåneland had representation in the Scanian Thing , which , along with the other two Things of the Danish state ( Jutland and Zealand ) , elected the Danish king . 
 The four Scanian provinces were joined under the jurisdiction of the Scanian Law , dated 1200 – 1216 , the oldest Nordic provincial law . In the chapter " Constitutional history " in Danish Medieval History , New Currents , the three provincial Things are described as being the legal authority that instituted changes suggested by the elected king . The suggestions for changes submitted by the king had to be approved by the three Things before being passed into law in the Danish state . 
 = = = Status today = = = 
 Skåneland is strictly a historic and cultural region . The name has long appeared as a term used in historical contexts in a variety of sources . The southern part of Sweden , including Skåneland , is considered to be included in Götaland , one of three historic " lands of Sweden " . The " land " Götaland bears the same name used for the historic province Götaland ( a province referred to as " Gothia " on the 17th @-@ century maps ) ; the inclusion of Skåneland is described as " historically inaccurate " by the Swedish <unk> . 
 As in other cultural regions , regionalism in Scania sometimes has a base in regional nationalism and sometimes in a more general opposition against centralized state nationalism or expansionist nationalism . As noted about regionalism in Norway , Scandinavian regionalism is not necessarily separatist . 
 = = = Modern usage = = = 
 There are a number of minor organisations promoting the use of the term , mainly active online , e.g. <unk> <unk> <unk> or <unk> Samling , Skåneland Football Federation and Stiftelsen <unk> <unk> Dag . 
 The private foundation Stiftelsen <unk> <unk> ( " foundation for a Scanian future " ) . was a member of the Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization ( <unk> ) 1993 @-@ 2011 , representing Skåneland under the name of Scania . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Population and settlements = = = 
 The earliest Danish historians , writing in the 12th and 13th century , believed that the Danish Kingdom had existed since king Dan , in a distant past . Eighth century sources mention the existence of Denmark as a kingdom . According to 9th century Frankish sources , by the early 9th century many of the chieftains in the south of Scandinavia acknowledged Danish kings as their overlords , though kingdom ( s ) were very loose confederations of lords until the last couple medieval centuries saw some increased centralization . The west and south coast of modern Sweden was so effectively part of the Danish realm that the said area ( and not the today Denmark ) was known as " Denmark " ( literally the frontier of the <unk> ) . Svend <unk> ( King of Denmark 1047 – ca . 1074 ) , who may have been from Scania himself , is often referred to as the king who along with his dynasty established Scania as an integral , and sometimes the more important , part of Denmark . 
 = = = From 1397 to 1658 = = = 
 When the Kalmar Union was formed in 1397 , the union was administered from Copenhagen . By 1471 Sweden rebelled under Sture family leadership . In 1503 , when Sten Sture the Elder died , eastern Sweden ’ s independence from Denmark had been established . 
 In 1600 Denmark controlled virtually all land bordering on Skagerrak , Kattegat , and the Sound . The current Swedish provinces of Skåne , Blekinge and Halland were Danish and the province of <unk> was Norwegian . Skåneland became the site of harsh fighting , especially in the 16th , 17th and 18th century , as Denmark and Sweden confronted each other for control of the Baltic . 
 Sweden intervened in the Danish civil war known as the Count 's Feud ( 1534 – 1536 ) , launching a highly destructive invasion of Skåneland as the ally of later king Christian III , who upon his coronation introduced Protestantism to the provinces . Subsequently , in the period between the breakup of the Kalmar Union and 1814 , Denmark and Sweden fought in Skåneland in 11 separate wars and other border provinces : the Northern Seven Years ' War ( 1563 – 70 ) , Kalmar War ( 1611 – 1613 ) , Torstenson War ( 1644 – 1645 ) , Second Northern War ( 1657 – 1658 and 1659 – 1660 ) , Scanian War ( 1674 – 1678 ) , Great Northern War ( 1700 and 1709 – 1720 ) , Theater War ( 1788 ) , and the Napoleonic Wars ( 1808 – 1809 and 1814 ) . 
 During the Northern Seven Years ' War , attacks were launched on Sweden from Danish Halland in 1563 , and Swedish counterattacks were launched against Danish provinces of Halland and Skåne in 1565 and 1569 . In 1570 peace was finally agreed when the Swedish king withdrew the claims to Danish Skåne , Halland , Blekinge and Gotland , while the Danes withdrew their claims to Sweden as a whole . 
 During the Torstenson War , a theater of the Thirty Years ' War , extensive combat took place in the Danish provinces of Skåne , Halland , and Blekinge . By the Second Treaty of Brömsebro ( 1645 ) Denmark ceded the Norwegian provinces of Jämtland and <unk> and agreed Sweden was to occupy the Danish province of Halland for 30 years as a guarantee of the treaty provisions . 
 During the Second Northern War ( 1655 – 1658 ) , Danish attempts to recover control of Halland ended in a serious defeat administered by Sweden . As a result , in the Treaty of Roskilde ( 1658 ) , which was largely confirmed by the Treaty of Copenhagen ( 1660 ) , Denmark ceded the provinces of Skåne , Blekinge and Halland ( i.e. , Skåneland ) . 
 Vilhelm Moberg , in his history of the Swedish people , provides a thoughtful discussion of the atrocities which were committed by both sides in the struggle over the border provinces , and identified them as the source of propaganda to inflame the peoples ' passions to continue the struggle . These lopsided representations were incorporated into history text books on the respective sides . As an example , Moberg compares the history texts he grew up with in Sweden which represented the Swedish soldier as ever pure and honorable to a letter written by Gustavus Adolphus celebrating the 24 Scanian parishes he had helped level by fire , with the troops encouraged to rape and murder the population at will , behavior that may well have been mirrored equally on the Danish side . Skåneland was a rather unpleasant place to dwell for an extended period . 
 = = = Assimilation with Sweden = = = 
 Following the Treaty of Roskilde in 1658 – but in direct contradiction of its terms – the Swedish government in 1683 demanded that the leading social groups of Skåneland accept Swedish customs and laws . Swedish became the only language permitted in Church liturgy and in schools , religious literature in Danish was banned , and all appointed politicians and priests were required to be Swedish . However the last Danish bishop , Peder <unk> remained in charge of the Diocese of Lund until his death in 1679 . To promote further Swedish assimilation , the University of Lund was inaugurated in 1666 ; the inhabitants of Scania were not allowed to enroll in Copenhagen University until the 19th century . 
 The population initially opposed the Swedish reforms , as can be ascertained from church records and court transcripts . The Swedes did encounter civil revolts in many areas , including the <unk> district , in dense forest regions of northern Scania . The Swedish authorities resorted to extreme measures against the 17th @-@ century rebels who were described as <unk> , a term used for raiding enemy soldiers or bandits .. The punishments included the use of impalement breaking on the wheel , as well as the nailing of bodies to church doors . In that way , it could take four to five days before the victim died . 
 The transformation of age @-@ old customs , commerce and administration to the Swedish model could not be effected quickly or easily . In the first fifty years of the transition , the treatment of the population was quite harsh . Denmark made several attempts to recapture the territories , the last in 1710 , but ultimately conceded the territories as lost . 
 Before 1658 , one of the provinces of Skåneland , Scania proper , had consisted of four counties : the counties of <unk> , <unk> , Helsingborg and <unk> . When Skåneland was annexed by Sweden , one of the counties of Scania , <unk> County , was merged with Blekinge to form one of a total of three Blekinge counties . 
 = = = Bornholm rebellion = = = 
 In 1658 , shortly after the Swedish general <unk> was sent to Bornholm to start the assimilation process , the population of Bornholm rebelled . Led by Jens Kofoed and Poul Anker , the rebellion formed in the town of Hasle , north of the largest city , Rønne . Before the rebel army reached the Swedish headquarters in Rønne , <unk> was shot by <unk> Clausen in the street of <unk> , in central Rønne . The Swedish fled the island as a result of the confusion and fear amongst the conscripts ; Jens Kofoed installed an intermediate rule and sent a message to King Frederick III of Denmark that Bornholm had liberated itself , and wished to return to Danish rule . This was confirmed in the 1660 peace settlement between Denmark and Sweden . 
