 = = Early life and career = = 
 Mary Margaret O 'Reilly was born in Springfield , Massachusetts , on October 14 , 1865 . Her parents , James A. and Joanna O 'Reilly , were immigrants from Ireland , and Mary was one of five children . The family lived in Springfield and nearby Chicopee , Massachusetts , where James O 'Reilly was a liquor wholesaler . He died after an illness in 1873 . As well as depriving the family of income , his death caused his family legal trouble : Austin O 'Reilly , a clerk in the now @-@ closed O 'Reilly business , tried to settle the estate by selling the remaining alcohol , but lacked a license to do so . Joanna O 'Reilly denied any knowledge of business affairs . Austin 's conviction for transporting liquor without a license was upheld by the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court . 
 Mary left school after ninth grade , at or soon after age 14 , as her help was needed to support the family . She likely worked for one of the local textile mills , and attended night school to train as a clerk and stenographer . From 1885 to 1903 , she worked as a clerk , living in Worcester along with a brother , in a boarding house owned by their mother . 
 = = Mint career ( 1904 – 1938 ) = = 
 = = = Rise to prominence = = = 
 O 'Reilly was hired by the United States Bureau of the Mint as a Class D temporary clerk in 1904 , when she was 38 years old , older than most new employees . She served in the Washington , D.C. headquarters of the Bureau of the Mint , where Mint Director George E. Roberts was impressed by her business experience and competence . Initially having only temporary status , she was made a permanent employee in 1905 , and was promoted again that year to Clerk Class I at a salary of $ 1 @,@ 200 . When Margaret Kelly was commissioned Examiner of the Bureau of the Mint in 1911 , the ripple of promotions in her wake included O 'Reilly , who became adjuster of accounts . This made her in effect the chief clerk of the Mint Bureau , with responsibility for reviewing all contracts . According to Teva J. Scheer , biographer of Nellie Tayloe Ross ( O 'Reilly 's final Mint Director before retirement ) " it must have required an almost unprecedented combination of drive and intelligence for [ O 'Reilly ] to have climbed so far up through the organization in her male @-@ dominated work environment " . 
 During the 1910s , O 'Reilly continued to gain promotion , serving both as examiner and as computer of bullion . She was frequently called upon to testify before Congress . In 1915 , Robert W. Woolley was appointed Mint Director , and was likely O 'Reilly 's favorite of those who served in that position during her third of a century at the Mint . She often concluded memoranda with personal good wishes , and Woolley reciprocated . After Woolley resigned in August 1916 , O 'Reilly served as acting director for part of the time until Woolley 's successor Friedrich Johannes Hugo von Engelken took office the next month , though Adjuster of the Bureau of the Mint Fred H. <unk> held the acting position for much of the interregnum . 
 = = = Assistant director = = = 
 Most directors of the Mint of the early 20th century were political appointees , lacking previous experience with the bureau . Von Engelken during his six @-@ month term as director in 1916 and 1917 left almost all supervision of the mints and assay offices to O 'Reilly . The Mint eliminated production of proof coins , popular among collectors , in 1916 . Although the suggestion that the bureau eliminate the special coins , on which it lost money , came from Philadelphia Mint Superintendent Adam M. Joyce , and was approved by von Engelken , O 'Reilly signed many of the letters to numismatists , and thus was blamed for the change in policy . 
 When von Engelken resigned in February 1917 , his successor was Raymond T. Baker , who foresaw that women would hold high government positions in increasing numbers , and gave O 'Reilly a more public role . Each year , Baker appeared before Congress to defend the bureau 's appropriation requests , and O 'Reilly sat behind him . In 1920 and 1921 , Baker tried to get Congress to formally designate O 'Reilly , who then held the title of executive clerk , as Assistant Director , but without success . After the Harding administration took office , Baker was replaced in 1922 by Frank E. Scobey , one of Harding 's Ohio Gang . The new director had little interest in Mint affairs , and O 'Reilly not only supervised the bureau 's operations , but was the chief witness before Congress in 1922 , defending both the appropriation request and the continuing drive to have herself designated Assistant Director . This time , Congress was more amenable , and she gained the title effective from 1924 . 
 In December 1921 , a public relations crisis over the design of the new Peace dollar had erupted while Baker was on a three @-@ day trip by train to the West Coast . Anthony de Francisci , designer of the coin , had included a broken sword on the reverse , which he intended as a sign of the end of war , but which many interpreted as a symbol of disgrace . Anger at such a design resonated in a country deeply sensitive about such matters due to World War I. With Baker unreachable , O 'Reilly realized the sword would have to be removed , and approached Treasury Undersecretary Seymour Parker Gilbert , who as acting secretary approved a revised design . The Mint 's Chief Engraver , George T. Morgan , skillfully removed the sword from the already @-@ prepared coinage hubs even before Baker cabled his own approval of the revised design he had not seen . 
 O 'Reilly ran most Mint operations under Scobey and his successor , Robert J. Grant . Although the Mint Bureau was very busy in the booming economy of the 1920s , numismatic historian Roger Burdette points out that there were flaws in operations — for example , Philadelphia Mint officials , instead of setting aside gold coins from each batch delivered for inspecting and testing by the annual Assay Commission , took all assay coins from a bag set aside at the start of the year , increasing the likelihood that nonstandard coins would go undetected . O 'Reilly did keep a close eye on coinage operations , warning the San Francisco Mint in November 1931 that it had produced fewer than 200 @,@ 000 nickels , a figure that if allowed to stand would have resulted in the issue being hoarded by collectors . She directed the mint to strike nothing but nickels for the remainder of the year , resulting in a total mintage for the 1931 – S of 1 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 , still the second @-@ lowest by date and mint mark in the Buffalo nickel series . 
 = = = Roosevelt administration and retirement = = = 
 When the Democratic Roosevelt administration took office in 1933 , O 'Reilly was serving as acting director following Grant 's resignation . President Franklin Roosevelt ( FDR ) appointed former Wyoming governor Nellie Tayloe Ross as Mint Director , the first woman to hold that position . By then , O 'Reilly was 67 years old , and appeared as a small , grandmotherly figure who was dubbed " the Sweetheart of the Treasury " — an appearance that hid her mental strength and determination . Ross 's personal secretary , <unk> Wilkins , described the Assistant Director of the Mint as " ruthless " . 
 Ross and O 'Reilly had mutual suspicions to overcome . Ross , who had recently endured poor relations with Eleanor Roosevelt and others on FDR 's campaign , did not trust the career staff . O 'Reilly saw another political appointee with no experience at the Mint Bureau replacing Grant , who had been Denver Mint superintendent before his directorship . After a brief period , the two women came to appreciate each other 's merits . 
 Among the issues that the Mint Bureau had to face in 1933 and 1934 was the calling @-@ in of most gold coins . When the Treasury Department issued regulations allowing such coins to be surrendered at branches of the Federal Reserve Bank , O 'Reilly sent out a memorandum over her signature as acting director noting that the Fed had no facilities to accept any gold other than bars with a government stamp . At the time , the Mint Bureau was one of the lowest @-@ status branches of the Department of the Treasury , esteemed far less than the Secret Service and other law enforcement @-@ related agencies that fell under the Treasury Secretary . Burdette points out that the gold regulations showed a lack of basic Mint knowledge both by Roosevelt 's appointees and the holdover senior officials from the Hoover administration . 
 Ross and O 'Reilly soon came to the usual division of labor between the director and assistant : the director would handle public affairs and make policy decisions as needed , while the assistant dealt with the day @-@ to @-@ day business of the bureau . Ross undertook a heavy travel schedule , visiting Mint facilities , making speeches backing Roosevelt , and campaigning for Democratic candidates in Wyoming . This left O 'Reilly running the Washington office as acting director . The two women carried on a businesslike but warm correspondence during these times , with O 'Reilly writing to Ross ( who had embarked on a tour of the mints ) " I am so anxious to have your mind at ease about the office here [ in Washington ] that I have resorted to rather frequent telegrams . They are so much more direct and up to date than letters ... my love to you and every good wish for the success of your visits to our beloved mint institutions . " Scheer suggests that O 'Reilly would have found Ross 's reports from the field valuable ; they showed how the Mint recovered from the initial years of the Depression , when relatively few coins were produced , to the mid @-@ 1930s , when strong demand for coinage led the bureau to run the mints with two or even three shifts . 
 In 1935 , O 'Reilly reached the mandatory federal retirement age of 70 . Her knowledge of bureau affairs was so extensive , and was so badly needed , that she was exempted from mandatory retirement by special order of President Roosevelt , at the request of Ross , giving O 'Reilly an extra year in the Mint Service . Although Ross supported the extension , she could not be seen as unable to do her job without O 'Reilly 's assistance , and hired Frank Leland Howard of the University of Virginia , who had a background in accounting , as O 'Reilly 's prospective replacement . Roosevelt approved a similar extension in 1936 , a distinction considered so significant that Treasury Secretary Henry Morgenthau , Jr. hosted a luncheon in her honor . Roosevelt again extended her federal service by one year in late 1937 , though warning that he would not exempt her again . An attempt by Morgenthau to further extend her tenure was turned down by the president the next July , and she retired on October 29 , 1938 , to be replaced by Howard . 
 At O 'Reilly 's request , there was no ceremony to mark her retirement , though her fellow employees chipped in to buy her a diamond @-@ encrusted watch , which they persuaded her to accept . President Roosevelt and Secretary Morgenthau sent letters of appreciation for her service . The New York Times carried word of her retirement , but no interview , and a week later editorialized that " there is modernity here , too . An answer to America 's challenge to women . It points to what women want out of life , and what women can get and give . " 
 = = Retirement and death = = 
 After her retirement , O 'Reilly continued to live in her rooms at the Hay – Adams residence in Washington . She did not involve herself in Mint affairs ; though Morgenthau sent her a few letters , they did not mention business . O 'Reilly kept busy by organizing fundraising for Catholic charities . She was not interviewed when the Mint in 1944 investigated how several 1933 double eagles , never officially released , had come onto the market , an omission Burdette finds unusual . 
 O 'Reilly died on December 6 , 1949 in Washington . Her New York Times obituary recalled that when she had been granted the first extension by Roosevelt , reporters had sought to interview her , only to be met with the following statement : 
 I am deeply grateful to the President for his extreme kindness . Life without work does not remotely interest me . But do you have to print anything about me ? 
 = Big Bang = 
 The Big Bang theory is the prevailing cosmological model for the universe from the earliest known periods through its subsequent large @-@ scale evolution . The model accounts for the fact that the universe expanded from a very high density and high temperature state , and offers a comprehensive explanation for a broad range of phenomena , including the abundance of light elements , the cosmic microwave background , large scale structure and Hubble 's Law . If the known laws of physics are extrapolated beyond where they have been verified , there is a singularity . Some estimates place this moment at approximately 13 @.@ 8 billion years ago , which is thus considered the age of the universe . After the initial expansion , the universe cooled sufficiently to allow the formation of subatomic particles , and later simple atoms . Giant clouds of these primordial elements later coalesced through gravity to form stars and galaxies . 
 Since Georges Lemaître first noted , in 1927 , that an expanding universe might be traced back in time to an originating single point , scientists have built on his idea of cosmic expansion . While the scientific community was once divided between supporters of two different expanding universe theories , the Big Bang and the Steady State theory , accumulated empirical evidence provides strong support for the former . In 1929 , from analysis of galactic redshifts , Edwin Hubble concluded that galaxies are drifting apart ; this is important observational evidence consistent with the hypothesis of an expanding universe . In 1965 the cosmic microwave background radiation was discovered , which was crucial evidence in favor of the Big Bang model , since that theory predicted the existence of background radiation throughout the universe before it was discovered . More recently , measurements of the redshifts of supernovae indicate that the expansion of the universe is accelerating , an observation attributed to dark energy 's existence . The known physical laws of nature can be used to calculate the characteristics of the universe in detail back in time to an initial state of extreme density and temperature . 
 = = Overview = = 
 American astronomer Edwin Hubble observed that the distances to faraway galaxies were strongly correlated with their redshifts . This was interpreted to mean that all distant galaxies and clusters are receding away from our vantage point with an apparent velocity proportional to their distance : that is , the farther they are , the faster they move away from us , regardless of direction . Assuming the Copernican principle ( that the Earth is not the center of the universe ) , the only remaining interpretation is that all observable regions of the universe are receding from all others . Since we know that the distance between galaxies increases today , it must mean that in the past galaxies were closer together . The continuous expansion of the universe implies that the universe was denser and hotter in the past . 
 Large particle accelerators can replicate the conditions that prevailed after the early moments of the universe , resulting in confirmation and refinement of the details of the Big Bang model . However , these accelerators can only probe so far into high energy regimes . Consequently , the state of the universe in the earliest instants of the Big Bang expansion is still poorly understood and an area of open investigation and speculation . 
 The first subatomic particles to be formed included protons , neutrons , and electrons . Though simple atomic nuclei formed within the first three minutes after the Big Bang , thousands of years passed before the first electrically neutral atoms formed . The majority of atoms produced by the Big Bang were hydrogen , along with helium and traces of lithium . Giant clouds of these primordial elements later coalesced through gravity to form stars and galaxies , and the heavier elements were synthesized either within stars or during supernovae . 
 The Big Bang theory offers a comprehensive explanation for a broad range of observed phenomena , including the abundance of light elements , the cosmic microwave background , large scale structure , and Hubble 's Law . The framework for the Big Bang model relies on Albert Einstein 's theory of general relativity and on simplifying assumptions such as homogeneity and isotropy of space . The governing equations were formulated by Alexander Friedmann , and similar solutions were worked on by Willem de Sitter . Since then , astrophysicists have incorporated observational and theoretical additions into the Big Bang model , and its <unk> as the Lambda @-@ CDM model serves as the framework for current investigations of theoretical cosmology . The Lambda @-@ CDM model is the standard model of Big Bang cosmology , the simplest model that provides a reasonably good account of various observations about the universe . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 = = = Singularity = = = 
 Extrapolation of the expansion of the universe backwards in time using general relativity yields an infinite density and temperature at a finite time in the past . This singularity signals the breakdown of general relativity and thus , all the laws of physics . How closely this can be extrapolated toward the singularity is debated — certainly no closer than the end of the Planck epoch . This singularity is sometimes called " the Big Bang " , but the term can also refer to the early hot , dense phase itself , which can be considered the " birth " of our universe . Based on measurements of the expansion using Type Ia supernovae and measurements of temperature fluctuations in the cosmic microwave background , the universe has an estimated age of 13 @.@ 799 ± 0 @.@ 021 billion years . The agreement of these three independent measurements strongly supports the ΛCDM model that describes in detail the contents of the universe . 
 = = = Inflation and baryogenesis = = = 
 The earliest phases of the Big Bang are subject to much speculation . In the most common models the universe was filled homogeneously and isotropically with a very high energy density and huge temperatures and pressures and was very rapidly expanding and cooling . Approximately 10 − 37 seconds into the expansion , a phase transition caused a cosmic inflation , during which the universe grew exponentially . After inflation stopped , the universe consisted of a quark – gluon plasma , as well as all other elementary particles . Temperatures were so high that the random motions of particles were at relativistic speeds , and particle – antiparticle pairs of all kinds were being continuously created and destroyed in collisions . At some point an unknown reaction called baryogenesis violated the conservation of baryon number , leading to a very small excess of quarks and leptons over antiquarks and <unk> — of the order of one part in 30 million . This resulted in the predominance of matter over antimatter in the present universe . 
 = = = Cooling = = = 
 The universe continued to decrease in density and fall in temperature , hence the typical energy of each particle was decreasing . Symmetry breaking phase transitions put the fundamental forces of physics and the parameters of elementary particles into their present form . After about 10 − 11 seconds , the picture becomes less speculative , since particle energies drop to values that can be attained in particle physics experiments . At about 10 − 6 seconds , quarks and gluons combined to form baryons such as protons and neutrons . The small excess of quarks over antiquarks led to a small excess of baryons over antibaryons . The temperature was now no longer high enough to create new proton – antiproton pairs ( similarly for neutrons – <unk> ) , so a mass annihilation immediately followed , leaving just one in 1010 of the original protons and neutrons , and none of their antiparticles . A similar process happened at about 1 second for electrons and positrons . After these <unk> , the remaining protons , neutrons and electrons were no longer moving relativistically and the energy density of the universe was dominated by photons ( with a minor contribution from neutrinos ) . 
 A few minutes into the expansion , when the temperature was about a billion ( one thousand million ; 109 ; SI prefix <unk> ) kelvin and the density was about that of air , neutrons combined with protons to form the universe 's deuterium and helium nuclei in a process called Big Bang nucleosynthesis . Most protons remained uncombined as hydrogen nuclei . As the universe cooled , the rest mass energy density of matter came to gravitationally dominate that of the photon radiation . After about 379 @,@ 000 years the electrons and nuclei combined into atoms ( mostly hydrogen ) ; hence the radiation decoupled from matter and continued through space largely unimpeded . This relic radiation is known as the cosmic microwave background radiation . The chemistry of life may have begun shortly after the Big Bang , 13 @.@ 8 billion years ago , during a habitable epoch when the universe was only 10 – 17 million years old . 
 = = = Structure formation = = = 
 Over a long period of time , the slightly denser regions of the nearly uniformly distributed matter gravitationally attracted nearby matter and thus grew even denser , forming gas clouds , stars , galaxies , and the other astronomical structures observable today . The details of this process depend on the amount and type of matter in the universe . The four possible types of matter are known as cold dark matter , warm dark matter , hot dark matter , and baryonic matter . The best measurements available ( from WMAP ) show that the data is well @-@ fit by a Lambda @-@ CDM model in which dark matter is assumed to be cold ( warm dark matter is ruled out by early reionization ) , and is estimated to make up about 23 % of the matter / energy of the universe , while baryonic matter makes up about 4 @.@ 6 % . In an " extended model " which includes hot dark matter in the form of neutrinos , then if the " physical baryon density " <unk> is estimated at about 0 @.@ 023 ( this is different from the ' baryon density ' <unk> expressed as a fraction of the total matter / energy density , which as noted above is about 0 @.@ 046 ) , and the corresponding cold dark matter density <unk> is about 0 @.@ 11 , the corresponding neutrino density <unk> is estimated to be less than 0 @.@ 0062 . 
 = = = Cosmic acceleration = = = 
 Independent lines of evidence from Type Ia supernovae and the CMB imply that the universe today is dominated by a mysterious form of energy known as dark energy , which apparently permeates all of space . The observations suggest 73 % of the total energy density of today 's universe is in this form . When the universe was very young , it was likely infused with dark energy , but with less space and everything closer together , gravity predominated , and it was slowly braking the expansion . But eventually , after numerous billion years of expansion , the growing abundance of dark energy caused the expansion of the universe to slowly begin to accelerate . Dark energy in its simplest formulation takes the form of the cosmological constant term in Einstein 's field equations of general relativity , but its composition and mechanism are unknown and , more generally , the details of its equation of state and relationship with the Standard Model of particle physics continue to be investigated both through observation and theoretically . 
 All of this cosmic evolution after the inflationary epoch can be rigorously described and modeled by the ΛCDM model of cosmology , which uses the independent frameworks of quantum mechanics and Einstein 's General Relativity . There is no well @-@ supported model describing the action prior to 10 − 15 seconds or so . Apparently a new unified theory of quantum gravitation is needed to break this barrier . Understanding this earliest of eras in the history of the universe is currently one of the greatest unsolved problems in physics . 
 = = Underlying assumptions = = 
 The Big Bang theory depends on two major assumptions : the universality of physical laws and the cosmological principle . The cosmological principle states that on large scales the universe is homogeneous and isotropic . 
 These ideas were initially taken as postulates , but today there are efforts to test each of them . For example , the first assumption has been tested by observations showing that largest possible deviation of the fine structure constant over much of the age of the universe is of order 10 − 5 . Also , general relativity has passed stringent tests on the scale of the Solar System and binary stars . 
 If the large @-@ scale universe appears isotropic as viewed from Earth , the cosmological principle can be derived from the simpler Copernican principle , which states that there is no preferred ( or special ) observer or vantage point . To this end , the cosmological principle has been confirmed to a level of 10 − 5 via observations of the CMB . The universe has been measured to be homogeneous on the largest scales at the 10 % level . 
 = = = Expansion of space = = = 
 General relativity describes spacetime by a metric , which determines the distances that separate nearby points . The points , which can be galaxies , stars , or other objects , themselves are specified using a coordinate chart or " grid " that is laid down over all spacetime . The cosmological principle implies that the metric should be homogeneous and isotropic on large scales , which uniquely singles out the Friedmann – Lemaître – Robertson – Walker metric ( FLRW metric ) . This metric contains a scale factor , which describes how the size of the universe changes with time . This enables a convenient choice of a coordinate system to be made , called comoving coordinates . In this coordinate system the grid expands along with the universe , and objects that are moving only because of the expansion of the universe remain at fixed points on the grid . While their coordinate distance ( comoving distance ) remains constant , the physical distance between two such comoving points expands proportionally with the scale factor of the universe . 
 The Big Bang is not an explosion of matter moving outward to fill an empty universe . Instead , space itself expands with time everywhere and increases the physical distance between two comoving points . In other words , the Big Bang is not an explosion in space , but rather an expansion of space . Because the FLRW metric assumes a uniform distribution of mass and energy , it applies to our universe only on large scales — local concentrations of matter such as our galaxy are gravitationally bound and as such do not experience the large @-@ scale expansion of space . 
 = = = Horizons = = = 
 An important feature of the Big Bang spacetime is the presence of horizons . Since the universe has a finite age , and light travels at a finite speed , there may be events in the past whose light has not had time to reach us . This places a limit or a past horizon on the most distant objects that can be observed . Conversely , because space is expanding , and more distant objects are receding ever more quickly , light emitted by us today may never " catch up " to very distant objects . This defines a future horizon , which limits the events in the future that we will be able to influence . The presence of either type of horizon depends on the details of the FLRW model that describes our universe . Our understanding of the universe back to very early times suggests that there is a past horizon , though in practice our view is also limited by the opacity of the universe at early times . So our view cannot extend further backward in time , though the horizon recedes in space . If the expansion of the universe continues to accelerate , there is a future horizon as well . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Etymology = = = 
 English astronomer Fred Hoyle is credited with coining the term " Big Bang " during a 1949 BBC radio broadcast . It is popularly reported that Hoyle , who favored an alternative " steady state " cosmological model , intended this to be pejorative , but Hoyle explicitly denied this and said it was just a striking image meant to highlight the difference between the two models . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The Big Bang theory developed from observations of the structure of the universe and from theoretical considerations . In 1912 Vesto Slipher measured the first Doppler shift of a " spiral nebula " ( spiral nebula is the obsolete term for spiral galaxies ) , and soon discovered that almost all such nebulae were receding from Earth . He did not grasp the cosmological implications of this fact , and indeed at the time it was highly controversial whether or not these nebulae were " island universes " outside our Milky Way . Ten years later , Alexander Friedmann , a Russian cosmologist and mathematician , derived the Friedmann equations from Albert Einstein 's equations of general relativity , showing that the universe might be expanding in contrast to the static universe model advocated by Einstein at that time . In 1924 Edwin Hubble 's measurement of the great distance to the nearest spiral nebulae showed that these systems were indeed other galaxies . Independently deriving Friedmann 's equations in 1927 , Georges Lemaître , a Belgian physicist and Roman Catholic priest , proposed that the inferred recession of the nebulae was due to the expansion of the universe . 
 In 1931 Lemaître went further and suggested that the evident expansion of the universe , if projected back in time , meant that the further in the past the smaller the universe was , until at some finite time in the past all the mass of the universe was concentrated into a single point , a " primeval atom " where and when the fabric of time and space came into existence . 
 Starting in 1924 , Hubble painstakingly developed a series of distance indicators , the forerunner of the cosmic distance ladder , using the 100 @-@ inch ( 2 @.@ 5 m ) Hooker telescope at Mount Wilson Observatory . This allowed him to estimate distances to galaxies whose redshifts had already been measured , mostly by Slipher . In 1929 Hubble discovered a correlation between distance and recession velocity — now known as Hubble 's law . Lemaître had already shown that this was expected , given the cosmological principle . 
 In the 1920s and 1930s almost every major cosmologist preferred an eternal steady state universe , and several complained that the beginning of time implied by the Big Bang imported religious concepts into physics ; this objection was later repeated by supporters of the steady state theory . This perception was enhanced by the fact that the originator of the Big Bang theory , Monsignor Georges Lemaître , was a Roman Catholic priest . Arthur Eddington agreed with Aristotle that the universe did not have a beginning in time , viz . , that matter is eternal . A beginning in time was " repugnant " to him . Lemaître , however , thought that 
 If the world has begun with a single quantum , the notions of space and time would altogether fail to have any meaning at the beginning ; they would only begin to have a sensible meaning when the original quantum had been divided into a sufficient number of quanta . If this suggestion is correct , the beginning of the world happened a little before the beginning of space and time . 
 During the 1930s other ideas were proposed as non @-@ standard cosmologies to explain Hubble 's observations , including the Milne model , the oscillatory universe ( originally suggested by Friedmann , but advocated by Albert Einstein and Richard Tolman ) and Fritz Zwicky 's tired light hypothesis . 
 After World War II , two distinct possibilities emerged . One was Fred Hoyle 's steady state model , whereby new matter would be created as the universe seemed to expand . In this model the universe is roughly the same at any point in time . The other was Lemaître 's Big Bang theory , advocated and developed by George Gamow , who introduced big bang nucleosynthesis ( BBN ) and whose associates , Ralph Alpher and Robert Herman , predicted the cosmic microwave background radiation ( CMB ) . Ironically , it was Hoyle who coined the phrase that came to be applied to Lemaître 's theory , referring to it as " this big bang idea " during a BBC Radio broadcast in March 1949 . For a while , support was split between these two theories . Eventually , the observational evidence , most notably from radio source counts , began to favor Big Bang over Steady State . The discovery and confirmation of the cosmic microwave background radiation in 1965 secured the Big Bang as the best theory of the origin and evolution of the universe . Much of the current work in cosmology includes understanding how galaxies form in the context of the Big Bang , understanding the physics of the universe at earlier and earlier times , and reconciling observations with the basic theory . 
 In 1968 and 1970 Roger Penrose , Stephen Hawking , and George F. R. Ellis published papers where they showed that mathematical singularities were an inevitable initial condition of general relativistic models of the Big Bang . Then , from the 1970s to the 1990s , cosmologists worked on characterizing the features of the Big Bang universe and resolving outstanding problems . In 1981 Alan Guth made a breakthrough in theoretical work on resolving certain outstanding theoretical problems in the Big Bang theory with the introduction of an epoch of rapid expansion in the early universe he called " inflation " . Meanwhile , during these decades , two questions in observational cosmology that generated much discussion and disagreement were over the precise values of the Hubble Constant and the matter @-@ density of the universe ( before the discovery of dark energy , thought to be the key predictor for the eventual fate of the universe ) . In the mid @-@ 1990s observations of certain globular clusters appeared to indicate that they were about 15 billion years old , which conflicted with most then @-@ current estimates of the age of the universe ( and indeed with the age measured today ) . This issue was later resolved when new computer simulations , which included the effects of mass loss due to stellar winds , indicated a much younger age for globular clusters . While there still remain some questions as to how accurately the ages of the clusters are measured , globular clusters are of interest to cosmology as some of the oldest objects in the universe . 
 Significant progress in Big Bang cosmology have been made since the late 1990s as a result of advances in telescope technology as well as the analysis of data from satellites such as COBE , the Hubble Space Telescope and WMAP . <unk> now have fairly precise and accurate measurements of many of the parameters of the Big Bang model , and have made the unexpected discovery that the expansion of the universe appears to be accelerating . 
 = = Observational evidence = = 
 The earliest and most direct observational evidence of the validity of the theory are the expansion of the universe according to Hubble 's law ( as indicated by the redshifts of galaxies ) , discovery and measurement of the cosmic microwave background and the relative abundances of light elements produced by Big Bang nucleosynthesis . More recent evidence includes observations of galaxy formation and evolution , and the distribution of large @-@ scale cosmic structures , These are sometimes called the " four pillars " of the Big Bang theory . 
 Precise modern models of the Big Bang appeal to various exotic physical phenomena that have not been observed in terrestrial laboratory experiments or incorporated into the Standard Model of particle physics . Of these features , dark matter is currently subjected to the most active laboratory investigations . Remaining issues include the <unk> halo problem and the dwarf galaxy problem of cold dark matter . Dark energy is also an area of intense interest for scientists , but it is not clear whether direct detection of dark energy will be possible . Inflation and baryogenesis remain more speculative features of current Big Bang models . Viable , quantitative explanations for such phenomena are still being sought . These are currently unsolved problems in physics . 
 = = = Hubble 's law and the expansion of space = = = 
 Observations of distant galaxies and quasars show that these objects are redshifted — the light emitted from them has been shifted to longer wavelengths . This can be seen by taking a frequency spectrum of an object and matching the spectroscopic pattern of emission lines or absorption lines corresponding to atoms of the chemical elements interacting with the light . These redshifts are uniformly isotropic , distributed evenly among the observed objects in all directions . If the redshift is interpreted as a Doppler shift , the recessional velocity of the object can be calculated . For some galaxies , it is possible to estimate distances via the cosmic distance ladder . When the recessional velocities are plotted against these distances , a linear relationship known as Hubble 's law is observed : 
 v 
 = <unk> , 
 where 
 v is the recessional velocity of the galaxy or other distant object , 
 D is the comoving distance to the object , and 
 H0 is Hubble 's constant , measured to be 70 @.@ 4 + 1 @.@ 3 
 − 1 @.@ 4 km / s / Mpc by the WMAP probe . 
 Hubble 's law has two possible explanations . Either we are at the center of an explosion of galaxies — which is untenable given the Copernican principle — or the universe is uniformly expanding everywhere . This universal expansion was predicted from general relativity by Alexander Friedmann in 1922 and Georges Lemaître in 1927 , well before Hubble made his 1929 analysis and observations , and it remains the cornerstone of the Big Bang theory as developed by Friedmann , Lemaître , Robertson , and Walker . 
 The theory requires the relation v = 
 HD to hold at all times , where D is the comoving distance , v is the recessional velocity , and v , H , and D vary as the universe expands ( hence we write H0 to denote the present @-@ day Hubble " constant " ) . For distances much smaller than the size of the observable universe , the Hubble redshift can be thought of as the Doppler shift corresponding to the recession velocity v. However , the redshift is not a true Doppler shift , but rather the result of the expansion of the universe between the time the light was emitted and the time that it was detected . 
 That space is undergoing metric expansion is shown by direct observational evidence of the Cosmological principle and the Copernican principle , which together with Hubble 's law have no other explanation . Astronomical redshifts are extremely isotropic and homogeneous , supporting the Cosmological principle that the universe looks the same in all directions , along with much other evidence . If the redshifts were the result of an explosion from a center distant from us , they would not be so similar in different directions . 
 Measurements of the effects of the cosmic microwave background radiation on the dynamics of distant astrophysical systems in 2000 proved the Copernican principle , that , on a cosmological scale , the Earth is not in a central position . Radiation from the Big Bang was demonstrably warmer at earlier times throughout the universe . Uniform cooling of the cosmic microwave background over billions of years is explainable only if the universe is experiencing a metric expansion , and excludes the possibility that we are near the unique center of an explosion . 
 = = = Cosmic microwave background radiation = = = 
 In 1965 Arno <unk> and Robert Wilson serendipitously discovered the cosmic background radiation , an omnidirectional signal in the microwave band . Their discovery provided substantial confirmation of the big @-@ bang predictions by Alpher , Herman and Gamow around 1950 . Through the 1970s the radiation was found to be approximately consistent with a black body spectrum in all directions ; this spectrum has been redshifted by the expansion of the universe , and today corresponds to approximately 2 @.@ 725 K. This tipped the balance of evidence in favor of the Big Bang model , and <unk> and Wilson were awarded a Nobel Prize in 1978 . 
 The surface of last scattering corresponding to emission of the CMB occurs shortly after recombination , the epoch when neutral hydrogen becomes stable . Prior to this , the universe comprised a hot dense photon @-@ baryon plasma sea where photons were quickly scattered from free charged particles . Peaking at around 372 ± 14 <unk> , the mean free path for a photon becomes long enough to reach the present day and the universe becomes transparent . 
 In 1989 NASA launched the Cosmic Background Explorer satellite ( COBE ) which made two major advances : in 1990 , high @-@ precision spectrum measurements showed the CMB frequency spectrum is an almost perfect blackbody with no deviations at a level of 1 part in 104 , and measured a residual temperature of 2 @.@ 726 K ( more recent measurements have revised this figure down slightly to 2 @.@ <unk> K ) ; then in 1992 further COBE measurements discovered tiny fluctuations ( anisotropies ) in the CMB temperature across the sky , at a level of about one part in 105 . John C. Mather and George Smoot were awarded the 2006 Nobel Prize in Physics for their leadership in these results . During the following decade , CMB anisotropies were further investigated by a large number of ground @-@ based and balloon experiments . In 2000 – 2001 several experiments , most notably <unk> , found the shape of the universe to be spatially almost flat by measuring the typical angular size ( the size on the sky ) of the anisotropies . 
 In early 2003 the first results of the Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe ( WMAP ) were released , yielding what were at the time the most accurate values for some of the cosmological parameters . The results disproved several specific cosmic inflation models , but are consistent with the inflation theory in general . The Planck space probe was launched in May 2009 . Other ground and balloon based cosmic microwave background experiments are ongoing . 
 = = = Abundance of primordial elements = = = 
 Using the Big Bang model it is possible to calculate the concentration of helium @-@ 4 , helium @-@ 3 , deuterium , and lithium @-@ 7 in the universe as ratios to the amount of ordinary hydrogen . The relative abundances depend on a single parameter , the ratio of photons to baryons . This value can be calculated independently from the detailed structure of CMB fluctuations . The ratios predicted ( by mass , not by number ) are about 0 @.@ 25 for 4He / H , about 10 − 3 for 2H / H , about 10 − 4 for 3He / H and about 10 − 9 for 7Li / H. 
 The measured abundances all agree at least roughly with those predicted from a single value of the baryon @-@ to @-@ photon ratio . The agreement is excellent for deuterium , close but formally discrepant for 4He , and off by a factor of two for 7Li ; in the latter two cases there are substantial systematic uncertainties . Nonetheless , the general consistency with abundances predicted by Big Bang nucleosynthesis is strong evidence for the Big Bang , as the theory is the only known explanation for the relative abundances of light elements , and it is virtually impossible to " tune " the Big Bang to produce much more or less than 20 – 30 % helium . Indeed , there is no obvious reason outside of the Big Bang that , for example , the young universe ( i.e. , before star formation , as determined by studying matter supposedly free of stellar nucleosynthesis products ) should have more helium than deuterium or more deuterium than 3He , and in constant ratios , too . 
 = = = Galactic evolution and distribution = = = 
 Detailed observations of the morphology and distribution of galaxies and quasars are in agreement with the current state of the Big Bang theory . A combination of observations and theory suggest that the first quasars and galaxies formed about a billion years after the Big Bang , and since then larger structures have been forming , such as galaxy clusters and superclusters . Populations of stars have been aging and evolving , so that distant galaxies ( which are observed as they were in the early universe ) appear very different from nearby galaxies ( observed in a more recent state ) . Moreover , galaxies that formed relatively recently appear markedly different from galaxies formed at similar distances but shortly after the Big Bang . These observations are strong arguments against the steady @-@ state model . Observations of star formation , galaxy and quasar distributions and larger structures agree well with Big Bang simulations of the formation of structure in the universe and are helping to complete details of the theory . 
 = = = Primordial gas clouds = = = 
 In 2011 astronomers found what they believe to be pristine clouds of primordial gas , by analyzing absorption lines in the spectra of distant quasars . Before this discovery , all other astronomical objects have been observed to contain heavy elements that are formed in stars . These two clouds of gas contain no elements heavier than hydrogen and deuterium . Since the clouds of gas have no heavy elements , they likely formed in the first few minutes after the Big Bang , during Big Bang nucleosynthesis . 
 = = = Other lines of evidence = = = 
 The age of the universe as estimated from the Hubble expansion and the CMB is now in good agreement with other estimates using the ages of the oldest stars , both as measured by applying the theory of stellar evolution to globular clusters and through radiometric dating of individual Population II stars . 
 The prediction that the CMB temperature was higher in the past has been experimentally supported by observations of very low temperature absorption lines in gas clouds at high redshift . This prediction also implies that the amplitude of the Sunyaev – Zel 'dovich effect in clusters of galaxies does not depend directly on redshift . Observations have found this to be roughly true , but this effect depends on cluster properties that do change with cosmic time , making precise measurements difficult . 
 On 17 March 2014 astronomers at the Harvard @-@ Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics announced the apparent detection of primordial gravitational waves , which , was shown to be due to galactic dust . On February 11 , 2016 , the LIGO Scientific Collaboration and Virgo Collaboration teams announced that they had made first observation of gravitational waves , originating from a pair of merging black holes using the Advanced LIGO detectors . 
 = = = Future observations = = = 
 Future gravitational waves observatories might see primordial gravitational waves , relics of the early universe , up to less than a second of the Big Bang . 
 = = Problems and related issues in physics = = 
 As with any theory , a number of mysteries and problems have arisen as a result of the development of the Big Bang theory . Some of these mysteries and problems have been resolved while others are still outstanding . Proposed solutions to some of the problems in the Big Bang model have revealed new mysteries of their own . For example , the horizon problem , the magnetic monopole problem , and the flatness problem are most commonly resolved with inflationary theory , but the details of the inflationary universe are still left unresolved and many , including some founders of the theory , say it has been disproven . What follows are a list of the mysterious aspects of the Big Bang theory still under intense investigation by cosmologists and astrophysicists . 
 = = = <unk> asymmetry = = = 
 It is not yet understood why the universe has more matter than antimatter . It is generally assumed that when the universe was young and very hot , it was in statistical equilibrium and contained equal numbers of baryons and antibaryons . However , observations suggest that the universe , including its most distant parts , is made almost entirely of matter . A process called baryogenesis was hypothesized to account for the asymmetry . For baryogenesis to occur , the Sakharov conditions must be satisfied . These require that baryon number is not conserved , that C @-@ symmetry and CP @-@ symmetry are violated and that the universe depart from thermodynamic equilibrium . All these conditions occur in the Standard Model , but the effect is not strong enough to explain the present baryon asymmetry . 
 = = = Dark energy = = = 
 Measurements of the redshift – magnitude relation for type Ia supernovae indicate that the expansion of the universe has been accelerating since the universe was about half its present age . To explain this acceleration , general relativity requires that much of the energy in the universe consists of a component with large negative pressure , dubbed " dark energy " . Dark energy , though speculative , solves numerous problems . Measurements of the cosmic microwave background indicate that the universe is very nearly spatially flat , and therefore according to general relativity the universe must have almost exactly the critical density of mass / energy . But the mass density of the universe can be measured from its gravitational clustering , and is found to have only about 30 % of the critical density . Since theory suggests that dark energy does not cluster in the usual way it is the best explanation for the " missing " energy density . Dark energy also helps to explain two geometrical measures of the overall curvature of the universe , one using the frequency of gravitational lenses , and the other using the characteristic pattern of the large @-@ scale structure as a cosmic ruler . 
 Negative pressure is believed to be a property of vacuum energy , but the exact nature and existence of dark energy remains one of the great mysteries of the Big Bang . Results from the WMAP team in 2008 are in accordance with a universe that consists of 73 % dark energy , 23 % dark matter , 4 @.@ 6 % regular matter and less than 1 % neutrinos . According to theory , the energy density in matter decreases with the expansion of the universe , but the dark energy density remains constant ( or nearly so ) as the universe expands . Therefore , matter made up a larger fraction of the total energy of the universe in the past than it does today , but its fractional contribution will fall in the far future as dark energy becomes even more dominant . 
 The dark energy component of the universe has been explained by theorists using a variety of competing theories including Einstein 's cosmological constant but also extending to more exotic forms of quintessence or other modified gravity schemes . A cosmological constant problem sometimes called the " most embarrassing problem in physics " results from the apparent discrepancy between the measured energy density of dark energy and the one naively predicted from Planck units . 
 = = = Dark matter = = = 
 During the 1970s and 80s , various observations showed that there is not sufficient visible matter in the universe to account for the apparent strength of gravitational forces within and between galaxies . This led to the idea that up to 90 % of the matter in the universe is dark matter that does not emit light or interact with normal baryonic matter . In addition , the assumption that the universe is mostly normal matter led to predictions that were strongly inconsistent with observations . In particular , the universe today is far more lumpy and contains far less deuterium than can be accounted for without dark matter . While dark matter has always been controversial , it is inferred by various observations : the anisotropies in the CMB , galaxy cluster velocity <unk> , large @-@ scale structure distributions , gravitational lensing studies , and X @-@ ray measurements of galaxy clusters . 
 Indirect evidence for dark matter comes from its gravitational influence on other matter , as no dark matter particles have been observed in laboratories . Many particle physics candidates for dark matter have been proposed , and several projects to detect them directly are underway . 
 Additionally , there are outstanding problems associated with the currently favored cold dark matter model which include the dwarf galaxy problem and the <unk> halo problem . Alternative theories have been proposed that do not require a large amount of undetected matter but instead modify the laws of gravity established by Newton and Einstein , but no alternative theory as been as successful as the cold dark matter proposal in explaining all extant observations . 
 = = = Horizon problem = = = 
 The horizon problem results from the premise that information cannot travel faster than light . In a universe of finite age this sets a limit — the particle horizon — on the separation of any two regions of space that are in causal contact . The observed isotropy of the CMB is problematic in this regard : if the universe had been dominated by radiation or matter at all times up to the epoch of last scattering , the particle horizon at that time would correspond to about 2 degrees on the sky . There would then be no mechanism to cause wider regions to have the same temperature . 
 A resolution to this apparent inconsistency is offered by inflationary theory in which a homogeneous and isotropic scalar energy field dominates the universe at some very early period ( before baryogenesis ) . During inflation , the universe undergoes exponential expansion , and the particle horizon expands much more rapidly than previously assumed , so that regions presently on opposite sides of the observable universe are well inside each other 's particle horizon . The observed isotropy of the CMB then follows from the fact that this larger region was in causal contact before the beginning of inflation . 
 Heisenberg 's uncertainty principle predicts that during the inflationary phase there would be quantum thermal fluctuations , which would be magnified to cosmic scale . These fluctuations serve as the seeds of all current structure in the universe . Inflation predicts that the primordial fluctuations are nearly scale invariant and Gaussian , which has been accurately confirmed by measurements of the CMB . 
 If inflation occurred , exponential expansion would push large regions of space well beyond our observable horizon . 
 A related issue to the classic horizon problem arises because in most standard cosmological inflation models , inflation ceases well before electroweak symmetry breaking occurs , so inflation should not be able to prevent large @-@ scale discontinuities in the electroweak vacuum since distant parts of the observable universe were causally separate when the electroweak epoch ended . 
 = = = Magnetic monopoles = = = 
 The magnetic monopole objection was raised in the late 1970s . Grand unified theories predicted topological defects in space that would manifest as magnetic monopoles . These objects would be produced efficiently in the hot early universe , resulting in a density much higher than is consistent with observations , given that no monopoles have been found . This problem is also resolved by cosmic inflation , which removes all point defects from the observable universe , in the same way that it drives the geometry to flatness . 
 = = = Flatness problem = = = 
 The flatness problem ( also known as the <unk> problem ) is an observational problem associated with a Friedmann – Lemaître – Robertson – Walker metric . The universe may have positive , negative , or zero spatial curvature depending on its total energy density . <unk> is negative if its density is less than the critical density , positive if greater , and zero at the critical density , in which case space is said to be flat . The problem is that any small departure from the critical density grows with time , and yet the universe today remains very close to flat . Given that a natural timescale for departure from flatness might be the Planck time , 10 − 43 seconds , the fact that the universe has reached neither a heat death nor a Big Crunch after billions of years requires an explanation . For instance , even at the relatively late age of a few minutes ( the time of nucleosynthesis ) , the universe density must have been within one part in 1014 of its critical value , or it would not exist as it does today . 
 = = Ultimate fate of the universe = = 
 Before observations of dark energy , cosmologists considered two scenarios for the future of the universe . If the mass density of the universe were greater than the critical density , then the universe would reach a maximum size and then begin to collapse . It would become denser and hotter again , ending with a state similar to that in which it started — a Big Crunch . Alternatively , if the density in the universe were equal to or below the critical density , the expansion would slow down but never stop . Star formation would cease with the consumption of interstellar gas in each galaxy ; stars would burn out leaving white dwarfs , neutron stars , and black holes . Very gradually , collisions between these would result in mass accumulating into larger and larger black holes . The average temperature of the universe would asymptotically approach absolute zero — a Big Freeze . Moreover , if the proton were unstable , then baryonic matter would disappear , leaving only radiation and black holes . Eventually , black holes would evaporate by emitting Hawking radiation . The entropy of the universe would increase to the point where no organized form of energy could be extracted from it , a scenario known as heat death . 
 Modern observations of accelerating expansion imply that more and more of the currently visible universe will pass beyond our event horizon and out of contact with us . The eventual result is not known . The ΛCDM model of the universe contains dark energy in the form of a cosmological constant . This theory suggests that only gravitationally bound systems , such as galaxies , will remain together , and they too will be subject to heat death as the universe expands and cools . Other explanations of dark energy , called phantom energy theories , suggest that ultimately galaxy clusters , stars , planets , atoms , nuclei , and matter itself will be torn apart by the ever @-@ increasing expansion in a so @-@ called Big Rip . 
 = = Speculations = = 
 While the Big Bang model is well established in cosmology , it is likely to be refined . The Big Bang theory , built upon the equations of classical general relativity , indicates a singularity at the origin of cosmic time ; this infinite energy density is regarded as impossible in physics . Still , it is known that the equations are not applicable before the time when the universe cooled down to the Planck temperature , and this conclusion depends on various assumptions , of which some could never be experimentally verified . ( Also see Planck epoch . ) 
 One proposed refinement to avoid this would @-@ be singularity is to develop a correct treatment of quantum gravity . 
 It is not known what could have preceded the hot dense state of the early universe or how and why it originated , though speculation abounds in the field of cosmogony . 
 Some proposals , each of which entails untested hypotheses , are : 
 Models including the Hartle – Hawking no @-@ boundary condition , in which the whole of space @-@ time is finite ; the Big Bang does represent the limit of time but without any singularity . 
 Big Bang lattice model , states that the universe at the moment of the Big Bang consists of an infinite lattice of fermions , which is smeared over the fundamental domain so it has rotational , translational and gauge symmetry . The symmetry is the largest symmetry possible and hence the lowest entropy of any state . 
 <unk> cosmology models , in which inflation is due to the movement of branes in string theory ; the pre @-@ Big Bang model ; the <unk> model , in which the Big Bang is the result of a collision between branes ; and the cyclic model , a variant of the <unk> model in which collisions occur periodically . In the latter model the Big Bang was preceded by a Big Crunch and the universe cycles from one process to the other . 
 Eternal inflation , in which universal inflation ends locally here and there in a random fashion , each end @-@ point leading to a bubble universe , expanding from its own big bang . 
 Proposals in the last two categories , see the Big Bang as an event in either a much larger and older universe or in a multiverse . 
 = = Religious and philosophical interpretations = = 
 As a description of the origin of the universe , the Big Bang has significant bearing on religion and philosophy . As a result , it has become one of the liveliest areas in the discourse between science and religion . Some believe the Big Bang implies a creator , and some see its mention in their holy books , while others argue that Big Bang cosmology makes the notion of a creator superfluous . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Farrell , John ( 2005 ) . The Day Without Yesterday : Lemaitre , Einstein , and the Birth of Modern Cosmology . New York , NY : Thunder 's Mouth Press . ISBN 1 @-@ 56025 @-@ 660 @-@ 5 . 
 Kolb , E. ; Turner , M. ( 1988 ) . The Early Universe . Addison – Wesley . ISBN 0 @-@ 201 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 Peacock , J. ( 1999 ) . Cosmological Physics . Cambridge University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 521 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 Woolfson , M. ( 2013 ) . Time , Space , Stars and Man : The Story of Big Bang ( 2nd edition ) . World Scientific Publishing . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 933 @-@ 3 . 
 = Hasta la Raíz = 
 Hasta la Raíz ( Spanish pronunciation : [ <unk> la <unk> ] , " To the Root " ) is the sixth studio album by Mexican recording artist Natalia Lafourcade . It was released on March 17 , 2015 , by Sony Music Latin . After the success of her previous album , Mujer Divina , a tribute to Mexican singer @-@ songwriter Agustín Lara , Lafourcade decided to record an album with original recordings . Lafourcade spent three years writing the songs and searching for inspiration in different cities , resulting in songs that express very personal feelings regarding love . The record was produced by Lafourcade , with the assistance of Argentinian musician Cachorro López and Mexican artist Leonel García . 
 Upon its release , Hasta la Raíz received favorable reviews from music critics , with some critics expressing skepticism about her songwriting and saying she had stayed within her comfort zone , and others praising her evolution as a musician and naming the album one of the best pop releases of the year . The record peaked at number eight on the US Billboard Latin Albums and number one in Mexico , where it was certified platinum , with over 60 @,@ 000 copies shipped in the country . Hasta la Raíz received a nomination for Album of the Year and won Best Alternative Music Album and Best Engineered Album at the 16th Latin Grammy Awards . The album also won Best Latin Rock , Urban or Alternative Album at the 58th Annual Grammy Awards . 
 To promote the album , four singles were released , and Lafourcade launched the 2015 Hasta la Raíz Tour to several Latin American countries , the United States , and Europe . The album 's first two singles , the title track and " Nunca Es Suficiente " reached the top five in Mexico . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 2010 Natalia Lafourcade joined Mexican orchestra conductor Alondra de la Parra on the musical project <unk> <unk> , an album created as part of the Bicentennial of Mexico celebration . While conducting research to find songs for that album , Lafourcade studied Mexican singer @-@ songwriter Agustín Lara 's catalog and decided to record a tribute album with his songs . Released in 2012 , Mujer Divina earned her accolades for Best Alternative Music Album and Best Long Form Music Video at the 14th Latin Grammy Awards . Two years later , Lafourcade traveled to Veracruz ( Mexico ) , Colombia , and Cuba in a search for musical inspiration and a balance between heart , mind and body . She has said that composition of her new music for Hasta la Raíz was closely woven with the experience of singing Lara 's music . 
 Hasta la Raíz is Lafourcade 's sixth studio album and her first album of original material in seven years , since Hu Hu Hu ( 2009 ) . It was produced by Argentinean musician Cachorro López , Mexican singer @-@ songwriter Leonel García , and Lafourcade after another record producer became too expensive : " I could not afford a very famous producer who had his fees at exorbitant figures , I won 't say his name , so I decided to take refuge on my friends [ Cachorro and Leonel ] , doing songs with them as accomplices , and they understood " . 
 = = Writing and recording = = 
 After completing the album Hu Hu Hu ( 2009 ) Lafourcade experienced writer 's block , and felt that the songs she was writing were too similar to those in her previous albums . For her new work , she sought inspiration from Agustín Lara 's repertoire and her native country , Mexico . " One of the things I wanted to happen with this record was to find the connection with Mexico and its people again " . She said she was a Mexican and proud of the " very many " positive parts it has . Musically , she wanted more simplicity in her songs . Lafourcade forced herself to write " without judgement " , recording voice memos on her phone as part of the writing process . She was inspired by the works of Latin American songwriters such as Simón Díaz , Violeta Parra , Mercedes Sosa , <unk> Vargas , and Caetano Veloso . While recording demos , Lafourcade realized that the songs were more direct and emotional than her previous work . The writing took three years , resulting in approximately 30 songs . Since the album was about her personal life , she selected what she felt were " the strongest ones " , saying , " more than making an album , I wanted to have songs ... that could stand on their own " . 
 The title track , " Hasta la Raíz " , was written by Lafourcade and Mexican singer @-@ songwriter Leonel García , with whom she had previously collaborated on her album Mujer Divina and on García 's album Todas <unk> ( 2012 ) . García had an idea about the song ; they then wrote the music together . <unk> referred to this collaboration as " magical " , saying the song was an anthem to human strength , and about not forgetting one 's roots . García played a huapango riff , and Lafourcade started singing along while producer Cachorro López recorded everything , and the final result is from that session . 
 There are two songs about falling in love , " Mi Lugar Favorito " and " Vámonos Negrito " . The former , arranged to emulate emotional outbursts , was the most difficult to finish , and the singer had a hard time trying to find the right place for it on the album . " Vámonos Negrito " is a tribute to her Latin American roots that she started writing after a show in Colombia and finished in Cuba ; in this song , one of her favorites , she tried to create a musical landscape with instruments , textures , and harmonies . The bolero " Antes de <unk> " , is a " sad and hopeful " song . It is about not letting go of the things we love . " Ya No Te Puedo Querer " is , according to Lafourcade , an obscure folk @-@ pop song about finding that one cannot be in a relationship anymore ; it was written during a concert tour in Monterrey . 
 " Para Qué <unk> " is a song about being all right and trusting someone . Lafourcade wrote the song in a short time but had problems with the chorus , so she asked Torreblanca 's lead singer Jose Manuel Torreblanca for help ; López did the arrangements . " Nunca es Suficiente " deals with emotions about a dysfunctional relationship and wanting something more . It was composed by Lafourcade and Daniela Azpiazu and was intended to be performed by Mexican artist Paulina Rubio , since both Lafourcade and Azpiazu wanted to write songs for other artists . However , upon finishing it , they decided to keep the song to themselves and use it either for <unk> 's project María Daniela y su Sonido Lasser or Lafourcade 's album . According to Beverly Bryan of The Village Voice , the song resembles Belle and Sebastian 's The Life Pursuit " in its treatment of Sixties @-@ era pop inspirations " . Mariano Prunes of AllMusic compared the track to the work of Spanish singer Jeanette on the song " Porque Te Vas " . Lafourcade decided upon the album 's title between the songs " Hasta la Raíz " and " <unk> Blancas " ; the latter was written in Las Vegas , during her trip to the Grammy Awards . It is a love story filled with metaphors about her love for Mexico , connection with the universe , and self @-@ preservation . The song had the most modified arrangement , being made with few chords . 
 In order to create a balance in the tracklist , Lafourcade wrote " Te Quiero Ver " as a " simple song " about wanting to be with someone . The track was co @-@ written by Marian <unk> , and was inspired by the music of the 1970s , including a chorus with answering voices , emulating musical theatre . The lyrics for " Lo Que <unk> " , deals with the decision to leave someone and going separate ways . " Estoy Lista " is a ballad about being ready to be well , and Lafourcade worked on the track in her spare time , taking a year to finish it . The last track , " No Más Llorar " , was written during a family reunion with her father and sister in Chile . Lafourcade wrote it about a love that could not be , her mourning and search for stability , forgiveness , and healing . In live performances , the singer dedicates the track to Mexico , to send hope through her music and help people deal with situations such as the Iguala mass kidnapping . " I feel that nowadays is really important that we acknowledge the social part . We must look inward and work , see which aspects we can address to deliver something more positive to the world " . 
 Regarding the musical arrangements , Lafourcade explained , " I felt that the arrangements had to function as the perfect embrace to the songs ... since each song had its own distinct personality . So it was like creating the ideal musical surroundings . I 'm very visual with music , so I always try to create atmospheres , panoramas , and images . Kind of like creating photographs through music " . She stated to Venue Magazine that the album sequence was selected to create a cycle , to have a beginning and an ending . Lissette Corsa of MTV Iggy said that the songs are " crafted as expansive , cinematic soundscapes that lend themselves to the mood of each song " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Upon its release , Hasta la Raíz received positive reactions from music critics . Beverly Bryan of The Village Voice stated that the album " casts a spell with deep feeling , and melodies and lyrics that linger in the mind . <unk> adorned with subtle strings and velvety production , it has the kind of warmth people are always saying they can hear on old vinyl records " . Bryan also predicted that this release would be recognized in the future as the singer 's " most profound and enduring statement " . In another positive review , Natalia Cano of the magazine Rolling Stone Mexico , referred to the album as " fresh and honest pop , a reflection of her musical maturity " , reiterating that the album " continues to place her as one of the most important composer and performer of Latin America . " AllMusic 's Mariano Prunes gave the album 4 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars ranking , and on his review stated that " these are extremely well @-@ written songs in the spirit of the great Latin America romantic tradition of which Lara was a founding father , but infused with a contemporary perspective " . Luis Romero of the website Coffee and Saturday said that the album is one of the best pop releases of the year , praising Lafourcade 's evolution as a musician , but was critical of Lafourcade for not having extended " her comfort zone " , since it is too early in her career to become settled in one type of music , " and the proof is that the best album tracks are those where she is helped by Leonel García , Torreblanca and María Daniela " . An editor from Televisa Espectáculos wrote a mixed review , commenting that the album has to be listened to twice to " fall in love with at least one song " , comparing positively the title track with Lafourcade 's work on her previous album ( Mujer Divina ) and the songs " Mi Lugar Favorito " and " Te Quiero Ver " with her album Hu Hu Hu , creating a " mix of sounds " on which Lafourcade shows all the things she learned after working with Agustín Lara 's catalog . Lissette Corsa , of MTV Iggy , stated that " despite moments of darkness and heartfelt sadness , Hasta la <unk> bristles with a sense of adventure and optimism " , and noted the influence of Chilean songwriter Violeta Parra in the track " Vámonos Negrito " , as part of Lafourcade 's " eclectic artistry " . Corsa also noted that the singer " drew from Joni Mitchell , Charles Bradley , and Amy Winehouse " . 
 The album earned the accolades for Best Alternative Music Album and Best Engineered Album , and was nominated for Album of the Year , at the 16th Annual Latin Grammy Awards . About the nominations , Lafourcade said to the newspaper Al Día , " I am very grateful to the people because this album has allowed me to reach them in a closer way , create a complicity ... I feel very happy and with high expectations , regardless of whether we get the Latin Grammy or not " . Billboard columnist Leila Cobo , while reviewing the nominees for the Latin Grammy Award for Album of the Year , stated that this is a " breakthrough album " for the singer , since she is going " beyond her alt roots into commercial territory but with finesse and guts that stay close to her origins " . Hasta la Raíz won a Grammy Award for Best Latin Rock , Urban or Alternative Album . The album ranked at number @-@ one in the list for the " 10 Best Albums of 2015 in Mexico " by newspaper El País ; according to the reviewer Luis Pablo Beauregard , it is an album " naked and raw , where the lyrics and fragility of her voice draw the footprint of heartbreak " . The American edition of Rolling Stone magazine placed Hasta la Raíz at number 3 in the list for the " 10 Best Latin Albums of the Year " , arguing that " the loftiness of the album 's ambitions are tempered by Lafourcade 's masterful songwriting , which remains as deft as a Mesut Özil cross pass " . The editors of Billboard magazine ranked the album at number 2 in the list for the " 10 Best Latin Albums of 2015 " , stating that the singer " manages to be retro and futuristic at the same time ... the sound is so unexpected , that coupled with Lafourcade ’ s sweet vocals , it 's arresting " . Website AllMusic included the album on their list for the " Best of 2015 : Favorite Latin and World Albums " , explaining that Lafourcade " delivers an intimate , poignant , quietly powerful collection of heartbreak songs on this gem of an album " . 
 = = Singles = = 
 The title track , " Hasta la Raíz " , was released as the lead single on January 14 , 2015 . It peaked at number 5 in Mexico 's Monitor Latino Pop Chart and number 17 in the U.S. Billboard Latin Pop Songs chart , and won Record of the Year , Song of the Year and Best Alternative Song at the Latin Grammy Awards of 2015 . The music video was directed by Alonso Ruizpalacios , at the Estudios Churubusco in Mexico City , gathering 300 fans who responded to an ad published in social networks . " Nunca Es Suficiente " was released as a promo single on January 21 , 2015 . The music video was released on March 23 , 2015 , and was directed by Martín Bautista , and features actors Diana Lein , Gustavo Sánchez Parra and <unk> Huerta . The video presents two couples during different stages of a love relationship . " Nunca Es Suficiente " peaked at number 4 in the Monitor Latino Pop Chart in Mexico . The track " Lo Que <unk> " was selected as the third single , with its music video also directed by Ruizpalacios and premiering on September 13 , 2015 . On December 10 , 2015 was announced that the track " Mi Lugar Favorito " was the fourth single from the album . 
 = = Commercial reception = = 
 In the United States , the album was available on March 17 , 2015 , as a digital download only and debuted at number 12 in the Billboard Latin Albums chart , selling 1 @,@ 000 digital units . On April 14 , the album was available on Amazon on Demand and on September 25 , 2015 , a physical CD was released . Following Lafourcade 's performance at the Latin Grammy Awards of 2015 , sales of the album increased 176 % and re @-@ entered the Billboard Latin Pop Albums chart at number 7 , almost matching its initial peak ( number 6 ) . The album re @-@ entered the Latin Albums chart in the week of January 23 , 2016 , to achieve its highest peak at number 8 and also reached a highest position in the Latin Pop Album chart , at number 5 . In the week of April 16 , 2016 , reached a peak of number 4 at the Latin Pop Album Chart . In Mexico , Hasta la Raíz peaked at number one in the Top 100 Mexico chart and was certified platinum by the Asociación Mexicana de Productores de Fonogramas y Videogramas for the shipment of 60 @,@ 000 copies . Hasta la Raíz peaked at number 73 in the Spanish Album Chart and 82 in the Italian Album Charts , spending one week on both record charts . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Tour = = 
 Lafourcade launched a promotional tour throughout Mexico and only performed at theaters that were at least 100 years old . The Village Voice , reporting on an interview with Lafourcade , noted , " There are enough such grand old structures in her country to make this possible " , although according to Lafourcade , " some of them are better maintained than others . " The " Hasta la Raíz Tour " opened in Tijuana on April 18 , 2015 , and also visited several cities in the United States such as San Francisco , Washington , D.C. , and New York City . In Hollywood , Lafourcade participated on the Latin Grammy Acoustic Sessions at the Fonda Theatre . A few dates in Argentina , Chile , Italy , and Spain were announced ; however , her record label , Sony Music , announced that due to illness the performance in Spain , set for June , would be canceled . In September , Lafourcade performed at " Festival <unk> 2015 " in Madrid , Spain . The singer also visited Colombia on October 1 , 2015 , performing at Bogotá 's Royal Center . On November 4 , 2015 , Lafourcade fulfilled a long @-@ held dream of performing for the first time at the Auditorio Nacional in Mexico City . " I 've been here with Julieta Venegas , and someone reminded me that I opened for Juanes a few years ago . When I was 13 years old , I ran away from home with my best friend to come to the Auditorio Nacional to see Christina Aguilera , and I wanted to be on stage , longing to have this opportunity . After many years of work , this became a reality . " To further promote the album , Lafourcade became the first Mexican female singer @-@ songwriter to record an acoustic session for the music streaming service Spotify . Titled Spotify Sessions , the live EP includes six tracks from Hasta la Raíz ( " Para Qué <unk> " , the title track , " Nunca Es Suficiente " , " Ya No Te Puedo Querer " , " <unk> Blancas " , and " No Más Llorar " ) and a cover version of Rafael Hernández 's " Silencio " . Lafourcade performed " Hasta la Raíz " at the Latin Grammy Awards of 2015 . Lafourcade also presented the tour in a sold @-@ out show held at the Teatro <unk> in Santiago de Chile , Chile on November 25 , 2015 . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Weekly charts = = = 
 = = = Album certification = = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 The following credits are from Hasta la Raíz album liner notes . 
 = = = Performance credits by song = = = 
 = = = Performance credits = = = 
 = = = Technical credits = = = 
 = Nebraska Highway 250 = 
 Nebraska Highway 250 ( N @-@ 250 ) is a highway in northwestern Nebraska . Its southern terminus is at N @-@ 2 , east of Ellsworth . N @-@ 250 does not intersect any state maintained road , until it reaches its northern terminus at U.S. Highway 20 ( US 20 ) in Rushville . The route was designated in 1960 , and was extended south in 1996 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 All of the route is in Sheridan County . N @-@ 250 starts at N @-@ 2 , south of Lakeside . The road shortly crosses a railroad owned by BNSF Railway and enters Lakeside . N @-@ 250 shifts west slightly , and bends around a lake . The route travels north , through sand hills , and passing by small lakes and ponds . East of Thompson Lake , N @-@ 250 intersects the 304th Trail , a road that connects to other lakes . Fifteen miles ( 24 km ) later , the road 298th Trail , which connects the Twin Lakes to the highway . A few miles later , the highway passes the Smith Lake State Wildlife Management Area , and crosses over the Niobrara River later . N @-@ 250 soon straightens out , and travels north for 26 miles ( 42 km ) . The road enters Rushville as Chamberlain Street . It enters downtown , and ends at US 20 . In 2012 , the Nebraska Department of Roads ( <unk> ) calculated as many as 305 vehicles traveling on N @-@ 250 near Rushville , and as few as 90 vehicles traveling north of Lakeside . This is expressed in terms of annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) , a measure of traffic volume for any average day of the year . 
 = = History = = 
 A metal @-@ surfaced road from US 20 in Rushville to north of the Niobrara River was constructed between 1940 and 1948 . It was extended south to north of Cravath Lake by 1953 . The road was removed from the highway system map in 1957 , and was re @-@ added in 1960 , as N @-@ 250 . A narrow road was extended from N @-@ 250 to N @-@ 2 around 1981 – 82 , but it was not part of N @-@ 250 until 1996 . The routing has not changed significantly since . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Sheridan County . 
 = Americium = 
 Americium is a radioactive transuranic chemical element with symbol Am and atomic number 95 . This member of the actinide series is located in the periodic table under the lanthanide element europium , and thus by analogy was named after the Americas . 
 Americium was first produced in 1944 by the group of Glenn T. Seaborg from Berkeley , California , at the metallurgical laboratory of University of Chicago . Although it is the third element in the transuranic series , it was discovered fourth , after the heavier curium . The discovery was kept secret and only released to the public in November 1945 . Most americium is produced by uranium or plutonium being bombarded with neutrons in nuclear reactors – one tonne of spent nuclear fuel contains about 100 grams of americium . It is widely used in commercial ionization chamber smoke detectors , as well as in neutron sources and industrial gauges . Several unusual applications , such as nuclear batteries or fuel for space ships with nuclear propulsion , have been proposed for the isotope 242mAm , but they are as yet hindered by the scarcity and high price of this nuclear isomer . 
 Americium is a relatively soft radioactive metal with silvery appearance . Its common isotopes are 241Am and 243Am . In chemical compounds , americium usually assumes the oxidation state + 3 , especially in solutions . Several other oxidation states are known , which range from + 2 to + 8 and can be identified by their characteristic optical absorption spectra . The crystal lattice of solid americium and its compounds contain small <unk> radiogenic defects , due to <unk> induced by self @-@ irradiation with alpha particles , which accumulates with time ; this can cause a drift of some material properties over time , more noticeable in older samples . 
 = = History = = 
 Although americium was likely produced in previous nuclear experiments , it was first intentionally synthesized , isolated and identified in late autumn 1944 , at the University of California , Berkeley , by Glenn T. Seaborg , Leon O. Morgan , Ralph A. James , and Albert Ghiorso . They used a 60 @-@ inch cyclotron at the University of California , Berkeley . The element was chemically identified at the Metallurgical Laboratory ( now Argonne National Laboratory ) of the University of Chicago . Following the lighter neptunium , plutonium , and heavier curium , americium was the fourth transuranium element to be discovered . At the time , the periodic table had been restructured by Seaborg to its present layout , containing the actinide row below the lanthanide one . This led to americium being located right below its twin lanthanide element europium ; it was thus by analogy named after the Americas : " The name americium ( after the Americas ) and the symbol Am are suggested for the element on the basis of its position as the sixth member of the actinide rare @-@ earth series , analogous to europium , Eu , of the lanthanide series . " 
 The new element was isolated from its oxides in a complex , multi @-@ step process . First plutonium @-@ 239 nitrate ( <unk> ) solution was coated on a platinum foil of about 0 @.@ 5 cm2 area , the solution was evaporated and the residue was converted into plutonium dioxide ( PuO2 ) by annealing . After cyclotron irradiation , the coating was dissolved with nitric acid , and then precipitated as the hydroxide using concentrated aqueous ammonia solution . The residue was dissolved in perchloric acid . Further separation was carried out by ion exchange , yielding a certain isotope of curium . The separation of curium and americium was so painstaking that those elements were initially called by the Berkeley group as pandemonium ( from Greek for all demons or hell ) and delirium ( from Latin for madness ) . 
 Initial experiments yielded four americium isotopes : 241Am , 242Am , <unk> and <unk> . Americium @-@ 241 was directly obtained from plutonium upon absorption of one neutron . It decays by emission of a α @-@ particle to 237Np ; the half @-@ life of this decay was first determined as 510 ± 20 years but then corrected to 432 @.@ 2 years . 
 <formula> 
 The times are half @-@ lives 
 The second isotope 242Am was produced upon neutron bombardment of the already @-@ created 241Am . Upon rapid β @-@ decay , 242Am converts into the isotope of curium 242Cm ( which had been discovered previously ) . The half @-@ life of this decay was initially determined at 17 hours , which was close to the presently accepted value of 16 @.@ 02 h . 
 <formula> 
 The discovery of americium and curium in 1944 was closely related to the Manhattan Project ; the results were confidential and declassified only in 1945 . Seaborg leaked the synthesis of the elements 95 and 96 on the U.S. radio show for children Quiz Kids five days before the official presentation at an American Chemical Society meeting on 11 November 1945 , when one of the listeners asked whether any new transuranium element beside plutonium and neptunium had been discovered during the war . After the discovery of americium isotopes 241Am and 242Am , their production and compounds were patented listing only Seaborg as the inventor . The initial americium samples weighed a few micrograms ; they were barely visible and were identified by their radioactivity . The first substantial amounts of metallic americium weighing 40 – 200 micrograms were not prepared until 1951 by reduction of americium ( III ) fluoride with barium metal in high vacuum at 1100 ° C. 
 = = Occurrence = = 
 The longest @-@ lived and most common isotopes of americium , 241Am and 243Am , have half @-@ lives of 432 @.@ 2 and 7 @,@ 370 years , respectively . Therefore , any primordial americium ( americium that was present on Earth during its formation ) should have decayed by now . 
 Existing americium is concentrated in the areas used for the atmospheric nuclear weapons tests conducted between 1945 and 1980 , as well as at the sites of nuclear incidents , such as the Chernobyl disaster . For example , the analysis of the debris at the testing site of the first U.S. hydrogen bomb , Ivy Mike , ( 1 November 1952 , Enewetak Atoll ) , revealed high concentrations of various actinides including americium ; but due to military secrecy , this result was published only until later in 1956 . <unk> , the glassy residue left on the desert floor near Alamogordo , New Mexico , after the plutonium @-@ based Trinity nuclear bomb test on 16 July 1945 , contains traces of americium @-@ 241 . Elevated levels of americium were also detected at the crash site of a US Boeing B @-@ 52 bomber aircraft , which carried four hydrogen bombs , in 1968 in Greenland . 
 In other regions , the average radioactivity of surface soil due to residual americium is only about 0 @.@ 01 picocuries / g ( 0 @.@ 37 mBq / g ) . Atmospheric americium compounds are poorly soluble in common solvents and mostly adhere to soil particles . Soil analysis revealed about 1 @,@ 900 times higher concentration of americium inside sandy soil particles than in the water present in the soil pores ; an even higher ratio was measured in loam soils . 
 Americium is produced mostly artificially in small quantities , for research purposes . A tonne of spent nuclear fuel contains about 100 grams of various americium isotopes , mostly 241Am and 243Am . Their prolonged radioactivity is undesirable for the disposal , and therefore americium , together with other long @-@ lived actinides , must be neutralized . The associated procedure may involve several steps , where americium is first separated and then converted by neutron bombardment in special reactors to short @-@ lived nuclides . This procedure is well known as nuclear transmutation , but it is still being developed for americium . The transuranic elements from americium to fermium occurred naturally in the natural nuclear fission reactor at Oklo , but no longer do so . 
 = = Synthesis and extraction = = 
 = = = Isotope <unk> = = = 
 Americium has been produced in small quantities in nuclear reactors for decades , and kilograms of its 241Am and 243Am isotopes have been accumulated by now . Nevertheless , since it was first offered for sale in 1962 , its price , about 1 @,@ 500 USD per gram of 241Am , remains almost unchanged owing to the very complex separation procedure . The heavier isotope 243Am is produced in much smaller amounts ; it is thus more difficult to separate , resulting in a higher cost of the order 100 @,@ 000 – 160 @,@ 000 USD / g . 
 Americium is not synthesized directly from uranium – the most common reactor material – but from the plutonium isotope 239Pu . The latter needs to be produced first , according to the following nuclear process : 
 <formula> 
 The capture of two neutrons by 239Pu ( a so @-@ called ( n , γ ) reaction ) , followed by a β @-@ decay , results in 241Am : 
 <formula> 
 The plutonium present in spent nuclear fuel contains about 12 % of 241Pu . Because it spontaneously converts to 241Am , 241Pu can be extracted and may be used to generate further 241Am . However , this process is rather slow : half of the original amount of 241Pu decays to 241Am after about 15 years , and the 241Am amount reaches a maximum after 70 years . 
 The obtained 241Am can be used for generating heavier americium isotopes by further neutron capture inside a nuclear reactor . In a light water reactor ( LWR ) , 79 % of 241Am converts to 242Am and 10 % to its nuclear isomer 242mAm : 
 79 % : <formula> 
 10 % : <formula> 
 Americium @-@ 242 has a half @-@ life of only 16 hours , which makes its further up @-@ conversion to 243Am , extremely inefficient . The latter isotope is produced instead in a process where 239Pu captures four neutrons under high neutron flux : 
 <formula> 
 = = = Metal generation = = = 
 Most synthesis routines yield a mixture of different actinide isotopes in oxide forms , from which isotopes of americium can be separated . In a typical procedure , the spent reactor fuel ( e.g. MOX fuel ) is dissolved in nitric acid , and the bulk of uranium and plutonium is removed using a PUREX @-@ type extraction ( Plutonium – URanium EXtraction ) with tributyl phosphate in a hydrocarbon . The lanthanides and remaining actinides are then separated from the aqueous residue ( <unk> ) by a <unk> @-@ based extraction , to give , after stripping , a mixture of trivalent actinides and lanthanides . Americium compounds are then selectively extracted using multi @-@ step chromatographic and centrifugation techniques with an appropriate reagent . A large amount of work has been done on the solvent extraction of americium . For example , a 2003 EU @-@ funded project codenamed " <unk> " studied <unk> and other compounds as potential extraction agents . A bis @-@ <unk> bipyridine complex was proposed in 2009 as such a reagent is highly selective to americium ( and curium ) . Separation of americium from the highly similar curium can be achieved by treating a slurry of their hydroxides in aqueous sodium bicarbonate with ozone , at elevated temperatures . Both Am and Cm are mostly present in solutions in the + 3 valence state ; whereas curium remains unchanged , americium oxidizes to soluble Am ( IV ) complexes which can be washed away . 
 Metallic americium is obtained by reduction from its compounds . Americium ( III ) fluoride was first used for this purpose . The reaction was conducted using elemental barium as reducing agent in a water- and oxygen @-@ free environment inside an apparatus made of tantalum and tungsten . 
 <formula> 
 An alternative is the reduction of americium dioxide by metallic lanthanum or thorium : 
 <formula> 
 = = Physical properties = = 
 In the periodic table , americium is located to the right of plutonium , to the left of curium , and below the lanthanide europium , with which it shares many similarities in physical and chemical properties . Americium is a highly radioactive element . When freshly prepared , it has a silvery @-@ white metallic lustre , but then slowly tarnishes in air . With a density of 12 g / cm3 , americium is less dense than both curium ( 13 @.@ 52 g / cm3 ) and plutonium ( 19 @.@ 8 g / cm3 ) ; but has a higher density than europium ( 5 @.@ 264 g / cm3 ) — mostly because of its higher atomic mass . Americium is relatively soft and easily deformable and has a significantly lower bulk modulus than the actinides before it : Th , Pa , U , Np and Pu . Its melting point of 1173 ° C is significantly higher than that of plutonium ( 639 ° C ) and europium ( 826 ° C ) , but lower than for curium ( 1340 ° C ) . 
 At ambient conditions , americium is present in its most stable α form which has a hexagonal crystal symmetry , and a space group P63 / mmc with lattice parameters a 
 = 346 @.@ 8 pm and c = 
 1124 pm , and four atoms per unit cell . The crystal consists of a double @-@ hexagonal close packing with the layer sequence ABAC and so is isotypic with α @-@ lanthanum and several actinides such as α @-@ curium . The crystal structure of americium changes with pressure and temperature . When compressed at room temperature to 5 GPa , α @-@ Am transforms to the β modification , which has a face @-@ centered cubic ( fcc ) symmetry , space group Fm3m and lattice constant a = 489 pm . This fcc structure is equivalent to the closest packing with the sequence ABC . Upon further compression to 23 GPa , americium transforms to an orthorhombic γ @-@ Am structure similar to that of α @-@ uranium . There are no further transitions observed up to 52 GPa , except for an appearance of a monoclinic phase at pressures between 10 and 15 GPa . There is no consistency on the status of this phase in the literature , which also sometimes lists the α , β and γ phases as I , II and III . The β @-@ γ transition is accompanied by a 6 % decrease in the crystal volume ; although theory also predicts a significant volume change for the α @-@ β transition , it is not observed experimentally . The pressure of the α @-@ β transition decreases with increasing temperature , and when α @-@ americium is heated at ambient pressure , at 770 ° C it changes into an fcc phase which is different from β @-@ Am , and at 1075 ° C it converts to a body @-@ centered cubic structure . The pressure @-@ temperature phase diagram of americium is thus rather similar to those of lanthanum , praseodymium and neodymium . 
 As with many other actinides , self @-@ damage of the crystal lattice due to alpha @-@ particle irradiation is intrinsic to americium . It is especially noticeable at low temperatures , where the mobility of the produced lattice defects is relatively low , by broadening of X @-@ ray diffraction peaks . This effect makes somewhat uncertain the temperature of americium and some of its properties , such as electrical resistivity . So for americium @-@ 241 , the resistivity at 4 @.@ 2 K increases with time from about 2 µOhm · cm to 10 µOhm · cm after 40 hours , and saturates at about 16 µOhm · cm after 140 hours . This effect is less pronounced at room temperature , due to annihilation of radiation defects ; also heating to room temperature the sample which was kept for hours at low temperatures restores its resistivity . In fresh samples , the resistivity gradually increases with temperature from about 2 µOhm · cm at liquid helium to 69 µOhm · cm at room temperature ; this behavior is similar to that of neptunium , uranium , thorium and protactinium , but is different from plutonium and curium which show a rapid rise up to 60 K followed by saturation . The room temperature value for americium is lower than that of neptunium , plutonium and curium , but higher than for uranium , thorium and protactinium . 
 Americium is paramagnetic in a wide temperature range , from that of liquid helium , to room temperature and above . This behavior is markedly different from that of its neighbor curium which exhibits antiferromagnetic transition at 52 K. The thermal expansion coefficient of americium is slightly anisotropic and amounts to ( 7 @.@ 5 ± 0 @.@ 2 ) × 10 − 6 / ° C along the shorter a axis and ( 6 @.@ 2 ± 0 @.@ 4 ) × 10 − 6 / ° C for the longer c hexagonal axis . The enthalpy of dissolution of americium metal in hydrochloric acid at standard conditions is − 620 @.@ 6 ± 1 @.@ 3 kJ / mol , from which the standard enthalpy change of formation ( <unk> ° ) of aqueous Am3 + ion is − 621 @.@ 2 ± 2 @.@ 0 kJ / mol − 1 . The standard potential Am3 + / <unk> is − 2 @.@ 08 ± 0 @.@ 01 V. 
 = = Chemical properties = = 
 Americium readily reacts with oxygen and dissolves well in acids . The most common oxidation state for americium is + 3 , in which americium compounds are rather stable against oxidation and reduction . In this sense , americium is chemically similar to most lanthanides . The trivalent americium forms insoluble fluoride , oxalate , iodate , hydroxide , phosphate and other salts . Other oxidation states have been observed between + 2 and + 7 , which is the widest range among the actinide elements . Their color in aqueous solutions varies as follows : Am3 + ( colorless to yellow @-@ reddish ) , <unk> + ( yellow @-@ reddish ) , <unk> + 
 2 ; ( yellow ) , <unk> + 
 2 ( brown ) and <unk> − 
 6 ( dark green ) . All oxidation states have their characteristic optical absorption spectra , with a few sharp peaks in the visible and mid @-@ infrared regions , and the position and intensity of these peaks can be converted into the concentrations of the corresponding oxidation states . For example , Am ( III ) has two sharp peaks at 504 and 811 nm , Am ( V ) at 514 and 715 nm , and Am ( VI ) at 666 and 992 nm . 
 Americium compounds with oxidation state + 4 and higher are strong oxidizing agents , comparable in strength to the permanganate ion ( MnO − 
 4 ) in acidic solutions . Whereas the <unk> + ions are unstable in solutions and readily convert to Am3 + , the + 4 oxidation state occurs well in solids , such as americium dioxide ( AmO2 ) and americium ( IV ) fluoride ( AmF4 ) . 
 All pentavalent and hexavalent americium compounds are complex salts such as <unk> , <unk> and <unk> , <unk> , <unk> . These high oxidation states Am ( IV ) , Am ( V ) and Am ( VI ) can be prepared from Am ( III ) by oxidation with ammonium persulfate in dilute nitric acid , with silver ( I ) oxide in perchloric acid , or with ozone or sodium persulfate in sodium carbonate solutions . The pentavalent oxidation state of americium was first observed in 1951 . It is present in aqueous solution in the form of AmO + 
 2 ions ( acidic ) or AmO − 
 3 ions ( alkaline ) which are however unstable and subject to several rapid disproportionation reactions : 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 = = Chemical compounds = = 
 = = = Oxygen compounds = = = 
 Three americium oxides are known , with the oxidation states + 2 ( AmO ) , + 3 ( <unk> ) and + 4 ( AmO2 ) . Americium ( II ) oxide was prepared in minute amounts and has not been characterized in details . Americium ( III ) oxide is a red @-@ brown solid with a melting point of <unk> ° C. Americium ( IV ) oxide is the main form of solid americium which is used in nearly all its applications . As most other actinide dioxides , it is a black solid with a cubic ( fluorite ) crystal structure . 
 The oxalate of americium ( III ) , vacuum dried at room temperature , has the chemical formula <unk> ( C2O4 ) 3 · 7H2O . Upon heating in vacuum , it loses water at 240 ° C and starts decomposing into AmO2 at 300 ° C , the decomposition completes at about 470 ° C. The initial oxalate dissolves in nitric acid with the maximum solubility of 0 @.@ 25 g / L. 
 = = = Halides = = = 
 Halides of americium are known for the oxidation states + 2 , + 3 and + 4 , where the + 3 is most stable , especially in solutions . 
 Reduction of Am ( III ) compounds with sodium amalgam yields Am ( II ) salts – the black halides <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . They are very sensitive to oxygen and oxidize in water , releasing hydrogen and converting back to the Am ( III ) state . Specific lattice constants are : 
 <unk> <unk> : a 
 = 896 @.@ 3 ± 0 @.@ 8 pm , b = 
 757 @.@ 3 ± 0 @.@ 8 pm and c 
 = 453 @.@ 2 ± 0 @.@ 6 pm 
 <unk> <unk> : a = 
 1159 @.@ 2 ± 0 @.@ 4 and c 
 = 712 @.@ 1 ± 0 @.@ 3 pm . They can also be prepared by reacting metallic americium with an appropriate mercury halide <unk> , where X = 
 Cl , Br or I : 
 <formula> 
 Americium ( III ) fluoride ( <unk> ) is poorly soluble and precipitates upon reaction of Am3 + and fluoride ions in weak acidic solutions : 
 <formula> 
 The tetravalent americium ( IV ) fluoride ( AmF4 ) is obtained by reacting solid americium ( III ) fluoride with molecular fluorine : 
 <formula> 
 Another known form of solid tetravalent americium chloride is <unk> . Tetravalent americium has also been observed in the aqueous phase . For this purpose , black Am ( OH ) 4 was dissolved in 15 @-@ M <unk> with the americium concentration of 0 @.@ 01 M. The resulting reddish solution had a characteristic optical absorption spectrum which is similar to that of AmF4 but differed from other oxidation states of americium . Heating the Am ( IV ) solution to 90 ° C did not result in its disproportionation or reduction , however a slow reduction was observed to Am ( III ) and assigned to self @-@ irradiation of americium by alpha particles . 
 Most americium ( III ) halides form hexagonal crystals with slight variation of the color and exact structure between the halogens . So , chloride ( <unk> ) is reddish and has a structure isotypic to uranium ( III ) chloride ( space group P63 / m ) and the melting point of 715 ° C. The fluoride is isotypic to <unk> ( space group P63 / mmc ) and the iodide to <unk> ( space group R3 ) . The bromide is an exception with the orthorhombic <unk> @-@ type structure and space group <unk> . Crystals of americium hexahydrate ( <unk> · 6H2O ) can be prepared by dissolving americium dioxide in hydrochloric acid and evaporating the liquid . Those crystals are hygroscopic and have yellow @-@ reddish color and a monoclinic crystal structure . 
 Oxyhalides of americium in the form <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> can be obtained by reacting the corresponding americium halide with oxygen or Sb2O3 , and <unk> can also be produced by vapor phase hydrolysis : 
 <formula> 
 = = = Chalcogenides and pnictides = = = 
 The known chalcogenides of americium include the sulfide <unk> , selenides <unk> and <unk> , and tellurides <unk> and <unk> . The pnictides of americium ( 243Am ) of the <unk> type are known for the elements phosphorus , arsenic , antimony and bismuth . They crystallize in the rock @-@ salt lattice . 
 = = = <unk> and borides = = = 
 Americium <unk> ( AmSi ) and " <unk> " ( nominally AmSix with : 1 @.@ 87 < x < 2 @.@ 0 ) were obtained by reduction of americium ( III ) fluoride with elementary silicon in vacuum at 1050 ° C ( AmSi ) and 1150 − 1200 ° C ( AmSix ) . AmSi is a black solid isomorphic with <unk> , it has an orthorhombic crystal symmetry . AmSix has a bright silvery lustre and a tetragonal crystal lattice ( space group <unk> / <unk> ) , it is isomorphic with <unk> and <unk> . <unk> of americium include <unk> and <unk> . The <unk> can be obtained by heating an oxide or halide of americium with magnesium diboride in vacuum or inert atmosphere . 
 = = = <unk> compounds = = = 
 Analogous to uranocene , americium forms the organometallic compound <unk> with two cyclooctatetraene ligands , with the chemical formula ( η8 @-@ C8H8 ) <unk> . It also makes the trigonal <unk> [ ( η5 @-@ C5H5 ) <unk> ) ] complex with three cyclopentadienyl rings surrounding one atom of americium . 
 Formation of the complexes of the type Am ( n @-@ C3H7 @-@ BTP ) 3 , where BTP stands for 2 @,@ 6 @-@ di ( 1 @,@ 2 @,@ 4 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 @-@ yl ) pyridine , in solutions containing n @-@ C3H7 @-@ BTP and Am3 + ions has been confirmed by EXAFS . Some of these BTP @-@ type complexes selectively interact with americium and therefore are useful in its selective separation from lanthanides and another actinides . 
 = = Biological aspects = = 
 Americium is an artificial element of recent origin , and thus does not have a biological requirement . It is harmful to life . It has been proposed to use bacteria for removal of americium and other heavy metals from rivers and streams . Thus , Enterobacteriaceae of the genus Citrobacter precipitate americium ions from aqueous solutions , binding them into a metal @-@ phosphate complex at their cell walls . Several studies have been reported on the biosorption and bioaccumulation of americium by bacteria and fungi . 
 = = Fission = = 
 The isotope 242mAm ( half @-@ life 141 years ) has the largest cross sections for absorption of thermal neutrons ( 5 @,@ 700 barns ) , that results in a small critical mass for a sustained nuclear chain reaction . The critical mass for a bare 242mAm sphere is about 9 – 14 kg ( the uncertainty results from insufficient knowledge of its material properties ) . It can be lowered to 3 – 5 kg with a metal reflector and should become even smaller with a water reflector . Such small critical mass is favorable for portable nuclear weapons , but those based on 242mAm are not known yet , probably because of its scarcity and high price . The critical masses of two other readily available isotopes , 241Am and 243Am , are relatively high – 57 @.@ 6 to 75 @.@ 6 kg for 241Am and 209 kg for 243Am . Scarcity and high price yet hinder application of americium as a nuclear fuel in nuclear reactors . 
 There are proposals of very compact 10 @-@ kW high @-@ flux reactors using as little as 20 grams of 242mAm . Such low @-@ power reactors would be relatively safe to use as neutron sources for radiation therapy in hospitals . 
 = = Isotopes = = 
 About 19 isotopes and 8 nuclear isomers are known for americium . There are two long @-@ lived alpha @-@ emitters , 241Am and 243Am with half @-@ lives of 432 @.@ 2 and 7 @,@ 370 years , respectively , and the nuclear isomer <unk> has a long half @-@ life of 141 years . The half @-@ lives of other isotopes and isomers range from 0 @.@ 64 microseconds for <unk> to 50 @.@ 8 hours for <unk> . As with most other actinides , the isotopes of americium with odd number of neutrons have relatively high rate of nuclear fission and low critical mass . 
 Americium @-@ 241 decays to 237Np emitting alpha particles of 5 different energies , mostly at 5 @.@ 486 MeV ( 85 @.@ 2 % ) and 5 @.@ 443 MeV ( 12 @.@ 8 % ) . Because many of the resulting states are metastable , they also emit gamma rays with the discrete energies between 26 @.@ 3 and 158 @.@ 5 keV . 
 Americium @-@ 242 is a short @-@ lived isotope with a half @-@ life of 16 @.@ 02 h . It mostly ( 82 @.@ 7 % ) converts by β @-@ decay to 242Cm , but also by electron capture to 242Pu ( 17 @.@ 3 % ) . Both 242Cm and 242Pu transform via nearly the same decay chain through 238Pu down to 234U . 
 Nearly all ( 99 @.@ 541 % ) of <unk> decays by internal conversion to 242Am and the remaining 0 @.@ 459 % by α @-@ decay to 238Np . The latter breaks down to 238Pu and then to 234U . 
 Americium @-@ 243 transforms by α @-@ emission into 239Np , which converts by β @-@ decay to 239Pu , and the 239Pu changes into 235U by emitting an α @-@ particle . 
 = = Applications = = 
 = = = Ionization @-@ type smoke detector = = = 
 Americium is the only synthetic element to have found its way into the household , where the most common type of smoke detector uses 241Am in the form of americium dioxide as its source of ionizing radiation . This isotope is preferred over 226Ra because it emits 5 times more alpha particles and relatively little harmful gamma radiation . Element collector Theodore Gray mentions in his book The Elements : A Visual Exploration of Every Known Atom in the Universe " You might think that a synthetic radioactive element that follows plutonium ( 94 ) — and has a significantly shorter half @-@ life — would be some kind of <unk> material , available only to scientists in secret laboratories . Perhaps a mad scientist is studying americium in a lair somewhere , but if you want some yourself you can simply walk into any neighborhood hardware store , supermarket , or Wal @-@ Mart and buy some , no questions asked . " He also adds " The reason is not that americium is fundamentally less dangerous than the elements around it . In fact , the commonly available isotope , 241Am , is significantly more radioactive than weapons @-@ grade plutonium , and at least as toxic . No , the difference is simply that there is a useful application for americium that requires only a very tiny amount , and for which a company was prepared to go through the effort required to carve out and get a regulatory exception . " The amount of americium in a typical new smoke detector is 1 <unk> ( 37 kBq ) or 0 @.@ 29 microgram . This amount declines slowly as the americium decays into neptunium @-@ 237 , a different transuranic element with a much longer half @-@ life ( about 2 @.@ 14 million years ) . With its half @-@ life of 432 @.@ 2 years , the americium in a smoke detector includes about 3 % neptunium after 19 years , and about 5 % after 32 years . The radiation passes through an ionization chamber , an air @-@ filled space between two electrodes , and permits a small , constant current between the electrodes . Any smoke that enters the chamber absorbs the alpha particles , which reduces the ionization and affects this current , triggering the alarm . Compared to the alternative optical smoke detector , the ionization smoke detector is cheaper and can detect particles which are too small to produce significant light scattering ; however , it is more prone to false alarms . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 As 241Am has a roughly similar half @-@ life to 238Pu ( 432 @.@ 2 years vs. 87 years ) , it has been proposed as an active element of radioisotope thermoelectric generators , for example in spacecraft . Although americium produces less heat and electricity – the power yield is 114 @.@ 7 mW / g for 241Am and 6 @.@ 31 mW / g for 243Am ( cf . 390 mW / g for 238Pu ) – and its radiation poses more threat to humans owing to neutron emission , the European Space Agency is considering using americium for its space probes . 
 Another proposed space @-@ related application of americium is a fuel for space ships with nuclear propulsion . It relies on the very high rate of nuclear fission of 242mAm , which can be maintained even in a micrometer @-@ thick foil . Small thickness avoids the problem of self @-@ absorption of emitted radiation . This problem is pertinent to uranium or plutonium rods , in which only surface layers provide alpha @-@ particles . The fission products of 242mAm can either directly propel the spaceship or they can heat up a thrusting gas ; they can also transfer their energy to a fluid and generate electricity through a magnetohydrodynamic generator . 
 One more proposal which utilizes the high nuclear fission rate of 242mAm is a nuclear battery . Its design relies not on the energy of the emitted by americium alpha particles , but on their charge , that is the americium acts as the self @-@ sustaining " cathode " . A single 3 @.@ 2 kg 242mAm charge of such battery could provide about 140 kW of power over a period of 80 days . With all the potential benefits , the current applications of 242mAm are as yet hindered by the scarcity and high price of this nuclear isomer . 
 = = = Neutron source = = = 
 The oxide of 241Am pressed with beryllium is an efficient neutron source . Here americium acts as the alpha source , and beryllium produces neutrons owing to its large cross @-@ section for the ( α , n ) nuclear reaction : 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 The most widespread use of <unk> neutron sources is a neutron probe – a device used to measure the quantity of water present in soil , as well as moisture / density for quality control in highway construction . 241Am neutron sources are also used in well logging applications , as well as in neutron radiography , tomography and other radiochemical investigations . 
 = = = Production of other elements = = = 
 Americium is a starting material for the production of other transuranic elements and transactinides – for example , 82 @.@ 7 % of 242Am decays to 242Cm and 17 @.@ 3 % to 242Pu . In the nuclear reactor , 242Am is also up @-@ converted by neutron capture to 243Am and <unk> , which transforms by β @-@ decay to 244Cm : 
 <formula> 
 Irradiation of 241Am by 12C or 22Ne ions yields the isotopes <unk> ( einsteinium ) or <unk> ( dubnium ) , respectively . Furthermore , the element berkelium ( <unk> isotope ) had been first intentionally produced and identified by bombarding 241Am with alpha particles , in 1949 , by the same Berkeley group , using the same 60 @-@ inch cyclotron . Similarly , nobelium was produced at the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research , Dubna , Russia , in 1965 in several reactions , one of which included irradiation of 243Am with 15N ions . Besides , one of the synthesis reactions for lawrencium , discovered by scientists at Berkeley and Dubna , included bombardment of 243Am with 18O . 
 = = = Spectrometer = = = 
 Americium @-@ 241 has been used as a portable source of both gamma rays and alpha particles for a number of medical and industrial uses . The 59 @.@ <unk> keV gamma ray emissions from 241Am in such sources can be used for indirect analysis of materials in radiography and X @-@ ray fluorescence spectroscopy , as well as for quality control in fixed nuclear density gauges and nuclear <unk> . For example , the element has been employed to gauge glass thickness to help create flat glass . Americium @-@ 241 is also suitable for calibration of gamma @-@ ray spectrometers in the low @-@ energy range , since its spectrum consists of nearly a single peak and negligible Compton continuum ( at least three orders of magnitude lower intensity ) . Americium @-@ 241 gamma rays were also used to provide passive diagnosis of thyroid function . This medical application is however obsolete . 
 = = Health concerns = = 
 As a highly radioactive element , americium and its compounds must be handled only in an appropriate laboratory under special arrangements . Although most americium isotopes predominantly emit alpha particles which can be blocked by thin layers of common materials , many of the daughter products emit gamma @-@ rays and neutrons which have a long penetration depth . 
 If consumed , most of the americium is excreted within a few days , with only 0 @.@ 05 % absorbed in the blood , of which roughly 45 % goes to the liver and 45 % to the bones , and the remaining 10 % is excreted . The uptake to the liver depends on the individual and increases with age . In the bones , americium is first deposited over cortical and trabecular surfaces and slowly redistributes over the bone with time . The biological half @-@ life of 241Am is 50 years in the bones and 20 years in the liver , whereas in the gonads ( testicles and ovaries ) it remains permanently ; in all these organs , americium promotes formation of cancer cells as a result of its radioactivity . 
 Americium often enters landfills from discarded smoke detectors . The rules associated with the disposal of smoke detectors are relaxed in most jurisdictions . In 1994 , 17 @-@ year @-@ old David Hahn extracted the americium from about 100 smoke detectors in an attempt to build a breeder nuclear reactor . There have been a few cases of exposure to americium , the worst case being that of chemical operations technician Harold McCluskey , who at the age of 64 was exposed to 500 times the occupational standard for americium @-@ 241 as a result of an explosion in his lab . McCluskey died at the age of 75 of unrelated pre @-@ existing disease . 
 = Peter ( Fringe ) = 
 " Peter " is the 16th episode of the second season of the American science fiction drama television series Fringe , and the 36th episode overall . 
 Considered a keystone episode of the series , " Peter " is a flashback episode , told as Walter Bishop ( John Noble ) reveals to Olivia Dunham ( Anna Torv ) that his son Peter ( Joshua Jackson ) is really the Peter of the parallel universe . Walter explains the events that occurred in 1985 that led to this , and the impact it had on the parallel universe to be at war with the prime one . 
 The episode 's story was written by Akiva Goldsman , J. H. Wyman , Jeff Pinkner , and Josh Singer . Its teleplay was written by Pinkner , Wyman , and Singer . David Straiton directed the episode . It was guest star Orla Brady 's first appearance as Walter 's wife Elizabeth . 
 " Peter " first aired in the United States on April 1 , 2010 . An estimated 5 @.@ 8 million viewers watched the episode , giving it a 2 @.@ 2 rating share among those 18 – 49 . The episode received almost overwhelmingly positive reviews , with numerous critics considering it to be the best Fringe episode to date . Actor John Noble was lauded for his performance , and " Peter " topped many " best of television " lists for the year . It was ranked the best episode of the entire series by IGN and Den of Geek and the second best by Entertainment Weekly . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The introduction scene follows from " Jacksonville " , where Olivia ( Anna Torv ) has discovered , through her Cortexiphan @-@ induced abilities , that Peter ( Joshua Jackson ) is from the parallel universe , and Walter ( John Noble ) takes her aside to tell her how this came to pass , shown to the viewer in an extended flashback . 
 In 1985 , Walter and William Bell had theorized the existence of a parallel universe , and created a window @-@ like device to observe it . Though they use their observations for military benefits , Walter has a more personal interest in the parallel universe , to seek a cure for a genetic disease crippling his son Peter ( Quinn Lord ) . " Walternate " , Walter 's doppelganger in the other universe , is also seeking a similar cure , his Peter suffering from the same disease . 
 The prime universe 's Peter succumbs to his illness and dies , and Walter and his wife Elizabeth ( Orla Brady ) mourn their loss , supported by Walter and William 's friend , Nina Sharp ( Blair Brown ) and Walter 's lab assistant , Carla Warren ( Jenni <unk> ) . Walter , through his window , shows Elizabeth the other Peter , and asserts they should be happy knowing another Peter exists . Later , Walter watches Walternate explore other cures . Walternate is distracted by the arrival of an Observer , September ( Michael Cerveris ) , and fails to see the telltale color change indicating a cure . Walter is able to recreate and stabilize Walternate 's cure , and then decides to use untested equipment to cross over to give the cure to Peter . Carla tries to stop Walter , knowing the technology could damage the fabric of space @-@ time , and contacts Nina for help . Separately , September informs his fellow Observers that he may have made a mistake and assures them he will correct it . 
 Walter sets up his equipment on the frozen ice of Reiden Lake , near a cabin where Elizabeth and Peter are staying ; Walter theorizes the frozen waters will buffer the effects of the crossing . Carla arrives with Nina , and both try to talk him out of it . When Walter realizes William is not with them , he takes this as an implicit sign of William 's consent to his plan , and activates the portal . Nina attempts to tackle Walter as he steps through , but instead part of her arm disappears in the portal as it closes ; Carla rushes her to the hospital . 
 In the parallel universe , Walter finds the cure vial shattered when Nina tackled him and he devises a new plan : to bring Peter back , administer a new batch of the cure , and return him . Meeting the parallel universe 's Elizabeth , he explains he is taking Peter back to the lab for some tests . As Walter walks Peter back across the lake to the portal , Peter realizes that Walter is not his real father . They cross through the portal safely , but the ice has weakened and both fall through , losing consciousness . Walter wakes to find September driving him and Peter back to Walter 's lab . September warns that " the boy must live " , and leaves Walter to drive the rest of the way . At the lab , as Peter receives the cure , Carla informs him that William will see to replacing Nina 's arm . Elizabeth arrives unannounced , and is overjoyed to see Peter , even though it is not her child . At that point , Walter realizes he will never be able to make himself return Peter to his proper <unk> pain of losing their child for the second time would be too great . 
 In the show 's conclusion in the present day , Walter tells Olivia that his crossing is what caused the crack between the two universes , including the Pattern on their side , and leading to the oncoming " storm " that William warned Olivia about . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode 's teleplay was co @-@ written by supervising producer Josh Singer and co @-@ showrunners Jeff Pinkner and J. H. Wyman , based on a story by Singer , Wyman , Pinkner , and consulting producer Akiva Goldsman . House M.D. veteran David Straiton served as episode director . 
 Fringe began casting for an actress to play Walter 's wife Elizabeth in November 2009 . In their report , they were looking for a woman roughly forty years old who was described as being " strong ( yet broken ) , intelligent , attractive , likable , lovely and extremely versatile " . In December 2009 , Entertainment Weekly announced Irish actress Orla Brady had been cast as Elizabeth Bishop , a possible recurring character . Some critics questioned the casting , as they considered Brady to be too young and were unsure if she would appear in the present or a flashback sequence . 
 " Peter " was set in 1985 , with a much younger Walter and Peter Bishop , and also features an appearance by Walter 's wife Elizabeth . Actor John Noble used material he had created since the airing of the pilot , which he explained was his sense of " what was this man like before he deteriorated . " The production crew tried different methods with the actor to create a younger Walter , such as changes to his hair , make @-@ up , and wardrobe ; they ultimately decided on using " tabs " to keep the wrinkles in his face back . He did not wear a wig , but the crew did add parts to the front and back . When asked what preparation went into playing a younger Walter , Noble explained : 
 " Quite a lot , but in the sense in my preparation to find the Walter that we all know now , I had to go back to him right at the beginning to see where he came from . So that process was started before the pilot really , what was this man like before he deteriorated , so I was able to revisit that . Physically , of course , what I had to do was capture the energy , to capture the physicality of the man , the vocal physicality of the man , this was my task . I was aided enormously by my hair and makeup and special effects people here in terms of getting the overall , and indeed wardrobe helped a lot as well . And then we , the shot up through these beautiful lenses that we got a different feel to the episode than we would now . All of those elements work together ... to create this version that you see in the episode . " 
 The episode was shot through special lenses to make it more reminiscent of the decade . At Peter 's funeral , actress Blair Brown wanted her character Nina Sharp to wear sunglasses , because she thought Nina would not share her emotions at the funeral . Unlike Noble , Brown wore a wig . The scenes at Reiden Lake were actually shot on a parking lot , and the crew placed a covering over it to simulate the cracks normally on a lake . 
 To reflect the episode 's setting in 1985 , the typical title credit sequence was redone using different music , the Asimov font for early computer type for the show 's logo , and terms that were " fringe science " at the time , such as " virtual reality , " " genetic engineering , " and " personal computing " . Pinkner later recalled , " One of our writers said off @-@ handedly that if we ’ re doing a show from 1985 , shouldn ’ t we do a credit sequence from 1985 , and literally , we pounced on it " . He and Wyman asked J. J. Abrams , who wrote the original credit sequence melody , to write a 1980s version ; Abrams was " very , very happy to do that , " according to Wyman . 
 As with other Fringe episodes , Fox and Science Olympiad released a lesson plan for grade school children based upon the science depicted in " Peter " ; the lesson 's intention was for " students [ to ] learn about the challenges of effectively communicating scientific principles and concepts , especially via non @-@ verbal methods . " 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 In viewing the parallel universe through the window , Walter and others witness a zeppelin docking at the Empire State Building , which was originally part of the building 's purpose until it was shown to be impractical . In a scene that takes place in the parallel universe , the Observers are seen leaving a theater having watched Back to the Future starring Eric Stoltz ; in reality , Eric Stoltz was originally cast in the role of Marty after Michael J. Fox was unavailable , but after filming for several weeks , Stoltz was replaced by Fox . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 On its first broadcast , " Peter " was watched an estimated 5 @.@ 8 million viewers , achieving a 3 @.@ 6 share in all households and 2 @.@ 2 share of viewers between 18 and 49 . In a Thursday night that had rating slumps from all the network shows , " Peter " was down 15 percent from the previous episode " Jacksonville " . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Peter " received widespread critical acclaim . As described by Andrew Hanson of the Los Angeles Times , " ' Peter ' is exactly what Fringe needs to be " for the show to distinguish itself from others like The X @-@ Files , in that it teased hints of the episode 's reveal in earlier shows , and followed through by revealing the truth , leaving the viewer wanting to know even more . Ramsey Isler of IGN considered " Peter " " the most masterfully crafted episode Fringe has ever had " , praising the performance of Noble and Brady in delivering the emotion needed for the episode . Tim Grierson of New York Magazine also praised the emotional performance of John Noble , calling it his " showcase " and one where " he didn ’ t disappoint " . The A.V. Club 's Noel Murray considered the episode one of the best of 2010 up to that point , and that " the show came back with a sense of purpose and surety it ’ s rarely had , even at its best " . 
 Since its airing and continuation into Season 3 , " Peter " has been considered a keystone episode for the series . Jeff Jensen of Entertainment Weekly called " Peter " the episode " when Fringe crossed over from fitfully great to just plain great " , and continues to maintain that quality throughout 2010 . Time 's James Poniewozik ranked " Peter " as the 5th best television episode of 2010 , stating that it both " fleshed out its mythology " and " deepened the emotional backstory " , and further praised Noble 's acting in the episode . The A.V. Club ranked Fringe the 15th best show of 2010 , highlighting " Peter " as an episode that " finally dramatized the moment that changed [ Peter 's ] life , giving the series ’ overarching storyline a devastating emotional core , based in a father ’ s love instead of in theoretical concept " . The Futon Critic ranked " Peter " as the 9th best episode of 2010 , calling it a " series defining episode that not only rationalized what appeared to be the <unk> but also raised the stakes on everything we had come to expect from the show thus far " . 
 Similarly , BuddyTV rated it the seventh best episode of 2010 , praising it for " open [ ing ] the door to the show ’ s brilliant use of the alternate universe , " and calling Noble 's acting " one of the best performances on TV " . SFX ranked " Peter " among the twenty things they love about the series , calling it " the lynchpin episode on which all of Fringe rests . " Executive producers Jeff Pinkner and J.H. Wyman , and co @-@ creator J. J. Abrams later said that " Peter " was one of their favorite episodes . In a 2013 list , Den of Geek ranked the episode as the best of the entire series . 
 As one result of the high praise and fan appreciation for " Peter " , a future episode , " Subject 13 " ( originally named " 6 Months Later " ) in Fringe 's third season aired on February 25 , 2011 . It returned to the events within " Peter " but told from the perspective of the parallel universe , including the impact of Peter 's abduction on both Walter and Elizabeth . Jeff Jensen of Entertainment Weekly named " Peter " the second best episode of the series , explaining that it " stands as a model for mythological storytelling that any sci @-@ fi / fantasy series would be wise to emulate . " In January 2013 , IGN ranked the episode as the best of the series : 
 The quintessential episode of Fringe lore , ' Peter ' gave us a flawless peek at the past , and the events that caused all this universe @-@ clashing mess in the first place . The episode was marked by a pitch @-@ perfect pace , excellent " <unk> " special effects , and a story that plays your heartstrings like an expert bard plucking out a tearful tune on a lyre . This episode brought us so many answers to the major questions of the series ... This was Fringe at its best . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 Writers J.H. Wyman , Jeff Pinkner , Josh Singer , and Akiva Goldsman submitted " Peter " for consideration in the Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series category at the 62nd Primetime Emmy Awards . At the 2011 Young Artist Awards , Quinn Lord received a nomination for Best Performance in a TV Series under the category " Guest Starring Young Actor Ten and Under " . 
 = Theory of Literature = 
 Theory of Literature is a book on literary scholarship by René Wellek , of the structuralist Prague school , and Austin Warren , a self @-@ described " old New Critic " . The two met at the University of Iowa in the late 1930s , and by 1940 had begun writing the book ; they wrote collaboratively , in a single voice over a period of three years . Its contents were based on their shared understandings of literature . 
 Originally consisting of twenty chapters – one was cut in later editions – Theory of Literature describes various aspects of literary theory , criticism , and history . After defining various aspects and relationships of literature in general , Wellek and Warren divide analysis of literature based on two approaches : extrinsic , relating to factors outside a work such as the author and society , and intrinsic , relating to factors within such as rhythm and meter . They stress the need to focus on the intrinsic elements of a work as the best way to truly understand it . In doing so they adapt the phenomenology used by Roman Ingarden . 
 Published by Harcourt , Brace , and Company in December 1948 , Theory of Literature received mixed reviews from the academic community . It was used to teach literary theory beginning soon after publication and remained in common use into the 1960s . Its success has been credited as introducing European literary scholarship into the US and crystallizing a movement towards intrinsic literary criticism . Theory of Literature saw three editions and has been translated into more than twenty languages . 
 = = Background = = 
 René Wellek ( 1903 – 1995 ) was an Austrian @-@ born scholar from the structuralist Prague school of linguistics , studying under Vilém <unk> . Wellek had training in classical literature and was fluent in several European languages , both Romance and Slavic . His theoretical training included the phenomenology of Edmund Husserl , as used in Roman Ingarden 's work , and the psychologically influenced linguistics of Karl Bühler . After Nazi Germany occupied Prague in 1939 , Wellek fled London – where he had been teaching – for the United States , teaching at the University of Iowa under Norman Foerster . 
 There Wellek met Austin Warren ( 1899 – 1986 ) , an American literary scholar who considered himself an " old New Critic " . He had written extensively on literary criticism and was raised in , but later saw several limitations to , the New Humanist views promoted by Irving Babbitt and Paul Elmer More . Wellek and Warren were soon in agreement over several aspects of literature , and by 1940 they had begun considering collaboration on a book . Over the next several years they furthered their understandings of European and American literature theory through discussions with Cleanth Brooks and Robert Penn Warren , and extensive reading of contemporary European writings . 
 = = Writing = = 
 Owing to several academic commitments , work on Theory of Literature did not begin until 1945 , after Wellek and Warren received a stipend from the Rockefeller Foundation over a period of two summers . Wellek and Warren began dividing their responsibilities , at first evenly , but with more work done by Wellek as Warren dealt with the illness , and later loss , of his wife Eleanor in 1946 . During this period of writing Wellek transferred to Yale University ( 1946 ) and Warren to the University of Michigan ( 1948 ) , but collaboration continued . 
 The title , according to Wellek and Warren , was " more than ordinarily difficult " to choose . Some titles , such as Theory of Literature and Methodology of Literary Study , were dismissed as too cumbersome . However , in a 1950 review for The Antioch Review , the literary scholar Herbert S. Benjamin wrote that a better title would have been Theory of the Methodology of the Literary Study ; he considered the book lacking the theory implied by the chosen title . 
 The original publication of Theory of Literature consists of twenty chapters set in five sections based on thematic similarities ; one chapter and section was removed in later editions . Wellek contributed thirteen of the book 's chapters , while Warren wrote six ; the final chapter was written collaboratively . Although most of the chapters are credited as the work of one man , the two often <unk> and proofread each other 's work , at times inserting entire sentences or paragraphs . Each also suggested further references that the other could use in expanding his chapter . 
 In their writing Wellek and Warren attempted to present a single voice despite the dominance of individuals . Their success in presenting such a voice has been debated . Wellek later recalled that people often told him it was difficult to tell who had written which chapter without consulting the book 's introduction . However , the literary scholar C. J. van Rees of Tilburg University notes that Wellek 's influences are prevalent in chapters authored by Warren . Aldo Scaglione , in a review of the second edition , wrote that " one immediately senses the change of hand " between chapters by different authors . 
 = = Contents = = 
 = = = Section 1 : Definitions and Distinctions . = = = 
 The first section , entitled Definitions and Distinctions , consists of five chapters and details how Wellek and Warren define literature . This section also contrasts Wellek and Warren 's definition with those of others , such views of literature as everything in print and as only belles @-@ lettres ( accepted literary canon ) . They define literary scholarship as beyond the personal ( " super @-@ personal " ) and contrasted with the literary arts by its more scientific approach . Wellek and Warren suggest that neither a purely objective nor a purely subjective approach would be able to properly describe literature . They note that literary scholarship should not only examine what makes a work or author unique , but also its general characteristics that allow it to be compared to other works . 
 Wellek and Warren limit their definition of literature to pieces of " imaginative literature " , which can gain artistic merit from their coherence and complexity . The language in literary works is contrasted from scientific and other language by the use of connotative ( non @-@ literal ) language and expressive content . Studies of literature must be literary and systematic , treating literature as literature and not part of another field . Wellek and Warren discuss several proposed functions of literature , beginning with Horace 's proclamation that literature must be " sweet and useful " ( dulce et <unk> ; have a coalescing aesthetic and functional role ) , and extending to literature as a substitute for travel and experience , a vehicle for truth or persuasion , to relieve or incite emotion , or as something without a function . They ultimately describe the main function of literature as being loyal to its own nature . 
 They call for a systematic and integrated study of literature , uniting literary theory , which outlines the basic principles of literature ; criticism , which critiques individual works ; and history , which outlines the development of literature . Although these aspects have clear distinctions , they are in a dialectical relationship and should not be separated ; for example , a theory of literature is impossible without referring to works of literature . They reject Historicist approaches to literary history , which they find reduce literary history to " a series of discrete and hence finally incomprehensible fragments " and emphasize the author 's intent too greatly . Instead , Wellek and Warren argue that a work must be seen from the point of view of both its own period and all subsequent periods , as a work 's historical meaning is derived from " the history of its criticism by its many readers in many ages . " Criticism should not be limited to classical and medieval literature , but also include works by living authors . 
 Wellek and Warren describe the term comparative literature as " troublesome " , noting that it has been used for the study of oral literature , the study of the literatures in two or more countries , and the study of a " general " , " universal " , or " world " literature ; this last use , according to the authors , <unk> issues present in the other understandings of the term . This understanding of literature as a totality can be used to trace the development of the art , unlimited by differences between languages . Within this comparative literature other <unk> literatures , which may be based on language families and schools , are also apparent . There are also national literatures which , although possibly of the same language , will still have thematic differentiations . These are also worthy of study . 
 = = = Section 2 : Preliminary Operations = = = 
 This section consists of a single chapter regarding the treatment , classification , annotation , and other aspects of working with manuscripts and related documentation . Wellek and Warren describe tasks such as authenticating manuscripts and establishing an author and date as important ones without which " critical analysis and historical understanding would be hopelessly handicapped " ; however , these tasks should be preliminary to the " ultimate task of scholarship " , analysis , and not a goal in themselves . Wellek and Warren note the importance of identifying forgeries , a task which can be completed in numerous ways : paleography , bibliography , linguistics , and history may all be involved . These forgeries may spark further investigation and literary debates which can result in a better understanding of the period , the writer , or the writer 's <unk> . 
 The authors identify two levels of operations when dealing with manuscripts : the assembly and preparation of the materials , and the establishment of aspects such as chronology and authorship . At the first level one must locate and identify materials to study , be they written , printed , or oral ; such a task may be difficult and depend on factors outside literature in its completion . Written and printed works must then be edited for readability ; this task , which requires " lucky guesswork " , entails deciphering illegible parts in the material , classifying it , and identifying possible changes made by scribes ( and thus bringing the material closer to its " author 's own " ) . Meanwhile , the second level may require greater initiative from the one studying a work ; it involves , among other things , selection of what should be published , how it is best arranged in a collection , the establishment of chronology and authorship through internal and external evidence , and the provision of proper annotation and commentary . 
 = = = Section 3 : The Extrinsic Approach to the Study of Literature = = = 
 The third section consists of five chapters discussing various elements extrinsic to works of literature , such as biography , psychology , social milieu , ideas , and other arts ; this is opposed to elements intrinsic to a work , which are explored in Section 4 . They write that research into extrinsic elements often results in an attempt to establish some causality between the extrinsic elements and a work . Although " [ n ] obody can deny that much light has been thrown on literature by a proper knowledge of the conditions under which it has been produced " , such studies " can never dispose of problems of description , analysis , and evaluation of an object such as a work of literary art . " 
 Wellek and Warren describe three views of a biographical approach , of which only one – the biographical aspects relating to the production of a work – can be of use ; this use , however , is limited . They reject the views that works accurately reflect the author 's life or that the author 's life must be understood in order to understand a particular work . According to Wellek and Warren , works may indeed reflect the author 's experiences , but they may also reflect an author 's hopes and dreams , or literary tradition and convention , and as such are " not a document for biography " . Likewise , an understanding of personal style ( what makes a work " Miltonic " , " Keatsian " , " Shakespearean " , or " Virgilian " ) does not rely on knowledge of the author 's life . They conclude that " it seems dangerous to ascribe to [ biography ] any real critical importance " , and that such approaches , if undertaken at all , should be done with a " sense " of the distinctions outlined above . 
 Wellek and Warren consider analysis of characters the only legitimate application of psychological analysis in literary study . Such an analysis , however , they find lacking on its own merits : individual characters do not fit psychological theories of the time they are written . Works which are true to certain psychological theories , meanwhile , are not necessarily better . Thus , they question the value of looking for psychological " truth " in how a work is presented . Additionally they outline and critique psychological theories that have been used to analyze authors and the creative process . 
 Wellek and Warren write that literature is ultimately a social institution as several aspects of it are created or influenced through social conventions and norms . They reject a more specific understanding of social realities in literature . An author , for example , is a social being , raised and shaped by society and is in a dialectic relationship with the audience : the audience provides recognition and an income , and the author shapes audiences ' tastes and behavior . Intrinsic elements of the work , and indeed the " realization of certain aesthetic values " , can reflect contemporary society and its attitudes . Literature does not , however , " correctly " reflect society or life , and may exhibit little connection . As such , " social truth " should not become an artistic value of its own right , and literature should not be thought of as a " substitute for sociology or politics " . 
 Wellek and Warren note arguments that literature is a form of philosophy or , alternatively , that it is devoid of such ideas . They reject extreme versions of these arguments . They write that " a knowledge of the history of philosophy and of general ideas " will be valuable for a researcher . However , they note that philosophical ideas may not have been consciously included in a work . Instead , they agree with the German scholar Rudolf Unger that " literature expresses a general attitude toward life , that poets usually answer , <unk> , questions which are also themes of philosophy " , in a manner that differs over time . They outline attempts at classifying these ideas , including through <unk> ( " world view " ) and <unk> ( " time spirit " ) , before showing shortcomings in these systems . They then write that students of literature , an art which may ( but need not ) parallel philosophical development , should focus on how ideas enter the work . Wellek and Warren argue that a work does not necessarily become better with more philosophical content . 
 Wellek and Warren write that the relationship between literature and other forms of art , such as architecture , sculpture , music , or visual art , is " highly various and complex " . For example , literature may inspire the other art forms , or vice versa . A work of literature may also attempt to have the same effect as another art , through visualization , musicality , or other techniques . However , literature remains a separate art form , and effects found within are conveyed imperfectly . The emotions triggered by a work , or the intentions or theories behind it , will likewise not completely parallel those of another art form ; individual forms of art have also " evolved " differently . Instead , Wellek and Warren suggest that works of art , like literature , can only be truly understood by looking at the works of art themselves and not their extrinsic aspects . A comparison between literature and another art form , thus , is secondary to establishing " outlines of strictly literary evolution " . 
 = = = Section 4 : The Intrinsic Study of Literature = = = 
 This section , almost twice the size of the others , consists of eight chapters regarding various elements intrinsic to works of literature . Wellek and Warren write that starting an analysis from elements intrinsic to the work is " natural and sensible " , given that " only the works themselves justify all our interest " in extrinsic issues . They outline different definitions of literature , including as artifacts , sequences of sounds pronounced when reading , the experiences of the reader or author , or the " sum of all past and possible experiences " ( alternatively " the experience common to all the experiences " ) related to a work . All these understandings they find lacking . Instead they suggest that literature is a " potential cause of experiences " consisting of a system of stratified norms – implicit in the work – which can only be partially realized by the reader ; it is neither purely material , mental , nor ideal , nor is it static or bereft of value . 
 Wellek and Warren consider patterns of sound as inherent to the text ; these must be analyzed while keeping the meaning ( or general emotional tone ) in mind . They suggest two different aspects of sound systems : sounds in isolation , and sounds in relations with others . The sounds in isolation are used in a work establish a euphony or orchestration – a sound aesthetic which may be pleasing or harsh – while the relational aspect " may become the basis of rhythm and meter " . Regarding euphony , Wellek and Warren discuss issues of classification , rhyme , <unk> , and the " physiognomy " of sounds as part of orchestration . Of rhythm they explore varying definitions , applications , typology , and artistic value . They then discuss theories of meter and their shortcomings , noting that the metric foundation differs between languages and stressing that meaning should not be divorced from meter . 
 Language , meanwhile , they describe as " quite literally the material of the literary artist " ; although a work is influenced by language , the writer 's style , the use of communicative language , may influence language . Rather than use a work to study linguistic history , they recommend examining works through stylistics , which in literature they define as " the study of a work of art or a group of works which are to be described in terms of their aesthetic function and meaning " . Such studies can be done either as a search for a " total meaning " or a " sum of individual traits " . Ideally , such a study should " establish some unifying principle , some general aesthetic " in a work or genre , although some may be more difficult than others . As such , they reject stylistic studies which focus mainly on " peculiarities of style " or which are linked to extrinsic elements . 
 For other understandings of meaning , Wellek and Warren suggest a look at the sequence of image , metaphor , symbol , and myth , which they consider making up the " central poetic structure " of a work . In turns , they outline various historical definitions of the terms – which at times overlap – before writing that most of these theories have treated the sequence as " detachable parts of the works in which they appear . " This Wellek and Warren refuse , instead arguing that " the meaning and function of literature [ i ] s centrally present in metaphor and myth " . They show that the dominant form of figurative language shifts over time before overviewing two diverging typologies of metaphor , that of Henry W. Wells and Hermann <unk> . They finally discuss several aspects of " practical criticism " based on poetic language and its underlying assumptions . They reject approaches which attempt to understand the author through his or her words or which attempt to understand figurative language alone ; instead , it should be studied not in isolation but as " an element in the totality , the integrity , of the literary work " . 
 After reiterating their views of the relationship between reality and literature , Wellek and Warren write that narrative fiction takes place in its own " worlds " , consisting of five <unk> elements : narrative structure , characters , setting , world @-@ view , and tone . The latter two are discussed in the following chapter . They define the narrative structure as built around a pattern of dialog and description , and various concepts related to narrative ; these include time within a work , narrative points of view and voices , major types , plot , devices , and pacing . This is followed by a discussion of characterization , involving modes , types , and typologies , then setting ( the environment in a work ) . This world can serve as a basis for analysis and judgment of a work . Although they focus on the " world " in narrative fiction , drama shares similar aspects . 
 Wellek and Warren consider genres as influencing " any critical and evaluative ... study " . All works of literature can be so classified , although the genres themselves are ( presumably ) not fixed . After outlining a brief history of the " ultimate " genres as understood by Aristotle ( poetry , prose , and drama ) , they show such an understanding as " scarcely promising of objective results " and overly prescriptive ; they also reject several alternative theories of genre . Instead , they suggest that genres should be understood descriptively , as based on the " outer form " ( meter , structure ) and the " inner form " ( attitude , tone , purpose ) , with the " outer form " emphasized . Wellek and Warren consider genres to be continually shifting , with good writers conforming to but ultimately expanding them . 
 According to Wellek and Warren , evaluation of literary work should be done based on the work 's own nature , divorced from an author 's practical or scientific intent . They reject evaluation based on extra @-@ literary content , writing instead that literature – like all fine art – will provide an " aesthetic experience " which can be judged . They note various criteria used to identify " good " literature , rejecting Russian formalism 's criterion of defamiliarization and similar understandings for one based on the diversity of materials amalgamated within a work . They reject a static hierarchy or <unk> understanding of literary greats . Instead , they suggest that every work 's rank changes when a new work is introduced and that values within are " really , or potentially , present in the art object " . They note a dialectic relationship between evaluating and critically analyzing literature . This ties genre theory to the history of literature . 
 Wellek and Warren – disapproving of contemporary histories of literature – opine that a history of literature is possible and should be based on elements intrinsic to works . Such a history should describe the development of " [ t ] he process of interpretation , criticism , and appreciation " or trace the development of works in small and large groups before tying it to universal literature . This " historical evolution " of related yet individual events they tie to " variable schemes of values " which must be " abstracted from history itself . " They suggest numerous ways in which this can be accomplished , including identifying the development of values , traits , forms , themes , and motifs . <unk> , they write , should not be based on chronological boundaries , but a " time section dominated by a system of literary norms , standards , and conventions , whose introduction , spread , diversification , integration , and disappearance can be traced " which must be extracted from history , with boundaries marked by both internal and external changes . They close the chapter by stating that existing methods are " clumsy " and that a new ideal and methods of literary history is necessary . 
 = = = Section 5 : The Academic Situation = = = 
 The final section of the book , removed in later editions , consists of a single chapter regarding the study of literature . Wellek and Warren bemoan that literary students are " offered no wider choice than between the ' historical method ' ... and dilettantism " , supporting instead a critically oriented literary scholarship . After finding faults with the literary scholarship in England , Germany , France , and Russia , Wellek and Warren suggest that the US is poised to start a new era in scholarship . They note that this opportunity may , however , be lost in a conflict between those advocating change and the inertia ( including persons defending the status quo ) in American literary studies and institutions . 
 Rather than maintain the system of having scholars specialized in certain time periods and authors , Wellek and Warren push for scholars who have mastered certain approaches and thought patterns , preferably those who are from a literary background . They also recommend " sharper distinction between the teacher and the scholar " , allowing some individuals to devote their careers to research and not teaching . They emphasize a need for fluency in several modern languages rather than an understanding of the classical ones ; this coincides with their urge to establish departments teaching comparative literature . They recommend the teaching of literary methods and theories in combination with periods and authors , with a retooling of the doctoral dissertation procedures . 
 = = Theoretical borrowings = = 
 Theory of Literature was influenced by Russian formalism , a school of thought which sought to examine literature ( or , more precisely , what formalist @-@ turned @-@ structuralist Roman Jakobson 's termed literariness ) as an autonomous body , and the American New Criticism , which likewise denied external influences . The book borrowed formalism 's concepts of an aesthetic function and dominance of different elements of language . Unlike Russian formalism , however , Wellek and Warren 's theory recognized the possibility of factors outside the work being studied , although Wellek and Warren continued to emphasize aspects within the work itself . Also unlike their forerunners , Wellek and Warren saw aesthetic value as not the defamiliarization of the mundane , but an interaction among the strata derived from Roman Ingarden 's work : the phonological ( sound ) level at the base , then semantic ( meaning ) , and the " world " created by literature . This last strata they divided into paradigms and " metaphysical qualities " , the level which a reader contemplates . They did not , however , accept Ingarden 's teachings as a whole , writing that Ingarden " analyze [ d ] the work of art without reference to values " , a system which they found untenable . 
 Wellek and Warren 's concept of aesthetics borrowed from the writings of Immanuel Kant , implying that a specific " aesthetic realm " was autonomous within the work and required a certain perspective to properly understand ; they emphasize this with a quote from the neo @-@ Kantian philosopher and literary critic Eliseo Vivas , that beauty is a " character of some things ... present only in the thing for those endowed with the capacity and the training through which alone it can be perceived " . Meanwhile , their depiction of a dynamic scale of values , as opposed to an anarchical one , is a reimagining of <unk> , which Wellek and Warren define as " <unk> [ ing ] that there is one poetry , one literature , comparable in all ages , developing , changing , full of possibilities " . They explicitly denounce absolutism and relativism . 
 = = Publication = = 
 Theory of Literature was published by Harcourt , Brace , and Company in December 1948 , with a copyright notice dated 1942 , 1947 , and 1949 . Wellek notes that 1942 , often quoted as a year of publication in Europe , is in fact when his article " The Mode of Existence of a Literary Work of Art " was published in The Southern Review ; the article was reused as a chapter of Theory of Literature , leading to the inclusion of the year 1942 . Several other works by Wellek and Warren had been adapted for Theory of Literature . 
 Translations of Theory of Literature began soon after it was published ; by 2010 the work had been translated into more than twenty languages , including Spanish , Korean , Hebrew , and Hindi . Two new editions were issued , first in 1956 then in 1962 . These new editions included updated bibliographies and clarified points ; the last chapter , " Study of Literature in the Graduate School " , was removed beginning in the second edition as Wellek and Warren considered the reforms suggested within already accomplished in several places . By 1976 Wellek was of the opinion that the book required updating , but asked rhetorically " who can master the astonishing and bewildering literature on theory which since [ 1949 ] has been produced in many countries ? " and noted that he and Warren were busy with their own projects . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Academic reception of Theory of Literature was mixed . The philologist Helmut Hatzfeld , reviewing shortly after the book 's release , described Theory of Literature as " radical in its viewpoint , rich in ideas and bibliographical material , poised in its judgment of other approaches to literature " as well as a " landmark in literary studies . " Although Hatzfeld agreed with Wellek and Warren 's main points , he thought it lacking in references to theories and literature from the Romance languages and concrete interpretations . William Troy , writing in The Hudson Review , echoed the sentiment , stating that , although the book was " unusually difficult " to read , he felt " unqualified agreement with the main position " . He expected that the book would not succeed with " anyone <unk> from birth with some susceptibility to ... ' intrinsic ' elements " , a group which he believed comprised the majority of those teaching literature in the US . Seymour <unk> , writing in Scrutiny , praised the book 's summary and <unk> ; he wrote that it was " in its way impressive " , a " tour de force " which would " usher in a new era " . However , <unk> felt that the book lacked a " controlling purpose " and that it neglected to emphasize the need to differentiate between " the cheap commercial appeal and the genuine " literature . 
 Edward G. Ballard , reviewing for The Journal of Philosophy , found the treatment lacking , with major terms left undefined and much of the book providing synopses of other writers ' theories ; he conceded , however , that it convincingly showed that " the intellectual study of literature qua literature has just begun " . In The Kenyon Review , Vivas wrote that the book 's discussion of the relation between literary criticism and scholarship " leaves nothing to be desired " , providing a " well balanced " look at the major points ; he found that no other such work existed in English at the time . Vivas opined , however , that Wellek and Warren lacked a single , non @-@ contradictory theory to use as a base for their conclusions . Kemp Malone , reviewing for Linguistics , discussed three chapters on elements of literature related to linguistics . He considered these to provide " food for thought " for linguists and suggested that Wellek was well @-@ versed in linguistics for a professor of literature , despite misusing several terms common in the discipline . 
 Newton Arvin , writing in the Partisan Review , found Theory of Literature to excessively indulge in formalism and expressed concern that the idea of literary history may have " gone into the discard once and for all " . Benjamin found the book not something new , but a final assertion of the dominance of New Criticism in literary theory , a dominance which he considered untenable . Rather than emphasize theory , he found that Theory of Literature was " ninety @-@ nine parts a ' good offense ' against its slain and buried foes " with " exceptionally lucid and authoritative " discussions of literary problems . Scaglione opined that Theory of Literature 's plain , imprecise language had introduced numerous inconsistencies within its theoretical framework ; he also stated that the book led readers to believe they were approaching an understanding of literature without ever reaching the core essence of the subject . 
 Ingarden , who believed his theories the basis of Wellek and Warren 's arguments , considered himself inadequately credited and took offense with the attribution of his ideas to " pure <unk> " . He also stated that they had misrepresented his views . George <unk> , prefacing his translation of Ingarden 's The Literary Work of Art , suggested that Theory of Literature was " instrumental " in spreading Ingarden 's ideas . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 At the time of publication Wellek and Warren considered Theory of Literature unparalleled in English @-@ language publications , an attempt to unite literary theory , criticism , history , and scholarship . Although they noted a similarity to existing German and Russian works , the authors considered those earlier works " eclectic " and " doctrinaire " , respectively . Ballard writes that Theory of Literature was published during a time of increasing focus on the art of literature , rather than its underlying philosophy . 
 In an academic biography of Wellek , Michael Holquist of the University of Columbia writes that Theory of Literature established Wellek 's reputation as a literary scholar for the next three decades . The book proved to be Wellek 's only " book @-@ length scholarly manifesto " , a format which Holquist credits to Warren 's influence . Wellek 's other works were essays on literary theory and criticism which , even though bound in a single volume , did not provide a single coherent manifesto . Wellek would continue to use the theories contained in Theory of Literature into the late 1980s . 
 The book was used to teach literary theory at universities beginning not long after publication and remained dominant into the mid @-@ 1960s , at which time an increasingly heterogeneous academia questioned the universal value of literature ; literary theorist Terry Eagleton finds that , after the 1960s , " it was no longer possible to take for granted what what literature was , how to read it , or what social functions it might serve " . Steven <unk> describes Theory of Literature as crystallizing an American movement towards intrinsic literary criticism , as dominated by New Criticism , while van Rees credits the book with popularizing a text @-@ oriented interpretation . <unk> writes that its importance for both American and general literary studies is " indisputable " . Writing in 1987 , Jeremy Hawthorn described the book as an " excellent introductory study " , despite extrinsic studies having become more dominant in literary criticism , while Holquist found that the book could still " be usefully invoked " in literary debates of the early 21st century . In an obituary of Wellek , Robert Thomas Jr. credited Theory of Literature with " <unk> [ ing ] European scholarship to the United States " and establishing a framework for comparative literature studies in the United States . 
 The theoretical positions promulgated in Theory of Literature have generally been criticized by later writers . Van Rees , for example , considers Wellek and Warren 's distinction between extrinsic and intrinsic aspects of literature to be too sharply drawn , leading to the two aspects becoming binary opposites . Holquist notes that this distinction proceeds from a different understanding of literature . He writes that Wellek 's school of thought considered literature as a " unified subject " with definite boundaries which could be mastered , while more recent scholarship has rendered " [ t ] he very identity of literature as an object of study ... no longer clear . " 
 = HMS Valiant ( 1863 ) = 
 HMS Valiant was the second ship of the Hector @-@ class armoured frigates ordered by the Royal Navy in 1861 . Her builders went bankrupt shortly after she was laid down , which significantly delayed her completion . After being launched in 1863 , she waited a further five years to receive her guns due to supply issues . Upon being commissioned in 1868 the ship was assigned as the First Reserve guard ship for Southern Ireland , where she remained until she was decommissioned in 1885 . Valiant was hulked in 1897 as part of the stoker training school HMS Indus before becoming a storeship for kite balloons during the First World War . The ship was converted to a floating oil tank in 1926 and served in that role until sold for scrap in 1956 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The Hector @-@ class ironclads , like their immediate predecessors , the Defence class , were designed as smaller and cheaper versions of the Warrior @-@ class armoured frigates . They were modified versions of the Defence @-@ class ships with additional armour and more powerful engines . 
 Valiant was 280 feet 2 inches ( 85 @.@ 4 m ) long between perpendiculars . She had a beam of 56 feet 4 inches ( 17 @.@ 2 m ) and a draft of 26 feet 2 inches ( 8 @.@ 0 m ) . The ship was 300 long tons ( 300 t ) overweight and displaced 7 @,@ 000 long tons ( 7 @,@ 100 t ) . The hull was subdivided by watertight transverse bulkheads into 92 compartments and had a double bottom underneath the engine and boiler rooms . The ships of her class were designed with a very low centre of gravity and had a metacentric height of 4 feet 6 inches ( 1 @.@ 4 m ) . While handy in manoeuvring , they rolled quite badly . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 Valiant had one 2 @-@ cylinder horizontal return connecting rod steam engine made by Maudslay Sons & Field driving a single 20 @-@ foot @-@ 2 @-@ inch ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) propeller . Six boilers provided steam to the engine at a working pressure of 25 psi ( 172 kPa ; 2 kgf / cm2 ) . The engine produced a total of 3 @,@ 560 indicated horsepower ( 2 @,@ 650 kW ) . During sea trials on 18 September 1865 Valiant had a maximum speed of 12 @.@ 65 knots ( 23 @.@ 43 km / h ; 14 @.@ 56 mph ) . The ship carried 450 long tons ( 460 t ) of coal , enough to steam 800 nautical miles ( 1 @,@ 500 km ; 920 mi ) at full speed . 
 The ship was barque @-@ rigged and had a sail area of 24 @,@ 500 square feet ( 2 @,@ 276 m2 ) . Her funnel was semi @-@ retractable to reduce wind resistance while under sail alone . She was designed to allow the ship 's propeller to be hoisted up into the stern of the ship to reduce drag while under sail , but the hoisting gear was never fitted . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The armament of the Hector @-@ class ships was intended to be 32 smoothbore , muzzle @-@ loading 68 @-@ pounder guns , 15 on each side on the main deck and one each fore and aft as chase guns on the upper deck . This was modified during construction to eight rifled 110 @-@ pounder breech @-@ loading guns and twenty @-@ four 68 @-@ pounders . The breech @-@ loading guns were a new design from Armstrong and much was hoped for them . Firing tests carried out in September 1861 against an armoured target , however , proved that the 110 @-@ pounder was inferior to the 68 @-@ pounder smoothbore gun in armour penetration and repeated incidents of breech explosions during the Battles for Shimonoseki and the Bombardment of Kagoshima in 1863 – 64 caused the navy to withdraw the gun from service shortly afterwards . 
 Due to her extended construction time , Valiant never received the breech loaders , and was armed with sixteen 7 @-@ inch ( 178 mm ) and two 8 @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) rifled muzzle @-@ loading guns . The two 8 @-@ inch guns were mounted on the quarterdeck where they could be fought in all weathers and four 7 @-@ inch guns were also fitted on the upper deck . The remaining twelve 7 @-@ inch guns were carried on the main deck . The shell of the 15 @-@ calibre 8 @-@ inch gun weighed 175 pounds ( 79 @.@ 4 kg ) while the gun itself weighed 9 long tons ( 9 @.@ 1 t ) . It had a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 410 ft / s ( 430 m / s ) and was credited with the ability to penetrate a nominal 9 @.@ 6 inches ( 244 mm ) of wrought iron armour at the muzzle . The 16 @-@ calibre 7 @-@ inch gun weighed 6 @.@ 5 long tons ( 6 @.@ 6 t ) and fired a 112 pounds ( 50 @.@ 8 kg ) shell . It was credited with the nominal ability to penetrate 7 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 196 mm ) armour . 
 = = = Armour = = = 
 The Hector @-@ class ships had a wrought iron waterline armour belt , 4 @.@ 5 inches ( 114 mm ) thick , that covered 216 feet ( 65 @.@ 8 m ) amidships and left the bow and stern unprotected . To protect against raking fire the belt was closed off by 4 @.@ 5 @-@ inch transverse bulkheads at each end at lower deck level . The armour extended to 5 feet 8 inches ( 1 @.@ 7 m ) below the waterline . The main deck was protected by a strake of armour that ran the full length of the ship . Amidships , it was 4 @.@ 5 @-@ inch thick for a length of 216 feet and tapered to a thickness of 2 @.@ 5 inches ( 64 mm ) to the ends of the ship . The armour was backed by 18 inches ( 460 mm ) of teak . The lack of armour at the stern meant that the steering gear was very vulnerable . 
 = = Service history = = 
 HMS Valiant was laid down 1 February 1861 by Westwood , Baillie in Cubitt Town . This company went bankrupt in November 1861 and was ultimately bought by Thames Ironworks , which delayed the ship 's launching until 14 October 1863 . In August 1865 , after Valiant had been towed to Portsmouth for fitting out , the ship was inspected by French officers during a port visit by ironclads of the French Navy . Production of the new muzzle @-@ loaded rifles was slow and ships already in commission had priority so Valiant was not commissioned until September 1868 , nearly five years after she was launched . 
 After Valiant was commissioned she became the First Reserve guard ship in Southern Ireland , where she remained until 1885 , an experience unique among the British ironclads , although she did have one break to have new boilers installed . From June to August 1878 the ship formed part of the Particular Service Squadron at the time of the Russian war scare during the Russo @-@ Turkish War , and sailed up the Dardanelles under the command of Admiral Hornby . On 20 July 1884 Valiant was accidentally rammed by the ironclad HMS Defence in Lough Swilly , damaging her hull and tearing off her boats , davits and fittings on one side of the ship . Valiant was paid off in 1885 , and saw no further front @-@ line service ; lying for thirteen years in a partially dismantled state at Devonport . In 1897 she was assigned to the HMS Indus stoker training establishment , briefly losing her name , before being renamed as Indus IV in 1904 . The ship was converted to a kite balloon storeship in 1915 , during World War I , and her name was changed to HMS Valiant III . She was offered for sale in 1922 , but there were no takers so that she was converted into a floating oil tank in 1926 and towed to Hamoaze , where she remained until 1956 . Valiant was sold in that year to Belgian ship breakers and towed to Bruges on 8 December 1956 . 
 = George Macaulay = 
 George Gibson Macaulay ( 7 December 1897 – 13 December 1940 ) was a professional English cricketer who played first @-@ class cricket for Yorkshire County Cricket Club between 1920 and 1935 . He played in eight Test matches for England from 1923 to 1933 , achieving the rare feat of taking a wicket with his first ball in Test cricket . One of the five Wisden Cricketers of the Year in 1924 , he took 1 @,@ 838 first @-@ class wickets at an average of 17 @.@ 64 including four hat @-@ tricks . 
 A leading member of the Yorkshire team which achieved a high level of success in the time he played , Macaulay was a volatile character who played aggressively . He left a job at a bank to become a professional cricketer , making his first @-@ class debut aged 23 as a fast bowler . Meeting limited success , he altered style to deliver off spin in addition to his pace bowling . This proved so effective that he was chosen to play for England in Test matches . However , his perceived poor attitude towards the game , and an unsuccessful match in the 1926 Ashes probably prevented him playing more Tests . His form slumped following injuries in the late 1920s , but a recovery in the early 1930s led to a recall by England , although he broke down in his second match back . Another injury in 1934 made cricket difficult for him and his first @-@ class career ended in 1935 , although he continued playing club cricket until the Second World War . A pilot officer in the Royal Air Force , he died of pneumonia on active service in the Second World War . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Macaulay was born in Thirsk on 7 December 1897 . His father was a well @-@ known local cricketer , as were his uncles . Macaulay was educated at Barnard Castle ; in later years , he took teams of famous cricketers to play annual matches against the school eleven . Upon leaving school , he worked as a bank clerk in Wakefield ; there , and in nearby Ossett , he played cricket and football . In the First World War , Macaulay served with the Royal Field Artillery ; afterwards he returned to work for the same bank as before , initially in London , then in Herne Bay , Kent , playing club cricket in his spare time . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Yorkshire debut = = = 
 In 1920 , Yorkshire needed to strengthen its bowling attack . Of the team 's previously successful bowlers , Major Booth had been killed in the war , Alonzo Drake had died soon afterwards from illness , and George Hirst was past his best . Although Wilfred Rhodes was able to ease the shortfall by resuming his career as a frontline spin bowler , Yorkshire needed new bowlers , particularly pacemen . Macaulay had been spotted playing club cricket by Sir Stanley Christopherson , a former Kent player . Subsequently , Harry Hayley , a 19th @-@ century Yorkshire cricketer , saw Macaulay in action and was sufficiently impressed to recommend him for a trial with the county . At the beginning of the 1920 season , Macaulay played in two warm @-@ up games for Yorkshire , taking six wickets for 52 runs in a one @-@ day game and four for 24 and two for 19 in a two @-@ day game . This was good enough to earn a first @-@ class debut on 15 May 1920 against Derbyshire in the County Championship , although he only took one wicket . Playing in the early part of the season , he took five wickets for 50 runs , his first five wicket haul , against Gloucestershire , followed by six for 47 against Worcestershire . He continued to play until the middle of June before dropping out of the team after an unsuccessful match against Surrey . In ten first @-@ class matches , he had taken 24 wickets at an average of 24 @.@ 35 , and managed a top score of just 15 with the bat . Wisden said he " had neither the pace nor the stamina required " , while it later said he tried to bowl at speeds beyond his capability . Even so , he decided to become a professional cricketer . Hirst and Rhodes persuaded him to reduce his pace and concentrate on bowling a good length while trying to spin the ball . He practised through the winter of 1920 – 21 to be ready for the next season . 
 Bowling a mixture of medium pace and his new style of off spin , Macaulay played 27 matches in 1921 . After taking wickets steadily at the start of the season , in his fourth game he took six wickets for ten runs as Warwickshire were bowled out for 72 . Four more wickets in the second innings gave Yorkshire a big victory and Macaulay had match figures of ten wickets for 65 runs , the first time he had taken ten wickets in a match . Macaulay then came to wider public attention by taking six wickets for three runs to bowl out Derbyshire for 23 runs . He later took ten wickets in the match against Surrey in a losing cause , and in total that season he took 101 first @-@ class wickets at an average of 17 @.@ 33 , placing him third in the Yorkshire bowling averages . With the bat , he scored 457 runs at an average of 22 @.@ 59 , surprising commentators with his ability . This included a maiden first @-@ class century against Nottinghamshire . His innings of 125 not out took Yorkshire from 211 for seven wickets when he came in to bat ( 228 for eight soon after ) to a total of 438 for nine declared , a lead of 264 ; Yorkshire went on to a comfortable win . His overall success in the season meant that his place in the team was secure . 
 Macaulay improved his bowling record in 1922 , taking more wickets at a lower average ( 133 wickets at an average of 14 @.@ 67 ) , and scoring another century . Helping Yorkshire to win the first of four County Championships in a row , Macaulay finished second to Rhodes in the team 's bowling averages . The first two matches of the season brought Macaulay figures of six for eight and five for 23 in a ten wicket win over Northamptonshire and six for 12 out of an opposition total of 78 in an innings win over Glamorgan . While he took only one wicket in the second innings , his first three innings had given him 17 wickets for 43 runs . He continued to pick up wickets , but his most significant performance came in June . In front of Marylebone Cricket Club ( MCC ) members at Lord 's , he took five for 31 as Middlesex were bowled out for 138 . Those watching were impressed and he was selected for the Players against the Gentlemen at the same ground in July . He took three for 97 out of a total of 430 in one of the most important matches of the season . These performances earned his selection for the MCC tour to South Africa that winter , although there were concerns his fitness was insufficient . Statistically , Macaulay 's best performance came shortly afterwards against Gloucestershire ; he took seven for 47 and twelve wickets in the match . Macaulay also scored 486 runs at an average of 17 @.@ 35 . 
 = = = Test debut = = = 
 Macaulay played eight first @-@ class matches in South Africa in 1922 – 23 , taking 29 wickets at an average of 16 @.@ 37 . His best first @-@ class performances were six for 18 against Pretoria and eight wickets in the match against Transvaal , while he was effective in minor matches , taking five for 40 against East Rand and six for 19 against Zululand . After England lost the first Test match , which Wisden attributed to a weakness in bowling , Macaulay replaced Greville Stevens and made his Test match debut for England in the second Test . He took the wicket of George Hearne with his first ball . He was the fourth player to take a wicket with his maiden delivery in Test cricket . In total , he took two for 19 in the first innings . In the second innings , South Africa were comfortably placed with a score of 157 for one , but four wickets fell to Macaulay while 13 runs were scored . Macaulay ended the innings with five wickets for 64 . Wisden commented that he bowled very finely in this match . He hit the winning run , batting at number eleven , to seal a one @-@ wicket win for England . He played in the remaining three Tests , finishing with 16 wickets at an average of 20 @.@ 37 . England won the series 2 – 1 , but the Wisden correspondent for the tour was not impressed by the English performances , noting that no really effective bowlers had emerged . 
 With his health improved by the tour , Wisden reported that Macaulay was in excellent form for the whole of the 1923 season . His performances earned him selection as one of Wisden 's Cricketers of the Year . The citation praised his stamina , spin and ability to bowl on all kinds of pitches but noted that he was easily discouraged and had a negative attitude if circumstances went against him . He achieved his highest season total of wickets to date , taking 166 at an average of 13 @.@ 84 , and came third in both the Yorkshire and national bowling averages . His best performance came in the first match of the season , when he took seven wickets for 13 against Glamorgan as they were dismissed for 63 . Later in the season , he took a hat @-@ trick against Warwickshire while claiming five for 42 . With the bat , Macaulay scored 463 runs at an average of 18 @.@ 52 . There were no international matches that season , but Macaulay was selected for The Rest in a Test trial against England in which he took just one wicket . 
 In 1924 , Macaulay further increased his total of wickets to 190 and lowered his bowling average to 13 @.@ 23 , placing him first in the national averages . His batting declined as he scored 395 runs at an average of 11 @.@ 96 . Although selected for another Test trial , Macaulay did not play in the series against the touring South African team until the third Test at Leeds , where he took one wicket in each South African innings , but was omitted from the final two Tests . Despite his success in the season , he was not chosen to tour Australia with the MCC that winter , even though Maurice Tate , the leading bowler on the tour , lacked support . Macaulay had been involved in controversy on the field in 1924 . At the time , the Yorkshire team were notorious for their aggressive attitude while fielding . In a match against Middlesex in 1924 at Sheffield , the hostility of the crowd provoked an MCC inquiry which found that Yorkshire bowler Abe Waddington had incited the spectators . Further incidents followed against Surrey . The editor of Wisden blamed Yorkshire 's poor discipline on a small group of approximately four players . Without naming Macaulay as one of them , he noted that Lord Hawke , the Yorkshire president , believed Macaulay should have been in the team to Australia , and that " it was entirely his own fault he was not chosen " . It is also possible that during a match at this time , Macaulay openly criticised the captaincy and bowling of Arthur Gilligan , the England captain . 
 Since 1923 , Macaulay had run a cricket outfitters in Leeds and Wakefield with his Yorkshire team @-@ mate Herbert Sutcliffe , borrowing £ 250 from his mother to help establish the business . During the winter of 1924 – 25 , the shop became a limited company and Macaulay one of its directors . According to Sutcliffe 's biographer Alan Hill , Macaulay quickly lost interest , and the partnership was dissolved a year later , but Sutcliffe made the lone venture a success . Macaulay received £ 900 from the outfitters upon his resignation . 
 = = = Mid @-@ 1920s career = = = 
 Macaulay 's most successful season in terms of wickets was 1925 , despite a very dry summer which produced a succession of good batting pitches . He took 211 wickets at an average of 15 @.@ 48 , coming top of the Yorkshire averages . Exactly 200 of his wickets were taken for Yorkshire — only Wilfred Rhodes and George Hirst had previously reached 200 wickets for Yorkshire , and only Bob Appleyard has done so since , as of 2013 . One of Macaulay 's highest profile performances in 1925 came for Yorkshire against Sussex , who were chasing 263 to win the game . Just after lunch on the final day , the score was 223 for three wickets . A possibly apocryphal story suggests that Macaulay drank champagne in the interval . He then delivered a spell of five wickets for eight runs in 33 balls to bowl out his opponents and finish with figures of seven for 67 . He then left the field exhausted . The cricket historian Mick Pope describes the match as a " lasting testimony to [ Macaulay 's ] belief that no cause was ever lost " . Macaulay was again selected for the Players against the Gentlemen at Lord 's , and took five wickets in the match . With the bat , Macaulay scored 621 runs at an average of 23 @.@ 88 , although he only passed fifty twice . 
 Yorkshire 's reign as County Champions ended in 1926 , the first season since 1921 when Yorkshire did not win the Championship . Wisden noted that the Yorkshire attack , with the exception of Rhodes , was less effective than previously . Macaulay bowled less overs and took fewer wickets at a higher bowling average ; his 134 wickets , at an average of 17 @.@ 78 , placed him second in the Yorkshire averages . Selected for a Test trial , he failed to take a wicket . Wisden described his performance as " lifeless " , while cricket writer Neville Cardus noted that he had " yet again ... fallen below his best away from the Yorkshire XI " . He was not chosen for the Gentlemen v Players match , never representing the Players again . 
 Macaulay was selected for the third Test against Australia at Headingley , possibly because Arthur Carr , the England captain , expected the pitch to favour spinners . The Australians were concerned that Macaulay represented a threat to their batting , but the match did not work out in Macaulay 's favour as a bowler ; having been dropped at the start of play , Charlie Macartney played what Wisden called one of the best innings of his career and vigorously attacked the England bowling , achieving the rare feat of scoring a century before the lunch interval . The Australian batsman had asked his captain if he could attack Macaulay in particular , and the Yorkshire bowler suffered as Macartney quickly dominated him . Macaulay eventually had Macartney caught after hitting a short ball in the air , but it was Macaulay 's only success in the innings . Macaulay conceded 123 runs in 32 overs as Australia scored 494 . When Macaulay came into bat from number ten in the batting order , England were 182 for eight wickets and facing defeat . He played an attacking innings of 76 , hitting ten fours , in a partnership of 108 with George Geary . This began an England recovery which helped the team to escape with a draw . Nevertheless , Macaulay did not play in the final two Tests of the series . Later in the season , he took fourteen wickets for 92 runs against Gloucestershire , including eight for 43 in the second innings . These were the best bowling figures of his career that he achieved in a match . Apart from his batting success in the Test match , Macaulay scored another two fifties and in the match against Somerset achieved a century . 
 = = = Decline = = = 
 Over the next four seasons , Yorkshire failed to win the Championship , although they never finished lower than fourth in the table . The team displayed an unaccustomed weakness in bowling , particularly after the death of Roy Kilner in 1928 . The effectiveness of the main bowlers was reduced by age and injury ; only Macaulay remained at something approaching his bowling peak . However , his performances worsened each year . His bowling figures in the 1927 season were similar to his achievements in 1926 , showing only a slight decline , but his total of wickets fell each season until 1930 . 
 In 1927 , Macaulay took 130 wickets at an average of 18 @.@ 26 . However , he suffered a foot injury in 1928 , and took time to recover his best form . His wicket tally fell to 120 and his average climbed to 24 @.@ 37 . His total of wickets decreased further to 102 in 1929 and his average remained above 20 . Hampered by another foot injury throughout 1930 , Macaulay failed to take 100 wickets for the first time since his debut season ; his average of 25 @.@ 12 was the highest of his career . In these seasons , he was only selected for one representative match , a Test trial in 1928 in which he failed to take a wicket . At the same time , his batting faded . In 1927 , Macaulay scored his highest run aggregate and passed fifty six times while hitting 678 runs at an average of 25 @.@ 11 . He improved his batting average in 1928 , accumulating 517 runs at 25 @.@ 85 with four more fifties . However , after 1928 , he never averaged more than 16 @.@ 26 with the bat and only scored two more fifties in his career , both in 1929 . 
 = = End of first @-@ class career = = 
 = = = Return to form = = = 
 From the 1931 season , Yorkshire once again dominated the County Championship , winning three consecutive trophies . A large part of the success was an increase in bowling strength . In 1931 , Macaulay slightly increased his haul of wickets from 91 to 97 , and his average dropped from 25 @.@ 12 to 15 @.@ 75 . This placed him third in the Yorkshire averages , behind Hedley Verity and Bill Bowes , who both took over 100 wickets and led a very strong bowling attack . That season , Macaulay was awarded a benefit match against Surrey which raised £ 1 @,@ 633 , worth approximately £ 82 @,@ 700 in 2008 . At the time , this was considered a poor reward for a Yorkshire cricketer . The following season , Macaulay took fewer wickets , managing 84 at an average of 19 @.@ 07 , which placed him fifth in the Yorkshire averages . He achieved his best bowling figures in first @-@ class cricket when he took eight for 21 against the Indian touring side . By now , Macaulay was a specialist spinner and had largely abandoned pace bowling ; Bill Bowes and Arthur Rhodes opened the Yorkshire bowling . 
 The 1933 season signalled a return to form for Macaulay . Wisden judged that he " recovered fully his length , spin and command over variations in pace " . He bowled more overs than anyone else in the team and passed 100 wickets for the first time since 1929 , the tenth and final time he did so , taking 148 wickets at an average of 16 @.@ 45 . Against Northamptonshire , he took seven for nine as the team was bowled out for 27 . He finished the match with thirteen for 34 . Against Lancashire , when his match figures were twelve for 49 , he took a hat @-@ trick in a sequence of four wickets in five balls ; he also took twelve wickets against Leicestershire . His form won a recall to the Test side after seven years . Not picked initially , a decision described by Wisden as unfair , he played in the first Test when E. W. Clark dropped out of the team before the match . Macaulay took one wicket in the first innings but had figures of four for 57 in the second innings to earn approval from Wisden . He was picked for the second Test but bowled only 14 overs before injuring his foot when fielding ; he was unable to take any further part in the game . He did not play in the third Test but was selected in festival game at Scarborough for the team selected from the MCC party which toured Australia in the previous winter . He played instead of an injured player , even though he did not take part in the tour . Macaulay ended second in the Yorkshire bowling averages . In its review of the season , Wisden stated that his form in the early part of the season would have placed his among the best cricketers in the world . 
 = = = Final seasons = = = 
 Macaulay 's final two seasons were affected by injury , as he was increasingly bothered by rheumatism . In the 1934 season , while trying to take a catch , he injured the finger he used to spin the ball . He did not appear for Yorkshire until June , but went on to take 55 wickets at an average of 23 @.@ 43 . The next season was his final one . He only played nine matches , taking 22 wickets at 20 @.@ 09 . At the end of the year , he retired from first @-@ class cricket and Yorkshire awarded him a special grant of £ 250 . Yorkshire did have a replacement in mind ; Frank Smailes was considered to be versatile enough in his bowling style to take Macaulay 's place , but it was not until Ellis Robinson secured a place in 1937 that a new specialist off @-@ spinner was found . 
 Macaulay ended his career with 1 @,@ 837 first @-@ class wickets at an average of 17 @.@ 65 . In eight Test matches , he took 24 of those wickets at an average of 27 @.@ 58 . In addition , he scored 6 @,@ 055 runs at an average of 18 @.@ 07 and held 373 catches . He took 100 wickets in a season ten times , a record only surpassed by four others for Yorkshire , while only three other Yorkshire bowlers have taken 200 wickets in a season . He also took four hat @-@ tricks . 
 = = = Post @-@ Yorkshire career = = = 
 Following his retirement , Macaulay initially attempted to market a patented rheumatic medicine , but the business quickly failed . He then established an athletic outfitting shop in Leeds . This business also was unsuccessful ; Macaulay blamed a lack of money and competition from other businesses . Consequently , he filed for bankruptcy in 1937 . Macaulay accused Yorkshire of worsening his situation by withholding most of his benefit money — of the total raised , he received only £ 530 . He believed that he was owed the balance , and continued his business under that assumption , but Yorkshire had invested the amount and he only received the interest . The matter arose in court , and when asked why he thought the money would be paid to him , Macaulay answered : " Because I had earned it " . He also rejected the accusation that he spent his time drinking in public houses , and another that he had neglected his two failed businesses . The Official Receiver found that Macaulay 's complaint against Yorkshire was without justification . Macaulay suggested that he should arrange for the invested money to be paid to his creditors in his will . Macaulay secured new employment , and a few days after the hearing it was announced that he would play professional cricket in Wales . 
 Macaulay played league cricket in Wales and Lancashire until the Second World War . During 1937 , he was the professional at Ebbw cricket club , and in 1938 and 1939 , he played in the Lancashire League as the professional for Todmorden , for whom he took nine wickets for 10 runs against Ramsbottom in the Worsley Cup final . Ramsbottom were bowled out for 47 to give Macaulay 's team a 26 @-@ run win . 
 When the Second World War began , Macaulay joined the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) Volunteer Reserve in 1940 as a Pilot Officer , and was stationed at Church Fenton , close to <unk> Ash where he lived with his wife Edith . Later in the year , he was stationed in the Shetland Islands , where he was bothered by the cold . Six days after his 43rd birthday , he died of pneumonia at the Sullom Voe RAF station on 13 December 1940 . He was buried in Lerwick Cemetery on Shetland . 
 = = Style and personality = = 
 As a batsman , Macaulay was reasonably good and possibly better than his statistics would suggest . He was capable of batting well in a crisis but may have been prevented from honing his batting skills by the Yorkshire leadership who wished him to focus on bowling . He generally batted low down in the order after the all @-@ rounders in the team . Macaulay 's fielding was also very effective . He was excellent at close range to the batsmen , particularly from his own bowling . 
 As a bowler , Macaulay fulfilled two roles . At the start of an innings , when the ball was new and hard , he opened the bowling with medium @-@ fast deliveries that swung away from right @-@ handed batsmen . In this style , he was very accurate and bowled a variety of deliveries to unsettle his opponents . Cricket writer R. C. Robertson @-@ Glasgow considered him to be better than any similar bowler in the 1920s except Maurice Tate , the leading medium paced bowler in England . Macaulay could vary his pace from medium to fast depending on the needs of the match situation and the type of pitch . When the pitch was suitable for spinning the ball , he bowled medium @-@ paced off breaks . Wisden said that his spin made him more effective than other bowlers of his speed on a sticky wicket , a pitch which has been affected by rain , making it erratic and difficult to bat on . His obituary further stated : " Under suitable conditions for using the off @-@ break , batsmen seemed at his mercy . " This was because he could bowl deliveries which were almost impossible for batsmen to play without getting out , but at the same time it was very difficult to score runs against him . Robertson @-@ Glasgow wrote that " on a rain @-@ damaged pitch he was in his glory . " He would make small adjustments to the positions of his fielders or bowl from different sides of the wicket , often making gestures or facial expressions as he did so . Robertson @-@ Glasgow said that " only the best could survive the onslaught except by a miracle " , and described Macaulay as a great bowler . The cricket writer Jim Kilburn suggested that Macaulay was " a great cricketer . He was great not so much in mathematical accomplishment ... as in cricketing character . " 
 Macaulay 's bowling action was relaxed and effortless , being admired by his contemporaries . Kilburn wrote : " His run @-@ up was half @-@ shambling , his steps short and his shoulders swaying , but his feet were faultlessly placed and his aim was high at the instant of delivery " . However , critics and team @-@ mates more widely knew him as passionate , hostile and fiery when bowling . Kilburn said that batsmen were Macaulay 's " mortal enemies " . He knew many tricks to dismiss or unsettle them , including the tactic of bowling the ball straight at their head without pitching , which was usually considered dangerous and unfair . Kilburn observed that " should the batsman survive he would be rewarded with a glare of concentrated venom calculated to stagger any but the stoutest heart ... Every scrap of his heart and soul went into every ball he bowled . He never gave up and his persistence was invariably triumphant sooner or later " . The Yorkshire Post , after his death , observed : " Macaulay will always be remembered for the fierceness of his enthusiasm when there was a fighting chance of victory " . 
 Macaulay displayed a temper when matters went against him . Robertson @-@ Glasgow described him as an unusual man , " fiercely independent , witty , argumentative , swift to joy and anger . He had pleasure in cracking a convention or cursing an enemy ... A cricket @-@ bag came between him and his blazer hanging on a peg ; and he 'd kick it and tell it a truth or two , then laugh . " Bill Bowes described how , when he was bowling , he would glare and mutter under his breath ; he seemed to be " filled with a devilish energy " . He would make sharp or biting comments , particularly if a fielder made a mistake when he was bowling and although often amusing , it could at times hurt the recipients , and his anger made his team @-@ mates wary of him . Yet , he could also express appreciation when a skillful batsmen hit a good shot from his bowling ; the result was that his colleagues were never sure what to expect from him , even after playing with him for years . Herbert Sutcliffe said he could be charming when not playing , but his wit could be sharp . Robertson @-@ Glasgow nevertheless described him as " a glorious opponent ; a great cricketer ; and a companion in a thousand " . 
 = A Trick of the Tail = 
 A Trick of the Tail is the seventh studio album from the English progressive rock band Genesis . It was released in February 1976 on Charisma Records and was the first album to feature drummer Phil Collins as lead vocalist following the departure of Peter Gabriel . It was a critical and commercial success in the UK and U.S. , reaching No. 3 and No. 31 respectively . 
 Following Gabriel 's decision to leave the band , the remaining members wanted to carry on and show they could still write and record successful material . The group wrote and rehearsed new songs during mid @-@ 1975 , and listened to around 400 audition tapes for a replacement frontman . They entered Trident Studios in October with producer David Hentschel to record the album without a definitive idea of who was going to perform lead vocals . Eventually , Collins was persuaded to sing " Squonk " , and the performance was so strong , he sang lead on the rest of album . 
 Upon release , critics were impressed by the improved sound quality and the group 's ability to survive the loss of Gabriel without sacrificing the quality of the music . The group went out on tour with Collins as frontman and Bill Bruford as an additional drummer , and the resulting performances in the US raised Genesis ' profile there . The album has been reissued on CD several times , including a deluxe package with bonus tracks in 2007 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Founding member and lead singer Peter Gabriel decided to leave Genesis in late 1974 , midway through the tour for the album The Lamb Lies Down on Broadway . The other members hoped he would reconsider , as they were still in debt and felt his departure could destroy the band 's future , but ultimately accepted that he would leave . The remaining members felt they still wanted to collaborate musically , and show journalists and critics they were primarily a song writing team that could still produce good music . Keyboardist Tony Banks had been close to Gabriel personally , and did not want the band to split up on top of seeing less of one of his best friends . He had written a number of songs for a possible solo project before deciding they should be used on the new Genesis album . 
 Following the end of the tour , guitarist Steve Hackett recorded a solo album , Voyage of the Acolyte with guitarist / bassist Mike Rutherford and drummer Phil Collins , feeling unsure that Genesis would survive . He reconvened with the remaining group members in July 1975 . Banks and Rutherford were particularly keen to write and record new material so that critics and fans would accept Gabriel 's departure . The group began rehearsals in a basement studio in Acton , and quickly wrote material they were happy with , but had not yet found a replacement lead singer . They placed an anonymous advertisement in the music paper Melody Maker for " a singer for a Genesis @-@ type group " , which received around 400 replies . Some applicants sent photographs of themselves in costume and wearing masks , as Gabriel had done on stage . A few weeks into rehearsals , Melody Maker managed to find out about Gabriel leaving the band , and their story made the front page of the 16 August issue , where journalist Chris Welch declared Genesis dead . The group spoke to the music papers to deny they were splitting up and explaining they had an album finished and waiting to be recorded . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Recording began in Trident Studios in October 1975 with producer David Hentschel . Hentschel had served as tape op and then engineer on earlier Genesis albums and Collins had become a fan of his album Startling Music , a re @-@ recording of Ringo Starr 's album Ringo on an ARP 2500 synthesizer . Collins thought the group could carry on as an instrumental act , but other group members felt that it would be boring without vocals . The group had still not decided on a replacement singer , so they decided to start recording backing tracks and audition singers as they went . 
 Some songs such as " Ripples ... " were written with the intention that Collins could sing them , similar to " More Fool Me " on Selling England by the Pound , but he did not want to take over as a permanent replacement , opting instead to teach potential lead singers the songs . The group still wanted a regular frontman for live performances , as they thought Collins would not be able to handle all the material , and it would be problematic trying to sing Gabriel 's vocal parts while drumming on tour . One of the auditionees , Mick <unk> , was invited into the studio to sing , but the backing tracks were in a key outside of his natural range and the band decided not to work with him . Having failed to produce a suitable vocalist , Collins reluctantly went in the studio to sing " Squonk " . His performance was well received by the band , and they decided that he should be their new lead vocalist . Hentschel stayed on as co @-@ producer for future Genesis albums up to 1980 's Duke . 
 = = Songs = = 
 The opening track , " Dance on a Volcano " was the first song written for the album . Rutherford felt in contrast to the material on The Lamb ... , it was easy to write , and was intended to show how Genesis would move forward . " <unk> " was mostly written by Hackett , with help from Banks . Rutherford recalled that Hackett " started writing verses which were very airy @-@ fairy and then he came down with a bang . " " Squonk " is based on the North American tale of the Squonk which , when captured , dissolves in a pool of tears . The song combines a main theme written by Rutherford against a middle section written by Banks , and was designed to sound like Led Zeppelin 's " Kashmir " . 
 " Robbery , Assault and Battery " was mostly written by Banks , in an attempt to capture some of the humorous lyrics that Gabriel had written for earlier albums . Collins sang the song in character , inspired by his earlier role as the Artful Dodger in Oliver ! before he became a professional musician . " Ripples ... " was a combination of a 12 @-@ string guitar piece composed by Rutherford and a piano @-@ led middle section written by Banks . The title track was inspired by Banks reading William Golding 's The Inheritors and described an alien visiting Earth and the reaction to it . 
 The closing song , " Los <unk> " , was written by the whole band . Collins came up with the basic rhythmic structure , inspired by his work in side project Brand X and wanting to take the looser playing style into Genesis , while Banks and Hackett wrote the main themes , including reprises of " Dance on a Volcano " and " Squonk " . The opening piece was recorded for a completely different song , " It 's Yourself " , which was later released as a B @-@ side . The track became a live favourite , and continued to be played through to the 2007 Turn It On Again tour . In 2014 , Hackett added the song to the playlist of his extended Genesis Revisited II tour . 
 = = Reception = = 
 A Trick of the Tail had a positive reception from music critics , who were impressed that the group could not only survive the loss of Gabriel but still deliver a good album . The sound quality had improved from previous albums as a result of Hentschel 's production skills . The album reached No. 3 in the UK , remaining on the charts for 39 weeks , and No. 31 in the U.S. It was certified Gold in the UK by the British Phonographic Institute in June and in the US by the RIAA in March 1990 . The album remained in the UK charts for 39 weeks and recouped a significant amount of $ 400 @,@ 000 worth of debt they had accumulated by the time Gabriel left . 
 For the first time in their career , Genesis filmed promotional videos for their songs . The first to be filmed was the title track , which features the band playing to the song together around a piano , including composite shots of a miniature Collins hopping around on a piano and a guitar . The group also produced promotional films of " Ripples ... " and " Robbery , Assault and Battery " . 
 = = Tour = = 
 Even after the album had been completed , Collins was unhappy about leaving the drumkit to sing lead , and the band were unsure he would be comfortable as frontman on tour . The group decided to try anyway , and needed someone to drum while Collins was singing . Collins insisted on choosing the touring drummer himself , selecting Bill Bruford , who he had already worked with in Brand X. Collins continued to drum during instrumental sections . 
 The new line @-@ up rehearsed in Dallas for a North American tour , starting in London , Ontario . Collins was nervous about what to say to the audience between songs , so Rutherford and Hackett helped with some announcements . Unlike Gabriel 's theatrical approach , Collins developed a humorous rapport with the audience , and it was immediately successful . Audiences were happy for Collins to sing old material such as " Supper 's Ready " in concert as he had been recruited as frontman from within the group . The resulting tour raised Genesis ' profile in the U.S. , where they had been relatively unknown while Gabriel was in the band . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 This is the first Genesis album to credit songwriters individually , as opposed to the band as a whole . 
 = = = 2007 SACD / CD / DVD release = = = 
 A new version of A Trick of the Tail was released in the UK and Japan in 2007 as part of the Genesis 1976 – 1982 box set . This includes the entire album in remixed stereo , surround sound , and related video tracks . A further DVD release includes audio and video tracks , including an interview with the band , the promotional videos , and the film Genesis : In Concert , filmed during the 1976 tour promoting the album . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Genesis 
 Mike Rutherford – 12 @-@ string guitar , bass , bass pedals 
 Tony Banks – pianos , synthesizers , organ , Mellotron , 12 @-@ string guitar , backing vocals 
 Phil Collins - drums , percussion , lead & backing vocals 
 Steve Hackett – electric guitar , 12 @-@ string guitars 
 Production 
 Genesis – production 
 David Hentschel – production , engineering 
 Nick " Haddock " Bradford – engineering 
 Tex and Jeff – equipment 
 Neal , John and Terry – liquid sustenance 
 Hipgnosis – sleeve design 
 Colin Elgie – sleeve design 
 Special thanks to Tony Smith , Alex Sim and Regis 
 Recorded at Trident Studios , London 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = James Graham ( British Army soldier ) = 
 James Graham ( 1791 – 1845 ) was an Irish non @-@ commissioned officer ( NCO ) in the British Army during the Napoleonic wars , recognised as the " bravest man in the army " . Serving in the Coldstream Guards , he was commended for his gallantry during the defence of Hougoumont , at Waterloo . Graham saved the life of an officer , and his own brother , and was among the small group responsible for closing the North Gate at Hougoumont after a French attack – an act which won the Duke of Wellington 's encomium . He was rewarded with a specially cast gallantry medal and an annuity . Graham continued to serve with distinction , and was credited with saving the life of Lord Frederick FitzClarence during the arrest of the Cato Street conspirators . After later serving in the 12th Royal Lancers , Graham was discharged in 1830 for ill health , and died at the Royal Hospital Kilmainham in 1845 . 
 = = Early life and service = = 
 James Graham was born in 1791 , in Clones , County Monaghan , Ireland . One of three brothers to serve in the British Army , Graham enlisted in the 2nd Battalion of the Coldstream Guards in 1813 , which was then stationed in England . Almost all soldiers at the time signed on for life in exchange for a " bounty " of £ 23 17s 6d , a large portion of which was absorbed by the cost of outfitting " necessities " . Graham was assigned to the battalion 's light company , and by 1815 had been made a corporal . It was not unusual for Irishmen to join English or Scottish regiments after the Act of Union between Great Britain and Ireland . Most battalions during the Napoleonic wars had a proportion of Irish soldiers . The Coldstream Guards were a regiment of Foot Guards , a group of elite infantry regiments of the British Army . In background and natural attributes , recruits to the Foot Guards differed little from those recruited into other regiments , but they received superior training and were expected to maintain rigorous discipline . Wellington considered Guards NCOs to be among the best in the army . 
 = = The road to Waterloo = = 
 The United Kingdom and her Allies had been at war against Napoleon 's French Empire since 1803 , but by early 1814 Wellington 's army had fought its way through the Peninsula to France , and the eastern Allies were threatening France 's eastern borders . On 31 March 1814 , allied armies entered Paris , and Napoleon abdicated on 6 April . Within a month of Napoleon 's abdication , he had been exiled to Elba . It appeared that the war was over , and arrangements for the peace were discussed at the Congress of Vienna . But on 26 February 1815 , Napoleon escaped from Elba and returned to France , where he raised an army . 
 The Allies assembled another army and planned for a summer offensive . The combatant Coldstream companies had been garrisoned in Brussels and Ath , where they were joined by the 2nd Battalion 's remaining four companies in early 1815 . In preparation for the coming offensive , Graham 's battalion joined with the 2nd Battalion of the Scots Guards to form the 1st Division 's 2nd Brigade . Basing themselves in Belgium , the Allies formed two armies , with the Duke of Wellington commanding the Anglo @-@ Allies , and Gebhard Leberecht von Blücher commanding the Prussians . Napoleon marched swiftly through France to meet them , and split his army to launch a two @-@ pronged attack . On 16 June 1815 , Napoleon himself led men against Blücher at Ligny , while Marshall Ney commanded an attack against Wellington 's forward army at the Battle of Quatre Bras . 
 Wellington had received news of Napoleon 's position on the night of 15 June , and issued orders to his army to hold the ground at Quatre Bras . Graham 's battalion , along with the rest of the 2nd Brigade , left Enghien , where they were quartered , at 3 a.m. on the morning of the 16th , for a twenty @-@ five mile march to Quatre Bras . They reached Quatre Bras at 4 p.m. , by which time the battle had been engaged for two hours . The Coldstream Guards immediately deployed into position to support the 1st Foot Guards , who were engaged with the enemy at Bossu Wood . Once the wood was cleared of French , Lieutenant @-@ Colonel James Macdonnell led the 2nd Brigade 's light companies ( including Graham 's ) in a counter @-@ attack against Jérôme Bonaparte 's Frenchmen , with other Guards companies in support . The various Guards battalions sustained heavy losses , but by 6 @.@ 30 p.m. Wellington 's position had strengthened . By 9 p.m. , Ney had withdrawn his men , and Wellington held the field . The French had lost 4 @,@ 000 men , the Allies 4 @,@ 800 . 
 Wellington held Quatre Bras , but the Prussians were not so successful at Ligny , and were forced to retreat . Hearing of Blücher 's defeat on the morning of 17 June , Wellington ordered his army to withdraw level with his ally ; they took position near the Belgian village of Waterloo . Graham 's company , and the Scots Guards ' light company , masked the retreat from the right , and did not leave Quatre Bras until mid @-@ afternoon . 
 The field at Waterloo was 5 @.@ 5 km wide , with two parallel ridges running west to east , creating a shallow valley 1 @.@ 4 km across . On the allied right lay the chateau of Hougoumont , a collection of walled farm buildings lying closer to the French line than the Allies ' line . Recognising its defensive importance , Wellington ordered Hanoverian and Nassau troops to occupy the farm . In allied hands , it would provide cover for flanking fire against any French assault of the main allied line ; in French hands , it would provide a bastion from which they could launch attacks . Since it defended the Nivelles road as well as the Allies ' right flank , Wellington ordered that it was to be held at all costs . 
 = = Hougoumont = = 
 The day 's battle began on 18 June 1815 at about 11 a.m. with a French attack on Hougoumont from the south @-@ west , led by Napoleon 's brother Jerome . The French gained control of much of the chateau 's park , but the Allies retained possession of the farmhouse and courtyard surrounds . Jerome continued his attempts to take the farmhouse throughout the day , making four or five assaults , most of which were repulsed by the defenders , who fired through loopholes , windows , and doorways . One assault at about 12 @.@ 30 p.m. breached the north gate , which had been left open to allow allied troop and supply movements . Sous @-@ Lieutenant <unk> , of the French 1st Light Infantry , broke through the wooden doors with an axe , allowing French soldiers to flood the courtyard . Graham 's commanding officer , Lieutenant @-@ Colonel James Macdonnell , led his men through the melee in the courtyard to the gates , in an attempt to shut them against the pressing French . This was done with the help of three officers ( Captain Wyndham , Ensign Hervey , and Ensign Gooch ) , Corporal Graham , and a few other soldiers including Graham 's brother Joseph . James Graham was the one to slot the bar in place . Flagstones , carts , and debris were then piled against the gates to hold them secure . The Frenchmen trapped within the courtyard were all killed , apart from a young drummer @-@ boy . 
 Wellington monitored the action at Hougoumont until about 1 p.m. , by which time he was content enough with the position 's security to concentrate his own attention on the allied centre . With the chateau secure , the 3 @,@ 500 British and German troops in the vicinity were able to defend the strongpoint against an estimated 14 @,@ 500 French soldiers . About 8 @,@ 000 French soldiers died attacking Hougoumont over the day . 
 During the battle , Graham also saved the life of Captain Wyndham – one of those who had shut the gate – by shooting a sniper whose musket was trained on the officer . Mid @-@ afternoon , a fire broke out in one of the farm buildings following a bombardment of incendiary shells . Graham 's brother Joseph was lying wounded within , and Graham requested permission to fall out , so he might rescue his brother ; given permission , he retrieved his brother and returned to his post . Joseph Graham died of wounds five days later . 
 At 7 p.m. the defenders at Hougoumont were still resisting , despite the burning buildings and their own dwindling ammunition . Within a couple of hours , the action in the rest of the field had resulted in a victory for the Allies : the French were in retreat . Afterwards , Wellington declared that " the success of the battle turned upon closing the gates at Hougoumont . " It seems likely that if the gates had not been shut so quickly the men holding the perimeter at Hougoumont would have been killed . It was a costly defence : the Coldstream Guards lost 8 officers , with 300 casualties among the men . James Graham was promoted to sergeant for his bravery at Hougoumont , and received a special medal for gallantry . 
 = = " The bravest man at Waterloo " = = 
 Wellington 's respect for those who served in Hougoumont was well known . After the battle he wrote : " You may depend upon it , no troops could have held Hougoumont but the British , and only the best of them . " But among those " best soldiers " , Graham stood out as being exceptional . In August 1815 , John Norcross , the Rector of Framlingham , sought to make over the income from a freehold farm to the " most deserving soldier at Waterloo " ; he approached the Duke of Wellington , who nominated Graham . Graham received an annuity from the farm of £ 10 a year for two years until the vicar became bankrupt . Wellington 's Supplementary Dispatches ( Vol . 11 ) make mention of Graham : 
 [ He ] assisted Lieutenant @-@ colonel Macdonnell in closing the gates , which had been left open for the purpose of communication , and which the enemy were in the act of forcing . His brother , a corporal in the regiment , was lying wounded in a barn , which was on fire , and Graham removed him so as to be secure from the fire , and then returned to his duty . He had been 3 2 / 12 years in the regiment . 
 This honour is noted in his service record now held at the Public Record Office , with the words : " The most valorous NCO at the battle of Waterloo selected by the Duke of Wellington . " 
 The Reverend Norcross died in 1837 . It was reported in a number of books and newspapers in the years following that Norcross had recovered his fortunes enough to leave £ 500 in his will to " the bravest man in England " and that , once appealed to , Wellington again turned to the events in Hougoumont , selecting Colonel Macdonnell . Macdonnell apparently split the bequest with Graham , since they had shut the gate together . There remains some doubt concerning this second bequest . Graham 's entry in the Dictionary of National Biography records only the initial annuity , and states that " various apparently incorrect versions of the Norcross gift have been published . " Archibald Murray ( in 1862 ) made reference to " the alleged sum of £ 500 " given to Colonel Macdonnell and reported investigations made by a fellow researcher who could find no proof of this bequest ; Murray concluded that the reports arose from a misrepresentation of the original annuity . In his history of Waterloo , Colonel <unk> provided a full account of Graham 's action at Hougoumont and the later annuity , but made no reference to the second bequest , despite reporting Graham 's own death at Kilmainham Hospital . <unk> had personally interviewed Graham . 
 = = Later career = = 
 Graham continued to serve in the Coldstream Guards after Waterloo . The 2nd Battalion advanced on Paris with the army , remaining there until 1816 as part of the army of occupation , after which they were posted to Cambrai . In November 1818 they returned to England . While stationed in London in 1820 , a detachment of Guards were ordered to support the police with the arrest of the Cato Street conspirators , under the command of Captain FitzClarence ( later given the title Lord Frederick FitzClarence ) , one of the illegitimate sons of the Duke of Clarence . The arrest was not straightforward , and a scuffle ensued . The Naval and Military Gazette ( May 1845 ) identified Sergeant Graham as the man who saved FitzClarence 's life . 
 Graham was discharged from the Guards in 1821 , and enlisted in the 12th Royal Lancers as a private . When Graham joined the Lancers , they were stationed in Ireland , and returned to England in 1824 . In 1826 , two squadrons saw service in Portugal before returning to England . Graham was discharged for ill health – " an injured chest and worn out " – in July 1830 , and received a Chelsea pension . 
 James Graham died in 1845 , at the Royal Hospital , Kilmainham . He was buried with military honours . A memorial plaque was erected at the Hospital , and it was later transferred to St <unk> 's Church , in Clones . 
 His obituary appeared in The Gentleman 's Magazine under the name " John Graham " : 
 23 April . At the Royal Hospital of Kilmainham , Sergeant John Graham , formerly in the light company of the 2nd battalion of Coldstream Guards , the individual selected by the Duke of Wellington as " the bravest of the brave " in the desperate combat at Waterloo , in order to profit by the generous offer of the Rev. Mr. Norcross , Rector of Framlingham , to confer a pension , during life , upon the soldier most distinguished in the brigade of guards on that glorious day . After the most minute inquiry , carried out by Sir John Byng 's directions , the laurel was awarded to an Irishman , John Graham , a native of <unk> [ sic ] , co . Monaghan . 
 = = Enduring legacy = = 
 James Graham 's exploits at Waterloo became much celebrated throughout Great Britain , and many accounts of the battle make reference to his actions , including a biography of Wellington , the memoirs of another sergeant , and Charles Dickens ' magazine Household Words . The shutting of the gate was portrayed by artist Robert Gibb in 1903 ; the painting is currently held by the National Museums of Scotland . A watercolour portrait of Sergeant Graham himself is held at the National Gallery of Ireland . 
 The actions of Graham and Macdonnell continue to be remembered as an iconic moment in the battle of Waterloo . In 1915 , cigarette manufacturers W.D. & H.O. Wills portrayed Graham and Macdonnell on one of the cigarette cards printed to commemorate the centenary of Waterloo . Since then , many authors of fiction concerning Waterloo have recreated the events at the gate , and even if they include their own fictional heroes they attribute the closing of the gate to Macdonnell and Graham . 
 The efforts of the Coldstream Guards at Waterloo , and Graham 's gallantry , remain celebrated by the Regiment . Every December the Sergeants ' Mess commemorate Graham 's bravery with a ceremonial game " Hanging the Brick " . The " Brick " – a stone from Hougoumont – is paraded through the barracks and hung up in the Sergeants ' Mess with all the honour due to regimental colours . Also retained by the Regiment are Graham 's Waterloo Medal and gallantry medal . In 2004 the Regiment named a new sergeants ' accommodation block after him , in Lille Barracks , Aldershot . A plaque on the building is inscribed with the words : 
 " In Memory of Sergeant James Graham WM , 2nd Battalion Coldstream Guards , " The Bravest Man in England " , Following His Actions in Closing The Gates at Hougoumont Farm , Waterloo , 18 June 1815 . " 
 = Hanky Panky ( Madonna song ) = 
 " Hanky Panky " is a song by American recording artist Madonna from her soundtrack album I 'm Breathless . It was released on June 30 , 1990 , by Sire Records as the album 's second and final single . Written and produced by Madonna and Patrick Leonard , the song was developed from a line in the parent film , Dick Tracy , talking about a woman who enjoys being spanked by her partner . Performed in an almost comical style , " Hanky Panky " is a jazz and swing song with a changing bassline and minor to major key @-@ shift in the chorus . It caused some controversy in Ireland because of its innuendo and racy lyrics , with women 's groups deeming them as harmful ; Madonna later clarified that the lyrics were intended as a joke . 
 The song garnered positive response from music critics , many of them highlighting its lyrical content . It was a moderate success , becoming a top @-@ ten hit in many countries including Australia , Ireland , Italy , the United Kingdom and the United States , while topping the chart in Finland . Madonna has performed the song on two of her concert tours ; on the 1990 Blond Ambition World Tour , and 14 years later on the Re @-@ Invention World Tour . The song has been covered by several tribute acts , and was also performed on the television series Ally McBeal ( 1997 ) . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 In 1990 , Madonna starred in the film Dick Tracy as Breathless Mahoney — a new role introduced for her — with Warren Beatty , her boyfriend at the time , playing the titular character . After the shooting for Dick Tracy was over , Madonna started working on the soundtrack . She had begun recording three songs by Stephen Sondheim for the film — " Sooner or Later " , " More " and " What Can You Lose " — which would be part of the album , but also had to write and develop new songs comparable in style to her previous releases . She produced the entire album , including the Sondheim songs . " I want people to think of me as a musical comedy actress . That 's what this album is about for me . It 's a stretch . Not just pop music , but songs that have a different feel to them , a theatrical feel " , she said at the time . 
 Madonna recruited producer Patrick Leonard and engineer Bill Bottrell to help her with the project . She and Leonard toiled to create music that would fit the style and production of the film , set in the days of the Untouchables law enforcement . " Hanky Panky " was written and produced by Madonna and Leonard and was released as the second and final single from I 'm Breathless on June 30 , 1990 . The cassette and the 7 " versions had " More " , another song from the album as its B @-@ side , while the 12 " releases had additional two remixes of the song by Kevin <unk> . Cover photograph for the single was done by Patrick Demarchelier with Jeri Heiden designing the sleeves . 
 = = Recording and composition = = 
 " Hanky Panky " was recorded within the three weeks time taken for the whole project . Personnel working on the song included Leonard on keyboards , Jeff Porcaro on drums , Guy Pratt on bass and Donna De Lory , Niki Haris and N 'Dea Davenport on background vocals . Lyrically , the song deals with sadomasochistic themes and is centered around a girl who celebrates the pleasures of a " good spanking " . It is performed in an almost comical style , and stemmed from a line in the film , where Breathless says to Tracy , " You don 't know whether to hit me or kiss me " . The track has a false introduction and starts slowly with piano , but changes after a few moments into a large jazz and swing song , with a changing bassline and minor to major key @-@ shift in the chorus . According to the sheet music published by Musicnotes.com , the song is set in common time , with a moderately slow groove tempo of 70 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of D minor , with Madonna 's vocals spanning from B ♭ 3 to D5 . The song has a basic sequence of Dm – C – Bm – <unk> in the beginning and changes to Dm – A – B ♭ 9 – A7 – Dm – C when the swing starts . During an interview with Rolling Stone , Madonna explained : 
 The spanking thing started because I believed that my character in Dick Tracy liked to get smacked around and that 's why she hung around with people like Al Pacino 's character . Warren [ Beatty ] asked me to write some songs , one of them , the Hanky Panky song , was about that . I say in the song ' Nothing like a good spanky ' , and in the middle I say , ' Ooh , my bottom hurts just thinking about it ' . When it came out everybody started asking , ' Do you like to get spanked ? ' and I said : ' Yeah . Yeah , I do ' . 
 The singer had to tone down some of the suggestive lyrics to please the officers at Disney , the producers of Dick Tracy , who were worried about their image . In Ireland , the song was subject to controversy after two women 's organizations accused Madonna of glorifying violence against women , specifically on the line " I 'll settle for the back of your hand " ; one of the groups , the National Women 's Council of Ireland , labelled the song " highly dangerous " while the other group , Ireland 's Women 's Aid , said the line was " extremely harmful " . Although initially approving of the idea of " getting spanked " — even admitting her fondness on The Arsenio Hall Show — Madonna later backed down from the theme of spanking , explaining that the lyrics were written as a joke and believed that it was instead her character Breathless Mahoney that liked to get spanked . She added that it should have been obvious that the song was humorous in nature , since Madonna believed her image was more of a dominant person who took charge , contrary to the song 's characterization . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 J. Randy Taraborrelli , author of Madonna : An Intimate Biography , commented that " the steamrolling ' Hanky Panky ' simply sounds like a silly innocent romp until you realize what she 's going on and on is about ( ' Warren 's favorite pastime ' ) ... being spanked ! " . The author also felt Madonna sang with " just a little too much authority " . Academic Georges Claude Guilbert , author of Madonna As Postmodern Myth , called it " a comic hymn to spanking " . Stephen Thomas Erlewine from AllMusic described it as a " double entendre @-@ laden hit " . Music critic Robert Christgau highlighted " Hanky Panky " as one of the best tracks on I 'm Breathless ; calling it a " fake period piece " but praising its " risqué s & m @-@ lite " sound as " all her " . Rolling Stone 's Mark Coleman wrote that the song , alongside " Cry Baby " and " I 'm Going Bananas " , was one of the " more @-@ legitimate sounding and confidently sung show tunes without a trace of disco " on the album . He also noted that " its titles alone are enough to conjure up visions of the elaborate production numbers on Madonna 's summer tour . " People magazine called it a " paean to kink " . Billboard 's Keith Caulfield referred to the song as a " goofy ( but catchy ! ) ditty about having a ' good spanky ' " . 
 Greg Sandow , from Entertainment Weekly , called it a " delightful challenge to censorship " . Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine felt it was a " cheeky " song , also writing that it touched on themes Madonna would go on to explore more explicitly later in the 1990s . Stephen Holden of The New York Times described it as a " big @-@ band blues [ song ] in which she endorses sexual spanking [ ... ] a calculated bid for outrage " . Ray Boren from The Deseret News described " Hanky Panky " as " naughty " , comparing it to the 1928 jazz song " Makin ' Whoopee " by Eddie Cantor . Dave Tianen from The Milwaukee Sentinel , while reviewing I 'm Breathless noted that " one aspect of Madonna remains constant even when you push her back in time . ' Hanky Panky ' is one of the few pop tunes to explore the erotic entertainment value in a good spanking . " Writing for The Pittsburgh Press , Peter B. King believed that the subject matter of " Hanky Panky " would surely receive " flank " , but defended Madonna saying that she had been singing about such topics for years by then . The Huffington Post ranked the song fifth on their list of " The 13 Most Underrated Madonna Songs " ; author Pandora Boxx hailed it as " a great fusion of ' 90s pop and vintage ' 30s " , but noted that " it 's ' scandalous ' subject matter ruffled too many feathers to make it a big hit " . A negative review came from Royal S. Brown , author of Film Musings : A Selected Anthology from Fanfare Magazine , who called it " ridiculous " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Following its release , " Hanky Panky " was initially blacklisted at some radio stations when they faced objections from audiences about the lyrical content . Nevertheless , it debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 at number 40 the week of June 30 , 1990 , as " Vogue " was descending from the top ten . The single quickly climbed up the chart , ultimately peaking at number ten the week of July 28 , 1990 . It was eventually certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) on September 19 , 1990 , for shipments of 500 @,@ 000 copies . Billboard ranked it at number 36 on their list of " Madonna 's 40 Biggest Hits " on the Hot 100 . In Canada , the song debuted at number 92 on the RPM Top Singles chart , and reached a peak of number 18 on the week of September 1 , 1990 . It was present for a total of 13 weeks on the chart . 
 In the United Kingdom , the song debuted at number 14 on the UK Singles Chart and after two weeks , reached its peak of number two the week of July 27 , 1990 ; spending a total of nine weeks within the top 100 of the chart . It was certified silver by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) on August 1 , 1990 , for shipments of 200 @,@ 000 copies . According to the Official Charts Company , the single has sold over 210 @,@ 000 copies as of October 2010 . In Australia , " Hanky Panky " debuted at number 18 on the ARIA Singles Chart the week of July 29 , 1990 , and peaked at number six four weeks later . It was ranked at number 45 on the ARIA year end chart . In New Zealand , the single debuted at number 23 on RIANZ Singles Chart and , after fluctuating for the next three weeks , reached a peak of number six , becoming Madonna 's 18th top @-@ ten single in the country . In the European nations , " Hanky Panky " reached the top @-@ ten of the charts in Ireland and Italy , as well as topping the charts in Finland . On the year @-@ end Italian charts , the song was ranked at number 38 . In other countries such as Austria , Belgium , Germany , Spain , Switzerland and the Netherlands , it managed to peak within the top 20 of the charts . 
 = = Live performances and covers = = 
 " Hanky Panky " was first performed on Madonna 's third concert tour , the Blond Ambition World Tour of 1990 . She performed the song dressed in a green and white striped vaudeville @-@ style corset , playing the part of a nightclub singer , standing in front of a microphone . Near the end of the performance , Madonna joked : " You all know the pleasures of a good spanking , don 't you ? [ ... ] When I hurt people , I feel better , you know what I mean ? " . Regarding the " shameless promotion " of Dick Tracy in this segment , author Lucy O 'Brien said that " along with her yen for artistic expression , Madonna has always had an eye on the bottom dollar ... [ But ] the Dick Tracy section is the least dynamic part of the show " . Two different performances were released on video , the first was included in Blond Ambition Japan Tour 90 , taped from the performance at Yokohama Stadium in Yokohama , Japan , on April 27 , 1990 , and the other once included on Blond Ambition World Tour Live , taped at the Stade de l 'Ouest in Nice , France , on August 5 , 1990 . 
 Fourteen years later , Madonna performed an energetic , showgirl themed version of " Hanky Panky " as part of her 2004 Re @-@ Invention World Tour . She appeared onstage dressed in a circus themed outfit , consisting of black hot pants and a bustier ; this ensemble resembled like a 1920s flapper in red and white stripes . Sean Piccoli , from the Sun @-@ Sentinel , praised Madonna 's ability to " summon the vampy humor of ' Hanky Panky ' — a Bette Midler moment if ever [ Madonna ] had one " . On May 2000 , the song was performed by actress Alicia Witt on the third season finale of the American television series Ally McBeal , titled " The Musical , Almost " . An Indie cover version by the band Killer Nannies In America , was included on the 2000 tribute album The Material Girl : A Tribute to Madonna . The Gary <unk> Orchestra included an instrumental version of the song on their album Who 's That Girl : The Madonna Story , Vol . 1 ( 2006 ) . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 US cassette / 7 " single 
 " Hanky Panky " – 3 : 57 
 " More " – 4 : 56 
 AUS / US / EUR maxi @-@ single 
 " Hanky Panky " ( Bare Bones Single Mix ) – 3 : 57 
 " Hanky Panky " ( Bare Bottom 12 " Mix ) – 6 : 36 
 " More " – 4 : 56 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Madonna – writer , vocals , producer 
 Patrick Leonard – writer , producer , keyboards 
 Jeff Porcaro – drums 
 Guy Pratt – bass 
 Donna De Lory – background vocals 
 Niki Haris – background vocals 
 N 'Dea Davenport – background vocals 
 Kevin <unk> – remix and additional production 
 Patrick Demarchelier – cover photographer 
 Jeri Heiden – designer 
 Credits adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Tucker : The Man and His Dream = 
 Tucker : The Man and His Dream is a 1988 American biographical comedy @-@ drama film directed by Francis Ford Coppola and starring Jeff Bridges . The film recounts the story of Preston Tucker and his attempt to produce and market the 1948 Tucker Sedan , which was met with scandal between the " Big Three automobile manufacturers " and accusations of stock fraud from the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission . Joan Allen , Martin Landau , Elias Koteas , Frederic Forrest and Christian Slater appear in supporting roles . 
 In 1973 , Coppola began development of a film based on the life of Tucker , originally with Marlon Brando in the lead role . Starting in 1976 , Coppola planned Tucker to be both a musical and an experimental film with music and lyrics written by Leonard Bernstein , Betty Comden and Adolph Green . The project eventually collapsed when Coppola 's American Zoetrope experienced financial problems . Tucker was revived in 1986 when Coppola 's friend , George Lucas , joined as a producer . 
 The film received critical praise , but was a box office disappointment . Nonetheless , Tucker : The Man and His Dream produced a spike in prices of Tucker Sedans , as well as a renewed appreciation for Tucker and his automobiles . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Detroit engineer Preston Tucker ( Jeff Bridges ) has been interested in building cars since childhood . During World War II he designed an armored car for the military and made money building gun turrets for aircraft in a small shop next to his home in Ypsilanti , Michigan . Tucker is supported by his large , extended family , including wife Vera ( Joan Allen ) and eldest son Preston Jr ( Christian Slater ) . 
 As the war winds down , Tucker has a dream of finally building the " car of the future . " The " Tucker Torpedo " will feature revolutionary safety designs including disc brakes , seat belts , a pop out windshield , and head lights which swivel when you turn . Tucker hires young designer Alex Tremulis ( Elias Koteas ) to help with the design and enlists New York financier Abe Karatz ( Martin Landau ) , to arrange financial support . Raising the money through a stock issue , Tucker and Karatz acquire the enormous Dodge Chicago Plant to begin manufacturing . Abe hires Robert Bennington ( Dean Goodman ) to run the new Tucker Corporation on a day @-@ to @-@ day basis . 
 Launching " the car of tomorrow " in a spectacular way , the Tucker Corporation is met with enthusiasm from shareholders and the general public . However , the Tucker company board of directors , unsure of his ability to overcome the technical and financial obstacles ahead , send Tucker off on a publicity campaign , and attempt to take complete control of the company . While Tucker travels the country , Bennington and directors change the design of Tucker 's car to a more conventional design , eliminating the safety and engineering advances Tucker was advertising . At the same time , Tucker faces animosity from the Big Three and the authorities led by Michigan Senator Homer S. Ferguson ( Lloyd Bridges ) . 
 Tucker returns from his publicity tour and confronts Bennington , who curtly informs him that he no longer has any power in the company to make decisions , and the engine originally planned for the car is not viable . Tucker then receives a call from Howard Hughes ( Dean Stockwell ) , who sends a private plane to bring Tucker to his aircraft manufacturing site . Hughes advises Tucker to purchase Air Cooled Motors , which can supply both the steel Tucker needs , as well as a small , powerful helicopter engine that might replace Tucker 's original " 589 " power plant . 
 Faced with being unable to change Bennington 's design , Tucker modifies the new engine and installs it in a test Tucker in the secrecy of his backyard tool and die shop . This prototype proves successful in both durability and crash testing . However , Tucker is confronted with allegations of stock fraud . Ferguson 's investigation with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission ( SEC ) , causes Karatz , once convicted of bank fraud , to resign , fearful that his criminal record will prejudice the hearings . Yellow journalism starts ruining Tucker 's public image even though the ultimate courtroom battle is resolved when he parades his entire production run of 50 Tucker Torpedoes , proving that he has reached production status . 
 After giving a speech to the jurors on how capitalism in the United States is harmed by efforts of large corporations against small entrepreneurs like himself , Tucker is acquitted on all charges . Nevertheless , his company falls into bankruptcy and Preston Tucker dies of lung cancer seven years later , never able to realize his dream of producing a state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art automobile . 
 The film ends with all 50 Tucker Sedans being driven down the streets of downtown Chicago , admired by everyone as they pass . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Background = = 
 From childhood , Coppola envisioned a film about the Tucker automobile and while attending the UCLA School of Theater , Film and Television in the early 1960s , further refined a film concept based on the life of Preston Tucker . In June 1973 , during the filming of The Godfather Part II ( 1974 ) , Coppola announced his intention to start development at American Zoetrope as writer , producer and director . He had already approached Marlon Brando for the lead role . He then purchased the rights from the Tucker Estate in 1976 , and , in addition to Brando , discussed the leading role with Jack Nicholson and also considered Burt Reynolds . Taking inspiration from Citizen Kane ( 1941 ) , Kabuki theater and the work of Bertolt Brecht , Coppola initially planned to make Tucker as a " dark kind of musical . " He later said that the idea approximated the style of an experimental film , similar to Mishima : A Life in Four Chapters ( 1985 ) , which he produced . 
 The musical would have featured Tucker predominantly , but storylines would have interwoven Thomas Edison , Henry Ford , Harvey Samuel Firestone and Andrew Carnegie as supporting characters . Leonard Bernstein agreed to write the music , and Betty Comden and Adolph Green were hired to write the lyrics . They all spent a week at Coppola 's home in California , planning the musical which resulted in Bernstein writing one song . Coppola also approached Gene Kelly as a consultant for the dance choreography . However , financing for Tucker fell through when Coppola 's production company , American Zoetrope , filed for bankruptcy after the box office failures of One from the Heart ( 1982 ) and The Cotton Club ( 1984 ) . Coppola abandoned Tucker for the time being and went to work on Peggy Sue Got Married ( 1986 ) . 
 In 1986 , during the production of Captain EO ( 1986 ) , Coppola 's friend George Lucas encouraged him to revive development for Tucker , believing it to be " the best film Francis had ever been involved with . " In addition , Lucas agreed to serve as executive producer and offered the use of his filmmaking companies , Lucasfilm and Industrial Light & Magic . He also convinced Coppola to drop the musical idea in favor of doing a homage to the films of Frank Capra , especially Mr. Smith Goes to Washington ( 1939 ) . Coppola became interested in the American Dream aspect of the storyline , as well as post @-@ World War II capitalism and politics . At one point , Coppola approached Capra to produce the film with Lucas , however , Capra thought Tucker was a failure and Coppola dropped that plan . 
 Coppola originally intended to write the screenplay himself , but due to his commitment to the filming of Gardens of Stone ( 1987 ) , engaged Arnold Schulman who scripted Capra 's A Hole in the Head ( 1959 ) . Schulman eventually collaborated with David Seidler on the Tucker project . Subsequently , Coppola rewrote the Schulman and Seidler scripts , but an attempt to get a co @-@ writing credit on the film was overruled by the Writers Guild of America , as an arbitration committee determined Coppola did not contribute enough to the script to warrant an on @-@ screen writing credit . The filmmakers devised a $ 24 million production budget , but Universal Pictures , Walt Disney Pictures , TriStar Pictures and Paramount Pictures wanted Coppola and Lucas to lower it to $ 15 million . Distributors were also dubious about working with Lucas after the 1986 commercial and critical failures of both Labyrinth and Howard the Duck . Lucas decided to cover the $ 24 million budget himself , and pre @-@ production proceeded . 
 = = Production = = 
 Development and production for Tucker : The Man and His Dream included the involvement of Tucker 's children and grandchildren . Jeff Bridges was cast in the title role and , for research , studied Preston Tucker 's mannerisms and movements through home movies . Tucker 's descendants also granted Bridges the opportunity to sport the man 's black pearl ring and cuff links for his wardrobe . Preston 's son , John Tucker , said that Bridges has " got it all in the mannerisms and the look . My father was very positive , always thinking of what came next . Jeff captures that . " Martin Landau was enthusiastic about accepting the pivotal role of Abe Karatz as a means to avoid typecasting . The construct of family values played a crucial role in the Tuckers ' life and Coppola studiously selected Joan Allen for the part of Vera , Tucker 's devoted wife while Christian Slater and Elias Koteas fill in the other central roles of eldest son and Tucker 's friend and confederate , Alex Tremulis . Coppola 's family was undergoing a stressful time during the production and he dedicated the film to Gio , his eldest son , who died before filming began . 
 Principal photography started with first unit shooting on April 13 , 1987 in the Ford Motor Company Assembly Plant in Richmond , California , doubling for the Dodge Chicago Plant . The majority of outdoor filming took place in Marin County , California as well as various locations including Oakland , Novato , and San Francisco . Forty @-@ seven of the original 52 Tucker ' 48s still exist , and many are in excellent condition . Twenty @-@ one of the cars were borrowed from members of the Tucker Automobile Club of America and were extensively used as both " set dressing " and in starring roles . Three cars were used to film the crash scene , a " before " version , with a fiberglass body , the car used to do the actual rollover was a Studebaker modified to look like a Tucker ( this car is currently in a privately owned museum in Tallahassee , Florida ) , and an " after crash " version which was another fiberglass body fitted to a Ford LTD chassis . The production is notable as the first film to have audio mixing work done at Lucas 's Skywalker Ranch . Production wrapped on July 17 , 1987 , and in the following month , Lucas convinced Paramount Pictures to distribute the film and cover the majority of the budget . He was helped by the fact that the studio was courting Coppola to direct The Godfather Part III ( 1990 ) . Prior to final editing , the studio insisted on amplifying the title to Tucker : The Man and His Dream . 
 = = Historical accuracy = = 
 Coppola had a certain amount of personal affinity with the short @-@ lived legacy of Preston Tucker . His father , Carmine Coppola , had been one of the original investors in Tucker stock and purchased one of the cars off the production line . Coppola included the involvement of Preston Tucker 's children , grandchildren and members of the Tucker Estate during the development of Tucker in the late 1970s , as well as during filming in 1987 . Coppola and Lucas acknowledged that they purposely intended to portray Tucker in an entirely sympathetic way . Both filmmakers each owned two Tuckers , although Lucas eventually sold one of his cars in September 2005 for $ 385 @,@ 500 . The Tucker Automobile Club made up of a legion of Tucker owners and collectors pronounced in their trade journal , TACA , that the " basic theme of the movie is quite accurate ... " although " the film compresses time and often takes artistic license with facts in order to more effectively present the story . " 
 <unk> Nazarian , Coppola 's librarian , spoke of the historical inaccuracies . " Preston Tucker didn 't really have an assembly line ; there 's one in the film . He actually had five kids ; there are only four in the film . Our story takes place in one year ; the real story took place over four years . People who know the story will find a lot of what they call errors . I 'm sure I 'll be deluged with letters . " Nazarian 's research , collected over several years , consisted of books , some 350 articles , interviews with the Tucker family , hundreds of photographs , home movies and information from the Tucker Automobile Club of America who the production company considered important arbiters of the Tucker mystique . " We knew the facts , " she continued , " but to fit the spirit of the story in a film that is exciting and has characters you love and characters you hate - that made us change a lot of things . Things like the president of the Tucker Company was a good guy really , but we needed a villain , so we made him a villain . " Alex Tremulis who served as one of the historical consultants during production , is depicted as the chief car designer of the Tucker Torpedo rather than as the stylist , and the film ignores the involvement of designer Philip Egan . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Tucker : The Man and His Dream was released in the United States on August 12 , 1988 , earning $ 3 @,@ 709 @,@ 562 in its opening weekend in 720 theaters . The film eventually grossed $ 19 @.@ 65 million in US totals and was declared a box office bomb because it did not reimburse its $ 24 million production budget , despite positive reviews . Pocket Books published a novelization written by Robert Tine to coincide with the release of the film . Paramount Home Video released Tucker : The Man and His Dream on DVD in October 2000 , which included audio commentary by Coppola , the 1948 promotional film Tucker : The Man and the Car ( with optional commentary by Coppola ) , as well as a making @-@ of featurette , Under the Hood : Making Tucker . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Critical reaction was mainly positive . Based on 37 reviews collected by Rotten Tomatoes , 84 % of the critics enjoyed the film with an average score of 7 @.@ 2 / 10 . By comparison Metacritic calculated an average score of 74 / 100 , based on 13 reviews . Richard Schickel of Time magazine praised the film for its exaggerated kitsch style . He also believed the role of Preston Tucker to be Jeff Bridges ' best performance . Janet Maslin from The New York Times agreed , writing that Coppola , known for his dark approach on his previous films , " found the directorial range to actually make a feel @-@ good movie . " In addition , Desson Thomson , writing in The Washington Post , called the film a " satisfying commercial breakthrough for Coppola , " and praised the cinematography of Vittorio Storaro , as well as the ubiquitous approach for Dean Stockwell 's cameo appearance as Howard Hughes . Roger Ebert gave a mixed review . " Preston Tucker lacks an ounce of common sense or any notion of the real odds against him . And since the movie never really deals with that - never really comes to grips with Tucker 's character - it begins as a saga but ends in whimsy . " 
 Although Coppola enjoyed his working relationship with Lucas , he commented in a July 1988 The New York Times interview with Robert Lindsey that " I think it 's a good movie - it 's eccentric , a little wacky , like the Tucker car - but it 's not the movie I would have made at the height of my power . " Coppola was able to stoically accept the critical and commercial reaction to Tucker : The Man and His Dream . " Every time in my career I tried to make , dare I say it , an art film , it never did well . " 
 Despite helming his " labor of love , " Coppola was insistent that Tucker : The Man and His Dream would be his last Hollywood project . He reiterated a long @-@ held dream of his own , embarking on a " period of amateurism and experimentation as a Hollywood dropout . " One of the unexpected benefits of the film 's release was a renewed interest in the Tucker automobile and a boost in the collector 's value of the Tucker 48 ; a recent auction of a low @-@ mileage example topped the $ 1 million mark . 
 = = Awards = = 
 At the 61st Academy Awards , Martin Landau was nominated for Best Supporting Actor , while production and set designers Dean <unk> and Armin Ganz ( Art Direction ) and Milena Canonero ( Costume Design ) were also nominated for their work . Landau did end up winning the Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor in a Motion Picture , while <unk> won the BAFTA Award for Best Production Design . Casting directors Jane Jenkins and Janet Hirshenson received a nomination for Feature Film <unk> Drama by the Casting Society of America . The film was nominated for the prestigious Grand Prix of the Belgian Syndicate of Cinema Critics . Music composer Joe Jackson received a Grammy Award nomination . 
 = Aggie Bonfire = 
 Aggie Bonfire was a long @-@ standing tradition at Texas A & M University as part of the college rivalry with the University of Texas at Austin . For 90 years , Texas A & M students — known as Aggies — built and burned a bonfire on campus each autumn . Known to the Aggie community simply as " Bonfire " , the annual autumn event symbolized Aggie students ' " burning desire to beat the hell outta t.u. " , a derogatory nickname for the University of Texas . The bonfire was traditionally lit around Thanksgiving in conjunction with festivities surrounding the annual college football game . Although early bonfires were little more than piles of trash , as time passed the annual event became more organized . Over the years the bonfire grew to an immense size , setting the world record in 1969 . In 1999 , the Bonfire collapsed during construction , killing twelve people , eleven students and one former student , and injuring twenty @-@ seven others . The accident led Texas A & M to declare a hiatus on an official Bonfire . However , since 2002 , a student @-@ sponsored coalition has constructed an annual unsanctioned , off @-@ campus " Student Bonfire " in the spirit of its predecessor . 
 = = Early years = = 
 The students of the Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas , known as Aggies , burned their first bonfire on November 18 , 1907 to congratulate the football team on a recent win . The first on @-@ campus Aggie Bonfire , a heap of trash and debris , was burned in 1909 to generate enthusiasm for a variety of sporting events . A decade later , the focus of the event narrowed to the annual rivalry game between Texas A & M and the University of Texas , held near Thanksgiving Day . Little information was recorded about the early Bonfires ; the 1921 Texas A & M yearbook mentioned the " final rally " of the students before the game against Texas , but did not refer to a bonfire . Six years later , the school yearbook published a photograph of the event . 
 Freshmen were expected to build the early Bonfires to help prove their worth . For almost two decades , the students constructed Bonfire from debris and wood acquired through various , sometimes illicit , means , including appropriating lumber intended for a dormitory in 1912 . In 1935 , a farmer reported that students carried off his entire barn as fuel for Bonfire . To prevent future incidents , the university made Bonfire a school @-@ sanctioned event . The following year , for the first time , the school provided axes , saws , and trucks for the students and pointed them toward a grove of dead trees on the edge of town . 
 During the 1940s , the school paper described Bonfire as " the greatest event of the football season " . The 1947 Corps handbook stated that " bonfire symbolizes two things : a burning desire to beat the team from the University of Texas , and the undying flame of love that every loyal Aggie carries in his heart for the school " ; this was often shortened to " the burning desire to beat the hell out of t.u. " The Bonfire design changed in 1942 . Universal Studios , filming the movie We 've Never Been Licked on the Texas A & M Campus , built a bonfire as a prop for the movie . Their structure used a design similar to a teepee , where all the logs rested against each other in a conical shape . The logs were placed at an angle between 23 and 30 degrees , giving it " a tremendous vertical and horizontal resistance " . This allowed Bonfire to grow from 25 feet ( 8 m ) tall to over 50 feet ( 20 m ) tall . Subsequent Aggies adopted the new idea , and the teepee design became standard for Bonfires for the next twenty @-@ five years . 
 Beginning in 1952 , the bonfires were constructed entirely from fresh @-@ cut logs . The event suffered its first fatality in 1955 , when a student was struck by a swerving car . The same year ( for unrelated reasons ) , Bonfire was moved from Simpson Drill Field in front of the Memorial Student Center to Duncan Field , near the dorms of the Corps of Cadets ( whose leaders oversaw construction ) . In 1957 , the structure collapsed two days before Bonfire was to be held , but students worked around @-@ the @-@ clock to rebuild it , and the bonfire burned as scheduled . 
 During this period , University of Texas students attempted several stunts , trying to light the stack early , but to no avail . In both 1933 and 1948 , students from UT rented an airplane and tried to drop fire bombs onto the stack . In one of these instances , the plane ran low on fuel , and was forced to land at <unk> Airport in College Station — the wooden portions of the plane found themselves part of Bonfire that year . In 1956 , there was an unsuccessful attempt to plant explosives at the Bonfire site , and , in the late 1970s , a College Station police officer was fired after trying to ignite the bonfire several days ahead of schedule . Students spotted the officer before he could succeed and chased him across campus . In 1999 , a Longhorn fan hired someone to build a six @-@ foot model airplane designed to carry a bomb into the wood stack to ignite it prematurely . " He was actually in the process of building that plane when they had the tragedy at bonfire " , Mel <unk> said . " At that point , we scrapped the plan . It would have been the next year that we planned to try it . " 
 = = Organizational change and expansion = = 
 In 1965 , membership in the Corps of Cadets became voluntary for students at Texas A & M. Before , Corps leaders directed construction of Bonfire . However , because the Corps had no authority over the " non @-@ <unk> " , or civilian students , a separate Bonfire leadership structure was instituted . The new leaders were designated with colored hard hats , or pots , with the overall leaders known as redpots . 
 The first Bonfire built with both Corps and non @-@ reg participation was in 1963 . The stack was scheduled to burn only days after the assassination of President John F. Kennedy . Out of respect , the students dismantled the stack . As Head Yell Leader Mike Marlowe explained , " It is the most we have and the least we can give . " 
 In the following years the structure became more elaborate , and in 1967 the flames could be seen 25 miles ( 40 km ) away . In 1969 , the stack of logs set the world record for the height of a bonfire at 109 ft 10 in ( 33 m ) tall . Out of concern for the safety of participants and the community , the university limited the size to 55 feet ( 17 m ) tall and 45 feet ( 14 m ) in diameter . As an added precaution , nearby campus buildings were equipped with rooftop sprinkler systems . Despite the new height restrictions , in the 1970s , the Guinness Book of Records listed Aggie Bonfire as the largest Bonfire in the world . 
 = = Design change = = 
 In 1978 , Bonfire shifted from its previous teepee design to a wedding cake style , in which upper stacks of logs were wedged on top of lower stacks . The structure was built around a fortified center pole , made from two telephone poles spliced together by cutting matching notches , approximately 10 feet ( 3 m ) long , and with 5 US gallons ( 19 L ) of glue . Four steel plates were bolted to the two poles , and a 3 ⁄ 8 inch ( 9 @.@ 5 mm ) cable wrapped around the joint and secured to the pole with steel staples . Four perimeter poles were placed 150 feet ( 46 m ) away and ropes were stretched between the perimeter poles to center poles and tension placed on them to hold the center pole together . After the center pole was erected , logs were placed vertically around it in a multi @-@ tiered wedding cake design composed of thousands of logs . By 1984 , the logs were sloping only 14 degrees . The spiral arrangement of the logs was designed to make Bonfire collapse into itself in a twisting motion , thus protecting spectators . Although the tradition stated that if Bonfire burned through midnight then A & M would win the following day 's football game , the introduction of the wedding cake design drastically reduced the time it took for Bonfire to fall , sometimes burning for only 30 or 45 minutes . 
 Despite the complexity of the design , there were no formal written instructions or architectural blueprints for the construction of Bonfire . Knowledge on how to build the structure was passed verbally from one <unk> to the next . By 1999 , the only written documentation on the building of Bonfire was the rough schematic printed on the back of the official Bonfire T @-@ shirt worn by participants from the freshman honors dormitory , Lechner . 
 While the Bonfires of the 1960s were constructed in five to ten days , working primarily in daylight , by the late 1970s , changes in the school led to a more elaborate and lengthy construction schedule . Construction began in late October with " Cut " , obtaining wood by cutting down trees with axes , which took several weekends . After Cut , students brought the logs to campus during " Load " , a process by which the logs were loaded by hand onto flatbed trucks and brought to campus . In early November , crews began " Stack " , a three @-@ week period in which the logs were wired together and Bonfire took shape . Near the end of stack , known as " Push " , students worked around the clock in rotating shifts . The first four of the six stacks were built with the efforts of all safety @-@ trained participants . The day before Bonfire was scheduled to burn , junior redpots would build the fifth stack , and then senior redpots would build the sixth . 
 During Cut , all logs were felled by hand , with students working in teams to chop down each tree with their axes . The manual labor ensured that participants were invested in each log that went into the Bonfire . Once the trees had fallen , <unk> , the " executive lumberjacks " , used chainsaws to cut limbs and prepare the logs . 
 To ensure safety during the Stack period , the organizers maintained a perimeter around the working area , and allowed only safety @-@ trained students through . Cranes , donated by local construction companies , assisted in getting logs onto the upper tiers , and volunteers from those companies were on @-@ hand at all times to offer advice . Emergency medical technicians were also required to be on site at all times and no more than 70 students at a time were allowed on the stack . Once the stack was finished , " an outhouse constructed by the freshmen of Texas A & M 's " Fightin ' Texas Aggie Band " and painted orange [ symbolizing a ] t.u. frat house " was bedecked with derogatory statements about rival University of Texas at Austin and then placed on top of the stack . 
 Although between two and five thousand students participated in the construction of Bonfire each year , most worked only part @-@ time , and many worked only one or two shifts . Student workers were organized by dormitories or Corps units , with a separate off @-@ campus student team . Many former students participated with teams they belonged to as students . Each team had assigned shifts , although individuals were not limited to working only the assigned shifts . Students working on Bonfire wore " grodes " — old T @-@ shirts , jeans , and boots . By tradition , grodes were either not washed until after Bonfire burned or not washed at all . 
 In 1983 , the city of College Station began manufacturing Austin city limits signs for students to place at the summit of the Bonfire so that students would stop stealing signs from Austin . The Fightin ' Texas Aggie Band began building the outhouse , ending the tradition of stealing Bonfire 's components . 
 = = Controversy = = 
 Although women were allowed to serve coffee and provide first aid in the late 1960s , in 1974 they were officially banned from both Cut and Stack . The ban was partially rescinded in 1979 , when women were again allowed to participate in Cut , and completely rescinded in 1981 . Few women participated in the early years , as female volunteers were subject to verbal abuse from their male counterparts . In 1987 , two female photographers from the school yearbook alleged that male workers shouted obscenities and threw dirt on them as they tried to take pictures of the raising of the center pole . The redpots responded that women were always welcome to participate as long as they did their share of the work , and that the photographers were standing dangerously close to the stack . To find their own place in the Bonfire hierarchy , female students founded the all @-@ female Bonfire Reload Crew to provide refreshments to those working at Cut and Stack . 
 Injuries plagued the construction process . In 1981 , student Wiley Keith Jopling died after being run over by a tractor at the Cut site . At the 1985 Cut site , one student broke his hip , and , in 1989 , another student lost two fingers when logs crushed his hand . Fractures and amputations were rare , but many students suffered cuts , scrapes , or exposure to poison ivy . Hazing , including beatings with ax handles , was common . 
 The 1980s also saw increased alcohol consumption during the Bonfire ceremony . In 1988 , police issued 140 Minor in Possession ( of alcohol ) citations and arrested six people . The following year , the local police department brought a paddywagon to the site for the first time , as they anticipated mass arrests for alcohol violations . As many as 150 police officers were on duty during the Bonfire burning from the Texas A & M and College Station police departments and the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission . 
 In 1989 , the Campus Ministry Association , representing 17 religious denominations , unanimously approved a resolution asking the university to change Bonfire because of concerns about safety , participant academic performance , humanitarian considerations , and the environment . Shortly afterwards , the Faculty Senate 's Committee of the Whole approved a resolution asking for a panel to explore alternatives to Bonfire . 
 Although students protested Bonfire 's environmental impact since 1970 , no changes were made for decades . In 1990 , student Scott <unk> asked the Bonfire leadership to help him address the problem . The group solicited volunteers , and in the spring of 1991 , they planted 400 trees . The tradition , Aggie Replant , has been repeated annually . The Replant organization became independent of Bonfire in 1994 when it gained its own Student Government Committee . 
 = = Later years = = 
 After being held at the Duncan Intramural Fields on the south side of A & M 's campus for twenty @-@ seven years , in 1992 , Bonfire was relocated to the Polo Fields on the northeast corner of campus . This more isolated site , with a larger area for people to gather , made it a safer location . After heavy rains in 1994 , the partially completed Bonfire began to slowly lean to the side as the soil underneath shifted . Student officials had enough warning to clear the area and tear down the Bonfire one week before its scheduled burn date . Nine tractors , two bulldozers , and two forklifts dismantled the stack on October 26 , 1994 , which , at 70 % completed , stood 40 feet ( 12 m ) tall and 45 feet ( 14 m ) wide . 
 The 1999 collapse of Bonfire was witnessed by thousands of people around the world . The Texas A & M Department of Computer Science set up a camera aimed at the Bonfire site that took a picture every 10 minutes and posted it on the Internet . On the day of the collapse over 29 @,@ 000 visitors visited the web page , at a time when only 20 million people worldwide had Internet access . 
 Students and alumni flocked to the Polo Fields , working around the clock , to rebuild the Bonfire in time for the game . It was completed only hours before it was scheduled to burn . After the 1994 Bonfire was burned , two tons of lime were spread on the Polo Fields to stabilize the ground . This layer hardened to a consistency similar to concrete . 
 In 1996 a student , Greg White , died in a car accident on his way home from Cut . The student and several companions were riding in the bed of a pickup truck when the driver lost control and the truck rolled . Nine other students were injured . 
 In its later years , students building Bonfire used logs donated by local landowners who wanted their land cleared for construction or farming . Over 8000 logs were used each year in the late 1990s , taking about 5000 students a combined 125 @,@ 000 man @-@ hours to construct . After being doused in 700 lb ( 318 kg ) of jet fuel , applied by staff members at A & M 's Fire Training School , the Yell Leaders , Drum Majors , and <unk> then lit the stack with torches the night before the annual football game against the University of Texas when at home and two nights before the game when it was played in Austin . 
 This event was popular amongst current and former students and people traveled from all over the state and the nation to observe the burning of Bonfire . Hotel rooms within 65 miles ( 105 km ) of College Station were booked weeks or months in advance of the date Bonfire burned . Crowds ranged from 30 @,@ 000 to 70 @,@ 000 people , depending on the weather and the strength of the Aggie football team . The 1998 Bonfire was broadcast live on Fox Sports Southwest . 
 = = 1999 collapse = = 
 At approximately 2 : 42 a.m. on November 18 , 1999 , the 59 @-@ foot high stack , consisting of about 5000 logs , collapsed during construction . Of the 58 students and former students working on the stack , 12 were killed and 27 were injured . Immediately after the collapse , Emergency Medical Technicians and trained First Responders of the Texas A & M Emergency Care Team ( <unk> ) , the student @-@ run , volunteer first @-@ responder service of Texas A & M University , who staffed every stage of construction of Bonfire , triaged patients and administered first aid . <unk> medics radioed an alert to University Police and Texas A & M University EMS ( also a student @-@ run service ) , who dispatched all remaining university medics , and requested mutual aid from the surrounding EMS , Fire , and Police agencies . In addition to the mutual aid received from the College Station and Bryan , Texas EMS , Fire , and Police Departments , members of Texas Task Force 1 , the state 's elite emergency response team , arrived to assist the rescue efforts . 
 Rescue operations took over 24 hours ; the pace was hampered by the decision to remove many of the logs by hand for fear that using heavy equipment to remove them would cause further collapses , resulting in further injuries to those still trapped . Students , including the entire Texas A & M football team and many members of the university 's Corps of Cadets , rushed to the site to assist rescue workers with the manual removal of the logs . The Texas A & M civil engineering department was also called on to examine the site and help the workers determine the order in which the logs could be safely removed , and , at the request of the Texas Forest Service , Steely Lumber Company in Huntsville , Texas sent log @-@ moving equipment and operators . Bonfire survivor John Comstock was the last living person to be removed from the stack . He spent months in the hospital following amputation of his left leg and partial paralysis of his right side . Comstock returned to A & M in 2001 to finish his degree . 
 = = = Response = = = 
 Within minutes of the collapse , word of the accident spread among students and the community . Before sunrise , the accident was the subject of news reports around the world . Within hours , 50 satellite trucks were broadcasting from the Texas A & M campus . At noon , students held an impromptu prayer service in the center of campus , at Rudder Fountain . An official memorial service was held less than seventeen hours after the collapse . Over 16 @,@ 000 mourners , including then Texas Lieutenant Governor Rick Perry , packed Reed Arena to pay tribute to those who died and those who had spent all day trying to rescue the injured . At the end of the service , as A & M University President Ray Bowen presented roses to the families of the dead and injured students , the crowd spontaneously stood in silence , linking arms with those standing next to them , before quietly singing " Amazing Grace " . Only after all of the rescue workers and family members had left the facility did the audience depart . 
 On November 25 , 1999 , the date that Bonfire would have burned , Aggies instead held a vigil and remembrance ceremony . Over 40 @,@ 000 people lit candles and observed up to two hours of silence at the site of the collapse , before walking to Kyle Field for yell practice . At the stadium , fans spontaneously relit their candles as the Parsons Mounted Cavalry fired the Aggie cannon twelve times , once for each victim . Former President George H. W. Bush and his wife Barbara and Texas Governor George W. Bush and his wife Laura attended the remembrance ceremony . 
 The following day , the Aggies upset the Texas Longhorns , winning 20 – 16 in the annual rivalry game . The game began with a flyover of F @-@ 16 jets , all piloted by former A & M students , in the missing man formation . This flyover was donated by Senator Phil Gramm who , as an elected official , had the title of a fly @-@ over reserved for his death and asked that the fly @-@ over be given instead in the honor of the 12 Aggies that died . At halftime , the Texas Longhorn Band dedicated their performance to the students lost and injured in the collapse , and ended by playing Amazing Grace and Taps , then removing their white hats in a show of respect as they walked off the field . The Fightin ' Texas Aggie Band also played a tribute to the fallen and , contrary to the usual tradition , marched off the field in a silent cadence . Aggie students , who normally sit only when the opposing band plays , stood throughout both performances and gave both standing ovations . 
 The Bonfire Memorial Commission collected the hundreds of thousands of items that were left by grieving visitors at the site of the collapse . At the Systems Building , Texas A & M leaders erected pictures of the deceased students . There , over a dozen seniors left behind their Aggie rings , permanently donating them to the students who did not live long enough to earn their own . Various organizations also established funds in memory of the victims and to help with expenses incurred because of the accident . In total , the funds received exceeded US $ 250 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Cause , aftermath , and controversy = = = 
 A commission created by Texas A & M University discovered that a number of factors led to the Bonfire collapse , including " excessive internal stresses " on the logs and " inadequate containment strength " in the wiring used to tie the logs together . The wiring broke after logs from upper tiers were " wedged " into lower tiers . 
 Detractors further blamed the school for the accident , saying that , in the name of tradition , administrators turned a blind eye to an unsafe structure being constructed with minimal engineering and safety protocols . Before the collapse , some people expressed concerns about the safety of the Bonfire , citing the partial collapse that occurred in a previous Bonfire , the progressively shorter Bonfire burn times ( collapse of the stack after lighting ) which had dropped from several hours to less than 20 minutes , and numerous incidents involving alcohol or unsafe horseplay at the Bonfire site . One of the students killed in the 1999 Bonfire collapse was under the legal drinking age yet a toxicology test showed high blood @-@ alcohol levels ; however , lower readings in a second test and inconsistencies in the initial sampling and annotation methods led to questions about the accuracy of the original tests . 
 Parents of students injured or killed in the 1999 collapse filed lawsuits against Texas A & M officials , including President Ray Bowen , Vice President of Student Affairs J. Malon <unk> , the 1999 redpots , and the university . In one of the six lawsuits , plaintiffs alleged that A & M officials violated the Bonfire victims ' right of due process by placing those victims in a " state @-@ created danger " by not ensuring Bonfire 's structural integrity and by allowing unqualified students to work on the stack . The plaintiffs pointed to a $ 2 million liability policy the university obtained in 1996 and accidental death and dismemberment insurance policies that the university obtained for student workers as early as 1987 as proof that the administrators knew of the dangers of Bonfire . Texas A & M maintains that the insurance policies were actually purchased by an advisory committee to Bonfire and not the university . On May 21 , 2004 , Federal Judge Samuel B. Kent dismissed all claims against the Texas A & M officials . In 2005 , 36 of the 64 original defendants , including all of the redpots , settled their portion of the case for an estimated $ 4 @.@ 25 million , paid by their insurance companies . The 5th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals dismissed the remaining lawsuits against Texas A & M and its officials in April 2007 . In October 2007 , the U.S. Supreme Court declined to review the appeals court ruling . 
 The Texas Board of Professional Engineers announced in 2000 that the Aggie Bonfire met the requirements to be considered a complex construction project that should be regulated by state engineering laws . If Bonfire is resumed by the university in its former state , it will have to be designed and overseen by a professional engineer . 
 For the next two years , the university pondered options for reinstating the tradition . Bowen formed a task force , which proposed a new design . The task force recommended that students be allowed to participate in building the Bonfire as long as they were monitored by professional construction experts . Current and former students debated whether the proposed division of labor could be considered a student project . The debate was rendered moot when the university discovered liability insurance for the revamped project would cost more than $ 2 million per year . In 2002 , Bowen announced that Bonfire was officially cancelled . Bowen 's successor Robert Gates upheld this decision , stating that a " change in the status quo regarding the future of Bonfire would be inappropriate while litigation is still on @-@ going " . 
 On October 28 , 2008 , Texas A & M settled the final lawsuit filed against them by the victims and their families . The university agreed to pay $ 2 @.@ 1 million and promised that if Bonfire returned to campus that " engineering oversight " would be provided . The final lawsuit , filed against two companies that provided crane operators and cranes for the bonfire , was settled in April 2014 . 
 = = Bonfire Memorial = = 
 A memorial was constructed on the university polo fields , the site of the accident . Construction began in October 2003 and was completed by November 2004 . On November 18 , 2004 , five years following the incident , the Bonfire Memorial was officially dedicated . The memorial is composed of three design elements : 
 Tradition Plaza – Marks the entrance to the memorial and reflects on Aggie traditions . 
 History Walk – <unk> of 89 stones representing the 89 previous years of Bonfire . A gap in the timeline signifies the 1963 Bonfire , which did not burn due to the John F. Kennedy assassination . The three previous Bonfire @-@ related deaths are also memorialized on this time line . 
 Spirit Ring – The ring surrounds the site of the collapse and represents the spirit that brought the students together . Twelve portals are placed around the ring , oriented toward each student 's hometown . Twenty @-@ seven stones complete the ring , representing the 27 students injured in the collapse . 
 The memorial design has been recognized by several organizations as an outstanding architectural design and masonry accomplishment . The American Institute of Architects , San Antonio Chapter , recognized the memorial as a winner of the 2005 AIA San Antonio Design Award . The memorial also was recognized as a winner of the 2005 <unk> International Excellence in Masonry Awards . 
 To further honor the victims , in 2000 , the Aggie Replant Committee planted twelve live oak trees at the Polo Grounds . 
