 = = Definition = = 
 A beat ' em up ( sometimes also called " brawlers " ) is a type of action game where the player character must fight a large number of enemies in unarmed combat or with melee weapons . Gameplay consists of walking through a level , one section at a time , defeating a group of enemies before advancing to the next section ; a boss fight normally occurs at the end of each level . However arcade versions of these games are often quite difficult to win , causing players to spend more money to try to win . 
 Beat ' em ups are related to — but distinct from — fighting games , which are based around one @-@ on @-@ one matches rather than scrolling levels and multiple enemies . Such terminology is loosely applied , however , as some commentators prefer to conflate the two terms . At times , both one @-@ on @-@ one fighting games and scrolling beat ' em ups have influenced each other in terms of graphics and style and can appeal to fans of either genre . Occasionally , a game will feature both kinds of gameplay . 
 = = Game design = = 
 Beat ' em up games usually employ vigilante crime fighting and revenge plots with the action taking place on city streets , though historical and fantasy themed games also exist . Players must walk from one end of the game world to the other , and thus each game level will usually scroll horizontally . Some later beat ' em ups dispense with 2D @-@ based scrolling levels , instead allowing the player to roam around larger 3D environments , though they retain the same simple gameplay and control systems . Throughout the level , players may acquire weapons that they can use as well as power @-@ ups that replenish the player 's health . 
 As players walk through the level , they are stopped by groups of enemies who must be defeated before they can continue . The level ends when all the enemies are defeated . Each level contains many identical groups of enemies , making these games notable for their repetition . In beat ' em up games , players often fight a boss — an enemy much stronger than the other enemies — at the end of each level . 
 Beat ' em ups often allow the player to choose between a selection of protagonists — each with their own strengths , weaknesses , and set of moves . Attacks can include rapid combinations of basic attacks ( combos ) as well as jumping and grappling attacks . Characters often have their own special attacks , which leads to different strategies depending on which character the player selects . The control system is usually simple to learn , comprising as little as two buttons . These buttons can be combined to pull off combos , as well as jumping and grappling attacks . Since the release of Double Dragon , many beat ' em ups have allowed two players to play the game cooperatively — a central aspect to the appeal of these games . Beat ' em ups are more likely to feature cooperative play than other game genres . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origin = = = 
 The first game to feature fist fighting was Sega 's boxing game Heavyweight Champ ( 1976 ) , which is viewed from a side @-@ view perspective like later fighting games . However , it was Data East 's fighting game Karate Champ ( 1984 ) which popularized martial arts themed games . The same year , Irem 's Hong Kong cinema @-@ inspired Kung @-@ Fu Master ( known as Spartan X in Japan ) laid the foundations for side @-@ scrolling beat ' em ups with its simple gameplay and multiple enemies . Also in 1984 , Bruce Lee combined multi @-@ player , multi @-@ character combat with traditional collecting , platform and puzzle gameplay . Later that year , Karateka combined the one @-@ on @-@ one fight sequences of Karate Champ with the freedom of movement in Kung @-@ Fu Master , and it successfully experimented with adding plot to its fighting action . It was also among the first beat ' em ups to be successfully ported to home systems . <unk> <unk> Kunio @-@ kun , released in 1986 in Japan , deviated from the martial arts themes of earlier games and introduced street brawling to the genre . The Western adaptation Renegade ( released the same year ) added an underworld revenge plot that proved more popular with gamers than the principled combat sport of other games . Renegade set the standard for future beat ' em up games as it introduced the ability to move both horizontally and vertically . It also introduced the use of combo attacks ; in contrast to earlier games , the opponents in Renegade and Double Dragon could take much more punishment , requiring a succession of punches , with the first hit temporarily immobilizing the enemy , making him unable to defend himself against successive punches . 
 = = = Golden age = = = 
 In 1987 , the release of Double Dragon ushered in a " Golden Age " for the beat ' em up genre that lasted nearly five years . The game was designed as <unk> Japan 's spiritual successor to Renegade , but it took the genre to new heights with its detailed set of martial arts attacks and its outstanding two @-@ player cooperative gameplay . Double Dragon 's success resulted in a flood of beat ' em ups that came in the late 1980s , where acclaimed titles such as Golden Axe and Final Fight ( both 1989 ) distinguished themselves from the others . Final Fight was Capcom 's intended sequel to Street Fighter ( provisionally titled Street Fighter ' 89 ) , but the company ultimately gave it a new title . In contrast to the simple combo attacks in Renegade and Double Dragon , the combo attacks in Final Fight were much more dynamic . Acclaimed as the best game in the genre , Final Fight spawned two sequels and was later ported to other systems . Final Fight was also the cause for Capcom to be famous and for <unk> Japan 's bankruptcy . Golden Axe was acclaimed for its visceral hack and slash action and cooperative mode and was influential through its selection of multiple protagonists with distinct fighting styles . It is considered one of the strongest beat ' em up titles for its fantasy elements , distinguishing it from the urban settings seen in other beat ' em ups . Another beat ' em up — River City Ransom ( 1989 ) , named Street Gangs in Europe — featured role @-@ playing game elements with which the player 's character could be upgraded , using money stolen from defeated enemies . 
 The Streets of Rage series was launched in the early 1990s and borrowed heavily from Final Fight . Streets of Rage 2 for Sega 's Mega Drive was notable for being one of the first console games to match the acclaim of arcade beat ' em ups . Its level design was praised for taking traditional beat ' em up settings and stringing them together in novel ways , and its success led to it being ported to arcades . The beat ' em up was also a popular genre for video games based on television series and movies , with Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles a surprise success , and encouraged many more beat ' em up games based on the characters . However , the " golden age " of the genre ended in the wake of the success of Capcom 's Street Fighter II ( 1991 ) , which drew gamers back towards one @-@ on @-@ one fighting games , while the subsequent emerging popularity of 3D video games diminished the popularity of 2D @-@ based pugilistic games in general . By the mid @-@ 1990s , the genre suffered from a lack of innovation . 
 = = = 32 @-@ bit era onward = = = 
 Core Design 's Fighting Force ( 1997 ) was anticipated to redefine the genre for 32 @-@ bit consoles through its use of a 3D environment . However , it was met with a lukewarm reception . The Dynasty Warriors series , beginning with Dynasty Warriors 2 in 2000 , offered traditional beat ' em up action on large 3D battlefields , displaying dozens of characters on the screen at a time . The series to date spans 14 games ( including expansions ) which players in the West view as overly similar , although the games ' creators claim their large audience in Japan appreciates the subtle differences between the titles . While critics saw Dynasty Warriors 2 as innovative and technically impressive , they held a mixed opinion of later titles . These later games received praise for simple , enjoyable gameplay but were simultaneously derided as overly simplistic and repetitive . Another best @-@ selling Japanese series , Yakuza , combined elaborate plots and detailed interactive environments with street brawling action . Despite these releases , game reviewers started to pronounce that the genre had died off . By 2002 , there were virtually no new beat ' em ups being released in arcades . 
 Capcom 's Viewtiful Joe ( 2003 ) used cel @-@ shaded graphics and innovative gameplay features ( such as the protagonist 's special powers ) to " reinvigorate " its traditional 2D scrolling formula . The Behemoth 's Castle Crashers ( 2008 ) also featured cartoon graphics , quirky humor , and acclaimed cooperative gameplay . Rockstar Games ' The Warriors ( based on the 1979 movie of the same name ) , released in 2005 , featured large scale brawling in 3D environments interspersed with other activities such as chase sequences . The game also featured a more traditional side @-@ scrolling beat ' em up Armies of the Night as bonus content , which was acclaimed along with the main game and was later released on the PlayStation Portable . Releases such as God Hand in 2006 and MadWorld in 2009 were seen as parodies of violence in popular culture , earning both games praise for not taking themselves as seriously as early beat ' em up games . Classic beat ' em ups have been re @-@ released on services such as the Virtual Console ; critics reaffirmed the appeal of some , while the appeal of others has been deemed to have diminished with time . Although the genre lacks the same presence it did in the late 1980s , some titles such as Viewtiful Joe and God Hand kept the genre alive . 
 In recent years , the beat ' em up genre has seen a revival in the form of popular 3D hack and slash games in the style of Devil May Cry ( 2001 onwards ) , including Ninja Gaiden ( 2004 onwards ) , God of War ( 2005 onwards ) , Heavenly Sword ( 2007 ) , Afro Samurai ( 2009 ) , and Bayonetta ( 2009 ) . Several traditional 2D scrolling beat ' em ups have also been released in recent years , including Scott Pilgrim vs. the World : The Game ( 2010 ) . The popular Grand Theft Auto series also has elements of the beat ' em up genre . 
 = R.C. Pro @-@ Am II = 
 R.C. Pro @-@ Am II is a racing video game developed by Rare and released by Tradewest for the Nintendo Entertainment System in December 1992 . The game is the sequel to the 1988 R.C. Pro @-@ Am and features similar gameplay with a wider variety of tracks , currency @-@ based vehicle and weapon upgrades , and bonus stages . In R.C. Pro @-@ Am II , four players , either human or artificial intelligence , race on a series of tracks to finish first while avoiding obstacles and hazards . The winner receives race points and money . The game features a multiplayer mode in which up to four human players can compete against each other simultaneously . 
 Reviewers praised the sequel 's additional features and variety , while others found its gameplay unoriginal compared to the original and its contemporaries . Critics lauded the multiplayer mode , which some said was a reason alone to buy the game . The game was released in Rare 's 2015 Rare Replay compilation for Xbox One . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 R.C. Pro @-@ Am II is a racing video game in which four vehicles compete on a series of 24 different tracks : eight standard racetracks , eight " cityscape " tracks , and eight offroad tracks . The difficulty level increases between each type of course . Players must navigate around course obstacles to finish the race . In the single @-@ player mode , the players races against three artificial intelligence opponents . The game also has a multiplayer mode in which up to four human players can race against each other . The objective of each race is to finish in the top three places to receive race points and money , which is used to upgrade vehicles and buy weapons . The top three finishers are qualified to participate in the next race while other players must use a continue . The game ends when the players run out of continues . 
 Players steer with the directional pad , accelerate with one button , and fire their weapon with the other . Before each race , players can use money earned from previous races to buy vehicle performance upgrades and weapons , which can be used on other competitors . Upgrades and weapons include the following : motors ( increased speed ) ; tires ( better turning ) ; missiles , bombs , and " freeze beams " ; and <unk> ( steal opponents ' cash ) . Other purchasable goods include additional ammunition . Players can save money to purchase better , more expensive upgrades later in the game . Players can also collect letters that spell " PRO AM II " that are scattered on the track . Upon finishing the collection , the player receives a new , faster vehicle with tighter controls . Track terrain varies , including winter environments , crossroads , and rivers . Track hazards like water , bombs , mud , ice , ridges , oil , and bomb @-@ dropping aircraft slow player speed . The game includes two types of bonus stages ( tug of war and drag race ) that award race points and cash . 
 = = Reception = = 
 R.C. Pro @-@ Am II was developed by Rare and published by Tradewest . It was released for the Nintendo Entertainment System in December 1992 . Nintendo Power praised the game 's controls and upgrade options , which made the game strategic . The magazine criticized the difficulty as unfair , with aircraft hazards that gave players no reaction time in which to dodge attacks . Nintendo Magazine System praised the game overall and its multiplayer in particular , but felt that better games were available . In 1993 , GamePro said that the game was better than its predecessor , but noted that the graphics and sound could have been better . <unk> appreciated how the sequel 's cars had better traction , but thought the game was technically unrefined considering its few advances in four years ' time . For example , they criticized Rare for recycling the original game 's audio . In 1994 , Game Players had high praise for the game 's multiplayer , screeching sound effects , vehicle handling , and replay value . They criticized its lack of in @-@ game music and current weapon indicators , and struggled to anticipate turns in the track in the game 's angled perspective . 
 <unk> magazine Retro Gamer said that R.C. Pro @-@ Am II was not substantially different from its predecessor . They found the racing game mechanics similar apart from the upgrade features . The reviewer added that players expected more , especially for a title that was released five years after the original . He also noted that while the single @-@ player mode was " passable " , the multiplayer mode was what made the game stand out on its own , providing " excellent gaming despite its lack of originality " . 
 R.C. Pro @-@ Am II was named Nintendo Power 's best NES game of 1993 over Battletoads & Double Dragon and Kirby 's Adventure . The magazine credited the game 's excellent controls and course variety . R.C. Pro @-@ Am II is included in Rare Replay , a compilation of 30 Rare titles , released on the Xbox One on August 4 , 2015 . 
 = Keith Johnson ( cricket administrator ) = 
 Keith Ormond <unk> Johnson , MBE , ( 28 December 1894 – 19 October 1972 ) was an Australian cricket administrator . He was the manager of the Australian Services cricket team in England , India and Australia immediately after World War II , and of the Australian team that toured England in 1948 . The 1948 Australian cricket team earned the sobriquet The Invincibles by being the first side to complete a tour of England without losing a single match . 
 Johnson joined the Australian Board of Control for International Cricket in 1935 as a delegate for New South Wales and served in the Royal Australian Air Force during World War II , performing public relations work in London . With the allied victory in Europe , first @-@ class cricket resumed and Johnson was appointed to manage the Australian Services team , which played England in a series of celebratory matches known as the Victory Tests to usher in the post @-@ war era . The series was highly successful , with unprecedented crowds raising large amounts for war charities . As a result , further matches were scheduled and Johnson 's men toured British India and Australia before being demobilised . Johnson 's administration was regarded as a major factor in the success of the tour . 
 In 1948 , Johnson managed the Australian tour of England , which again brought record profits and attendances , in spite of Australia 's overwhelming dominance . Johnson 's management of the tour — which generated large amounts of media attention — was again lauded . However , in 1951 – 52 , the Australian Board of Control excluded Sid Barnes from the team for " reasons other than cricket " . Barnes took the matter to court , and in the ensuing trial , his lawyer embarrassed Johnson , who contradicted himself several times under cross @-@ examination . Following the trial , Johnson resigned from the board and took no further part in cricket administration . 
 = = Early years and pre @-@ World War II career = = 
 Johnson was born on 28 December 1894 in the inner @-@ Sydney suburb of Paddington . He later moved to the north shore suburb of Mosman , where he worked as a mechanic before serving briefly in the 3rd Field Company Army Engineers . On 8 October 1916 , in the middle of World War I , Johnson enlisted in the First Australian Imperial Force as a gunner in the 5th Field Artillery Brigade . His unit left Sydney on 10 February 1917 and headed for Europe . He returned to Australia on 1 July 1919 . 
 After the end of World War I , Johnson married his wife Margaret . Johnson joined the Australian Board of Control for International Cricket in 1935 as a delegate for the New South Wales Cricket Association , having been affiliated with the Mosman Cricket Club in Sydney Grade Cricket . He had attended the annual general meeting in September 1934 as a proxy for Billy Bull , who was travelling back to Australia with the national team , which had been touring England . 
 = = Managerial career = = 
 = = = Australian Services = = = 
 During World War II , Johnson served in the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) . He enlisted in the RAAF on 13 April 1942 in Sydney . Johnson rose to the rank of flight lieutenant and was deployed to London , where he did public relations work at the RAAF 's overseas headquarters . In June 1945 , he was appointed as manager of the Australian Services cricket team on its tour of Britain for the Victory Tests , India and Australia from mid @-@ 1945 to early @-@ 1946 . Officially a military unit , the team 's commanding officer was Squadron leader Stan Sismey of the RAAF , although the on @-@ field captain was Warrant officer Lindsay Hassett of the Second Australian Imperial Force . 
 Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack praised Johnson 's organisational work in arranging the services ' tour : " A stranger to this country , he found the programme in only skeleton form ; and that the tour proved such a success from every point of view was due to his hard work and courtesy . " The almanack reprinted Johnson 's message of thanks to the English cricket community in full before the team sailed to India . 
 The Victory Tests started in May 1945 between the Australian Services and England in celebration of the allied victory in Europe . In previous seasons , the English cricket administrator and former captain Pelham Warner had organised matches between the RAAF and various English military teams as an expression of defiance against Nazi air raids , and the Victory Tests were a continuation of this , although the matches were only three days long and did not have Test status . 
 In the First Victory Test , the Australian Servicemen scraped home by six wickets with only two balls and minutes to spare . The last pre @-@ war series between England and Australia in 1938 had been an attritional and hard @-@ nosed contest , but in the afterglow of the war victory , the cricketers played flamboyantly with abandon in front of packed crowds . The attractive , attacking style of play was widely praised by commentators and the match raised £ 1 @,@ 935 for war relief charities . England then levelled the series by winning the Second Victory Test at Bramall Lane , Sheffield with a hard @-@ fought battle , by 41 runs . Australia won the Third Victory Test by four wickets late on the final day and drew the Fourth Victory Test at Lord 's . That would have been the end of the series , but because of the record attendance of 93 @,@ 000 at Lord 's , another match was appended . England drew the series by winning the Fifth Victory Test in front of another capacity crowd . The Victory Tests were regarded as an outstanding success , with a total attendance of 367 @,@ 000 and bright and attacking play . 
 Due to the unexpectedly strong success of the Victory Tests , the government of Australia , acting on the impetus of Foreign Minister H.V. " Doc " Evatt , ordered the Australian Services to delay their demobilisation . With the team raising so much money for war charities , the government directed them to travel home via India and Ceylon to play further matches , in order to raise more funds for the Red Cross . 
 Johnson found himself in a difficult situation during the Indian leg of the tour . The team — mostly made up of RAAF personnel — had been ill with food poisoning and dysentery , and travelled across the Indian subcontinent by long train journeys . The airmen wanted to travel by air , and threatened to abandon the tour or replace Hassett , an AIF member , with either Keith Carmody or Keith Miller , who were RAAF fighter pilots . However , the standoff was ended when Sismey arranged for a RAAF plane to transport the team . On the playing arena , it was not a happy tour for Johnson and his men . They lost the three @-@ match series against India 1 – 0 and recorded only one victory , against South Zone , in their nine matches . 
 Johnson 's team arrived in Australia towards the end of 1945 , but the armed services and Australian Board of Control ordered them to play another series against the various Australian states . Johnson had sought fixtures for his team in Australia , but this was before the Evatt had added the matches in the subcontinent . He implored the administrators to recognise that the players were already overworked , but was ignored . The Services performed poorly ; after playing out consecutive draws against Western Australia and South Australia , they were crushed by an innings by both Victoria and New South Wales , before drawing against Queensland and Tasmania , the smallest state in the country . 
 Johnson was involved in another administrative dispute during the Australian leg of the campaign . Cec Pepper — whom teammates Miller and Dick Whitington regarded as one of the best all rounders in the world and a certainty for Australian Test selection — appealed for leg before wicket against Australian captain Don Bradman in the match against South Australia . The appeal was turned down and Pepper complained to the umpire Jack Scott , prompting Bradman — who was also a member of the Australian Board of Control and the board of the South Australian Cricket Association — to ask Scott whether Pepper 's behaviour was acceptable . As he was an employee of the SACA , Scott answered to Bradman , and he lodged a complaint about Pepper to the Australian Board of Control . Pepper was never selected for Australia . Cricket historian Gideon Haigh said that " Johnson was clearly upset by the affair , and also by the failure of the [ national ] selection panel [ Bradman among them ] ... to send Pepper , second only to Miller as a cricketer in the Services XI , to New Zealand " . Johnson tried to intercede on Pepper 's behalf , to no avail , although the other board members claimed that no pressure had been placed on the selectors to exclude Pepper . 
 The home leg of the tour was a poor end to the long and taxing Australian Services campaign . As the military men played poorly in Australia , the national selectors concluded that their achievements against England must have been against weak opposition , and only Hassett and Miller were selected for the Australian tour of New Zealand . Johnson then helped to arrange England 's first post @-@ war tour of Australia , in 1946 – 47 . 
 = = = 1948 tour = = = 
 Johnson was a late appointment as manager for the 1948 tour of England , taking over from his New South Wales colleague Bill Jeanes , who was secretary of the Australian Board of Control and had managed the previous Australian tour of England in 1938 . Jeanes had become increasingly unpopular among the players because of an approach that Haigh called " increasingly officious and <unk> " . 
 Led by Bradman — widely regarded as the greatest batsman in history — the Australians went through their 34 matches without defeat , earning the sobriquet The Invincibles . They won 25 of their matches , 17 of these by an innings , and crushed England 4 – 0 in the five Tests , winning most games heavily . 
 Despite the Australians ' domination of the local teams , the English public showed unprecedented levels of interest in the cricket . Record gate takings were registered at most venues , even when rain affected the matches , and the record attendance for a Test match in England was broken twice , in the Second Test at Lord 's and the Fourth Test at Headingley . The 158 @,@ 000 spectators that watched the proceedings at Headingley remain a record for a Test on English soil . As a result , Australia made £ 82 @,@ 671 from the tour , resulting in a profit of £ 54 @,@ 172 . The popularity of the team meant that they were inundated with invitations for social appointments with government officials and members of the royal family , and they had to juggle a plethora of off @-@ field engagements , with 103 days of scheduled cricket in the space of 144 days . As a result , Johnson was flooded with phone calls and letters , which he had to attend to by himself , as he was the only administrator among the touring party . Bradman later said he was worried that Johnson 's tireless work would cause health problems because he " worked like a slave day and night " and that " it was the tribute to a bulldog determination to see the job through " . The journalist Andy Flanagan said that Johnson was " ' on the ball ' every minute of the waking day , and it would be safe to say half the night too . " 
 Johnson was again praised by Wisden in its report on the 1948 tour . " <unk> for the smooth running of the tour and general harmony of the team was due largely to the manager , Mr Keith Johnson , hard @-@ working and always genial , " it said . " Paying tribute to the loyalty of the players , Mr Johnson said there had not been a discordant note in the party throughout the tour . " Flanagan labelled Johnson as " conscientious , reserved , dignified , extraordinarily industrious and scrupulously trustworthy " . He went on to say that " No organization , no body corporate , no individual could ever hope to have a more loyal , a more devoted , or a more conscientious officer ... Although to the world in general all the praise and glory for the unequalled triumph the tour proved to be goes to Sir Donald Bradman , only those who travelled with the team will ever have a proper conception of the part played in that triumph by Keith Johnson . " Bradman said that Johnson " created friends and goodwill everywhere both for himself and the team , and no side could have wished for a better Manager " . On the journey back to Australia , the players presented Johnson with a silver Georgian salver , with their signatures engraved on the memento . 
 In a " farewell message " to England quoted in Wisden , Johnson said that the " most lasting memory " would be the team 's visit to Balmoral Castle . Johnson said " We felt we were going into an Englishman 's home and into his family heart " . " It was difficult to believe that we were being entertained by Royalty . My personal wish would be for everybody in the Empire to spend an hour or so with the King and Queen . It would do them a tremendous amount of good . " 
 = = = Barnes libel case = = = 
 Johnson 's claim of tour harmony and player loyalty in 1948 was thrown into a different light by events less than four years later . The opening batsman Sid Barnes — a core member of the 1948 team — was seeking a return to Test cricket . Barnes was known for being a somewhat eccentric self @-@ promoter . During the 1948 tour , Barnes organised a multitude of business deals while not playing cricket , and avoided paying customs duties on the enormous amount of goods he acquired in Britain by disembarking at Melbourne instead of Sydney . 
 Barnes then made himself unavailable for first @-@ class cricket , preferring to pursue business interests instead , and ridiculed the fee paid for the 1949 – 50 tour of South Africa . He wrote a column for Sydney 's The Daily Telegraph , titled " Like It or Lump It " , in which he often lampooned the administration of the game . 
 However , in 1951 – 52 , Barnes made a return to cricket , and sought selection in the national team to play the West Indies during the 1951 – 52 Australian season . Australia had been unable to find a reliable opener to accompany Barnes 's former partner Arthur Morris . Australia 's batsmen struggled in the first two Tests , and before the Third Test , Barnes scored 107 against Victoria , putting on 210 in partnership with Morris for New South Wales . The Sporting Globe in Melbourne had presciently predicted that the board would object if the selectors chose Barnes . 
 Barnes was duly selected for the Third Test by a panel of three , chaired by his former captain Bradman , but the choice was vetoed by the Australian Board of Control " for reasons outside of cricket " . Bradman was one of four board members to support Barnes 's selection , while 10 objected , including Johnson . 
 The matches took place and Barnes did not play . He was unable to find out why he had been excluded and was resigned to making an appearance before the board at its next meeting in September 1952 to ask for an explanation . 
 In the meantime , the team was not announced at the scheduled time due to the delay caused by the veto . Journalists deduced the story and Barnes became a cause célèbre for many weeks , missing all the remaining Tests . Speculation abounded as to the nature of his supposed misdeeds . These included jumping the turnstile at a ground when he forgot his player 's pass , insulting the royal family , theft from team @-@ mates , drunkenness , stealing a car , parking his car in someone else 's space , or that Barnes had lampooned the board in the narration accompanying the home movies he made of the 1948 tour . In later years , a file of unknown authorship regarding Barnes 's behaviour was deposited in the NSWCA library . It accused Barnes of allowing young spectators to enter the playing arena to field the ball instead of doing so himself , and of denigrating umpires by cupping his hands over his eyes and showing dissent by implying that they were blind . 
 Barnes continued to score heavily , and during one match , he crossed paths with Johnson , who reportedly apologised to him for the exclusion from the team . However , Johnson advised Barnes to " keep quiet and say nothing " and added that " You will come out of it all right , you will be a certainty for the 1953 trip [ to England ] " . 
 On 24 April 1952 , a letter appeared in Sydney 's Daily Mirror from Jacob Raith , a baker from Stanmore in Sydney , in response to a letter from Barnes 's friend Stacy Atkin , which condemned the board for vetoing Barnes 's selection . Raith 's letter said that the board must have had good reason to exclude Barnes . 
 The board is an impartial body of cricket administrators made up of men who have given outstanding service to the game . It must be abundantly clear to all that they would not have excluded Mr Barnes from an Australian XI capriciously and only for some matter of a sufficiently serious nature . In declining to meet his request to publish reasons , the board may well be acting kindly towards him . 
 The Board of Control had previously granted itself the power to exclude a player from the national team " on grounds other than cricket ability " following the poor behaviour of some members of the 1912 team that toured England . Instead , Barnes sued Raith for libel and engaged a top Sydney lawyer , Jack Shand — described by Haigh as " the foremost trial lawyer of his day " — to represent him , with the aim of uncovering the reasons for his exclusion . Bradman felt that Raith 's letter was a premeditated set @-@ up to give Barnes a pretext to instigate a trial . The libel trial , held in August 1952 , was a sensation , and Johnson , still a member of the board , was the central figure . According to Haigh , " it was effectively the Board , not Raith , in the dock " . 
 It emerged very quickly during the trial that Raith had no particular knowledge of the workings of the board . A series of administrators came forward to say that Barnes had reportedly misbehaved on the 1948 tour , even though Johnson 's official report as manager had made no mention of any disharmony . Aubrey Oxlade , the chairman of the board and one of the four board members who voted to ratify Barnes 's selection , said that the batsman 's indiscretions were " childish things " and " not serious at all " . Later , Frank Cush , another board member who had supported Barnes 's inclusion , replied " none at all " when asked if there were any legitimate reasons for excluding Barnes . Selector Chappie Dwyer said " I have a very high opinion of him as a cricketer ... and I have no objection to him as a man " . 
 Johnson was called as a witness , and , under questioning from Shand , a different story came out . Johnson agreed that his written report of the 1948 tour had said that the team had behaved " in a manner befitting worthy representatives of Australia " and that " on and off the field their conduct was exemplary " . However , in a verbal report , Johnson said he had drawn the board 's attention to various misdemeanours by Barnes that , in his opinion , were sufficiently serious to warrant the player 's exclusion from future Australian Test sides . Johnson said that Barnes had shown a " general reluctance for anything savouring of authority " . The misdeeds included taking pictures as the Australian team was presented to the royal family on the playing arena during the Test match at Lord 's , asking permission to travel alone in England ( Barnes ' family was living in Scotland at the time ) , and " abducting " twelfth man Ernie Toshack to play tennis during the match at Northampton on a court " 300 yards from the pavilion " . Under cross @-@ examination , Johnson said that Barnes 's taking pictures of the royal family at Lord 's was the most serious of these misdemeanours . He admitted he had not known that Barnes had received permission from the MCC and the royal family 's protocol chief to take the photos . Shand also established that Barnes had then shown the films to raise money for various charities . He further showed that Barnes had not agitated when reminded of the policy against players meeting with family members on tour . However , Johnson believed that the cumulative effect of the misdeeds " warranted omission from the team " and he saw no problem in the fact that his verbal advice to the board recommending Barnes ' exclusion was at odds with the written report on the 1948 tour . Under pressure from Shand , Johnson admitted that " I don 't always write what I think " . According to Haigh , " Shand effortlessly twisted him [ Johnson ] inside out " . 
 Shand : Will you admit one of two things : either your report to the Board or your statement that that was your state of mind , that you thought his conduct was so serious as to be left out of the team — one or other is a deliberate lie ? 
 Johnson : No . 
 Shand : Think what you are saying . One or other was a deliberate and wicked lie . 
 Johnson : No . 
 Shand : How could you really have thought that he had behaved in a manner befitting worthy representatives of Australia and on and off the field his conduct was exemplary if you thought his conduct was so serious as to warrant his omission from the team ? How do you reconcile those two ? 
 Johnson : After a lot of thought . 
 Shand : I am not asking for a lot of thought . 
 Johnson : I have to report on the team as a whole , and that is my opinion . 
 Shand : You admit that applies to every one of them . 
 Johnson : Yes . 
 Shand : And yet one of them was guilty of conduct so serious in your opinion as to warrant his omission ... These reports are circulated . 
 Johnson : Yes . 
 ... 
 Shand : And it would be a misleading report ? 
 Johnson : Yes . 
 Shand : You still claim to be a responsible person ? 
 Johnson : Yes . 
 Shand : You consider it is reasonable to mislead the various state associations ? 
 Johnson : In a case like that , yes . 
 Shand : Depending on the circumstances you have no misgivings about misleading people ? 
 Johnson : I would not mislead people . 
 Shand : You did , didn 't you — the state bodies , about Barnes ? 
 Johnson : Yes . 
 Shand had nearly reduced Johnson to tears , having previously caused a senior police officer to cry during the hearing of a royal commission the year before . A colleague of Shand 's recalled his " capacity of insinuation in tone which could annoy and bring a witness into antagonism " . Shand then asked Johnson about a hypothetical case of Barnes being selected in the future . Johnson evaded the matter of whether he would select the player until Shand asked him to assume that " Barnes is in the best possible form and he is the best cricketer in Australia " , to which Johnson replied that he would not . 
 On the trial 's second day , soon after Barnes had taken to the witness stand , Raith 's counsel withdrew his client 's defence . It had been his task , he said , to prove a plea that the allegation in Raith 's letter was true , and that Barnes had not been excluded capriciously . Counsel remarked that " seldom in the history of libel actions has such a plea failed so completely and utterly . " The case ended at that point ; Barnes was vindicated , and Raith 's counsel issued him with a public apology . According to fellow administrator Alan Barnes , Johnson was a " wide @-@ open type of bloke " who was vulnerable to manoeuvring . Colleagues advised Johnson to hire a lawyer before the case started , but he refused , saying that the libel case was merely a sporting matter , not a legal one . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 After the libel trial , Johnson resigned from the board on 9 February 1953 , and played no further part in cricket administration in Australia . He also resigned from the NSWCA and withdrew his candidature for the manager 's position for the 1953 tour of England . Philip <unk> wrote in his history of the NSWCA that Johnson " may be said to have been a victim of that affair no less than Barnes " . Johnson wrote to the Australian Board of Control , ostensibly tendering his resignation on the grounds of difficulties in travelling to meetings , and thanking the other members for their " courtesy , cooperation and help " . He was not mentioned again in the board minutes again until his death was noted almost two decades later . 
 Johnson retained the support of many of the players : six Victorian members of the 1948 team , including Lindsay Hassett , Ian Johnson and Neil Harvey , wrote to the Herald newspaper in Melbourne expressing their " confidence , respect and affection " for the tour manager . <unk> described Johnson as a " considerate , patient , inoffensive man for whom nothing was too much trouble . As a cricket official , he was efficient and dedicated . " Johnson was appointed a Member of the Order of the British Empire for services to cricket in the 1964 Queen 's Birthday Honours , and died in 1972 after collapsing when rising to make a speech at a charity lunch in Sydney . 
 = Pilot ( The Cosby Show ) = 
 " Pilot " ( also known as " Theo 's Economic Lesson " ) is the pilot and the first episode of the first season of the American sitcom The Cosby Show . " Pilot " originally aired in the United States on NBC on Thursday September 20 , 1984 , at 8 : 00 PM Eastern time . This episode debuted the week before the official start of the 1984 – 85 United States network television season . The confrontation with Theo in this episode is seen again in a flashback in the series finale " And So We Commence " . The episode was directed by Jay Sandrich and written by Ed . Weinberger and Michael J. Leeson . The episode was a critical and commercial success , achieving both high ratings and positive critical feedback . 
 Theo 's ( Malcolm @-@ Jamal Warner ) report card contained four Ds , which upset his mother , Clair ( Phylicia Ayers @-@ Allen ) . Theo attempts to pacify his father , Cliff ( Bill Cosby ) , by letting him know that since he did not intend to go to college , his low grades did not matter to him . His reasoning was that it is his destiny to be a " regular person . " In an attempt to guide his son by analogy , Cliff gives fatherly advice using Monopoly money as a teaching tool about the blue @-@ collar economic facts of life for the everyday American . Although the lessons seem harsh , Cliff makes it clear that his instruction is an attempt to convince him that it is important to try his best . Cliff is troubled upon meeting Denise 's ( Lisa Bonet ) latest admirer ( Todd Hollowell ) who is a former merchant marine and Turkish prisoner . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Clair Huxtable , an attorney , and her children are having dinner at home . Clair is upset with Theo due to the poor grades on his recent report cards . His younger sister Vanessa was trying to get Theo in trouble for throwing food at her as well . Dr. Cliff Huxtable comes home from a long day at his job as an obstetrician / gynecologist just after the meal . 
 Cliff confronts Theo about his poor grades and asks how he plans to get into college with such grades . When Theo replies that he 's not planning to go to college , Cliff replies " Damn right . " Theo explains that he just plans to get a job after school as a regular person . Cliff uses play money from a Monopoly game to show just how far a " regular person " ' s income would actually go in the adult world . Cliff gives him an amount of money representing a generous monthly salary for a " regular person " . He then takes money out of Theo 's hand in amounts representing various costs such as housing , food , clothes , transportation and finally a girlfriend , until there is nothing left . 
 Cliff also meets Denise 's earring @-@ wearing beau , who had recently been in a Turkish prison . When Cliff tells his daughter about what time he expects her home and what attire she should wear , she scoffs at the notion since it is a Friday night and thus , " not a school night . " Cliff responds by asking her if she went to school that day and that it was a " school night . " 
 Theo responds that he should accept his son 's weaknesses and love him unconditionally because they are father and son — a typical sentimental idiom in family sitcoms of that time , and one which generated the typical applause from the studio audience . Cliff , however , to the audience 's surprise and amused approval , immediately and angrily calls this sentiment " the dumbest thing I 've ever heard in my life " . He completely rejects the notion that loving his son means he must quietly and willingly accept it when the boy does not give his best effort in school , and famously threatened him with the often quoted line , " I brought you in this world , and I 'll take you out . " Cliff then tells his son that he expects him to work to his potential and tells Theo that he loves him . 
 At the end of the day , Clair and Cliff settle into bed . As he becomes amorous , she reminds him that was how they got all those troublesome kids . This puts him off for a few seconds . Then Vanessa and Rudy knock on the bedroom door because Rudy was scared of " the Wolf Man " in their closet . Clair invites the kids to sleep with her and Cliff . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Bill Cosby as Dr. Clifford " Cliff " Huxtable , OB @-@ GYN ( the only episode for which he was Clifford rather than Heathcliff ) 
 Phylicia Ayers @-@ Allen as Clair Olivia Huxtable , Esq . 
 Malcolm @-@ Jamal Warner as Theodore Aloysius " Theo " Huxtable 
 Keshia Knight Pulliam as <unk> Lillian " Rudy " Huxtable 
 Tempestt Bledsoe as Vanessa Huxtable 
 Lisa Bonet as Denise Huxtable 
 = = Production = = 
 Taping of the pilot took place in May 1984 , prior to being green @-@ lighted as a full series for the NBC fall schedule . Although this episode was written by Weinberger and Leeson , the <unk> for the series was Earl Pomerantz . The episode , which was filmed in two live performances , was based on Cosby 's real life conversation with his son Ennis about " regular people " , but included elements of Cosby 's stand @-@ up comedy routine . Rather than producing the show in Hollywood , the show was produced in New York City . During the 1983 – 84 United States television season , no sitcoms had finished in the top 10 in the rankings and only one sitcom ( <unk> ) was renewed . As the networks battled to preempt each other 's thunder for the 1984 – 85 United States television season , the Cosby Show became one of seven NBC shows ( along with Punky Brewster , Miami Vice , Hunter , Highway to Heaven , Partners in Crime , Hot Pursuit ) to debut prior to the September 24 date that marked the official beginning of the season . In the show , Bill Cosby is an obstetrician with his office located below his family 's residence in a brownstone home . Less than three months before the show debuted , its producers had not yet decided whether the brownstone would be set in Brooklyn or Manhattan . 
 The set used for the pilot episode of The Cosby Show was notably different than the one used during the remainder of the series . In the first episode , the first floor has extra rooms that it does not have in the rest of the series . In the pilot , Cliff and Clair Huxtable have only four children . The fifth child , Sondra - who was the eldest child - was not introduced until the tenth episode of the first season , entitled " Bon Jour , Sondra " . Her being away at college is the reason given for her absence in the earlier part of the season . In this episode , the plaque outside Cliff 's office lists his full first name as " Clifford . " In the rest of the episodes , however , his name is Heathcliff . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 Cosby was a three @-@ time winner of the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series , but Tom Selleck was the incumbent winner and Cosby had had three failed series since his success with I Spy . Cosby 's sitcom was slotted against Selleck 's Magnum , P.I. , which had dominated the time slot for years . The show placed first in the Nielsen Media Research ratings for the week with a 21 @.@ 6 million person viewership . This placed it ahead of runner @-@ up 60 Minutes , which had an audience of 20 @.@ 7 million . It was the most popular premier for NBC since the 1977 premier of What Really Happened to the Class of ' 65 ? . 
 = = = Critical review = = = 
 John J. O 'Connor of The New York Times wrote that " With only the premiere to go on , The Cosby Show is by far the classiest and most entertaining new situation comedy of the season . " After the pilot aired , David Bianculli wrote in the Sunday Philadelphia Inquirer that " This sitcom will lose to CBS 's Magnum , P.I. , but it 's too funny , and Cosby is too good , for NBC to dump it . " In a separate article in the same edition , he spoke more glowingly describing it as " the best TV sitcom since Cheers , and a good bet to become an instant classic . Cosby is delightful , and his series is both funny and intelligent . " He also described the family as " amazingly real " . According to Associated Press syndicated writer Jerry Buck , in the episode , " Cosby handles his son in a manner that is not only funny but intelligent . " Mike Boone of The Gazette described Cosby and Ayers @-@ Allen as " credible parents " and Cosby 's fatherly advice as a " delightful confrontation " . Boone also noted that " understanding the special world of children " has always been a part of Cosby 's comedy , and that this was present in the comical scene where Cliff and Theo discuss serious matters using play money . Star @-@ Banner said " The dialogue is typically Cosby — easy and funny — and you can just see yourself getting to like these people very much . " According to Associated Press writer Fred Rothenberg , the response to the opening episode was glowing with the Los Angeles Times praising the show as " the best comedy of the fall season by a long , long , <unk> shot . " ; The New York Times saying " by far the classiest and most entertaining situation comedy . " ; and The Washington Post calling it " the best , funniest , most humane new show of the season . " He also noted that marketing executives were not surprised at the reaction to the show . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Weinberger and Leeson won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Writing for a Comedy Series for this episode at the 37th Primetime Emmy Awards on September 22 , 1985 , where the series won three of its eight nominations . Jay Sandrich won the Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing – Comedy Series at the Directors Guild of America Awards 1984 for this episode . 
 = Mike Junkin = 
 Michael Wayne Junkin ( born November 21 , 1964 ) is a former American football linebacker who played in the National Football League ( NFL ) for three seasons with the Cleveland Browns and the Kansas City Chiefs . He played in 20 games over the course of his NFL career . 
 Junkin played four years of college football at Duke University . In the 1987 NFL Draft , the Cleveland Browns traded up to select him with the fifth overall pick . He played in parts of two seasons for the Browns , both of which ended early due to injury . Junkin was then traded to the Kansas City Chiefs for a fifth @-@ round selection and played in five more games . After his release from the Chiefs , he did not play another game in the NFL . His failure to establish himself in the NFL has caused him to be regarded as a draft bust . 
 = = High school and college = = 
 Junkin was born in North Little Rock , Arkansas to Kirk , a United Airlines pilot , and Doris , a substitute teacher . His brother Trey Junkin was an NFL player as well . Junkin attended Belvidere High School in Belvidere , Illinois , and played tight end on the football team . In 1982 , his senior year , he was the team 's MVP and captain . He was named to the Belvidere Bucs Football Hall of Fame in 2013 . 
 After graduating from high school , Junkin played college football with the Duke Blue Devils . He played in three games for the Blue Devils as a freshman . In one game against North Carolina State , Junkin had 25 tackles en route to a 27 – 26 Duke victory ; head coach Steve Sloan stated afterwards that it was " one of the best games I have ever seen a freshman play . " Between his freshman and sophomore seasons , Junkin went from 205 pounds to 240 to help get more playing time . As a sophomore , he spent the 1984 season as one of five starting linebackers on a modified Duke defense , which normally would have three or four linebackers . In his junior season , he was again a starting linebacker and finished the season with 162 tackles despite playing on an injured knee . Junkin started off his senior year with 15 tackles against Northwestern despite battling a head cold . Three weeks later in a game against Virginia , Junkin had 18 tackles and was named Atlantic Coast Conference defensive player of the week . Junkin graduated from Duke after the 1986 season as the school record @-@ holder for career tackles with 512 . Due to his performance his senior year , Junkin was named to the Second Team College Football All @-@ American . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 Junkin was selected with the fifth overall pick in the 1987 NFL Draft by the Cleveland Browns . To acquire him , the Browns traded Chip Banks along with their first and second @-@ round picks to the San Diego Chargers for their first and second @-@ round picks . In regards to the selection , head coach Marty Schottenheimer stated that scout Dom <unk> had watched him play , and compared his playing style to " a mad dog in a meat market . " However , <unk> saw him as a second @-@ round talent despite the quote , and felt he was not worth the fifth overall selection , but Schottenheimer overruled his scouts and selected Junkin with that pick . The Browns ' archrival , the Pittsburgh Steelers , were surprised at the pick as they had expected the Browns to select Shane Conlan after trading up for the pick ; the St. Louis Cardinals selection of Kelly Stouffer and the Buffalo Bills selection of Conlan eventually allowed the Steelers to select future Hall of Fame cornerback Rod Woodson , haunting the Browns for years . 
 Entering the 1987 Cleveland Browns season , Junkin was projected to be the starting outside linebacker opposite Clay Matthews , Jr. despite playing inside linebacker in college , which generated criticism around the league as a transition that would be difficult for him to make . After a 16 @-@ day holdout , the Browns and Junkin agreed to a four @-@ year deal worth nearly two million dollars . After missing the first preseason game against the St. Louis Cardinals , he made his debut against the New York Giants . In that game , he played the second half and failed to record a tackle . By the end of training camp , due to struggles learning the outside linebacker position , he made the roster , but lost the starting job to Anthony Griggs . After the Browns moved to a 4 @-@ 3 defense for the second game against the Pittsburgh Steelers , Junkin made his debut , and the plan was for him to gradually see more playing time each week . In early November , due to a combination of a players ' strike and an injured wrist , Junkin was placed on the injured reserve list and replaced on the active roster by David Grayson . 
 Due to a combination of the Browns drafting Clifford Charlton and Junkin 's desire to move back inside , the Browns planned to move him back to inside linebacker for the 1988 season . He spent training camp competing with Eddie Johnson for the second inside linebacker position alongside Mike Johnson , and by the end of preseason play , Junkin had won the starting job . In his first career start against the Kansas City Chiefs , Junkin had six tackles , including the first one of the game in a 6 – 3 Browns win . A month later , Junkin injured his knee , and was forced to miss several games . He returned to the team in early November , but Johnson had played so well in Junkin 's absence that he spent the next few weeks as the backup inside linebacker . He was given the starting job again to end the season , but missed tackles and a lack of impact plays led to his second season being considered a disappointment . 
 In early 1989 , Schottenheimer was fired as Browns head coach , and took the head coaching job with the Kansas City Chiefs . He still had faith in Junkin , unlike the Browns , and traded a fifth @-@ round pick to bring him to Kansas City . Two weeks after the trade , a report came out that Junkin had taken steroids provided by a doctor to treat an injured ankle , and had failed a drug test at the scouting combine as a result . Entering the 1989 Kansas City Chiefs season , Junkin competed with Walker Lee Ashley for the second inside linebacker spot alongside Dino Hackett . Ashley won the job , and Junkin played five games before a shoulder injury sidelined him for the rest of the season . He was released from the Chiefs after season 's end , and retired after not being signed by any team through the 1990 season . 
 Junkin became known as a draft bust due to his unproductive career . An ESPN article in 2008 noted Junkin noted as the eighth biggest draft bust of all time . He was also named one of the Cleveland ' Browns worst three draft picks from 1995 or earlier . 
 = Lat = 
 Datuk Mohammad Nor Khalid ( Jawi : محمد <unk> خالد ) , more commonly known as Lat , ( born 5 March 1951 ) is a Malaysian cartoonist . Winner of the Fukuoka Asian Culture Prize in 2002 , Lat has published more than 20 volumes of cartoons since he was 13 years old . His works mostly illustrate Malaysia 's social and political scenes , portraying them in a comedic light without bias . Lat 's best known work is The Kampung Boy ( 1979 ) , which is published in several countries across the world . In 1994 , the Sultan of Perak bestowed the honorific title of datuk on Lat , in recognition of the cartoonist 's work in helping to promote social harmony and understanding through his cartoons . 
 Born in a village , Lat spent his youth in the countryside before moving to the city at the age of 11 . While in school , he supplemented his family 's income by contributing cartoon strips to newspapers and magazines . He was 13 years old when he achieved his first published comic book , Tiga Sekawan ( Three Friends Catch a Thief ) . After failing to attain the grades that were required to continue education beyond high school , Lat became a newspaper reporter . In 1974 , he switched careers to be an editorial cartoonist . His works , reflecting his view about Malaysian life and the world , are staple features in national newspapers such as New Straits Times and Berita <unk> . He adapted his life experiences and published them as his autobiographies , The Kampung Boy and Town Boy , telling stories of rural and urban life with subtle comparisons between the two . 
 Lat 's style has been described as reflective of his early influences , The Beano and The Dandy . He has , however , come into his own way of illustration , drawing the common man on the streets with bold strokes in pen and ink . A trademark of his Malay characters is their three @-@ loop noses . Lat paid attention to family life and children because of his <unk> of Raja Hamzah , a senior cartoonist who was also popular in the 1960s with his comics about swashbuckling heroes . Rejabhad , a well @-@ respected cartoonist , was Lat 's mentor , and imbued the junior cartoonist with a preference to be sensitive to the subjects of his works . Lat 's attention to details gained him popularity , endearing his works to the masses who find them believable and unbiased . 
 Aside from writing and publishing cartoons , Lat has ventured into the fields of animation , merchandising , and theme parks with his creations . His name and works are recognised internationally ; foreign cartoonists , such as Matt Groening and Sergio Aragonés , admire his art , and foreign governments invite Lat to tour their countries , hoping to gain greater exposure for their countries through Lat 's cartoons of his experiences in them . After 27 years of living and working in Kuala Lumpur , Lat moved back to Ipoh for a more sedate lifestyle in semi @-@ retirement . 
 = = Childhood and education = = 
 Mohammad Nor Khalid was born on 5 March 1951 in a kampung ( village ) in Ipoh , Perak , Malaysia . His father was a government clerk with the Malaysian Armed Forces , and his mother a housewife . Khalid was a stocky boy with a cherubic face , which led his family to nickname him <unk> ( round ) . His friends shortened it to " Lat " ; it became the name by which he was more commonly known in his kampung and later in the world . Lat was the eldest child in his family , and he often played in the jungles , plantations , and tin mines with his friends . Their toys were usually improvised from everyday sundries and items of nature . Lat liked to doodle with materials provided by his parents , and his other forms of recreation were reading comics and watching television ; Lat idolised local cartoonist Raja Hamzah , who was popular with his tales of swashbuckling Malay heroes . Malaysian art critic and historian Redza <unk> believes Lat 's early years in the kampung ingrained the cartoonist with pride in his kampung roots and a " peculiarly Malay " outlook — " full of [ ... ] gentleness and refinement " . 
 Lat 's formal education began at a local Malay kampung ( village ) school ; these institutions often taught in the vernacular and did not aspire to academic attainment . The boy changed schools several times ; the nature of his father 's job moved the family from one military base to another across the country , until they settled back at his birthplace in 1960 . A year later , Lat passed the Special Malay Class Examination , qualifying him to attend an English medium boarding school — National Type Primary School — in the state 's capital , Ipoh . His achievement helped his father make the decision to sell their kampung estate and move the family to the town ; society in those days considered education at an English medium school a springboard to a good future . Lat continued his education at Anderson School , Perak 's " premier non @-@ missionary English medium school " . Redza highlights Lat 's move to Ipoh for higher schooling as a significant point in the cartoonist 's development ; the multi @-@ racial environment helped establish his diverse friendships , which in turn broadened his cultural perspectives . 
 At the age of nine , Lat began to supplement his family 's income through his artistic skills , by drawing comics and selling them to his friends . Four years later , in 1964 , the young cartoonist achieved his first published work : a local movie magazine — <unk> <unk> — printed his comic strips , paying him with movie tickets . Lat 's first comic book publication , Tiga Sekawan ( Three Friends Catch a Thief ) , was published by Sinaran Brothers that year . The company had accepted Lat 's submission , mistaking him for an adult and paying him 25 Malaysian <unk> ( RM ) for a story about three friends who band together to catch thieves . In 1968 , at the age of 17 , Lat started penning Keluarga Si Mamat ( Mamat 's Family ) , a comic strip for Berita <unk> ( the Sunday edition of Berita Harian ) . The series ran in the paper every week for 26 years . Although still a schoolboy , Lat was earning a monthly income of <unk> , a large sum in those days , from his cartoons . His education finished two years later at the end of Form 5 ; his Third Grade in the Senior Cambridge examinations was not enough for him to advance to Form 6 . Graduating with an education equivalent to that of high school , Lat started looking for a job and had his sights set on becoming an illustrator . 
 = = Reporter to cartoonist = = 
 Moving to the Malaysian capital Kuala Lumpur , Lat applied for a cartoonist 's position at Berita Harian . He was told there was no vacancy , but the paper 's editor , Abdul Samad Ismail , offered him the post of a crime reporter . Lat accepted , a decision he explained was borne from necessity rather than choice : " It was a question of survival . I had to earn money to help support the family . " At that time , Lat 's father had fallen seriously ill and could not work ; Lat had to become the breadwinner of his family . Aside from taking the job , he continued contributing cartoons to other publications . Lat was later transferred to Berita 's parent publication , New Straits Times . Moving throughout the city to report on crimes gave Lat opportunities to observe and interact with the myriads of lives in the urban landscape , enabling him to gather material for his cartoons and increasing his understanding of the world . Nevertheless , he felt he lacked the persistently inquisitive nature needed to succeed as a crime reporter . Furthermore , his " breathtakingly detailed , lurid and graphically gory descriptions " of the aftermaths of crimes had to be frequently toned down by his seniors . Lat became convinced that he was a failure at his job , and his despondency led him to tender his resignation . Samad , believing Lat had a bright future with the press , furiously rejected the letter . 
 Lat 's career took a turn for the better on 10 February 1974 ; Asia Magazine , a periodical based in Hong Kong , published his cartoons about <unk> — a circumcision ceremony all Malaysian boys of the Islamic faith have to undergo . The cartoons impressed Tan Sri Lee Siew Yee , editor @-@ in @-@ chief of the New Straits Times . Lee found Lat 's portrayal of the important ceremony humorous yet sensitive , and grumbled that the newspaper should have hired the artist . He was surprised to be told that Lat was already working within his organisation . Lat was called to Lee 's office to have a talk , which raised the reporter 's profile in the company . He became the paper 's column cartoonist , taking up a position created for him by Samad , now deputy editor of the New Straits Times . His first duty was to document Malaysian culture in a series of cartoons titled Scenes of Malaysian Life . The newspaper also sent him to study for four months at St Martin 's School of Art in London , where he was introduced to English editorial cartoons and newspapers . Returning to Malaysia full of fascination with his experience , Lat transformed Scenes of Malaysian Life into a series of editorial cartoons . His approach proved popular , and at the end of 1975 he was appointed full @-@ time cartoonist with total freedom in his work . 
 Lat produced a steady stream of editorial cartoons that entertained Malaysian society . By 1978 , two collections of his works ( Lots of Lat and Lat 's Lot ) had been compiled and sold to the public . Although Malaysians knew of Lat through Scenes of Malaysian Life , it was his next work that propelled him into national consciousness and international recognition . In 1979 , Berita Publishing Sendirian Berhad published Lat 's The Kampung Boy , an autobiographical cartoon account of his youth . The book was a commercial hit ; according to Lat , the first printing — 60 @,@ 000 to 70 @,@ 000 copies — sold out within four months of the book 's release . Readers of the book were captivated by his " heart @-@ warming " portrayal of Malaysian rural life , rendered with " scribbly black @-@ and @-@ white sketches " and accompanied by " simple but eloquent prose " . By 2009 , the book has been reprinted 16 times and published in several other countries in various languages , including Portuguese , French , and Japanese . The success of The Kampung Boy established Lat as the " most renowned cartoonist in Malaysia . " 
 = = After The Kampung Boy = = 
 In 1981 , Town Boy was published . It continued The Kampung Boy 's story , telling of the protagonist 's teenage life in an urban setting . Two more compilations of Lat 's editorial cartoons ( With a Little Bit of Lat and Lots More Lat ) were published and the number of people who recognised him continued to grow . In 1984 , partly from a desire to step away from the limelight , Lat resigned from the New Straits Times to become a freelancer , but continued to draw Scenes of Malaysia Life for the newspaper . He set up his own company , Kampung Boy Sendirian Berhad ( Village Boy private limited ) , to oversee the merchandising of his cartoon characters and publishing of his books . In 2009 , Kampung Boy partnered Sanrio and Hit Entertainment in a project to open an indoor theme park which would later be called as Puteri Harbour Family Theme Park in <unk> , Johor in August 2012 . One of the park 's attractions will be the sight of performers dressed up as Kampung Boy characters beside those in Hello Kitty and Bob the Builder costumes and also reported in August 2012 will be a Lat @-@ inspired diner called Lat 's Place . It will be designed in a Malaysian village setting , coupled with animations for patrons to interact with . 
 Lat has experimented with media other than paper . In 1993 he produced a short animated feature , Mina Smiles , for Unesco ; the video , featuring a female lead , was for a literacy campaign . Personal concerns motivated Lat for his next foray into animation ; judging that Western animation of the 1980s and 90s had negative influences , he wanted to produce a series for Malaysian children that espoused local values . The result was Kampung Boy the television series ( 1997 ) , an adaptation of his trademark comic . The 26 @-@ episode series received positive reviews for technical details and content . There were comments on its similarities to The Simpsons , and on its English which was not entirely local . His most recent involvement with animation was in 2009 ; Lat 's Window to the World , a musical animated feature , played at the Petronas Philharmonic Hall . Lat had been commissioned to help create three animated vignettes based on The Kampung Boy to accompany the instruments of the Malaysian Philharmonic Orchestra . The scores , composed by Carl Davis , complemented Lat 's visuals , capturing the spirit of kampung childhood in a " simple , idyllic past " . 
 In 1997 , after 27 years of living in Kuala Lumpur , Lat moved back to Ipoh with his family . Aside from retreating slightly from the cartooning scene , he wanted to be close to his old kampung and let his children experience life in a small town or village ; he had married in 1977 , and the couple have four children — two daughters and two sons . Lat said that raising his children has helped him cope with the pressures of his fame and made him realise that he might be losing touch with the new generation of Malaysians who have different tastes in cartoons . His wife helps him in his work , scanning his completed cartoons and emailing them to the newspaper offices in Kuala Lumpur . Lat still draws with his usual pens and inks , avoiding the use of computers except to read his emails . In 2011 – 12 , he is to join other artists from around the world in Italy for the Civitella Ranieri Fellowship programme . During their one @-@ month stay , they are encouraged to share ideas in an environment fostered to stimulate their creativity . 
 = = Art style = = 
 Lat covers various genres in his works . His portfolio is diverse ; John A. Lent , a scholar of Asian cartoons , found it to difficult to classify the cartoonist into any particular field . In his Keluarga Si Mamat series , Lat drew <unk> and satires that examined the encounters between traditional and modern values . Humorous stories of children at play also populated the series . Jennifer Rodrigo Willmott , writer for Reader 's Digest , stated that : 
 Lat 's cartoon characters have always been ordinary people — a villager in his checkered sarong , a money @-@ changer in his white dhoti , a Malay government servant in his bush jacket and sometimes even Lat himself : that character with the flat , round face ; the nose slightly off centre ; the untidy mop of dark , curly hair ; and the constant toothy grin . 
 Using a large cast of characters — a wide assortment of personalities and cultures — allows Lat to comment on a wider range of topics than is possible with a small group of characters . Malaysian comics scholar Muliyadi <unk> commented that the humour in Lat 's cartoons is evoked through graphical and textual means ; " short , compact dialogues " and puns form the text while " facial expressions and actions " of the characters help to bring out the funny side of things . Muliyadi further stated that Lat 's works offer many levels of interpretation ; one reader would laugh at Lat 's cartoon for its slapstick , while another would find the same work hilarious for its subtle critique of society . As an example , Muliyadi referred to a Keluarga Si Mamat strip published in 1972 . Malaysia was facing a shortage of qualified physical education teachers then , and such duties were often placed on the shoulders of teachers of other faculties . Lat illustrated an obese teacher who conducted a physical education session to his eventual collapse . Muliyadi suggested that the cartoon could be interpreted as a simple tease of the teacher 's plight , a suggestion to examine the curriculum taught ( change physical education to an informal session ) , a remark on the shortage of teachers , or more extremely , a criticism of the government 's failure to prevent the situation from happening . 
 The narration of Lat 's early cartoons , such as Tiga Sekawan and Keluarga Si Mamat , was in Malay . His later works , however , were mostly in English ; Scenes of Malaysian Life ran only in the English @-@ language New Straits Times . The English idiom in his works reflects the local pidgin form — " <unk> " — containing <unk> of Malay words and a simpler grammatical structure . After a string of successful English publications , Lat worried he had neglected Malaysians who were not proficient in English . He drew Mat Som , a story of a kampung boy who moved to the city to work as a writer and courted a pretty city girl . The comic was in Malay and a commercial hit ; its first print of 30 @,@ 000 copies sold out in three months . Far Eastern Economic Review journalist <unk> <unk> remarked that Lat 's strength was his ability to portray the plight of the common man in a satiric light without any form of bias . 
 = = = Early style = = = 
 Lat 's artistic skills were cultivated from youth and self @-@ taught . The cartoonist believes he inherited the talent and interest from his father , who doodled as a hobby and was notorious for his sense of humour as the " village jester " . Lat says his siblings were also gifted in drawing , but they never bothered to develop their talents . His parents actively encouraged him to develop his artistic skills , although his father occasionally told him not to make a career of it . He also received encouragement from outside his family ; Lat 's primary school teacher Mrs Moira Hew ( the inspiration for one of his characters , the Butterfly @-@ <unk> Lady ) , helped nurture his gift , frequently asking him to illustrate lessons in class . Her teachings expanded Lat 's mind and made him more receptive to ideas that looked beyond his kampung . 
 The early influences on his art style were from the West . Like most of the Malaysian children in the 1950s , Lat watched Hanna @-@ Barbera cartoons ( The Flintstones and The Jetsons ) on television and read imported British comics , such as The Dandy and The Beano . He studied them and used their styles and themes in his early doodles . After the foreign influences in his works were noticed by a family friend , Lat was advised by his father to observe and draw upon ideas from their surroundings instead . Heeding the advice , the young cartoonist intimated himself with local happenings . Tiga Sekawan was conceived as a humorous crime @-@ fighting story of a local flavour . Keluarga Si Mamat and its protagonist were named after his youngest brother Mamat , its stories based on Lat 's observations of his fellow villagers and schoolmates . The inspiration for his cartoons about <unk> came about when he was on assignment at a hospital . As he was taking breaks from investigating the dead victims of crime brought to the morgue , Lat chanced upon the circumcisions performed by the hospital on ethnic Malay boys . He found their experiences clinical , devoid of the elaborate and personal ceremonies that celebrated his own rite to manhood in the village . Lat felt compelled to illustrate the differences between life in his kampung and the city . 
 When Lat formally entered the cartooning industry , he was not totally unfamiliar with the profession . He had the benefit of the mentorship of Rejabhad , an experienced political cartoonist . Rejabhad was well respected by his countrymen , who titled him the " penghulu ( chief ) of Malay cartoonists " . After noticing Lat 's submissions to newspapers and magazines , he corresponded with the young cartoonist . When Rejabhad was requested by Lat 's mother to take care of her 15 @-@ year @-@ old son in the cartooning industry , he accepted . He gave advice and influenced Lat 's growth as a cartoonist . Lat treated Rejabhad with great respect , holding up his mentor as a role model . The affection and admiration was mutual . Thirty @-@ six years after taking Lat under his wing , Rejabhad recounted their relationship in these words : 
 Lat and I are so far apart but so close in heart . When I meet him , my mouth is sewed up . When the love is very close , the mouth is dumb , can 't speak a word . Lat is on top of the mountain , as he doesn 't forget the grass at the foot of the mountain . When he goes here and there , he tells people I 'm his teacher . 
 Rejabhad was not the first local figure to have exerted an influence on Lat . Raja Hamzah , popular with his action comics and ghost stories , was Lat 's " hero " in his childhood . It was Raja Hamzah 's cartoons of local swashbuckling adventurers that inspired Lat to become a cartoonist . Tiga Sekawan was the culmination of that desire , the success after numerous failed submissions and an affirmation to Lat that he could become a cartoonist like his idol . Raja Hamzah also had success with comic strips on family life , such as Mat <unk> 's Family and Dol <unk> and Wak <unk> . These cartoons imbued Lat with a fascination of family life and the antics of children , which served him well in his later works . Lat was interested in studying the details of his surroundings and capturing them in his works . Keluarga Si Mamat and The Kampung Boy faithfully depicted their characters ' appearances and attitudes . Their narrations were written in a style that was natural to the locals . Thus , Lat was able to make his readers believe his stories and characters were substantially " Malay " . 
 = = = Later style = = = 
 After his study trip to London in 1975 , Lat 's works exhibited the influences of editorial cartoonists such as Frank Dickens , Ralph Steadman , and Gerald Scarfe . In 1997 , Ron Provencher , a professor emeritus at Northern Illinois University , reported that Lat 's style reminded his informants on the Malaysian cartooning scene of The Beano . Muliyadi elaborated that The Beano and The Dandy 's " theme of a child 's world " is evident in Lat 's Keluarga Si Mamat . Others commented that Lat 's art stood out on its own . Singaporean cartoonist Morgan Chua believed that Lat " managed to create an impressively local style while remaining original " , and although comics historian Isao Shimizu found Lat 's lines " somewhat crude " , he noted that the cartoonist 's work was " highly original " and " full of life " . Redza 's judgement was that The Beano and The Dandy were " early formative [ influences ] " on Lat before he came into his own style . Lent gave his assessment in 1999 : 
 It is Lat 's drawing that is so evocative , so true to life , despite its very exaggerated distortion . Lat 's Malaysian characters are distinguished by their ethnic linkages ( for example , his Malay characters have three loop noses ) , which in itself , is no mean feat . The drawings are bold strokes , expressive dialogue in English and Bahasa Malaysian , as well as in what portends to be Chinese , Tamil , and entertaining backgrounds that tell their own stories . 
 Lat 's work with pen and ink so impressed Larry Gonick that the American cartoonist was tempted into experimenting with this medium for part of his The Cartoon History of the Universe . Gonick tried to use the medium as he did his regular brushes ; however , the results proved unsatisfactory . Lat occasionally colours his works , such as those in his Kampong Boy : Yesterday and Today ( 1993 ) , using watercolour or marker pens . According to Lent , Redza judged that Lat had " elevated cartooning to the level of ' high visual arts ' through his social commentary and ' construction of the landscape ' " . The art critic was not alone in having a high regard for Lat 's works . Jaafar Taib , cartoonist and editor of Malaysian satirical magazine Gila @-@ Gila , found Lat 's cartoons retained their humour and relevance throughout time . He explained that this quality arose from the well @-@ thought @-@ out composition of Lat 's works , which helped to clearly express the ideas behind the cartoons . 
 = = = Sensitive topics = = = 
 At the time that Lat started drawing for the New Straits Times , local political cartoonists were gentle in their treatment of Malaysian politicians ; the politicians ' features were recreated faithfully and criticisms were voiced in the form of subtle poems . Lat , however , pushed the boundaries ; although he portrayed the politicians with dignity , he exaggerated notable features of their appearances and traits . Lat recalled that in 1974 , he was told to change one of his works , which portrayed Malaysian Prime Minister Abdul Razak from the back . Lee refused to print the work unchanged , and pointedly asked the cartoonist " You want to go to jail ? ! " In 1975 , however , Lat 's next attempt at a political cartoon won Lee 's approval . The satire featured a caricature of Razak 's successor — Hussein Onn — on the back of a camel , travelling back to Kuala Lumpur from Saudi Arabia ; its punchline was Hussein 's hailing of his mount to slow down after reading news that a pay raise for the civil service would be enacted on his return . 
 Malaysia 's political class grew comfortable with Lat 's caricatures , and like the rest of the country , found them entertaining . Muliyadi described Lat 's style as " subtle , indirect , and symbolic " , following traditional forms of Malaysian humour in terms of ethics and aesthetics . The cartoonist 's compliance with tradition in his art earned him the country 's respect . When Lat was critical of politicians , he portrayed them in situations " unusual , abnormal or unexpected " to their status or personalities , using the contrast to make the piece humorous . Mahathir bin Mohamad , Malaysia 's fourth Prime Minister , was Lat 's frequent target for much of his political career , providing more than 20 years worth of material to the cartoonist — enough for a 146 @-@ page compilation Dr Who ? ! ( 2004 ) . Lat 's political wit targeted not only local politicians , but also Israeli actions in the Middle East and foreign figures such as prominent Singaporean politician Lee Kwan Yew . Despite his many works of political nature , Lat does not consider himself a political cartoonist and openly admits that there are others better than he is in this field . 
 Lat prefers to portray his ideas with as little antagonism as possible . He heeds the advice of his mentor , Rejabhad , and is aware of sensitivities , especially those of race , culture , and religion . As he devises the concept for his cartoon , he eliminates anything he believes to be malicious or insensitive . At the Fourth Asian Cartoon Exhibition in Tokyo , Lat revealed that when it came to making religious comments in his work , he only did so on his own religion ( Islam ) . In such cases , Lat uses his art to help educate the young about his faith . Lat trusts his editors to do their jobs and cull what is socially unacceptable for print . In an interview , he revealed his discomfort with the concept of self @-@ publishing , believing that unadulterated or unsupervised cartoon drawing could lead to " rubbish " . He prefers to be assertive in areas with which he is comfortable or competent . Lat is adamant on not changing what he has already drawn ; several pieces of his cartoons remain unpublished because editors refused to print them unchanged . When that happens , the editors spike ( blank ) the space for his regular cartoon in the newspaper . Lat admitted of his <unk> works : " Okay , maybe I 've pushed the line a little bit , but I 've never got into trouble and , frankly , only a handful of my cartoons were ever spiked . " 
 = = Interests and beliefs = = 
 Music has played a crucial part in Lat 's life since his youth ; he revealed in an interview that listening to songs such as Peggy March 's " I Will Follow Him " and Paul & Paula 's " Hey Paula " helped him learn English . Listening to music had also become an important ritual in his work , providing him with inspiration in his art . When he sketches " fashionable girls " , he puts on Paul McCartney 's tracks , and switches to Indonesian gamelan when he needs to draw intricate details . He enjoys pop music , particularly rock music of the 1950s and 60s , listening to The Beatles , Bob Dylan , and Elvis Presley . Lat is also partial to country music , and to singers such as Hank Williams and Roy Rogers because he finds their tunes " humble " . His enjoyment of music is more than a passive interest ; he is proficient with the guitar and piano , and can play them by ear . 
 Malaysian society used to look down on cartoonists , assuming that those who practised the trade were intellectually inferior to writers , or were lesser artists ; Lat was not the only cartoonist to be paid with movie tickets in the 1950s ; Rejabhad once received one ticket for ten cartoons , and many others were likewise recompensed , or were paid very little money . Despite the lowly reputation of his profession at that time , Lat is very proud of his choice of career ; he once took umbrage with an acquaintance 's girlfriend for her presumption that the words and ideas in his cartoons were not his own . Drawing cartoons is more than a career to him : 
 If it is a job then how come it 's been going on for 33 years , from childhood to now ? A job is something you do at a certain time . You go to work , you finish it , you retire . If this is a job , then by now I should have retired . But I am still drawing . It 's not a job to me . It is something expected of me . 
 The elongated " L " in Lat 's signature was born from his joy in completing a work . He professes that his primary aim in drawing cartoons is to make people laugh ; his role as a cartoonist is " to translate the reaction of the people into humorous cartoons " . He has no intentions to preach his beliefs through his art , believing that people should be free to make up their own minds and that the best he can do is to make readers ponder the deeper meanings behind a humorous scene . The reward he has sought from drawing since his youth is simple : 
 It gives a good feeling when people are amused by your funny drawings , especially for a kid . I felt like an entertainer when my drawings were shown to relatives and friends , and they laughed or even smiled . 
 Lat 's pride in cartooning pushed him to promote the art as a respectable career . In 1991 , he banded together with fellow cartoonists <unk> , Rejabhad , and Muliyadi to start " <unk> " ( Persatuan <unk> Selangor dan Kuala Lumpur ) . This association holds exhibitions and forums , to raise public awareness of cartooning and to build relationships among its members . It also helps to clarify legal issues such as copyrights to its members , and acts as an intermediary between them and the government . In the previous year , Lat 's company , Kampung Boy , had organised the first Malaysian International Cartoonists Gathering , bringing together cartoonists from several countries across the world to exhibit their art and participate in conferences to educate others in their work . In Redza 's opinion , Lat played a great role in making cartooning respectable among his fellow Malaysians . 
 Aside from promoting the rights of fellow cartoonists , Lat developed an interest in encouraging conservation of the natural environment . Several of his works caricature the consequences of pollution and over @-@ exploitation of resources . Invited to give a speech at the 9th Osaka International Symposium on Civilisation in 1988 , Lat talked about the environmental problems associated with overpopulation and heavy industrialisation . He further reminisced about the simple cleaner life he had enjoyed as a child in the kampung . In 1977 , when a protest was organised against logging activities in the Endau @-@ <unk> Reserves , Lat helped gain support for the movement by drawing cartoons in the newspapers that highlighted the issue . Lat is also particularly concerned over what he sees as the negative side of urban development . He believes that such developments have contributed to the loss of the traditional way of life ; people forget the old culture and values as they ingratiate themselves with the rapid pace and sophistication of urban lifestyles . His defence and fondness of the old ways are manifested in his The Kampung Boy , Town Boy , Mat Som , and Kampung Boy : Yesterday and Today , which champion the old lifestyles as spiritually superior . 
 = = Influence and legacy = = 
 Recognised globally , and widely popular in his country , Lat has been styled " cultural hero " , " his nation 's conscience in cartoon form " and " Malaysian icon " among other effusive titles . The Malaysian Press Institute felt Lat had " become an institution in [ his ] own right " , honouring him with their Special Jury Award in 2005 . Cartoonists in the Southeast Asian region , such as Muliyadi , Chua , and Rejabhad , have given high praise to Lat , and his admirers further abroad include North American cartoonists Matt Groening and Eddie Campbell . Groening , creator of The Simpsons , gave a testimonial for the United States version of The Kampung Boy , praising Lat 's signature work as " one of the all @-@ time great cartoon books " . Sergio Aragonés , the creator of Groo the Wanderer , is another of Lat 's American fans . After visiting Malaysia in 1987 , Aragonés used the experience to create a story for Groo in which the bumbling swordsman chances on the isle of <unk> , whose inhabitants and natural habitat were modelled after those of the Southeast Asian country . Aragonés drew the noses of the islanders in Lat 's distinctive style , and named one of the prominent native characters — an inquisitive boy — after the Malaysian cartoonist . 
 Lent ( 2003 ) and Shimizu ( 1996 ) both suggest that the Malaysian comic industry began to boom after Lat joined the profession on a full @-@ time basis in 1974 . Lent further hazards that the cartoonist profession was made more respectable in Malaysia by the award to Lat in 1994 of a datuk title ( equivalent to a knighthood ) . <unk> on Lat by the Sultan of Perak , the title was Malaysia 's highest recognition of the cartoonist 's influence on his countrymen and his contributions to the country . Before Lat 's emergence , Malaysian cartooning was largely unappreciated by the public , despite the popular works of Raja <unk> and Rejabhad . Lat 's successes showed Malaysians that they could thrive and succeed as cartoonists , and inspired them to look to the cartooning profession for potential careers . Several younger artists imitated his style in the hopes of capturing equivalent rewards . <unk> and <unk> <unk> copied the distinctive three loop noses and hairstyles of Lat 's characters . Others , such as Reggie Lee and Nan , incorporated Lat 's detailed " thematic and stylistic approaches " in their works . Muliyadi dubbed Lat the " Father of Contemporary Malaysian Cartoons " , for being the first Malaysian cartoonist to achieve global recognition and for helping to improve the industry 's image in their country . 
 The effects of Lat 's works were not confined to the artistic sector . In the period before his debut , Malaysian cartoonists supported calls for national unity . The characters in a cartoon were often of one race , and negative focus on the foibles of particular races or cultures worked its way into the mainstream . Such cartoons did not help to sooth racial tensions that were simmering then . The situation erupted with the racial riots of 1969 , and for several years after these incidents relationships among the races were raw and fragile . According to Redza , Lat soothed the nation 's racial woes with his works . Drawing members of various races in his crowd scenes and showing their interactions with one another , Lat portrayed Malaysians in a gentle and unbiased comic manner . Redza pointed out although one may argue that Lat was forced into the role of racial and cultural mediator ( because of his employment with his country 's " leading English @-@ language newspaper serving a multi @-@ racial readership " ) , he possessed the necessary qualities — intimate knowledge of various races and culture — to succeed in the job . Lat 's fans recognised the trademark of his oeuvre as " a safe and nice humour that made everyone feel good and nostalgic by appealing to their benevolent sides rather than by poking at their bad sides " . It proved to be a successful formula ; more than 850 @,@ 000 copies of his books were sold in the twelve years after the first compilation of his editorial cartoons went on sale in 1977 . The comfort that readers sought from his works was such that when in September 2008 Lat deviated from his usual style , to draw a cartoon about racially charged politicking in his country , it shocked journalist <unk> Hassan . She found the illustration of a group of Malaysians huddled under an umbrella , taking shelter from a rain of xenophobic phrases , full of profound sadness . 
 Lat 's works have been used in academic studies — the fields of which are diverse , spanning law , urban planning , and diets . The academics use his drawings to help them illustrate their points in a humorous yet educational manner . Foreign embassy officials have sought Lat for his insight into the cultures of their societies . They have invited him to tour their countries , in the hope that he will record his experiences in cartoon form to share with the world . The first country to do so was the United States , followed by others such as Australia , Germany , and Japan . In 1998 , Lat became the first cartoonist to be made an Eisenhower Fellow and revisited the United States ; his research programme was the study of relationships among the many races in United States society . In 2007 , the National University of Malaysia awarded him an Honorary Doctorate in Anthropology and Sociology . Lat 's works are recognised as visual records of Malaysia 's cultural history ; he was awarded a Fukuoka Asian Culture Prize in 2002 for preserving Malay rural culture in his works . 
 In 1986 , Lat became the first cartoonist to exhibit his work at the National Museum in Kuala Lumpur ; the event drew a record number of 600 @,@ 000 visitors in two months . He is treated as a celebrity , and his cartoon characters decorate stamps , financial guides , and aeroplanes . When Reader 's Digest asked Malaysians in 2010 to rank which of 50 local personalities was most worthy of trust , Lat was returned fourth on the list . According to Jaafar , " 100 % of Malaysians respect and admire Lat , and see a Malaysian truth , whether he is drawing a policeman , teachers , or hookers . " 
 = = List of major honours = = 
 1994 – <unk> title of datuk 
 1998 – Eisenhower Fellowship 
 2002 – Fukuoka Asian Culture Prize 
 2005 – Petronas Journalism Awards ( Special Jury Award ) 
 2007 – Honorary Doctorate in Anthropology and Sociology 
 2010 – Civitella Ranieri Visual Arts Fellowship 
 = = List of selected works = = 
 This is a partial list of Lat 's books ( first prints ) ; excluded are translations and commissioned works , such as <unk> ( 1986 ) for Malaysian Airlines and the annual personal financial management guides ( since 1999 ) for Bank Negara Malaysia . 
 Tiga Sekawan : <unk> <unk> [ Three Friends Catch a Thief ] ( in Malay ) . Penang , Malaysia : Sinaran Brothers . 1964 . 
 Lots of Lat . Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia : Berita Publishing . February 1977 . 
 Lat 's Lot . Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia : Berita Publishing . June 1978 . 
 The Kampung Boy . Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia : Berita Publishing . 1979 . 
 Keluarga Si Mamat [ Mamat 's Family ] ( in Malay ) . Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia : Berita Publishing . 1979 . 
 With a Little Bit of Lat . Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia : Berita Publishing . 1980 . 
 Town Boy . Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia : Berita Publishing . 1981 . 
 Lots More Lat . Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia : Berita Publishing . 1980 . 
 Lat and His Lot Again ! . Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia : Berita Publishing . 1983 . ISBN 967 @-@ 969 @-@ 404 @-@ 6 . 
 <unk> Mak ... ! [ I Don 't Know , mother ... ! ] ( in Malay ) . Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia : Berita Publishing . 1985 . ISBN 967 @-@ 969 @-@ 076 @-@ 8 . 
 It 's a Lat Lat Lat Lat World . Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia : Berita Publishing . 1985 . ISBN 967 @-@ 969 @-@ 075 @-@ X. 
 Lat and Gang . Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia : Berita Publishing . 1987 . ISBN 967 @-@ 969 @-@ 157 @-@ 8 . 
 Lat with a Punch . Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia : Berita Publishing . 1988 . ISBN 967 @-@ 969 @-@ 180 @-@ 2 . 
 Better Lat than Never . Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia : Berita Publishing . 1989 . ISBN 978 @-@ 967 @-@ 969 @-@ 211 @-@ 2 . 
 Mat Som ( in Malay ) . Selangor , Malaysia : Kampung Boy . 1989 . ISBN 967 @-@ 969 @-@ 075 @-@ X. 
 Lat as Usual . Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia : Berita Publishing . 1990 . ISBN 967 @-@ 969 @-@ 262 @-@ 0 . 
 Be Serious Lat . Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia : Berita Publishing . 1992 . ISBN 967 @-@ 969 @-@ 398 @-@ 8 . 
 Kampung Boy : Yesterday and Today . Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia : Berita Publishing . 1993 . ISBN 967 @-@ 969 @-@ 307 @-@ 4 . 
 Lat 30 Years Later . Selangor , Malaysia : Kampung Boy . 1994 . ISBN 983 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 @-@ 8 . 
 Lat Was Here . Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia : Berita Publishing . 1995 . ISBN 967 @-@ 969 @-@ 347 @-@ 3 . 
 Lat Gets Lost . Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia : Berita Publishing . 1996 . ISBN 967 @-@ 969 @-@ 455 @-@ 0 . 
 The Portable Lat . Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia : Berita Publishing . 1998 . ISBN 967 @-@ 969 @-@ 500 @-@ X. 
 Lat at Large . Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia : Berita Publishing . 1999 . ISBN 967 @-@ 969 @-@ 508 @-@ 5 . 
 Dr Who ? ! : Capturing the Life and Times of a Leader in Cartoons . Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia : Berita Publishing . 2004 . ISBN 967 @-@ 969 @-@ 528 @-@ X. 
 Lat : The Early Series . Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia : New Straits Times Publishing . 2009 . ISBN 978 @-@ 983 @-@ 871 @-@ 037 @-@ 4 . 
 = Ebla = 
 Ebla ( Arabic : <unk> , modern : <unk> <unk> , Tell Mardikh ) , was one of the earliest kingdoms in Syria . Its remains constitute a tell located about 55 km ( 34 mi ) southwest of Aleppo near the village of Mardikh . Ebla was an important center throughout the third millennium BC and in the first half of the second millennium BC . Its discovery proved the Levant was a center of ancient , centralized civilization equal to Egypt and Mesopotamia , and ruled out the view that the latter two were the only important centers in the Near East during the early Bronze Age . Karl Moore described the first Eblaite kingdom as the first recorded world power . 
 Starting as a small settlement in the early Bronze Age ( c . 3500 BC ) , Ebla developed into a trading empire and later into an expansionist power that imposed its hegemony over much of northern and eastern Syria . Its language , Eblaite , is now considered the earliest attested Semitic language after Akkadian . Ebla was destroyed during the 23rd century BC ; it was then rebuilt and was mentioned in the records of the Third Dynasty of Ur . The second Ebla was a continuation of the first , ruled by a new royal dynasty . It was destroyed at the end of the third millennium BC , which paved the way for the Amorite tribes to settle in the city , forming the third Ebla . The third kingdom also flourished as a trade center ; it became a subject and an ally of Yamhad ( modern @-@ day Aleppo ) until its final destruction by the Hittite king Mursili I in c . 1600 BC . 
 Ebla maintained its prosperity through a vast trading network . Artifacts from Sumer , Cyprus , Egypt and as far as Afghanistan were recovered from the city 's palaces . The political organization of Ebla had features different from the Sumerian model . Women enjoyed a special status and the queen had major influence in the state and religious affairs . The pantheon of gods was mainly north Semitic and included deities exclusive to Ebla . The city was excavated starting in 1964 , and became famous for the Ebla tablets , an archive of about 20 @,@ 000 cuneiform tablets found there , dated to around 2350 BC . Written in both Sumerian and Eblaite and using the cuneiform , the archive has allowed a better understanding of the Sumerian language and provided important information over the political organization and social customs of the mid third millennium BC 's Levant . 
 = = History = = 
 A possible meaning of the word " Ebla " is " white rock " , referring to the limestone outcrop on which the city was built . Ebla was first settled around 3500 BC ; its growth was supported by many satellite agricultural settlements . The city benefited from its role as an entrepôt of growing international trade , which probably began with an increased demand for wool in Sumer . Archaeologists designate this early habitation period " Mardikh I " ; it ended around 3000 BC . Mardikh I is followed by the first and second kingdoms era between about 3000 and 2000 BC , designated " Mardikh II " . I. J. Gelb consider Ebla as part of the Kish civilization , which was a cultural entity of East Semitic @-@ speaking populations that stretched from the center of Mesopotamia to the western Levant . 
 = = = First kingdom = = = 
 During the first kingdom period between about 3000 and 2300 BC , Ebla was the most prominent kingdom among the Syrian states , especially during the second half of the 3rd millennium BC , which is known as " the age of the archives " after the Ebla tablets . 
 = = = = Early period = = = = 
 The early period between 3000 and 2400 BC is designated " Mardikh IIA " . General knowledge about the city 's history prior to the written archives is obtained through excavations . The first stages of Mardikh IIA is identified with building " CC " , and structures that form a part of building " G2 " , which was apparently a royal palace built c . 2700 BC . Toward the end of this period , a hundred years ' war with Mari started . Mari gained the upper hand through the actions of its king <unk> , who conquered many of Ebla 's cities . In the mid @-@ 25th century BC , king Kun @-@ Damu defeated Mari , but the state 's power declined following his reign . 
 = = = = Archive period = = = = 
 The archive period , which is designated " Mardikh <unk> " , lasted from c . 2400 BC until c . 2300 BC . The end of the period is known as the " first destruction " , mainly referring to the destruction of the royal palace ( called palace " G " and built over the earlier " G2 " ) , and much of the acropolis . During the archive period , Ebla had political and military dominance over the other Syrian city @-@ states of northern and eastern Syria , which are mentioned in the archives . Most of the tablets , which date from that period , are about economic matters but also include royal letters and diplomatic documents . 
 The written archives do not date from before Igrish @-@ Halam 's reign , which saw Ebla paying tribute to Mari , and an extensive invasion of Eblaite cities in the middle Euphrates region led by the Mariote king Iblul @-@ Il . Ebla recovered under King Irkab @-@ Damu in about 2340 BC ; becoming prosperous and launching a successful counter @-@ offensive against Mari . Irkab @-@ Damu concluded a peace and trading treaty with <unk> ; it is one of the earliest @-@ recorded treaties in history . 
 At its greatest extent , Ebla controlled an area roughly half the size of modern Syria , from Ursa 'um in the north , to the area around Damascus in the south , and from Phoenicia and the coastal mountains in the west , to <unk> in the east . Half of kingdom was under the direct control of the king and was administered by governors ; the rest consisted of vassal kingdoms paying tribute and supplying military assistance to Ebla . One of the most important of these vassals was Armi , which is the city most often mentioned in the Ebla tablets . Ebla had more than sixty vassal kingdoms and city @-@ states , including <unk> , Burman , Emar , <unk> and <unk> . 
 The vizier was the king 's chief official . The holder of the office possessed great authority ; the most powerful vizier was Ibrium , who campaigned against <unk> during the term of his predecessor <unk> . During the reign of Isar @-@ Damu , Ebla continued the war against Mari , which defeated Ebla 's ally Nagar , blocking trade routes between Ebla and southern Mesopotamia via upper Mesopotamia . Ebla conducted regular military campaigns against rebellious vassals , including several attacks on Armi , and a campaign against the southern city of <unk> — close to Qatna . In order to settle the war with Mari , Isar @-@ Damu allied with Nagar and Kish . The campaign was headed by the Eblaite vizier Ibbi @-@ Sipish , who led the combined armies to victory in a battle near Terqa . The alliance also attacked Armi and occupied it , leaving Ibbi @-@ Sipish 's son Enzi @-@ Malik as governor . Ebla suffered its first destruction a few years after the campaign , probably following Isar @-@ Damu 's death . 
 = = = = First destruction of Ebla = = = = 
 The first destruction occurred c . 2300 BC ; palace " G " was burned , baking the clay tablets of the royal archives and preserving them . Many theories about the cause and the perpetrator have been posited : 
 High ( early ) dating hypothesis : Giovanni Pettinato supports an early dating for Ebla that would put the destruction at around 2500 BC . Pettinato , while preferring the date of 2500 BC , later accepted the event could have happened in 2400 BC . The scholar suggests the city was destroyed in 2400 BC by a Mesopotamian such as <unk> of Lagash — who boasted of taking tribute from Mari — or <unk> of Umma , who claimed to have reached the Mediterranean . 
 Akkadian hypothesis : Both kings Sargon of Akkad and his grandson Naram @-@ Sin claimed to have destroyed a town called Ibla , The discoverer of Ebla , Paolo <unk> , considers Sargon a more likely culprit ; his view is supported by Trevor Bryce , but rejected by Michael Astour . 
 Mari 's revenge : According to Alfonso Archi and Maria Biga , the destruction happened approximately three or four years after the battle of Terqa . Archi and Biga say the destruction was caused by Mari in retaliation for its humiliating defeat at Terqa . This view is supported by Mario <unk> . Archi says the Mariote king <unk> @-@ Mari destroyed Ebla before ascending the throne of his city . 
 Natural catastrophe : Astour says a natural catastrophe caused the blaze which ended the archive period . He says the destruction was limited to the area of the royal palace and there is no convincing evidence of looting . He dates the fire to c . 2290 BC ( Middle Chronology ) . 
 = = = Second kingdom = = = 
 The second kingdom 's period is designated " Mardikh <unk> " , and spans the period between 2300 and 2000 BC . The second kingdom lasted until Ebla 's second destruction , which occurred anytime between 2050 and 1950 BC , with the 2000 BC dating being a mere formal date . The Akkadians under Sargon and his descendant Naram @-@ Sin invaded the northern borders of Ebla aiming for the forests of the Amanus Mountain ; the intrusions were separated by roughly 90 years and the areas attacked were not attached to Akkad . Archi accept that the Ibla mentioned in the annals of Sargon and Naram @-@ Sin is the Syrian Ebla but do not consider them responsible for the destruction which ended the Archive period . By the time of Naram @-@ Sin , Armi was the hegemonic city in northern Syria and was destroyed by the Akkadian king . 
 A new local dynasty ruled the second kingdom of Ebla , but there was continuity with its first kingdom heritage . Ebla maintained its earliest features , including its architectural style and the sanctity of the first kingdom 's religious sites . A new royal palace was built in the lower town , and the transition from the archive period is marked only by the destruction of palace " G " . Little is known about the second kingdom because no written material have been discovered aside from one inscription dating to the end of the period . 
 The second kingdom was attested to in contemporaneous sources ; in an inscription , <unk> of Lagash asked for cedars to be brought from Urshu in the mountains of Ebla , indicating Ebla 's territory included Urshu north of Carchemish in modern @-@ day Turkey . Texts that dates to the seventh year of Amar @-@ Sin ( c . 2040 BC ) , a ruler of the Ur III empire , mention a messenger of the <unk> ( " <unk> " ) of Ebla . The second kingdom was considered a vassal by the Ur III government , but the nature of the relation is unknown and it included the payment of tribute . A formal recognition of Ur 's overlordship appears to be a condition for the right of trade with that empire . 
 The second kingdom disintegrated toward the end of the 21st century BC , and ended with the destruction of the city by fire , although evidence for the event has only been found outside of the so called " Temple of the Rock " , and in the area around palace " E " on the acropolis . The reason for the destruction is not known ; according to Astour , it could have been the result of a Hurrian invasion c . 2030 BC , led by the former Eblaite vassal city of <unk> . The destruction of Ebla is mentioned in the fragmentary <unk> @-@ Hittite legendary epic " Song of Release " discovered in 1983 , which Astour considers as describing the destruction of the second kingdom . In the epic , an Eblaite assembly led by a man called " <unk> " prevents king Meki from showing mercy to prisoners from Ebla 's former vassal <unk> , provoking the wrath of the Hurrian storm god Teshub and causing him to destroy the city . 
 = = = Third kingdom = = = 
 The third kingdom is designated " Mardikh III " ; it is divided into periods " A " ( c . 2000 – 1800 BC ) and " B " ( c . 1800 – 1600 BC ) . In period " A " , Ebla was quickly rebuilt as a planned city . The foundations covered the remains of Mardikh II ; new palaces and temples were built , and new fortifications were built in two circles — one for the low city and one for the acropolis . The city was laid out on regular lines and large public buildings were built . Further construction took place in period " B " . 
 The first known king of the third kingdom is Ibbit @-@ Lim , who described himself as the <unk> of Ebla . A basalt votive statue bearing Ibbit @-@ Lim 's inscription was discovered in 1968 ; this helped to identify the site of Tell @-@ Mardikh with the ancient kingdom Ebla . The name of the king is Amorite in the view of Pettinato ; it is therefore probable the inhabitants of third kingdom Ebla were predominantly Amorites , as were most of the inhabitants of Syria at that time . 
 By the beginning of the 18th century BC , Ebla had become a vassal of Yamhad , an Amorite kingdom centered in Aleppo . Written records are not available for this period , but the city was still a vassal during Yarim @-@ Lim III of Yamhad 's reign . One of the known rulers of Ebla during this period was <unk> , who received gifts from the Egyptian Pharaoh Hotepibre , indicating the continuing wide connections and importance of Ebla . The city was mentioned in tablets from the Yamhadite vassal city of Alalakh in modern @-@ day Turkey ; an Eblaite princess married a son of King <unk> of Alalakh , who belonged to a branch of the royal Yamhadite dynasty . 
 Ebla was destroyed by the Hittite King Mursili I in about 1600 BC . <unk> was probably the last king of Ebla ; a seal of his crown prince <unk> was discovered in the western palace " Q " . According to Archi , the " Song of Release " epic describes the destruction of the third kingdom and preserves older elements . 
 = = = Later periods = = = 
 Ebla never recovered from its third destruction . It was a small village in the phase designated " Mardikh IV " ( 1600 – 1200 BC ) , and was mentioned in the records of Alalakh as a vassal to the Idrimi dynasty . " Mardikh V " ( 1200 – 535 BC ) was a rural , early Iron Age settlement that grew in size during later periods . Further development occurred during " Mardikh VI " , which lasted until c . 60 AD . " Mardikh VII " began in the 3rd century AD and lasted until the 7th century , after which the site was abandoned . 
 = = Organization = = 
 = = = City layout = = = 
 Ebla consisted of a lower town and a raised acropolis in the center . During the first kingdom , the city had an area of 56 hectares and was protected by mud @-@ brick fortifications . Ebla was divided into four districts — each with its own gate in the outer wall . The acropolis included the king 's palace " G " , and one of two temples in city dedicated to Kura ( called the " Red Temple " ) . The lower city included the second temple of Kura in the southeast called " Temple of the Rock " . During the second kingdom , a royal palace ( Archaic Palace " P5 " ) was built in the lower town northwest of the acropolis , in addition to temple " D " built over the destroyed " Red Temple " . 
 During the third kingdom , Ebla was a large city nearly 60 hectares in size , and was protected by a fortified rampart , with double chambered gates . The acropolis was fortified and separated from the lower town . New royal palace " E " was built on the acropolis ( during Mardikh IIIB ) , and a temple of Ishtar was constructed over the former " Red " and " D " temples ( in area " D " ) . The lower town was also divided into four districts ; palace " P5 " was used during Mardikh IIIA , and replaced during Mardikh IIIB by the " Intermediate Palace " . 
 Other building included the vizier palace , the western palace ( in area " Q " ) , the temple of Shamash ( temple " N " ) , the temple of Rasap ( temple " B1 " ) and the northern palace ( built over the " Intermediate Palace " ) . In the north of the lower town , a second temple for Ishtar was built , while the former " Temple of the Rock " was replaced by a temple of Hadad . Beneath the western palace , natural caves constituted a royal burial ground ; it includes many tombs such as the " Tomb of the Lord of the Goats " and " Tomb of the Princess " . 
 = = = Government = = = 
 The first kingdom government consisted of the king ( styled <unk> ) and the grand vizier , who headed a council of elders ( <unk> ) and the administration . The central administration was located in the acropolis . The queen shared the running of affairs of state with the king , the crown prince was involved in internal matters and the second prince was involved in foreign affairs . Most affairs , including military ones , were handled by the vizier and the administration , which consisted of 13 court dignitaries — each of whom controlled between 400 and 800 men forming a bureaucracy with 11 @,@ 700 people . Each of the four quarters of the lower city was governed by a chief inspector and many deputies . Smaller cities were governed by governors , each of whom was under the authority of the grand vizier . Women received salaries equal to those of men and could accede to important positions and head government agencies . 
 The second kingdom was a monarchy but little is known about it because of a lack of written records . The third kingdom was a city @-@ state monarchy with reduced importance under the authority of Yamhad . 
 = = = = Kings of Ebla = = = = 
 The Eblaites worshiped dead kings as gods . For the first kingdom monarchs , tablets listing offerings to kings mention ten names , and another list mentions 33 kings . No kings are known from the second kingdom and all dates are estimates according to the Middle chronology . 
 = = People , language and culture = = 
 = = = The first and second kingdoms = = = 
 Mardikh II 's periods shared the same <unk> the population of Ebla during Mardikh <unk> is estimated to have numbered around 40 @,@ 000 in the capital , and over 200 @,@ 000 people in the entire kingdom . The Eblaites of Mardikh II were Semites . Giovanni Pettinato said the Eblaite language was a West Semitic language ; Gelb and others said it was an East Semitic dialect closer to the Akkadian language . Academic consensus considers Eblaite an East @-@ Semitic language which exhibits both West @-@ Semitic and East @-@ Semitic features . 
 Ebla held several religious and social festivals , including rituals for the succession of a new king , which normally lasted for several weeks . The Eblaite calendars were based on a solar year divided into twelve months . Two calendars were discovered ; the " old calendar " used during the reign of Igrish @-@ Halam , and a " new calendar " introduced by vizier Ibbi @-@ Sipish . Many months were named in honor of deities ; in the new calendar , " Itu be @-@ li " was the first month of the year , and meant " the month of the lord " . Each year was given a name instead of a number . 
 The Eblaites imported <unk> from Nagar , and used them to draw the carriages of royalty and high officials , as well as diplomatic gifts for allied cities . Society was less centered around the palace and the temple than in Mesopotamian kingdoms . The Eblaite palace was designed around the courtyard , which was open toward the city , thus making the administration approachable . This contrasts with Mesopotamian palaces , which resembled citadels with narrow entrances and limited access to the external courtyard . Music played an important part in the society and musicians were both locals , or hired from other cities such as Mari . Ebla also hired acrobats from Nagar , but later reduced their number and kept some to train local Eblaite acrobats . 
 = = = The third kingdom = = = 
 The Mardikh III population was predominately Semitic Amorite . The Amorites were mentioned in the first kingdom 's tablets as neighbors and as rural subjects . They came to dominate Ebla after the destruction of the second kingdom and formed the bulk of its population . The city witnessed a great increase in construction , and many palaces , temples and fortifications were built . The Amorite Eblaites worshiped many of the same deities as the Eblaites of earlier periods , and maintained the sanctity of the acropolis in the center of the city . The third kingdom 's iconography and royal ideology were under the influence of Yamhad 's culture ; kingship was received from the Yamhadite deities instead of Ishtar of Ebla , which is evident by the Eblaite seals of <unk> 's period . 
 = = Economy = = 
 During the first kingdom period , the palace controlled the economy , but wealthy families managed their financial affairs without government intervention . The economic system was <unk> ; the palace distributed food to its permanent and seasonal workers . It is estimated that around 40 @,@ 000 persons contributed to this system , but in general , and unlike in Mesopotamia , land stayed in the hands of villages , which paid an annual share to the palace . Agriculture was mainly pastoral ; large herds of cattle were managed by the palace . The city 's inhabitants owned around 140 @,@ 000 head of sheep and goats , and 9 @,@ 000 cattle . 
 Ebla derived its prosperity from trade ; its wealth was equal to that of the most important Sumerian cities , and its main commercial rival was Mari . Ebla 's main articles of trade were probably timber from the nearby mountains , and textiles . Handicrafts also appear to have been a major export , evidenced by the quantity of artifacts recovered from the palaces of the city . Ebla possessed a wide commercial network reaching as far as modern @-@ day Afghanistan . It shipped textiles to Cyprus , possibly through the port of Ugarit , but most of its trade seems to have been directed by river @-@ boat towards Mesopotamia — chiefly Kish . The main palace G was found to contain artifacts dating from Ancient Egypt bearing the names of Pharaohs <unk> and Pepi I. 
 Ebla continued to be a center of trade during the second kingdom , evidenced by the surrounding cities that appeared during its period and were destroyed along with the city . Trade continued to be Ebla 's main economic activity during the third kingdom ; archaeological finds show there was an extensive exchange with Egypt and coastal Syrian cities such as Byblos . 
 = = Religion = = 
 Ebla was a polytheistic state . During the first kingdom , the pantheon had three genres of deities ; in the first and most common there were pairs of gods , such as the deity and his female consort , or divine couples such as the deities that cooperate to create the cosmos , as in the Egyptian and Mesopotamian pantheons . The second genre included single deities , while the third genre consisted of divine pairs who were actually a single deity that had two names . Eblaites worshiped few Mesopotamian deities , preferring northern Semitic gods , some of which were unique to Ebla . 
 The first genre included the eastern Semitic chief god Dagan , and his consort , <unk> ( " his wife " ) . The patron gods of the city were Kura , who was unique to Ebla , and his consort <unk> . Other major deities included Hadad ( Hadda ) and his consort <unk> , and Rasap and his consort <unk> . 
 The second genre included the Syrian goddess Ishara , who was the goddess of the royal family . Ishtar was also worshiped but was mentioned only five times in one of the monthly offering lists , while Ishara was far more important , appearing 40 times . Other deities included Damu ; <unk> , who was exclusive to Ebla ; the Mesopotamian god Utu ; <unk> ; and <unk> the goddess of the sun who had a temple dedicated to her cult . 
 The third genre included the artisan god <unk> / Tit , <unk> @-@ wa @-@ <unk> and the planet Venus represented by twin mountain Gods ; Shahar as the morning star and <unk> as the evening star . Eblaites also practiced the deification of dead kings . The four city gates were named after the gods Dagan , Hadda , Rasap and Utu , but it is unknown which gate had which name . Overall , the offering list mentioned about 40 deities receiving sacrifices . 
 During the third kingdom , Amorites worshiped common northern Semitic gods ; the unique Eblaite deities disappeared . Hadad was the most important god , while Ishtar took Ishara 's place and became the city 's most important deity apart from Hadad . 
 = = = Biblical connection theories = = = 
 At the beginning of the process of deciphering the tablets , Pettinato made claims about a possible connections between Ebla and the Bible , citing an alleged references in the tablets to the existence of Yahweh , the Patriarchs , Sodom and Gomorrah and other Biblical references . However , much of the initial media excitement about a supposed Eblaite connections with the Bible , based on preliminary guesses and speculations by Pettinato and others , is now widely discredited as " exceptional and unsubstantiated claims " and " great amounts of disinformation that leaked to the public " . In Ebla studies , the focus has shifted away from comparisons with the Bible ; Ebla is now studied as a civilization in its own right . The change came after a bitter personal and academic conflict between the scholars involved , as well as what some described as political interference by the Syrian authorities . 
 = = Discovery and library = = 
 In 1964 , Italian archaeologists from the University of Rome La Sapienza under the direction of Paolo <unk> began excavating at Tell Mardikh . In 1968 , they recovered a statue dedicated to the goddess Ishtar bearing the name of Ibbit @-@ Lim , mentioning him as king of Ebla . That identified the city , long known from <unk> and Akkadian inscriptions . In the next decade , the team discovered a palace ( palace G ) dating from c . 2500 – 2000 BC . Finds in the palaces include a small sculpture made out of precious materials , black stones and gold . Other artifacts included wood furniture inlaid with mother @-@ of @-@ pearl and composite statues created from colored stones . A silver bowl bearing king <unk> 's name was recovered from the " Tomb of the Lord of the Goats " , together with Egyptian jewels and an Egyptian ceremonial mace presented by pharaoh Hotepibre . Ebla 's first kingdom is an example of early Syrian centralized states , and is considered one of the earliest empires by scholars including Samuel Finer and Karl Moore , who consider it the first @-@ recorded world power . Ebla 's discovery changed the former view of Syria 's history as a bridge between Mesopotamia and Egypt ; it proved the region was a center of civilization in its own right . 
 About 20 @,@ 000 cuneiform tablets consisting of 2 @,@ 500 well @-@ preserved , complete tablets and thousands of fragments , were discovered in the site . About 80 % of the tablets are written using the usual Sumerian combination of logograms and phonetic signs , while the others exhibited an innovative , purely phonetic representation using Sumerian cuneiform of a previously unknown Semitic language , which was called " Eblaite " . Bilingual Sumerian / Eblaite vocabulary lists were found among the tablets , allowing them to be translated . 
 Ebla 's close link to southern Mesopotamia , where the script had developed , further highlights the contemporaneous links between the Sumerians and Semitic cultures . The tablets provide many important insights into the cultural , economic and political life in northern Mesopotamia around the middle of the 3rd millennium BC . They also provide insight into the everyday lives of the inhabitants and containing information about state revenues , Sumerian @-@ Eblaite dictionaries , school texts , an archive of provisions and tribute , law cases , diplomatic and trade contacts , and a scriptorium where apprentices copied texts . The tablets also contain writings on Ebla 's hymns , legends , scientific observations and magic . 
 = = = Library = = = 
 The tablets constitute one of the oldest archives and libraries ever found ; there is tangible evidence of their arrangement and even classification . The larger tablets had originally been stored on shelves , but had fallen onto the floor when the palace was destroyed . The locations of the fallen tablets allowed the excavators to reconstruct their original positions on the shelves ; they found the tablets had originally been shelved according to subject . 
 These features were absent from earlier Sumerian excavations . Sophisticated techniques of arrangement of texts , coupled with their composition , evidence the great antiquity of archival and library practices , which may be far older than was assumed to be the case before the discovery of the Ebla library . A sizable portion of the tablets contain literary and lexicographic texts ; evidence seems to suggest the collection also served — at least partially — as a true library rather than a collection of archives intended solely for use by the kings , their ministers , and their bureaucracy . The tablets show evidence of the early transcription of texts into foreign languages and scripts , classification and cataloging for easier retrieval , and arrangement by size , form and content . The Ebla tablets have thus provided scholars with new insights into the origin of library practices that were in use 4 @,@ 500 years ago . 
 = = Current situation = = 
 As a result of the Syrian Civil War , excavations of Ebla stopped in March 2011 , and large @-@ scale looting occurred after the site came under the control of an opposition armed group . Many tunnels were dug and a crypt full of human remains was discovered ; the remains were scattered and discarded by the robbers , who hoped to find jewelry and other precious artifacts . Digging all around the mound was conducted by nearby villagers with the aim of finding artifacts ; some villagers removed carloads of soil suitable for making ceramic liners for bread @-@ baking ovens from the tunnels . 
 = Prester John = 
 Prester John ( Latin : Presbyter Johannes ) is a legendary Christian patriarch and king popular in European chronicles and tradition from the 12th through the 17th century . He was said to rule over a Nestorian ( Church of the East ) Christian nation lost amid the Muslims and pagans of the Orient . The accounts are varied collections of medieval popular fantasy , depicting Prester John as a descendant of the Three Magi , ruling a kingdom full of riches , marvels , and strange creatures . 
 At first , Prester John was imagined to reside in India ; tales of the Nestorian Christians ' evangelistic success there and of Thomas the Apostle 's subcontinental travels probably provided the first seeds of the legend . After the coming of the Mongols to the Western world , accounts placed the king in Central Asia , and eventually Portuguese explorers convinced themselves that they had found him in Ethiopia . 
 = = Origin of the legend = = 
 Though its immediate genesis is unclear , the legend of Prester John drew strongly from earlier accounts of the Orient and of Westerners ' travels there . Particularly influential were the stories of Saint Thomas the Apostle 's proselytizing in India , as recorded in the 3rd @-@ century work known as the Acts of Thomas , and reports of the Church of the East in Greater Persia . The Church of the East , also called the Nestorian church , had gained a wide following in the Eastern nations and engaged the Western imagination as an assemblage both exotic and familiarly Christian . Particularly inspiring were the Nestorians ' missionary successes among the Mongols and Turks of Central Asia ; René Grousset ( 1970 ) suggested that one of the seeds of the story may have come from the Keraites , which had thousands of its members converted to Nestorian Christianity shortly after the year 1000 . By the 12th century , the <unk> rulers were still following a custom of bearing Christian names , which may have fueled the legend . 
 Additionally , a kernel of the tradition may have been drawn from the shadowy early Christian figure John the Presbyter of Syria , whose existence is first inferred by the ecclesiastical historian and bishop Eusebius of Caesarea based on his reading of earlier church fathers . This man , said in one document to be the author of two of the Epistles of John , was supposed to have been the teacher of the martyr bishop Papias , who had in turn taught Eusebius ' own teacher Irenaeus . However , little links this figure , supposedly active in the late 1st century , to the Prester John legend beyond the name . 
 The later accounts of Prester John borrowed heavily from literary texts concerning the East , including the great body of ancient and medieval geographical and travel literature . Details were often lifted from literary and pseudohistorical accounts , such as the tale of Sinbad the Sailor . The Alexander romance , a fabulous account of Alexander the Great 's conquests , was especially influential in this regard . 
 Scholars have debated over the origins of Prester John ’ s name , speculating that Prester could be a corruption of either the word " Presbyter " or " priest " . Sir John Mandeville , a medieval writer who was famous in his lifetime for his travel accounts , wrote of an emperor named John who decides to become a priest after an audience with a Christian knight , in which the " <unk> <unk> , that he <unk> no longer ben <unk> <unk> ne <unk> , but <unk> " . This reference suggests that the latter reading of Prester as " <unk> " as the correct interpretation of Prester John 's name . 
 The legend is first recorded in the early 12th century with reports of visits of an " Archbishop of India " to Constantinople , and of a " Patriarch of India " to Rome at the time of Pope Callixtus II ( 1119 – 1124 ) . These visits cannot be confirmed , evidence of both being secondhand reports . What is certain is that German chronicler Otto of Freising reported in his Chronicon of 1145 that the previous year he had met a certain Hugh , bishop of Jabala in Syria , at the court of Pope Eugene III in Viterbo . Hugh was an emissary of Prince Raymond of Antioch seeking Western aid against the Saracens after the Siege of Edessa , and his counsel incited Eugene to call for the Second Crusade . He told Otto , in the presence of the pope , that Prester John , a Nestorian Christian who served in the dual position of priest and king , had regained the city of Ecbatana from the brother monarchs of Medes and Persia , the <unk> , in a great battle " not many years ago " . Afterwards Prester John allegedly set out for Jerusalem to rescue the Holy Land , but the swollen waters of the Tigris compelled him to return to his own country . His fabulous wealth was demonstrated by his emerald scepter ; his holiness by his descent from the Three Magi . 
 Silverberg connects this account with historical events of 1141 , when the Kara @-@ Khitan Khanate under Yelü Dashi defeated the Seljuk Turks near Samarkand . While the Kara @-@ Khitan at the time were Buddhists and not Christian , several vassals of the Kara @-@ Khitan practiced Nestorian Christianity , which may have contributed to the legend as well as the possibility that the Europeans , who were unfamiliar with the concept of Buddhism , assumed that if the leader was not Muslim , he must be Christian . The report of the defeat would have inspired a notion of " deliverance from the East " , and it is possible Otto recorded Hugh 's report to prevent complacency in the Crusade 's European backers ; according to his account , no help could be expected from a powerful Eastern king . 
 = = Letter of Prester John = = 
 No more of the tale is recorded until about 1165 when copies of what was certainly a forged Letter of Prester John started spreading throughout Europe . An epistolary wonder tale with parallels suggesting its author knew the Romance of Alexander and the above @-@ mentioned Acts of Thomas , the Letter was supposedly written to the Byzantine Emperor Manuel I Comnenus ( 1143 – 1180 ) by Prester John , descendant of one of the Three Magi and King of India . The many marvels of richness and magic it contained captured the imagination of Europeans , and it was translated into numerous languages , including Hebrew . It circulated in ever more embellished form for centuries in manuscripts , a hundred examples of which still exist . The invention of printing perpetuated the letter 's popularity in printed form ; it was still current in popular culture during the period of European exploration . Part of the letter 's essence was that a lost kingdom of Nestorian Christians still existed in the <unk> of Central Asia . 
 The credence given to the reports was such that Pope Alexander III sent a letter to Prester John via his physician Philip on September 27 , 1177 . Nothing more is recorded of Philip , but it is most probable that he did not return with word from Prester John . The Letter continued to circulate , accruing more embellishments with each copy . In modern times , textual analysis of the letter 's variant Hebrew versions has suggested an origin among the Jews of northern Italy or Languedoc : several Italian words remained in the Hebrew texts . At any rate , the Letter 's author was most likely a Westerner , though his or her purpose remains unclear . 
 = = Mongol Empire = = 
 In 1221 , Jacques de Vitry , Bishop of Acre , returned from the disastrous Fifth Crusade with good news : King David of India , the son or grandson of Prester John , had mobilized his armies against the Saracens . He had already conquered Persia , then under the Khwarezmian Empire 's control , and was moving on towards Baghdad as well . This descendant of the great king who had defeated the Seljuks in 1141 planned to reconquer and rebuild Jerusalem . Controversial Soviet historian and ethnologist Lev Gumilev speculated that the much reduced crusader Kingdom of Jerusalem in the Levant resuscitated this legend in order to raise Christian hopes and to encourage European monarchs who by that time had lost interest in getting involved in costly crusades in a distant region that was far removed from their own states and affairs . 
 The bishop of Acre was correct in thinking that a great King had conquered Persia ; however " King David " , as it turned out , was <unk> warlord Genghis Khan . His reign took the story of Prester John in a new direction . Though Genghis was at first seen as a scourge of Christianity 's enemies , he proved to be tolerant of religious faiths among those subjects that did not resist the empire , and was the first East Asian ruler to invite clerics from three major religions ( Christianity , Islam , and Buddhism ) to a symposium so that he might learn more about their beliefs . The Mongol ruler was also reputed to have a Nestorian Christian favorite among his many wives , whom the Europeans imagined as influential in the disastrous Mongol sack of Baghdad . 
 The Mongol Empire 's rise gave Western Christians the opportunity to visit lands that they had never seen before , and they set out in large numbers along the Empire 's secure roads . Belief that a lost Nestorian kingdom existed in the east , or that the Crusader states ' salvation depended on an alliance with an Eastern monarch , was one reason for the numerous Christian ambassadors and missionaries sent to the Mongols . These include Franciscan explorers Giovanni da Pian del <unk> in 1245 and William of Rubruck in 1253 . 
 The link between Prester John and Genghis Khan was elaborated upon at this time , as the Prester became identified with Genghis ' foster father , Toghril , king of the Keraites , given the Jin title Ong Khan Toghril . Fairly truthful chroniclers and explorers such as Marco Polo , Crusader @-@ historian Jean de Joinville , and the Franciscan voyager Odoric of Pordenone stripped Prester John of much of his otherworldly veneer , portraying him as a more realistic earthly monarch . Odoric places John 's land to the west of Cathay en route to Europe , and mentions its capital as <unk> , which may correspond to Kazan , the Tatar capital near Moscow . Joinville describes Genghis Khan in his chronicle as a " wise man " who unites all the Tartar tribes and leads them to victory against their strongest enemy , Prester John . William of Rubruck says a certain " <unk> " , lord of the Keraites and brother to the Nestorian King John , was defeated by the Mongols under Genghis . Genghis made off with <unk> 's daughter and married her to his son , and their union produced Möngke , the Khan at the time William wrote . According to Marco Polo 's Travels , the war between the Prester and Genghis started when Genghis , new ruler of the rebellious Tartars , asked for the hand of Prester John 's daughter in marriage . Angered that his lowly vassal would make such a request , Prester John denied him in no uncertain terms . In the war that followed , Genghis triumphed and Prester John perished . 
 The historical figure behind these accounts , Toghril , was in fact a Nestorian Christian monarch defeated by Genghis . He had fostered the future Khan after the death of his father <unk> and was one of his early allies , but the two had a falling out . After Toghril rejected a proposal to wed his son and daughter to Genghis ' children , the rift between them grew until war broke out in 1203 . Genghis captured <unk> Beki , daughter of Toghril 's brother <unk> <unk> , and married her to his son Tolui ; they had several children , including Möngke , Kublai , Hulagu , and Ariq Böke . 
 The major characteristic of Prester John tales from this period is the king 's portrayal not as an invincible hero , but merely one of many adversaries defeated by the Mongols . But as the Mongol Empire collapsed , Europeans began to shift away from the idea that Prester John had ever really been a Central Asian king . At any rate they had little hope of finding him there , as travel in the region became dangerous without the security the Empire had provided . In works such as The Travels of Sir John Mandeville and Historia <unk> Regum by John of Hildesheim , Prester John 's domain tends to regain its fantastic aspects and finds itself located not on the steppes of Central Asia , but back in India proper , or some other exotic locale . Wolfram von Eschenbach tied the history of Prester John to the Holy Grail legend in his poem Parzival , in which the Prester is the son of the Grail maiden and the Saracen knight <unk> . 
 A theory was put forward by the Russian scholar Ph. Bruun in 1876 , who suggested that Prester John might be found among the kings of Georgia , which , at the time of Crusades , experienced military resurgence challenging the Muslim power . However , this theory , though regarded with certain indulgence by Henry Yule and some modern Georgian historians , was summarily dismissed by Friedrich <unk> . 
 = = Ethiopia = = 
 Prester John had been considered the ruler of India since the legend 's beginnings , but " India " was a vague concept to the Europeans . Writers often spoke of the " Three Indias " , and lacking any real knowledge of the Indian Ocean , they sometimes considered Ethiopia one of the three . Westerners knew that Ethiopia was a powerful Christian nation , but contact had been sporadic since the rise of Islam . No Prester John was to be found in Asia , so European imagination moved him around the blurry frontiers of " India " until it found an appropriately powerful kingdom for him in Ethiopia . Evidence has suggested that locating Prester John 's kingdom in Ethiopia entered the collective consciousness around 1250 . 
 Marco Polo had discussed Ethiopia as a magnificent Christian land and Orthodox Christians had a legend that the nation would one day rise up and invade Arabia , but they did not place Prester John there . Then in 1306 , 30 Ethiopian ambassadors from Emperor <unk> Arad came to Europe , and Prester John was mentioned as the patriarch of their church in a record of their visit . Another description of an African Prester John is in the <unk> <unk> of Dominican missionary Jordanus , around 1329 . In discussing the " Third India " , Jordanus records a number of fanciful stories about the land and its king , whom he says Europeans call Prester John . 
 After this point , an African location became increasingly popular . This may have resulted from increasing ties between Europe and Africa as 1428 saw the Kings of Aragon and Ethiopia actively negotiating the possibility of a strategic marriage between the two kingdoms . On 7 May 1487 , two Portuguese envoys , <unk> da Covilhã and Afonso de <unk> , were sent traveling secretly overland to gather information on a possible sea route to India , but also to inquire about Prester John . Covilhã managed to reach Ethiopia . Although well received , he was forbidden to depart . More envoys were sent in 1507 , after Socotra was taken by the Portuguese . As a result of this mission , and facing Muslim expansion , regent queen Eleni of Ethiopia sent ambassador Mateus to king Manuel I of Portugal and to the Pope , in search of a coalition . Mateus reached Portugal via Goa , having returned with a Portuguese embassy , along with priest Francisco Álvares in 1520 . Francisco Álvares ' book , which included the testimony of Covilhã , the <unk> <unk> das Terras do <unk> João das Indias ( " A True Relation of the Lands of Prester John of the Indies " ) was the first direct account of Ethiopia , greatly increasing European knowledge at the time , as it was presented to the pope , published and quoted by Giovanni Battista Ramusio . 
 By the time the emperor <unk> Dengel and the Portuguese had established diplomatic contact with each other in 1520 , Prester John was the name by which Europeans knew the Emperor of Ethiopia . The Ethiopians , though , had never called their emperor that . When ambassadors from Emperor Zara Yaqob attended the Council of Florence in 1441 , they were confused when council prelates insisted on referring to their monarch as Prester John . They tried to explain that nowhere in Zara Yaqob 's list of regnal names did that title occur . However , their admonitions did little to stop Europeans from calling the King of Ethiopia Prester John . Some writers who used the title did understand it was not an indigenous honorific ; for instance Jordanus seems to use it simply because his readers would have been familiar with it , not because he thought it authentic . 
 Ethiopia has been claimed for many years as the origin of the Prester John legend , but most modern experts believe that the legend was simply adapted to fit that nation in the same fashion that it had been projected upon Ong Khan and Central Asia during the 13th century . Modern scholars find nothing about the Prester or his country in the early material that would make Ethiopia a more suitable identification than any place else , and furthermore , specialists in Ethiopian history have effectively demonstrated that the story was not widely known there until well after European contact . Czech Franciscan <unk> Prutky asked Emperor <unk> II about this identification in 1751 , and Prutky states that the man was " astonished , and told me that the kings of Abyssinia had never been accustomed to call themselves by this name . " In a footnote to this passage , Richard Pankhurst states that this is apparently the first recorded statement by an Ethiopian monarch about this tale , and they were likely unaware of the title until Prutky 's inquiry . 
 17th @-@ century academics like German orientalist Hiob Ludolf demonstrated that there was no actual native connection between Prester John and the Ethiopian monarchs , and the fabled king left the maps for good . 
 = = Modern reception = = 
 The legend had affected several hundred years of European and world history , directly and indirectly , by encouraging Europe 's explorers , missionaries , scholars , and treasure hunters . 
 William Shakespeare 's 1600 play Much Ado About Nothing contains an early modern reference to the legendary king , as does Tirso de Molina 's El <unk> de Sevilla . In 1910 British novelist and politician John Buchan used the legend in his sixth book , Prester John , to supplement a plot about a Zulu uprising in South Africa . This book is an archetypal example of the early 20th @-@ century adventure novel , and proved very popular in its day . 
 Charles Williams , a member of the 20th @-@ century literary group the Inklings , made Prester John a messianic protector of the Holy Grail in his 1930 novel War in Heaven . The Prester and his kingdom also figure prominently in Umberto Eco 's 2000 novel <unk> , in which the titular protagonist enlists his friends to write the Letter of Prester John for his adoptive father Frederick Barbarossa , but it is stolen before they can send it out . 
 Perhaps because of Buchan 's work , Prester John also appeared in 20th @-@ century pulp fiction and comics . For example , Marvel Comics has featured " Prester John " in issues of Fantastic Four and Thor . He was a significant supporting character in several issues of the DC Comics fantasy series Arak : Son of Thunder . His Avatar is the ally of the Pendragon in Mage : The Hero Defined . The 1992 video game Castles II : Siege and Conquest contains a sub @-@ plot involving the search for Prester John 's kingdom . Prester John also features in Tad Williams ' epic trilogy , Memory , Sorrow and Thorn and Season 2 of Netflix 's Marco Polo includes references to <unk> John . 
 = = = Fiction = = = 
 Eco , Umberto ( 2000 ) . <unk> . ISBN 0 @-@ 15 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 Fox , Gardner F. ( December 1953 ) . One Sword for Love . Number 360 . New York : Gold Medal Books . 
 Valente , <unk> M. ( 2010 ) . The Habitation of the Blessed . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 199 @-@ 2 . 
 Hansen , Brooks ( 2003 ) . The Monsters of St. Helena . ISBN 0 @-@ 312 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 <unk> , Leo . Conrad <unk> series . 
 Man , R A Lafferty . The All @-@ at @-@ Once Man . 
 = To Heart 2 = 
 To Heart 2 ( <unk> , Tu <unk> 2 ) , stylized as ToHeart2 , is a Japanese romance visual novel developed by Leaf and published by Aquaplus . It was first released for the PlayStation 2 on December 28 , 2004 as an all @-@ ages title , and was followed by an adult version playable on Microsoft Windows and subsequent all @-@ ages versions for the PlayStation Portable and PlayStation 3 . This deviated from the release history of the game 's predecessor , To Heart , which was originally released with adult content prior to receiving versions with such content removed . The gameplay in To Heart 2 follows a branching plot line with multiple endings , which offers pre @-@ determined scenarios and courses of interaction based on the player 's decisions . Its story centers on the male protagonist Takaaki Kouno , and focuses on the appeal of the female main characters . 
 The game was positively received in both sales and popularity . Its original PlayStation 2 release sold more than 82 @,@ 000 copies in its first week of release in Japan , and it was voted as the third best bishōjo game by the readers of Dengeki G 's Magazine in 2007 . It has since received several spin @-@ off titles , including a sequel entitled To Heart 2 Another Days , which was released on February 29 , 2008 for Windows , and has also made transitions to other media . There have been six anime adaptations of To Heart 2 : an anime television adaptation produced by <unk> 's Team Iguchi , which was first broadcast in Japan between October 3 , 2005 and January 2 , 2006 ; and five original video animation series produced by Aquaplus and Chaos Project . Four manga series , fifteen sets of manga anthologies , three Internet radio shows , two drama CDs , and six novel adaptations based on To Heart 2 have also been produced . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 To Heart 2 is a romance " novel @-@ type adventure game " in which the player assumes the role of Takaaki Kouno , who begins his second year of high school after reuniting with a childhood friend . Much of its gameplay is spent on reading the story 's narrative and dialogue . The text in the game is accompanied by character sprites , which represent who Takaaki is talking to , appearing over background artwork . Throughout the game , the player encounters CG artwork at certain points in the story , which take the place of the background art and character sprites . A gallery of the viewed CGs and played background music is available on the game 's title screen . To Heart 2 follows a branching plot line with multiple endings , and depending on the decisions that the player makes during the game , the plot will progress in a specific direction . 
 The game divides each school day of the storyline into four segments . These segments illustrate the events that occur during Takaaki 's commute to school , during school , after school , and after he returns home at the end of each day . Depending on the time of the day and the player 's actions , he or she may be presented one of three types of events : mandatory events , which occur automatically during certain points in the game 's plot line ; temporary events , which occur during certain periods of time only if specific conditions are met ; or after school events , which occur at the end of each school day . 
 At the end of each school day , the player will be given the option to navigate to various locations within the game 's setting . Each <unk> location is accompanied by an image of a heroine in order to allow the choices to be easier to make . Throughout gameplay , the player is given multiple options to choose from . Text progression pauses at these points , and depending on the choices that the player makes , the affection rate of the heroine associated with the event will either increase , decrease , or remain the same . This mechanism determines which direction of the plot the player will progress into , but influences the story only during Konomi 's and Karin 's plot lines . 
 In the PlayStation 2 version , there are nine plot lines that the player will have the chance to experience , one for each of the heroines in the story except Sango and Ruri , who share the same plot line . This is expanded to ten plot lines in the Windows and PlayStation Portable versions with the addition of Sasara 's scenario , and further expanded to eleven scenarios in the PlayStation 3 version with the addition of Mio 's scenario . In order to view all of the plot lines , the player will have to replay the game multiple times and make different decisions to progress the plot in alternate directions . In all versions , the game also contains a bad ending in which the player is unable to pursue the other scenarios . This ending serves as the basis of the Another Days scenario in To Heart 2 Another Days , which allows the player to pursue an additional seven heroines . 
 To Heart 2 X Rated , the Windows version of the visual novel , includes two additional minigames that serve to lengthen the experience the game provides ; these minigames do not affect the main plot in any way . In both minigames , the player controls one of the heroines from To Heart 2 's storyline , who is made available upon the completion of her scenario in the main portion of the game . The first of the two minigames , titled " Super Sweets Scramble " ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , is a scrolling shooter in which the player 's goal is to progress through a vertically scrolling level , while attacking enemies that resemble confectioneries and dodging their attacks . The second , titled " Dokidoki Panic Library " ( <unk> , Dokidoki Panikku <unk> ) , is a puzzle game in which the player competes against an opponent for the highest score , by connecting three or more books of the same color and eliminating them from the screen . 
 = = Plot and characters = = 
 To Heart 2 's story revolves around the male protagonist Takaaki Kouno , a high school student who has an aversion to most girls around him , and focuses on his interactions with his schoolmates . The story begins on March 1 , 2004 , when Takaaki 's parents leave for an overseas business trip . That morning , Konomi <unk> , Takaaki 's childhood friend , comes to meet Takaaki for their commute to school . Konomi is a cheerful and innocent , but childish girl . She is one year younger than Takaaki , who often views her as a younger sister . The two are also friends with Yuuji <unk> , who is in the same class as Takaaki . Despite being the son of a wealthy and prestigious family , Yuuji has a frivolous and carefree personality , and often flirts with the girls at school . Takaaki later reunites with Tamaki <unk> , another childhood friend , who had promised to return before being enrolled into a boarding school . Tamaki has a strong and dominant personality , and tends to act as an elder sister figure to those around her . She later transfers into Takaaki 's high school upon the beginning of the new school year . 
 Throughout the story , Takaaki meets several other heroines attending his school . The first is Manaka Komaki , a timid , clumsy , but accommodating girl who is the vice class representative of Takaaki 's class . She <unk> spends time in the school library 's storage , and helps the library committee with general tasks . Similar to Takaaki , she is inarticulate around the opposite gender . Manaka is also close friends with Yuma <unk> , an aggressive girl who commutes to school by a mountain bike . Yuma sees Takaaki as a rival after she first met him at school , and often challenges him to various duels . She often laments her grandfather 's insistence of having her take over the family business , and attempts to hide her family background from Takaaki . Karin <unk> is a schoolmate of Takaaki 's and the founder of the school 's mystery club . Karin has a cheerful and energetic personality , and has an odd affection towards the occult and objects such as egg sandwiches . She first meets Takaaki early in the story , and later deceives him into joining the mystery club . 
 Sango <unk> is an underclassman who takes a liking to Takaaki . She is lively and innocent , but also intelligent . She is in particular proficient in computer @-@ related subjects , and designed multiple humanoid maid robots as an engineer for Kurusugawa Electronics . Ruri <unk> is another underclassman of Takaaki and Sango 's younger twin sister . In contrast to her older sister , Ruri has a bad @-@ mouthed and hostile personality . She is very protective of Sango , and often regards Takaaki 's interactions with her in bad faith . Lucy Maria <unk> is a girl whom Takaaki meets one day on his way home . She has a calm personality , and opens up to very few people except him . Lucy claims to be an alien , and speaks a unique language she calls the " <unk> Language " ( <unk> , <unk> ) . She later attends Takaaki 's school under the name <unk> <unk> . Yūki Kusakabe is a gentle and well @-@ mannered girl who often lingers in the school building at night . She was one of Takaaki 's classmates in elementary school , but has since transferred away because of her parents ' divorce . 
 Two heroines were subsequently added to To Heart 2 's story in later versions of the game . Sasara <unk> becomes the student council president of Takaaki 's school during his second year . She inherits her position from the previous president Ma @-@ ryan , as she is the only remaining student council member after the latter 's graduation . Sasara is very diligent , often completing all of the student council 's tasks by herself . She is often feared by students for her strict attitude , but is actually disguising a shy and gentle personality . Mio <unk> is Takaaki 's classmate . She remains largely unnoticed by other students , most of whom remain oblivious of her name . She originally ties her hair up and wears eyeglasses , but later wears contact lens and her hair untied as an attempt by Takaaki to change the impression she gives to others . 
 = = Development = = 
 To Heart 2 's development originally began as a collaborative effort for the PlayStation 2 between the Osaka and Tokyo studios of Aquaplus . During one of the staff meetings for the partnered project , To Heart 2 was conceived when a staff member jokingly mentioned the possibility of a sequel for the original To Heart . Production began shortly after once the team realized the popularity and success of the forerunner . Naoya Shimokawa , the president of Aquaplus , produced the resulting project , and Tsutomu <unk> served as the game 's director . 
 The work on the game 's scenario was split between four writers . Shōsuke Miyake drafted the game 's overall storyline as well as the scenarios for Sango , Ruri , and Lucy ; <unk> Makura wrote the scenarios for Manaka and Yuma ; Takeshi Marui for Karin and Yūki ; and <unk> for Konomi and Tamaki . Likewise , the game 's character designs were split amongst four artists . Misato <unk> provided the character designs and illustrations for Konomi and Yuma ; Hisashi Kawata for Lucy and Karin ; <unk> <unk> for Tamaki and Manaka ; and Takeshi Nakamura for Sango , Ruri , and Yūki . The game 's music was composed by Shimokawa , Junya Matsuoka , Shinya Ishikawa , <unk> <unk> , and Michio Kinugasa . 
 Since the development staff had an equal number of writers as illustrators , it was originally planned to pair each illustrator with a single scenario writer ; <unk> was also to provide designs for the main heroine . Though this would have simplified the project 's work load by easing communications among the staff , the idea was scrapped once the staff realized that the final product might merely be a collection of four distinct pieces . Ultimately , writing and design responsibilities were divided based on the staff members ' individual preferences . The staff also commented that the development team faced communication difficulties because of the physical distance between the two Aquaplus studios . Early in production , members from both studios gathered in a single location to discuss development , but as production progressed , they began to rely on other methods of communication such as telephone calls and instant messaging . <unk> noted that these methods made it complicated for the writers and illustrators to communicate effectively , and during the development of To Heart 2 X Rated , Miyake took a two @-@ month @-@ long business trip to Osaka to rectify the problem . 
 Rather than creating a new setting for To Heart 2 , the development team chose to roll over various inherent features from the original . The majority of the game is set within the same school and town , but instead focuses on the northern side of town , rather than the southern side , which is the primary setting of To Heart . The story is set two years after To Heart , and its lack of mobile phones was an attempt to replicate the technological themes of its predecessor . Despite the story 's inclusion of maid robots , the writers stated that the story 's setting was influenced by the 1990s , during which To Heart took place . As the only artist to return from the original 's development team , Kawata was consulted by the other illustrators for character designs . He commented that the other artists attempted to create their designs with respect to the previous work , but he decided otherwise by attempting to " shape a new image " for the designs . The illustrators avoided creating a character with green hair as a heroine , because of the overwhelming impression the character Multi had left them in To Heart . Miyake noted that it was difficult for him to write the scenario for To Heart 2 because the game 's development began during the time he was writing December When There Is No Angel , and Ruri and Sango 's original scenario had to be rewritten because of their overwhelming resemblance to the latter title . 
 = = = Release history = = = 
 To Heart 2 was first released as an all @-@ ages title for the PlayStation 2 on December 28 , 2004 in three versions : a limited edition , a deluxe edition , and a regular edition . The limited edition release contains the game itself , an original soundtrack disc , a visual concept collection , a calendar , and a special casing ; the deluxe edition contains the extras included in the limited edition and a version of To Heart playable on the PS2 ; the regular edition does not contain the aforementioned extras . The original PS2 version was followed by an adult version entitled To Heart 2 X Rated ( stylized as ToHeart2 <unk> ) . It was first released on December 9 , 2005 for Microsoft Windows PCs as a limited edition , and was subsequently followed by a regular edition release on December 23 , 2005 . X Rated is the fifth title in the Leaf Visual Novel Series ; it contains additional scenarios and introduces a new heroine named Sasara <unk> . Its source code was released by Aquaplus under the GNU General Public License on December 22 , 2005 along with the source code for <unk> to <unk> ! ! , Tears to Tiara , and <unk> . This decision was made due to the inclusion of <unk> derived code ; <unk> being distributed under the same license . The source code for all four games is distributed upon request in CD @-@ R format . A source code mirror is hosted on GitHub . 
 An all @-@ ages version , titled To Heart 2 Portable , was released for the PlayStation Portable on July 30 , 2009 . Unlike previous releases , the PSP release allowed viewing the game in both the original 4 : 3 and widescreen 16 : 9 aspect ratios . It was released in three versions : " W Pack Limited Edition " , " W Pack " , and a regular edition . W Pack includes a version of To Heart playable on PSP , while the limited edition also includes figurines of characters Sasara and Ma @-@ ryan . A budget @-@ priced version of Portable was released on April 25 , 2013 , while a downloadable version for the PlayStation Store followed on May 30 . An enhanced re @-@ release for the PlayStation 3 , titled To Heart 2 DX Plus , was released on September 22 , 2011 in limited and regular editions . DX Plus is a compilation of To Heart 2 and its spin @-@ off To Heart 2 Another Days . It contains new computer graphic illustrations , additional and rewritten scenarios , including a new heroine named Mio <unk> , and Motion Portrait graphics rendering . The limited edition release contains a 300 @-@ page A4 @-@ sized art book named To Heart 2 Perfect Visual Collection ( ToHeart2 <unk> , ToHeart2 <unk> Bijuaru <unk> ) , a four @-@ disc soundtrack titled To Heart 2 Complete Soundtrack ( ToHeart2 <unk> , ToHeart2 <unk> Saundotorakku ) , and the game itself . A budget @-@ priced release and a downloadable version of DX Plus were released on June 26 , 2014 . 
 = = = Spin @-@ offs = = = 
 To Heart 2 has received multiple spin @-@ off titles since its initial PlayStation 2 release . The first spin @-@ off release is a desk accessory package titled To Heart 2 Desktop Accessory ( ToHeart2 <unk> , ToHeart2 <unk> <unk> ) and released by Aquaplus on November 25 , 2005 in limited and regular editions . The release is a collection of multiple wallpapers , screensavers , desktop mascots , voice clips , and a typing game titled " Typing in Heart " ( <unk> in <unk> , <unk> in <unk> ) . Its limited edition release contained a binder and a <unk> pen , both of which are not found in the regular edition release . The second spin @-@ off release is a visual novel titled To Heart 2 Another Days , and it was first released as an adult game on February 29 , 2008 for Microsoft Windows PCs in limited and regular editions . Another Days ' plot takes place in the fall as a continuation of To Heart 2 's story , and its main storyline allows the player to pursue seven heroines consisting of both supporting female characters from To Heart 2 and new characters . In addition , Another Days also contains two additional scenarios that extend storylines from the original game . The first additional scenario is based on Manaka 's scenario , and features Ikuno as the protagonist , while the second scenario extends Konomi 's scenario , and features Tamaki and Konomi as heroines . Another Days ' limited edition release was bundled with a soundtrack disc titled To Heart 2 Secret Sound Track , which contained additional music not found in To Heart 2 's original soundtrack release . The scenarios of Another Days are also included as part of the PlayStation 3 compilation , To Heart 2 DX Plus . 
 The third spin @-@ off release is entitled Manaka de Ikuno ! ! ( <unk> ! ! ) , and it was released in both limited and regular editions on December 18 , 2009 for Microsoft Windows PCs . Manaka de Ikuno ! ! itself is a collection of four games : a role @-@ playing video game titled " Final Dragon Chronicle : Guilty Requiem " featuring the characters of To Heart 2 , an action game titled " Magical Fight ! " ( <unk> Fight ! , <unk> <unk> ! ) , a collectible card game titled " Princess Collection " , and a 3D visual novel titled " <unk> : <unk> to Tokubetsu na <unk> " ( <unk> ～ <unk> ～ ) featuring Manaka as the heroine . Its limited edition release included an illustration book and an original soundtrack disc ; the regular edition did not contain the aforementioned extras . An all @-@ ages version of " Final Dragon Chronicle " for the PlayStation Portable , titled To Heart 2 : Dungeon Travelers ( ToHeart2 <unk> , ToHeart2 Danjon <unk> ) , was released on June 30 , 2011 . The visual novel also inspired a pachinko slot machine produced by Sammy . The pachinko slot adaptation , named Pachislot To Heart 2 , was released to Japanese pachinko parlors in February 2012 . A video game recreation of Pachislot for the PS3 was later released by Aquaplus on October 25 , 2012 . The characters Tamaki , Konomi , Manaka and Sasara appear as playable characters in the 2011 fighting game <unk> : Aquaplus Dream Match , while Yuma and Ma @-@ ryan appear as supporting partner characters . The game 's characters also appear in their Dungeon Travelers attire as downloadable content playable characters for the PlayStation Vita version of Dungeon Travelers 2 : <unk> <unk> to <unk> no Fūin . 
 = = Related media = = 
 = = = Books and publications = = = 
 A 113 @-@ page guidebook titled To Heart 2 : Master Guide was published by MediaWorks on January 15 , 2005 . The book contains poster artwork , the ' face patterns ' of each character , selected CG scenes and a guide on how to play through each character 's scenarios . Voice actress interviews are also included , as well as a brief guide on how to play through each scenario in To Heart . This was followed by another 192 @-@ page guidebook for the visual novel titled The Essence of To Heart 2 : To Heart 2 Official Guidebook , which was published by Enterbrain on March 4 , 2005 . The book contains detailed character descriptions , a complete walk through to every heroine in the game , computer graphics , and interviews with the game 's development staff . Enterbrain also released a 223 @-@ page guidebook entitled The Essence of To Heart 2 Portable : To Heart 2 Portable Official Guidebook for the PlayStation Portable version of the game on August 18 , 2009 . The guidebook is based on the original Essence for the PlayStation 2 game , but contained new and revised content for the PSP version . A guidebook for the PSP spinoff To Heart 2 : Dungeon Travelers , named To Heart 2 : Dungeon Travelers Official Complete Guide , was released by Enterbrain on August 11 , 2011 . 
 Multiple novels based on the To Heart 2 franchise have also been published by several publishers . A single @-@ volume short story anthology entitled To Heart 2 Short Stories was published by Square Enix under their Game Novels imprint on June 30 , 2005 . This was followed by three light novels written by Osamu Murata and published by Harvest Novels under their <unk> Bunko imprint . The first volume , titled To Heart 2 Multiple Choice : Takaaki <unk> <unk> ! ? ( ToHeart2 <unk> ～ <unk> ！ ？ ～ , To Heart 2 Multiple Choice : Takaaki 's Illegitimate Child Crisis ! ? ) , was illustrated by Yōichi <unk> and released on October 5 , 2009 . The second , titled To Heart 2 Two Pieces : Manaka and Sasara ( ToHeart2 TwoPieces ～ <unk> ～ , ToHeart2 TwoPieces : Manaka to Sasara ) , was illustrated by <unk> and <unk> Shinozuka and released on June 1 , 2010 . The third , titled To Heart 2 Two Pieces : Konomi and Tamaki ( ToHeart2 TwoPieces ～ <unk> ～ , ToHeart2 TwoPieces : Konomi to Tamaki ) , was illustrated by Tasuku <unk> and Sana Wakatsuki and released on July 5 , 2010 . 
 Harvest also released a two @-@ volume short story compilation entitled To Heart 2 <unk> ( ToHeart2 <unk> , To Heart 2 Short Story Collection ) and written by Ikkaku <unk> , <unk> Nanami , and Tomoyuki Fujinami . The first volume was released on December 5 , 2010 , while the second was released on June 1 , 2011 . A single @-@ volume light novel based on the " Final Dragon Chronicle " minigame was again published by Harvest . The novel , titled To Heart 2 : Final Dragon Chronicle Sono Go ( ToHeart2 <unk> ・ <unk> , ToHeart2 : Fainaru Doragon Kuronikuru Sono Go , To Heart 2 : Final Dragon Chronicle Thereafter ) , was written by Takuya Baba , illustrated by Ushio <unk> , and released on February 20 , 2011 . 
 = = = Manga = = = 
 To Heart 2 has received multiple manga adaptations since its original visual novel release . The first manga series was illustrated by Haruka <unk> and serialized in the shōnen manga magazine Dengeki Daioh between February 21 , 2005 and January 21 , 2007 . The individual chapters were later compiled into three bound volumes published by MediaWorks between October 22 , 2005 and May 26 , 2007 . The second manga adaptation , titled To Heart 2 : Colorful Note , is a retelling of the entire To Heart 2 story . Colorful Note was illustrated by Tsuna <unk> and serialized in the shōnen manga magazine Monthly GFantasy between March 18 , 2005 and March 18 , 2008 . It was later collected into five volumes published by Square Enix between October 27 , 2005 and April 27 , 2009 . Another manga , titled To Heart 2 SD : Seitokai Days , was serialized in the manga magazine Manga 4 @-@ koma Kings Palette Lite between July 2 , 2008 and September 2 , 2010 and was illustrated by Natsuki <unk> . It was released as a single bound volume by Ichijinsha on December 22 , 2009 . A manga adaptation of To Heart 2 Another Days was serialized in ASCII Media Works 's Dengeki G 's Festival ! Comic between July 26 , 2008 and August 26 , 2010 . Another Days was illustrated by <unk> , and was collected into two bound volumes released on February 26 , 2010 and April 27 , 2011 . 
 There are also fifteen sets of manga anthologies produced by different companies and drawn by a multitude of different artists . The first anthology series , titled simply To Heart 2 , was published by Square Enix as two volumes on February 18 and May 27 , 2005 . It was followed by a sixteen @-@ volume anthology series titled To Heart 2 Comic Anthology released by Ichijinsha between February 25 , 2005 and June 25 , 2007 . A two @-@ volume anthology series titled To Heart 2 Anthology Comic was released by Fox Publishing between March 10 and June 25 , 2005 . The fourth anthology series , titled To Heart 2 : 4 @-@ koma Manga Gekijō ( ToHeart2 <unk> ) and published by Square Enix , was released on March 18 and June 30 , 2005 in two volumes . A three @-@ volume anthology named Anthology Comic To Heart 2 was released by Ohzora Publishing between March 24 and August 24 , 2005 in three volumes . A two @-@ volume anthology series , titled Comic Anthology To Heart 2 : Anata ga Koisuru Monogatari ( コミックアンソロジー ToHeart2 ～ <unk> ～ ) , was published by Broccoli and distributed by Jive on April 2 and August 1 , 2005 . A single @-@ volume anthology , again titled To Heart 2 Anthology Comic , was published by Enterbrain under their Magi @-@ Cu Comics imprint on April 25 , 2005 . 
 A single @-@ volume manga anthology , again titled simply To Heart 2 , was published by Mag Garden under their BC Anthology Collection on May 28 , 2005 . Another manga anthology series , named To Heart 2 4 @-@ koma Kingdom ( To <unk> <unk> ) , was published by Futabasha in two volumes on May 28 and October 29 , 2005 . Hobby Japan released a single @-@ volume manga anthology , again titled To Heart 2 Anthology Comic , on July 25 , 2005 . This was followed by a single @-@ volume anthology named Anthology Comics To Heart 2 Heartful 4 @-@ koma ( <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> To Heart 2 <unk> 4 @-@ koma ) and published by Ohzora on September 24 , 2005 . The twelfth anthology released was a three @-@ volume series titled To Heart 2 : Special Days Comic Anthology and published by Ichijinsha between May 24 and July 25 , 2008 . A single @-@ volume anthology titled Magi @-@ Cu 4 @-@ koma To Heart 2 ( <unk> ToHeart2 , <unk> 4 @-@ koma ToHeart2 ) was published by Enterbrain on June 25 , 2008 . Another single @-@ volume anthology titled To Heart 2 : After School Diary 4 @-@ koma Maximum and published by <unk> followed its release on August 11 , 2008 . The last manga anthology series , titled To Heart 2 Anthology Comic : Precious Days , was released by Capcom on December 10 , 2008 and February 20 , 2009 as two volumes . 
 = = = Anime = = = 
 An anime television adaptation of To Heart 2 was produced by <unk> 's Team Iguchi , directed by <unk> Sudō , and was scripted by head writer Hiroshi Yamaguchi . Both members had previously served the same positions for the studio 's Comic Party anime adaptation , and Yamaguchi was also the main writer for the To Heart anime . The anime series , containing fourteen episodes , was first broadcast in Japan between October 3 , 2005 and January 2 , 2006 on Television Kanagawa as a UHF anime . Out of the fourteen episodes , thirteen were regular episodes , while a summary episode also aired after the eleventh episode . Inspired by the film Mystery Train , Sudō and the production staff created the series ' story as a nonlinear narrative ; each episode of the anime follows a different heroine 's interactions with the protagonist over the same span of time . The anime series was released in Japan as seven separate DVD volumes between December 22 , 2005 and June 23 , 2006 by Imagica . A DVD box set containing the series was released on September 10 , 2008 . 
 There have also been five sets of original video animation series produced by Chaos Project and Aquaplus . Of the five OVA series , Yasuhisa Katō directed the first two sets of episodes , while Jun 'ichi Sakata replaced him for the remaining episodes . The first OVA series , containing three episodes , were released by Imagica as three DVD volumes between February 28 and September 28 , 2007 . The second set of two OVA episodes , titled To Heart 2 AD , was released by Frontier Works as two DVD volumes between March 26 and August 8 , 2008 . The third set of two episodes , titled To Heart 2 AD Plus , followed as two DVD volumes between April 24 and October 7 , 2009 . The fourth set of two episodes , titled To Heart 2 AD Next , was released as two volumes in Blu @-@ ray Disc and DVD formats on September 23 and December 22 , 2010 . The fifth set of two episodes , titled To Heart 2 : Dungeon Travelers , was released as two volumes in BD and DVD formats on February 22 and July 25 , 2012 . To commemorate the visual novel 's tenth anniversary , a BD box set collecting all eleven episodes on two discs will be released on December 3 , 2014 . 
 = = = Internet radio shows = = = 
 There have been three Internet radio talk shows pertaining to To Heart 2 . The first radio show was titled Radio To Heart 2 , and was hosted by <unk> <unk> and Shizuka Itō , who voiced Konomi and Tamaki respectively in the visual novel . After the show 's initial run on the Japanese Internet radio network Onsen ended on March 30 , 2006 with its twenty @-@ fifth episode , it began its renewed broadcast on Radio Kansai and the <unk> website in April 2006 , and continued to broadcast until its 116th episode on January 17 , 2008 . Seven CD compilations , each containing thirteen of the show 's renewed episodes and an extra recording , were released between November 25 , 2006 and December 26 , 2008 . It was followed by a second radio show , titled Sasara , Ma @-@ ryan no Seitokai <unk> Rajio for To Heart 2 ( <unk> ・ <unk> for ToHeart2 , Sasara and Ma @-@ ryan 's Student Council President Radio for To Heart 2 ) . The show is hosted by Ryōko Ono and Ema Kogure , who voiced Sasara and Ma @-@ ryan respectively , and began streaming on Onsen on February 15 , 2008 . Eleven CD compilations , each containing thirteen episodes and an extra recording , have been released since December 26 , 2008 , with the latest volume having been released on September 30 , 2011 . 
 The third Internet radio show , titled Kurusugawa <unk> <unk> <unk> 3 <unk> Rajio <unk> ( <unk> <unk> <unk> , Kurusugawa Industries Presents : Maid Robot Sisters Began A Radio Show ) , was hosted by Emiko Hagiwara , Kotomi Yamakawa , and Harumi Sakurai , who voiced <unk> , Harumi , and <unk> respectively . The radio show was streamed on <unk> between September 7 , 2009 and April 5 , 2010 , and lasted thirty episodes . The episodes were compiled into three CD volumes , each containing ten episodes and an extra recording . The first CD volume was first sold at the Aquaplus Festa 2009 and Comiket 77 events in December 2009 , before receiving a public release on January 29 , 2010 , while the third volume was first sold at Comiket 78 in August 2010 , and later on September 23 , 2009 as a public release . 
 = = = Music and audio CDs = = = 
 Three pieces of theme music are used in the original To Heart 2 visual novel . " Heart to Heart " , the opening theme , was performed by Arisa Nakayama and composed by <unk> <unk> . " <unk> " ( <unk> , " Thank You " ) , the ending theme , was performed by <unk> and composed by Naoya Shimokawa . Both songs ' lyrics were written by <unk> <unk> . An insert song , " Hoshi no Uta " ( <unk> , " Star 's Song " ) , is also used in Yūki 's storyline . The song was performed by Rina Satō , who voiced Yūki in the visual novel , and composed and written by Takeshi Marui . The first music CD published for the game was the original soundtrack album . The soundtrack 's release preceded that of the visual novel 's on December 22 , 2004 , and the two @-@ disc album contains thirty @-@ eight tracks collected from the background music and theme songs used in the game . A separate soundtrack album containing thirty @-@ three tracks was also packaged with the game 's limited and deluxe edition releases . This was then followed by an album titled Heart to Heart by Nakayama on June 22 , 2005 , which contains the opening theme and songs from other Leaf video games . 
 An image song album , titled To Heart 2 Character Songs , was released on November 23 , 2005 containing nine songs sung by the voice actresses who voiced the heroines found in To Heart 2 . A second soundtrack album containing additional music from To Heart 2 Another Days , titled To Heart 2 Secret Sound Track , was bundled with the limited edition release on February 29 , 2008 . A maxi @-@ single , titled " Cosmos no Yō ni " ( <unk> , <unk> no Yō ni ) , was then published on March 26 , 2008 featuring the titular ending theme for Another Days by Rena Uehara . It was followed by a second image song album , titled To Heart 2 Character Songs Vol . 2 , on December 25 , 2008 featuring eight songs based on the additional heroines found in the later games . A third soundtrack album , titled To Heart 2 Complete Soundtrack , was bundled with the limited edition of the PlayStation 3 game , To Heart 2 DX Plus , on September 22 , 2011 . The soundtrack consists of four discs of music compiled from the background music and songs used throughout the series . 
 Several drama CDs based on To Heart 2 have also been produced . The first set , titled Anthology Drama CD To Heart 2 , was released as two volumes between February 24 and March 24 , 2006 . Two drama CD volumes based on To Heart 2 and Another Days were also released as part of the Aquaplus <unk> CD ( <unk> <unk> , Aquaplus Daily CD ) series . The second volume of the <unk> CD series , based on To Heart 2 , was released on December 5 , 2007 , while the fourth volume , based on Another Days , was released on June 4 , 2008 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to a weekly sales ranking conducted by Media Create , the original version of To Heart 2 was the fourth best @-@ selling video game for the week ending on January 2 , 2005 , during which the game sold 86 @,@ 485 copies . Another ranking conducted during the same week by <unk> instead placed this number at 82 @,@ 949 copies sold . The game subsequently remained on Media Create 's sales ranking at thirty @-@ fourth , forty @-@ seventh , and fiftieth until the week ending on January 23 , 2005 . In a sales ranking of bishōjo games conducted by PCNews , To Heart 2 X Rated 's limited edition premiered at first place in the rankings . It subsequently ranked third , thirty @-@ sixth , sixteenth , and twice at thirty @-@ second , before making its last appearance on the chart at fiftieth place in late March 2006 . To Heart 2 Portable , the PSP version , was the ninth best @-@ selling video game and sold 32 @,@ 521 copies between July 27 and August 2 , 2009 . To Heart 2 DX Plus , the PS3 compilation , placed eighth in sales and sold 24 @,@ 429 copies in Japan between September 19 and 25 , 2011 . 
 Sales surveys conducted by <unk> indicate that To Heart 2 Another Days was the most pre @-@ ordered bishōjo game in Japan between mid @-@ October 2007 and mid @-@ January 2008 . It also ranked first as the most widely sold bishōjo game in Japan in February 2008 , and was the fifth most widely sold in March 2008 . Manaka de Ikuno ! ! ranked second in bishōjo game pre @-@ orders in Japan between mid @-@ September and mid @-@ October 2009 , and it ranked third between mid @-@ October and mid @-@ November 2009 . Its limited and regular edition releases placed second and forty @-@ second respectively in the sales rankings in January 2010 , while the two releases collectively ranked thirty @-@ third and fiftieth in the two following months . The PSP spin @-@ off To Heart 2 : Dungeon Travelers was the third best @-@ selling video game and sold 37 @,@ 396 copies in Japan between June 27 and July 3 , 2011 . 
 In the October 2007 issue of Dengeki G 's Magazine , poll results for the fifty best bishōjo games were released . Out of 249 titles , To Heart 2 ranked third with seventy @-@ four votes . Getchu.com hosts an annual voting poll called the " Getchu.com Bishōjo Game Ranking " where users vote online for the best games of the previous year in several different categories . For the 2005 ranking , the categories were : overall , scenario , music , visuals , gameplay system , and heroines . Among the rankings conducted in early 2006 , To Heart 2 X Rated placed sixth overall , eighth in scenario , seventh in music , fourth in visuals , and ninth in gameplay system . Two heroines from the game , Sasara and Manaka , ranked as the seventh and ninth most popular heroines respectively . 
 = The Millionaire Milkman = 
 The Millionaire Milkman is a 1910 American silent short drama produced by the Thanhouser Company . The film focus on Jack Cass , a young millionaire , who has affections for a society girl named Clara Moore . Jack receives a letter of warning about Clara 's real interest , his money . Jack decides to decides to test his suspicions and the character of Clara , by having newspapers announce the ruin of his mind and his fortune . Clara calls Jack to confirm the story and breaks off the engagement . May Dustin , the orphan girl who Clara 's family treats as a servant , expresses sympathy for Jack . Jack becomes infatuated with May and becomes the milkman to see her every day . The two are married and May learns that Jack had never lost his fortune . The cast and production credits are unknown . The film was released on December 16 , 1910 , and met with mixed reviews . The film is presumed lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Though the film is presumed lost , a synopsis survives in The Moving Picture World from December 17 , 1910 . It states : " Clara Moore is a society girl who has won the affections of Jack Cass , a young millionaire . He thinks she loves him , but it is really his money that she adores . Prompted by a letter of warning , Jack decides to prove his sweetheart 's love . One reason is that he privately disapproves of the way Clara and her mother have treated a poor relation , an orphan girl , who has been left in their care . Instead of giving her a home , they make a servant of her . Jack 's plot works like a charm . His faithful valet gives the newspapers the story of the failure of Jack 's mind , and that young man 's ruin . Clara reads it and when Jack calls and admits that the reports are correct , she returns his ring and says that all is over between them . In fact the only person in the house that shows any sympathy for Jack is the poor relation , May Dustin , and naturally he compares her with the heartless society girl . Jack wants to see more of May , and invents a unique way of doing so . He buys out the milkman who serves the family , and in that way is able to call on May everyday . Liking soon ripens into love , and May agrees to wed Jack , although thinking he has nothing in the world but a meager salary . After marriage she is told the truth and finds that her husband has money enough to supply her every wish . As for Clara , she has lost her only chance to win a prized millionaire . " 
 = = Production = = 
 The writer of the scenario is unknown , but it was most likely Lloyd Lonergan . He was an experienced newspaperman employed by The New York Evening World while writing scripts for the Thanhouser productions . The film director is unknown , but it may have been Barry O 'Neil or Lucius J. Henderson . Cameramen employed by the company during this era included Blair Smith , Carl Louis Gregory , and Alfred H. Moses , Jr. though none are specifically credited . The role of the cameraman was uncredited in 1910 productions . The cast credits are unknown , but many 1910 Thanhouser productions are fragmentary . In late 1910 , the Thanhouser company released a list of the important personalities in their films . The list includes G.W. Abbe , Justus D. Barnes , Frank H. Crane , Irene Crane , Marie Eline , Violet Heming , Martin J. Faust , Thomas Fortune , George Middleton , Grace Moore , John W. Noble , Anna Rosemond , Mrs. George Walters . 
 This film was an early example of the use of the character names Jack and May , which were repeatedly used by Lonergan in various productions . Film historian Q David Bowers mentions that patrons who watched the film did not know the protagonist 's name , as " it must have become a studio joke to decide who was to play Jack and who was to play May . In actuality , names such as Jack and May were used in printed synopses to keep track of who was who , but such names were usually not mentioned in the film 's subtitles . " The previous and first usage of the two leading character roles was in Dots and Dashes . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The single reel drama , approximately 1 @,@ 000 feet long , was released on December 16 , 1910 . At least one theater advertised the film as a comedy instead of a drama . The film had a wide national release , theaters showing the film include those in Kansas , Pennsylvania , South Dakota , and Arizona . The film was shown in Singapore in 1913 . 
 The New York Dramatic Mirror praised the film for its well @-@ execution , but it didn 't miss a chance to balance it by criticizing the actor who played the milkman , " The Laura Jean Libbey style of romance is here presented with more than the usual success . ... The purchase of the milk delivery job was not convincing and the milkman talked too much at the camera ; otherwise the picture is not seriously defective in detail . " The Moving Picture World gave a positive review , concluding that " The life and action which characterize the Thanhouser productions are all present , while the photography is satisfactory and helps to make a good picture . " 
 An unrelated comedy film with the same title was released by Pathé Frères on December 25 , 1912 . 
 = Pathways into Darkness = 
 Pathways into Darkness is a first @-@ person adventure video game developed and published by Bungie Software Products Corporation in 1993 , exclusively for Apple Macintosh personal computers . Players assume the role of a Special Forces soldier who must stop a powerful , godlike being from awakening and destroying the world . Players solve puzzles and defeat enemies to unlock parts of a pyramid where the god sleeps ; the game 's ending changes depending on player actions . 
 Pathways began as a sequel to Bungie 's Minotaur : The Labyrinths of Crete , before the developers created an original story . Jason Jones programmed the game , while his friend Colin Brent developed the environments and creatures . The game features three @-@ dimensional texture mapped graphics and stereo sound on supported Macintosh models . Pathways was critically acclaimed and won a host of awards ; it was also Bungie 's first major commercial success and enabled the two @-@ man team of Jason Jones and Alex Seropian to move into a Chicago office and begin paying staff . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Pathways into Darkness is a first @-@ person shooter and adventure game . The game interface consists of four windows . The primary " World View " shows the player character 's first @-@ person perspective . Players move , dodge fire , and use weapons and items using the computer keyboard . The " Inventory " window displays items players have acquired . The " Message " window relates events and the in @-@ game time , and the " Player " window displays health and energy information . The in @-@ game clock runs constantly during gameplay , except when in conversation ; if the time progresses past the point at which the sleeping god wakes , the player loses the game . 
 In the game , players fight various monsters as they explore the pyramid 's halls and catacombs . Players may pick up weapons and ammunition left behind by others to supplement their arsenal . As additional levels are unlocked , new weapons become available , including machine guns and grenade launchers . Players can absorb a certain amount of damage , but once their health reaches zero , they must resume their progress at the last saved checkpoint . Resting in place replenishes health but saps game time and leaves the player open to attack . Scattered throughout the levels are other items players may use . Potions have different effects : rare blue potions , for example , rid the player character of poison and damage . Otherwise items provide points or cash ; every four points increases the player character 's maximum health by two units . Crystals can be used against enemies to freeze , burn , or otherwise harm them . 
 Through the use of the yellow crystal , players can converse with Previously Living Sentient Beings or " <unk> " . Conversations provide players with puzzle information , strategies for defeating monsters , and story background . Rather than relying on a branching tree of conversation options , players type keywords into a dialogue box . When a certain keyword ( typically found in a previous statement by the dead person in question ) is entered , the dead person will give a response . The manual gives a starting point by mentioning that all dead people respond to " name " and " death " , by giving their name and describing how they died , respectively . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Pathways casts the player as a member of a US Army Special Forces team sent on a mission to the Yucatán Peninsula . On May 5 , 1994 , a diplomat from the alien <unk> appeared to the President of the United States and informed him that on May 13 , an ancient godlike being sleeping beneath a pyramid would awaken and destroy the Earth . The only way to prevent this catastrophe is to prevent the god from awakening . The eight @-@ man Special Forces team carries a nuclear weapon , with the goal of entering the ancient pyramid , descending to the bottom level where the god sleeps , and activating the bomb to stun the god and bury it under tons of rock . 
 Before the game begins , the player character 's parachute fails to open . Awakening hours later , the character finds almost all his equipment inoperable . Reaching the pyramid on foot hours after the rest of the team entered the structure , the player must complete the team 's mission before the god awakens in five days . In the pyramid , the player finds bodies of squad @-@ mates , the remains of Spanish @-@ speaking treasure hunters , and fallen members of a Nazi expedition from the 1930s who were looking for a secret weapon but never returned . Additional plot elements can be revealed by speaking to these dead , enabled by an item attainable early in the game , the yellow crystal . 
 The game 's ending changes depending on whether the player has a radio beacon to call for extraction , and when the nuclear device is set to explode . Forgetting to set the bomb , or setting it to explode at any time past the awakening of the dreaming god , results in Earth 's destruction . The device 's detonation before the player reaches a minimum safe distance results in a pyrrhic victory . The most favorable endings are achieved by leaving the pyramid with a beacon for evacuation at least twenty game minutes before the device is set to go off ; if the game ends with enough time for the player to escape on foot , the player survives without a beacon . 
 = = Development = = 
 Pathways was Bungie 's fourth title ( and third commercial title ) after their previous game , Minotaur : The Labyrinths of Crete , sold around 2 @,@ 500 copies . In the summer of 1992 , Jones was living in dorms at the University of Chicago when he saw Wolfenstein 3D , a shooter game with three @-@ dimensional ( 3D ) graphics . Inspired , Jones created a rough 3D @-@ graphics engine for the Mac that simulated walls with <unk> and rectangles . Originally , Bungie intended Pathways to be a straightforward 3D version of Minotaur , but they quickly found that the top @-@ down perspective of their previous game did not mesh with the 3D presentation . An additional consideration was that the developers wanted to create a game that did not rely on then @-@ rare networks and modems , an issue in marketing Minotaur . The rest of 1992 was spent tweaking the graphics engine . 
 Work on the game 's storyline and levels began in January 1993 . Jones recalled that starting from cliché plots they moved towards " very interesting and unique but extremely difficult to understand stories " . One of the more complicated stories cast the player as one of a group of Roman soldiers who discovered a mountain spring that extended their lives . Every seven years one soldier would be picked to descend into the caves and bring back more water . If the leader died , a new one would be selected to undertake the journey to ensure their survival . " It was a very interesting plot since your quest wasn 't necessarily virtuous , it didn 't involve doing good things or saving the world , " Jones said . " It was just you were chosen , more or less against your will , to become the next leader of this freak cult of immortals . " The final plot occupied a middle ground between the simple and complex stories , because the developers did not want to force players to become deeply involved in the story . 
 While Bungie founder Alex Seropian handled the business aspect of Bungie and produced the game 's box art and promotional material , Jones programmed the game , wrote the story line , and contributed to the game 's manual . Whereas Jones had single @-@ handedly coded Minotaur , the small staff for Pathways was due to lack of money for a large team . To speed implementation , Jones built a level editor for the game that allowed him to add objects , monsters and walls to the levels . The game 's levels and mazes span 40 million scaled square feet . Jones ' friend , Colin Brent , did much of the art and creature design , reducing Jones ' workload and , in the programmer 's opinion , improving the art . Each monster was drawn by hand in different states such as stationary , moving , attacking , and dying . They were then scanned into the computer and added to the game ; if there were problems , they were redrawn . Once the final drawings were complete , the images were colorized in 24 @-@ bit color using Adobe Photoshop . Despite the game 's advanced graphics , Pathways was designed to work on any Macintosh model ; it was one of 30 applications that ran natively on Apple 's <unk> on launch day . 
 By July 1993 the game was behind schedule ; only the above @-@ ground portions of the pyramid were complete . Jones put in eighteen @-@ hour days for the month leading up to the MacWorld Expo where the game was to be sold ; he finished the game in a relatively bug @-@ free state just before the Expo , and Bungie had 500 shrinkwrapped copies of the game available for sale at MacWorld . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Pathways was a critical success . Inside Mac Games reviewer Jon Blum wrote in 1993 that Pathways was " one of the best Macintosh games I 've ever played " . Computer Gaming World described Pathways as " a dungeon crawl , pure and simple " . While describing the game before obtaining a gun as " tedious " and criticizing the small number of save points per level , the magazine praised the " simple , elegant and easy to use " user interface and " excellent " graphics and sound . Computer Gaming World concluded that while " somewhat weak on actual game play " , Pathways was " a job worthy of a strong recommendation " . Macworld 's Steven Levy commented that the gameplay and graphics were extremely smooth . He singled out the creatures for specific praise , likening them to " something that might have come from a brain @-@ merge of Tim Burton , Anne Rice and Hieronymus Bosch " instead of simple line drawings . Complaints and criticisms of the game included the difficulty level ; Blum found some segments too difficult and that it was possible to spend hours playing before realizing that the player had made an irreversible mistake . Jones admitted that the game was harder than he intended . The title received several awards , including Inside Mac Games ' " Adventure Game of the Year " , Macworld 's " Best Role @-@ Playing Game " , and was listed on the <unk> 100 . 
 Pathways sold more copies than expected , making it Bungie 's first commercial success . It was the third bestselling Macintosh title of the first half of 1994 after Myst and Sim City 2000 , with projected seven @-@ figure sales for the year . The game made Bungie enough money that the company was able to move from Seropian 's apartment to a dedicated office in Chicago 's South Side . At their new location , the Bungie team expanded and began work on another first @-@ person shooter , Marathon . Interviewed by Inside Mac Games , Jones said that he did not believe that there would ever be a sequel to Pathways . " There 's a lot of reasons for that , one of them being that I tend to dislike sequels , " he said , " A lot of cool things have happened with the rendering technology since Pathways shipped , and it suggests some different products which don 't really fit into the Pathways world . " 
 = Vagrant Story = 
 Vagrant Story ( <unk> , <unk> Sutōrī ) is a Japanese @-@ developed action role @-@ playing game developed and published by Square ( now Square Enix ) for the PlayStation video game console . The game was released in 2000 , and has been re @-@ released through the PlayStation Network for the PlayStation 3 and PlayStation Portable consoles . Vagrant Story was primarily developed by the team responsible for Final Fantasy Tactics , with Yasumi Matsuno serving as producer , writer and director . 
 The game takes place in the fictional kingdom of Valendia and the ruined city of Leá Monde . The story centers on Ashley Riot , an elite agent known as a Riskbreaker , who must travel to Leá Monde to investigate the link between a cult leader and a senior <unk> Parliament member , Duke Bardorba . In the prologue , Ashley is blamed for murdering the duke , and the game discloses the events that happen one week before the murder . 
 Vagrant Story is unique as a console action / adventure role @-@ playing game in that it features no shops and no player interaction with other characters ; instead , the game focuses on weapon creation and modification , as well as elements of puzzle @-@ solving and strategy . The game received critical acclaim from gaming magazines and websites . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Vagrant Story is a solo action role @-@ playing game , in which the player controls Ashley Riot from a third @-@ person perspective while exploring Leá Monde and the catacombs underneath . The player may also switch into first @-@ person perspective to allow for a 360 ° view using the START button or right analog stick on the game controller . Characters and sprites are proportionate with each other , and the player navigates Ashley on a three @-@ dimensional field map . Navigation is in real @-@ time , and areas accessed by the player are stored in an in @-@ game map menu . 
 Ashley can run , jump , and push crates and cubes to navigate around obstacles , adding puzzle and platforming elements to gameplay . During the game , the player must sometimes solve block puzzles to advance the story . When the player returns to a completed block puzzle room , a time @-@ attack mode called " Evolve , or Die ! ! " begins . Players must reach the end of the room in the shortest time possible , after which they are ranked . This stage is optional and can be turned off from the menu . 
 In the field map , players may engage the enemy as soon as they enter Battle Mode , which uses a pausable real @-@ time combat system , much like Square 's Parasite Eve ( 1998 ) . In Battle Mode , when the player taps the attack button , a spherical <unk> appears around Ashley . Individual body parts within this sphere can be targeted . The battle system involves the player chaining different attacks known as Chain Abilities to achieve large combos and deal damage to the enemy . This is done by pressing buttons in timely succession , making combat resemble a rhythm game . In addition to Chain Abilities , Defensive Abilities allow Ashley to reduce or reflect damage or avoid status ailments . Ashley also gains Break Arts , which exchange his hit points ( HP ) for increased damage . 
 Magic in Vagrant Story is learned later in the game using Grimoires that are dropped by enemies . Once a Grimoire is used , the magic spell associated with the Grimoire will remain in the menu , and players only need to spend magic points ( MP ) to cast a learned spell . Magic spells can be used to attack , heal , create status effects , and manipulate Ashley 's elemental and enemy affinities . Certain magic spells allow the player to affect multiple targets by using a small sphere positioned within the Battle Mode wire frame . Unlike physical attacks however , magic attacks cannot be chained . 
 Risk is an essential element in the battle system . A Risk bar is placed below the HP and MP bar , representing the Risk Points the player has accumulated . Risk Points affect Ashley 's concentration ; the longer Ashley attacks a target , the more his Risk Point accumulates — lowering his accuracy and defenses . Chain and Defensive Abilities increase Risk faster than regular attacks , while Break Arts do not increase Risk at all . Enemy attacks and spells deal more damage if the player has high Risk . The advantage , however , is the higher chances for the player to score critical hits and restore higher HP . 
 Vagrant Story 's crafting system allows the player to create and customize weapons and armor in designated " workshop " areas , inputting various ranges , strengths , and statistics . Weapons fall into one of three main damage types : blunt , piercing , and edged . Equipment are influenced by their material and affinity to enemy classes and elements . Affinities influence the effectiveness of weapons and armor ; however , equipment might lose one form of affinity when it gains another type . Weapons and armor can be combined , merging their affinities and sometimes creating a new type of blade or armor in the process . Different weapon types have different ranges , such as a bow and arrow having a longer range than melee weapons such as a mace . 
 Like several Square titles , the New Game Plus option is made available to the player upon first completing the game . In Vagrant Story , selecting " New Game + " enables the player to replay the story using their end @-@ game weapons , items , and statistics instead of the defaults . This option allows players to access a hidden level , which features more intimidating enemies and more powerful equipment . The story does not change , and original enemy statistics will remain at default . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Vagrant Story is set in the fictitious city of Leá Monde , while the kingdom of Valendia is engulfed in civil war . Leá Monde is an old town with a history spanning more than two millennia . Located on an island surrounded by reefs , the walls have been the " witness of many battles " and are " stronger than the mightiest forts of Valendia " . In its golden years , Leá Monde was a thriving community until an earthquake struck the town 25 years before the game , destroying the city and leaving the ground unstable . 
 The Grand Cathedral and the Temple of Kiltia are at the center of the city . This area is surrounded by the west and east districts , both in fairly good shape , as well as the massive , fortress @-@ like City Walls . Beneath the ground are an abandoned mineshaft and limestone quarry , the shadowy labyrinths of an " Undercity " , and the dark Iron Maiden dungeon . The maze @-@ like <unk> Forest , named for the so @-@ called <unk> that can be found within , covers part of the city . Other locations include the Graylands , the setting for the prologue event ; and <unk> , the city where the Valendia Knights of Peace 's Headquarters is located . While Valendia and Leá Monde are fictitious , the game 's scenery is inspired by real @-@ life landscapes of the southwest of France , including the city of Saint @-@ Émilion . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The protagonist is Ashley Riot , a male member of the Valendia Knights of the Peace ( VKP ) in pursuit of a cult leader named Sydney <unk> . Sydney , leader of the religious cult Müllenkamp , laid siege to Duke Bardorba 's manor in search of a key and kidnapped Bardorba 's son , Joshua . Ashley 's partner is Callo <unk> , an agent of the VKP <unk> . Also attempting to capture Sydney is Romeo Guildenstern of the Crimson Blades , whose mission was undertaken without the approval of the VKP . 
 Ashley is a Riskbreaker , a militant division of the VKP responsible for upholding state security and law . Although Callo accompanies him , Ashley does not accept her as a combat partner due to her lack of combat experience . Callo ends up being Sydney 's hostage and discovers the truth of Müllenkamp 's activities . Another Riskbreaker , Rosencrantz , appears during Ashley 's battles in Leá Monde , briefing him on the plans of the VKP , Sydney and the Cardinal , and subsequently his take on Ashley 's past . This casts suspicion on Ashley 's behalf , as <unk> always work alone . 
 The Crimson Blades , under direct orders of Cardinal <unk> , are a group that is part of the Cardinal 's Knights of the Cross , in charge of seeking heretics and quelling cults . Romeo Guildenstern , their leader , is a pious man , deeply faithful to his belief and consequently immune to the Dark 's powers . Under orders of the Cardinal , he pursues Sydney with a small army in his command and his captains : Samantha , Duane , Grissom , Tieger and <unk> . 
 Müllenkamp is a cult based in Leá Monde . The city suffered a catastrophe when the population was killed in an earthquake . The city , filled with corpses controlled by Darkness , is the cult 's stronghold . Sydney and his accomplice , Hardin , survive the pursuit of the Crimson Blade , though Hardin sometimes doubts Sydney 's intentions . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 The plot of Vagrant Story , titled " The Phantom Pain " , is presented as the prelude to the " story of the wanderer " . Beginning in the Graylands , Ashley and Callo are sent by the VKP to Duke Bardorba 's manor to investigate the Duke 's involvement with Müllenkamp and the Cardinal 's interest in Sydney <unk> . Ashley infiltrates the manor and encounters Sydney , witnessing his powers first hand . Sydney escapes with his accomplice Hardin and the Duke 's son Joshua , leaving Ashley with a clue to his whereabouts . This event was dubbed the " Graylands Incident " . 
 Ashley and Callo arrive in Leá Monde and a lone Ashley infiltrates the city through the underground wine cellars . Along the way , he learns of objects holding magical power known as Grimoires and the city 's power to spawn the undead and mythological creatures . He encounters Guildenstern and his lover Samantha , and learns of the condition known as incomplete death and the Cardinal 's true intention for his pursuit of Sydney : immortality . The Crimson Blades confront Ashley and reveals his presence to Guildenstern . 
 Escaping unharmed , Ashley encounters Rosencrantz who intends to join him , though Ashley declines . Rosencrantz tells him of the VKP and the Parliaments ' knowledge of the dark powers of Leá Monde , and that the hidden powers deep within a person can be unleashed with the help of the Dark . In his encounters with Sydney , Ashley is shown visions of his past , where his wife Tia and his son Marco are killed by rogues . Meeting Rosencrantz again , Ashley is told that they were not his family , but mistaken targets he killed during a mission of theirs . Ashley 's guilt over their deaths was manipulated by the VKP to turn Ashley into a loyal Riskbreaker . Ashley recalls his hidden battle skills and experiences " clairvoyance " , seeing the progress of the Crimson Blades , which leads him to the Great Cathedral . 
 Sydney had captured Callo earlier and brought her with them . Callo learned that Hardin was skeptical of Sydney 's plans . She begins to develop the powers of " heart @-@ seeing " , a form of telepathy , as they continue their escape deeper into Leá Monde . With her powers , she learned of Sydney 's intentions and Hardin 's reason to join Müllenkamp and his closeness to Joshua . Sydney left them to stop the others from advancing ; taunting Guildenstern and Samantha , and provoking Ashley to follow him as he intends to bestow his powers upon Ashley . Ashley was not interested in inheriting the powers of Darkness ; seeing that Callo had been captured , his only intention is to rescue her . 
 While discussing the Gran Grimoire , a powerful source of magic , Guildenstern and Samantha discover ancient Kildean letterings carved throughout the city walls . Rosencrantz reveals that the city is the Gran Grimoire and its power lies at the city center : the Grand Cathedral . As Guildenstern leaves for the Grand Cathedral , Rosencrantz searches for Ashley and Sydney . Finding them , Rosencrantz , confident in his immunity against Darkness , tries to force Sydney to surrender his powers . Rosencrantz also assaults Ashley to prove that he is not a suitable candidate for the powers of Darkness . Sydney refuses to listen and kills Rosencrantz by using a possessed statue , leaving Ashley to once again prove himself as his chosen successor . 
 Guildenstern continues on to the Great Cathedral in the center of the city , leading him to Callo , Hardin and Joshua . <unk> Hardin about a certain " key " known as the Blood @-@ Sin , Guildenstern reveals his intentions in acquiring the Dark 's powers . Sydney arrives to teleport Hardin and the rest away , leaving him to Guildenstern . Guildenstern acquires the " key " from him and murders Samantha as his sacrifice for the powers of darkness . Ashley arrives later and listens as Sydney reveals his true intentions . Ashley then confronts Guildenstern and manages to defeat him . 
 Upon Guildenstern 's defeat , Ashley , now bearing the " key " , carries Sydney out of the collapsing city . The creatures spawned within the city begin to disappear . Callo , Hardin and Joshua escape the city , though Hardin dies and the fate of Callo and Joshua remains unknown . In the epilogue , Ashley goes to visit the ailing Duke Bardorba in his manor , although once they were alone , it was Sydney who was in the room . Sydney tells the duke that he had found a suitable heir to the Darkness in Ashley , and that their plan to inherit the powers of Darkness was successful . The duke then proceeds to kill Sydney , and he himself died soon after of unknown causes . In a report received by the VKP a week after the Graylands Incident , the duke was believed to be murdered , and Ashley became the prime suspect , though he was never found again . 
 = = Development = = 
 Matsuno , the game 's producer and director , preferred to create a new game title from scratch and use design ideas from staff collaborations , rather than reusing popular characters and designs that are found in sequels . Vagrant Story is regarded as a mixture of genres , as it contains elements of role @-@ playing in its battles and platform games when in the field map . Matsuno explained that the development team was not eager to place Vagrant Story into a specific genre , preferring to create the game with a genre of its own . 
 During the design phase , Matsuno was shown photographs from France , particularly Saint @-@ Émilion in the region of Bordeaux . This region was visited by one of Matsuno 's colleagues , who was a wine enthusiast and favored Saint @-@ Émilion , one of the largest vineyards of Bordeaux . Captivated by this small town 's architecture , the design team went on a trip to France to adopt these styles into the game . A team of five people was formed on September 1998 , including Matsuno and the principal persons in charge of graphics and decorations , to realize the game 's setting . 
 Development of the game began in January 1998 , spanning two years with manpower that steadily increased from 20 to 50 at peak development phase . The storyline conceived for the game follows Ashley Riot 's origins as a dedicated government agent prior to being the titular " vagrant " who is " involved in many incidents " after the events in Leá Monde . Inspiration for the plot is derived from Hollywood " classic and blockbuster " films as well as European and Asian films . The gameplay was conceived to cater to hardcore gamers who do not " ask for hints and read through strategy guides " . However , Matsuno revealed that over half of the game 's story was cut due to capacity and development time constraints . Memory issues was considered the most challenging aspect of the game development , with the team forced to adjust the game 's interface , texture mapping and polygon mesh in maps , as well as removing gaming elements such as AI @-@ controlled supporting non @-@ player characters that would have joined Ashley in the middle of the game . 
 Vagrant Story was conceived during a time when most games had made the transition into three @-@ dimensional graphics . Games with real @-@ time polygons were the mainstream , and it was decided for Vagrant Story to follow this trend . Murata , the main programmer , expressed his concerns in working towards a large @-@ scale three @-@ dimensional game for the first time . To avoid discrepancies in the frame rate caused by the large number of polygon models , the modeling team had to select an aspect of each character to focus their attention . Art director Minagawa mentioned that painstaking detail were given to each individual model , even to characters that only appear for a few seconds in the game . The same character models were used throughout the game to create a seamless transition between event cutscenes and actual gameplay . The sound effects of Vagrant Story are credited to Minoru Akao , the game 's sound programmer ; and Tomohiro Yajima , the sound editor and engineer . 
 = = = Releases = = = 
 A demo disc of Vagrant Story was included in the packaging of Seiken Densetsu : Legend of Mana in Japan . During the Square Millennium Event held by Square in Tokyo , movies of Vagrant Story such as the opening sequence and the weapon crafting system were presented to onlookers . Matsuno stated that a normal playthrough would take the player five to six hours to complete . 
 In North America , Vagrant Story was released as part of Square 's " Summer of Adventure " that lasted from May to September 2000 . Vagrant Story was released with two discs ; the first disc is the game itself , while the second disc is a demo disc released by Square to give the player a preview of seven titles . The seven titles include three interactive demos and four non @-@ interactive demos ; the former being Chocobo Racing , Front Mission 3 and Threads of Fate , and the latter Chrono Cross , SaGa Frontier 2 , Chocobo 's Dungeon 2 and Legend of Mana . Both discs were included in the North American release on May 15 , 2000 . Due to a ruling by the Quebec government that video game titles in Canada should be sold with both French and English @-@ language instructions , Vagrant Story 's release was delayed in Canada . In the European PAL release , the game did not feature the additional demo disc . 
 = = = Merchandise = = = 
 On April 13 , 2000 , DigiCube published the Vagrant Story Ultimania , the official 496 @-@ page strategy guide for the game with the ISBN 4 @-@ <unk> @-@ 75 @-@ 6 . The contents include staff interviews , a detailed background story , and information on monsters and items . On July 20 , 2006 , the book was republished by Studio BentStuff and Square Enix . Other merchandise include jewellery , T @-@ shirts , cigarette lighters and posters featuring character artwork and CG renders . For the North American release , a 16 @-@ page comic @-@ book tie @-@ in with art by Steve <unk> , Clarence <unk> and Michael Turner of Witchblade fame was published by <unk> Entertainment and Squaresoft . The comic was freely distributed at the Electronic Entertainment Expo 2000 and included an interview between Matsuno and Square Electronic Arts assistant product manager Andrew Shiozaki . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The original score for Vagrant Story was composed , arranged , and produced by Hitoshi Sakimoto , whose previous video game works included the soundtracks to Radiant Silvergun and Final Fantasy Tactics , with additional arrangement by Takeharu Ishimoto for Track 2 – 30 and <unk> Noda for Track 2 – 31 . A Japanese orchestra ensemble , Shinozuka Group , performed for the orchestral piece of Track 2 – 29 . All synthesizing operations are led by Takeharu Ishimoto with assistance from Hidenori Iwasaki for Track 1 – 1 and <unk> Noda for Track 2 – 18 . 
 Sakimoto noted that during the initial phase , he composed " bright and cheerful " tunes similar to Final Fantasy Tactics , but Matsuno emphasized music that was " more deep and heavy " . Matsuno also advised him to listen to music from The X @-@ Files for ideas on ambient scores , and Sakimoto pointed out influences of James Horner and Hans Zimmer in his compositions . Sakimoto was impressed with the dedication of the development team to the game , and expressed uneasiness trying to come up with music during the game previews . Sakimoto created themes for each character and monster , and made several changes in their melody to reflect their relationships , feelings as well as antagonistic views . The soundtrack for Vagrant Story remains to be one of Sakimoto 's favorite compositions . 
 The album was first released on two Compact Discs by DigiCube on March 8 , 2000 bearing the catalog number SSCX @-@ <unk> . It was subsequently re @-@ released by Square Enix on March 24 , 2006 with the catalog number SQEX @-@ <unk> / 9 ; the re @-@ release removed some of the original PlayStation synth reverb , yielding a slightly different version of the audio . The CDs contain 57 tracks , including two remixes and tracks that were not used in the game . Packaged with it is a small booklet featuring interviews with the composer and character artworks . 
 Tracklist 
 = = Reception = = 
 In May 2000 , Vagrant Story was the fifth best @-@ selling PlayStation title of the month . 100 @,@ 000 units were sold in the first 20 days of the game 's release , despite being overshadowed by other Square titles like Final Fantasy IX and Chrono Cross . Vagrant Story was the third of twenty games to date , and the only game on the PlayStation , to receive a perfect score of 40 from Famitsu magazine . 
 Reviews were generally positive — multimedia news websites IGN and GameSpot praised the gameplay and story . IGN described the story as " so deep and intuitive that it 'll likely please fans " , and said the battle system maintains " a needed element of strategy and balance " . The graphics were seen as a breakaway from the clichés of Square 's contemporary titles . Extensive detail was given to the background settings and character expressions . The game 's sound effects have been praised as " well done and impressive , straying from Square 's <unk> noise " , as details such as the background audio help create a believable world for the player . 
 The battle system , however , was described by GameSpot as too complex for beginner players , as even hard @-@ core players require a " comprehensive understanding " of the weapon customization system . IGN pointed out that enemy encounters can be more difficult than boss battles . 1UP.com noted that the game 's inventory was too limited for the vast number of customizations possible ; this was considered particularly troublesome because some boss enemies are only vulnerable to certain types of weapons . 
 Alexander O. Smith is responsible for the English localization of Vagrant Story , using archaic English as compared to its straightforward Japanese version . His effort on translating Vagrant Story was described by Andrew Vestal as an " unparalleled — and unprecedented — work " of Japanese to English video game translation , " in spite of the occasional typo or grammatical hiccup " , as quoted by IGN . Vagrant Story was awarded " Best PlayStation Game " in the E3 2000 IGN Awards and was nominated for Best Console Action / Adventure in the 4th Annual Interactive Achievements Awards held by the Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Three years after its 2000 release , Vagrant Story was selected as one of Sony 's Greatest Hits . Games released as Greatest Hits were sold at a lower price , often increasing units sold . Vagrant Story is also part of Ultimate Hits , Square Enix 's main budget range . The game was later made playable on Sony 's PlayStation Portable and PlayStation 3 consoles when Square Enix announced the title 's release on the PlayStation Stores in Japan , Europe and North America . 
 The 2006 role @-@ playing video game Final Fantasy XII contains several references to Vagrant Story . Terms such as Riskbreaker , <unk> and Kildea ( albeit with different spellings in the localizations ) , are commonly used in both games . According to an interview with Joypad , a French gaming magazine , in 2004 , Yasumi Matsuno claimed during its development that Ivalice , the game world he created when he joined Square in 1995 , is a complex world with a very long history and the stories of Vagrant Story , Final Fantasy Tactics , and Final Fantasy XII are said to unfold quite close on the Ivalice map . The original plan , however , was not to place Vagrant Story in the Ivalice universe . Matsuno stated in 2011 via his Twitter account that the plot elements of Final Fantasy Tactics found in Vagrant Story were meant to be intertextual reference to the Ivalice title as a form of " fan service " . 
 Vagrant Story is acknowledged as a game with an " extreme popularity " outside Japan eight years after it was first released . In October 2007 , during an interview with the development team responsible for the remake of Final Fantasy Tactics for the PlayStation Portable , Final Fantasy Tactics : The War of the Lions , Executive Producer Akitoshi Kawazu was asked about the possibility of a remake or port of the title to the PSP . Kawazu mentioned that it is " the next natural candidate for such an update " , although there would be difficulty in porting the game , because it was a title that already pushed the original PlayStation to its technical limits . Kawazu also remarked that bringing the character Ashley Riot into other Ivalice titles would be difficult since , even in Vagrant Story , " there 's really not that much learn ( ed ) about Ashley Riot " . 
 = Rae Wilson = 
 Rae Wilson is a fictional character from the British Channel 4 soap opera Hollyoaks , played by Alice Barlow . She appeared in the series from 5 October 2009 until 13 September 2011 . Actress Helen Russell @-@ Clark – who went on to play Jem Costello – originally auditioned for the role , but the part was awarded to Barlow . Producer Lucy Allan said Barlow was her favourite addition to the cast during 2009 . 
 Initially portrayed as an imaginary character in a schizophrenia storyline , Rae was later revealed to be real when she arrived to study in Hollyoaks . She was central to a controversial suicide storyline , and was part of a love triangle with Ste Hay ( Kieron Richardson ) and Brendan Brady ( Emmett J. Scanlan ) , which left her pregnant by Ste . She miscarried during an argument with Brendan and subsequently feuded with him ; Barlow praised her character for being one of the few who dared to oppose the Hollyoaks villain . Rae was originally characterised as a chav with a feisty persona , but underwent a transformation when she attempted to embrace domestic life with Ste . During series four of the post @-@ watershed spin @-@ off Hollyoaks Later , Rae was murdered by a serial killer , Silas Blissett ( Jeff Rawle ) . The late broadcast slot allowed an explicit depiction of her death . Barlow hoped that Rae would be remembered for her strong @-@ willed nature , and that her exit would be considered one of the best in the programme 's history . 
 In 2011 , Barlow won an All About Soap award for Rae 's love @-@ triangle storyline . AfterElton criticised the lack of character development Rae received , and along with the Sunday Mercury , bemoaned the dearth of realism exhibited in Rae staying with Ste despite knowing that he was homosexual . Readers of the soap opera magazine Inside Soap indicated that they did not want Silas to murder Rae . 
 = = Creation and casting = = 
 At a July 2009 Hollyoaks press day , series producer Lucy Allan announced that there would be a " big stunt " involving schizophrenic character Barry " Newt " Newton ( Nico Mirallegro ) in October of that year . It was later revealed that a new character , Rae , would join the serial as part of a " shock suicide plot " involving Newt , in which the two characters would jump off a bridge . Alice Barlow 's casting as Rae was announced in October 2009 . Barlow stated that she was " absolutely on top of the world " to receive the part , particularly as one of her childhood dreams was to appear in a soap opera . Helen Russell @-@ Clark – who went on to play Jem Costello in the serial – also auditioned for Rae , and reached the final stages of casting . Allan said Rae was one of her favourite additions to the cast in 2009 and expressed her pride in Barlow 's performance , saying , " to introduce a character as somebody and then to completely change the character six weeks later , while still delivering the performances that Alice does , is a testament to a young actress . " In early 2011 , Barlow decided to leave Hollyoaks to pursue other projects . Her departure was kept secret until her exit scenes were aired . Barlow described her time with the programme as " the perfect end " to her teenage years and said she could not " have asked for anything better . " 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Characterisation = = = 
 In her corporeal state , Rae has gone through a series of transformations . Initially a rather angry chav , she relaunched herself as a DJ . Entanglement in a <unk> love triangle then saw her embrace life as a housewife and carer of small children , but when that didn 't work out she opted to re @-@ relaunch her DJ career . 
 During her first appearances as a figment of Newt 's imagination , Rae was depicted as a goth with an emo persona . When she was reintroduced as a real person , Rae 's character was more reminiscent to that of a chav . The character later underwent a transitional period ; she retained her strong personality , but displayed a weaker side resulting from the setbacks she encountered . Barlow found the role challenging , as her own personality is dissimilar from her character 's . She described Rae as someone who always makes her opinion known , and hoped she would be remembered for her strong @-@ willed persona . 
 = = = Suicide pact = = = 
 Rae was introduced as Newt 's imaginary friend . They made a suicide pact , and jumped off a bridge together into deep water . The stunt was filmed at Stanley Dock in Liverpool , where a 45 @-@ foot ( 14 m ) tower was erected for them to jump from . Although stunt doubles were available , both Barlow and Mirallegro decided to perform their own stunts , and spent around four minutes filming underwater . The storyline received prominent coverage in the media days before the scenes were due to be broadcast because two young girls in Scotland had died in a similar suicide pact , having jumped from the Erskine Bridge into the River Clyde . Channel 4 decided to broadcast the Hollyoaks scenes as planned , and released a statement which explained : 
 We feel it is appropriate to continue with the transmission of these episodes as this is not a one @-@ off programme but an established and long @-@ running series . The audience will be familiar with the character of Newt and this plotline , which has been both trailed and promoted , has been developing over a number of weeks . Hollyoaks has a strong track record of dealing with sensitive issues , and the transmission will be followed by a programme support announcement directing viewers to a 24 @-@ hour helpline . 
 The care home in which the two deceased girls had been housed criticised the decision , and deemed the broadcast " likely to cause further distress . " 
 Allan said the underwater sequence following the bridge jump was her favourite scene of 2009 . She said , " It was a beautiful moment on screen and it was the moment that the audience realised that Newt was trying to kill himself . For me , that moment of realisation made that scene so powerful . " Once the suicide storyline had concluded , it was revealed that Rae was a real character in the series . 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 = = = = Rae , Ste and Brendan = = = = 
 Following Newt 's departure from the series , Rae began dating Ste Hay ( Kieron Richardson ) . A love triangle formed between Rae , Ste and Brendan Brady ( Emmett J. Scanlan ) , who wanted Ste for himself . Scanlan said that Brendan 's actions – paying Veronica ( Lynsey McLaren ) to try and split Ste and Rae up , and giving Ste money to stay away from Rae – demonstrated Brendan 's willingness to use " power and manipulation " . Unaware that Ste and Brendan had begun an affair , Rae discovered that she was pregnant . All About Soap magazine wrote that Rae was " knocked sideways " by the discovery , and noted her uncertainty at the prospect of becoming a teenage mother . Brendan and Ste decide to end their affair for Rae 's sake , but soon resumed their relationship . 
 Rae ultimately learnt of the affair ; Richardson characterised her response as being " shocked and angry " , and Barlow told Inside Soap magazine that the revelation left her character " more torn than ever . " The discovery prompted Rae to consider having an abortion , but Brendan convinced her not to , and revealed that he once lost his own child . Barlow called the scenes " really heartfelt stuff " , and explained that Ste saw no problem with Rae having the baby , as he already had a son and considered himself a good father , whereas it was " a bigger deal " for Rae , who was childless . Discussing Rae and Ste 's relationship , Barlow said that Rae truly loved Ste , and that they had a special connection formed through the hardships they had faced together . Despite this , Rae rebuffed Ste 's attempt to rekindle their relationship . Barlow said that her character could not return to Ste because she knew that he was gay , that Rae was " determined to keep the baby " and wanted to prove that she could be a good single mother . However , during an argument with Brendan , Rae suffered a miscarriage . Barlow found the filming of these scenes difficult . 
 As the storyline concluded , Rae resolved to remain friends with Ste and support him through his difficult relationship with Brendan . This resulted in a feud between Brendan and herself . Barlow explained that Rae had " a handle " on him and was " one of the few characters [ able to ] stand up to Brendan . " She enjoyed portraying this dynamic , and assessed that Rae " always felt like she had the upper hand " as she knew the truth about Brendan 's sexuality . 
 = = = = Rae and Ethan = = = = 
 Rae was involved in a relationship storyline with Ethan Scott ( Craig Vye ) , who was already romancing both Liberty Savage ( Abi Phillips ) and Theresa McQueen ( Jorgie Porter ) . Viewers were initially unaware that Rae was seeing Ethan , but knew that he was cheating on Theresa and Liberty with an unknown third woman . Porter said Theresa , her character , was incredulous when she saw Ethan kissing Rae . Barlow was also surprised by the twist ; she had not expected Rae to be involved . Once the three women discovered the truth about Ethan 's infidelity , they decided that " the best revenge is humiliation " , exposed Ethan 's lies and poured gunge over him in front of the entire village . Vye described the storyline as a " classic case of wanting what you can 't have " . He explained that Ethan was not ready to settle down and would end up alone . 
 The actors involved made an effort to give the storyline a comedic tone , to keep it from becoming too serious . Porter felt that it reflected real life , as there are men in society who behave as Ethan did . The storyline proved popular with viewers , and both Barlow and Porter received a high volume of messages through the social networking website Twitter from viewers expressing their surprise at Rae 's involvement . Digital Spy showcased Rae being exposed as Ethan 's lover and her subsequent revenge plot in its " Pic of the day " feature . 
 = = = Exit and murder = = = 
 Barlow decided to leave Hollyoaks in early 2011 , as she felt she had given all she could to the role . This prompted the producers to devise a memorable exit storyline for Rae . Barlow was informed of their plans in March 2011 , but her exit , and details of the storyline , were concealed from viewers . Speculation arose that Rae would become the next victim of serial killer Silas Blissett ( Jeff Rawle ) ; Barlow tried to discredit these rumours , and denied that she was leaving Hollyoaks as she wanted viewers to be " surprised and shocked " by her exit . 
 In August 2011 , a leaked clip of Silas preparing to attack Theresa was posted on YouTube , which led viewers to believe that Theresa would become his next victim , which was confirmed in the fourth series of Hollyoaks Later . Porter said that it was " scary and worrying " ; however , she would not confirm whether Silas killed her character . Emma Smithwick , the programme 's producer , confirmed that the late night episodes would feature the death of a regular character . 
 When the episodes aired , Silas was angered by Rae 's attitude – her desire to use men for casual flings – and realised he could frame Brendan for her murder . He then beat Rae and strangled her to death in an alleyway . Barlow said that because Hollyoaks Later is broadcast late at night , there were no limits to the storyline , allowing the producers to " do whatever they wanted with it . " She described Rae 's death scene as " absolutely incredible " and loved the chance to work with accredited actor Rawle . She explained that Rae 's death had been kept secret in order to shock viewers in the same way the death of Sarah Barnes ( Loui Batley ) had previously done . Barlow said she was happy and grateful with the nature of her exit storyline , as the opportunity to " go out with a bang " was better than Rae leaving quietly in a taxi . She hoped that Rae 's murder would " go down in Hollyoaks history " as one of the best exits . In the aftermath , Brendan was arrested for Rae 's murder after Silas planted evidence on him . Barlow stated that other characters blamed Brendan because he had caused Rae to fear for her life , and that Ste believed he was culpable because " [ a ] fter all the ups and downs , Ste knows exactly what the relationship between Rae and Brendan has been like and all the problems they 've had . " 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Rae meets Barry " Newt " Newton ( Nico Mirallegro ) while he is living rough , and teaches him how to survive on the streets . She is disliked by Eli ( Marc <unk> ) , Newt 's alternate persona caused by his schizophrenia . Rae and Newt become close and begin a relationship . After Newt admits he has schizophrenia , Eli takes over his mind and tries to kill Rae , but Newt manages to stop him . Newt and Rae decide to escape their problems by committing suicide together by jumping from a height into water . As they climb to the top of a warehouse to jump , Newt 's ex @-@ girlfriend Lauren Valentine ( Dominique Jackson ) and his foster father Jack Osborne ( Jimmy McKenna ) rush to stop Newt , who pushes Eli into the canal as Rae jumps . Newt jumps in after them , but is rescued by Jack . After recovering , Newt locates Rae 's grandmother Lily ( Meryl Hampton ) and tells her that her granddaughter is dead . Rae , however , then arrives alive and well . She does not recognise Newt , and has a different hairstyle and clothing from her previous appearances . Newt realises that he had seen a photograph of Rae and had created an alternate persona around her . The woman he thought he had known was another figment of his imagination . 
 To Rae 's displeasure , her school is soon merged with Newt 's . She rebuffs his attempts to talk to her , and after gaining employment at the local diner , is further dismayed to find that Newt works there . She tries to have him fired , but eventually accepts that they must work together . After she is locked in a cupboard by Lauren , Rae reveals that she is claustrophobic and believes she is cursed . She tells Newt that both of her sisters died before their 18th birthdays and she believes the same will happen to her . Newt helps Rae to overcome her fear of the curse , and she agrees to move to Scotland with him . However , her grandmother suffers a stroke shortly before her planned departure , so she decides to stay in Hollyoaks to care for her . 
 Rae grows close to Ste , her employer at the diner , and they begin dating . Brendan Brady is jealous because he is attracted to Ste , and tries to separate them . Brendan and Ste begin sleeping together ; he tells Ste to continue seeing Rae so their own relationship can remain a secret . Rae discovers that she is pregnant and Ste promises to support her . Rae considers having an abortion but ultimately decides against it . After catching Brendan and Ste kissing , Rae resolves to raise the baby alone , but suffers a miscarriage after a vicious row with Brendan . Rae threatens to out Brendan to the community , so he retaliates by setting her up and having her arrested as a drug dealer . Rae is released without charge after Warren Fox ( Jamie Lomas ) tampers with the substance , which is found to be icing sugar . 
 Rae briefly works as a barmaid at a local pub , but leaves her job after exposing an affair between Gaz Bennett ( Joel <unk> ) and her boss Heidi Costello ( Kim <unk> ) . She begins a relationship with Ethan Scott ( Craig Vye ) , unaware that he is also dating Theresa McQueen and Liberty Savage . When the women discover his infidelity , they plot their revenge together . Rae tells Ethan she has an STD , Theresa claims to be pregnant and Liberty pretends to set a wedding date . They then humiliate Ethan with the truth and throw gunge over him in front of the local residents . 
 When Rae accidentally reveals that Brendan is gay in front of his son , Brendan is furious and threatens to kill her . Rae later tells Silas Blissett ( Jeff Rawle ) about Brendan 's threat , but is unaware that Silas is a serial killer . Rae also reveals that she is tired of men treating her badly , and vows to use them in future . Silas steals Theresa 's phone and sends Rae a text message asking to meet her outside . When Rae emerges , Silas repeatedly punches her , then strangles her to death . He places Rae 's body in the boot of Brendan 's car , framing him . Ste arranges a memorial for her after Brendan is charged with her murder . However , Brendan is later released when Silas is discovered as her killer . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In 2011 , Rae , Ste and Brendan 's romance plot won the " Best Love Triangle " accolade at the All About Soap Bubble Awards . Rae 's murder earned a nomination for " Spectacular Scene of the Year " at the 2012 British Soap Awards . Holy Soap said that Rae 's most memorable moment was being locked in a cupboard and subsequently revealing herself to be cursed . Roz Laws of the Sunday Mercury called Rae 's interest in Ste a mystery , noting his violent history and homosexuality as reasons Rae should have avoided him . Anthony D. Langford of AfterElton said that Hollyoaks had no interest in Rae as a character , and no desire to " make her a real fleshed out person " . He added that Rae had no common sense because " no woman would regularly leave her man alone for long periods of time with the guy she knows he had an affair with . " He also said that Rae should have known that Ste and Brendan 's affair had resumed . 
 Langford later wrote that Rae 's murder and the subsequent blaming of Brendan were predictable , but made " compelling drama " , and that Rae had been killed in " a rather gruesome and shocking fashion " . Jaci Stephen of the Daily Mail criticised the dearth of drug @-@ related storylines in Hollyoaks , and though she praised the element of humour in the plot which saw Rae charged with possession of icing sugar , she said it was " hardly the Marx Brothers " . Inside Soap polled its readers on which Hollyoaks character they most wanted to be murdered by Silas . Rae and Theresa were voted as favourites to survive , while Leanne and Ruby Button ( Anna Shaffer ) were voted to be his next victims . 
 = Sieges of Taunton = 
 The sieges of Taunton were a series of three blockades during the First English Civil War . The town of Taunton , in Somerset , was considered to be of strategic importance because it controlled the main road from Bristol to Devon and Cornwall . Robert Blake commanded the town 's Parliamentarian defences during all three sieges , from September 1644 to July 1645 . 
 The first siege was laid by Edmund Wyndham on 23 September , and was primarily composed of Royalist troops from local Somerset garrisons . After initial assaults drove Blake and his troops back into Taunton Castle , the blockade was conducted from 1 – 2 miles ( 1 @.@ 6 – 3 @.@ 2 km ) away , and concentrated more on starving the garrison than continued attacks . The town was relieved by a force under James Holborne on 14 December . 
 Over the next three months , Blake was able to establish a network of earthen defences in Taunton , including a basic perimeter and a number of forts . The Royalists began the second , and bloodiest , siege in late March 1645 , initially under Sir Richard Grenville . A series of disputes between the Royalist commanders allowed Taunton some respite at the start of the siege , but in May the attacks were fierce under the command of Sir Ralph Hopton . After five days of intense fighting , which had once again driven the defending army back to a small central perimeter including the castle , the Royalists retreated in the face of a Parliamentarian relief army commanded by Ralph Weldon . 
 Lord Goring , who had proposed the second siege , renewed the blockade for a third time in mid @-@ May , after engaging Weldon 's departing army and forcing it back into Taunton . Goring 's siege was lax and allowed provisions into the town , diminishing its effectiveness . The Parliamentarian defence tied up Goring and his 10 – 15 @,@ 000 troops , who would have otherwise been available to fight for the King at Naseby , where historians believe they could have tipped the battle in favour of the Royalists . Instead , after securing a Parliamentarian victory at Naseby , Thomas Fairfax marched his army to relieve Taunton on 9 July 1645 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Loyalties in Somerset were divided at the start of the First English Civil War ; many of the prominent landowners and those living in the countryside favoured King Charles I , but most of the towns , including Taunton , were Parliamentarian , predominantly due to their Puritan beliefs . By August 1642 , the town was held by a small Parliamentarian force . In June the following year , Sir Ralph Hopton led his Royalist army , consisting of eighteen regiments equally split between foot and cavalry , out of Cornwall and into Somerset . He forced the surrender of Taunton to the King without engaging in battle , and established a garrison in Taunton Castle . 
 In mid @-@ 1644 , Robert Devereux , 3rd Earl of Essex , the Chief Commander of the Parliamentary army , decided to reclaim the West Country . He moved through Dorset , retaking Dorchester and Weymouth , and then left the coast and headed towards Chard . At the time , Taunton was held by a garrison of 800 men commanded by Colonel John Stawell , but the proximity of the Earl of Essex 's army led the town to be abandoned , leaving only 80 men to defend the castle . The historian Robert Morris , in The Sieges of Taunton 1644 – 1645 , suggests that Stawell and his men retreated to Bridgwater , but in The History of the Rebellion , the 17th @-@ century historian Edward Hyde claims that the troops were requisitioned by Prince Maurice during his retreat from Lyme Regis to Plymouth . 
 On 8 July 1644 , the Earl of Essex sent a Parliamentarian force , led by Colonel Sir Robert Pye with Lieutenant Colonel Robert Blake as his second in command , to reclaim Taunton . They took the town without a fight , and surrounded the castle . The Royalist forces under Major William Reeve that were garrisoned at Taunton Castle surrendered and retreated to Bridgwater . Pye left Taunton shortly after the capture , leaving Blake to hold the town . Blake had an army of about 1 @,@ 000 men , and was charged with trying to blockade the roads to support the Earl of Essex 's campaign in Devon and Cornwall . 
 = = Sieges = = 
 = = = First siege = = = 
 The Earl of Essex 's campaign failed , suffering a total defeat at the Battle of Lostwithiel in early September 1644 . His remaining forces retreated back to Dorset , leaving only Plymouth , Lyme Regis and Taunton under Parliamentarian control in the South West . Blake was aware of the vulnerability of Taunton , which , unlike many towns and cities of the time , did not have any town walls . On the eastern side of the town , which was the most vulnerable , he dug trenches outside the Eastern gate and erected a barricade across the street within it . At least three earthen forts were also built in that end of town . King Charles I held council in Chard , and shortly after ordered a Royalist force numbering 3 @,@ 000 troops to set up the first siege of Taunton . Initially , Sir Francis Dodington was going to command the attack , but the only available men were those in Bridgwater under the command of Colonel Edmund Wyndham . 
 The siege began on 23 September 1644 . Wyndham was assisted in the attack by his brother , Francis Wyndham , who brought his garrison from Dunster Castle , and Edward Rodney , who commanded an infantry regiment . The Royalist forces initially set themselves up around the town , where they were able to use their artillery to bombard the castle from the west and the town from the east . In his record of the siege , Morris claims that the besieging forces were unable to establish a presence in the town , and set up a wide perimeter roughly 1 – 2 miles ( 1 @.@ 6 – 3 @.@ 2 km ) away . However , almost all other sources agree that after initial skirmishes , the Royalists broke through the eastern defences and forced Blake 's troops back into the castle itself . 
 During the siege , Edmund Wyndham and Blake exchanged letters ; Wyndham initially wrote to explain that he felt the siege was a gentle method of attack , rather than using " fire and sword " . He offered generous terms for surrender , and signed the letter " Your well @-@ wishing Neighbour and Country @-@ man " ; the pair had served as members of parliament together for Bridgwater in 1640 . Blake was unmoved , and wrote back to unequivocally reject the offer . Blake sent skirmishing parties out against the attackers with some success , though food and ammunition began to run out for the defending troops . To further this , Wyndham heavily rationed the town 's population to prevent them smuggling food to the garrison . A petition to Parliament for help was answered when Sir William Waller , who commanded the Parliamentarian army in Wiltshire , sent a force of 3 @,@ 000 men under the command of his deputy , Major General James Holborne , in support of the town . 
 Wyndham had initially planned to attack Holborne 's forces at Chard , but instead retreated back to his garrison at Bridgwater on 14 December . He recorded that during his retreat , " the enemy sallied upon me but they were so hungry that they could not follow me . " The day after the arrival of Holborne , a supply caravan containing food , 2 @,@ 000 muskets and 40 barrels of gunpowder restocked the town . Fearing further Royalist assaults , Holborne provided 1 @,@ 000 of his own men as reinforcements for the town 's defence . 
 = = = Second siege = = = 
 In early 1645 , Blake sent raiding parties out from Taunton that , according to Hyde , controlled a large area and disrupted activities throughout Somerset . Around that time , Lord Goring , the lieutenant @-@ general of the south @-@ eastern counties in the Royalist army , requested troops from the King so that he could mount a " large @-@ scale southeastern campaign " . His request was rejected , and he was despatched to the South West instead . He duly changed his focus , electing to target first Weymouth , and then Taunton , both Parliamentarian strongholds in the area . He took Weymouth , but was unable to hold it in the face of Parliamentarian reinforcements . In a letter he received from the King shortly after that loss , he was ordered to gather the Royalist forces of the area together in order to " [ clear ] those parts of the rebels ' forces . " 
 The King sent orders for Sir Richard Grenville and John Berkeley to support Goring in the attack on Taunton . Goring arrived outside Taunton on 11 March , and a sizeable part of Berkeley 's garrison from Exeter arrived soon after . Grenville did not leave his siege of Plymouth and , coupled with the threat from a Parliamentarian force formed by Waller and Oliver Cromwell combining their armies in Hampshire , the attack on Taunton was postponed . After further urging from the King and the Prince of Wales , Grenville did eventually travel up towards Taunton and was ordered to follow Goring to support the King in the north , as Grenville 's force of 3 @,@ 000 men was considered too small to assault Taunton . He refused , claiming that " he had promised the commissioners of Devon and Cornwall , that he would not advance beyond Taunton " , while also boasting that he could claim the town in ten days . He was delegated command of the siege , and arrived outside Taunton on 2 April . Only a day after his arrival , Grenville was injured while attacking Wellington House , and as the wound was serious , he was carried to Exeter . 
 The blockade set by Grenville was initially some distance from the town , and did not prevent Blake from sending and receiving messages . The besieging army was reinforced soon after with Goring 's infantry and artillery units , and so , with a large force , the attackers closed in on the town , establishing entrenchments within musket @-@ shot of Taunton 's defences . Command of the siege passed to Berkeley , though Grenville 's troops often failed to follow the new commander 's orders , and some of them deserted . Despite Grenville 's retirement from the battle due to injury , he and Berkeley clashed ; Grenville complained to the Prince of Wales that Berkeley was conducting the siege badly , while Berkeley claimed that Grenville had given his men orders to desert . These disagreements led Hopton , by now the commander of the Royalist forces in the West Country , to be given command of the siege . 
 As the siege continued , supplies once again began to run out for the defending army , and Parliament identified the relief of Taunton as being a priority . On 28 April , they ordered Thomas Fairfax , the Commander in Chief of the recently established New Model Army , to relieve the town . Fairfax marched with the whole of his army towards Taunton ; the Royalists considered sending their own army to meet him before he could reach London , but Prince Rupert convinced them instead to focus on conquering the north of England . In response to the Royalist movement north , Fairfax split his own army in two , sending a force of between 6 @,@ 000 and 7 @,@ 000 on to Taunton under Colonel Ralph Weldon , while Fairfax led the rest north . 
 Aware that the Parliamentarians under Fairfax were on their way , Hopton increased the attacks on the town on 6 May . Further attacks the following day focused on the east side of the town , first bombarding it with cannon shot , and then storming the earthen redoubt that Blake had established . After some early success in which they captured one of the earthen forts , the attackers were forced back by a combination of musket shot , stones and boiling water . The next day , after yet more attacks made little impact , Hopton staged a battle on the south side of the town between two parties of his own army in an attempt to make Blake believe the Parliamentarian army had arrived . Hopton hoped that Blake would send out some of his own men to support the relieving force , but the feint failed . That evening , at around 7 pm , the Royalist force , which consisted of around 4 @,@ 200 infantry and 2 @,@ 000 cavalry , launched an all @-@ out assault against the town . In heavy fighting , the attackers captured two of the earthen forts on the eastern side of town , and broke through the defences . Once inside Blake 's outer perimeter , the besieging army discovered that there were Parliamentarian musketeers within every house , which prevented them advancing any further , though they did set fire to a number of buildings , hoping to force the defenders to retreat . The tactic failed when the wind blew the flames back towards the Royalists , halting their attack . 
 The attack was renewed around 11 am on 9 May , and over the next seven hours , Hopton 's army advanced slowly through the town . His forces pushed the Parliamentarian troops back one building at a time , until they were left with only a small area of land in the middle of the town . Within the perimeter was the castle , an entrenchment in the market square , St Mary Magdalene Church and an earthen defence known as " Maiden 's fort " . By this time , a combination of artillery and arson attacks had set most of the east side of town on fire . An attempt by three people — two men and a woman — to set fires inside the remaining defences was quashed , and the culprits lynched . 
 Further assaults were made on 10 May , along with a demand for Blake and his men to surrender , to which Blake responded that he " had four pairs of boots left and would eat three of them before he yielded . " Weldon 's relieving force had met with small parties of the Royalist army around Chard and <unk> , and they sent an advance party ahead of them , which reached Orchard Portman , roughly 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) south of Taunton , on 10 May . Fearing that they were facing the entirety of Fairfax 's army , Hopton ordered his forces to abandon their attacks and retreat to Bridgwater . As they left , they felled trees across roads to slow the Parliamentarian advance . Weldon 's army arrived in Taunton on 11 May , relieving and restocking the town . Accounts of Taunton 's losses vary between 50 and 200 killed , with 200 or more casualties on top of that , while two thirds of the houses in the town had been razed . Having relieved Taunton , Weldon and his army left the following day and marched eastwards . 
 = = = Third siege = = = 
 Over the course of the siege , Lord Goring had been with the King in Oxford , and on 10 May he returned to Bristol with a royal warrant pronouncing him the Commander of the Royalist Army in the West Country , replacing Hopton . Goring began his operations by harrying Weldon 's army , and forcing them to retreat back to Taunton . Goring , commanding about 10 @,@ 000 men , established a third siege of the town in under a year . He ignored orders from the King for him to support the Royalist efforts in the Midlands , claiming that " Taunton would be taken in a few days . " Despite his promises , he soon discovered that his army was too small to enact a rapid takeover of the town , and he established a loose blockade . Hyde , who is frequently scathing of Goring in his description of the Civil War , recalls that " Goring was so far from making any advance upon Taunton , that he grew much more negligent in it than he had been ; suffered provisions , in great quantities , to be carried into the town . " As well as being lax in his siege , Goring was often drunk and — reminiscent of the earlier siege — was deserted by many of his troops . 
 The regional commander of the Parliamentarian forces , Colonel Edward Massey , was ordered to relieve Taunton in June , but he could only raise 3 @,@ 000 men ; far less than was needed to dispel Goring 's army . The New Model Army , with Fairfax at their head , were busy in the Midlands defeating the bulk of the Royalist army at the Battle of Naseby , described by modern sources as " the decisive clash of the English Civil War " . Goring had been ordered by the King to abandon his siege and join the Royalist forces at Naseby , and it has been suggested by modern historians that with his forces , and his leadership , the Royalists might have won the battle . Immediately after securing that victory , Fairfax led his army down towards Taunton once again . Aware of the approaching army , Lord Goring mounted a final assault on the town , hoping to catch Blake unaware by sending his cavalry towards the town on 9 July . The attack was neutralised by a section of Fairfax 's army in Ilminster , and Goring withdrew from Taunton to meet Fairfax at the Battle of Langport , relieving the third and final siege of Taunton during the English Civil War . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In his history of Taunton , H. J. Wickenden suggests that over half of the town was burned or destroyed during the three sieges , while Diane Purkiss claims that it was as high as two thirds of the town . Several compensation payouts were made to the town and some of its residents , funded by fines against those who had fought for the Royalists , such as Sir William Portman , who had been the Member of Parliament for Taunton at the outbreak of the war and was fined £ 7 @,@ 000 . Although the Parliamentarians destroyed many of the castles that had featured in the Civil War , Taunton Castle was considered a Parliamentarian stronghold , and remained intact . In 1647 , only two years after the end of the sieges , the castle was sold as part of the estate of Taunton Manor . In 1660 , shortly after taking the throne , Charles II stripped Taunton of its town charter for its part in the Civil War , and had the castle 's outer walls removed . 
 After commanding the defence of Taunton , Blake was ordered to capture Dunster Castle , which he achieved after a nine @-@ month siege . After the war , he was honoured by Parliament for his efforts and rewarded with £ 500 , while a further £ 2 @,@ 000 was split amongst his men . He took no side during the Second Civil War and , three years later , under the Commonwealth of England , he became a general at sea , as one of the three commissioners of the navy , and spent the rest of his life as a naval commander , for which he remains best known . 
 = Afternoon = 
 Afternoon is the time of the day between noon and evening . It is the time when the sun is descending from its zenith in the sky to somewhat before its terminus at the horizon in the west direction . In human life , it occupies roughly the latter half of the standard work and school day . It is also associated with a number of concerns related to health , safety , and economic productivity : generally , the early afternoon , after most people have eaten lunch , corresponds to decreased work performance , decreased alertness , and a higher incidence of motor vehicle accidents . It is usually from 12 PM to 6 PM . 
 = = Terminology = = 
 Afternoon is the time occurring between noon and evening . The specific range of time this encompasses varies in one direction : noon is currently defined as a constant 12 : 00 pm , but when afternoon ends is dependent on when evening begins , for which there is no standard definition . However , before a period of transition from the twelfth to fourteenth centuries , noon instead referred to 3 pm — possible explanations include shifting times for prayers and midday meals , along which one concept of noon was defined — and so afternoon would have referred to a narrower timeframe . 
 The word afternoon , which derives from after and noon , has been attested from about the year 1300 ; Middle English contained both afternoon and the synonym <unk> . The standard locative marking for the word was at afternoon in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries but has shifted to in the afternoon since then . In Southern U.S. and Midland American English , the word evening is sometimes used to encompass all times between noon and night . The Irish language contains four different words to mark time intervals from late afternoon to nightfall , this period being considered mystical . Metaphorically , the word afternoon refers to a relatively late period in the expanse of time or in one 's life . 
 The term should not be confused with " after noon " ( two separate words ) , which is a translation of the Latin post <unk> ( p.m. ) , meaning a time between 12 : 00 midday and 12 : 00 midnight . 
 = = Events = = 
 Afternoon is a time when the sun is descending from its daytime peak . During the afternoon , the sun moves from roughly the center of the sky to deep in the west . In late afternoon , sunlight is particularly bright and glaring , because the sun is at a low angle in the sky . The standard working time in most industrialized countries goes from the morning to the late afternoon or evening — <unk> , 9 am to 5 pm — so the latter part of this time takes place in the afternoon . Schools usually let out during the afternoon as well . 
 = = Effects on living organisms = = 
 = = = Hormones and body temperature = = = 
 In diurnal animals , it is typical for blood levels of the hormone cortisol — which is used to increase blood sugar and aid metabolism and is also produced in response to stress — to be most stable in the afternoon after decreasing throughout the morning . However , cortisol levels are also the most reactive to environmental changes unrelated to sleep and daylight during the afternoon . As a result , this time of day is considered optimal for researchers studying stress and hormone levels . Plants generally have their highest photosynthetic levels of the day at noon and in the early afternoon , owing to the sun 's high angle in the sky . The large proliferation of maize crops across Earth has caused tiny , harmless fluctuations in the normal pattern of atmospheric carbon dioxide levels , since these crops photosynthesize large amounts of carbon dioxide during these times and this process sharply drops down during the late afternoon and evening . 
 In humans , body temperature is typically highest during the mid to late afternoon . However , human athletes being tested for physical vigor on exercise machines showed no statistically significant difference after lunch . Owners of factory farms are advised to use buildings with an east – west ( as opposed to north – south ) orientation to house their livestock , because an east – west orientation generally means thicker walls on the east and west to accommodate the sun 's acute angle and intense glare during late afternoon . When these animals are too hot , they are more likely to become belligerent and unproductive . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The afternoon , especially the early afternoon , is associated with a dip in a variety of areas of human cognitive and productive functioning . Notably , motor vehicle accidents are common in the early afternoon , when drivers presumably have recently finished lunch . A study of motor accidents in Sweden between 1987 and 1991 found that the time around 5 pm had by far the most accidents : around 1 @,@ 600 at 5 pm compared to around 1 @,@ 000 each at 4 pm and 6 pm . This trend may have been influenced by the afternoon rush hour , but the morning rush hour showed a much smaller increase . In Finland , accidents in the agriculture industry are most common in the afternoon , specifically Monday afternoons in September . 
 One psychology professor studying circadian rhythms found that his students performed somewhat worse on exams in the afternoon than in the morning , but even worse in the evening . Neither of these differences , however , was statistically significant . Four studies carried out in 1997 found that subjects who were given tests on differentiating traffic signs had longer reaction times when tested at 3 : 00 pm and 6 : 00 pm than at 9 : 00 am and 12 : 00 pm . These trends held across all four studies and for both complex and abstract questions . 
 Human productivity routinely decreases in the afternoon . Power plants have shown significant reductions in productivity in the afternoon compared to the morning , the largest differences occurring on Saturdays and the smallest on Mondays . One 1950s study covering two female factory workers for six months found that their productivity was 13 percent lower in the afternoon , the least productive time being their last hour at work . It was summarized that the differences came from personal breaks and unproductive activities at the workplace . Another , larger study found that afternoon declines in productivity were greater during longer work shifts . 
 It is important to note , however , that not all humans share identical circadian rhythms . One study across Italy and Spain had students fill out a questionnaire , then ranked them on a " <unk> – <unk> " scale . The results were a fairly standard bell curve . Levels of alertness over the course of the day had a significant correlation with scores on the questionnaire . All categories of participants — evening types , morning types , and intermediate types — had high levels of alertness from roughly 2 pm to 8 pm , but outside this window their alertness levels corresponded to their scores . 
 = Kit Mueller = 
 Christopher J. " Kit " Mueller ( born c . 1971 ) is a retired American basketball player . He played high school basketball in the Chicago metropolitan area for Downers Grove South High School . Subsequently , he starred for the Princeton Tigers men 's basketball team , where he was a two @-@ time Ivy League Men 's Basketball Player of the Year ( 1990 and 1991 ) and three @-@ time first team All @-@ Ivy League player ( 1989 , 1990 and 1991 ) as a center . He was also a two @-@ time Academic All @-@ America selection . As an All @-@ Ivy League performer , he led his team to three consecutive Ivy League Championships and NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournaments . 
 He matriculated to Princeton University , after an injury late in his senior year caused other Division I schools to withdraw their offers . As of 2011 , he continues to rank second and fourth in school history in career assists ( 381 ) and points ( 1546 ) , respectively . He led the team in rebounds all four seasons and in points , assists and blocked shots three times each . He led the Ivy League in field goal percentage three times and ranks third all @-@ time in Princeton history in that statistic for his career . 
 The team earned three consecutive Ivy League championships during his career , including an undefeated conference record during his senior season . Despite the team 's success and his individual accolades , his Princeton tenure was punctuated by three NCAA Tournament first round losses by a total of seven points , most notably the March 17 , 1989 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament first round 50 – 49 loss to the number @-@ one seeded Georgetown Hoyas team featuring Alonzo Mourning and Dikembe Mutombo as well as 1989 Big East Conference Men 's Basketball Player of the Year Charles Smith . 
 After his collegiate career ended , Mueller played professional basketball in Switzerland . Then he returned to Chicago , where he became a hedge fund trader . In Chicago , he has played amateur 3 @-@ on @-@ 3 basketball with other Ivy League athletes at national competitions . 
 = = High school = = 
 Mueller attended Downers Grove South High School . As a freshman , he led the sophomore team with 18 points per game . He came off the bench for the varsity team as a sophomore to average 10 points per game as a 6 @-@ foot @-@ 3 @-@ inch ( 1 @.@ 91 m ) 185 @-@ pound ( 84 kg ) forward . He grew 2 inches ( 5 @.@ 1 cm ) and 20 pounds ( 9 @.@ 1 kg ) prior to his junior season and became a center . As a junior , his outside shot was still undeveloped , but he averaged 20 points and 10 rebounds , leading his team to the 1986 Des Plaines Valley League championship and a second straight trip to the sectional finals . The team was ranked in the Chicago Sun @-@ Times Super 25 for a couple of weeks during the season . He was benched for one game in early March of his junior year for disciplinary reasons by coach Dick <unk> . The Chicago Sun @-@ Times named him the MVP of the league . Mueller also played varsity tennis as a junior . Following the school year , he played in the suburban summer basketball league at Triton College in River Grove , Illinois . 
 As a senior , he was his team 's only returning varsity letterman , and was ranked by the Chicago Sun @-@ Times among the preseason top 50 Metro Chicago basketball players . Off The Glass , a national basketball magazine , ranked him among the 19 best basketball players in the state of Illinois , along with Walter Bond , Marcus Liberty , Brian Banks and Rodell Davis . At the beginning of December of his senior season , the team was ranked 23rd in the Chicago Sun @-@ Times ' Metro Chicago top 25 , and there was talk of the team improving on the 23 – 6 record of the prior year . He led the West Suburban Conference in scoring and rebounding most of the season and was an All @-@ Conference selection . Mueller posted his career @-@ high 45 points on March 3 , 1987 in an 83 – 47 victory against Montini High School . By the end of his senior season , he was one of the 20 All @-@ Chicago Area selections by the Chicago Sun @-@ Times , in a class that included Eric Anderson , Bond , Liberty and Sam Mack , after averaging 23 points and 14 rebounds . However , unlike Anderson , Liberty and Bond , he was not one of the 9 area All @-@ State nominees . 
 Mueller , who scored 1290 out of 1600 on his SAT and a 31 on his ACT , was a highly recruited high school basketball player . However , by early March 1987 , he had not signed a National Letter of Intent as a commitment to any school . At that time , he was keeping a pair of piranhas at home in an aquarium and accidentally injured his left foot by breaking the aquarium 's glass . The resulting injury caused severe damage to his leg including a severed achilles tendon ; he had surgery to repair the damage in late March . Division I schools like Northwestern University withdrew their scholarship offers ; however , Princeton maintained an interest , with supporters like John Rogers behind him . As most of his scholarship offers were withdrawn , he began to focus on schools that could provide him an academic opportunity in the event that his basketball career was over . He eventually matriculated to Princeton unsure of whether he would ever play competitive basketball again . 
 = = College = = 
 As a freshman , Mueller helped the 1987 – 88 Tigers win their final three games in March to finish the season with a 17 – 9 ( 9 – 5 Ivy League ) record . He posted 25 points in the March 1 , 1988 67 – 65 victory against Penn . Then , two games later in the final game of the season on March 5 , he added 22 in 79 – 58 victory over league champion Cornell . He finished the season as the Ivy League statistical champion in field goal percentage for the first of three times . He led the team in rebounds and blocked shots . 
 Mueller began his career wearing the number 55 , but switched to 00 by his sophomore year . During his sophomore season , the 1988 – 89 team earned a # 1 vs. # 16 matchup in the first round of the 1989 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament with their Pete Carril @-@ coached <unk> offense . The New York Times reported that the matchup seemed comical to some even though <unk> had a system that frustrated many offensive systems and had already produced upsets . In the St. Patrick 's Day Georgetown game , the 16th @-@ seeded Tigers were 23 point underdogs according to the Las Vegas bookmakers and Dick Vitale had promised to serve as a Tiger ballboy if they won . Entering the game , the last four Ivy League representatives in the tournament had lost in the first round by an average of 35 points . During the game , Mueller 's defensive assignment was Mourning , and he contributed 9 points and 8 assists to Princeton 's 49 @-@ point effort . During the game , Mueller played beyond the foul line on the offensive end , forcing Mourning to leave passing lanes open for back @-@ door attacks . Although the strategy enabled Princeton to stay in the game , Mourning had seven blocked shots , including two in the final fifteen seconds . Mueller 's final shot was deflected by Mourning , which is remembered by Princeton fans as an uncalled foul . The team finished with a 19 – 8 ( 11 – 3 ) record . Later in the same tournament , Duke would use Christian Laettner at the top of the key , like Princeton had used Mueller , and eliminate Georgetown by shutting down Mourning . The Princeton @-@ Georgetown game is regarded as one of only a handful of close # 1 vs. # 16 matchups in NCAA tournament history . For the season , he repeated as Ivy League field goal percentage champion . He was a first @-@ team All @-@ Ivy honoree . He led the team in points , rebounds , assists and blocked shots . 
 As a junior , Mueller led the 1989 – 90 Tigers to a repeat Ivy League championship as the Ivy League Player of the Year . The team earned a 13 seed for the 1990 NCAA Tournament . The team finished with a 20 – 7 ( 11 – 3 ) record after losing to the Arkansas Razorbacks by a 68 – 64 margin . Mueller was one of only six Tigers to appear in the game and led the team with 19 points . As a junior , Mueller earned a third team Academic All @-@ America recognition from College Sports Information Directors of America . He was a first @-@ team All @-@ Ivy performer as well as Ivy League Player of the Year . He led the team in points , rebounds , and assists . 
 In a February 23 , 1991 , game against Cornell , Mueller earned his current position as Princeton 's second all @-@ time leading scorer one night after the 1990 – 91 Princeton Tigers men 's basketball team had clinched its third consecutive Ivy League championship with a victory over Columbia . The team went undefeated in the Ivy League and earned a birth in the 1991 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament . After its strong tournament performances in the prior two seasons and strong regular season , the team earned a number 8 seed , which was a record for the highest seed by an Ivy League school at the time . The team had another close but disappointing loss , this time by a 50 – 48 margin to Villanova , finishing with a 24 – 3 ( 14 – 0 ) record . That year , senior Mueller served as team captain , and earned first team Academic All @-@ America honors . That season marked the third year that Mueller led the team in points , assists and blocked shots and fourth time he led the team in rebounds . For the season , he earned his third Ivy League field goal percentage championship . He repeated as Ivy League Player of the Year and was a first @-@ team All @-@ Ivy performer for the third consecutive season . 
 He continues to remain prominent in the Princeton basketball record books . When Mueller ended his career , his 1546 career points trailed only Bill Bradley and his 381 career assists were also second in school history . His single @-@ season assist totals of 140 in 1989 @-@ 90 and 128 in 1990 @-@ 91 remain second and fourth in school history . Only one other Tiger has totalled 11 assists in a game ( a feat Mueller achieved three times ) . His career 59 @.@ 5 field goal percentage is third in school history , as is his sophomore single @-@ season rate of 64 @.@ 9 % . A 2009 publication by ESPN ranked him among the five greatest basketball players in Princeton history . On March 19 , 2012 , Doug Davis surpassed Mueller for second place on the Princeton scoring list . On March 1 , 2013 , Ian Hummer passed him as well . 
 = = Post graduate = = 
 After graduation , Mueller played professional basketball in Switzerland . He then became a professional hedge fund trader , and has played in competitive 3 @-@ on @-@ 3 basketball leagues with various combinations of Ivy League athletes including Arne Duncan , Craig Robinson , Mitch Henderson and Rogers in the mid to late 1990s and early 2000s . The mid @-@ 1990s versions of the team were Chicago area champions . In 1998 , he won a 3 @-@ on @-@ 3 tournament in Dallas with Rogers and Robinson . Both the 2001 and 2003 versions of the team , named " Slow and Steady " , qualified for national competition . The 2003 team with Duncan , Robinson , Henderson and Brian Earl made the national championship . 
 = Air ( visual novel ) = 
 Air is a Japanese adult visual novel developed by Key released on September 8 , 2000 for Windows PCs . Key later released versions of Air without the erotic content , and the game was ported to the Dreamcast , PlayStation 2 and PlayStation Portable . The story follows the life of Yukito Kunisaki , a traveling showman searching for the " girl in the sky " . He arrives in a quiet , seaside town where he meets three girls , one of whom is the key to the end of his journey . 
 The gameplay in Air follows a branching plot line which offers pre @-@ determined scenarios with courses of interaction , and focuses on the appeal of the three female main characters by the player character . The game is divided into three segments — Dream , Summer , and Air — which serve as different phases in the overall story . The title of the game reflects the prominent themes of the air , skies , and use of wings throughout gameplay . The game ranked as the best @-@ selling PC game sold in Japan for the time of its release , and charted in the national top 50 several more times afterwards . Air has sold over 300 @,@ 000 units across several platforms . 
 Following the game 's release , Air made several transitions into other media . A manga by Yukimaru Katsura was serialized in Kadokawa Shoten 's Comptiq , and later published into two volumes . Comic anthologies and art books were also published , as were audio dramas and several albums of music . Kyoto Animation produced a 13 @-@ episode anime television series and a two @-@ episode anime mini @-@ series in 2005 , and Toei Animation produced an anime film in 2005 . The anime adaptations are licensed by Funimation who released them in North America . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Air is a romance visual novel in which the player assumes the role of three characters . Much of its gameplay is spent on reading the story 's narrative and dialogue . Air follows a branching plot line with multiple endings , and depending on the decisions that the player makes during the game , the plot will progress in a specific direction . With the consumer ports , if an undesired choice was selected , there would be an option to rewind the story to correct the mistake . However , if the player reaches a bad end to a storyline , the player does not have this option and must reload the game at the last saved point . 
 There are five main plot lines that the player will have the chance to experience , three which are initially available and two more which can later become available . Throughout gameplay , the player is given multiple options to choose from , and text progression pauses at these points until a choice is made . To view all plot lines in their entirety , the player will have to replay the game multiple times and choose different choices to further the plot to an alternate direction . 
 When first playing the game , the player assumes the role of Yukito Kunisaki and the scenarios for the three heroines are available in what is called the Dream story arc . After the plot lines for these three heroines have been completed , an additional scenario called Summer is made available where the player assumes the role of <unk> . Summer is a linear novel arc in which no choices are presented to the player . Upon the completion of the Summer route , another scenario called Air is made available , which serves as the true ending to the story . In Air , the player assumes the role of a crow named Sora . In the adult versions of the game , there are scenes with sexual CGs depicting Yukito and a given heroine having sex . Later , Key released versions of Air without the erotic content . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting and themes = = = 
 There are important locations featured in Air that are based on places in the city Kami in Hyōgo Prefecture , Japan . Air is set in the Kasumi district of Kami ; during the course of the series ' creation , Kasumi was an individual town that has since merged with two others to form the city of Kami . Many of the locales in Air , such as the seawall , the train station , the shrine , and the school are based on real places . As Air is set in the middle of summer , the season offers bright , sunny skies for the town during the day . In the manga adaptation , the town is described as a " quiet town with few people ... with nothing but beaches and countryside . " Scenario assistant Yūichi Suzumoto has commented that his impression of Air is similar to that of a folk song due to the rural setting and heartwarming story progression . 
 As indicated by the title , air , skies and wings are important themes : Yukito is searching for the " girl in the sky " , and Misuzu believes her other self is flying in the sky above her . Other characters show a similar relationship to the sky , such as Minagi who is a member of the astronomy club , and Michiru who has a fondness for bubbles that float in the air . Kano wants wings to fly , and Kanna already has them . Misuzu names a crow she finds Sora ( 空 ) — Japanese for sky . Another major theme is the maternal bond , as the four heroines ' stories , as well as Yukito 's , revolve around their mothers , either biological or adoptive . Main scenario writer Jun Maeda commented that he prefers to include mothers in games if given the choice between only include a mother and father , as is what happened with Air , though he backs this up by noting that in bishōjo games , women are the main focus anyway . Complicated relationships involving family members and friends play a key part throughout the story . One of the sub @-@ themes in the story is magic . <unk> , Yukito 's mother , and Yukito himself have the ability to use magic , though Yukito is the least skilled among them . Kano was told by her sister that when she grows up and takes off her yellow ribbon , she will gain the power to do magic . However , the problems of parents leaving their offspring and poverty are displayed realistically . 
 = = = Main characters = = = 
 The player assumes the role of Yukito Kunisaki , the protagonist of Air . He lives a poor life going from town to town with little money , trying to make a living off his show with a puppet . By being an adolescent or young adult , Yukito sometimes acts childishly if provoked . Yukito tends to be helpful to those around him while trying to earn any money at the same time , and does his best to look after Misuzu in the Dream arc . Misuzu Kamio , the main heroine of Air , makes Yukito quite mistrustful at first by being too friendly , but eventually earns his affection . She is a cheerful but introverted , slightly clumsy and simplistic high school girl , and often utters the pseudo @-@ <unk> phrase <unk> when she feels troubled , a habit she retained from childhood . Misuzu has a great love of dinosaurs , finding the story of their glory and extinction " romantic " . The second of the three heroines Yukito meets after Misuzu is Kano Kirishima , a girl attending the same school as Misuzu . She is usually energetic , playful , and tells jokes by saying nonsensical things . Kano is friends with a strange stray dog named Potato that follows her around and is able to communicate in his strange manner of speech . Kano still believes in things she was told by her older sister Hijiri as a child as a way of coping with her past . The third and final heroine Yukito meets is a girl in Misuzu 's class at school named Minagi Tohno , a top student in the school who is introverted as well . Until she met Yukito , her only friend was Michiru , with whom she often blows bubbles at the abandoned train station in town . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 Air 's story revolves around three girls whose lives are connected to the same man . In the first story arc , Dream , Yukito Kunisaki is a showman traveling across Japan , continuing his late mother 's search for the " girl in the sky " . The story opens on Monday July 17 , 2000 when Yukito comes across a small seaside town where the story takes place . On his first day in town , Yukito tries to earn money by putting on a mysterious puppet show where he manipulates a doll magically without strings for a small audience of kids passing by . Yukito is unsuccessful in gaining the children 's favor , and the children leave without paying him for his performance . That night , Yukito sleeps on the town 's seawall by the beach . Yukito collapses from heat stroke the next day and is taken to a nearby fisherman 's guild ; after he awakens , they feed him , and give him some very large rice balls to take with him as he is leaving . As he sits on the town 's seawall eating one of the rice balls , he notices a young girl beside him who introduces herself as Misuzu Kamio — a sincere yet clumsy girl who is eager to become friends with him . Misuzu persistently attempts to play with him , while Yukito tries to refuse her efforts . He eventually follows her home lured by the chance to eat . After Haruko , Misuzu 's aunt and foster mother , is persuaded , it is decided that he will stay with them for the time being . 
 The next day , Yukito meets a girl named Kano Kirishima and a stray dog named Potato ; Kano and Misuzu go to the same high school . Later that day , Yukito meets a third girl named Minagi Tohno , Misuzu 's classmate , and her friend Michiru . Like Misuzu , both Kano and Minagi have strange personalities connected with mysterious pasts . Before long , a legend of " one thousand summers " begins to unfold where the mysteries of the past are framed primarily by the relationship between Yukito and Misuzu . The cursed " girl in the sky " Yukito has been searching for turns out to be Misuzu . By the time he figures this out , she has already grown to love him and has passed her 15th birthday . Once these things have come to pass , the " girl in the sky " is cursed to die . The remainder of this arc is dedicated to Yukito 's attempt to save her , trying to effectively break the curse . 
 The next arc , Summer , reveals events that occurred in the summer of one thousand years before the Dream arc , taking place in the Heian period . <unk> no mikoto , or Kanna , is one of the last winged beings in Air 's fictional setting and is held as a prisoner in her own castle . Since she bears wings on her back , she is not permitted to leave the castle walls or see her mother , who is in a similar situation elsewhere . With <unk> , a member of her samurai guard , and <unk> , a fledgling telekinetic , Kanna escapes and traverses feudal Japan to find her mother . However , the rest of the guard and a sect of Buddhist monks follow them . After catching up , they place a curse on Kanna where she must endure constant reincarnation and death whenever she finds love ; Misuzu is one such reincarnation . 
 In the last arc , Air , Yukito 's final wish to save Misuzu 's life is heard . The story starts over from the Dream arc , although it is seen through the view point of a crow Misuzu finds and names Sora . New things are revealed that were not seen following Yukito in the Dream arc . After Misuzu finds Sora and brings him back home , her condition worsens and eventually she forgets even who Haruko is . Misuzu 's father Keisuke Tachibana shows up during this arc wanting to take Misuzu back to his home , but Haruko pleads with him to grant her more time , and they agree on extending the time for three more days . After the three days pass , Keisuke comes back and sees the love between Misuzu and Haruko ; he decides to let them stay together . The remainder of this arc has Misuzu and Haruko spending time together like mother and daughter , culminating in Misuzu 's death . 
 = = Development = = 
 After the completion of Kanon , the Key staff started production on Air and expanded the number of people involved in this project compared to Kanon . The executive producer for Air was Takahiro Baba from VisualArt 's , the publishing company that Key is under . The planning for Air was headed by Jun Maeda who was also one of two main scenario writers , the other being Takashi Ishikawa . Scenario assistance was provided by four more people : Kazuki Fujii , Kai , Tōya Okano , and Yūichi Suzumoto . Art direction was headed by Key 's artist Itaru Hinoue who worked on the character design . Further computer graphics were split between three people — Miracle Mikipon , Na @-@ Ga , and Shinory — and background art was provided by Din and Torino . The music in the game was composed primarily by Shinji Orito , Jun Maeda , and Magome Togoshi , who had started working with Key since before Kanon 's release . After the completion of Air , two of the staff — Kazuki Fujii , and Takashi Ishikawa — left Key . 
 Jun Maeda , the main scenario writer of Air , commented that in the early stages of Air 's production , it was already decided that it was to be an adult game , and he further assumes that if it was not at least first released with adult content , that it would not have been as commercially successful . Maeda also commented that he wanted to write Air to give players the chance to experience the entire story as a whole rather than just a sum of differing parts as typical bishōjo games do , including Kanon . While attempting to do this , Maeda also tried to simultaneously make it seem similar to typical visual novels in the same genre as Air to give the game appeal to the players who often play such games . As such , while the game incorporates stories from several characters , they are all of varying lengths . 
 = = = Release history = = = 
 Air was released as an adult game on September 8 , 2000 as a limited edition , playable on a Windows PC as a 2 @-@ disc CD @-@ ROM set . The limited edition came bundled with the remix album <unk> remixing background music tracks featured in the visual novel . The regular edition was released on July 27 , 2001 . Key released on all ages version on July 27 , 2001 for Windows . An updated adult version called the Air Standard Edition was released on April 8 , 2005 with added support for Windows 2000 / XP as a DVD @-@ ROM . An updated all ages version of Air compatible for Windows Vista PCs was released by Key on July 31 , 2009 in a box set containing five other Key visual novels called Key 10th Memorial Box . Another updated all ages version compatible for Windows 7 PCs called Air Memorial Edition was released on May 28 , 2010 . 
 The first consumer console port of the game was released for the Dreamcast ( DC ) on September 20 , 2001 by NEC Interchannel . A PlayStation 2 ( PS2 ) version was released on August 8 , 2002 also by NEC Interchannel . The PS2 version was re @-@ released as a " Best " version on September 1 , 2005 . The PS2 version was bundled in a " Key 3 @-@ Part Work Premium Box " package together with the PS2 versions of Kanon and Clannad released on July 30 , 2009 . To compensate for the lack of erotic content in the consumer ports , extra scenes were added . 
 A version playable on SoftBank 3G mobile phones was released by Prototype through VisualArt 's Motto on May 1 , 2007 . Prototype later released a VGA edition produced by NTT DoCoMo playable on FOMA phones in February 2008 . The version for the FOMA phones was split into two separate files : the Dream story arc comprised the first file , and the remaining Summer and Air arcs comprised the second file . A version of the Dream arc playable on Android devices was released on July 27 , 2012 . A version containing the Summer and Air arcs for Android devices was released on August 15 , 2012 . A full version Air on Android devices was released on October 24 , 2012 in two editions : one without voice acting , and one with voice acting , including Yukito . Two versions were released on May 2 , 2013 : an adult version for Android devices and an all ages version playable on iOS devices . A PlayStation Portable ( PSP ) version of the game was released in Japan on November 22 , 2007 by Prototype . A downloadable version of the PSP release via the PlayStation Store was released by Prototype on September 2 , 2010 . A PlayStation Vita version will be released by Prototype on September 8 , 2016 . In the original release , there was no voice acting for the characters , though this was later changed for the DC version , which except for Yukito included full voice acting , and the PS2 and PSP versions , which had full voice acting . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 = = = Manga = = = 
 An Air manga was serialized in the Japanese computer game magazine Comptiq between August 10 , 2004 and February 10 , 2006 . The individual chapters were later collected into two separate volumes published by Kadokawa Shoten . The story was adapted from the visual novel version that preceded it , and was illustrated by Japanese artist Yukimaru Katsura . Between the two volumes , there are 15 main chapters ( nine in volume one and six in volume two ) , and two bonus chapters included at the end of each volume . The manga version goes through the Dream and Air arcs in detail while the Summer arc is only touched upon briefly throughout the manga . The main focus is on Misuzu 's story with Kano and Minagi serving as minor characters in comparison . However , Minagi 's story is explained in the bonus installment at the end of volume two . 
 There are also five sets of manga anthologies produced by different companies and drawn by a multitude of different artists . The first volume of the earliest anthology series , released by Ichijinsha under the title Air Comic Anthology , was released on January 25 , 2001 under their DNA Media Comics label . Volumes for this series continued to be released until December 25 , 2001 with the seventh volume . The second anthology , Air Anthology Comic , was released in a single volume by Softgarage on December 20 , 2002 . On April 17 , 2004 , Ohzora released an anthology composed of works based on both Kanon and Air titled Haru <unk> : Kanon & Air . Ohzora also released three other anthologies under the title Air , the last of which came out on March 24 , 2005 . The last manga anthology was released as a single volume on April 2 , 2005 by Jive titled Comic Anthology Air : Kimi no Iru Basho . Each of the anthology series are written and drawn by an average of 20 people per volume . 
 = = = Drama CDs = = = 
 There were nine drama CDs released based on Air released by Lantis . The first three focused solely on each of the main heroines separately per CD where the cover of the album would depict which of the girls to be presented . These three albums were released on August 24 , 2005 . The next set of three was done the same way and released on October 21 , 2005 . The last three were released in one month increments after the second batch of three drama CDs went on sale . The seventh CD focused on the events of the Summer arc in the story while the last two were based on the Air arc . At least the last CD released on January 25 , 2006 contained original stories in addition to the story from the visual novel . 
 = = = Anime = = = 
 On November 17 , 2004 , a teaser DVD named " Air prelude " was produced containing interviews with the anime 's cast , clean opening and ending theme video sequences , and promotional footage of the anime itself ; it was a limited edition DVD , with only 20 @,@ 000 copies produced . The anime television series is produced by Kyoto Animation , directed by Tatsuya Ishihara , written by Fumihiko <unk> , and features character design by Tomoe Aratani who based the designs on Itaru Hinoue 's original concept . Thirteen episodes were produced by Kyoto Animation : 12 regular episodes , and a final recap episode which summarizes Misuzu 's story arc . The anime also follows the game by splitting the series into three parts ; Dream ( episodes one through seven ) , Summer ( episodes eight and nine ) , and Air ( episodes 10 through 12 ) , with the recap episode ( episode 13 ) following . The episodes aired between January 6 and March 31 , 2005 on the BS @-@ i Japanese television network . The theme songs from the Air visual novel are used for the anime 's opening theme , ending theme and soundtrack . After the conclusion of the anime series , a mini @-@ series which added to the Summer arc of the story called Air in Summer aired on August 28 and September 4 , 2005 a week later on BS @-@ i . Air in Summer consisted of two episodes and was produced by the same staff as the anime series . 
 A DVD released on March 31 , 2005 called " Air Memories " contained promotional commercials for the series , staff commentaries , and clean ending sequences from the 12th and 13th episodes , lasting 92 minutes . The episodes were released to Region 2 DVD between April 6 and September 7 , 2005 by Pony Canyon in limited and regular editions containing two episodes per volume . The DVD for Air in Summer was later released on October 5 , 2005 in Japan . Additionally , Air became one of the first anime series to be released in Blu @-@ ray Disc format on December 22 , 2006 . A new version of the Blu @-@ ray Disc box set was released on November 28 , 2008 in Japan . 
 On April 27 , 2007 , ADV Films co @-@ founder and executive Matt Greenfield announced the acquisition of both the anime series and the film during a panel at the anime convention Anime Matsuri ; it paid $ 145 @,@ 000 for the TV series . The 12 main episodes and two Air in Summer episodes were licensed for North American distribution by ADV Films . The episodes were released on four DVD compilations between August 14 and November 27 , 2007 . The second DVD volume was sold in two editions , with the difference between the two being a series box all four DVDs could fit inside . In July 2008 , the license for the anime series and film was transferred to Funimation , which continued to produce them in North America in English . Funimation released a three @-@ disc series box set of the Air anime on April 21 , 2009 , which did not include the recap episode . 
 = = = Film = = = 
 An Air animated film directed by Osamu Dezaki premiered in Japanese theaters on February 5 , 2005 . The film , animated by Toei Animation , is a reinterpretation of the original Air storyline which centers on the story arc of the female lead Misuzu Kamio . Yukito Kunisaki arrives in the town of Kami for a chance to earn money at the summer festival and meets Misuzu on his first day in town . They soon become friends and a story one thousand years old begins to unfold . The film was later sold on DVD and released in three editions : the Collector 's Edition , the Special Edition , and the Regular Edition on August 5 , 2005 . The Air film was originally released on DVD by ADV Films in North America on December 11 , 2007 . Funimation continued the release of the film as of July 2008 when the license was transferred from ADV to Funimation ; Funimation re @-@ released the film on April 21 , 2009 . 
 = = Music = = 
 The visual novel has three main theme songs : the opening theme " Tori no Uta " ( <unk> , Bird 's Poem ) , the ending theme " Farewell song " , and " Aozora " ( <unk> , Blue Skies ) as an insert song . Each song is sung by Lia of I 've Sound and the lyrics were written by Jun Maeda . Five of the characters have leitmotifs , or background music theme songs — the three heroines , Kanna , and Michiru . Misuzu 's theme is " Natsukage " ( <unk> , Summer Lights ) ; Kano 's theme is " <unk> " ( <unk> , Puddle ) ; Minagi 's theme is " Niji " ( <unk> , Rainbows ) ; Kanna 's theme is " <unk> " ( <unk> , Moon Child ) ; lastly , Michiru 's theme is " <unk> " ( <unk> , <unk> ) . Of the six music tracks not used in the visual novel , but of which were included on the game 's original soundtrack , the first two were failed attempts at creating a theme for Minagi . 
 The first album , <unk> , came bundled with the original release of Air in September 2000 . The next album was released in August 2001 as a maxi single titled " Natsukage / Nostalgia " containing a vocal version of " Natsukage " , and a B @-@ side track ; both songs were sung by Lia and the rest of the single was produced by Jun Maeda . The game 's original soundtrack was released in September 2002 containing two discs with 31 different tracks along with remix and instrumental versions of the opening and ending themes . A piano arrange album was released in December 2003 called Re @-@ feel which contained five tracks from Air and five from Kanon . An EP containing original versions of the three theme songs and remixed versions of the opening and ending themes was released in May 2006 called Air Analog Collector 's Edition : Tori no Uta / Farewell song . Each of the albums released for the visual novel version were released on Key 's record label Key Sounds Label . The film 's original soundtrack was released in March 2005 by Frontier Works . A bonus symphony CD titled Shinwa e no <unk> was released with the special edition Air film DVD on August 5 , 2005 . Overall , Air 's music has been well received , and the original soundtrack for the visual novel has met with high sales . The opening theme was involved in copyright infringement in 2005 . 
 = = Reception and sales = = 
 According to a national ranking of how well bishōjo games sold nationally in Japan , the original Air PC release premiered at number one in the rankings . The game ranked twice at 42 in November and December 2000 , at 20 in January 2001 , and twice more at 42 through February 2001 . The original release appeared on the charts twice more : the first in late September to early October 2001 at 26 , and again in the last two weeks of May 2002 , ranking in at 43 . The regular edition of the Air PC release premiered at number 13 , ranked in at number 41 in the following ranking , and 42 in the ranking after that . The PC all ages version premiered at number seven in the rankings and had a final ranking at 30 in the next ranking . The Air Standard Edition premiered at number one in the rankings . The Air Standard Edition ranked in twice more , at 34 and at 28 in the next two rankings . Air was the highest selling game of 2000 selling 102 @,@ 080 units , which was about 25 @,@ 000 more units than the second highest game , <unk> de <unk> ! . The Dreamcast version sold 42 @,@ 445 units in its first week , and was the fourth highest selling console game in Japan that week . The video game magazine Famitsu scored this version a 30 out of 40 , and it ultimately sold 50 @,@ 406 units to rank as the 53rd highest selling Japanese Dreamcast game ever , as of 2007 . NTT Publishing reported that over 300 @,@ 000 units of Air have been sold . 
 " Air took the bishōjo gaming world by storm , " as states a review of the Dreamcast game by MobyGames . Air was described as a game that stands out , much like Key 's first title Kanon , due to an intricate plot that keeps the player interested , and has a good replay value as well . In an interview of Jun Maeda and Yūichi Suzumoto , they were both surprised to find out that the Japanese public ( in March 2001 ) felt Air to be a soothing game , but Maeda and Suzumoto made it clear that this impression is completely at odds with their impression of the game , and they remark that there was not one person who worked on Air who thought that . Characters from Air have appeared in dōjin works not directly based on the Air series . Games such as Eternal Fighter Zero <unk> Sky <unk> by Twilight Frontier where most of the playable characters either came from Air or from the earlier Key games Kanon or One . In the October 2007 issue of Dengeki G 's Magazine , poll results for the 50 best bishōjo games were released . Out of 249 titles , Air ranked eighth with 43 votes . 
 = Richard Neal = 
 Richard Edmund Neal ( born February 14 , 1949 ) is an American politician and the U.S. Representative for Massachusetts 's 1st congressional district . He is a member of the Democratic Party and a former city councilor and mayor of Springfield , Massachusetts . He is currently the dean of the Massachusetts delegation to the House of Representatives . 
 A Springfield native , Neal graduated from American International College and received a master 's degree from the University of Hartford . After graduating he became involved in politics , working as an assistant to the mayor of Springfield . He served as president of the Springfield City Council from 1979 to 1983 while teaching high school history courses and lecturing at local colleges . He served as mayor of Springfield from 1983 to 1989 , overseeing a period of economic growth . With his political influence and a head start on contributions , he was nearly uncontested when he ran for election to the House of Representatives in 1988 . 
 As a member of the House Ways and Means Committee and former chairman of the Subcommittee on Select Revenue Measures , Neal is an influential figure in House economic policy . He has also dedicated much of his career to US – Ireland relations and maintaining American involvement in the Northern Ireland peace process , for which he has won several acclamations . He has a generally liberal voting record , but is considered a moderate on such issues as abortion and trade . 
 = = Early life , education , and academic career = = 
 Richard Edmund Neal was born February 14 , 1949 , in Worcester , Massachusetts , the oldest of three children . He and his two younger sisters were raised in Springfield by their mother , a housewife , and their father , a custodian at <unk> . Neal 's maternal grandparents were from Northern Ireland and his paternal grandparents were from Ireland . Neal 's mother died of a heart attack when he was 13 , and he was attending Springfield Technical High School when his father , an alcoholic , died . Neal and his two younger sisters moved in with their grandmother and later their aunt , forced to rely on Social Security checks as they grew up . 
 After graduating high school , Neal attended Holyoke Community College in Holyoke and then American International College in Springfield , with the assistance of survivor 's benefits . He graduated in 1972 with a Bachelor of Arts in political science . He then attended the University of Hartford 's Barney School of Business and Public Administration , graduating in 1976 with a Master of Arts in public administration . Early in his career , Neal taught history at Cathedral High School . 
 = = Local government = = 
 Neal began his political career as co @-@ chairman of Democratic presidential candidate George McGovern 's 1972 election campaign in Western Massachusetts . In 1973 he became an assistant to Springfield Mayor William C. Sullivan . Neal was elected to the Springfield City Council in 1978 and was named President of the City Council in 1979 . The following year he was named as a delegate for presidential candidate Edward M. Kennedy at the 1980 Democratic National Convention . While a city councilor , Neal taught history at Cathedral High School , and gave lectures at Springfield College , American International College , Springfield Technical Community College and Western New England College . 
 In 1983 Neal made plans to challenge Theodore Dimauro , the Democratic incumbent Mayor of Springfield . This pressure led Dimauro to retire and Neal was elected mayor . Neal was re @-@ elected in 1985 and 1987 . As mayor , Neal oversaw a period of significant economic growth , with over $ 400 million of development and investment in the city , and a surplus in the city budget . He worked to strengthen Springfield 's appearance , pushing to revive and preserve the city 's historic homes and initiating an influential Clean City Campaign to reduce litter . 
 = = U.S. House of Representatives = = 
 = = = Elections = = = 
 Neal ran for the United States House of Representatives in Massachusetts 's 2nd congressional district in 1988 after 18 @-@ term Democratic incumbent Edward Boland retired . Boland had alerted Neal of his impending retirement , allowing the mayor a head @-@ start on his campaign . Neal raised $ 200 @,@ 000 in campaign contributions and collected signatures across the district before the retirement was formally announced . He was unopposed in the Democratic primary , and his only general election opponent was Communist Party candidate Louis R. <unk> , whom he defeated with over 80 percent of the vote . 
 Neal has won re @-@ election in every term since . Former Springfield mayor Theodore Dimauro , reflecting sentiments that Neal had an unfair advantage in the previous election , ran as a challenger in the 1990 Democratic primary . Dimauro 's campaign was sullied by a false rumor he spread about the Bank of New England 's financial situation , and Neal won the primary easily . He was unopposed in the general election , winning 68 percent of the vote . In 1992 his popularity was threatened by the House banking scandal , in which he had made dozens of unpenalized overdrafts at the House Bank . After narrowly defeating two Democratic opponents , he was challenged by Republican Anthony W. Ravosa , Jr . , and Independent Thomas R. Sheehan . Neal won with 53 percent of the vote . 
 In a Springfield Union @-@ News poll taken in mid @-@ October 1994 , Neal was only ahead of John <unk> by 6 percentage points . Neal then went on to spend nearly $ 500 @,@ 000 against <unk> in the last 2 weeks of the election to defeat him . The 1994 general election also featured a third party candidate as well , Kate Ross , who received 6 % of the vote . With blanks , Neal actually received only 51 % of the vote in 1994 . 
 Since 1994 , Neal has had little electoral opposition . He was challenged by Mark Steele in 1996 and easily dispatched him with 71 percent of the vote and ran unopposed in 1998 . In 2000 he won the Democratic primary against Joseph R. Fountain , who challenged Neal 's positions as " anti @-@ choice " and " anti @-@ gun " . Neal had been unopposed in the general election since 1996 , but faced Republican opponent Tom Wesley in the 2010 United States Congressional elections , which Neal won by a margin of 57 % to 43 % . 
 For his first 12 terms in Congress , Neal represented a district centered on Springfield and stretching as far east as the southern and western suburbs of Worcester . When Massachusetts lost a congressional district after the 2010 census , the bulk of Neal 's territory , including his home in Springfield , was merged with the 1st District , held by fellow Democrat John Olver . The prospect of an incumbent vs. incumbent contest was averted when Olver retired . The new 1st was no less Democratic than the old 2nd , and Neal was reelected without much difficulty in 2012 and 2014 . 
 = = = Tenure = = = 
 Neal has a generally liberal political record . He was given a 100 percent " Liberal Quotient " by Americans for Democratic Action ( ADA ) for his 2008 voting record , and the organization named him one of the year 's " ADA Heroes " . He was given an 8 @.@ 19 percent " Lifetime Rating " by the American Conservative Union ( ACU ) based on his votes from 1989 to 2009 . In the 110th United States Congress Neal voted with the Democratic Party leadership on 98 @.@ 9 percent of bills ; in the 111th United States Congress , Neal voted with the Democratic party leadership 95 % of the time . 
 Neal was a member of the House Democratic Steering Committee in the 105th Congress and is now an at @-@ large whip for the House Democrats . Neal is a co @-@ chair of the New England Congressional Caucus , a group aiming to advance the regional interests of New England . 
 = = = = Economy and budget = = = = 
 With several influential committee posts , Neal has made economic policy the focus of his career , although his success has been mixed . He served his first two terms on the House Banking Committee , where he served on the Financial Services Subcommittee . As the banking reform law of 1991 was being drafted , he cautioned that President George H.W. Bush 's proposal could negatively affect small businesses and minority @-@ owned businesses . He introduced an amendment to require reports on lending to these businesses , which was adopted . 
 In 1993 Neal moved to the House Ways and Means Committee , where he currently serves . He has been chairman of the Subcommittee on Select Revenue Measures since 2008 and is a member of the Subcommittee on Trade . Previously he served on the Oversight and Social Security subcommittees . In the late 2000s analysts considered Neal a likely frontrunner for chairman of the Ways and Means Committee , and in the wake of Charles B. Rangel 's 2010 departure he began actively seeking the post . In June 2010 , while pursuing the chairmanship , he invited campaign contributors to a $ 5 @,@ 000 @-@ per @-@ person weekend fundraiser in Cape Cod . This drew fire from The Boston Globe , which criticized him for " [ acceding ] to the capital 's money culture . " 
 According to Congressional Quarterly 's Politics in America , one of Neal 's long @-@ standing legislative priorities is to simplify the tax code . Neal has long advocated repealing the Alternative Minimum Tax ( AMT ) , believing its effects have reached unreasonably low income brackets . He led an unsuccessful movement to reform the AMT in 2007 . He successfully pushed in 1998 to exempt a child tax credit from being affected by the AMT , and in 2001 Congress made the exemption permanent at his urging . He voted against the tax cuts of 2001 and 2003 , saying that they would force millions onto the AMT . Another priority of Neal 's is to eliminate tax " loopholes " that favor higher @-@ income individuals . He was the lead proponent of a bill to require federal contractors to pay federal taxes for workers hired through offshore shell headquarters . The bill , H.R. <unk> , passed both houses of Congress unanimously and was signed into law in May 2008 . 
 On trade policy , Neal has a moderate record , supporting lower trade barriers . He voted against the North American Free Trade Agreement ( NAFTA ) in 1993 . In 1995 and 2002 he voted against fast track bills which gave the president the authority to negotiate trade deals without amendments by Congress . In 2007 he voted in favor of the United States – Peru Trade Promotion Agreement despite some Democratic opposition . 
 Neal is a strong supporter of the Social Security program . He moved from the Trade subcommittee to the Social Security subcommittee in 2005 to challenge President George W. Bush 's attempts to partially privatize it . He pushed a proposal to automatically enroll employees in Individual Retirement Accounts ( <unk> ) , and successfully lobbied President Barack Obama to include it in a proposed 2009 budget outline . 
 = = = = Foreign policy = = = = 
 Descended from Irish nationalist grandparents on both sides , Neal has been an advocate for Irish concerns throughout his Congressional career , pushing to keep the United States involved in the Northern Ireland peace process . He is the co @-@ chair of the ad hoc Committee on Irish Affairs , has been chairman of the Friends of Ireland since 2007 , and was considered as a candidate for United States Ambassador to Ireland in 1998 . After the disarmament of the Irish Republican Army ( IRA ) in September 2005 , Neal was among a group of Congressmen who met with Sinn Féin MP Martin McGuinness to congratulate him on the action of disarmament and ensure a lasting peace had been reached . Neal invited Sinn Féin President Gerry Adams to the inauguration of Barack Obama in January 2009 . Neal has been named as one of the top 100 Irish @-@ Americans by Irish America magazine and received the International Leadership Award from The American Ireland Fund in 2002 . 
 Neal is an opponent of the Iraq War , saying the war was based on false intelligence . He voted against the original invasion in 2003 and opposed President Bush 's 2006 request to send additional troops . He cited veterans ' affairs as his top priority in 2010 . 
 = = = = Domestic policy = = = = 
 A longtime advocate of health care reform , Neal was involved in the major health care reform efforts of 1993 – 94 and 2009 – 10 . In working on the unsuccessful Clinton health care plan of 1993 he balanced his desire for health care reform with the interests of the major health insurance and medical companies in his district , achieving a compromise allowing insurance companies to charge small businesses higher premiums . He was later involved writing the House 's 2009 health care reform bill , the Affordable Health Care for America Act . As chairman of the Select Revenue Measures subcommittee , he had a hand in developing the bill 's financing plan . He explained that his priorities were to address " pre @-@ existing conditions , capping out @-@ of @-@ pocket expenses and making sure people don 't lose their health care if they lose their job " . Despite his support for the act , he spoke about his preference for a " piecemeal " approach to health care reform , saying it would allow for a more reasonable debate . 
 Coming from a relatively Catholic district , Neal has a more conservative record on the issue of abortion than other Massachusetts representatives . He said in 2010 , " I have always opposed taxpayer funding of abortion . I 'd keep Roe v. Wade and restrict it , I 've always thought : keep abortion , with restrictions for late @-@ term abortion . [ Given ] the voting pattern I have , both sides would say I 'm mixed and guess what ? That 's where the American people are . " He voted for the Partial @-@ Birth Abortion Ban Act of 2003 , which made the intact dilation and extraction abortion procedure illegal in most cases . During debate on the House health care reform bill , he voted in favor of the Stupak – Pitts Amendment , restricting government funding of abortion . On other social issues Neal has a moderate record : he supports a proposed Constitutional amendment to ban desecration of the U.S. flag , and has twice voted against an amendment to ban same @-@ sex marriage . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Neal is a Roman Catholic . He lives in Springfield with his wife Maureen Neal , née Conway . They have four children : Rory Christopher , Brendan Conway , Maura Katherine , and Sean Richard . In addition to his duties as a congressman , Neal teaches a journalism course at the University of Massachusetts Amherst called " The Politician and the Journalist " . 
 = Hurricane Belle = 
 Hurricane Belle was a strong tropical cyclone that caused moderate damage across the East Coast of the United States in August 1976 . In late July , a tropical wave emerged off the west coast of Africa . Traversing the Atlantic Ocean for more than a week , the system eventually consolidated into a tropical depression near the Bahamas on August 6 . Remaining nearly stationary for a day , the depression strengthened into a tropical storm on August 7 and a hurricane later that day as it acquired a northwest motion . Formation of an eye accompanied quick intensification and Belle reached its peak the following day with winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) . The hurricane subsequently turned north and accelerated , skirting the Outer Banks of North Carolina . Early on August 10 , Belle made landfall on Long Island , New York , as a minimal hurricane crossing Long Island Sound and hitting the central coast of Connecticut as strong tropical storm . Thereafter , Belle transitioned into an extratropical cyclone over New England before moving over Atlantic Canada . The system turned east while over the north Atlantic and ultimately dissipated on August 15 to the south of Iceland . 
 Threatening much of the East Coast of the United States , hurricane warnings were issued from Georgia to Maine . An estimated 500 @,@ 000 people evacuated coastal areas accordingly . Overall , impacts from Belle were less than expected and mainly attributed to flooding across New England . Hundreds of thousands of residents lost power due to high winds . A total of 12 people lost their lives , mostly incidents indirectly related to the hurricane , and damage reached an estimated $ 100 million . Portions of New Jersey , New York , and Vermont were later declared major disaster areas by then @-@ President Gerald Ford . Some damage also took place in New Brunswick , Canada , from heavy rain . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On July 28 , 1976 , a tropical wave emerged off the west coast of Africa . An unusually well @-@ organized system for the time of year and location , considerable deep convection accompanied it . A possible low @-@ level circulation consolidated within the system by July 31 as it raced west <unk> the Atlantic Ocean . As it approached the Lesser Antilles in early August , convection separated from the system and moved north of the islands while the wave itself continued into the Caribbean Sea . The northern portion of the system eventually reached a point north of the Bahamas on August 5 and grew increasingly organized . Well @-@ defined upper @-@ level outflow became established that evening . A low @-@ level center formed early on August 6 and became a tropical depression by 06 : 00 UTC while situated roughly 290 mi ( 465 km ) east @-@ northeast of Nassau , Bahamas . Over the next 24 hours , the system remained almost stationary and executed a small counter @-@ clockwise loop . Early on August 7 , the depression acquired gale @-@ force winds and became a tropical storm . Accordingly , it was assigned the name Belle . Acquiring a slow northwest trajectory , Belle steadily intensified on August 7 . Reconnaissance aircraft investigating the storm revealed the system to have achieved hurricane strength by 18 : 00 UTC as its pressure fell to 985 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 09 inHg ) . Additionally , a well @-@ defined eye was present by this time . 
 The cyclone turned northward and accelerated on August 8 while reaching major hurricane status that evening . Early on August 9 , Belle achieved its peak intensity with maximum estimated surface winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 957 mb ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 26 inHg ) . At higher altitudes within the storm , recon reported winds up to 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) . Turning to just east of due north , Belle began weakening shortly thereafter with its eye becoming obscured . Late on August 9 , the hurricane passed within 60 mi ( 95 km ) of Hatteras Island , North Carolina . Contrary to most storms which threaten the northeastern states , Belle did not accelerate tremendously as it neared land . Accordingly , it weakened quickly in response to cooler waters in the region . Around 05 : 00 UTC on August 10 , Belle made landfall as a minimal hurricane with 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) winds along Jones Beach , Long Island , New York . Briefly crossing the Long Island Sound , Belle made a second landfall as a strong tropical storm near Bridgeport , Connecticut . Once inland over New England , the system transitioned into an extratropical cyclone while traversing New Hampshire . The remnants accelerated northeast and later due east across Atlantic Canada before emerging over the Labrador Sea on August 12 . While situated between the Azores and Greenland , ex @-@ Belle turned north @-@ northeast and ultimately dissipated south of Iceland on August 15 . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Owing to Hurricane Belle 's proximity to many states along the Eastern Seaboard , hurricane watches and warnings were issued for the entire coast from Georgia to Maine . Accordingly , evacuations took place in numerous states with an estimated 500 @,@ 000 people evacuating overall . 
 Officials advised residents near the coastline to evacuate to safer areas further inland . Approximately 40 @,@ 000 vacationing in the Outer Banks evacuated ; however , roughly 2 @,@ 500 residents decided to ride out the storm in their homes . In Kitty Hawk and Nags Head , volunteer firefighters traveled door @-@ to @-@ door urging residents to leave . Schools and hotels across the areas were utilized as shelters for tourists . National Parks across the Outer Banks closed for the duration of the storm . Aircraft at the Marine Corps Camp Lejeune were relocated inland and helicopters were moved to hangars ; some helicopters remained available for emergency rescue operations . An estimated 6 @,@ 200 residents evacuated to Red Cross shelters in the state . 
 The majority of evacuations in the country were in New Jersey , with 250 @,@ 000 residents and tourists relocating . Of this total , 65 @,@ 000 were from the Long Beach Island and 12 @,@ 000 on the Barnegat Peninsula . With Hurricane Belle expected to make landfall around high tide and a full moon , the forecast storm tide in rivaled that of Hurricane Donna in 1960 . This placed roughly 500 @,@ 000 people in danger and officials in New York immediately began preparations . Police officers handed out sandbags to residents in low @-@ lying areas and National Guard armories and some public schools were used as evacuation centers . Approximately 30 @,@ 000 evacuated in New York City and Suffolk County , 11 @,@ 000 of whom utilized the aforementioned shelters . In Staten Island , 225 patients in a local hospital were relocated to a second facility . A flood watch was issued for the Hudson Valley in southern New York ahead of the hurricane on August 8 . Advisories from the National Hurricane Center emphasized the flood risk as well . Numerous flights in and out of New York were cancelled , Wall Street was closed , and the United Nations postponed a meeting . Summer tourists evacuated from most beaches but many residents decided to stay . In Connecticut , 52 helicopters and 100 pilots from the National Guard were placed on standby for possible relief missions following the storm . 
 Farther north in Rhode Island , 10 @,@ 000 people fled from the coast . Despite evacuation orders , nearly half of the residents in Narragansett , Rhode Island , refused to leave their homes and as a result martial law was implemented to get people to leave . The Red Cross reported that about 2 @,@ 300 people evacuated Cape Cod , Massachusetts , and thousands of tourists left the area . About 70 flights to and from Boston 's Logan International Airport were canceled . Flood warnings were raised across western portions of the state . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Across the Eastern United States , the effects of Belle were less than anticipated . A total of 12 people lost their lives , mostly due to traffic accidents , and damage amounted to $ 100 million . 
 Hurricane Belle produced a swath of light to moderate , and locally heavy , rain extending from North Carolina into New England . The highest totals were confined to areas closer to the storm 's center , with accumulations of 3 to 5 in ( 76 to 127 mm ) common along its track . Notable state maximums included 6 @.@ 8 in ( 170 mm ) in Massachusetts , 6 @.@ 68 in ( 170 mm ) in Maryland , 5 @.@ 85 in ( 149 mm ) in Maine , 5 @.@ 77 in ( 147 mm ) in New York , 5 @.@ 66 in ( 144 mm ) in New Jersey , 5 @.@ 37 in ( 136 mm ) in Connecticut , and 5 @.@ 3 in ( 130 mm ) in Virginia . Although on the weaker side of the storm , New Jersey saw the highest winds from Belle , with an estimated peak gust of 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) in Ship Bottom . A similar gust was estimated to have occurred in Jones Beach , New York , where Belle made landfall . Hurricane @-@ force gusts also affected portions of Connecticut , New York , and North Carolina . LaGuardia Airport , near New York City , saw sustained winds of 52 mph ( 84 km / h ) with gusts to 63 mph ( 101 km / h ) . Tropical storm @-@ force conditions occurred in every New England state alongside coastal Mid @-@ Atlantic states . Tides of 3 – 4 ft ( 0 @.@ 91 – 1 @.@ 22 m ) above normal were common from North Carolina to Rhode Island . Atlantic City , New Jersey saw the greatest tides at 8 @.@ 85 ft ( 2 @.@ 70 m ) above mean low @-@ tide , while Battery Park in lower Manhattan saw a peak value of 7 @.@ 2 ft ( 2 @.@ 2 m ) above mean low tide . 
 North Carolina escaped relatively unscathed from the hurricane , with only a few reports of wind damage in the Outer Banks . Windows at a hotel in Nags Head were blown out . Along the North Carolina – Virginia border , five people lost their lives in a car accident on a rain @-@ slicked highway . Minor damage took place in Maryland . Although on the weaker side of the storm , gusty winds knocked down numerous power lines in New Jersey , leaving 10 @,@ 000 people in the dark and setting off 75 fire alarms , one of which was a relatively large fire forcing the evacuation of a nursing home . Roughly 500 ft ( 150 m ) of the Atlantic City boardwalk was damaged or destroyed , with repairs estimated to reach $ 5 million . Damage to properties in Monmouth and Ocean counties amounted to $ 3 @.@ 6 million and $ 1 million , respectively . On August 21 , then @-@ President Gerald Ford issued a major disaster declaration for Atlantic , Cape May , Monmouth , and Ocean counties , allowing them to receive federal funding . 
 The high winds knocked down trees and power lines across Long Island , New York , leaving roughly 170 @,@ 000 residents without electricity . Power crews from Pennsylvania were called in to assist in restoring electricity . Damage across the island reached $ 8 million , of which $ 3 million stemmed from erosion at Rockaway Beach . One person was killed in New York when a branch snapped off a tree due to high winds and fell on her . An estimated 36 @,@ 000 residents in the lower Hudson Valley lost power . President Ford later declared Nassau , Suffolk , and Rensselaer counties major disaster areas . Effects were similar in Connecticut where approximately 247 @,@ 000 people lost electricity . Commuter train service along Conrail 's New York – New Haven line was canceled due to power outages . A portion of the Merritt Parkway was closed due to downed trees . High winds in Bridgeport toppled many trees and power lines , shattered windows , and sparked two house fires . Five boats in the city 's harbor sustained damage . Flooding in and around Danbury prompted evacuations of an apartment complex and motel . One fatality took place in <unk> due to slippery roads . Overall damage in Connecticut was far less than expected , according to state police , with losses reaching $ 7 @.@ 1 million and mostly stemming from Fairfield and New Haven counties . Power companies brought in additional personnel to expedite the restoration process , though many remained in the dark days after the storm . A couple and their two dogs in Vernon died from carbon monoxide poisoning from a generator on August 14 . 
 Owing to heavy rains that preceded the hurricane , widespread small stream flooding took place in New England , particularly in Vermont where then @-@ governor Thomas P. Salmon declared a state of emergency . Flooding in the state was reported as the worst in 30 years , with southern areas of the state seeing the greatest damage . Hardest hit was the town of Chester where 35 of its 85 roads flooded and 5 bridges were washed out . Otter Creek crested at 5 ft ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) above flood stage . Significant damage also took place in Jamaica , Ludlow , and Londonderry . Two people died in Huntington after the footbridge they were crossing collapsed into the Huntington River . Portions of Route 100 were washed out . Property damage in the state reached $ 5 – 10 million . The overall scale of flooding was regarded as a 1 @-@ in @-@ 10 to 1 @-@ in @-@ 25 year event . Immediately following the hurricane , a statewide ban on drinking water was imposed with an order to boil it first . This was later lifted on August 23 . Salt accumulation along power lines in Rhode Island cut electricity to 8 @,@ 000 residents on Aquidneck Island . Along the Saint John River in Aroostook County , Maine , flooding caused $ 2 @.@ 5 million worth of damage to crops and buildings . 
 Heavy rains across New Brunswick , Canada , amounting to 7 in ( 180 mm ) in <unk> , triggered flooding that damaged crops , homes , and roads . Losses from the event were estimated to be at least $ 1 million . 
 = Siege of Sparta = 
 The Siege of Sparta took place in 272 BC and was a battle fought between Epirus , led by King Pyrrhus , ( r . 297 – 272 BC ) and an alliance consisting of Sparta , under the command of King Areus I ( r . 309 – 265 BC ) and his heir Acrotatus , and Macedon . The battle was fought at Sparta and ended in a Spartan @-@ Macedonian victory . 
 Following his defeat in Italy by the Roman Republic , Pyrrhus was forced to retreat back to Epirus . On his return to Epirus , he declared war against Antigonus Gonatas ( r . 283 – 239 BC ) , managing to take control of Macedon . In 272 BC , he was approached by a Spartan prince , Cleonymus , a claimant to the Spartan throne who had been overlooked . Pyrrhus saw this invitation as an opportunity to extend his wars of conquest to the Peloponnese and invaded Sparta . Despite the majority of the Spartan army campaigning in Crete , the remaining Spartans were able to mount a defence led by the Spartan Crown Prince Acrotatus . The Spartans were able to withstand the Epiriote assaults until the arrival of the main Spartan army , led by King Areus I , and Macedonian reinforcements , prompting Pyrrhus to abandon the siege . 
 After this failure , Pyrrhus ravaged the Spartan hinterland whilst fending off counter @-@ attacks by the victorious Spartans . On the invitation of an Argive ally , Pyrrhus attempted to seize Argos . The assault culminated in a fiasco with Pyrrhus being attacked by his Argive opponents , the pursuing Spartan army of Areus and a Macedonian army commanded by Antigonus Gonatas . Pyrrhus was killed in the ensuing battle in the streets of Argos , ending Epiriote hopes of establishing a hegemony in Greece . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 281 BC , at the request of the Greek city of Tarentum , Pyrrhus , the King of the Greek state of Epirus , went with an army of 25 @,@ 500 men and 20 elephants to Italy to help fight the Romans . The Romans had succeeded in conquering most of Italy and were now moving in to take the Greek cities in Magna Graecia . After arriving in Italy in 280 BC , Pyrrhus defeated a Roman army at the Battle of Heraclea , near Tarentum . Pyrrhus repeated his success against Romans by defeating another army at the Battle of Asculum . 
 These victories proved to be very costly to Pyrrhus and he diverted his attention to Sicily , where the Greek states on the island were appealing for his help against Carthage . Despite defeating the Carthaginians and occupying most of the island , Pyrrhus ' behaviour alienated him from his Greek allies and he was forced to abandon Sicily and return to the Italian mainland . Pyrrhus attacked the rebuilt Roman army and after the inconclusive Battle of Beneventum , Pyrrhus returned to Epirus after leaving a garrison at Tarentum . 
 The war in Italy had drained Pyrrhus ' financial and military resources . To increase his resources and bolster his standing , he declared war on King Antigonus II Gonatas of Macedon . He ravaged part of the country before managing to defeat Antigonus at the Battle of the Aous . This defeat compelled Antigonus to flee to Thessaloniki , where he was protected by his strong navy . Following Antigonus ' flight , Pyrrhus was able to gain control of most of Macedon and Thessaly , declaring himself King of Macedon . 
