 = = Prelude = = 
 Upon his seizure of the Macedonian throne , Pyrrhus was approached by a Spartan Prince , Cleonymus who was serving as an officer in his army . The Spartan persuaded Pyrrhus to assist him in his plot to capture Sparta . Cleonymus ' motives in wanting to attack Sparta were twofold . Firstly , he bore a grudge because his countrymen had overlooked him in favour of his nephew , Areus I when determining the successor of the Agiad throne . Plutarch , the Greek historian , attributed Cleonymus ' non @-@ selection as king to his violent disposition and arbitrariness . Moreover , Cleonymus had been slighted because his new wife , Chilonis , had been seduced by Areus ' son , <unk> . These perceived insults spurred Cleonymus to leave Sparta and scheme to usurp the throne . 
 Pyrrhus was receptive to Cleonymus ' appeals to install him on the Spartan throne and agreed to assist him . To achieve this , the Epiriote King assembled an army numbering of 27 @,@ 000 men . It consisted 25 @,@ 000 infantry , 2 @,@ 000 cavalry and was supplemented by 24 war elephants . The size of Pyrrhus ' expedition indicates that he viewed aiding Cleonymus as an opportunity to extend his hegemony into the Peloponnese and securing Sparta as an ally . An alternate theory is that Pyrrhus undertook his invasion of the Peloponnese as a means of cutting off any support that Antigonus was still receiving from the southern Greek poleis . After mustering his force , Pyrrhus marched south through central Greece and through to the Peloponnese . N. G. L. Hammond speculates that Pyrrhus ' army marched down to <unk> on the Aetolian side of the Gulf of Corinth and crossed from there into the Peloponnese . This suggests that the invasion was facilitated by the Aetolian League , a power confederate in Central Greece , which was hostile to Antigonus . 
 Upon his arrival in the Peloponnese , Pyrrhus was welcomed in Achaia before continuing his march to Megalopolis . There he was met by Spartan ambassadors as well as those from Messene , Athens and the Achaean League . Pyrrhus appears to have received support for his invasion from some of Sparta 's neighbours , namely Elis , Megalopolis and some <unk> cities which would profit from reduced Spartan power . In response to the Spartan emissaries ' inquiries as to his intentions , the Epiriote King managed to deceive them . Pyrrhus asserted that his aim in invading the Peloponnese was to liberate the cities still held by Antigonus and to send his sons to Sparta to be educated in the agoge . After the withdrawal of the ambassadors , the Epiriote army advanced into Laconia followed the Eurotas River south and started to ravaging the territory of the Spartan perioeci . Pyrrhus ' deceit prompted outrage in Sparta and ambassador were again dispatched to the Epiriote to <unk> him for his perfidy . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = First day = = = 
 At the time of the invading army 's entry into Laconia , Sparta was only lightly defended . The majority of the Spartan army had accompanied Areus on campaign in Crete , where the Lacedaimonians were supporting the polis of Gortyn . As such , Sparta must have seemed like an easy target to Pyrrhus . Arriving outside Sparta in the evening , Cleonymus advised Pyrrhus to attack immediately to take advantage of the dearth of defenders . Pyrrhus decided against launching an immediate offensive as he feared the destruction that would be wrought by his Gallic soldiers if they were to enter the city at night . Anticipating no resistance , Pyrrhus order his army to make camp and prepared to enter Sparta in the morning . 
 The appearance of the Epirote army before their city caught the Spartans unprepared . Despite the <unk> <unk> being in favour of sending the women to Crete for their protection , this was opposed by <unk> , the former queen and grandmother of the Eurypontid King Eudamidas II , who ensured that the Spartan women would remain to assist with the protection of the city . After the arrangements for the women were reached , the Spartans began bolstering the settlement 's defences . The defenders were aware that the Epiriotes had brought elephants and to counteract them , the older men and women dug a trench parallel to Pyrrhus ' camp with wagons sunken into the ground at the flanks to hinder the enemy 's advance . The trench was a formidable obstacle , spanning 800 feet in length with a depth of six feet and a width of nine feet . Pausanias recounts that the meagre Spartan garrison were assisted during the siege by allies who had arrived from Argos and Messene . Additionally , the Spartans sent messengers to both Areus summoning him back to Sparta and to Antigonus , seeking assistance from him despite the fact that Sparta and Macedon had historically been enemies . 
 When daybreak approached and the Epiriote army was preparing its attack , the Spartans assumed defensive positions behind their trench . They were encouraged by the women who had remained and by the sight of Chilonis , who had placing a halter around her neck , declared that she would commit suicide rather than return to Cleonymus if Pyrrhus captured the city . The besiegers , led by Pyrrhus in person , attempted to storm the Spartan defences but were repulsed as they were unable to secure firm footing in the face of Spartan attacks , rendering the trench impassable . 
 Seeking to circumvent this obstacle , Pyrrhus sent a force of 2 @,@ 000 Gauls and some picked Chaonians under the commander of his son Ptolemy to go around the trench . These troops found their path blocked by the wagons which the Lacedaimonians had sunken into the soil . The wagons were planted so deeply that they hindered not only the Epiriote assault but also Spartan efforts to repel the foray . Eventually the Gauls managed to remove some of the wagons , giving them the opportunity to burst into the city . Acrotatus , seeing the danger , exploited a series of depressions in the terrain to lead a force of 300 men undetected against the Epiriote rear . This manoeuvre evoked panic amongst the Gauls who were compelled to abandon their attempt to enter the city and had to turn around to confront the attack to their rear . After a hard fought battle , the Epiriote flanking group was pushed back into the trench with heavy casualties inflicted upon them . The Spartans , elated by <unk> ' leadership , told him to withdraw from the battle and return to Chilonis so as to beget more children like him for Sparta . 
 = = = Second day = = = 
 Pyrrhus failed to breach the <unk> defences and when night fell , he withdrew back to his camp . According to Plutarch , Pyrrhus received an omen during the night . As he slept , he dreamt of Sparta being smitten and set alight by thunderbolts coming from his own hand . While Pyrrhus and most of his counsellors interpreted the dream as indicating that they would seize Sparta by storm , his friend Lysimachus warned him that places struck by thunderbolts were usually avoided and that Pyrrhus was destined not to enter Sparta . Pyrrhus dismissed this interpretation and buoyed by what he deemed to be a portentous sign , he prepared his men for a further assault . 
 In the face of the renewed Epiriote offensive , the Spartans held their defences with vigour . Due to the lack of manpower , the Spartan women were active in offering missiles to the defenders as well as taking away the wounded and providing food and drink to those who required it . To nullify the advantage of the Spartans ' position , the Epiriotes began filling up the trench with materials which they were bringing to the front line as well as the bodies of their slain comrades . The efforts of the besiegers were hindered by the Spartans who were aware of the importance of maintaining their defensive obstacles . 
 In response to the Spartan counter @-@ attack against the Epiriotes filling the trench , Pyrrhus decided to personally lead a charge against the Spartan lines . Mounted on his horse , the Epiriote King was able to force his away through the trench , over the wagons and into the city with a group of his companions . The sudden onslaught of Pyrrhus sparked panic amongst the defenders of this section . At this point Pyrrhus ' horse was wounded by a javelin which pierced its belly causing it to throw the King to the ground . The fall of the King threw his companions into a state of confusion and enabled the Spartans to rally . The Spartans launched a barrage of missiles at the King 's comrades , felling many of them . Despite the deaths of many of his guards , Pyrrhus was successfully taken to the safety of the main Epiriote lines . 
 = = = Fighting retreat = = = 
 Following this unsuccessful foray , Pyrrhus ordered his army to fall back . He hoped that the Spartans would now be willing to come to terms due to the heavy casualties they had suffered . Pyrrhus ' hopes of a Spartan capitulation were thwarted by the arrival of reinforcements . Upon hearing of Pyrrhus ' intention to conquer Sparta , Antigonus Gonatas had dispatched his general , Ameinias the Phocian , from Corinth with a group of mercenaries to relieve the Lacedaimonians . Shortly after this , the defenders ' numbers of the defenders were further augmented by the arrival of Areus with 2 @,@ 000 men from Crete . The arrival of these reinforcements greatly reduced the strain on the Spartans , with women and those who were not of military age being able to withdraw from the front line . 
 Bolstered by the fresh troops , the Spartans and their Macedonian allies prepared themselves for Pyrrhus ' next assault against the trench . The presence of more adversaries intensified Pyrrhus ' determination to capture the city and he ordered another attack on the trenches . He was unable to accomplish anything and suffered further losses . The failure of this attack convinced Pyrrhus about the futility of persevering with the siege and he decided to lift it and withdraw . 
 Pyrrhus intended to spend the winter in Laconia , possibly with the purpose of launching a fresh attack on Sparta and sent his army to begin ravaging the surrounding countryside . At this point , Pyrrhus received an emissary from Aristeas , a prominent citizen of the major Peloponnesian polis of Argos , seeking his assistance to overthrow the regime of <unk> , which was supportive of Antigonus and the Macedonians . Pyrrhus hastened to seize the opportunity to capture Argos and began to withdraw from Laconia , heading north to Argolis . 
 His retreating army were continuously harried by the Spartans under the command of Areus . By setting ambushes and occupying important positions along the Epiriote line of retreat , the Spartans were able to inflicted significant casualties on Pyrrhus ' rearguard of Gauls and Molossians . In an attempt to counter the panic and crumbling morale of his rear which was engaging the Spartans , Pyrrhus sent his son Ptolemy to take command . By doing this , Pyrrhus ' hope was that his son 's presence would rally the rearguard and give him enough time to extricate the rest of his army from the narrow pass through which they were marching . The battle intensified around Ptolemy 's position and he was set upon by a picked Spartan band led by Evaclus . In the fight that ensued , Ptolemy was slain and his remaining troops being overwhelmed by the triumphant Spartans . Upon hearing of his son 's death and the disintegration of his rearguard , Pyrrhus charged the Spartans with his Molossian cavalry , killing Evaclus with his own hand before destroying the remainder of his picked Spartan troops . With the defeat of Evaclus ' force , Pyrrhus was able to withdraw the rest of his army from Laconia . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After their evacuation of Laconia , Pyrrhus directed his army towards Argos and upon learning that Antigonus was in the vicinity pitched his camp at Nauplia . After a series of negotiations between the Argives , Macedonians and Epiriotes , Pyrrhus agreed to withdraw from Argos . During the night , he entered Argos accompanied by his army with Aristeas ' aid . In the ensuing melee , the Epiriotes were set upon by the Argives as well as <unk> ' Macedonians and a body of Spartans led by Areus , who had been brought into the city by <unk> ' faction . While attempting to retreat , Pyrrhus was struck on the head by a tile and while lying stunned , was decapitated by Antigonus ' troops . 
 Pyrrhus ' defeat in the Peloponnese led to the diminution of Epirus ' power and the loss of its Macedonian and Thessalian conquests . Antigonus capitalised on his Peloponnesian victory to wrest back control of Macedonia and become the preeminent power in Greece . The establishment of Macedonian dominance led to a breakdown of the Spartan @-@ Macedonian alliance . In a bid to further his own royal ambitions , Areus had Sparta join a coalition of Greek poleis and fought Macedon in the Chremonidean War . The war ended in a crushing Spartan defeat with Antigonus defeating and killing his former ally Areus in a battle on the Isthmus of Corinth in 265 BC . The defeat was so disastrous for Sparta that they would not rise to be a regional power until the reign of Cleomenes III thirty years later . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 The Siege of Sparta is available to play as one of the historical battles in the award @-@ winning video game , Rome : Total War . The user must command the army of Pyrrhus as he attempts to capture Sparta . 
 French painter François <unk> @-@ Lebrun painted a work entitled <unk> de <unk> par Pyrrhus ( Siege of Sparta by Pyrrhus ) in 1799 – 1800 depicting the battle . 
 = = = Ancient sources = = = 
 Pausanias ; Jones , W. H. S. ( translator ) ( 1918 ) . Description of Greece . New York : Harvard University Press . 
 Plutarch ; Scott @-@ Kilvert , Ian ( translator ) ( 1973 ) . Life of Pyrrhus . New York : Penguin Classics . ISBN 0 @-@ 14 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 = = = Modern sources = = = 
 Cartledge , Paul ; Spawforth , Antony ( 1989 ) . Hellenistic and Roman Sparta : A tale of two cities . London : Routledge . ISBN 0 @-@ 415 @-@ 03290 @-@ 3 . 
 Cross , Geoffrey ( 2015 ) . Epirus . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . ISBN <unk> . 
 Fox , Robert Lane ( 2006 ) . The Classical World . Maryborough : Penguin Books . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 14 @-@ 103761 @-@ 5 . 
 Green , Peter ( 1993 ) . Alexander to Actium : The Historical Evolution of the Hellenistic Age . Los Angeles : University of California Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 500 @-@ 01485 @-@ X. 
 Hammond , N. G. L. ( 1988 ) . A History of Macedonia : 336 – 167 BC . Oxford : Oxford University Press . ISBN 0198148151 . 
 Pomeroy , Sarah ( 2002 ) . Spartan Women . Oxford : Oxford University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 415 @-@ 03290 @-@ 3 . 
 Walbank , F. W. ( 1984 ) . The Cambridge Ancient History , Volume 7 , Part 1 : The Hellenistic World . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 521 @-@ <unk> @-@ X. 
 Wylie , Graham ( 1999 ) . " Pyrrhus <unk> " . <unk> . 58 ( Societe d 'Etudes <unk> de Bruxelles ) 2 . 
 = Theodore Komnenos Doukas = 
 Theodore Komnenos Doukas ( Greek : Θεόδωρος Κομνηνός Δούκας , <unk> Komnēnos Doukas , Latinized as Theodore Comnenus Ducas , died ca . 1253 ) , was ruler of Epirus and Thessaly from 1215 to 1230 and of Thessalonica and most of the rest of Macedonia and western Thrace from 1224 to 1230 . He was also the power behind the rule of his sons John and Demetrios over Thessalonica in 1237 – 46 . 
 Theodore was the scion of a distinguished Byzantine aristocratic family related to the imperial Komnenos , Doukas , and Angelos dynasties . Nevertheless , nothing is known about Theodore 's life before the conquest of Constantinople and dissolution of the Byzantine Empire by the Fourth Crusade in 1204 . Following the fall of Constantinople , he served Theodore I Laskaris , founder of the Empire of Nicaea , for a few years , before being called to Epirus , where his bastard half @-@ brother Michael I Komnenos Doukas had founded an independent principality . When Michael died in 1215 , Theodore sidelined his brother 's underage and illegitimate son Michael II and assumed the governance of the Epirote state . Theodore continued his brother 's policy of territorial expansion . Allied with Serbia , he expanded into Macedonia , threatening the Latin Kingdom of Thessalonica . The capture of the Latin Emperor Peter II of Courtenay in 1217 opened the way to the gradual envelopment of Thessalonica , culminating in the city 's fall in 1224 . 
 As ruler of Thessalonica , Theodore quickly declared himself emperor , challenging the Nicaean emperor John III Vatatzes 's claims on the Byzantine imperial throne . In 1225 , he advanced to the outskirts of Constantinople , but his final attack against the seat of the much @-@ reduced Latin Empire was delayed until 1230 . In that year , Theodore amassed an army to besiege Constantinople , but then diverted it against Bulgaria , an ambivalent ally which threatened his northern flank . Theodore was defeated and captured at the Battle of Klokotnitsa , and spent the next seven years in captivity . In the meantime , he was succeeded by his brother Manuel . Manuel quickly lost Thrace , most of Macedonia , and Albania to the Bulgarian Tsar John II Asen . Thessalonica itself became a Bulgarian vassal , while in Epirus proper power was seized by Michael II , returning from exile . 
 Theodore was released in 1237 when his daughter Irene married John Asen , and quickly managed to regain control of Thessalonica , ousting Manuel . Having been blinded during his captivity and thus disqualified from occupying the throne again , he installed his eldest son John as emperor , but remained the de facto regent of the state . Manuel tried to regain Thessalonica with Nicaean support , but a negotiated settlement was reached which gave him Thessaly and left Thessalonica and its environs to Theodore and John . In 1241 , John III Vatatzes invited Theodore to visit Nicaea . He was welcomed and treated with great honour , but was effectively detained there until the spring of next year , when Vatatzes marched on Thessalonica with Theodore in tow . Theodore was sent in to negotiate with his son and convince him to accept demotion to the rank of Despot and to recognize the suzerainty of Nicaea . John died in 1244 and was succeeded by Theodore 's younger son Demetrios . In 1246 Vatatzes overthrew the unpopular Demetrios and annexed Thessalonica . Theodore influenced his nephew Michael II to launch an attack on Thessalonica in 1251 , but in 1252 , Vatatzes campaigned against them and forced Michael to come to terms . Theodore was taken prisoner and sent into exile in Nicaea , where he died around 1253 . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Born between 1180 and 1185 , Theodore was a son of the sebastokrator John Doukas and of Zoe Doukaina . His paternal grandparents were Constantine Angelos and Theodora , a daughter of the Byzantine emperor Alexios I Komnenos ( reigned 1081 – 1118 ) . Theodore 's uncle , Andronikos , was the father of the emperors Isaac II Angelos ( r . 1185 – 95 and 1203 – 04 ) and Alexios III Angelos ( r . 1195 – 1203 ) , who were Theodore 's first cousins . As with most members of his family , he preferred to use the surname of " Doukas " or " Komnenos Doukas " ( Κομνηνός ὁ Δούκας ) ; contemporaries variously called him " Doukas " , " Komnenos " , or even " Grand Komnenos " ( μέγας Κομνηνός ) , an appellation more usually found among the ruling family of the Empire of Trebizond . Theodore evidently preferred to be associated with the more successful dynasties of the Doukai and the Komnenoi , rather than the disastrous reign of the Angeloi ; indeed the only medieval writers to call him " Angelos " were the later , hostile pro @-@ Palaiologos historians Nikephoros Gregoras and Theodore Skoutariotes , while George Akropolites refers to him as " Komnenos " until his defeat at Klokotnitsa in 1230 and as " Angelos " after . 
 Theodore 's early life is obscure . He followed Theodore Laskaris to Asia Minor after the Fourth Crusade captured Constantinople in 1204 , where Laskaris founded the Empire of Nicaea . Theodore 's service under Laskaris is relatively unknown except for a brief reference in a letter written by the Metropolitan of Corfu , George Bardanes , one of Theodore 's apologists . Bardanes writes that Theodore " took many dangers for his sake and wrested many fortresses from the enemies and subdued them to Laskaris ' rule " , distinguishing himself through his valour and receiving many rewards from the Nicaean ruler . Some modern scholars , such as Karl Hopf and Antoine Bon , have identified a certain Theodore , who appears as " lord of Argos " and the successor of Leo Sgouros in leading the resistance against the Crusaders in the northwestern Peloponnese after Sgouros ' death in 1208 , with Theodore Komnenos Doukas . This view has been questioned by Raymond @-@ Joseph Loenertz , who argues that there is no evidence for such an assumption , an conversely it is well established that Theodore was in Nicaean service at the time . 
 Around 1210 , Theodore was invited by his half @-@ brother Michael I Komnenos Doukas to Epirus , where Michael had founded an independent Greek principality . Michael wanted Theodore 's aid , as his only son , the future Michael II Komnenos Doukas , was underage and illegitimate , while Michael 's other half @-@ brothers were considered to lack the ability to rule . Laskaris allowed Theodore to leave , but bound him with an oath of allegiance to himself and his heirs . Before going to Epirus , Theodore had married Maria Petraliphaina , with whom he had four children . 
 = = Ruler of Epirus = = 
 From 1210 on , Michael I Komnenos Doukas was engaged in a campaign of expansion , chiefly at the expense of the Latin Kingdom of Thessalonica to his east ; after initial reverses , much of Thessaly was conquered . By 1214 , Dyrrhachium and Corfu had been recovered from the Latins as well . The traditional view of historians is that these events marked Michael I 's repudiation of the allegiance he had sworn to the Latin Empire , but historian Philip Van Tricht argues that both Michael and later Theodore remained , at least in theory , vassals of the Latin Empire until 1217 . Michael was assassinated by a servant in late 1214 or in 1215 . As Michael II was illegitimate and too young , Theodore had no trouble in sidelining the boy . According to the hagiography of St. Theodora of Arta , the boy and his mother spent the duration of his reign exiled in the Peloponnese . 
 = = = Relations with Serbia and Nicaea = = = 
 Theodore was capable and extremely ambitious . Notwithstanding his oath to Laskaris , he aspired not only to expand his state at the expense of Thessalonica , but to eventually recover Constantinople and revive the Byzantine Empire . To secure his northern flank , Theodore allied himself with Serbia and the Albanian clans . The Principality of Arbanon was already in the Epirote political orbit under Michael I , and closer ties developed when its ruler Demetrios died in 1215 , leaving his principality to his widow , who promptly remarried the next year to a Greek magnate , Gregory <unk> . Against the Serbs , Theodore abandoned Michael I 's attempt to pursue a northward expansion into Zeta , and instead pursued an alliance with the Serbian prince Stefan II Nemanjić ( r . 1196 – 1228 ) that was directed towards keeping the Bulgarians in check . The ties between Epirus and Serbia were solidified by the marriage of Theodore 's brother Manuel Komnenos Doukas to one of Stefan II 's sisters ca . 1216 . Stefan II then sought to wed one of his sons — in all likelihood his eldest son and heir , Stefan Radoslav — to Michael I 's second daughter Theodora . The Archbishop of Ohrid , Demetrios Chomatianos , refused to sanction the marriage due to consanguinity — Theodora was a second cousin of Stefan Radoslav 's mother , Eudokia Angelina , a daughter of Alexios III Angelos . In 1217 , Stefan II tried to circumvent this by suggesting himself as the groom to Theodora 's half @-@ sister Maria , but Chomatianos vetoed this proposal as well on similar grounds . Finally , Stefan Radoslav married Theodore 's firstborn daughter Anna in winter 1219 / 20 . 
 With his position thus strengthened , Theodore expanded his territory into northern Macedonia , although it is possible that at least part of this region had already been captured by Michael I after the death of the local Bulgarian ruler Strez in 1214 . It is unclear to what extent Theodore 's expansion involved direct conflict with the Bulgarian Tsar Boril ( r . 1207 – 18 ) , but by 1217 he held Ohrid , Prilep , and most of the plain of Pelagonia , at least up to Strez 's old capital at Prosek , and likely beyond , approaching the Strymon River . As the Greek historian Konstantinos Varzos has noted , the capture of Ohrid , seat of the eponymous archbishopric , was particularly important for the standing of the Epirote state and Theodore 's aspirations . Theodore sponsored the election of the distinguished canonist Chomatianos to the archiepiscopal throne in 1217 , and Chomatianos would repay that support with his steadfast championing of Epirote claims to the Byzantine imperial inheritance vis @-@ à @-@ vis the rival claims of Nicaea . 
 Following the Fourth Crusade , the Orthodox clergy in the two main Greek states , Epirus and Nicaea , had effectively become separated . In 1208 , the Nicaeans had convened a synod and elected Michael Autoreianos as successor to the vacant see of the Patriarch of Constantinople . The election was uncanonical and therefore of questionable legitimacy . This in turn meant that Laskaris ' imperial title was also open to challenge , as he had been crowned by the same Michael Autoreianos . Already under Michael I , two local synods of bishops had emerged in the Epirote domains to carry on administration of the Church , largely independent of the Patriarch , one at Naupaktos under John Apokaukos , and one at Ohrid under Chomatianos . The more ambitious Chomatianos soon became the pre @-@ eminent " western " bishop , and sought to strengthen the de facto Epirote autonomy in ecclesiastical affairs , including the appointment of bishops for the local sees without the Patriarch 's interference . This policy , which dovetailed with Theodore 's own ambitions of independence from and rivalry towards Nicaea , brought the two branches of the Greek Church to an open quarrel , as the Nicaea @-@ based patriarch Manuel I Sarantenos began appointing bishops of his own to Epirote sees , whom the Epirotes refused to accept . Despite his close ties to Epirus , Stefan II Nemanjić exploited the Epirote – Nicaean rivalry to his advantage to secure autocephaly for the Serbian Church , which traditionally had been under the jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Ohrid . Brushing aside Chomatianos ' vehement objections , Stefan managed to have his brother <unk> , renamed Sava , consecrated by Manuel Sarantenos as autocephalous archbishop of Serbia in 1219 . Theodore took care not to let the quarrels of the churchmen affect his cordial relations with the Serbian ruler . 
 Theodore 's drive into Macedonia disquieted another local strongman , Alexius Slav , ruler of Melnik . A sworn enemy of Boril , Alexius had been abandoned by his erstwhile ally , the Latin Emperor , Henry of Flanders ( r . 1205 – 16 ) , who in 1213 allied himself with Bulgaria . Facing a possible attack by Theodore as well , Alexius now preferred to make common cause with him , and married a niece of Theodore 's wife . 
 = = = Capture of Peter of Courtenay = = = 
 The Epirote successes in Macedonia worried the Latins , as they opened the way to another attack on Thessalonica . The Kingdom of Thessalonica had been much weakened after the death of its founder , Boniface of Montferrat , in 1207 , since which it had been ruled by a regency for his underage son Demetrius ( r . 1207 – 24 ) . Interrupting a campaign against the Nicaeans in Asia Minor , Henry of Flanders hastened to Thessalonica . He took up contact with Boril and was preparing to march against Theodore when he suddenly died on 11 June 1216 , probably of malaria , although poisoning by his second wife Maria of Bulgaria has also been suggested . The death of the warlike Henry , followed by that of Pope Innocent III , the instigator of the Fourth Crusade , a month later , was a major stroke of good fortune for Theodore as it removed two of his most eminent and capable opponents . 
 The barons of the Latin Empire then elected Peter II of Courtenay , a cousin of King Philip II Augustus of France , as the new Latin Emperor . Receiving news of his election , Peter assembled a small army of 160 knights and 5 @,@ 500 foot and horse , and set out from France . After being crowned by Pope Honorius III in Rome , he set sail from Brindisi in April 1217 . Peter landed at Dyrrhachium , which he had promised to conquer and return to Venice , while his wife Yolanda of Flanders sailed on to Constantinople . As in the Norman invasion of William II of Sicily ( r . 1166 – 89 ) in 1185 , Peter intended ( after capturing Dyrrhachium ) to follow the ancient Via Egnatia to Thessalonica , wresting Albania and Macedonia from Epirote control in the process . 
 The commonly accepted version of events is that Dyrrhachium resisted with success , and as his casualties mounted Peter was forced to raise the siege and start his march towards Thessalonica . The march proved difficult , due to both the harsh terrain and the open hostility of the local population — the Western sources ( the Annales <unk> , Richard of San Germano , Philippe Mouskes , and the continuator of Robert of Auxerre ) also stress the loyalty of the local Albanian population to Theodore . After a few days , Theodore with his army confronted Peter . Theodore requested talks with the papal legate , Giovanni Colonna , whom he assured of his goodwill and support . Western sources claim that Theodore offered to recognize the primacy of the Catholic Church and the suzerainty of the Latin Empire — as well as to support Peter in his planned participation in the Fifth Crusade — and offered the Latins food and guides through the mountains . Peter was glad to receive this unexpected help , and an agreement between the two was concluded . As soon as the Latins let their guard down , Theodore fell upon them . Peter of Courtenay , Colonna , the Latin Archbishop of Salona , Count William I of Sancerre , and many Latin nobles were taken captive , while Peter 's army scattered into small roving bands trying to survive . Akropolites , the chronicler Ephraim , and some Western sources on the other hand claim that Dyrrhachium was captured , and are followed by some modern scholars , including the Greek I. D. Romanos and the French Alain <unk> . According to this view , Theodore offered to acknowledge Peter 's suzerainty after the city 's fall , only to treacherously ambush and defeat him . As the historian John Van Antwerp Fine remarks , " it is not important which version is correct " ; the outcome was the same , and if lost , Dyrrhachium was quickly retaken after Peter 's capture . 
 According to Philip Van Tricht , Theodore 's actions were motivated by several factors , which led him to regard Peter as a threat to himself and his principality . Peter 's attempt to return Dyrrhachium to Venice , even if it had failed for the moment , boded ill for the future . Peter 's recognition of the rights of Demetrius ' half @-@ brother William VI of Montferrat over Thessalonica opened the way for William to take power there , and Theodore was loath to see Thessalonica — whose rulers still claimed suzerainty over Epirus — strengthened , particularly given the presence of his exiled nephew Michael II in the court of the Latin Principality of Achaea . At the same time , Theodore and his court resented the increased papal interference in Greek affairs , especially in the aftermath of the mission of Cardinal Pelagius , the previous papal legate to Constantinople , whose actions had deepened the rift between Greeks and Latins further . 
 = = = Wars with the Latins and the capture of Thessalonica = = = 
 Whatever the true course of events , Theodore 's unexpected victory echoed throughout the Greek world , and greatly enhanced his standing ; even the usually hostile Akropolites was forced to admit in his history that this feat was " of great help to the Romans " . Conversely it dismayed Pope Honorius , who sent letters to the Latin princes of Greece as well as the Doge of Venice and Peter of Courtenay 's son @-@ in @-@ law King Andrew II of Hungary ( r . 1205 – 35 ) , urging them to engage themselves to secure the release of Peter and Colonna . He even wrote to Andrew and the French bishops to call for a crusade against Theodore , with which he also threatened Theodore in a letter . With the first contingents for the crusade assembling at Ancona in late 1217 , and the Venetians eager to profit from the crusade to recover Dyrrhachium , the pressure bore fruit : in March 1218 , Colonna was released , with Theodore offering his apologies and assurances of loyalty to the Pope . Honorius then changed his policy to the point of forbidding the Doge of Venice to harm Theodore in the slightest , hoping thereby to secure the release of more prisoners . Although some of the lesser barons were freed , Peter and many of the most senior lords remained in captivity until their death . It is unknown when Peter of Courtenay died , but this was probably before September 1219 . 
 The capture of Peter of Courtenay left both major Latin states in Greece , Thessalonica and Constantinople , in the hands of female regents . Before arriving in Constantinople , where she gave birth to Peter 's posthumous son , Baldwin II ( r . 1228 – 73 ) , Yolanda had stopped at the Peloponnese . There she quickly came to appreciate the wealth and strength of the Principality of Achaea , and arranged the marriage of her daughter Agnes to the principality 's heir , Geoffrey II of Villehardouin ( r. ca . 1229 – 46 ) . A politically astute ruler , Yolanda also secured her eastern border by offering her daughter Maria of Courtenay in marriage to Theodore Laskaris , who had just been widowed for the second time . 
 Before launching his final stroke against Thessalonica , Theodore also took care to secure his southern flank , by appointing his brother Constantine Komnenos Doukas as governor in Aetolia and Acarnania . An energetic governor , Constantine not only effectively shielded the Epirote domains from the threat of the Duchy of Athens , but soon recovered Neopatras and Lamia as well . Theodore himself turned his attention to clearing Thessaly of any remaining Latin presence , culminating in the surrender of the great Platamon Castle in 1218 . Over the next few years , one by one , Theodore captured the fortresses around Thessalonica itself . Platamon controlled the entrance to the <unk> Gulf , and with the surrender of Serres in late 1221 , Theodore cut the land connection between Constantinople and Thessalonica as well . Thessalonica was left thereby , in the words of John Fine , " more or less an island in the midst of Theodore 's possessions " . 
 As the fall of Thessalonica appeared imminent , Pope Honorius excommunicated Theodore , ordered an embargo on horses , troops , and supplies from the Adriatic ports , and sent letters to Constantinople urging assistance to Demetrius . Demetrius himself went to Italy to seek aid , being received by the Pope in Rome in March 1222 and by Emperor Frederick II ( r . 1220 – 50 ) soon after . A crusade was proclaimed against Theodore , and troops began to gather in Italy . In the meantime , the Latin Empire , now under Robert of Courtenay ( r . 1221 – 28 ) , was once more embroiled in warfare with Nicaea as it supported Laskaris ' brothers in their challenge against the new Nicaean emperor , John III Doukas Vatatzes ( r . 1222 – 54 ) . The first detachments of the assembling crusade , under Count Oberto II of <unk> , arrived at Thessalonica in summer 1222 and joined the de facto regent , Guy Pallavicini . Theodore now hastened his move against Thessalonica . After preliminary operations in late 1222 , in early 1223 he laid siege to the city . Honorius excommunicated him again , and redoubled his effort to promote the crusade , which had come to a standstill in the meantime . At the Pope 's urging , Venice and Emperor Frederick promised aid . Robert of Courtenay also pledged to assist , while Honorius called upon the Latin princes of southern Greece to join in the effort . The crusade finally assembled at Brindisi in March 1224 . In his instructions to his legate , however , Honorius did not rule out the possibility of Theodore coming to terms with the Crusaders . True to his word , in April 1224 Robert of Courtenay sent an army to besiege Serres . During the siege , the Latin generals learned of the disastrous defeat of the main Latin army at the hands of John III Doukas Vatatzes at the Battle of Poimanenon . They lifted the siege and hastened back to Constantinople , only to be intercepted by Theodore 's men ; most of the Latin army were killed or taken prisoner . 
 This double disaster destroyed the Pope 's plans for the crusade , as he had envisaged it to land in Theodore 's rear while he was engaged with Robert 's army . At the same time , the prospective leader of the crusade , William VI of Montferrat , fell ill . In November , the Pope was forced to postpone the crusade 's departure for the next spring . With news of the Latin defeats and the postponement of the crusade , the exhausted defenders of Thessalonica surrendered the city to Theodore sometime in December 1224 . The crusade to relieve it sailed in March 1225 , and landed in Thessaly at Halmyros . The Crusader army was soon decimated by dysentery , allegedly because the Greeks had poisoned the local water supply . William of Montferrat himself succumbed to it , and the remnants of the army left Greece . Demetrius of Montferrat still hoped to recover his realm with the help of Frederick II , but died in 1227 . 
 = = Emperor of Thessalonica = = 
 The capture of Thessalonica , traditionally the second city of the Byzantine Empire after Constantinople , was a major stroke against the Latins and greatly boosted Theodore 's standing , so much that he now regarded himself as superior to Vatatzes , and openly claimed the Byzantine imperial title by putting on the purple boots reserved to the emperor . Indeed , one of his major supporters , the eminent Metropolitan of Naupaktos , John Apokaukos , in a letter to the Patriarch in 1222 declared that the Epirotes already regarded Theodore as their " God @-@ sent regent and emperor " , and later wrote to Theodore 's wife expressing the hope that he might be able to assist at their imperial coronation at Thessalonica . 
 = = = Coronation controversy with Nicaea = = = 
 According to Byzantine custom , the coronation of an emperor could only take place in Constantinople and be performed by the Patriarch ; yet Constantinople was still in Latin hands , and the Patriarch ( now Germanus II , 1223 – 40 ) resided in Nicaea . Theodore thus turned to the Metropolitan of Thessalonica , Constantine Mesopotamites , whom he had just restored to his see after removing the Latin prelate . Mesopotamites however recognized the Patriarch at Nicaea as legitimate , and steadfastly refused to perform the rite , despite pressure from Theodore , his brother Constantine , and John Apokaukos . Rather than submit , he preferred to return to exile . In response , in March 1225 Theodore convened a council of the bishops of his domains at Arta , chaired by Apokaukos . The council approved a declaration , composed by Apokaukos , which extolled Theodore 's achievements against the Latins and Bulgarians , his liberation of Greek lands , eviction of Catholic priests and restoration of Orthodox bishops , and his imperial descent , and declared that the council recognized only him as emperor . Armed with this declaration , Theodore had the loyal Archbishop of Ohrid , Demetrios Chomatianos , perform the coronation instead . 
 Although Theodore appears to have assumed , and was addressed by , the imperial title almost immediately after the capture of Thessalonica , the date of his actual coronation is unknown . The French scholar Lucien Stiernon places it in the period between June 1227 and April 1228 , but the Greek Apostolos D. <unk> rejects this , reasoning that Theodore had no obvious reason to delay his coronation for so long , and suggested that he was crowned in 1225 , immediately after the council of Arta . Eleni Bees @-@ <unk> on the other hand , based on the letters of Apokaukos , suggests a date between 3 April and August 1227 , while <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> has narrowed the date down to 29 May 1227 . 
 As befitted an emperor , Theodore began setting up a court at his new capital , and dispensed court titles to his relatives and followers . His brothers Manuel and Constantine were raised to the rank of Despot , the long @-@ serving John <unk> became panhypersebastos and <unk> ( chief minister ) , and a number of scions of old Byzantine aristocratic families , who had sought refuge in Epirus , were appointed as provincial governors alongside members of the local aristocracy . The title of doux was used , but unlike earlier times these were mostly civilian governors with little military authority . Theodore awarded titles with such largesse that formerly exclusive titles such as pansebastos sebastos or <unk> were devalued and came to be held by city notables . To secure his new capital , Theodore instituted a guard of " <unk> " under a <unk> . 
 John Vatatzes initially reacted to Theodore 's proclamation as emperor by offering to recognize him as a sort of viceroy in his lands , but Theodore rejected this and publicly assumed the full titulature of the Byzantine emperors , as " basileus and autokrator of the Romans " . Theodore 's coronation deepened the rift between the western Greeks and Nicaea , which once again was expressed in the ecclesiastic sphere . At first , the Nicaeans tried to limit the blame to Chomatianos : though writing respectfully of Theodore himself , Patriarch Germanus II expressed his indignation at the presumption of Chomatianos in usurping the patriarchal privilege of crowning an emperor , while Chomatianos claimed that , as the successor of the ancient see of Justiniana Prima , he was an independent prelate and had the authority to do so . 
 In 1227 , a synod of Epirote bishops in Arta tried to find a compromise , acknowledging the overall authority of the Patriarch at Nicaea but requesting administrative autonomy , i.e. the right for Theodore to appoint bishops in his domains . They gave the Patriarch three months to reply , and suggested that if he did not heed their proposals , they might be forced to recognize the supremacy of the Pope instead . Germanus replied by having the patriarchal synod condemn Theodore 's assumption of the imperial title . The conflict escalated when Germanus appointed his own candidate to the vacant see of Dyrrhachium . Theodore expelled the bishop , and the Epirote synod instead elected a friend of Chomatianos , Constantine <unk> , as the bishop . Germanus now attacked Theodore directly . In response , George Bardanes composed a letter to Germanus , which insisted on Epirote ecclesiastical autonomy and challenged the very legality of Germanus ' claims to the patriarchate . The result was a full schism between the Nicaean and Epirote churches that lasted until 1232 / 3 . 
 = = = Expansion into Thrace = = = 
 Following Theodore 's coronation , there were four rulers who claimed the imperial title and vied for control of Constantinople : Theodore , the Latin Emperor , Robert of Courtenay , John III Doukas Vatatzes of Nicaea , and the young but ambitious John II Asen ( r . 1218 – 41 ) of Bulgaria . The Latin Empire was a shadow of its former strength : following Poimanenon , the Latins had lost most of their territories in Asia , while in Europe , it was soon reduced to the environs of Constantinople itself . Already in 1224 , or at least in 1225 , Theodore captured Chalcidice with Mount Athos , and in spring 1225 , he advanced through eastern Macedonia and western Thrace , seizing Christopolis , Xanthi , <unk> , Mosynopolis and Didymoteicho . In an attempt to pre @-@ empt him and block his advance onto Constantinople , the Nicaeans had answered the summons of the inhabitants of Adrianople and taken over the city from the Latins . Theodore however crossed the Evros River and blockaded the city , until it agreed to surrender . The Nicaean army , under the protostrator John Ises and John Kamytzes Komnenos , was allowed to withdraw unmolested to Asia with ships provided by Theodore . 
 The capture of Adrianople opened the path to Constantinople for Theodore . In order to secure his northern flank , he concluded an alliance with John Asen , sealed by the ( second ) marriage of his brother Manuel to Maria , an illegitimate daughter of Asen . At the same time , the Latins turned to Nicaea and concluded a peace treaty in exchange for further territorial concessions . This pact too was sealed by a marriage , of Theodore Laskaris ' daughter Eudokia to the Latin baron Anseau de Cayeux . In the same summer of 1225 , Theodore led his army to the environs of Constantinople , reaching the towns of Bizye and Vrysis . Anseau de Cayeux , leading the Latin army , was heavily wounded in the clashes , but Constantinople itself was not attacked . Not only was Theodore unprepared for a siege against the mighty Theodosian Walls , but news of William of Montferrat 's landing at Thessaly forced him to break off operations and return west . 
 For reasons that are unknown , Theodore did not renew his attack on Constantinople in 1226 or the years thereafter . Instead , he seems to have occupied himself with domestic affairs , as well as taking care to improve relations with Frederick II during the latter 's stop @-@ over at Corfu and Cephallonia to lead the Sixth Crusade in 1228 . In 1229 , he even sent a company of Greek troops to serve under Frederick in Italy . At the same time , Theodore presided over a rupture in relations with Venice , after his governor in Corfu sequestered the cargo of a shipwrecked Venetian ship . Theodore issued an edict on 19 August 1228 prohibiting Venetian merchants from practising commerce in his realm . In January of the same year , Robert of Courtenay died , leaving the throne of the Latin Empire to his eleven @-@ year @-@ old brother , Baldwin II . With a regency taking over the governance of the state , the Latin Empire stood further enfeebled . At this moment , John Asen offered an alliance . Baldwin II would marry his daughter Helena , while John Asen would take over the regency and lend his assistance at repelling Theodore 's attacks . The Latin barons viewed the offer with mistrust , as it would offer John Asen every opportunity to take over Constantinople himself ; instead , they strung out negotiations , and eventually chose the 80 @-@ year @-@ old but energetic John of Brienne ( r . 1229 – 37 ) as regent . Although the Bulgarian offer failed , it served to open a rift between Theodore and his nominal ally . In a move clearly directed against John Asen , in September 1228 , Theodore agreed to a one @-@ year truce with the Latin Empire 's regent , <unk> of <unk> , with the border between the two empires running along a line from Ainos to Vrysis . 
 = = Klokotnitsa and Bulgarian captivity = = 
 Finally , in late 1229 , Theodore began assembling his forces at Thessalonica — including a contingent of troops sent by Frederick II — for the projected final attack on Constantinople . As his troops marched east in spring 1230 , he unexpectedly turned his army north and followed the Evros valley into Bulgaria . Theodore 's motives for this sudden change are debated . Contemporary and later historians like Akropolites denounced this as a sign of Theodore 's duplicity and treachery . A more likely suggestion is that Theodore , hitherto undefeated in battle , desired to check Bulgarian power and avoid the possibility of the Bulgarians striking in his rear while he was engaged in besieging Constantinople . Although caught by surprise , John Asen reacted rapidly . Allegedly affixing the text of the broken treaty to one of his spears as a flag , he rallied his troops and met Theodore in battle in April 1230 . The ensuing Battle of Klokotnitsa was a crushing victory for the Bulgarian ruler , who took Theodore and many of his officers captive . 
 In the aftermath of Klokotnitsa , Bulgaria emerged as the mightiest power in the Balkans . Deprived of its energetic ruler , Theodore 's empire collapsed : within a few months Thrace , most of Macedonia , and Albania , fell under Bulgarian rule . As John Asen boasted in an inscription in the Holy Forty Martyrs Church at his capital of Tarnovo , he " occupied all the land from Adrianople to Dyrrhachium , Greek , Serbian , and Albanian alike " , although Dyrrhachium itself apparently remained in Greek hands . The Latin Duchy of Philippopolis was also annexed , and Alexius Slav 's principality in the Rhodope Mountains was extinguished in the process , with Alexius spending the rest of his life at Asen 's court . 
 Theodore 's brother Manuel , who managed to escape from Klokotnitsa , now took over the throne in Thessalonica . His domain was reduced to the environs of the city and his family 's core territories in Epirus and Thessaly , as well as Dyrrhachium and Corfu , while his brother Constantine in Aetolia and Acarnania recognized his suzerainty . As a son @-@ in @-@ law of John Asen , Manuel was allowed to maintain internal autonomy , but to all intents and purposes he was a client of the Bulgarian Tsar . At about the same time , Michael I 's bastard son Michael II returned from exile and quickly succeeded , apparently with the support of the local population , in taking over control of Epirus . Manuel was forced to recognize the fait accompli under the pretense that Michael recognized his suzerainty , in token of which Manuel conferred him the title of Despot . In reality Michael was fully independent , and very quickly ceased to acknowledge Manuel 's suzerainty ; by 1236 , he had seized Corfu . In order to preserve some freedom of manoeuvre and counter Asen 's attempts to subordinate the Epirote Church to the Bulgarian Church of Tarnovo , Manuel turned to his brother 's erstwhile rivals in Nicaea and brought an end to the ecclesiastical schism by acknowledging the legitimacy and superiority of the Nicaea @-@ based Patriarch . 
 Theodore himself remained in captivity at Tarnovo for seven years . Initially he was treated with honour , but at some point during his captivity he was accused of plotting against John Asen and blinded as a result . This was the customary Byzantine punishment for treason and means of sidelining potential political rivals . According to a contemporary letter written in Hebrew , Asen initially ordered two Jews to carry out the deed , for Theodore had been persecuting the Jews in his territory and confiscating their wealth to fund his campaigns . Theodore begged to be spared , and they refused to carry out the blinding , whereupon the enraged Tsar had them thrown from a cliff . Finally , in 1237 Theodore was released when Asen , recently widowed , fell in love with Theodore 's sole unmarried daughter , Irene . Immediately after the marriage , Theodore was released and allowed to depart Tarnovo to wherever he wished . 
 = = Return to Thessalonica and final years = = 
 = = = Recovery of Thessalonica = = = 
 As soon as he was set free , Theodore returned to Thessalonica . Lacking any escort or followers , he disguised himself as a beggar in order to enter the city in secret . There he contacted old supporters and favourites , and organized a conspiracy that soon ousted Manuel and took over the city . As Byzantine custom barred him from re @-@ assuming the imperial office due to his blinding , Theodore installed his son John Komnenos Doukas ( r . 1237 – 44 ) as emperor ( without a coronation ceremony ) , but remained the real ruler of the empire in his son 's name . John himself appears to have been mostly interested in religion , and more inclined to enter a monastery than to become emperor . Theodore had to persuade him that being named emperor was a God @-@ given gift , and that he was indeed the rightful Emperor of the Romans due to his imperial descent . 
 The deposed Manuel was sent to exile at Attaleia in Asia Minor , while his wife Maria was allowed to return to her father . Despite Theodore 's actions and the overthrow of his daughter and son @-@ in @-@ law , Akropolites reports that John Asen remained favourably disposed towards Theodore due to his passionate love for Irene . Manuel did not remain quiescent in exile ; determined to avenge himself , from Attaleia he secured passage through Turkish lands to Nicaea . There John Vatatzes welcomed him and agreed to support him , but not before he secured from Manuel oaths of loyalty to himself . Thus in early 1239 Manuel with six Nicaean ships set sail for Greece , landing near Demetrias in Thessaly . He received widespread support in the province , perhaps even from the local governor , Michael I 's son @-@ in @-@ law Constantine Maliasenos , allowing him to raise an army and in a short time occupy Farsala , Larissa , and Platamon . Faced with the option of open civil war , Manuel and Theodore eventually came to terms by dividing the territories of Thessalonica among themselves . Manuel renounced his allegiance to Vatatzes and received Thessaly , John and Theodore kept Thessalonica and the remaining parts of Macedonia as far west as Vodena and Ostrovo , and Constantine was confirmed in his appanage of Aetolia and Acarnania . To further secure their position , both Theodore and Michael concluded treaties with the powerful Prince of Achaea , Geoffrey II of Villehardouin . 
 = = = Submission of Thessalonica to Nicaea = = = 
 Michael II in Epirus was not part of the brothers ' agreement , and continued to pursue his own policies independently of his uncles . In 1241 , when Manuel died , Michael moved quickly to occupy Thessaly . In June of the same year , John Asen died , leaving the throne to his seven @-@ year @-@ old son Kaliman ( r . 1241 – 46 ) . Coupled with the increasingly deteriorating situation of the Latin Empire , this development left John Vatatzes of Nicaea as the pre @-@ eminent ruler of the region , and the obvious candidate for the capture of Constantinople . 
 Before undertaking any moves against Constantinople , Vatatzes realized the need to settle affairs with Thessalonica , and in particular with Theodore , whose ambition , capability , and machinations he feared . In 1240 or 1241 he therefore issued an invitation , with assurances of safe @-@ conduct , to Theodore to visit Nicaea . Theodore accepted , and was treated with great honours by Vatatzes , who deferred to him as his " uncle " and dined with him at the same table . In reality , Theodore was a prisoner in Nicaea ; he was not allowed to leave , and throughout his sojourn in the Nicaean court , preparations were in full swing for a campaign against Thessalonica . In spring 1242 , Vatatzes crossed over into Europe at the head of his army , with Theodore accompanying him as an honorary prisoner . Facing no resistance , the Nicaean army and fleet arrived before Thessalonica . The city 's garrison and inhabitants resisted with success and the Nicaean army , lacking heavy siege equipment , had to settle for a drawn @-@ out blockade . Soon , however , news arrived of a Mongol invasion of Asia Minor , which forced Vatatzes to break off the campaign and return to Nicaea . Nevertheless , the Nicaean emperor kept this news a secret , and sent Theodore to his son to negotiate . John himself reportedly was willing to surrender the city outright , but his father convinced him to hold out for better terms . In the end , after 40 days of negotiations , John was allowed to keep control of Thessalonica , but renounced his imperial title and accepted Nicaean suzerainty and the title of Despot . Theodore was also allowed to remain at Thessalonica at his son 's side . 
 John ruled as Despot in Thessalonica for two years , until his death in 1244 . Theodore himself retired to Vodena , from where he supervised the affairs of state . On John 's death he raised his younger son Demetrios Komnenos Doukas ( r . 1244 – 46 ) in his place , and sent an embassy to Nicaea to announce the succession , as befitted the terms of vassalage agreed in 1242 . If John was a religious ascetic , Demetrios was a dissolute youngster who enjoyed partying with his favourites and seducing married women . Although Theodore remained in charge of governance , Demetrios quickly became so unpopular that many leading citizens began viewing direct Nicaean rule with favour . 
 Things came to a head in autumn 1246 , when Kaliman of Bulgaria died , leaving the country in the hands of a regency for his younger brother Michael Asen ( r . 1246 – 57 ) . Vatatzes quickly attacked Bulgaria , and within three months captured most of Thrace and all of eastern and northern Macedonia , while Michael II of Epirus also took advantage of the opportunity to expand into Albania and northwestern Macedonia . At the close of this campaign in November , as Vatatzes was encamped at Melnik , he was informed of a conspiracy to depose Demetrios and deliver Thessalonica to him in exchange for a chrysobull guaranteeing the traditional rights and privileges of the city . Vatatzes readily granted this , and sent envoys to Demetrios calling for him to appear in person at his camp . Demetrios , suspicious of Vatatzes ' intentions , refused , and the Nicaeans marched on Thessalonica . After a few days , the conspirators opened one of the gates to the Nicaean army , and the city was quickly captured . Demetrios was captured and exiled to <unk> in Bithynia , while Thessalonica and all of Macedonia were placed under the governance of the Grand Domestic Andronikos Palaiologos . Theodore himself , isolated and without power in his refuge at Vodena , apparently remained uninvolved in these events . 
 = = = Final throw of the dice and death = = = 
 With Thessalonica secured , Vatatzes turned to Epirus , offering Michael II a marriage alliance between Michael 's eldest son Nikephoros and his own granddaughter Maria . The offer was enthusiastically accepted by Michael 's wife , Theodora Petraliphaina , and the young couple were engaged at Pegae . Michael , who had not abandoned his family 's ambitions , remained ambivalent about the Nicaean alliance , and Theodore used his influence over his nephew to turn him against it . Thus , in spring 1251 , Michael launched a sudden attack on Thessalonica . The city resisted successfully , and in spring of the next year Vatatzes once more crossed into Europe to campaign against the Komnenoi Doukai . Theodore with Michael had turned to the north , capturing Prilep and Veles , and when they received news of Vatatzes ' arrival , they withdrew to Epirus via Kastoria . Vatatzes besieged and captured Theodore 's stronghold of Vodena , but soon became bogged down in skirmishing in the area of Kastoria . The stalemate was broken when two Epirote generals , John Glabas and Theodore Petraliphas , defected to the Nicaeans , followed shortly after by the ruler of Kruja , Golem . This forced Michael to come to terms with Vatatzes , ceding the fortresses he had captured as well as his remaining holdings in Macedonia , and reconfirming the marriage alliance with Nicaea . Furthermore , Vatatzes explicitly demanded the handing over of Theodore . The Epirote ambassadors met Vatatzes at Vodena , where they offered Theodore and the young Nikephoros as hostages . The latter was granted the title of Despot and soon allowed to return to Epirus , but Theodore was moved as a prisoner to Asia Minor . He died shortly after , around 1253 . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 The modern biographer of the Komnenoi , Konstantinos Varzos , described Theodore as an " energetic , resourceful , and exceedingly ambitious statesman , who inherited from his ancestor Alexios I Komnenos his endurance and persistence , but not the latter 's intelligence , diplomacy , and ability to adapt " . Varzos furthermore points out that despite his great ability , Theodore 's ambition to be the one to recover Constantinople and his irreconcilable rivalry with Nicaea actually hampered and delayed the restoration of the Byzantine Empire by several decades . 
 Theodore 's legacy left a lasting mark on the political worldview of the western Greeks : Byzantinist Donald Nicol remarks that " the memory of Theodore Doukas 's victories and of his title to the Byzantine crown lived on in northern Greece and in the hearts of his descendants for many years to come " . Michael II continued his uncle 's rivalry with Nicaea , further delaying the recovery of Constantinople , and even after the restoration of the Byzantine Empire by Nicaea in 1261 , the rulers of Epirus would continue to challenge the revived empire and uphold their own claim to the Byzantine throne . 
 = = Family = = 
 By his wife Maria Petraliphaina , Theodore had four children : 
 Anna Angelina Komnene Doukaina , who married King Stefan Radoslav of Serbia 
 John Komnenos Doukas , who became Emperor of Thessalonica in 1237 
 Irene Komnene Doukaina , who married John Asen 
 Demetrios Komnenos Doukas , who succeeded as ruler of Thessalonica in 1244 
 = USS Colorado ( BB @-@ 45 ) = 
 USS Colorado ( BB @-@ 45 ) , was the lead ship of the Colorado class of battleships , the third ship of the United States Navy named in honor of the 38th state . Her keel was laid down on 29 May 1919 by the New York Shipbuilding Corporation . She was launched on 22 March 1921 ; and commissioned on 30 August 1923 . She was armed with eight 16 @-@ inch ( 406 mm ) guns and fourteen 5 @-@ inch ( 127 mm ) deck guns ; two 5 @-@ inch guns were removed in an overhaul . 
 Colorado took her maiden voyage in 1923 to Europe . She later operated with the Battle Fleet and sailed through the Pacific during the interwar years . She also underwent a further refit , during which her four 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) anti @-@ aircraft guns were replaced with an equal number of 5 in ( 127 mm ) / 25 cal guns . 
 During the early part of World War II , Colorado undertook a defensive patrol near the Golden Gate Bridge in May 1942 to stop a possible Japanese invasion . She then sailed to Fiji to stop any further Japanese advance into the Pacific . Next , she supported the landings on Tarawa , the Marshall Islands , Saipan , Guam , and Tinian . On 24 July 1944 , during the shelling of Tinian , Colorado received 22 shell hits from shore batteries , but continued to support the invading troops until 3 August . She later arrived in Leyte Gulf on 20 November 1944 to support American troops fighting ashore . On 27 November , she was hit by two Kamikazes which caused moderate damage . 
 After that , Colorado sailed to Luzon on 1 January 1945 , where she participated in the preinvasion bombardments in Lingayen Gulf . She returned to Okinawa on 6 August and sailed from there to Japan for the occupation of the country , arriving in Tokyo on 27 August . Departing Tokyo Bay on 20 September , she arrived at San Francisco on 15 October . She was placed out of commission in reserve in Pearl Harbor on 7 January 1947 , and sold for scrapping on 23 July 1959 . She won seven battle stars during her service . Many of Colorado 's anti @-@ aircraft guns are in museums across the state of Colorado ( her bell and teak decking are also in museums ) or mounted on the museum ship Olympia . 
 = = Description = = 
 Colorado was 624 feet 3 inches ( 190 @.@ 27 m ) long overall , had a beam of 97 @.@ 5 ft ( 29 @.@ 7 m ) and a draft of 38 ft ( 12 m ) . She displaced 32 @,@ 100 long tons ( 32 @,@ 600 t ) as designed and up to 33 @,@ 060 long tons ( 33 @,@ 590 t ) at full load . The ship was powered by a four @-@ shaft turbo @-@ electric drive , rated at 28 @,@ 900 shaft horsepower ( 21 @,@ 600 kW ) and eight Babcock & Wilcox boilers , generating a top speed of 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) . She had a range of 8 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 15 @,@ 000 km ; 9 @,@ 200 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . She had a crew of 1 @,@ 080 officers and enlisted men . 
 She was armed with a main battery of eight 16 @-@ inch ( 406 mm ) / 45 caliber Mark 1 guns in four twin gun turrets on the centerline , two forward and aft . The secondary battery consisted of fourteen 5 @-@ inch ( 127 mm ) / 51 caliber guns , two of which were removed in an overhaul . The anti @-@ aircraft defense consisted of four 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) / 23 caliber guns , which were soon replaced , first by 5 @-@ inch ( 127 mm ) / 25 caliber guns , and then by 5 @-@ inch ( 127 mm ) / 38 caliber guns . As was standard for capital ships of the period , Colorado carried two 21 in ( 533 mm ) torpedo tubes in deck @-@ mounted launchers . 
 Colorado 's main armored belt was 13 @.@ 5 in ( 343 mm ) thick over the magazines and the machinery spaces and 8 in ( 203 mm ) elsewhere . The main battery gun turrets had 18 @-@ inch ( 460 mm ) thick faces , and the supporting barbettes had 13 in ( 330 mm ) of armor plating on their exposed sides . Armor that was 3 @.@ 5 in ( 89 mm ) thick protected the decks . The conning tower had 11 in ( 280 mm ) thick sides . 
 = = Construction and commission = = 
 Her keel was laid down on 29 May 1919 by the New York Shipbuilding Corporation of Camden , New Jersey . She was launched on 22 March 1921 sponsored by Mrs. Max Melville , <unk> , daughter of United States Senator from Colorado Samuel D. Nicholson ; and commissioned on 30 August 1923 . The ship 's first commanding officer was Captain Reginald R. Belknap . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 = = = Inter @-@ war period = = = 
 Colorado departed New York Harbor on 29 December 1923 to start a maiden voyage to Europe . The voyage took her to Britain , France , Italy and the island of Gibraltar , with port calls to Portsmouth , Cherbourg , Villefranche , Naples , and the British base at Gibraltar . She returned to New York Harbor on 15 February 1924 and upon her return completed some final tests and undertook some repairs before sailing to the U.S. West Coast for force assignment . She steamed from New York Harbor on 11 July and arrived at San Francisco on 15 September . 
 Over the next twelve years , Colorado was assigned to the Pacific Battle Fleet , during which time she participated in numerous exercises and ceremonies along with the rest of the fleet . She returned to the East Coast on several occasions to help with fleet problems in the Caribbean and also took a cruise to Samoa , Australia , and New Zealand from 8 June to 26 September 1925 to show the U.S. flag in the southwestern Pacific . She was overhauled in 1928 – 29 , during which her four 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) anti @-@ aircraft guns were replaced by eight 5 @-@ inch ( 130 mm ) / 25 caliber guns . In 1932 , went to Long Beach to help with the damage caused by the earthquake there . She later sailed to the Pacific Ocean to help with search for Amelia Earhart . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 From 27 January 1941 , Colorado was based in Pearl Harbor undergoing intensive training exercises and taking part in several war games until 25 June , when she departed Hawaii for the West Coast . Undergoing overhaul at the Puget Sound Navy Yard , she was not present for the attack on Pearl Harbor on 7 December . During the refit , two of the 12 original 5 in / 51 caliber guns were removed , and were replaced by an equal number of 5 in / 38 caliber guns . On 31 May , she and Maryland patrolled near Golden Gate Bridge to protect San Francisco from any Japanese attack . 
 After refit work was completed on 31 March 1942 , Colorado carried out extensive training maneuvers along the West Coast , before returning to Pearl Harbor to complete her final preparations for action . She operated in the vicinity of the Fiji Islands and New Hebrides from 8 November 1942 to 17 September 1943 to prevent any further Japanese expansion in the Pacific . She sailed from Pearl Harbor on 21 October 1943 to provide pre @-@ invasion shelling and fire support for the invasion of Tarawa , returning to port on 7 December 1943 . After another overhaul on the West Coast , Colorado returned to Lahaina Roads , in the Hawaiian Islands , on 21 January 1944 and sortied the next day for the Marshall Islands . She provided the pre @-@ invasion bombardment and fire support for the invasions of Kwajalein and Eniwetok until 23 February , when she headed for the Puget Sound Navy Yard for another overhaul . 
 She joined other units going for the Mariana Islands at the harbor at San Francisco . She departed on 5 May passing Pearl Harbor and Kwajalein to the pre @-@ invasion shelling at Saipan , Guam , and Tinian after 14 June . During the shelling of Tinian on 24 July she was damaged , 43 men were killed , and 198 wounded by 22 shell hits from Japanese shore batteries ; she continued shelling the island and providing fire support for the invasion troops . After undergoing extensive repairs along the West Coast , she arrived in Leyte Gulf to begin the invasion of Leyte . A week after her arrival she was struck by two kamikaze suicide bombers , which killed 19 crewmembers , injured 72 , and moderately damaged the ship . Despite the damage , she bombarded Mindoro on schedule from 12 to 17 January 1945 . She then proceeded to Manus Island for urgent repairs . 
 She returned to Luzon on New Year 's Day 1945 to participate in the pre @-@ invasion shelling of the Lingayen Gulf . She was hit by accidental gunfire eight days later . The gunfire hit her superstructure , and caused 69 casualties ( 18 killed , 51 wounded ) . After a few repairs at the island of Ulithi , she joined in the pre @-@ invasion shelling group for the invasion of Okinawa at Kerama Retto . She stayed at Okinawa until 22 May , providing anti @-@ aircraft cover and fire support for the invasion troops . On 6 August , she returned to the occupied Okinawa to sail to Japan for its occupation . On 27 August , she covered the airborne occupation of Atsugi Airfield . 
 Colorado was awarded seven battle stars for her World War II service . 
 = = = Post war = = = 
 Colorado departed Tokyo Bay on 20 September 1945 for San Francisco . She arrived there on 15 October , and then sailed for Seattle for Navy Day ( 27 October ) . She was part of the Operation Magic Carpet force , making three runs to Pearl Harbor to transport <unk> soldiers home , before returning to Bremerton Navy Yard for her deactivation . She was placed out of reserve commission on 7 January 1947 and was sold for scrap on 23 July 1959 . 
 = = Artifacts on display = = 
 The ship 's bell is currently on display in the University Memorial Center ( UMC ) at the University of Colorado . A 5 in ( 130 mm ) / 51 cal deck gun from Colorado was donated to the Puget Sound Maritime Historical Society in 1959 , and is displayed at the Museum of History and Industry in Seattle . It was one of eight such guns on Colorado . 
 Six of Colorado 's 5 / 51 cal guns were put aboard the protected cruiser USS Olympia , after she became a museum in Philadelphia in 1957 . Boards from her deck were re @-@ purposed to form a wall in the main lounge of Haggett Hall at the University of Washington . A plaque commemorates the source . 
 On 7 February 2014 , Boeing donated the teak decking of Colorado to the USO Northwest SeaTac Center to serve as the new center ’ s entry flooring . Her helm is in the collection of the Colorado Springs Museum . It was donated to the museum in 1961 by Rear Admiral G. R. Luker and other naval officers . Admiral Luker served on Colorado . The donation also included a bronze plaque and other historical materials . 
 = = = Book sources = = = 
 Breyer , Siegfried ( 1973 ) . Battleships and Battle Cruisers 1905 – 1970 . New York City : Doubleday and Company . ISBN 0 @-@ 385 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 Gardiner , Robert ; Gray , Randal , eds . ( 1985 ) . Conway 's All the World 's Fighting Ships , 1906 – 1921 . Annapolis , Maryland : Naval Institute Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 87021 @-@ 907 @-@ 3 . 
 Kearns , Patricia M. ; Morris , James M. ( 2011 ) . Historical Dictionary of the United States Navy ( Second ed . ) . Lanham , Maryland : Scarecrow Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 8108 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 Martin , Robert J. ( 1997 ) . USS West Virginia ( BB @-@ 48 ) . Nashville , Tennessee : Turner Publishing Company . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 341 @-@ 3 . 
 Turner Publishing ( 2002 ) . USS New York . Nashville , Tennessee : Turner Publishing Company . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 809 @-@ 2 . 
 = = = News sources = = = 
 Schaefer , Scott ( 7 February 2014 ) . " Ceremony held for transfer of the USS Colorado 's teak decking " . The SeaTac Blog . SeaTac , Washington : South King Media . Retrieved 22 July 2015 . 
 = = = Web sources = = = 
 " Colorado " . Dictionary of American Naval Fighting Ships . Navy Department , Naval History & Heritage Command . Retrieved 15 September 2011 . 
 USS Colorado Alumni Association . " USS Colorado ( BB @-@ 45 ) – Memorials " . USS Colorado Alumni Association . Retrieved 29 June 2015 . 
 = Liquid crystal = 
 Liquid crystals ( LCs ) are matter in a state which has properties between those of conventional liquids and those of solid crystals . For instance , a liquid crystal may flow like a liquid , but its molecules may be oriented in a crystal @-@ like way . There are many different types of liquid @-@ crystal phases , which can be distinguished by their different optical properties ( such as birefringence ) . When viewed under a microscope using a polarized light source , different liquid crystal phases will appear to have distinct textures . The contrasting areas in the textures correspond to domains where the liquid @-@ crystal molecules are oriented in different directions . Within a domain , however , the molecules are well ordered . LC materials may not always be in a liquid @-@ crystal phase ( just as water may turn into ice or steam ) . 
 Liquid crystals can be divided into thermotropic , lyotropic and metallotropic phases . Thermotropic and lyotropic liquid crystals consist mostly of organic molecules , although a few minerals are also known . Thermotropic LCs exhibit a phase transition into the liquid @-@ crystal phase as temperature is changed . Lyotropic LCs exhibit phase transitions as a function of both temperature and concentration of the liquid @-@ crystal molecules in a solvent ( typically water ) . Metallotropic LCs are composed of both organic and inorganic molecules ; their liquid @-@ crystal transition depends not only on temperature and concentration , but also on the inorganic @-@ organic composition ratio . 
 Examples of liquid crystals can be found both in the natural world and in technological applications . Most contemporary electronic displays use liquid crystals . Lyotropic liquid @-@ crystalline phases are abundant in living systems but can also be found in the mineral world . For example , many proteins and cell membranes are liquid crystals . Other well @-@ known examples of liquid crystals are solutions of soap and various related detergents , as well as the tobacco mosaic virus , and some clays . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1888 , Austrian botanical physiologist Friedrich Reinitzer , working at the Karl @-@ Ferdinands @-@ Universität , examined the physico @-@ chemical properties of various derivatives of cholesterol which now belong to the class of materials known as cholesteric liquid crystals . Previously , other researchers had observed distinct color effects when cooling cholesterol derivatives just above the freezing point , but had not associated it with a new phenomenon . Reinitzer perceived that color changes in a derivative cholesteryl benzoate were not the most peculiar feature . 
 He found that cholesteryl benzoate does not melt in the same manner as other compounds , but has two melting points . At 145 @.@ 5 ° C ( 293 @.@ 9 ° F ) it melts into a cloudy liquid , and at 178 @.@ 5 ° C ( 353 @.@ 3 ° F ) it melts again and the cloudy liquid becomes clear . The phenomenon is reversible . Seeking help from a physicist , on March 14 , 1888 , he wrote to Otto Lehmann , at that time a Privatdozent in Aachen . They exchanged letters and samples . Lehmann examined the intermediate cloudy fluid , and reported seeing crystallites . Reinitzer 's Viennese colleague von Zepharovich also indicated that the intermediate " fluid " was crystalline . The exchange of letters with Lehmann ended on April 24 , with many questions unanswered . Reinitzer presented his results , with credits to Lehmann and von Zepharovich , at a meeting of the Vienna Chemical Society on May 3 , 1888 . 
 By that time , Reinitzer had discovered and described three important features of cholesteric liquid crystals ( the name coined by Otto Lehmann in 1904 ) : the existence of two melting points , the reflection of circularly polarized light , and the ability to rotate the polarization direction of light . 
 After his accidental discovery , Reinitzer did not pursue studying liquid crystals further . The research was continued by Lehmann , who realized that he had encountered a new phenomenon and was in a position to investigate it : In his postdoctoral years he had acquired expertise in crystallography and microscopy . Lehmann started a systematic study , first of cholesteryl benzoate , and then of related compounds which exhibited the double @-@ melting phenomenon . He was able to make observations in polarized light , and his microscope was equipped with a hot stage ( sample holder equipped with a heater ) enabling high temperature observations . The intermediate cloudy phase clearly sustained flow , but other features , particularly the signature under a microscope , convinced Lehmann that he was dealing with a solid . By the end of August 1889 he had published his results in the Zeitschrift für Physikalische Chemie . 
 Lehmann 's work was continued and significantly expanded by the German chemist Daniel <unk> , who from the beginning of 20th century until his retirement in 1935 , had synthesized most of the liquid crystals known . However , liquid crystals were not popular among scientists and the material remained a pure scientific curiosity for about 80 years . 
 After World War II work on the synthesis of liquid crystals was restarted at university research laboratories in Europe . George William Gray , a prominent researcher of liquid crystals , began investigating these materials in England in the late 1940s . His group synthesized many new materials that exhibited the liquid crystalline state and developed a better understanding of how to design molecules that exhibit the state . His book Molecular Structure and the Properties of Liquid Crystals became a guidebook on the subject . One of the first U.S. chemists to study liquid crystals was Glenn H. Brown , starting in 1953 at the University of Cincinnati and later at Kent State University . In 1965 , he organized the first international conference on liquid crystals , in Kent , Ohio , with about 100 of the world ’ s top liquid crystal scientists in attendance . This conference marked the beginning of a worldwide effort to perform research in this field , which soon led to the development of practical applications for these unique materials . 
 Liquid crystal materials became a focus of research in the development of flat panel electronic displays beginning in 1962 at RCA Laboratories . When physical chemist Richard Williams applied an electric field to a thin layer of a nematic liquid crystal at 125 ° C , he observed the formation of a regular pattern that he called domains ( now known as Williams Domains ) . This led his colleague George H. Heilmeier to perform research on a liquid crystal @-@ based flat panel display to replace the cathode ray vacuum tube used in televisions . But the para @-@ <unk> that Williams and Heilmeier used exhibits the nematic liquid crystal state only above 116 ° C , which made it impractical to use in a commercial display product . A material that could be operated at room temperature was clearly needed . 
 In 1966 , Joel E. <unk> and Joseph A. Castellano , research chemists in Heilmeier group at RCA , discovered that mixtures made exclusively of nematic compounds that differed only in the number of carbon atoms in the terminal side chains could yield room @-@ temperature nematic liquid crystals . A ternary mixture of Schiff base compounds resulted in a material that had a nematic range of 22 – 105 ° C. Operation at room temperature enabled the first practical display device to be made . The team then proceeded to prepare numerous mixtures of nematic compounds many of which had much lower melting points . This technique of mixing nematic compounds to obtain wide operating temperature range eventually became the industry standard and is used to this very day to tailor materials to meet specific applications . 
 In 1969 , Hans <unk> succeeded in synthesizing a substance that had a nematic phase at room temperature , <unk> , which is one of the most popular subjects of liquid crystal research . The next step to commercialization of liquid crystal displays was the synthesis of further chemically stable substances ( <unk> ) with low melting temperatures by George Gray . That work with Ken Harrison and the UK MOD ( RRE Malvern ) , in 1973 , led to design of new materials resulting in rapid adoption of small area LCDs within electronic products . 
 These molecules are rod @-@ shaped ; some are created in the lab and some could appear spontaneously in nature . Since then , two new types of LC molecules were discovered , both are man @-@ make : disc @-@ shaped ( created by S. Chandrasekhar 's group in India , 1977 ) and bowl @-@ shaped ( invented by Lui Lam in China , 1982 , and synthesized in Europe three years later ) . 
 In 1991 , when liquid crystal displays were already well established , Pierre @-@ Gilles de Gennes working at the Université Paris @-@ Sud received the Nobel Prize in physics " for discovering that methods developed for studying order phenomena in simple systems can be generalized to more complex forms of matter , in particular to liquid crystals and polymers " . 
 = = Design of liquid crystalline materials = = 
 A large number of chemical compounds are known to exhibit one or several liquid crystalline phases . Despite significant differences in chemical composition , these molecules have some common features in chemical and physical properties . There are three types of thermotropic liquid crystals : discotics , bowlics and rod @-@ shaped molecules . <unk> are flat disc @-@ like molecules consisting of a core of adjacent aromatic rings ; the core in a <unk> is not flat but like a rice bowl ( a three @-@ dimensional object ) . This allows for two dimensional columnar ordering , for both discotics and bowlics . Rod @-@ shaped molecules have an elongated , anisotropic geometry which allows for preferential alignment along one spatial direction . 
 • The molecular shape should be relatively thin , flat or bowl @-@ like , especially within rigid molecular frameworks . 
 • The molecular length should be at least 1 @.@ 3 nm , consistent with the presence of long alkyl group on many room @-@ temperature liquid crystals . 
 • The structure should not be branched or angular , except for the bowlics . 
 • A low melting point is preferable in order to avoid metastable , <unk> liquid crystalline phases . Low @-@ temperature <unk> behavior in general is technologically more useful , and alkyl terminal groups promote this . 
 An extended , structurally rigid , highly anisotropic shape seems to be the main criterion for liquid crystalline behavior , and as a result many liquid crystalline materials are based on benzene rings . 
 = = Liquid @-@ crystal phases = = 
 The various liquid @-@ crystal phases ( called mesophases ) can be characterized by the type of ordering . One can distinguish positional order ( whether molecules are arranged in any sort of ordered lattice ) and orientational order ( whether molecules are mostly pointing in the same direction ) , and moreover order can be either short @-@ range ( only between molecules close to each other ) or long @-@ range ( extending to larger , sometimes macroscopic , dimensions ) . Most thermotropic LCs will have an isotropic phase at high temperature . That is that heating will eventually drive them into a conventional liquid phase characterized by random and isotropic molecular ordering ( little to no long @-@ range order ) , and fluid @-@ like flow behavior . Under other conditions ( for instance , lower temperature ) , a LC might inhabit one or more phases with significant anisotropic orientational structure and short @-@ range orientational order while still having an ability to flow . 
 The ordering of liquid crystalline phases is extensive on the molecular scale . This order extends up to the entire domain size , which may be on the order of micrometers , but usually does not extend to the macroscopic scale as often occurs in classical crystalline solids . However some techniques , such as the use of boundaries or an applied electric field , can be used to enforce a single ordered domain in a macroscopic liquid crystal sample . The ordering in a liquid crystal might extend along only one dimension , with the material being essentially disordered in the other two directions . 
 = = = Thermotropic liquid crystals = = = 
 Thermotropic phases are those that occur in a certain temperature range . If the temperature rise is too high , thermal motion will destroy the delicate cooperative ordering of the LC phase , pushing the material into a conventional isotropic liquid phase . At too low temperature , most LC materials will form a conventional crystal . Many thermotropic LCs exhibit a variety of phases as temperature is changed . For instance , on heating a particular type of LC molecule ( called mesogen ) may exhibit various smectic phases followed by the nematic phase and finally the isotropic phase as temperature is increased . An example of a compound displaying thermotropic LC behavior is para @-@ <unk> . 
 = = = = <unk> phase = = = = 
 One of the most common LC phases is the nematic . The word nematic comes from the Greek <unk> ( Greek : <unk> ) , which means " thread " . This term originates from the thread @-@ like topological defects observed in nematics , which are formally called ' <unk> ' . Nematics also exhibit so @-@ called " hedgehog " topological defects . In a nematic phase , the <unk> or rod @-@ shaped organic molecules have no positional order , but they self @-@ align to have long @-@ range directional order with their long axes roughly parallel . Thus , the molecules are free to flow and their center of mass positions are randomly distributed as in a liquid , but still maintain their long @-@ range directional order . Most nematics are uniaxial : they have one axis that is longer and preferred , with the other two being equivalent ( can be approximated as cylinders or rods ) . However , some liquid crystals are biaxial nematics , meaning that in addition to orienting their long axis , they also orient along a secondary axis . Nematics have fluidity similar to that of ordinary ( isotropic ) liquids but they can be easily aligned by an external magnetic or electric field . Aligned nematics have the optical properties of uniaxial crystals and this makes them extremely useful in liquid crystal displays ( LCD ) . 
 = = = = Smectic phases = = = = 
 The smectic phases , which are found at lower temperatures than the nematic , form well @-@ defined layers that can slide over one another in a manner similar to that of soap . The word " smectic " originates from the Latin word " <unk> " , meaning cleaning , or having soap @-@ like properties . The <unk> are thus <unk> ordered along one direction . In the Smectic A phase , the molecules are oriented along the layer normal , while in the Smectic C phase they are tilted away from it . These phases are liquid @-@ like within the layers . There are many different smectic phases , all characterized by different types and degrees of positional and orientational order . 
 = = = = Chiral phases = = = = 
 The chiral nematic phase exhibits chirality ( handedness ) . This phase is often called the cholesteric phase because it was first observed for cholesterol derivatives . Only chiral molecules ( i.e. , those that have no internal planes of symmetry ) can give rise to such a phase . This phase exhibits a twisting of the molecules perpendicular to the director , with the molecular axis parallel to the director . The finite twist angle between adjacent molecules is due to their asymmetric packing , which results in longer @-@ range chiral order . In the smectic C * phase ( an asterisk denotes a chiral phase ) , the molecules have positional ordering in a layered structure ( as in the other smectic phases ) , with the molecules tilted by a finite angle with respect to the layer normal . The chirality induces a finite azimuthal twist from one layer to the next , producing a spiral twisting of the molecular axis along the layer normal . 
 The chiral pitch , p , refers to the distance over which the LC molecules undergo a full 360 ° twist ( but note that the structure of the chiral nematic phase repeats itself every half @-@ pitch , since in this phase directors at 0 ° and ± 180 ° are equivalent ) . The pitch , p , typically changes when the temperature is altered or when other molecules are added to the LC host ( an achiral LC host material will form a chiral phase if doped with a chiral material ) , allowing the pitch of a given material to be tuned accordingly . In some liquid crystal systems , the pitch is of the same order as the wavelength of visible light . This causes these systems to exhibit unique optical properties , such as Bragg reflection and low @-@ threshold laser emission , and these properties are exploited in a number of optical applications . For the case of Bragg reflection only the lowest @-@ order reflection is allowed if the light is incident along the helical axis , whereas for oblique incidence higher @-@ order reflections become permitted . <unk> liquid crystals also exhibit the unique property that they reflect circularly polarized light when it is incident along the helical axis and elliptically polarized if it comes in obliquely . 
 Blue phases are liquid crystal phases that appear in the temperature range between a chiral nematic phase and an isotropic liquid phase . Blue phases have a regular three @-@ dimensional cubic structure of defects with lattice periods of several hundred nanometers , and thus they exhibit selective Bragg reflections in the wavelength range of visible light corresponding to the cubic lattice . It was theoretically predicted in 1981 that these phases can possess icosahedral symmetry similar to quasicrystals . 
 Although blue phases are of interest for fast light modulators or tunable photonic crystals , they exist in a very narrow temperature range , usually less than a few kelvin . Recently the stabilization of blue phases over a temperature range of more than 60 K including room temperature ( 260 – 326 K ) has been demonstrated . Blue phases stabilized at room temperature allow electro @-@ optical switching with response times of the order of 10 − 4 s . 
 In May 2008 , the first Blue Phase Mode LCD panel had been developed . 
 = = = = <unk> phases = = = = 
 Disk @-@ shaped LC molecules can orient themselves in a layer @-@ like fashion known as the discotic nematic phase . If the disks pack into stacks , the phase is called a discotic columnar . The columns themselves may be organized into rectangular or hexagonal arrays . Chiral discotic phases , similar to the chiral nematic phase , are also known . 
 = = = = Bowlic phases = = = = 
 Bowl @-@ shaped LC molecules , like in discotics , can form columnar phases . Other phases , such as nonpolar nematic , polar nematic , <unk> , donut and onion phases , have been predicted . Bowlic phases , except nonpolar nematic , are polar phases . 
 = = = Lyotropic liquid crystals = = = 
 A lyotropic liquid crystal consists of two or more components that exhibit liquid @-@ crystalline properties in certain concentration ranges . In the lyotropic phases , solvent molecules fill the space around the compounds to provide fluidity to the system . In contrast to thermotropic liquid crystals , these <unk> have another degree of freedom of concentration that enables them to induce a variety of different phases . 
 A compound that has two immiscible hydrophilic and hydrophobic parts within the same molecule is called an amphiphilic molecule . Many amphiphilic molecules show lyotropic liquid @-@ crystalline phase sequences depending on the volume balances between the hydrophilic part and hydrophobic part . These structures are formed through the micro @-@ phase segregation of two incompatible components on a nanometer scale . Soap is an everyday example of a lyotropic liquid crystal . 
 The content of water or other solvent molecules changes the self @-@ assembled structures . At very low amphiphile concentration , the molecules will be dispersed randomly without any ordering . At slightly higher ( but still low ) concentration , amphiphilic molecules will spontaneously assemble into micelles or vesicles . This is done so as to ' hide ' the hydrophobic tail of the amphiphile inside the micelle core , exposing a hydrophilic ( water @-@ soluble ) surface to aqueous solution . These spherical objects do not order themselves in solution , however . At higher concentration , the assemblies will become ordered . A typical phase is a hexagonal columnar phase , where the amphiphiles form long cylinders ( again with a hydrophilic surface ) that arrange themselves into a roughly hexagonal lattice . This is called the middle soap phase . At still higher concentration , a lamellar phase ( neat soap phase ) may form , wherein extended sheets of amphiphiles are separated by thin layers of water . For some systems , a cubic ( also called viscous isotropic ) phase may exist between the hexagonal and lamellar phases , wherein spheres are formed that create a dense cubic lattice . These spheres may also be connected to one another , forming a <unk> cubic phase . 
 The objects created by amphiphiles are usually spherical ( as in the case of micelles ) , but may also be disc @-@ like ( <unk> ) , rod @-@ like , or biaxial ( all three micelle axes are distinct ) . These anisotropic self @-@ assembled nano @-@ structures can then order themselves in much the same way as thermotropic liquid crystals do , forming large @-@ scale versions of all the thermotropic phases ( such as a nematic phase of rod @-@ shaped micelles ) . 
 For some systems , at high concentrations , inverse phases are observed . That is , one may generate an inverse hexagonal columnar phase ( columns of water encapsulated by amphiphiles ) or an inverse micellar phase ( a bulk liquid crystal sample with spherical water cavities ) . 
 A generic progression of phases , going from low to high amphiphile concentration , is : 
 Discontinuous cubic phase ( micellar cubic phase ) 
 Hexagonal phase ( hexagonal columnar phase ) ( middle phase ) 
 <unk> phase 
 <unk> cubic phase 
 Reverse hexagonal columnar phase 
 Inverse cubic phase ( Inverse micellar phase ) 
 Even within the same phases , their self @-@ assembled structures are tunable by the concentration : for example , in lamellar phases , the layer distances increase with the solvent volume . Since lyotropic liquid crystals rely on a subtle balance of intermolecular interactions , it is more difficult to analyze their structures and properties than those of thermotropic liquid crystals . 
 Similar phases and characteristics can be observed in immiscible <unk> copolymers . 
 = = = Metallotropic liquid crystals = = = 
 Liquid crystal phases can also be based on low @-@ melting inorganic phases like ZnCl2 that have a structure formed of linked tetrahedra and easily form glasses . The addition of long chain soap @-@ like molecules leads to a series of new phases that show a variety of liquid crystalline behavior both as a function of the inorganic @-@ organic composition ratio and of temperature . This class of materials has been named metallotropic . 
 = = = Laboratory analysis of mesophases = = = 
 Thermotropic mesophases are detected and characterized by two major methods , the original method was use of thermal optical microscopy , in which a small sample of the material was placed between two crossed polarizers ; the sample was then heated and cooled . As the isotropic phase would not significantly affect the polarization of the light , it would appear very dark , whereas the crystal and liquid crystal phases will both polarize the light in a uniform way , leading to brightness and color gradients . This method allows for the characterization of the particular phase , as the different phases are defined by their particular order , which must be observed . The second method , differential scanning calorimetry ( DSC ) , allows for more precise determination of phase transitions and transition enthalpies . In DSC , a small sample is heated in a way that generates a very precise change in temperature with respect to time . During phase transitions , the heat flow required to maintain this heating or cooling rate will change . These changes can be observed and attributed to various phase transitions , such as key liquid crystal transitions . 
 Lyotropic mesophases are analyzed in a similar fashion , though these experiments are somewhat more complex , as the concentration of mesogen is a key factor . These experiments are run at various concentrations of mesogen in order to analyze that impact . 
 = = Biological liquid crystals = = 
 Lyotropic liquid @-@ crystalline phases are abundant in living systems , the study of which is referred to as lipid polymorphism . Accordingly , lyotropic liquid crystals attract particular attention in the field of biomimetic chemistry . In particular , biological membranes and cell membranes are a form of liquid crystal . Their constituent molecules ( e.g. phospholipids ) are perpendicular to the membrane surface , yet the membrane is flexible . These lipids vary in shape ( see page on lipid polymorphism ) . The constituent molecules can inter @-@ mingle easily , but tend not to leave the membrane due to the high energy requirement of this process . Lipid molecules can flip from one side of the membrane to the other , this process being catalyzed by flippases and floppases ( depending on the direction of movement ) . These liquid crystal membrane phases can also host important proteins such as receptors freely " floating " inside , or partly outside , the membrane , e.g. CCT . 
 Many other biological structures exhibit liquid @-@ crystal behavior . For instance , the concentrated protein solution that is extruded by a spider to generate silk is , in fact , a liquid crystal phase . The precise ordering of molecules in silk is critical to its renowned strength . DNA and many polypeptides can also form LC phases and this too forms an important part of current academic research . 
 = = Mineral liquid crystals = = 
 Examples of liquid crystals can also be found in the mineral world , most of them being <unk> first discovered was Vanadium ( V ) oxide , by Zocher in 1925 . Since then , few others have been discovered and studied in details . The existence of a true nematic phase in the case of the smectic clays family , was raised by Langmuir in 1938 , but remained open for a very long time and was only solved recently . With the rapid development of <unk> and the synthesis of many new anisotropic nanoparticles , the number of such mineral liquid crystals is quickly increasing with for example , carbon nanotubes and graphene . A lamellar phase was even discovered , <unk> that exhibit <unk> up to ~ 250 nm for the <unk> distance . 
 = = Pattern formation in liquid crystals = = 
 Anisotropy of liquid crystals is a property not observed in other fluids . This anisotropy makes flows of liquid crystals behave more differentially than those of ordinary fluids . For example , injection of a flux of a liquid crystal between two close parallel plates ( viscous fingering ) causes orientation of the molecules to couple with the flow , with the resulting emergence of dendritic patterns . This anisotropy is also manifested in the interfacial energy ( surface tension ) between different liquid crystal phases . This anisotropy determines the equilibrium shape at the coexistence temperature , and is so strong that usually facets appear . When temperature is changed one of the phases grows , forming different morphologies depending on the temperature change . Since growth is controlled by heat diffusion , anisotropy in thermal conductivity favors growth in specific directions , which has also an effect on the final shape . 
 = = Theoretical treatment of liquid crystals = = 
 Microscopic theoretical treatment of fluid phases can become quite complicated , owing to the high material density , meaning that strong interactions , hard @-@ core <unk> , and many @-@ body correlations cannot be ignored . In the case of liquid crystals , anisotropy in all of these interactions further complicates analysis . There are a number of fairly simple theories , however , that can at least predict the general behavior of the phase transitions in liquid crystal systems . 
 = = = Director = = = 
 As we already saw above , the nematic liquid crystals are composed of rod @-@ like molecules with the long axes of neighboring molecules aligned approximately to one another . To describe this anisotropic structure , a dimensionless unit vector n called the director , is introduced to represent the direction of preferred orientation of molecules in the neighborhood of any point . Because there is no physical polarity along the director axis , n and -n are fully equivalent . 
 = = = Order parameter = = = 
 The description of liquid crystals involves an analysis of order . A second rank symmetric <unk> tensor order parameter is used to describe the orientational order of a nematic liquid crystal , although a scalar order parameter is usually sufficient to describe uniaxial nematic liquid crystals . To make this quantitative , an orientational order parameter is usually defined based on the average of the second Legendre polynomial : 
 <formula> 
 where <formula> is the angle between the liquid @-@ crystal molecular axis and the local director ( which is the ' preferred direction ' in a volume element of a liquid crystal sample , also representing its local optical axis ) . The brackets denote both a temporal and spatial average . This definition is convenient , since for a completely random and isotropic sample , S = 0 , whereas for a perfectly aligned sample S = 1 . For a typical liquid crystal sample , S is on the order of 0 @.@ 3 to 0 @.@ 8 , and generally decreases as the temperature is raised . In particular , a sharp drop of the order parameter to 0 is observed when the system undergoes a phase transition from an LC phase into the isotropic phase . The order parameter can be measured experimentally in a number of ways ; for instance , <unk> , birefringence , Raman scattering , NMR and EPR can be used to determine S. 
 The order of a liquid crystal could also be characterized by using other even Legendre polynomials ( all the odd polynomials average to zero since the director can point in either of two antiparallel directions ) . These higher @-@ order averages are more difficult to measure , but can yield additional information about molecular ordering . 
 A positional order parameter is also used to describe the ordering of a liquid crystal . It is characterized by the variation of the density of the center of mass of the liquid crystal molecules along a given vector . In the case of positional variation along the z @-@ axis the density <formula> is often given by : 
 <formula> 
 The complex positional order parameter is defined as <formula> and <formula> the average density . Typically only the first two terms are kept and higher order terms are ignored since most phases can be described adequately using sinusoidal functions . For a perfect nematic <formula> and for a smectic phase <formula> will take on complex values . The complex nature of this order parameter allows for many parallels between nematic to smectic phase transitions and conductor to superconductor transitions . 
 = = = Onsager hard @-@ rod model = = = 
 A simple model which predicts lyotropic phase transitions is the hard @-@ rod model proposed by Lars Onsager . This theory considers the volume excluded from the center @-@ of @-@ mass of one idealized cylinder as it approaches another . Specifically , if the cylinders are oriented parallel to one another , there is very little volume that is excluded from the center @-@ of @-@ mass of the approaching cylinder ( it can come quite close to the other cylinder ) . If , however , the cylinders are at some angle to one another , then there is a large volume surrounding the cylinder which the approaching cylinder 's center @-@ of @-@ mass cannot enter ( due to the hard @-@ rod repulsion between the two idealized objects ) . Thus , this angular arrangement sees a decrease in the net positional entropy of the approaching cylinder ( there are fewer states available to it ) . 
 The fundamental insight here is that , whilst parallel arrangements of anisotropic objects lead to a decrease in orientational entropy , there is an increase in positional entropy . Thus in some case greater positional order will be <unk> favorable . This theory thus predicts that a solution of rod @-@ shaped objects will undergo a phase transition , at sufficient concentration , into a nematic phase . Although this model is conceptually helpful , its mathematical formulation makes several assumptions that limit its applicability to real systems . 
 = = = Maier – Saupe mean field theory = = = 
 This statistical theory , proposed by Alfred Saupe and Wilhelm Maier , includes contributions from an attractive intermolecular potential from an induced dipole moment between adjacent liquid crystal molecules . The anisotropic attraction stabilizes parallel alignment of neighboring molecules , and the theory then considers a mean @-@ field average of the interaction . Solved self @-@ consistently , this theory predicts thermotropic nematic @-@ isotropic phase transitions , consistent with experiment . 
 = = = McMillan 's model = = = 
 McMillan 's model , proposed by William McMillan , is an extension of the Maier – Saupe mean field theory used to describe the phase transition of a liquid crystal from a nematic to a smectic A phase . It predicts that the phase transition can be either continuous or discontinuous depending on the strength of the short @-@ range interaction between the molecules . As a result , it allows for a triple critical point where the nematic , isotropic , and smectic A phase meet . Although it predicts the existence of a triple critical point , it does not successfully predict its value . The model utilizes two order parameters that describe the orientational and positional order of the liquid crystal . The first is simply the average of the second Legendre polynomial and the second order parameter is given by : 
 <formula> 
 The values zi , <unk> , and d are the position of the molecule , the angle between the molecular axis and director , and the layer spacing . The postulated potential energy of a single molecule is given by : 
 <formula> 
 Here constant α quantifies the strength of the interaction between adjacent molecules . The potential is then used to derive the thermodynamic properties of the system assuming thermal equilibrium . It results in two self @-@ consistency equations that must be solved numerically , the solutions of which are the three stable phases of the liquid crystal . 
 = = = Elastic continuum theory = = = 
 In this formalism , a liquid crystal material is treated as a continuum ; molecular details are entirely ignored . Rather , this theory considers perturbations to a presumed oriented sample . The distortions of the liquid crystal are commonly described by the Frank free energy density . One can identify three types of distortions that could occur in an oriented sample : ( 1 ) twists of the material , where neighboring molecules are forced to be angled with respect to one another , rather than aligned ; ( 2 ) splay of the material , where bending occurs perpendicular to the director ; and ( 3 ) bend of the material , where the distortion is parallel to the director and molecular axis . All three of these types of distortions incur an energy penalty . They are distortions that are induced by the boundary conditions at domain walls or the enclosing container . The response of the material can then be decomposed into terms based on the elastic constants corresponding to the three types of distortions . Elastic continuum theory is a particularly powerful tool for modeling liquid crystal devices and lipid bilayers . 
 = = External influences on liquid crystals = = 
 Scientists and engineers are able to use liquid crystals in a variety of applications because external perturbation can cause significant changes in the macroscopic properties of the liquid crystal system . Both electric and magnetic fields can be used to induce these changes . The magnitude of the fields , as well as the speed at which the molecules align are important characteristics industry deals with . Special surface treatments can be used in liquid crystal devices to force specific orientations of the director . 
 = = = Electric and magnetic field effects = = = 
 The ability of the director to align along an external field is caused by the electric nature of the molecules . Permanent electric dipoles result when one end of a molecule has a net positive charge while the other end has a net negative charge . When an external electric field is applied to the liquid crystal , the dipole molecules tend to orient themselves along the direction of the field . 
 Even if a molecule does not form a permanent dipole , it can still be influenced by an electric field . In some cases , the field produces slight re @-@ arrangement of electrons and protons in molecules such that an induced electric dipole results . While not as strong as permanent dipoles , orientation with the external field still occurs . The effects of magnetic fields on liquid crystal molecules are analogous to electric fields . Because magnetic fields are generated by moving electric charges , permanent magnetic dipoles are produced by electrons moving about atoms . When a magnetic field is applied , the molecules will tend to align with or against the field . 
 = = = Surface preparations = = = 
 In the absence of an external field , the director of a liquid crystal is free to point in any direction . It is possible , however , to force the director to point in a specific direction by introducing an outside agent to the system . For example , when a thin polymer coating ( usually a polyimide ) is spread on a glass substrate and rubbed in a single direction with a cloth , it is observed that liquid crystal molecules in contact with that surface align with the rubbing direction . The currently accepted mechanism for this is believed to be an epitaxial growth of the liquid crystal layers on the partially aligned polymer chains in the near surface layers of the polyimide . 
 = = = Fredericks transition = = = 
 The competition between orientation produced by surface anchoring and by electric field effects is often exploited in liquid crystal devices . Consider the case in which liquid crystal molecules are aligned parallel to the surface and an electric field is applied perpendicular to the cell . At first , as the electric field increases in magnitude , no change in alignment occurs . However at a threshold magnitude of electric field , deformation occurs . Deformation occurs where the director changes its orientation from one molecule to the next . The occurrence of such a change from an aligned to a deformed state is called a Fredericks transition and can also be produced by the application of a magnetic field of sufficient strength . 
 The Fredericks transition is fundamental to the operation of many liquid crystal displays because the director orientation ( and thus the properties ) can be controlled easily by the application of a field . 
 = = Effect of chirality = = 
 As already described , chiral liquid @-@ crystal molecules usually give rise to chiral mesophases . This means that the molecule must possess some form of asymmetry , usually a stereogenic center . An additional requirement is that the system not be racemic : a mixture of right- and left @-@ handed molecules will cancel the chiral effect . Due to the cooperative nature of liquid crystal ordering , however , a small amount of chiral dopant in an otherwise achiral <unk> is often enough to select out one domain handedness , making the system overall chiral . 
 Chiral phases usually have a helical twisting of the molecules . If the pitch of this twist is on the order of the wavelength of visible light , then interesting optical interference effects can be observed . The chiral twisting that occurs in chiral LC phases also makes the system respond differently from right- and left @-@ handed circularly polarized light . These materials can thus be used as polarization filters . 
 It is possible for chiral LC molecules to produce essentially achiral mesophases . For instance , in certain ranges of concentration and molecular weight , DNA will form an achiral line <unk> phase . An interesting recent observation is of the formation of chiral mesophases from achiral LC molecules . Specifically , bent @-@ core molecules ( sometimes called banana liquid crystals ) have been shown to form liquid crystal phases that are chiral . In any particular sample , various domains will have opposite handedness , but within any given domain , strong chiral ordering will be present . The appearance mechanism of this macroscopic chirality is not yet entirely clear . It appears that the molecules stack in layers and orient themselves in a tilted fashion inside the layers . These liquid crystals phases may be ferroelectric or anti @-@ ferroelectric , both of which are of interest for applications . 
 Chirality can also be incorporated into a phase by adding a chiral dopant , which may not form LCs itself . Twisted @-@ nematic or super @-@ twisted nematic mixtures often contain a small amount of such dopants . 
 = = Applications of liquid crystals = = 
 Liquid crystals find wide use in liquid crystal displays , which rely on the optical properties of certain liquid crystalline substances in the presence or absence of an electric field . In a typical device , a liquid crystal layer ( typically 4 μm thick ) sits between two polarizers that are crossed ( oriented at 90 ° to one another ) . The liquid crystal alignment is chosen so that its relaxed phase is a twisted one ( see Twisted nematic field effect ) . This twisted phase <unk> light that has passed through the first polarizer , allowing its transmission through the second polarizer ( and reflected back to the observer if a reflector is provided ) . The device thus appears transparent . When an electric field is applied to the LC layer , the long molecular axes tend to align parallel to the electric field thus gradually <unk> in the center of the liquid crystal layer . In this state , the LC molecules do not reorient light , so the light polarized at the first polarizer is absorbed at the second polarizer , and the device loses transparency with increasing voltage . In this way , the electric field can be used to make a pixel switch between transparent or opaque on command . Color LCD systems use the same technique , with color filters used to generate red , green , and blue pixels . Chiral smectic liquid crystals are used in ferroelectric LCDs which are fast @-@ switching binary light modulators . Similar principles can be used to make other liquid crystal based optical devices . 
 Liquid crystal tunable filters are used as <unk> devices , e.g. , in hyperspectral imaging . 
 Thermotropic chiral LCs whose pitch varies strongly with temperature can be used as crude liquid crystal thermometers , since the color of the material will change as the pitch is changed . Liquid crystal color transitions are used on many aquarium and pool thermometers as well as on thermometers for infants or baths . Other liquid crystal materials change color when stretched or stressed . Thus , liquid crystal sheets are often used in industry to look for hot spots , map heat flow , measure stress distribution patterns , and so on . Liquid crystal in fluid form is used to detect electrically generated hot spots for failure analysis in the semiconductor industry . 
 Liquid crystal lasers use a liquid crystal in the lasing medium as a distributed feedback mechanism instead of external mirrors . Emission at a photonic bandgap created by the periodic dielectric structure of the liquid crystal gives a low @-@ threshold high @-@ output device with stable monochromatic emission . 
 Polymer Dispersed Liquid Crystal ( <unk> ) sheets and rolls are available as adhesive backed Smart film which can be applied to windows and electrically switched between transparent and opaque to provide privacy . 
 Many common fluids , such as soapy water , are in fact liquid crystals . Soap forms a variety of LC phases depending on its concentration in water . 
 Bowlic columns could be used for fast switches . 
 = The Worship Project = 
 The Worship Project is the fifth independent album by American Christian rock band MercyMe . Produced by the band and recorded by Jim Bryson ( the band 's keyboardist ) , the album was released on October 14 , 1999 . In contrast to the band 's previous efforts , which were influenced by grunge music , The Worship Project is a worship album . MercyMe wrote songs for the album using a basic verse – chorus style so as to be easy to learn and sing along to and to easily fit on a PowerPoint screen . The album incorporates alternative , rock , and pop musical styles , as well as " rootsy " elements like organs and violins . 
 Like most independent albums , The Worship Project did not appear on any record charts after its release and received little attention from music critics , with the exception of a review in the UK Christian music magazine Cross Rhythms . However , the album was much more successful than the band 's previous efforts , selling over 60 @,@ 000 copies within a year . The band would release one more independent album before signing with INO Records and releasing their first major studio album , Almost There ( 2001 ) . Several songs from The Worship Project were included on the album , including " I Can Only Imagine " , which became the band 's breakthrough single and the first Christian song to receive a double platinum certification from the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 MercyMe formed in 1994 by vocalist Bart Millard , guitarist Mike Scheuchzer , and keyboardist Jim Bryson . The band later brought on drummer Robby Shaffer and bassist Nathan Cochran . Prior to the release of The Worship Project , MercyMe had independently released four Christian alternative rock albums , drawing influence from the grunge style popular at the time . While playing live , however , the band realized that their original songs from these albums failed to connect with their audiences . In contrast , their covers of popular worship songs received a greater reception among live audience , leading the band to write and produce a whole album of original worship songs . 
 The Worship Project was MercyMe 's first attempt at producing corporate worship songs . With the exception of " Beautiful " , which was written solely by Cochran , the lyrics on the album were written by Millard , while the music was composed by the entire band . The band utilized a simple verse – chorus format when writing songs the album , with the songs being designed to easily fit on a PowerPoint screen . The only song on the album not to utilize this format , " I Can Only Imagine " , was included at the last minute , and only because it was important to Millard , who wrote the song reminiscing about his dad 's death . The album was recorded at The Pig Sty in Fort Worth , Texas . It was produced by the band , engineered and mixed by Bryson , and mastered by Eric Wolf at Wolf Mastering in Nashville . 
 The Worship Project has been described as being a worship album , drawing influences from rock , pop , and alternative music . Mike Rimmer of Cross Rhythms noted the album occasionally features " rootsy " elements as well as " Hammond – style organs " and " faint violins " . The album 's opening song , " Here With Us " , had been described as a rock song . In the Encyclopedia of Contemporary Christian Music , Mark Allan Powell considered " Happy Little Love Song " as being a " Pearl Jam – type anthem fit for arenas " . Powell also described " Hearts Sing Louder " as being influenced by Smash Mouth , and felt " It 's My Joy " had a " bluesy rhythm " with " 70s organs " ; the song also samples " Joyful , Joyful We Adore You " . 
 = = Release , reception , and impact = = 
 The Worship Project was released on October 14 , 1999 . The band also issued The Worship Project Kit , which included the album as well a devotional and the words and chords to the songs . The album was sold through the Internet as well as bookstore signings . Copes of the album were produced by the band in their garage . Like most independent albums , The Worship Project did not appear on any record charts and met with limited fanfare . In the October 1 , 2000 edition of Cross Rhythms , Mike Rimmer gave the album seven out of ten stars . Rimmer praised the album as being far superior to most major – label worship albums , but felt that " it all sounds curiously familiar without being distinctive ... whilst this is a good effort , it falls short of being amazing " . Sales for The Worship Project far exceeded sales of the band 's previous independent records – according to Millard , whereas their previous albums would be lucky to sell 1 @,@ 000 copies in a year , The Worship Project sold over 60 @,@ 000 copies within a year . Millard estimated the album 's overall sales at 100 @,@ 000 – other sources peg the album 's sales as of 2006 at 60 @,@ 000 or 65 @,@ 000 copies . 
 The difficulty of selling the album directly , in addition to having to book and manage for themselves , led the band to pursue a contract with a record label . The band would release one more independent album , 2000 's Look , before signing with INO Records and releasing their 2001 album Almost There . Two songs from The Worship Project were re – recorded and included on Almost There – " I Can Only Imagine " and " Cannot Say Enough " . " I Can Only Imagine " was released as the album 's second single and became the band 's breakthrough hit , topping the US Christian radio charts and receiving a GMA Dove Award for " Song of the Year " before becoming a hit on US mainstream radio as well . It became the first Christian song to be certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , signifying sales of over 2 million digital copies of the song . Another song from The Worship Project , " Hearts Sing Louder " , was included on the band 's 2011 Family Christian Stores – exclusive album The Worship Sessions . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 ( Credits from the album liner notes ) 
 = = Track listing = = 
 ( Credits and tracklist from the album liner notes ) 
 = Kidney Now ! = 
 " Kidney Now ! " is the twenty @-@ second episode and season finale of the third season of the American television comedy series 30 Rock , and the 58th overall episode of the series . It was directed by series producer Don Scardino , and written by show producers Jack Burditt and Robert Carlock . The episode originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) network in the United States on May 14 , 2009 . Guest stars in this episode include Alan Alda , Kay Cannon , Donald Glover , <unk> Groves , Chris Parnell , Paula Pell , and Sherri Shepherd . In addition , " Kidney Now ! " featured many musical guest stars including Clay Aiken , Elvis Costello , Mary J. Blige , Sheryl Crow , the Beastie Boys ( Mike D and Ad Rock ) , Steve Earle , Adam Levine , Sara Bareilles , Wyclef Jean , Norah Jones , Talib Kweli , Michael McDonald , Rhett Miller , Moby , Robert Randolph , Rachael Yamagata and Cyndi Lauper , all as themselves . 
 In the episode , Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) gets to know his newly discovered father , Milton Greene ( Alda ) , but quickly learns that Milton needs a kidney transplant , and discovers he is not a suitable donor . As a result , Jack decides to use the liberal media to find an alternate way to get him a kidney donor . Meanwhile , people seek Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) out as a relationship expert as a result of her " Dealbreaker " sketches , and Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) helps Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) deal with his embarrassment over not finishing high school . 
 The song " He Needs a Kidney " was written by show composer and co @-@ executive producer Jeff Richmond . The concept of doing a charity concert was based on Robert Carlock and series creator Tina Fey wanting to include a musical performance in the episode with the Milton Greene character in need of a kidney donor . Carlock and Fey wanted " He Needs a Kidney " to be similar to the 1985 charity song , " We Are the World " . Following the airing of this 30 Rock episode , NBC released the musical performance video of " He Needs a Kidney " on iTunes with all proceeds from the sales going to the National Kidney Foundation . 
 " Kidney Now ! " was generally well received among television critics . According to the Nielsen Media Research , this episode was watched by 5 @.@ 7 million viewers . Jack Burditt and Robert Carlock were nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award nomination in the category for Outstanding Writing in a Comedy Series for their work in this episode . In addition , Tony <unk> and Griffin Richardson received a Creative Arts Emmy Award nomination in the category for Outstanding Sound Mixing for a Comedy or Drama Series ( half @-@ hour ) and Animation . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) gets to know his newly discovered father , Milton Greene ( Alan Alda ) but soon discovers Milton has a serious medical condition and is in search of a kidney donor . After discovering he is an unsuitable donor by Dr. Leo Spaceman ( Chris Parnell ) , Jack uses his contacts — musicians Clay Aiken , Sara Bareilles , the Beastie Boys ( Mike D and Ad @-@ Rock ) , Mary J. Blige , Elvis Costello , Sheryl Crow , Steve Earle , Wyclef Jean , Norah Jones , Talib Kweli , Cyndi Lauper , Adam Levine , Michael McDonald , Rhett Miller , Moby , Robert Randolph , and Rachael Yamagata — to arrange a charity benefit entitled " Kidney Now ! " in attempt to find a donor for Milton . 
 Meanwhile , Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) gains notoriety after making an appearance on The Vontella Show , along with Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) , as a relationship expert after her " Dealbreaker " sketches on the fictitious comedy sketch show The Girlie Show with Tracy Jordan ( TGS ) . As a result of the success she received as the relationship expert on The Vontella Show , Liz signs a book deal based on the sketch , and begins dispensing relationship advice to the female staff of TGS , and to Angie Jordan ( Sherri Shepherd ) and Paula Hornberger ( Paula Pell ) , the wives of TGS star Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) and producer Pete Hornberger ( Scott Adsit ) , respectively . Though , Tracy and Pete are upset with the advice Liz gave to their wives , Liz blows them off and goes to <unk> 's with her date . 
 At the same time , Tracy is invited to speak at the graduation ceremony of his former high school ( named after Frank Lucas , the infamous Harlem drug lord ) . NBC page and friend Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) tries to help him overcome troubling memories from his high school experience . Kenneth persuades Tracy to go to the graduation , which he does , where Tracy gives his speech and receives an honorary diploma . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Kidney Now ! " was directed by series producer Don Scardino , and written by 30 Rock producers Jack Burditt and Robert Carlock . This was Burditt and Carlock 's fourth script collaboration , having penned the episodes " Cleveland " , " Subway Hero " , and " Sandwich Day " . This was Scardino 's twenty @-@ first directed episode . " Kidney Now ! " originally aired on NBC in the United States on May 14 , 2009 , as the twenty @-@ second episode and season finale of the show 's third season and the 58th overall episode of the series . 
 " Kidney Now ! " was first read by its cast on March 5 , 2009 ; it was filmed on March 16 – 17 , 2009 . " He Needs a Kidney " , the charity song featured in this episode , was written by show composer and co @-@ executive producer Jeff Richmond . Richmond is married to series creator , executive producer and lead actress Tina Fey . In discussion of the development of " Kidney Now ! " , Richmond said that Carlock and Fey " were trying to figure out a way to highlight Jack 's dad in getting a kidney and how they 're going to deal with that " , and that the two came to the decision to " take advantage of the singing " , as they have done so in the past with different 30 Rock episodes , in which the show 's characters have sung songs . Carlock and Fey agreed to the idea that a song be included in the season finale , but that it be an anthem like the 1985 charity song , " We Are the World " , as the cause is that the Milton Greene character is in need of a kidney donor . " Basically , the parameters were if ' We Are the World ' but they want to get a kidney . I think we had angles that everyone has two kidneys and you 'll only need one kidney , and we thought ' Alright , we 'll get some distance on that ' " , said Richmond . While working on the track , Fey suggested to Richmond that he incorporate Milton Greene 's name in one part of the song , which he did , as this was sung by singers Cyndi Lauper and Robert Randolph . 
 Giancarlo Vulcano , a music editor and associate arranger on the show , revealed that Richmond taught him the song one morning at Silvercup Studios — where the show is filmed — and they played the first half of " He Needs a Kidney " at the script 's read @-@ through . According to Vulcano , the 30 Rock staff loved the song and the two were satisfied with the reception of it . While arranging the instrumentation , Richmond hired violinists for the episode 's background music and for " He Needs a Kidney " , which according to him he usually does not get the opportunity to have a lot of violin sounds on the show . The recording sessions with the musical guests took place on Stage 1 at Silvercup Studios ; Stage 1 serves as the set for TGS with Tracy Jordan , a fictitious comedy sketch show featured on 30 Rock . Richmond and Vulcano were complimentary towards the musicians — Clay Aiken , Sara Bareilles , the Beastie Boys ( Mike D and Ad @-@ Rock ) , Mary J. Blige , Elvis Costello , Sheryl Crow , Steve Earle , Wyclef Jean , Norah Jones , Talib Kweli , Cyndi Lauper , Adam Levine , Michael McDonald , Rhett Miller , Moby , Robert Randolph , and Rachael Yamagata — who performed " He Needs a Kidney " . In the DVD commentary for this episode , Richmond believed that the entire song would not make it into the airing . Elvis Costello was once approached to do an appearance on 30 Rock , but the appearance fell @-@ through . At an Oscar 's after party , Fey ran into Costello and asked him if he could appear , which he agreed to . According to Fey , none of the music artists got paid to appear on the show as " they all did [ it ] for free . " The reason for this was due to a joke in the song in which Sheryl Crow was the only individual to get paid , as the rest said they did it for free . Following the broadcast of this episode of 30 Rock , the musical performance video was made available for digital download on iTunes with all the proceeds from the sales going to the National Kidney Foundation . 
 According to Fey , there were discussions on whether or not to use a real talk show host from New York , for the " Dealbreakers " segment , but ultimately decided to make one up and went with actress <unk> Groves who plays talk show host Vontella in " Kidney Now ! " . The Tracy character plot was based on Tracy Morgan who in real @-@ life was given a diploma by his former high school , DeWitt Clinton High School . Like the Tracy character , who dropped out of high school after being asked to dissect a frog , Morgan dropped out of DeWitt Clinton when his father became ill . Jack and Liz 's scene , along with Tracy and Kenneth 's , at the end where they watch the charity concert , was filmed the day before the musical number took place . " They were pretending to look at the singing " , revealed Fey . They forced that shot in so that the episode not just end with the performance . 
 Professor Milton Greene was played by guest actor Alan Alda , best known for his role as Hawkeye Pierce from the television series M * A * S * H. This was Alda 's second appearance , having appeared in the previous episode " Mamma Mia " . In a scene of " Kidney Now ! " , Tracy breaks down crying and says " There is no baby . I was chicken ! I was chicken ! " then Milton , who sees this , asks " A guy crying about a chicken and a baby ? I thought this was a comedy show . " This was a reference to Alda 's M * A * S * H character in the series finale episode in which Hawkeye breaks down after realizing he had seen a woman smother her baby to death , not a chicken as Hawkeye had originally recalled in his repressed mind . Comedian actor Chris Parnell , who played Dr. Leo Spaceman in the season finale , has appeared in the main cast of Saturday Night Live ( SNL ) , a weekly sketch comedy series which airs on NBC in the United States . Fey was the head writer on SNL from 1999 until 2006 . Comedian actress Sherri Shepherd reprised her role as Angie Jordan , the wife of Tracy , for the fifth time . Paula Pell made her second guest spot as the character Paula Hornberger , the wife of Pete Hornberger , played by Scott Adsit . In " Kidney Now ! " , Angie and Paula ask Liz for relationship advice . In addition , 30 Rock writers Jack Burditt , Kay Cannon , and Donald Glover appear in the episode ; Burditt and Cannon appear in The Vontella Show segment as members from the audience who ask Liz questions . When Tracy accepts an honorary diploma from his former high school , in his speech , Tracy outs Glover 's character . The success of the benefit concert for Milton is not explicitly referenced until Alda 's character alludes to it in the season five episode " Christmas Attack Zone " , though in the season four episode " Into the Crevasse " , Milton is shown to have finished his book entitled From Peanut to President , a biography of U.S. President Jimmy Carter . 
 One filmed scene from " Kidney Now ! " was cut out from the airing . Instead , the scene was featured on 30 Rock ’ s season three DVD as part of the deleted scenes in the Bonus feature . In the scene , Liz enters the TGS writer 's room , and tells the writing staff that she got recognized from her appearance on The Vontella Show as the relationship expert from " Dealbreakers " . Pete cannot believe that Liz gave actual relationship advice on the program , citing Liz 's own past relationship faults . 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to the Nielsen Media Research , " Kidney Now ! " was watched by 5 @.@ 7 million viewers during its original United States broadcast . The rating was an 8 percent drop in viewership from the previous week 's episode , " Mamma Mia " , which was seen by 6 @.@ 2 million American viewers . The show claimed a 2 @.@ 8 rating / 7 share among viewers aged 18 to 49 , meaning that 2 @.@ 8 percent of all people in that group , and 7 percent of all people from that group watching television at the time , watched the episode . Jack Burditt and Robert Carlock received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Writing in a Comedy Series for their work on " Kidney Now ! " , but they lost it to fellow 30 Rock writer Matt Hubbard for the episode " Reunion " at the 61st Primetime Emmy Awards . At the same awards show , Tony <unk> and Griffin Richardson were nominated for a Creative Arts Emmy Award for Outstanding Sound Mixing for a Comedy or Drama Series ( half @-@ hour ) and Animation . 
 IGN contributor Robert Canning wrote that the ending from this episode " did have a season finale feel to it with the big musical number . [ ... ] Still , it was a great season , and I loved going out with two of the best characters on TV summing up the moment perfectly – Liz : ' We sure had quite a year . ' Jack : ' What are you talking about ? It 's May . ' " Canning gave it an 8 @.@ 5 out of 10 rating . Television columnist Alan Sepinwall for The Star @-@ Ledger wrote that the " all @-@ star cast of musicians " featured were not able to dominate the episode " to the point where the episode didn 't work . " Sepinwall , however , added that despite " Kidney Now ! " not being a classic 30 Rock episode " it was [ still ] funny enough – which , I suppose , also makes it an appropriate finale for this uneven season . " Further in the review , Sepinwall was complimentary towards Liz 's plot , writing that the character 's sequence on The Vontella Show was " hilarious , and a fine demonstration of how much confidence Tina Fey has gained as an actress over the years . " The A.V. Club ’ s Nathan Rabin also enjoyed the Liz character , reporting that she " delivered a virtuoso performance in [ The Vontella Show ] , instantly homing in on the fatal flaw in every relationship and obliterating it with highly quotable sass . " In discussion to Tracy 's plot , Rabin opined it was the " weakest of the various threads " in this episode . Bob Sassone of AOL 's TV Squad confessed in his recap that he was going to summarize " Kidney Now ! " as " a little disappointing , but then I hit rewind on my DVR and watched it again and realized , wow , they actually hit all of the season finale notes rather perfectly [ ... ] This episode was quite funny . " 
 Rick Porter of Zap2it worried how the series would fit in " the likes " of Elvis Costello , Mary J. Blige , Sheryl Crow , Clay Aiken and Adam Levine " without it overwhelming the episode " , and reported that the answer to that " turned out to be ' very effectively . ' " In regards to the storylines , itself , he noted that Jack 's quest in getting Milton a kidney " balanced nicely " with Liz 's story , and that Tracy 's " had some good moments " . In conclusion , Porter wrote " For a show that doesn 't always know how to end episodes , it 's done really well at ending seasons . " TV Guide Magazine ’ s Sandra <unk> wrote that the " He Needs a Kidney " song was hilarious , and that it " stole [ 30 Rock ’ s ] season finale . " Patrick Goldstein , a contributor for the Los Angeles Times , was favorable to the musical number , reporting " [ t ] he song itself is a hoot , highlighted by a wonderful spoken @-@ word kidney donation pitch that begins with Costello saying : ' Listen , when someone starts talking in the middle of a song , you know it 's serious . ' " Entertainment Weekly contributor Annie Barrett said " Kidney Now ! " was " sweet and all " , and noted that the " Vontella @-@ as @-@ Tyra spoof " was " brilliant . " Time contributor James Poniewozik wrote that this episode " was a fitting end for a guest @-@ star @-@ heavy ... season of 30 Rock " , but added that the finale overall was " maybe average " , however , " the ending at least delivered the goods , with the best sitcom celebrity benefit song " . 
 = Battle of Oriskany = 
 The Battle of Oriskany , fought on August 6 , 1777 , was one of the bloodiest battles in the North American theater of the American Revolutionary War and a significant engagement of the Saratoga campaign . An American party trying to relieve the siege of Fort Stanwix was ambushed by a party of Loyalists and allies of several Native American tribes . This was one of the few battles in the war in which almost all of the participants were North American : Loyalists and allied Indians fought against Patriots and allied Oneida in the absence of British soldiers . 
 Early in the siege of Fort Stanwix , an American relief force from the Mohawk Valley under General Nicholas Herkimer , numbering around 800 men of the Tryon County militia , and a party of Oneida warriors , approached in an attempt to raise the siege . British commander Barry St. Leger authorized an intercept force consisting of a Hanau Jäger ( light infantry ) detachment , Sir John Johnson 's King 's Royal Regiment of New York , Indian allies from the Six Nations , particularly Mohawk and Seneca ; and other tribes to the north and west , and Indian Department Rangers , totaling at least 450 men . 
 The Loyalist and Indian force ambushed Herkimer 's force in a small valley about six miles ( 10 km ) east of Fort Stanwix , near the present @-@ day village of Oriskany , New York . During the battle , Herkimer was mortally wounded . The battle cost the Patriots approximately 450 casualties , while the Loyalists and Indians lost approximately 150 dead and wounded . The result of the battle remains ambiguous because the apparent Loyalist victory was significantly affected by a sortie from Fort Stanwix in which the Loyalist camps were sacked , spoiling morale among the allied Indians . 
 For the Iroquois nations , the battle marked the beginning of a civil war , as Oneida warriors under Colonel Louis and Han <unk> allied with the American cause and fought against members of other Iroquois nations . There were also internal divisions among the Oneida , some of whom went to Canada as allies of the British . The site is known in oral histories of the Iroquois nations as " A Place of Great Sadness . " The site has been designated as a National Historic Landmark and is marked by a battle monument at the Oriskany Battlefield State Historic Site . 
 = = Background = = 
 In June 1777 , the British Army , under the command of General " Gentleman Johnny " Burgoyne , launched a two @-@ pronged attack from Quebec . Burgoyne 's objective was to split New England from the other colonies by gaining control of New York 's Hudson Valley . The main thrust came south across Lake Champlain under Burgoyne 's command ; the second thrust was led by Lt. Colonel Barry St. Leger and was intended to come down the Mohawk Valley and meet Burgoyne 's army near Albany . 
 St. Leger 's expedition consisted of about 1 @,@ 800 men , who were a mix of British regulars , Hessian Jägers from Hanau , Loyalists , Indians of several tribes , including the Mohawk and Seneca of the Iroquois , and Rangers . They traveled up the Saint Lawrence River and along the shore of Lake Ontario to the Oswego River , which they ascended to reach the Oneida Carry ( present @-@ day Rome , New York later developed here ) . They began to besiege Fort Stanwix , a Continental Army post guarding the portage . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 Alerted to the possibility of a British attack along the Mohawk River , Nicholas Herkimer , the head of Tryon County 's Committee of Safety , issued a proclamation on July 17 warning of possible military activity and urging the people to respond if needed . Warned by friendly Oneidas on July 30 that the British were just four days from Fort Stanwix , Herkimer put out a call @-@ to @-@ arms . The force raised totaled 800 from the Tryon County militia ; it was composed primarily of poorly trained farmers , who were chiefly of Palatine German descent . Setting out on August 4 , the column camped near the Oneida village of <unk> on August 5 . While a number of the militia dropped out of the column due to their lack of conditioning , Herkimer 's forces were augmented by a company of 60 to 100 Oneida warriors , led primarily by Han <unk> , a strong supporter of the Patriot cause . That evening , Herkimer sent three men toward the fort with messages for the fort 's commander , Colonel Peter Gansevoort . Gansevoort was to signal the receipt of the message with three cannon shots , and then sortie to meet the approaching column . Due to difficulties in penetrating the British lines , these couriers did not deliver the message until late the next morning , after the battle was already underway . 
 St. Leger learned on August 5 from a messenger sent by Molly Brant to her brother Joseph Brant , the Mohawk leader who led a portion of St. Leger 's Indian contingent , that Herkimer and his relief expedition were on their way . St. Leger sent a detachment of light infantry from Sir John Johnson 's Royal Yorkers toward the position that evening to monitor Herkimer 's position , and Brant followed early the next morning with about 400 Indians and Butler 's Rangers . Although many of the Indians were armed with muskets , some were not , and only carried tomahawk and spear . 
 = = Battle = = 
 On the morning of August 6 , Herkimer held a war council . Since his force had not yet heard the expected signal from the fort , he wanted to wait . However , his captains pressed him to continue , accusing Herkimer of being a Tory because his brother was serving under St. Leger . Stung by these accusations , Herkimer ordered the column to march on toward Stanwix . 
 About six miles ( 9 @.@ 6 km ) from the fort , the road dipped more than fifty feet ( 15 m ) into a marshy ravine , where a stream about three feet ( 1 m ) wide meandered along the bottom . Sayenqueraghta and Cornplanter , two Seneca war chiefs , chose this place to set up an ambush . While the King 's Royal Yorkers waited behind a nearby rise , the Indians concealed themselves on both sides of the ravine . The plan was for the Yorkers to stop the head of the column , after which the Indians would attack the extended column . At about 10 am , Herkimer 's column , with Herkimer on horseback near the front , descended into the ravine , crossed the stream , and began ascending the other side . 
 Contrary to the plan , the Indians lying in wait near the rear of the column , apparently unable to contain themselves any longer , opened fire , taking the column completely by surprise . Leading the 1st Regiment ( Canajoharie district ) , Colonel Ebenezer Cox was shot off his horse and killed in the first volley . Herkimer turned his horse to see the action , and was very shortly thereafter struck by a ball , which shattered his leg and killed the horse . He was carried by several of his officers to a beech tree , where his men urged him to retire from further danger . He defiantly replied , " I will face the enemy " , and calmly sat leaning against the tree , smoking a pipe and giving directions and words of encouragement to the men nearby . 
 As the trap had been sprung too early , portions of the column had not yet entered the ravine . Most of these men panicked and fled ; some of the attacking Indians pursued them , resulting in a string of dead and wounded that extended for several miles . Between the loss of the column rear and those killed or wounded in the initial volleys , only about one half of Herkimer 's men were likely still fighting thirty minutes into the battle . Some of the attackers , notably those not armed with muskets , waited for the flash of an opponent 's musket fire before rushing to attack with the tomahawk before the enemy had time to reload , a highly effective tactic against those men who did not have bayonets . Louis <unk> , a Mohawk warrior fighting with Herkimer 's men , shot one of the enemy whose fire had been devastating in its accuracy , noting that " every time he rises up he kills one of our men " . 
 Herkimer 's men eventually rallied , fighting their way out of the ravine to the crest just to its west . John Johnson , concerned about the militia 's tenacity , returned to the British camp and requested some reinforcements from St. Leger shortly before a thunderstorm broke out . Another seventy men headed back with him toward the battle . The thunderstorm caused a one @-@ hour break in the fighting , during which Herkimer regrouped his militia on the higher ground . He instructed his men to fight in pairs : while one man fired and reloaded , the other waited and then only fired if attacked . Ordered to fire in relays , the pairs were to try to keep at least one weapon loaded at all times , to reduce the effectiveness of the tomahawk attacks . 
 John Butler , the leader of the rangers , took time during the thunderstorm to question some of the captives , and learned about the three @-@ cannon signal . When Johnson and his reinforcements arrived , Butler convinced them to turn their coats inside out to disguise themselves as a relief party coming from the fort . When the fighting restarted , Johnson and the rest of his Royal Yorkers joined the battle , but one of the Patriot militiaman , Captain Jacob <unk> , recognized the face of a Loyalist neighbor . Close combat , at times hand @-@ to @-@ hand fighting between neighbors , continued for some time . 
 = = = Sortie from Fort Stanwix = = = 
 When Herkimer 's messengers reached the fort around 11 am , Colonel Gansevoort began organizing the requested sortie . After the heavy thunderstorm passed , Lieutenant Colonel Marinus Willett led 250 men from the fort , and proceeded to raid the nearly deserted enemy camps to the south of the fort . Driving away the few British and Indians left in those camps ( who included women ) and taking four prisoners along the way , the Patriots collected blankets and other personal possessions from the Indian camps . They also successfully raided John Johnson 's camp , taking his letters and other writings ( including an intercepted letter to Gansevoort from his fiancée ) . 
 One of the Indians who had stayed behind to guard the camp ran to the battlefield to alert fellow warriors that their camps were being raided . They disengaged with cries of " <unk> , <unk> ! " , the Seneca signal to retire , and headed for the camps to protect their women and possessions . This forced the smaller number of German and Loyalist combatants to also withdraw . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Patriots = = = 
 The battered remnant of Herkimer 's force , with Herkimer seriously wounded and many of its captains killed , retreated to Fort Dayton . The wounded Herkimer was carried by his men from the battlefield . His leg was amputated , but the operation went poorly and he died on August 16 . While the Indians retrieved most of their dead from the battlefield the following day , many dead and wounded Patriots were left on the field . When Benedict Arnold 's relief column marched through the scene several weeks later , the stench and grisly scene was , according to various accounts , quite memorable . 
 When General Philip Schuyler learned of the retreat from Oriskany , he immediately organized additional relief to be sent to the area . The siege at Fort Stanwix was eventually lifted on August 21 when a relief column led by General Benedict Arnold approached . While still at Fort Dayton , Arnold sent messengers into the British camp who convinced the British and Indian besiegers that his force was much larger than it was in fact . 
 = = = Loyalists = = = 
 Loyalist John Butler was promoted to Lieutenant Colonel for his role in the battle , and authorized to raise a regiment that became known as Butler 's Rangers . After the siege was lifted , some Loyalists returned to Quebec . Others ( including numerous warriors from various tribes ) joined Burgoyne 's campaign on the Hudson . 
 = = = Native Americans = = = 
 Brant and Sayenqueraghta , the principal Seneca chief , proposed the next day to continue the fighting by pursuing the Colonials downriver toward German Flatts but St. Leger turned their proposal down . This battle marked the beginning of the civil war in the Iroquois Confederacy . It was the first time that their peoples had fought against each other . Four of the Iroquois nations : Mohawk , Seneca , Cayuga and Onondaga , were allied with the British , as were some Oneida . The Iroquois in St. Leger 's camp met in council and decided to send the rebel @-@ allied Oneida a bloody hatchet . Brant 's Mohawks raided and burned the Oneida settlement of <unk> later in the siege . In retaliation , the Oneida plundered the Mohawk castles of <unk> and Canajoharie . They later raided the Fort Hunter Mohawk , prompting most of the remaining Mohawk in central New York to flee to Quebec . 
 According to a mid @-@ 19th century account , Brant 's Indians were said to have tortured and eaten some of their prisoners . However , modern historians dispute this . It is likely that some of the prisoners taken were ritually killed ( which to Europeans is extremely similar to torture ) ; there does not appear to be any evidence of cannibalism ( ritual or otherwise ) . John Butler reported that four prisoners held by the Indians " were conformable to the Indian custom afterwards killed . " 
 = = = Winners and losers = = = 
 The battle was , based on the percentage of casualties suffered , one of the bloodiest of the war . About half of Herkimer 's force was killed or wounded , as was about 15 % of the British force . 
 St. Leger claimed the battle as a victory , as he had stopped the American relief column , but the Americans maintained control of the battlefield after the withdrawal of the opposing Indians . The British victory was tempered by the discontent of the Indians after the battle . When they joined the expedition , they expected that the British forces would do most of the fighting . They were the dominant fighters in this action , and some suffered the loss of their personal belongings taken during the American sortie from the fort . This blow to their morale contributed to the eventual failure of St. Leger 's expedition . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 <unk> , one of the Indians at the battle , was interviewed many years afterwards . He recalled , " I thought at that time the Blood Shed a Stream running down on the <unk> [ sic ] ground . " A monument commemorating the battle was erected in 1884 at 43 ° <unk> 75 ° <unk> , and much of the battlefield is now preserved in the Oriskany Battlefield State Historic Site . The site was recognized as a National Historic Landmark in 1962 , and added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1966 . 
 Nicholas Herkimer was honored when the town of Herkimer and Herkimer County , New York were named for him . 
 = = Representation in popular culture = = 
 Colonial settlement and wars in the Mohawk Valley , including the Battle of Oriskany , were memorialized by Walter D. Edmonds in his 1937 novel , Drums Along the Mohawk and its film adaptation . 
 The battle was honored by the naming of the aircraft carrier USS Oriskany , launched in 1945 . 
 The battle acts as the crux of Charles Fenno Hoffman 's 1840 novel <unk> . 
 = Kali = 
 Kālī ( / <unk> / ; Sanskrit : <unk> ) , also known as <unk> ( Sanskrit : <unk> ) , is a Hindu goddess . The name Kali is derived from the Sanskrit " <unk> " , or time — she therefore represents Time , Change , Power , Creation , Preservation , and Destruction . " Kali " also mean " the black one " , the feminine noun of the Sanskrit adjective <unk> . 
 Kali 's earliest appearance is that of a destroyer principally of evil forces . She is worshipped by devotional movements and tantric sects variously as the Divine Mother , Mother of the Universe , Adi Shakti , or Adi Parashakti . Shakta Hindu sects and <unk> Tantric beliefs additionally worship her as the ultimate reality or Brahman . She is also seen as divine protector and the one who bestows moksha , or liberation . Kali is the first of the 10 Mahavidyas , or manifestations of the Great Goddess , or ultimate reality . She is often portrayed standing or dancing on her consort , the Hindu god Shiva , who lies calm and prostrate beneath her . Kali is worshipped by Hindus throughout India but particularly Bengal , Assam , Kashmir , Punjab , Himachal Pradesh , Kerala , and Tamil Nadu , along with Nepal and Sri Lanka . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 Kālī is the feminine form of <unk> ( " black , dark coloured " ) . Kālī also shares the meaning of " time " or " the fullness of time " with the masculine noun " kāla " — and by extension , time as " that which brings all things to an end , the destroyer . " Other names include <unk> ( " the night of death " or " the night of destruction " ) , and <unk> ( " the black one " ) . 
 The homonymous kāla , " appointed time " , which depending on context can mean " death " , is distinct from kāla " black " , but became associated through popular etymology . The association is seen in a passage from the Mahābhārata , depicting a female figure who carries away the spirits of slain warriors and animals . She is called <unk> ( which Thomas Coburn , a historian of Sanskrit Goddess literature , translates as " night of death " ) and also <unk> ( which , as Coburn notes , can be read here either as a proper name or as a description " the black one " ) . Kālī is also the feminine form of Kāla , an epithet of Shiva , and thus the consort of Shiva . 
 Kali properly transliterated from Sanskrit is Kālī , which should not be confused with the common Sanskrit word properly transliterated as kali , meaning " terrible " . They are grammatically unrelated , the first being nominal / ablative the latter adjectival . Frequent confusion comes in interpreting the kali yuga , or " terrible age , " one of the four great ages ( <unk> ) of Hindu cosmology , as conflated with the goddess Kali . This is mostly due to her appearance , which is often described as terrible and fearsome . In fact , the goddess Kali should not be confused with kali yuga , as her name holds separate and unrelated meaning . 
 = = Origins = = 
 Hugh Urban notes that although the word Kālī appears as early as the Atharva Veda , the first use of it as a proper name is in the <unk> Grhya Sutra ( 19 @.@ 7 ) . Kali appears in the Mundaka Upanishad ( section 1 , chapter 2 , verse 4 ) not explicitly as a goddess , but as the black tongue of the seven flickering tongues of Agni , the Hindu god of fire . 
 According to David Kinsley , Kāli is first mentioned in Hindu tradition as a distinct goddess around 600 CE , and these texts " usually place her on the periphery of Hindu society or on the battlefield . " She is often regarded as the Shakti of Shiva , and is closely associated with him in various Puranas . 
 Her most well known appearance on the battlefield is in the sixth century Devi Mahatmyam . Two demons , <unk> and Munda attack the goddess Durga . Durga responds with such anger that her face turns dark and Kali appears out of her forehead . Kali 's appearance is black , gaunt with sunken eyes , and wearing a tiger skin and a garland of human heads . She immediately defeats the two demons . Later in the same battle , the demon Raktabija is undefeated because of his ability to reproduce himself from every drop of his blood that reaches the ground . Countless Raktabija clones appear on the battlefield . Kali eventually defeats him by sucking his blood before it can reach the ground , and eating the numerous clones . Kinsley writes that Kali represents " Durga 's personified wrath , her embodied fury . " 
 Other origin stories involve Parvati and Shiva . Parvati is typically portrayed as a benign and friendly goddess . The Linga Purana describes Shiva asking Parvati to defeat the demon Daruka , who received a boon that would only allow a female to kill him . Parvati merges with Shiva 's body , reappearing as Kali to defeat Daruka and his armies . Her bloodlust gets out of control , only calming when Shiva intervenes . The Vamana Purana has a different version of Kali 's relationship with Parvati . When Shiva addresses Parvati as Kali , " the black one , " she is greatly offended . Parvati performs austerities to lose her dark complexion and becomes Gauri , the golden one . Her dark sheath becomes <unk> , who while enraged , creates Kali . Regarding the relationship between Kali , Parvati , and Shiva , Kinsley writes that : 
 In relation to Siva , she [ Kali ] appears to play the opposite role from that of Parvati . Parvati calms Siva , counterbalancing his antisocial or destructive tendencies ; she brings him within the sphere of domesticity and with her soft glances urges him to moderate the destructive aspects of his <unk> dance . Kali is Shiva 's " other wife , " as it were , provoking him and encouraging him in his mad , antisocial , disruptive habits . It is never Kali who tames Siva , but Siva who must calm Kali . 
 = = Legends = = 
 Kāli appears in the <unk> <unk> of the Mahabharata ( 10 @.@ 8 @.@ 64 ) . She is called <unk> ( literally , " black night " ) and appears to the Pandava soldiers in dreams , until finally she appears amidst the fighting during an attack by Drona 's son <unk> . 
 Another story involving Kali is her escapade with a band of thieves . The thieves wanted to make a human sacrifice to Kali , and unwisely chose a saintly Brahmin monk as their victim . The radiance of the young monk was so much that it burned the image of Kali , who took living form and killed the entire band of thieves , decapitating them and drinking their blood . 
 = = = Slayer of Raktabija = = = 
 In Kāli 's most famous legend , Durga and her assistants , the Matrikas , wound the demon Raktabija , in various ways and with a variety of weapons in an attempt to destroy him . They soon find that they have worsened the situation for with every drop of blood that is dripped from Raktabija he reproduces a clone of himself . The battlefield becomes increasingly filled with his duplicates . Durga summons Kāli to combat the demons . The Devi Mahatmyam describes : 
 Out of the surface of her ( Durga 's ) forehead , fierce with frown , issued suddenly Kali of terrible countenance , armed with a sword and noose . Bearing the strange khatvanga ( skull @-@ topped staff ) , decorated with a garland of skulls , clad in a tiger 's skin , very appalling owing to her emaciated flesh , with gaping mouth , fearful with her tongue lolling out , having deep reddish eyes , filling the regions of the sky with her roars , falling upon <unk> and slaughtering the great asuras in that army , she devoured those hordes of the foes of the devas . 
 Kali consumes Raktabija and his duplicates , and dances on the corpses of the slain . In the Devi Mahatmya version of this story , Kali is also described as a Matrika and as a Shakti or power of Devi . She is given the epithet <unk> ( Chamunda ) , i.e. the slayer of the demons Chanda and Munda . Chamunda is very often identified with Kali and is very much like her in appearance and habit . 
 = = Iconography and forms = = 
 Kali is portrayed mostly in two forms : the popular four @-@ armed form and the ten @-@ armed Mahakali form . In both of her forms , she is described as being black in colour but is most often depicted as blue in popular Indian art . Her eyes are described as red with intoxication , and in absolute rage , her hair is shown disheveled , small fangs sometimes protrude out of her mouth , and her tongue is lolling . She is often shown naked or just wearing a skirt made of human arms and a garland of human heads . She is also accompanied by serpents and a jackal while standing on the calm and prostrate Shiva , usually right foot forward to symbolize the more popular <unk> or right @-@ handed path , as opposed to the more infamous and transgressive Vamamarga or left @-@ handed path . 
 In the ten @-@ armed form of Mahakali she is depicted as shining like a blue stone . She has ten faces , ten feet , and three eyes for each head . She has ornaments decked on all her limbs . There is no association with Shiva . 
 The Kalika Purana describes Kali as possessing a soothing dark complexion , as perfectly beautiful , riding a lion , four @-@ armed , holding a sword and blue lotuses , her hair unrestrained , body firm and youthful . 
 In spite of her seemingly terrible form , Kali Ma is often considered the kindest and most loving of all the Hindu goddesses , as she is regarded by her devotees as the Mother of the whole Universe . And because of her terrible form , she is also often seen as a great protector . When the Bengali saint Ramakrishna once asked a devotee why one would prefer to worship Mother over him , this devotee rhetorically replied , " Maharaj , when they are in trouble your devotees come running to you . But , where do you run when you are in trouble ? " 
 = = = Popular form = = = 
 Classic depictions of Kali share several features , as follows : 
 Kali 's most common four armed iconographic image shows each hand carrying variously a sword , a trishul ( trident ) , a severed head , and a bowl or skull @-@ cup ( kapala ) catching the blood of the severed head . 
 Two of these hands ( usually the left ) are holding a sword and a severed head . The sword signifies divine knowledge and the human head signifies human ego which must be slain by divine knowledge in order to attain moksha . The other two hands ( usually the right ) are in the abhaya ( fearlessness ) and varada ( blessing ) mudras , which means her initiated devotees ( or anyone worshipping her with a true heart ) will be saved as she will guide them here and in the hereafter . 
 She has a garland consisting of human heads , variously enumerated at 108 ( an auspicious number in Hinduism and the number of countable beads on a japa mala or rosary for repetition of mantras ) or 51 , which represents <unk> or the Garland of letters of the Sanskrit alphabet , Devanagari . Hindus believe Sanskrit is a language of dynamism , and each of these letters represents a form of energy , or a form of Kali . Therefore , she is generally seen as the mother of language , and all mantras . 
 She is often depicted naked which symbolizes her being beyond the covering of Maya since she is pure ( nirguna ) being @-@ consciousness @-@ bliss and far above <unk> . She is shown as very dark as she is brahman in its supreme unmanifest state . She has no permanent qualities — she will continue to exist even when the universe ends . It is therefore believed that the concepts of color , light , good , bad do not apply to her 
 = = = Mahakali = = = 
 Mahakali ( Sanskrit : <unk> , Devanagari : <unk> ) , literally translated as Great Kali , is sometimes considered as a greater form of Kali , identified with the Ultimate reality of Brahman . It can also be used as an honorific of the Goddess Kali , signifying her greatness by the prefix " <unk> " . Mahakali , in Sanskrit , is etymologically the feminized variant of Mahakala or Great Time ( which is interpreted also as Death ) , an epithet of the God Shiva in Hinduism . Mahakali is the presiding Goddess of the first episode of the Devi Mahatmya . Here she is depicted as Devi in her universal form as Shakti . Here Devi serves as the agent who allows the cosmic order to be restored . 
 Kali is depicted in the Mahakali form as having ten heads , ten arms , and ten legs . Each of her ten hands is carrying a various implement which vary in different accounts , but each of these represent the power of one of the Devas or Hindu Gods and are often the identifying weapon or ritual item of a given Deva . The implication is that Mahakali subsumes and is responsible for the powers that these deities possess and this is in line with the interpretation that Mahakali is identical with Brahman . While not displaying ten heads , an " <unk> " or one headed image may be displayed with ten arms , signifying the same concept : the powers of the various Gods come only through Her grace . 
 = = = Daksinakali = = = 
 Daksinakali is the most popular form of Kali in Bengal . There are various versions for the origin of the name <unk> . One is the story of Yama , lord of death , who lives in the south ( <unk> ) . When Yama heard Kali 's name , he fled in terror , and so those who worship Kali are said to be able to overcome death itself . Dakshina also refers to the gift given to a priest before performing a ritual or to one 's guru . Such gifts are traditionally given with the right hand . Daksinakali 's two right hands are traditionally depicted in gestures of blessing and giving of boons . 
 Daksinakali is typically shown with her right foot on Shiva 's chest — while depictions showing Kali with her left foot on Shiva 's chest depict the even more fearsome <unk> . The pose shows the conclusion of an episode in which Kali was rampaging out of control after destroying many demons . Shiva , fearing that Kali would not stop until she destroyed the world , could only think of one way to pacify her . He lay down on the battlefield so that she would have to step on him . Seeing her consort under her foot , Kali realized that she had gone too far , and calmed down . In some interpretations of the story , Shiva was attempting to receive Kali 's grace by receiving her foot on his chest . One meaning of <unk> is south or south @-@ facing , the direction associated with Yama , lord of death — and also with cremation grounds . 
 The growing popularity of worship of a more benign form of Kali , as Daksinakali , is often attributed to <unk> <unk> . He was a noted Bengali leader of the 18th century , author of a Tantra encyclopedia called Tantrasara . Kali appeared to him in a dream and told him to popularize her in a particular form that would appear to him the following day . The next morning he observed a young woman making cow dung patties . While placing a patty on a wall , she stood in the <unk> pose , with her right foot forward . When she sees <unk> watching her , she is embarrassed and puts her tongue between her teeth . <unk> took his previous worship of Kali out of the cremation grounds and into a more domestic setting . 
 = = = <unk> Kali = = = 
 If the Kali steps out with the left foot and holds the sword in her right hand , she is the terrible form of Mother , the <unk> Kali of the cremation <unk> is worshiped by <unk> , the followers of Tantra , who believe that one 's spiritual discipline practised in a <unk> ( cremation ground ) brings success quickly . 
 = = = Maternal Kali = = = 
 At the time of <unk> Manthan ( churning of the ocean ) , a poison emerged with the potential to destroy the world . At the request of all the gods , Lord Shiva drank it to save the world . Since he is beyond death he did not die , but was in severe pain due to the effect of the poison . He then became a child so that Kali could feed him with her milk which soothed the effect of the poison . 
 = = Symbolism = = 
 There are many different interpretations of the symbolic meanings of Kali 's depiction , depending on a Tantric or devotional approach , and on whether one views her image symbolically , allegorically , or mystically . 
 = = = Physical form = = = 
 There are many varied depictions of the different forms of Kali . The most common shows her with four arms and hands , showing aspects of creation and destruction . The two right hands are often held out in blessing , one in a mudra saying " fear not " ( <unk> ) , the other conferring boons . Her left hands hold a severed head and blood @-@ covered sword . The sword severs the bondage of ignorance and ego , represented by the severed head . One interpretation of Kali 's tongue is that the red tongue symbolizes the <unk> nature being conquered by the white ( symbolizing <unk> ) nature of the teeth . Her blackness represents that she is nirguna , beyond all qualities of nature , and transcendent . Other interpretations for her tongue include blood lust , and the sticking out of her tongue in embarrassment that she has gone too far in stepping on Shiva 's chest . 
 Kali is often shown standing with her right foot on Shiva 's chest . This represents an episode where Kali was out of control on the battlefield , such that she was about to destroy the entire universe . Shiva pacified her by laying down under her foot , both to receive her blessing , but also to pacify and calm her . Shiva is sometimes shown with a blissful smile on his face . She is typically shown with a garland of severed heads , often numbering fifty . This can symbolize the letters of the Sanskrit alphabet and therefore as the primordial sound of Aum from which all creation proceeds . The severed arms which make up her skirt represent her devotee 's karma that she has taken on . 
 = = = Mother Nature = = = 
 The name Kali means Kala or force of time . When there were neither the creation , nor the sun , the moon , the planets , and the earth , there was only darkness and everything was created from the darkness . The Dark appearance of kali represents the darkness from which everything was born . Her complexion is deep blue , like the sky and ocean water as blue . As she is also the goddess of Preservation Kali is worshiped as mother to preserve the nature . Kali is standing calm on Shiva , her appearance represents the preservation of mother nature . Her free , long and black hair represents nature 's freedom from civilization . Under the third eye of kali , the signs of both sun , moon and fire are visible which represent the driving forces of <unk> is not always thought of as a Dark Goddess . Despite Kali 's origins in battle , She evolved to a full @-@ fledged symbol of Mother Nature in Her creative , nurturing and devouring aspects . She is referred to as a great and loving primordial Mother Goddess in the Hindu tantric tradition . In this aspect , as Mother Goddess , She is referred to as Kali Ma , meaning Kali Mother , and millions of Hindus revere Her as such . 
 = = Worship = = 
 = = = Mantra = = = 
 Kali could be considered a general concept , like Durga , and is mostly worshiped in the Kali Kula sect of worship . The closest way of direct worship is Maha Kali or Bhadrakali ( Bhadra in Sanskrit means ' gentle ' ) . Kali is worshiped as one of the 10 Mahavidya forms of Adi Parashakti . One mantra for worship is : 
 Sanskrit : सर ् <unk> ् <unk> ् <unk> ् <unk> <unk> सर ् <unk> ् <unk> । <unk> ् <unk> त ् र ् यम ् <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ् <unk> ते ॥ 
 <unk> <unk> मंगल <unk> <unk> ् <unk> <unk> । <unk> ् <unk> <unk> क ् षमा <unk> ् री स ् <unk> स ् <unk> <unk> ् <unk> ‍ ते ॥ 
 ( <unk> <unk> <unk> . <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> tē . 
 <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> . <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ‍ tē . ) 
 = = = Tantra = = = 
 Goddesses play an important role in the study and practice of Tantra Yoga , and are affirmed to be as central to discerning the nature of reality as are the male deities . Although Parvati is often said to be the recipient and student of Shiva 's wisdom in the form of Tantras , it is Kali who seems to dominate much of the Tantric iconography , texts , and rituals . In many sources Kāli is praised as the highest reality or greatest of all deities . The Nirvana @-@ tantra says the gods Brahma , Vishnu , and Shiva all arise from her like bubbles in the sea , ceaselessly arising and passing away , leaving their original source unchanged . The <unk> @-@ tantra and the <unk> @-@ tantra declare all of Kāli 's mantras to be the greatest and the Yogini @-@ tantra , Kamakhya @-@ tantra and the <unk> @-@ tantra all proclaim Kāli <unk> ( manifestations of Mahadevi , or " divinity itself " ) . They declare her to be an essence of her own form ( <unk> ) of the Mahadevi . 
 In the <unk> @-@ tantra , Kāli is one of the epithets for the primordial <unk> , and in one passage Shiva praises her : 
 At the dissolution of things , it is Kāla [ Time ] Who will devour all , and by reason of this He is called Mahākāla [ an epithet of Lord Shiva ] , and since Thou devourest Mahākāla Himself , it is Thou who art the Supreme Primordial <unk> . Because Thou devourest Kāla , Thou art Kāli , the original form of all things , and because Thou art the Origin of and devourest all things Thou art called the Adya [ the Primordial One ] . Re @-@ assuming after Dissolution Thine own form , dark and formless , Thou alone <unk> as One ineffable and inconceivable . Though having a form , yet art Thou formless ; though <unk> without beginning , multiform by the power of Maya , Thou art the Beginning of all , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> that Thou art . 
 The figure of Kāli conveys death , destruction , and the consuming aspects of reality . As such , she is also a " forbidden thing " , or even death itself . In the <unk> ritual , the sadhaka boldly seeks to confront Kali , and thereby assimilates and transforms her into a vehicle of salvation . This is clear in the work of the <unk> @-@ stotra , a short praise of Kāli describing the <unk> ritual unto her , performed on cremation grounds . ( <unk> @-@ sadhana ) 
 He , O <unk> who in the cremation @-@ ground , naked , and with dishevelled hair , intently meditates upon Thee and recites Thy mantra , and with each recitation makes offering to Thee of a thousand <unk> flowers with seed , becomes without any effort a Lord of the earth . Oh Kāli , whoever on Tuesday at midnight , having uttered Thy mantra , makes offering even but once with devotion to Thee of a hair of his Shakti [ his energy / female companion ] in the cremation @-@ ground , becomes a great poet , a Lord of the earth , and ever goes mounted upon an elephant . 
 The <unk> @-@ stotra , dated to approximately 10th century ACE , clearly indicates that Kāli is more than a terrible , vicious , slayer of demons who serves Durga or Shiva . Here , she is identified as the supreme mother of the universe , associated with the five elements . In union with Lord Shiva , she creates and destroys worlds . Her appearance also takes a different turn , befitting her role as ruler of the world and object of meditation . In contrast to her terrible aspects , she takes on hints of a more benign dimension . She is described as young and beautiful , has a gentle smile , and makes gestures with her two right hands to dispel any fear and offer boons . The more positive features exposed offer the distillation of divine wrath into a goddess of salvation , who rids the sadhaka of fear . Here , Kali appears as a symbol of triumph over death . 
 = = = Bengali tradition = = = 
 Kali is also a central figure in late medieval Bengali devotional literature , with such devotees as Ramprasad Sen ( 1718 – 75 ) . With the exception of being associated with Parvati as Shiva 's consort , Kāli is rarely pictured in Hindu legends and iconography as a motherly figure until Bengali devotions beginning in the early eighteenth century . Even in <unk> tradition her appearance and habits change little , if at all . 
 The Tantric approach to Kāli is to display courage by confronting her on cremation grounds in the dead of night , despite her terrible appearance . In contrast , the Bengali devotee appropriates Kāli 's teachings adopting the attitude of a child , coming to love her unreservedly . In both cases , the goal of the devotee is to become reconciled with death and to learn acceptance of the way that things are . These themes are well addressed in Rāmprasād 's work . Rāmprasād comments in many of his other songs that Kāli is indifferent to his wellbeing , causes him to suffer , brings his worldly desires to nothing and his worldly goods to ruin . He also states that she does not behave like a mother should and that she ignores his pleas : 
 To be a child of Kāli , Rāmprasād asserts , is to be denied of earthly delights and pleasures . Kāli is said to refrain from giving that which is expected . To the devotee , it is perhaps her very refusal to do so that enables her devotees to reflect on dimensions of themselves and of reality that go beyond the material world . 
 A significant portion of Bengali devotional music features Kāli as its central theme and is known as Shyama Sangeet ( " Music of the Night " ) . Mostly sung by male vocalists , today even women have taken to this form of music . One of the finest singers of <unk> <unk> is <unk> Bhattacharya . 
 Kāli is especially venerated in the festival of Kali Puja in eastern India — celebrated when the new moon day of Ashwin month coincides with the festival of Diwali . The practice of animal sacrifice is common during Kali Puja in Bengal , Orissa , and Assam , though it is rare outside of those areas . The Hindu temples where this takes place involves the ritual slaying of goats , chickens and sometimes male Water buffalos . Throughout India , the practice is becoming less common . The rituals in eastern India temples where animals are killed are generally led by Brahmin priests . A number of Tantric Puranas specify the ritual for how the animal should be killed . A Brahmin priest will recite a mantra in the ear of animal to be sacrificed , in order to free the animal from the cycle of life and death . Groups such as People for Animals continue to protest animal sacrifice based on court rulings forbidding the practice in some locations . 
 In a unique form of Kāli worship , <unk> worships Kāli in the form of a hand painted image of the deity known as <unk> ( meaning the deity drawn on a piece of cloth ) . 
 = = = Worship in the Western world = = = 
 An academic study of western Kali enthusiasts noted that , " as shown in the histories of all cross @-@ cultural religious transplants , Kali devotionalism in the West must take on its own indigenous forms if it is to adapt to its new environment . " Rachel Fell McDermott , Professor of Asian and Middle Eastern Cultures at Columbia University and author of several books on Kali , has noted the evolving views in the West regarding Kali and her worship . In 1998 she pointed out that : 
 A variety of writers and thinkers have found Kali an exciting figure for reflection and exploration , notably feminists and participants in New Age spirituality who are attracted to goddess worship . [ For them ] , Kali is a symbol of wholeness and healing , associated especially with repressed female power and sexuality . [ However , such interpretations often exhibit ] confusion and misrepresentation , stemming from a lack of knowledge of Hindu history among these authors , [ who only rarely ] draw upon materials written by scholars of the Hindu religious tradition . . . It is hard to import the worship of a goddess from another culture : religious associations and connotations have to be learned , imagined or intuited when the deep symbolic meanings embedded in the native culture are not available . 
 By 2003 McDermott amended her previous view by writing that : 
 " ... cross @-@ cultural borrowing is appropriate and a natural by @-@ product of religious globalization — although such borrowing ought to be done responsibly and self @-@ consciously . If some Kali enthusiasts , therefore , careen ahead , reveling in a goddess of power and sex , many others , particularly since the early 1990s , have decided to reconsider their theological trajectories . These , whether of South Asian descent or not , are endeavoring to rein in what they perceive as excesses of feminist and New Age interpretations of the Goddess by choosing to be informed by , moved by , an Indian view of her character . " 
 = 1979 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1979 Atlantic hurricane season was the first season to include both male and female names . The season officially began on June 1 , and lasted until November 30 . These dates conventionally delimit the period of each year when most tropical cyclones form in the Atlantic basin . It was slightly below average , with nine systems reaching tropical storm intensity . The first system , an unnumbered tropical depression , developed north of Puerto Rico on June 9 . Two days later , Tropical Depression One formed and produced severe flooding in Jamaica , with 40 deaths and about $ 27 million ( 1979 USD ) in damage . Tropical Storm Ana caused minimal impact in the Lesser Antilles . Hurricane Bob spawned tornadoes and produced minor wind damage along the Gulf Coast of the United States , primarily in Louisiana , while the remnants caused flooding , especially in Indiana . Tropical Storm Claudette caused extensive flooding , due to torrential rainfall . There were two deaths and damaged totaled $ 750 million . 
 The most intense tropical cyclone of the season was Hurricane David . It moved across the Lesser Antilles in late August , with the worst hit islands being Dominica and Martinique . The storm then strengthened further and struck Dominican Republic as a Category 5 hurricane . David was the strongest and deadliest tropical cyclone to make landfall in that country since 1930 . In Dominican Republic alone , the system caused approximately 1 @,@ 000 death and $ 1 billion in damage . Later , David brought wind damage , tornadoes , and flooding to portions of the East Coast of the United States . Overall , the storm resulted in 2 @,@ 068 deaths and $ 1 @.@ 54 billion in damage . Hurricane Frederic brought destruction to the Gulf Coast of the United States , especially in Alabama and Mississippi . With $ 2 @.@ 3 billion in damage , Frederic was the costliest hurricane in the history of the United States , until Hurricane Hugo in 1989 . 
 Tropical Storm Elena brought flooding to the Greater Houston area , with five deaths and about $ 10 million in damage . However , little impact was reported elsewhere . Hurricane Henri remained offshore in the Gulf of Mexico and disrupted efforts to stop the Ixtoc I oil spill . Henri also caused flooding in portions of Mexico . In mid and late @-@ September , a tropical depression caused flooding in the Southern United States , especially Texas . Four deaths were reported , two in Texas and two in Kentucky . Toward the end of October , a brief subtropical storm struck Newfoundland , but left little impact . Other than Tropical Depression One and the tropical depression that brought flooding to the Southern United States in mid and late @-@ September , none of the other depressions caused significant effects of land . Collectively , the tropical cyclones of the season resulted in $ 4 @.@ 63 billion in damage and at least 2 @,@ 136 deaths . Pacific Storm Blanca originated in the basin . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 The Atlantic hurricane season officially began on June 1 , 1979 . Although 27 tropical cyclones developed , only nine of them reach tropical storm intensity , which is slightly below the 1950 @-@ 2000 average of 9 @.@ 6 named storms per season . Of the nine tropical storms , five of them strengthened into a hurricane , which is also slightly below average . Two of the five hurricane became major hurricanes , which is Category 3 or greater on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . Three tropical storms , one subtropical storm , and three hurricanes made landfall during the season and caused at least 2 @,@ 136 fatalities and $ 4 @.@ 63 billion . Despite its intensity , Tropical Depression One also resulted in damage and deaths due to severe flooding in Jamaica . The last storm of the season , an unnumbered tropical depression , dissipated on November 15 , about 15 days before the official end of hurricane season on November 30 . 
 Tropical cyclogenesis began in June , with three tropical depressions , one of which strengthened into Tropical Storm Ana . A total of four systems formed in the month of July , including Hurricane Bob and Tropical Storm Claudette . Activity briefly halted after Tropical Depression Six dissipated on August 6 and lasted until Hurricane David developed on August 25 . There were four other tropical cyclones that month , including Hurricane Frederic and Tropical Storm Elena . In September , six systems developed , with the named storms of the month being hurricane Gloria and Henri . October was slightly less active , with four tropical cyclones , one of which was an unnamed subtropical storm . Two additional tropical depressions developed in November , the second of which dissipated on November 15 . 
 The season 's activity was reflected with an accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) rating of 93 . ACE is , broadly speaking , a measure of the power of the hurricane multiplied by the length of time it existed , so storms that last a long time , as well as particularly strong hurricanes , have high ACEs . It is only calculated for full advisories on tropical systems at or exceeding 39 mph ( 63 km / h ) , which is tropical storm strength . Although officially , subtropical storms are not included in the ACE value , the figure above includes periods when storms were in a subtropical phase . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Depression One = = = 
 A tropical wave in the western Caribbean Sea situated south of Grand Cayman developed into a tropical depression on June 11 . Tracking generally northward , the depression passed west of Jamaica . On June 12 , the depression peaked with maximum sustained winds of 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) system , having never reached tropical storm status . The following day , it made landfall in Cuba . Early on June 14 , the depression emerged into the western Atlantic Ocean and then moved parallel to the east coast of Florida for a few days . The depression made another landfall in South Carolina on June 16 and dissipated hours later . 
 The slow movement of the depression to the west of Jamaica resulted in torrential rainfall , peaking at 32 in ( 810 mm ) in Friendship , a city in Westmoreland Parish . Throughout western Jamaica , about 1 @,@ 000 homes were destroyed or severely damaged , while up to 40 @,@ 000 people were rendered homeless . The city of New Market was submerged for at least six months . Crops , electricity , telephones , buildings , and railways also suffered damage during the disaster . There were 40 deaths and approximately $ 27 million in damage . The depression also brought heavy precipitation to the Bahamas and Cuba . Along the East Coast of the United States , light rainfall , strong winds , and rough seas were observed . In South Carolina , a person went missing and was later presumed to have drowned after their boat was torn loose from its mooring . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Ana = = = 
 A tropical wave exited the west coast of Africa and entered the Atlantic on June 14 . It headed westward and after satellite imagery indicated a closed circulation , the wave was classified as a tropical depression on June 19 , while located several hundred miles east @-@ southeast of the Windward Islands . The system was the first tropical cyclone to develop east of the Lesser Antilles in June since the 1933 Trinidad hurricane ; more recently , a tropical depression in 2000 and another in 2003 formed further east in that month . Initially , the depression tracked west @-@ northwestward , before curving northwestward by late on June 20 . 
 A United States Air Force reconnaissance aircraft noted that the depression was strengthening and by early on June 22 , it was upgraded to Tropical Storm Ana . Thereafter , the storm began tracking almost due westward toward the Lesser Antilles . Ana peaked with winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) , before wind shear began detaching deep convection from the center , resulting in weakening . Early on June 23 , the storm struck St. Lucia and then fell to tropical depression intensity upon entering the Caribbean Sea . Ana continued weakening and degenerated back into a tropical wave on June 24 , while located between Puerto Rico and Venezuela . Despite directly crossing St. Lucia , only light rainfall occurred . In Dominica , rain fell for 15 hours and gusty winds were reported . 
 = = = Hurricane Bob = = = 
 A tropical wave developed into a tropical depression in the southwestern Gulf of Mexico on July 9 . Tracking in a general northward direction , favorable conditions allowed for quick strengthening . Less than a day after formation , the system reached tropical storm intensity , followed by hurricane intensity on July 11 . Shortly after strengthening into a hurricane , Bob reached its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 75 mph ( 121 km / h ) . At the same intensity , Bob made landfall west of Grand Isle , Louisiana , and rapidly weakened after moving inland . However , the resulting tropical depression persisted for several days as it paralleled the Mississippi and Ohio rivers . On July 16 , the system emerged into the western Atlantic , where it was subsequently absorbed by a nearby low @-@ pressure area . 
 Widespread offshore and coastal evacuations took place along the Gulf Coast of the United States in preparation for Hurricane Bob . Effects from the hurricane on the United States were mostly marginal and typical of a minimal hurricane . The cyclone produced a moderate storm surge , damaging some coastal installments and causing coastal inundation . Strong winds were also associated with Bob 's landfall , though no stations observed winds of hurricane force . The winds downed trees and blew out windows , in addition to causing widespread power outages . Heavy rainfall was also reported in some locations , peaking at 7 @.@ 16 in ( 182 mm ) in Louisiana . Further inland , the torrential rains led to flooding in Indiana , resulting in more considerable damage as opposed to the coast . Bob also spawned eight tornadoes , with two causing significant damage . Overall , Bob was responsible for one death and $ 20 million in damage . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Claudette = = = 
 A tropical wave spawned a tropical depression east of the Lesser Antilles on July 16 . It gradually strengthened into Tropical Storm Claudette on July 17 and crossed the northern Leeward Islands later that day . As the storm approached Puerto Rico early on July 18 , it weakened back to a tropical depression . Claudette degenerated back into a tropical wave after crossing Puerto Rico . Late on July 18 , the remnants struck Dominican Republic and emerged into the Caribbean Sea on the following day . The system crossed western Cuba on July 21 , shortly before reaching the Gulf of Mexico and regenerated into a tropical cyclone . By July 23 , Claudette regained tropical storm intensity and turned northward . The storm made landfall near the Texas @-@ Louisiana border later that day . It eventually dissipated over West Virginia on July 29 . 
 In the Lesser Antilles , the storm brought heavy rainfall and gusty winds to several islands . Minor flooding occurred in Saint Croix . Rainfall exceeding 10 inches ( 250 mm ) in some areas of Puerto Rico led to widespread agricultural damage , flooded homes and streets . There was one fatality and approximately $ 750 @,@ 000 in damage . Up to 42 inches ( 1 @,@ 100 mm ) of rain fell in one day in Alvin , Texas , which is the record 24 ‑ hour precipitation amount for any location in the United States . Within the state of Texas alone , hundreds of businesses and an estimated 15 @,@ 000 homes sustained flood damage . Rice crops were also ruined . One drowning death was reported in the state . In Louisiana , extensive coastal flooding occurred , with miles of roads battered or destroyed in Cameron Parish , while several boats along the coast capsized . At Johnson Bayou , fishing camps and homes suffered damage or destruction . Further inland , other states experienced freshwater flooding , especially Indiana and Missouri . Overall , Claudette was responsible for two deaths and $ 750 million in losses . 
 = = = Hurricane David = = = 
 A tropical wave developed into a tropical depression at 12 : 00 UTC on August 25 , while located about 870 mi ( 1 @,@ 400 km ) southeast of Cape Verde . Moving westward , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm David early the next day . Shortly after attaining hurricane status on August 27 , David rapidly deepened . By 12 : 00 UTC the following day , it was a strong Category 4 hurricane . Thereafter , the storm oscillated in intensity while approaching the Lesser Antilles and struck Dominica late on August 29 @.@ with winds 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) . After entering the Caribbean Sea , further deepening occurred and at 18 : 00 UTC on August 30 , David peaked with maximum sustained winds of 175 mph ( 280 km / h ) . Late on August 31 , it curved northwestward and struck Santo Domingo , Dominican Republic at the same intensity . 
 The storm rapidly weakened while crossing Hispaniola and was only a Category 1 hurricane upon emerging into the Windward Passage on September 1 . Moving northwestward , David made landfall in the eastern tip of Cuba that day and briefly weakened to a tropical storm . However , after reaching the Atlantic , it re @-@ strengthened into a Category 1 . David then moved through the Bahamas and crossed Andros Island on September 2 . Thereafter , the storm re @-@ intensified into a Category 2 and made landfall near West Palm Beach , Florida late the next day . The hurricane remained barely inland and re @-@ emerged into the Atlantic at Merritt Island early on September 4 . Thereafter , the cyclone weakened slightly and made landfall in Blackbeard Island , Georgia later that day as a Category 1 hurricane . David headed north @-@ northeastward and weakened to a tropical storm on September 5 . While crossing the Mid @-@ Atlantic states , the storm curved northeastward and accelerated , before becoming extratropical over New York late on September 6 . The remnants of David persisted over New England and Atlantic Canada , before dissipating northeast of Newfoundland on September 8 . 
 In Dominica , strong winds damaged or destroyed 80 % of homes , leaving 75 % of the island 's population homeless . Agricultural was also severely impacted , with 75 % of crops ruined , including a complete loss of bananas . There were 56 deaths and 180 injuries . Similar destruction occurred on Guadeloupe and Martinique , with hundreds left homeless and extensive damage to crops . Guadeloupe and Martinique also had $ 50 million and $ 100 million in damage , respectively . In Puerto Rico , flooding and high winds combined resulted in $ 70 million in damage and seven fatalities , four from electrocution . Dominican Republic was lashed with very strong winds and torrential rains . Entire villages were destroyed and numerous others were left isolated because of damage or destruction to many roads . Thousands of houses were destroyed , leaving over 200 @,@ 000 homeless in the aftermath of the hurricane . Additionally , nearly 70 % of the country 's crops were ruined . Overall , the storm caused at least 2 @,@ 000 deaths and about $ 1 billion in damage in Dominican Republic . Minimal impact occurred in the Bahamas , Cuba , and Haiti . In Florida , strong winds left moderate damage , including a downed radio tower , snapping a crane , and <unk> buildings . There were also 10 tornadoes . Damage totaled approximately $ 95 million . Other states along the East Coast of the United States experienced flooding and tornadoes . The latter was particularly severe in Virginia , with tornadoes causing one death , damaging 270 homes , and destroying three other homes . Throughout the United States , there were 15 deaths and about $ 320 million in damage . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Eight = = = 
 A tropical disturbance formed over the Isthmus of Tehuantepec on August 24 . By the following day , the disturbance developed into a tropical depression , operationally classified as the eight of the season . The depression entered the Bay of Campeche on August 25 and headed northward . Around 06 : 00 UTC the following day , the system peaked with maximum sustained winds of 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) . However , on August 28 , a ridge of high pressure forced the system to move west @-@ southwestward , causing it make landfall in a rural area of Tamaulipas later that day . The depression brought heavy rainfall to some areas of Mexico , with 18 @.@ 94 in ( 481 mm ) of precipitation observed in Santa María <unk> , Oaxaca . Rainfall extended northward into Texas , peaking at 4 @.@ 86 in ( 123 mm ) in McAllen . 
 = = = Hurricane Frederic = = = 
 Satellite imagery and ship observations indicated that a tropical depression developed at 06 : 00 UTC on August 29 , while located about 270 mi ( 430 km ) south @-@ southwest of the southernmost island of Cape Verde . By 12 : 00 UTC the next day , the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Frederic . Further intensification occurred , with the storm becoming a hurricane on September 1 . However , outflow from Hurricane David caused Fredric to weaken back to a tropical storm early the following day . While moving across the northern Leeward Islands on September 4 , bringing gusty winds and heavy rainfall to some islands . In Sint Maarten , a fishing boat sank , killing seven people . Strong winds were observed in the United States Virgin Islands . On Saint Thomas , the roofs of three large apartment buildings were blown off , leaving about 50 families homeless . Additionally , flooding destroyed four houses and impacted 50 others . Numerous houses on Saint Croix also suffered water damage . 
 Around midday on September 4 , Frederic made landfall in Humacao , Puerto Rico with winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) . Flooding on the island forced over 6 @,@ 000 people to flee their homes in search of shelter . Numerous roads were closed due to landslides and inundation . At least nine cities experienced flooding . After crossing Puerto Rico , Frederic briefly re @-@ emerged into the Caribbean Sea , before making landfall near Santo Domingo , Dominican Republic with winds of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) at 00 : 00 UTC on September 6 . Minimal impact was reported in that country , though heavy rainfall , exceeding 24 in ( 610 mm ) in some places , compounded damage inflicted by Hurricane David . Frederic weakened further while crossing Hispaniola . Later on September 6 , the system briefly re @-@ emerged into the Atlantic Ocean , but land interaction with the island weakened it to a tropical depression . The storm crossed the Windward Passage and then made landfall in southeastern Guantánamo Province of Cuba early on September 7 . Due to the weak nature of Frederic , minimal impact was reported . It then moved along , or just offshore the southern coast of Cuba . While situated south of Matanzas Province early on September 9 , the system re @-@ strengthened into a tropical storm . Despite land interaction with Cuba , Frederic continued to intensify . 
 Shortly before emerging into the Gulf of Mexico on September 10 , Frederic re @-@ intensified into a hurricane . During the next few days , the storm significantly , but not rapidly , strengthened while moving northwestward . At 12 : 00 UTC on September 12 , Frederic attained its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 135 mph ( 215 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 943 mbar ( 27 @.@ 8 inHg ) . Early on the next day , the storm made landfall near Dauphin Island and then near the Alabama – Mississippi state line . The storm rapidly weakened and fell to tropical storm intensity by late on September 13 . Frederic then accelerated northeastward and became extratropical over New York around 18 : 00 UTC the next day . The remnants persisted until dissipating over New Brunswick early on September 15 . Frederic brought destruction to the Gulf Coast of the United States . In Alabama , storm surge up to 12 ft ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) and wind gusts as high as 145 mph ( 233 km / h ) caused the destruction of nearly all buildings within 900 ft ( 270 m ) of the coast . In the Mobile , nearly 90 % of the city lost electricity . Extensive coastal damage was also reported in Mississippi , due to tides ranging from 6 to 12 ft ( 1 @.@ 8 to 3 @.@ 7 m ) above normal . Hundreds of structures were severely impacted or destroyed . Throughout the United States , the storm caused five deaths and approximately $ 2 @.@ 3 billion in damage . Thus , Frederic was the costliest tropical cyclone in the United States , until being surpassed by Hurricane Hugo in 1989 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Elena = = = 
 On August 27 , a weak tropical wave crossed Florida and entered the Gulf of Mexico . Upon reaching the central Gulf of Mexico , ships , buoys , and satellite observations indicated that a tropical depression developed early on August 30 , while located about halfway between the southeastern tip of Louisiana and the north coast of the Yucatán Peninsula . A reconnaissance aircraft flight confirmed the existence of a tropical depression . Late on August 30 , the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Elena . Early the next day , Elena peaked with winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 1 @,@ 004 mbar ( 29 @.@ 6 inHg ) . 
 Around 12 : 00 UTC on September 1 , the storm made landfall near Matagorda , Texas with winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) . Elena rapidly weakened to a tropical depression about six hours later , before dissipating early on September 2 . Due to the weak nature of the storm , impact was generally minor . In Texas , precipitation peaked at 10 @.@ 28 in ( 261 mm ) at Palacios Municipal Airport . Flooding occurred , with the worst impact in Harris County . Hundreds of cars were stalled or submerged in downtown Houston and 45 buses suffered water damage . <unk> and the police station were also inundated . Elsewhere in the county , some homes and businesses were flooded . Elena caused five deaths and less than $ 10 million in damage . 
 = = = Hurricane Gloria = = = 
 A tropical wave existed the west coast of Africa and developed into a tropical depression by September 4 . Under the influence of a trough in the westerlies , the depression northeastward and bypassed Cape Verde on September 5 . At 12 : 00 UTC on the following day , the depression was upgraded to Tropical Storm Gloria , while moving west @-@ northwestward at about 17 mph ( 27 km / h ) . After curving abruptly north @-@ northwestward , Gloria became a hurricane early on September 7 . A higher latitude frontal system and a high pressure area caused Gloria to decelerate and resulted in a westward motion beginning on September 9 . 
 Gloria briefly weakened to a tropical storm late on September 10 , but re @-@ strengthened into a hurricane on the following day . Eventually , the hurricane turned northeastward and began to accelerate . At 1800 UTC on September 12 , Gloria attained its peak intensity with winds of 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 975 mbar ( 28 @.@ 8 inHg ) . The storm then began weakening and fell to Category 1 hurricane intensity on September 13 . During that time , Gloria slowly began merging with a low pressure area that was located north of the Azores and lost tropical characteristics by September 15 . Gloria was centered well north of Flores Island in the Azores , at the time . 
 = = = Hurricane Henri = = = 
 A tropical wave developed into a tropical depression near the Yucatan Peninsula on September 15 . It quickly entered the Gulf of Mexico and turned westward . As the depression was curving southwestward on September 16 , it strengthened and was upgraded to Tropical Storm Henri . Thereafter , Henri decelerated and continued to intensify , becoming a hurricane on September 17 . Later that day , as it was turning northwestward , the hurricane peaked with winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 983 mbar ( 29 @.@ 0 inHg ) . A nearby low pressure area caused Henri to move erratically . Henri began weakening due to land interaction with Mexico and it was downgraded back to a tropical storm on September 18 . 
 By September 19 , Henri doubled @-@ back southeastward while weakening to a tropical depression . The depression lost much of its convection and curved northeastward on September 20 , ahead of a cold front . Henri turned east @-@ northeastward on September 23 and was absorbed by a frontal low pressure trough in the east @-@ central Gulf of Mexico on the following day . This was a rare example of a storm entering the Gulf of Mexico and dissipating without making landfall . Henri disrupted cleanup efforts from the Ixtoc I oil spill by damaging a cap designed to stop oil from flowing into the Gulf of Mexico . Although it remained offshore , the storm brought heavy rainfall to Mexico , peaking at 19 @.@ 59 inches ( 498 mm ) , forcing at least 2 @,@ 000 people from their homes in Ciudad del Carmen , Campeche . 
 = = = Mid @-@ September Tropical Depression = = = 
 This system formed as a non @-@ tropical low within a pre @-@ existing area of heavy thunderstorms along a stationary front on September 19 off the coast of Brownsville , Texas . The low appeared to the northwest of Tropical Storm Henri in the Gulf of Mexico and to the east of a cold @-@ core low over Arizona and New Mexico . The low became a non @-@ tropical gale center on September 20 , while moving into southeast Texas . The cyclone continued northeastward and dissipating over Tennessee . Sources differ on the status of this storm , with the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) initially considering it a tropical depression , while the National Climatic Data Center considered the system non @-@ tropical and it is not included in the Atlantic hurricane best track . 
 The depression brought heavy rainfall to Texas , with 10 to 15 in ( 250 to 380 mm ) of precipitation between Corpus Christi and southwestern Louisiana . Severe flooding occurred , especially in Brazoria , Galveston , Harris , Nueces , and San Patricio counties . In Harris County alone , nearly 1 @,@ 950 homes and hundreds of cars were flooded . Two deaths were reported in Texas , both from drowning . Portions of western Louisiana experienced 10 to 17 in ( 250 to 430 mm ) , resulting in severe flooding , with the worst impacted parishes being Allen , Calcasieu , and Rapides . Collectively , 1 @,@ 400 homes , businesses , and schools were flooded in the three parishes , while 40 @,@ 000 to 50 @,@ 000 acres ( 16 @,@ 000 to 20 @,@ 000 ha ) of crops were inundated . In Mississippi , locally strong winds caused minor damage . Flooding to a lesser extend was also reported in Kentucky , North Carolina , and Virginia . Two additional deaths occurred in Kentucky . 
 = = = Subtropical Storm One = = = 
 A frontal wave formed about 200 mi ( 320 km ) south @-@ southwest of Bermuda in response to a short wave in the westerlies on October 23 . After satellite imagery indicated that convection associated with the system was becoming increasingly concentrated , a subtropical depression developed 12 : 00 UTC . The subtropical depression moved rapidly north @-@ northeastward and strengthened into a subtropical storm early on October 24 , based on satellite imagery classification . Accelerating to a forward speed of 29 mph ( 47 km / h ) , the storm intensified further and peaked with maximum sustained winds of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) – equivalent to a minimal Category 1 hurricane – at 18 : 00 UTC on October 24 . 
 Early on October 25 , the system attained its minimum barometric pressure of 980 mbar ( 29 inHg ) . The storm already began weakening and losing tropical characteristics after tracking away from the Gulf Stream . Shortly thereafter , the cyclone made landfall near Rose Blanche @-@ Harbour le Cou , Newfoundland , with winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . By the time it re @-@ emerged into the Atlantic later on October 25 , the system had transitioned into an extratropical cyclone . Rainfall spread across Atlantic Canada , peaking at 2 @.@ 91 in ( 74 mm ) on northeastern Cape Breton Island in Nova Scotia . 
 = = = Other storms = = = 
 The first tropical depression of the season developed north of Puerto Rico on June 9 . It headed northward without intensifying and dissipated near Bermuda on the following day . Tropical Depression One existed in June from June 11 to June 16 . Another tropical depression developed north of Hispaniola on July 8 . It headed northward and then curved northeastward , bypass during the process . By July 13 , the depression dissipated while located well south of Newfoundland . A day after the previous tropical depression developed , another depression formed near 10th parallel in the eastern Atlantic on July 9 . It headed due westward and dissipated on July 11 . A tropical depression formed offshore of Georgia July 10 . The system moved north of due east with slight intensification on July 11 . It turned east , passing south of Bermuda early on the morning of July 13 while accelerating eastward , with the depression dissipating that afternoon . A tropical depression formed offshore western Africa on July 20 . The system moved westward through Cape Verde as a weak system on July 22 . The system turned west @-@ northwest and by late on July 25 , the depression began to weaken as it turned more to the north , and the system dissipated well to the east @-@ southeast of Bermuda on July 26 . Tropical Depression Six developed east of the Lesser Antilles on July 28 . The depression moved to the northwest and bypassed Bermuda on August 4 . The depression made landfall on the southeastern tip of Newfoundland on August 5 after passing southeast of Nova Scotia earlier that day . Tropical Depression Six became an extratropical cyclone while southeast of Labrador on August 6 . 
 Tropical Depression Eight formed in the Bay of Campeche on August 25 . Moving generally northwest , the depression moved into Mexico just south of the international border with the United States late on August 27 . Early on the following day , it dissipated inland . In Brownsville , Texas , rainfall accumulations totaled to 2 @.@ 83 inches ( 72 mm ) on August 27 , which was a record amount of precipitation for that date . The last tropical depression in August developed offshore of the The Carolinas on August 29 . The system quickly moved east @-@ northeast between the East coast North America and Bermuda over the next couple days . The depression became a frontal wave southeast of Newfoundland on September 1 , and dissipated soon afterward . Early in September , a tropical depression formed northeast of Cape Verde on September 1 . The depression moved west @-@ northwest before recurving sharply while located near the 40th meridian west on September 4 . Steadily weakening thereafter over cool waters , the depression dissipated southeast of the Azores on September 6 . A tropical depression formed near Cape Verde on September 16 and initially <unk> northwestward . Once it passed the 50th meridian west , the system turned northward and passed between Bermuda and the Azores . Turning northeast on September 20 , the system became an extratropical cyclone , passing northwest of the Azores before dissipating on September 21 . A tropical depression formed in the tropical north Atlantic east of the Lesser Antilles on September 21 . The system moved northwest over the next few days , staying well east of the Leeward Islands , before dissipating on September 24 . 
 Tropical Depression Fourteen formed on October 12 near Honduras and slowly moved to the northeast towards Cuba . The depression remained south of Cuba and turned back towards the Yucatan Peninsula . The depression made landfall in the Yucatan Peninsula on October 20 and dissipated shortly thereafter . Impact from the depression in this region is unknown . Toward the end of October , a tropical depression formed in the eastern tropical Atlantic on October 22 . It moved northwest over the next six days , dissipating on October 28 to the southwest of the Azores . The last tropical depression in October developed near Panama on October 24 . The depression initially moved northward toward Cuba , but eventually veered southwestward . By October 29 , the depression made landfall in Nicaragua and dissipated several hours later . Impact from this system in Central America is unknown . A subtropical depression formed from an old weather front , or baroclinic zone , on November 6 near Puerto Rico . The depression moved northeastward but appeared to have made contact with the westerlies , as it turned off to the east @-@ northeast . Ships that passed through the system recorded winds of 35 @-@ 40 mph ( 55 – 65 km / h ) . Early on November 10 , the system degenerated to a low pressure area , which soon dissipated . The final tropical depression of the season formed northeast of the Greater Antilles along a frontal zone on November 13 . The depression completed a quick recurvature over the next couple days without significant changes in intensity . By November 15 , the depression dissipated as a tropical cyclone . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 Since 1953 , the NHC and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ( NOAA ) used a naming list that contained only female names . Throughout the years , feminist groups criticized this practice , especially in the aftermath of hurricanes Eloise in 1975 and Belle in 1976 . However , in May 1978 , NOAA administrator Richard A. Frank announced by a list with male and female names would be used in the eastern Pacific Ocean that year and in the Atlantic by 1979 , after submitting a proposal to the World Meteorological Organization . Initially , male names were scheduled to be introduced in the 1981 season . Storms were named Ana , Bob , Claudette , David , Frederic and Henri for the first time in 1979 . The name Elena was previously used in the 1965 season , and the name Gloria was used in 1976 . The names not retired from this list were used again in the 1985 season . The World Meteorological Organization retired two names in the spring of 1980 : David and Frederic . They were replaced in the 1985 season by Danny and Fabian . Names that were not assigned are marked in gray . 
 = = Season effects = = 
 The following table lists all of the storms that have formed in the 1979 Atlantic hurricane season . It includes their duration , names , landfall ( s ) ( in parentheses ) , damages , and death totals . Damage and deaths include totals while the storm was extratropical , a wave , or a low , and all of the damage figures are in 1979 USD . 
 = Carl Nielsen = 
 Carl August Nielsen ( Danish : [ <unk> <unk> ̩ ] ; 9 June 1865 – 3 October 1931 ) was a Danish musician , conductor and violinist , widely recognized as his country 's most prominent composer . 
 Brought up by poor but musically talented parents on the island of Funen , he demonstrated his musical abilities at an early age . He initially played in a military band before attending the Royal Danish Academy of Music in Copenhagen from 1884 until December 1886 . He premiered his Op. 1 , Suite for Strings , in 1888 , at the age of 23 . The following year , Nielsen began a 16 @-@ year stint as a second violinist in the prestigious Royal Danish Orchestra under the conductor Johan Svendsen , during which he played in Giuseppe Verdi 's Falstaff and Otello at their Danish premieres . In 1916 , he took a post teaching at the Royal Academy and continued to work there until his death . 
 Although his symphonies , concertos and choral music are now internationally acclaimed , Nielsen 's career and personal life were marked by many difficulties , often reflected in his music . The works he composed between 1897 and 1904 are sometimes ascribed to his " psychological " period , resulting mainly from a turbulent marriage with the sculptor Anne Marie <unk> . Nielsen is especially noted for his six symphonies , his Wind Quintet and his concertos for violin , flute and clarinet . In Denmark , his opera Maskarade and many of his songs have become an integral part of the national heritage . His early music was inspired by composers such as Brahms and Grieg , but he soon developed his own style , first experimenting with progressive tonality and later diverging even more radically from the standards of composition still common at the time . Nielsen 's sixth and final symphony , Sinfonia semplice , was written in 1924 – 25 . He died from a heart attack six years later , and is buried in Vestre Cemetery , Copenhagen . 
 Nielsen maintained the reputation of an outsider during his lifetime , both in his own country and internationally . It was only later that his works firmly entered the international repertoire , accelerating in popularity from the 1960s through Leonard Bernstein and others . In Denmark , Nielsen 's reputation was sealed in 2006 when three of his compositions were listed by the Ministry of Culture amongst the twelve greatest pieces of Danish music . For many years , he appeared on the Danish hundred @-@ kroner banknote . The Carl Nielsen Museum in Odense documents his life and that of his wife . Between 1994 and 2009 the Royal Danish Library , sponsored by the Danish government , completed the Carl Nielsen Edition , freely available online , containing background information and sheet music for all Nielsen 's works , many of which had not been previously published . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Nielsen was born the seventh of twelve children to a poor peasant family in 1865 at Nørre <unk> near <unk> , south of Odense on the island of Funen . His father , Niels Jørgensen , was a house painter and traditional musician who , with his abilities as a fiddler and cornet player , was in strong demand for local celebrations . Nielsen described his childhood in his autobiography Min Fynske <unk> ( My Childhood on Funen ) . His mother , whom he recalls singing folk songs during his childhood , came from a well @-@ to @-@ do family of sea captains while one of his half @-@ uncles , Hans Andersen ( 1837 – 1881 ) , was a talented musician . 
 Nielsen gave an account of his introduction to music : " I had heard music before , heard father play the violin and cornet , heard mother singing , and , when in bed with the measles , I had tried myself out on the little violin " . He had received the instrument from his mother when he was six . He learned the violin and piano as a child and wrote his earliest compositions at the age of eight or nine : a lullaby , now lost , and a polka which the composer mentioned in his autobiography . As his parents did not believe he had any future as a musician , they apprenticed him to a shopkeeper from a nearby village when he was fourteen ; the shopkeeper went bankrupt by midsummer and Nielsen had to return home . After learning to play brass instruments , on 1 November 1879 he became a bugler and alto trombonist in the band of the army 's 16th Battalion at nearby Odense . 
 Nielsen did not give up the violin during his time with the battalion , continuing to play it when he went home to perform at dances with his father . The army paid him three kroner and 45 <unk> and a loaf of bread every five days for two and a half years , after which his salary was raised slightly , enabling him to buy the civilian clothes he needed to perform at barn dances . 
 = = = Studies and early career = = = 
 In 1881 , Nielsen began to take his violin playing more seriously , studying privately under Carl Larsen , the sexton at Odense Cathedral . It is not known how much Nielsen composed during this period , but from his autobiography , it can be deduced that he wrote some trios and quartets for brass instruments , and that he had difficulty in coming to terms with the fact that brass instruments were tuned in different keys . Following an introduction to Niels W. Gade , the director of the Royal Academy in Copenhagen , by whom he was well received , Nielsen obtained his release from the military band at short notice , and studied at the Academy from the beginning of 1884 . 
 Though not an outstanding student and composing little , Nielsen progressed well in violin under Valdemar <unk> ( 1832 – 1907 ) , and received a solid grounding in music theory from Orla <unk> ( 1844 – 1905 ) , who would remain a valued adviser during his early years as a professional composer . He also studied composition under Gade , whom he liked as a friend but not for his music . Contacts with fellow students and cultured families in Copenhagen , some of whom would become lifelong friends , became equally important . The patchy education resulting from his country background left Nielsen <unk> curious about the arts , philosophy and aesthetics . But , in the opinion of the musicologist David Fanning , it also left him " with a highly personal , common man 's point of view on those subjects " . He left the Academy at the end of 1886 , after graduating with good but not outstanding marks in all subjects . He then went to stay with the retired Odense merchant Jens Georg Nielsen ( 1820 – 1901 ) and his wife at their apartment on <unk> as he was not yet in a position to pay his own way . While there , he fell in love with their 14 @-@ year @-@ old daughter Emilie <unk> . The affair was to last for the next three years . 
 On 17 September 1887 , Nielsen played the violin in the Tivoli Concert Hall when his Andante tranquillo e Scherzo for strings was premiered . Shortly afterwards , on 25 January 1888 , his String Quartet in F major was played at one of the private performances of the <unk> <unk> ( Private Chamber Music Society ) . While Nielsen considered the Quartet in F to be his official debut as a professional composer , a far greater impression was made by his Suite for Strings . Performed at Tivoli Gardens , Copenhagen on 8 September 1888 , it was designated by Nielsen as his Op. 1 . 
 By September 1889 Nielsen had progressed well enough on the violin to gain a position with the second violins in the prestigious Royal Danish Orchestra which played at Copenhagen 's Royal Theatre , then conducted by Johan Svendsen . In this position he experienced Giuseppe Verdi 's Falstaff and Otello at their Danish premieres . Although this employment sometimes caused Nielsen considerable frustration , he continued to play there until 1905 . After Svendsen 's retirement in 1906 , Nielsen increasingly served as conductor ( being officially appointed assistant conductor in 1910 ) . Between graduation and attaining this position , he made a modest income from private violin lessons while enjoying the continuing support of his patrons , not only Jens Georg Nielsen but also Albert Sachs ( born 1846 ) and Hans <unk> ( 1827 – 1897 ) who both ran factories in Odense . After less than a year at the Royal Theatre , Nielsen won a scholarship of 1 @,@ 800 kroner , giving him the means to spend several months travelling in Europe . 
 = = = Marriage and children = = = 
 While travelling , Nielsen discovered and then turned against Richard Wagner 's music dramas , heard many of Europe 's leading orchestras and soloists and sharpened his opinions on both music and the visual arts . Although he revered the music of Bach and Mozart , he remained ambivalent about much 19th @-@ century music . In 1891 he met the composer and pianist Ferruccio Busoni in Leipzig ; they were to maintain a correspondence for over thirty years . Shortly after arriving in Paris in early March 1891 Nielsen met the Danish sculptor Anne Marie <unk> , who was also travelling on a scholarship . They toured Italy together and married in St Mark 's English Church , Florence , on 10 May 1891 before returning to Denmark . According to Fanning , their relationship was not only a " love match " , but also a " meeting of minds " ; Anne Marie was a gifted artist and a " strong @-@ willed and modern @-@ minded woman , determined to forge her own career " . This determination would strain the Nielsens ' marriage , as Anne Marie would spend months away from home during the 1890s and 1900s , leaving Carl , who was susceptible to opportunities with other ladies , to raise their three young children in addition to composing and fulfilling his duties at the Royal Theatre . 
 Nielsen sublimated his anger and frustration over his marriage in a number of musical works , most notably between 1897 and 1904 , a period which he sometimes called his " psychological " period . Fanning writes , " At this time his interest in the driving forces behind human personality crystallized in the opera Saul and David and the Second Symphony ( The Four <unk> ) and the cantatas Hymnus amoris and <unk> " . Carl suggested divorce in March 1905 and had considered moving to Germany for a fresh start , but despite several extended periods of separation the Nielsens remained married for the remainder of the composer 's life . 
 Nielsen had five children , two of them illegitimate . He had already fathered a son , Carl August Nielsen , in January 1888 , before he met Anne Marie . In 1912 , an illegitimate daughter was born – Rachel Siegmann , about whom Anne Marie never learned . With his wife Nielsen had two daughters and a son . Irmelin , the elder daughter , studied music theory with her father and in December 1919 married Eggert Møller ( 1893 – 1978 ) , a medical doctor who became a professor at the University of Copenhagen and director of the polyclinic at the National Hospital . The younger daughter Anne Marie , who graduated from the Copenhagen Academy of Arts , married the Hungarian violinist Emil Telmányi ( 1892 – 1988 ) in 1918 ; he contributed to the promotion of Nielsen 's music , both as a violinist and a conductor . Nielsen 's son , Hans <unk> , was handicapped as a result of meningitis and spent most of his life away from the family . He died near Kolding in 1956 . 
 = = = Mature composer = = = 
 At first , Nielsen 's works did not gain sufficient recognition for him to be able to support himself . During the concert which saw the premiere of his First Symphony on 14 March 1894 conducted by Svendsen , Nielsen played in the second violin section . The symphony was a great success when played in Berlin in 1896 , contributing significantly to his reputation . He was increasingly in demand to write incidental music for the theatre as well as cantatas for special occasions , both of which provided a welcome source of additional income . Fanning comments on the relationship which developed between his programmatic and symphonic works : " Sometimes he would find <unk> ideas in his supposedly pure orchestral music ; sometimes a text or scenario forced him to invent vivid musical imagery which he could later turn to more abstract use . " 
 Nielsen 's cantata Hymnus amoris for soloists , chorus and orchestra was first performed at Copenhagen 's <unk> ( The Music Society ) on 27 April 1897 . It was inspired by Titian 's painting Miracle of the Jealous Husband which Nielsen had seen on his honeymoon in Italy in 1891 . On one of the copies , he wrote : " To my own Marie ! These tones in praise of love are nothing compared to the real thing . " 
 Beginning in 1901 , Nielsen received a modest state pension – initially 800 kroner per annum , growing to 7 @,@ 500 kroner by 1927 – to augment his violinist 's salary . This allowed him to stop taking private pupils and left him more time to compose . From 1903 , he also had an annual retainer from his principal publisher , Wilhelm Hansen Edition . Between 1905 and 1914 he served as second conductor at the Royal Theatre . For his son @-@ in @-@ law , Emil Telmányi , Nielsen wrote his Violin Concerto , Op. 33 ( 1911 ) . From 1914 to 1926 , he conducted the <unk> orchestra . In 1916 , he took a post teaching at the Royal Danish Academy of Music in Copenhagen , and continued to work there until his death . 
 The strain of dual careers and constant separation from his wife led to an extended breach in his marriage . The couple began separation proceedings in 1916 , and separation by mutual consent was granted in 1919 . In the period 1916 – 22 , Nielsen often lived on Funen retreating to the Damgaard and Fuglsang estates , or worked as a conductor in Gothenburg . The period was one of creative crisis for Nielsen which , coinciding with World War I , would strongly influence his Fourth ( 1914 – 16 ) and Fifth symphonies ( 1921 – 22 ) , arguably his greatest works according to Fanning . The composer was particularly upset in the 1920s when his long @-@ standing Danish publisher Wilhelm Hansen was unable to undertake publication of many of his major works , including Aladdin and Pan and Syrinx . 
 The sixth and final symphony , Sinfonia semplice , was written in 1924 – 25 . After suffering a serious heart attack in 1925 , Nielsen was forced to curtail much of his activity , although he continued to compose until his death . His sixtieth birthday in 1925 brought many congratulations , a decoration from the Swedish government , and a gala concert and reception in Copenhagen . The composer , however , was in a dour mood ; in an article in Politiken on 9 November 1925 he wrote : 
 If I could live my life again , I would chase any thoughts of Art out of my head and be apprenticed to a merchant or pursue some other useful trade the results of which could be visible in the end ... What use is it to me that the whole world acknowledges me , but hurries away and leaves me alone with my wares until everything breaks down and I discover to my disgrace that I have lived as a foolish dreamer and believed that the more I worked and exerted myself in my art , the better position I would achieve . No , it is no enviable fate to be an artist . 
 = = = Final years and death = = = 
 Nielsen 's final large @-@ scale orchestral works were his Flute Concerto ( 1926 ) and the Clarinet Concerto ( 1928 ) , of which Robert Layton writes : " If ever there was music from another planet , this is surely it . Its sonorities are sparse and monochrome , its air rarefied and bracing . " Nielsen 's last musical composition , the organ work <unk> , was premiered posthumously in 1931 . 
 During his final years , Nielsen produced a short book of essays entitled Living Music ( 1925 ) , followed in 1927 by his memoir Min Fynske <unk> . In 1926 he wrote in his diary " My home soil pulls me more and more like a long sucking kiss . Does it mean that I shall finally return and rest in the earth of Funen ? Then it must be in the place where I was born : <unk> , <unk> parish " . 
 This was not to be . Nielsen was admitted to Copenhagen 's National Hospital ( <unk> ) on 1 October 1931 following a series of heart attacks . He died there at ten minutes past midnight on 3 October , surrounded by his family . His last words to them were " You are standing here as if you were waiting for something " . 
 He was buried in Copenhagen 's Vestre Cemetery ; all the music at his funeral , including the hymns , was the work of the composer . After his death , his wife was commissioned to sculpt a monument to him , to be erected in central Copenhagen . She wrote : " I wanted to take the winged horse , eternal symbol of poetry , and place a musician on its back . He was to sit there between the rushing wings blowing a reed pipe out over Copenhagen . " Dispute about her design and a shortfall in funding meant that erection of the monument was delayed and that Anne Marie herself ended up subsidising it . It was finally unveiled in 1939 . 
 = = Music = = 
 Nielsen 's works are sometimes referred to by CNW numbers , based on the Catalogue of Carl Nielsen 's Works ( CNW ) published online by the Danish Royal Library in 2015 . The CNW catalogue is intended to replace the 1965 catalogue compiled by Dan Fog and <unk> <unk> ( FS numbers ) . 
 = = = Musical style = = = 
 In his Lives of the Great Composers , the music critic Harold Schonberg emphasizes the breadth of Nielsen 's compositions , his energetic rhythms , generous orchestration and his individuality . In comparing him with Jean Sibelius , he considers he had " just as much sweep , even more power , and a more universal message " . The Oxford University music professor Daniel Grimley qualifies Nielsen as " one of the most playful , life @-@ affirming , and awkward voices in twentieth @-@ century music " thanks to the " melodic richness and harmonic vitality " of his work . Anne @-@ Marie Reynolds , author of Carl Nielsen 's Voice : His Songs in Context , cites Robert Simpson 's view that " all of his music is vocal in origin " , maintaining that song @-@ writing strongly influenced Nielsen 's development as a composer . 
 The Danish sociologist Benedikte <unk> observes that the perception of Nielsen and his music in his home country is rather different from his international appreciation . His interest and background in folk music had special resonance for Danes , and this was intensified during the nationalistic movements of the 1930s and during World War II , when singing was an important basis for the Danes to distinguish themselves from their German enemies . Nielsen 's songs retain an important place in Danish culture and education . The musicologist Niels Krabbe describes the popular image of Nielsen in Denmark as being like " the ugly duckling syndrome " – a reference to the tale of the Danish writer Hans Christian Andersen – whereby " a poor boy ... passing through adversity and frugality ... marches into Copenhagen and ... comes to conquer the position as the uncrowned King " . Thus while outside Denmark Nielsen is largely thought of as the composer of orchestral music and the opera Maskarade , in his own country he is more of a national symbol . These two sides were officially brought together in Denmark in 2006 when the Ministry of Culture issued a list of the twelve greatest Danish musical works , which included three by Nielsen – Maskarade , the Fourth Symphony , and a pair of his Danish songs . Krabbe asks the rhetorical question : " Can ' the national ' in Nielsen be demonstrated in the music in the form of particular themes , harmonies , sounds , forms , etc . , or is it a pure construct of reception history ? " 
 Nielsen himself was ambiguous about his attitudes to late Romantic German music and to nationalism in music . He wrote to the Dutch composer Julius Röntgen in 1909 " I am surprised by the technical skills of the Germans nowadays , and I cannot help thinking that all this delight in complication must exhaust itself . I foresee a completely new art of pure archaic virtue . What do you think about songs sung in unison ? We must go back ... to the pure and the clear . " On the other hand , he wrote in 1925 " Nothing destroys music more than nationalism does ... and it is impossible to deliver national music on request . " 
 Nielsen studied Renaissance polyphony closely , which accounts for some of the melodic and harmonic content of his music . This interest is exemplified in his Tre <unk> ( Three Motets , Op. 55 ) . To non @-@ Danish critics , Nielsen 's music initially had a neo @-@ classical sound but became increasingly modern as he developed his own approach to what the writer and composer Robert Simpson called progressive tonality , moving from one key to another . Typically , Nielsen 's music might end in a different key from that of its commencement , sometimes as the outcome of a struggle as in his symphonies . There is debate as to how much such elements owe to his folk music activities . Some critics have referred to his rhythms , his use of <unk> or appoggiaturas , or his frequent use of a flattened seventh and minor third in his works , as being typically Danish . The composer himself wrote " The intervals , as I see it , are the elements which first arouse a deeper interest in music ... [ I ] t is intervals which surprise and delight us anew every time we hear the cuckoo in spring . Its appeal would be less if its call were all on one note . " 
 Nielsen 's philosophy of music style is perhaps summed up in his advice in a 1907 letter to the Norwegian composer Knut Harder : " You have ... fluency , so far , so good ; but I advise you again and again , my dear Mr. Harder ; <unk> , Clarity , Strength . 
 = = = Symphonies = = = 
 Nielsen is perhaps most closely associated outside Denmark with his six symphonies , written between 1892 and 1925 . The works have much in common : they are all just over 30 minutes long , brass instruments are a key component of the orchestration , and they all exhibit unusual changes in tonality , which heighten the dramatic tension . From its opening bars , Symphony No. 1 ( Op. 7 , 1890 – 92 ) , while reflecting the influence of Grieg and Brahms , shows Nielsen 's individuality . In the Second ( Op. 16 , 1901 – 02 ) , Nielsen embarks on the development of human character . Inspiration came from a painting in an inn depicting the four temperaments ( choleric , phlegmatic , melancholic and sanguine ) . 
 The title of the Third , Sinfonia Espansiva ( Op. 27 , 1910 – 11 ) , is understood by the English composer Robert Simpson to refer to the " outward growth of the mind 's scope " . It fully exploits Nielsen 's technique of confronting two keys at the same time and includes a peaceful section with soprano and baritone voices , singing a tune without words . Symphony No. 4 , The <unk> , ( Op. 29 , 1914 – 16 ) written during World War I is among the most frequently performed of the symphonies . In the last movement two sets of timpani are placed on opposite sides of the stage undertaking a kind of musical duel . Nielsen described the symphony as " the life force , the unquenchable will to live " . 
 Also frequently performed is the Fifth Symphony ( Op. 50 , 1921 – 22 ) presenting another battle between the forces of order and chaos . A snare drummer is given the task of interrupting the orchestra , playing ad libitum and out of time , as if to destroy the music . Performed by the Danish Radio Symphony Orchestra conducted by Erik Tuxen at the 1950 Edinburgh International Festival , it caused a sensation , sparking interest in Nielsen 's music outside Scandinavia . In the Sixth Symphony ( without opus number ) , written 1924 – 25 , and subtitled Sinfonia <unk> ( Simple Symphony ) , the tonal language seems similar to that in Nielsen 's other symphonies , but the symphony develops into a sequence of cameos , some sad , some grotesque , some humorous . 
 = = = Operas and cantatas = = = 
 Nielsen 's two operas are very different in style . The four @-@ act Saul og David ( Saul and David ) , written in 1902 to a libretto by Einar Christiansen , tells the Biblical story of Saul 's jealousy of the young David while Maskarade ( Masquerade ) is a comic opera in three acts written in 1906 to a Danish libretto by Vilhelm Andersen , based on the comedy by Ludvig Holberg . Saul and David received a negative press when it was premiered in November 1902 and did no better when it was revived in 1904 . By contrast , in November 1906 Masquerade was a resounding success with an exceptional run of 25 performances over its first four months . Generally considered to be Denmark 's national opera , in its home country it has enjoyed lasting success and popularity , attributable to its many strophic songs , its dances and its underlying " old Copenhagen " atmosphere . 
 Nielsen wrote a considerable number of choral works but most of them were composed for special occasions and were seldom reprised . Three fully @-@ fledged cantatas for soloists , orchestra and choir have , however , entered the repertoire . Nielsen composed Hymnus amoris ( Hymn of Love ) , Op. 12 ( 1897 ) after studying early polyphonic choral style . Writing in the newspaper Dannebrog , Nanna Liebmann referred to the work as " a decisive victory " for Nielsen , and Angul <unk> of <unk> welcomed its improved clarity and purity . But the Berlingske Tidende reviewer H.W. Schytte thought Nielsen had been pretentious presenting the lyrics in Latin rather than Danish . <unk> ( The Sleep ) , Op. 18 , Nielsen 's second major choral work , sets to music the various phases of sleep including the terror of a nightmare in its central movement which , with its unusual discords , came as a shock to the reviewers at its premiere in March 1905 . <unk> <unk> ( Springtime on Funen ) , Op. 42 , completed in 1922 , has been cited as the most Danish of all Nielsen 's compositions as it extols the beauty of Funen 's countryside . 
 = = = Concertos = = = 
 Nielsen wrote three concertos : the Violin Concerto , Op. 33 is a middle @-@ period work , from 1911 , which lies within the tradition of European classicism , whereas the Flute Concerto ( without opus number ) of 1926 and the Clarinet Concerto , Op. 57 which followed in 1928 are late works , influenced by the modernism of the 1920s and , according to the Danish musicologist Herbert Rosenberg , the product of " an extremely experienced composer who knows how to avoid <unk> . " Unlike Nielsen 's later works , the Violin Concerto has a distinct , melody @-@ oriented neo @-@ classical structure . The Flute Concerto , in two movements , was written for the flautist Holger Gilbert @-@ Jespersen , a member of the Copenhagen Wind Quintet which had premiered Nielsen 's Wind Quintet ( 1922 ) . In contrast to the rather traditional style of the Violin Concerto , it reflects the modernistic trends of the period . The first movement , for example , switches between D minor , E @-@ flat minor and F major before the flute comes to the fore with a cantabile theme in E major . The Clarinet Concerto was also written for a member of the Copenhagen Wind Quintet , Aage <unk> . Nielsen stretches the capacities of instrument and player to the utmost ; the concerto has just one continuous movement and contains a struggle between the soloist and the orchestra and between the two principal competing keys , F major and E major . 
 The wind concertos present many examples of what Nielsen called <unk> ( " objectification " ) . By this term he meant giving instrumentalists freedom of interpretation and performance within the bounds set out by the score . 
 = = = Orchestral music = = = 
 Nielsen 's earliest work composed specifically for orchestra was the immediately successful Suite for Strings ( 1888 ) , which evoked Scandinavian Romanticism as expressed by Grieg and Svendsen . The work marked an important milestone in Nielsen 's career as it was not only his first real success but it was also the first of his pieces he conducted himself when it was played in Odense a month later . 
 The Helios Overture , Op. 17 ( 1903 ) stems from Nielsen 's stay in Athens which inspired him to compose a work depicting the sun rising and setting over the Aegean Sea . The score is a showpiece for orchestra , and has been amongst Nielsen 's most popular works . Saga @-@ <unk> ( Saga Dream ) , Op. 39 ( 1907 – 08 ) is a tone poem for orchestra based on the Icelandic Njal 's Saga . In Nielsen 's words : 
 There are among other things four cadenzas for oboe , clarinet , bassoon and flute which run quite freely alongside one another , with no harmonic connection , and without my marking time . They are just like four streams of thought , each going its own way – differently and randomly for each performance – until they meet in a point of rest , as if flowing into a lock where they are united . 
 At the Bier of a Young Artist ( Ved en ung <unk> <unk> ) for string orchestra was written for the funeral of the Danish painter Oluf Hartmann in January 1910 and was also played at Nielsen 's own funeral . Pan and Syrinx ( Pan og Syrinx ) , a vigorous nine @-@ minute symphonic poem inspired by Ovid 's Metamorphoses , was premiered in 1911 . The <unk> Overture , An Imaginary Trip to the Faroe Islands ( En <unk> til <unk> ) , draws on Faroese folk tunes but also contains freely composed sections . 
 Among Nielsen 's orchestral works for the stage are Aladdin ( 1919 ) and <unk> ( The Mother ) , Op. 41 ( 1920 ) . Aladdin was written to accompany a production of Adam Oehlenschläger 's fairy tale at The Royal Theatre in Copenhagen . The complete score , lasting over 80 minutes , is Nielsen 's longest work apart from his operas , but a shorter orchestral suite consisting of the Oriental March , Hindu Dance and Negro Dance is often performed . <unk> , written to celebrate the reunification of Southern Jutland with Denmark , was first performed in 1921 ; it is a setting of patriotic verses written for the occasion . 
 = = = Chamber music = = = 
 Nielsen composed several chamber music works , some of them still high on the international repertoire . The Wind Quintet , one of his most popular pieces , was composed in 1922 specifically for the Copenhagen Wind Quintet . Simpson , explaining that Nielsen 's fondness of wind instruments was closely related to his love of nature , writes : " He was also intensely interested in human character , and in the Wind Quintet composed deliberately for five friends ; each part is cunningly made to suit the individuality of each player . " 
 Nielsen wrote four string quartets . The First String Quartet No. 1 in G minor , Op. 13 ( 1889 , revised 1900 ) contains a " <unk> " section in the finale , bringing together themes from the first , third and fourth movements . The Second String Quartet No. 2 in F minor , Op. 5 appeared in 1890 and the Third String Quartet in E @-@ flat major , Op. 14 in 1898 . The music historian Jan <unk> suggests that in this work " the handling of texture is confident and far less derivative than in earlier works ... [ the quartet ] prompts the most regret that Nielsen did not pursue the genre further ... to parallel his later symphonic development " . The Fourth String Quartet in F major ( 1904 ) initially received a mixed reception , with critics uncertain about its reserved style . Nielsen revised it several times , the final version in 1919 being listed as his Op. 44 . 
 The violin was Nielsen 's own instrument and he composed four large @-@ scale chamber works for it . The departures from standard procedures in the First Sonata , Op. 9 ( 1895 ) , including its often sudden modulations and its terse thematic material , disconcerted Danish critics at its first performance . The Second Sonata , Op. 35 of 1912 was written for the violinist Peder Møller who earlier that year had premiered the composer 's Violin Concerto . The work is an example of the composer 's progressive tonality since , although it is stated to be in the key of G minor , the first and final movements end in different keys . The critic Emilius Bangert wrote of the premiere ( which was given by Axel Gade ) , " The overall impression was of a beautiful , unbroken line – a flow of notes – where in particular a wonderful second subject in the first part and the pure , high sphere of the last part were captivating " . Two other works are for violin solo . The Prelude , Theme and Variations , Op. 48 ( 1923 ) was written for Telmányi , and , like Nielsen 's Chaconne for piano , Op. 32 , was inspired by the music of Johann Sebastian Bach . The Preludio e Presto , Op. 52 ( 1928 ) was written as a tribute for the sixtieth birthday of the composer Fini Henriques . 
 = = = Keyboard works = = = 
 Although Nielsen came to compose mainly at the piano , he only composed directly for it occasionally over a period of 40 years , creating works often with a distinctive style which slowed their international acceptance . Nielsen 's own piano technique , an echo of which is probably preserved in three wax cylinders marked " Carl Nielsen " at the State Archives in Aarhus , seems to have been mediocre . Reviewing the 1969 recording of works by the pianist John Ogdon , John Horton commented on the early pieces : " Nielsen 's technical resources hardly measure up to the grandeur of his designs " , whilst characterising the later pieces as " major works which can stand comparison with his symphonic music " . The anti @-@ romantic tone of the Symphonic Suite , Op. 8 ( 1894 ) was described by a later critic as " nothing less than a clenched fist straight in the face of all established musical convention " . In Nielsen 's words , the Chaconne , Op. 32 ( 1917 ) was " a really big piece , and I think effective " . It is not only inspired by the work of Bach , especially the chaconne for solo violin , but also by the virtuoso piano arrangements of Bach 's music by composers such as Robert Schumann , Johannes Brahms and Ferruccio Busoni . Also on a large scale , and from the same year , is the Theme and Variations , Op. 41 , in which critics have discerned the influences of Brahms and also of Max Reger , of whom Nielsen had earlier written to a friend " I think that the public will be utterly unable to grasp Reger 's work and yet I am a lot more sympathetic towards his efforts than towards ... Richard Strauss " . 
 All Nielsen 's organ works were late compositions . The Danish organist Finn <unk> suggests that his interest was prompted by the <unk> ( Organ reform movement ) , and the renewal of the front pipes of the Schnitger organ in the St. Jacobi Church , Hamburg , from 1928 to 1930 . Nielsen 's last major work – <unk> , Op. 58 , a 22 @-@ minute piece for organ – was composed between June 1930 and February 1931 , only a few months before his death . 
 = = = Songs and hymns = = = 
 Over the years , Nielsen wrote the music for over 290 songs and hymns , most of them for verses and poems by well @-@ known Danish authors such as N. F. S. Grundtvig , Ingemann , Poul Martin Møller , Adam Oehlenschläger and Jeppe <unk> . In Denmark , many of them are still popular today both with adults and children . They are regarded as " the most representative part of the country 's most representative composer 's output " . In 1906 , Nielsen had explained the significance of such songs to his countrymen : 
 With certain melodic inflections we Danes unavoidably think of the poems of , for example , Ingemann , Christian Winther or Drachmann , and we often seem to perceive the smell of Danish landscapes and rural images in our songs and music . But it is also clear that a foreigner , who knows neither our countryside , nor our painters , our poets , or our history in the same intimate way as we do ourselves , will be completely unable to grasp what it is that brings us to hear and tremble with sympathetic understanding . 
 Of great significance was Nielsen 's contribution to the 1922 publication , <unk> <unk> ( The Folk High School Songbook ) , of which he was one of the editors together with Thomas Laub , Oluf Ring and Thorvald Aagaard . The book contained about 600 melodies , of which about 200 were composed by the editors , and was intended to provide a repertoire for communal singing , an integral part of Danish folk culture . The collection was extremely popular and became embedded in the Danish educational system . During the German occupation of Denmark in World War II , mass song gatherings , using these melodies , were part of Denmark 's " spiritual re @-@ armament " , and after the war in 1945 Nielsen 's contributions were characterised by one writer as " shining jewels in our treasure @-@ chest of patriotic songs " . This remains a significant factor in Danish assessment of the composer . 
 = = = Editions = = = 
 Between 1994 and 2009 a complete new edition of Nielsen 's works , the Carl Nielsen Edition , was commissioned by the Danish Government ( at a cost of over 40 million kroner ) . For many of the works , including the operas Maskarade and Saul and David , and the complete Aladdin music , this was their first printed publication , copies of manuscripts having previously been used in performances . The scores are now all available for download free of charge at the website of the Danish Royal Library ( which also owns most of Nielsen 's music manuscripts ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Unlike that of his contemporary , the Finn Jean Sibelius , Nielsen 's reputation abroad did not start to evolve until after World War II . For some time , international interest was largely directed towards his symphonies while his other works , many of them highly popular in Denmark , have only recently started to become part of the world repertoire . Even in Denmark , many of his compositions failed to impress . It was only in 1897 after the first performance of Hymnus amoris that he received support from the critics , to be substantially reinforced in 1906 by their enthusiastic reception of Masquerade . 
 Within two months of its successful premiere at the Odd Fellows Concert Hall in Copenhagen on 28 February 1912 , the Third Symphony ( Espansiva ) was in the repertoire of the Amsterdam Concertgebouw , and by 1913 it had seen performances in Stuttgart , Stockholm and Helsinki . The symphony was the most popular of all Nielsen 's works during his lifetime and was also played in Berlin , Hamburg , London and Gothenburg . Other works caused some uncertainty , even in Denmark . After the premiere of the Fifth Symphony ( 1922 ) one critic wrote : " The treasure of Danish symphonies and Carl Nielsen 's own output have been enriched by a strange and highly original work . " Another , however , described it as a " bloody , clenched fist in the face of an unsuspecting snob audience " , also qualifying it as " filthy music from trenches " . 
 At the end of the 1940s two major biographies of Nielsen appeared in Danish , dominating opinion of the composer 's life and work for several decades . Robert Simpson 's book Carl Nielsen , Symphonist ( first edition 1952 ) was the earliest large @-@ scale study in English . 
 An international breakthrough came in 1962 when Leonard Bernstein recorded the Fifth Symphony with the New York Philharmonic Orchestra for CBS . The recording helped Nielsen 's music to achieve appreciation beyond his home country and is considered one of the finest recorded accounts of the symphony . Nielsen 's centenary in 1965 was widely celebrated , both in terms of performances and publications , and Bernstein was awarded the Sonning Prize for his recording of the Third Symphony . In 1988 Nielsen 's diaries and his letters to Anne Marie were published , and these , together with a 1991 biography by Jørgen Jensen using this new material , led to a revised objective assessment of the composer 's personality . Writing in The New York Times on the occasion of Nielsen 's 125th anniversary in 1990 , the music critic Andrew Pincus recalled that 25 years earlier Bernstein had believed the world was ready to accept the Dane as the equal of Jean Sibelius , speaking of " his rough charm , his swing , his drive , his rhythmic surprises , his strange power of harmonic and tonal relationships – and especially his constant unpredictability " ( which Pincus believed was still a challenge for audiences ) . Biographies and studies in English in the 1990s helped to establish Nielsen 's status world @-@ wide , to the point at which his music has become a regular feature of concert programming in Western countries . 
 Writing in The New Yorker in 2008 , the American music critic Alex Ross compares the " brute strength " of Nielsen 's symphonies to Beethoven 's Eroica and Fifth Symphony but explains that only now were the Americans slowly beginning to appreciate the Danish composer . In particular , he compliments Alan Gilbert on his understanding and interpretations of the Nielsen symphonies . 
 Nielsen did not record any of his works . However , three younger contemporary conductors who had worked with him , Thomas Jensen , <unk> <unk> , and Erik Tuxen , did record his symphonies and other orchestral works with the Danish Radio Symphony Orchestra between 1946 and 1952 . Jensen also made the first LP recording of the Fifth Symphony in 1954 . Work carried out by the recently published complete Carl Nielsen Edition has revealed that the scores used in these recordings often differ from the composer 's original intentions and thus the supposed authenticity of these recordings is now debatable . 
 There are now numerous recordings of all Nielsen 's major works , including complete cycles of the symphonies conducted by , amongst others , Sir Colin Davis , Herbert Blomstedt and Sakari <unk> . Over 50 recordings have been made of Nielsen 's Wind Quintet . In January 2015 , the New York Philharmonic conducted by Alan Gilbert completed recordings of Nielsen 's six symphonies and three concertos . Anthony Tommasini of The New York Times qualified the CD of Symphonies Nos. 2 and 3 as " terrific " in the newspaper 's list of the best classical music recordings of 2012 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 From 1916 , Nielsen taught at the Royal Academy where he became director in 1931 , shortly before his death . He also had private students in his earlier days in order to supplement his income . As a result of his teaching , Nielsen has exerted considerable influence on classical music in Denmark . Among his most successful pupils were the composers Thorvald Aagaard , remembered in particular for his songs , Harald <unk> , both a conductor and orchestral composer , and Jørgen <unk> who composed choral and chamber music mainly for his folk music school ( <unk> <unk> ) . Among his other students were the musicologist Knud Jeppesen , the pianist Herman Koppel , the academy professor and symphony composer Poul <unk> , the organist Emilius Bangert who played at Roskilde Cathedral , and Nancy Dalberg , one of Nielsen 's private students who helped with the orchestration of Aladdin . Nielsen also instructed the conductor and choirmaster Mogens <unk> , remembered for his interpretations of Baroque music , and Rudolph Simonsen , the pianist and composer who became director of the Academy after Nielsen 's death . 
 The Carl Nielsen Society maintains a listing of performances of Nielsen 's works , classified by region ( Denmark , Scandinavia , Europe apart from Scandinavia and outside Europe ) which demonstrates that his music is regularly performed throughout the world . The concerti and symphonies feature frequently in these listings . The Carl Nielsen International Competition commenced in the 1970s under the auspices of the Odense Symphony Orchestra . A four @-@ yearly violin competition has been held there since 1980 . Flute and clarinet competitions were later added , but these have now been discontinued . An international Organ Competition , originally founded by the city of Odense , became associated with the Nielsen competition in 2009 , but from 2015 will be organized separately , based in Odense Cathedral . 
 In his home country , the Carl Nielsen Museum , in Odense , is dedicated to Nielsen and his wife , Anne Marie . The composer is featured on the 100 kroner note issued by the Danish National Bank from 1997 to 2010 . His image was selected in recognition of his contribution to Danish music compositions such as his opera Maskarade , his Espansiva symphony and his many songs including " Danmark , nu blunder den lyse nat " . 
 Several special events were scheduled on or around 9 June 2015 to commemorate the 150th anniversary of Nielsen 's birth . In addition to many performances in Denmark , concerts were programmed in cities across Europe , including London , Leipzig , Kraków , Gothenburg , Helsinki and Vienna , and even further afield in Japan , Egypt and New York . For 9 June , Nielsen 's birthday , the Danish National Symphony Orchestra presented a programme in Copenhagen 's DR Concert Hall featuring Hymnus amoris , the Clarinet Concerto and Symphony No. 4 for a broadcast extending across Europe and the United States . The Danish Royal Opera has programmed Maskarade and a new production ( directed by David Pountney ) of Saul og David . During 2015 , the Danish Quartet scheduled performances of Nielsen 's string quartets in Denmark , Israel , Germany , Norway and the UK ( at the Cheltenham Music Festival ) . In the UK , the BBC Philharmonic prepared a concert series on Nielsen beginning on 9 June in Manchester . Nielsen 's Maskarade overture was also the first item for the opening night of the 2015 BBC Promenade Concerts in London , while his compositions featured in five other concerts of the Prom season . The city of Odense , which has strong connections with Nielsen , developed an extensive programme of concerts and cultural events for the anniversary year . 
 = Heavy metal music = 
 Heavy metal ( or simply metal ) is a genre of rock music that developed in the late 1960s and early 1970s , largely in the United Kingdom and the United States . With roots in blues rock and psychedelic rock , the bands that created heavy metal developed a thick , massive sound , characterized by highly amplified distortion , extended guitar solos , emphatic beats , and overall loudness . Heavy metal lyrics and performance styles are sometimes associated with masculinity , aggression , and machismo . 
 The first heavy metal bands such as Led Zeppelin , Black Sabbath and Deep Purple attracted large audiences , though they were often derided by critics , a status common throughout the history of the genre . During the mid @-@ 1970s , Judas Priest helped spur the genre 's evolution by discarding much of its blues influence ; Motörhead introduced a punk rock sensibility and an increasing emphasis on speed . Beginning in the late 1970s , bands in the new wave of British heavy metal such as Iron Maiden and Saxon followed in a similar vein . Before the end of the decade , heavy metal fans became known as " metalheads " or " headbangers " . 
 During the 1980s , glam metal became a commercial force with groups such as Mötley Crüe and Poison . Underground scenes produced an array of more aggressive styles : thrash metal broke into the mainstream with bands such as Metallica , Megadeth , Slayer , and Anthrax , while other extreme subgenres of metal such as death metal and black metal remain subcultural phenomena . Since the mid @-@ 1990s popular styles have further expanded the definition of the genre . These include groove metal ( with bands such as Pantera ) and nu metal ( with bands such as Slipknot , Korn and Linkin Park ) , the latter of which often incorporates elements of grunge and hip hop . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Heavy metal is traditionally characterized by loud distorted guitars , emphatic rhythms , dense bass @-@ and @-@ drum sound , and vigorous vocals . Metal subgenres variously emphasize , alter , or omit one or more of these attributes . New York Times critic Jon Pareles writes , " In the taxonomy of popular music , heavy metal is a major subspecies of hard @-@ rock — the breed with less syncopation , less blues , more showmanship and more brute force . " The typical band lineup includes a drummer , a bassist , a rhythm guitarist , a lead guitarist , and a singer , who may or may not be an instrumentalist . Keyboard instruments are sometimes used to enhance the fullness of the sound . 
 The electric guitar and the sonic power that it projects through amplification has historically been the key element in heavy metal . The heavy metal guitar sound comes from a combined use of high volumes and heavy distortion . Guitar solos are " ... an essential element of the heavy metal code ... that underscores the significance of the guitar " to the genre . Most heavy metal songs " ... featur [ e ] at least one guitar solo " , which is " ... a primary means through which the heavy metal performer expresses virtuosity . " One exception is nu metal bands , which tend to omit guitar solos . With rhythm guitar parts , the " heavy crunch sound in heavy metal ... [ is created by ] palm muting " the strings with the picking hand and using distortion . Palm muting creates a tighter , more precise sound and it emphasizes the low end . 
 The lead role of the guitar in heavy metal often collides with the traditional " frontman " or bandleader role of the vocalist , creating a musical tension as the two " contend for dominance " in a spirit of " affectionate rivalry " . Heavy metal " demands the subordination of the voice " to the overall sound of the band . Reflecting metal 's roots in the 1960s counterculture , an " explicit display of emotion " is required from the vocals as a sign of authenticity . Critic Simon Frith claims that the metal singer 's " tone of voice " is more important than the lyrics . 
 The prominent role of the bass is also key to the metal sound , and the interplay of bass and guitar is a central element . The bass guitar provides the low @-@ end sound crucial to making the music " heavy " . The bass plays a " ... more important role in heavy metal than in any other genre of rock . " Metal basslines vary widely in complexity , from holding down a low pedal point as a foundation to doubling complex riffs and licks along with the lead and / or rhythm guitars . Some bands feature the bass as a lead instrument , an approach popularized by Metallica 's Cliff Burton with his heavy emphasis on bass guitar solos and use of chords while playing bass in the early 1980s . 
 The essence of metal drumming is creating a loud , constant beat for the band using the " trifecta of speed , power , and precision " . Metal drumming " requires an exceptional amount of endurance " , and drummers have to develop " considerable speed , coordination , and dexterity ... to play the intricate patterns " used in metal . A characteristic metal drumming technique is the cymbal choke , which consists of striking a cymbal and then immediately silencing it by grabbing it with the other hand ( or , in some cases , the same striking hand ) , producing a burst of sound . The metal drum setup is generally much larger than those employed in other forms of rock music . Black metal , death metal and some " mainstream metal " bands " ... all depend upon double @-@ kicks and blast beats . " 
 In live performance , loudness — an " onslaught of sound , " in sociologist Deena Weinstein 's description — is considered vital . In his book <unk> , psychologist Jeffrey Arnett refers to heavy metal concerts as " the sensory equivalent of war . " Following the lead set by Jimi Hendrix , Cream and The Who , early heavy metal acts such as Blue Cheer set new benchmarks for volume . As Blue Cheer 's Dick Peterson put it , " All we knew was we wanted more power . " A 1977 review of a Motörhead concert noted how " excessive volume in particular figured into the band 's impact . " Weinstein makes the case that in the same way that melody is the main element of pop and rhythm is the main focus of house music , powerful sound , timbre , and volume are the key elements of metal . She argues that the loudness is designed to " sweep the listener into the sound " and to provide a " shot of youthful vitality . " 
 In relation to the gender composition of heavy metal bands , it has been said that " [ h ] eavy metal performers are almost exclusively male " " ... [ a ] t least until the mid @-@ 1980s " apart from " ... exceptions such as Girlschool . " However , " ... now [ in the 2010s ] maybe more than ever – strong metal women have put up their dukes and got down to it " , " <unk> [ ing ] out a considerable place for [ them ] selves . " 
 = = = Musical language = = = 
 = = = = Rhythm and tempo = = = = 
 The rhythm in metal songs is emphatic , with deliberate stresses . Weinstein observes that the wide array of sonic effects available to metal drummers enables the " rhythmic pattern to take on a complexity within its elemental drive and <unk> " . In many heavy metal songs , the main groove is characterized by short , two @-@ note or three @-@ note rhythmic figures — generally made up of 8th or 16th notes . These rhythmic figures are usually performed with a staccato attack created by using a palm @-@ muted technique on the rhythm guitar . 
 Brief , abrupt , and detached rhythmic cells are joined into rhythmic phrases with a distinctive , often jerky texture . These phrases are used to create rhythmic accompaniment and melodic figures called riffs , which help to establish thematic hooks . Heavy metal songs also use longer rhythmic figures such as whole <unk> or dotted quarter note @-@ length chords in slow @-@ tempo power ballads . The tempos in early heavy metal music tended to be " slow , even ponderous " . By the late 1970s , however , metal bands were employing a wide variety of tempos . In the 2000s decade , metal tempos range from slow ballad tempos ( quarter note 
 = 60 beats per minute ) to extremely fast blast beat tempos ( quarter note = 
 350 beats per minute ) . 
 = = = = Harmony = = = = 
 One of the signatures of the genre is the guitar power chord . In technical terms , the power chord is relatively simple : it involves just one main interval , generally the perfect fifth , though an octave may be added as a doubling of the root . When power chords are played on the lower strings at high volumes and with distortion , additional low frequency sounds are created , which add to the " ... weight of the sound " and create an effect of " ... overwhelming power " . Although the perfect fifth interval is the most common basis for the power chord , power chords are also based on different intervals such as the minor third , major third , perfect fourth , diminished fifth , or minor sixth . Most power chords are also played with a consistent finger arrangement that can be slid easily up and down the fretboard . 
 = = = = Typical harmonic structures = = = = 
 Heavy metal is usually based on riffs created with three main harmonic traits : modal scale progressions , tritone and chromatic progressions , and the use of pedal points . Traditional heavy metal tends to employ modal scales , in particular the Aeolian and Phrygian modes . Harmonically speaking , this means the genre typically incorporates modal chord progressions such as the Aeolian progressions I @-@ VI @-@ VII , I @-@ <unk> ( VI ) , or I @-@ VI @-@ IV @-@ VII and Phrygian progressions implying the relation between I and ♭ II ( I- ♭ II @-@ I , I- ♭ II @-@ III , or I- ♭ II @-@ VII for example ) . Tense @-@ sounding chromatic or tritone relationships are used in a number of metal chord progressions . In addition to using modal harmonic relationships , heavy metal also uses " ... pentatonic and blues @-@ derived features . " 
 The tritone , an interval spanning three whole tones — such as C and F # — was a forbidden dissonance in medieval ecclesiastical singing , which led monks to call it diabolus in musica — " the devil in music " . 
 Heavy metal songs often make extensive use of pedal point as a harmonic basis . A pedal point is a sustained tone , typically in the bass range , during which at least one foreign ( i.e. , dissonant ) harmony is sounded in the other parts . According to Robert Walser , heavy metal harmonic relationships are " ... often quite complex " and the harmonic analysis done by metal players and teachers is " ... often very sophisticated . " In the study of heavy metal chord structures , it has been concluded that " ... heavy metal music has proved to be far more complicated " than other music researchers had realized . 
 = = = = Relationship with classical music = = = = 
 It has been stated that , alongside blues and R & B , the " assemblage of disparate musical styles known ... as ' classical music ' " has been a major influence on heavy metal since the genre 's earliest days . Also that metal 's " most influential musicians have been guitar players who have also studied classical music . Their appropriation and adaptation of classical models sparked the development of a new kind of guitar virtuosity [ and ] changes in the harmonic and melodic language of heavy metal . " 
 In an article written for Grove Music Online , Walser stated that the " 1980s brought on ... the widespread adaptation of chord progressions and virtuosic practices from 18th @-@ century European models , especially Bach and Antonio Vivaldi , by influential guitarists such as Ritchie Blackmore , Marty Friedman , Jason Becker , Uli Jon Roth , Eddie Van Halen , Randy Rhoads and Yngwie Malmsteen " . Kurt Bachmann of Believer has stated that " If done correctly , metal and classical fit quite well together . Classical and metal are probably the two genres that have the most in common when it comes to feel , texture , creativity . " 
 Although a number of metal musicians cite classical composers as inspiration , classical and metal are rooted in different cultural traditions and practices — classical in the art music tradition , metal in the popular music tradition . As musicologists Nicolas Cook and Nicola Dibben note , " Analyses of popular music also sometimes reveal the influence of ' art traditions . ' An example is Walser 's linkage of heavy metal music with the ideologies and even some of the performance practices of nineteenth @-@ century Romanticism . However , it would be clearly wrong to claim that traditions such as blues , rock , heavy metal , rap or dance music derive primarily from " art music . ' " 
 = = = Lyrical themes = = = 
 According to scholars David Hatch and Stephen Millward , Black Sabbath , and the numerous metal bands that they inspired , have concentrated lyrically " on dark and depressing subject matter to an extent hitherto unprecedented in any form of pop music " . They take as an example Sabbath 's second album Paranoid ( 1970 ) , which " included songs dealing with personal trauma — ' Paranoid ' and ' Fairies Wear Boots ' ( which described the unsavoury side effects of drug @-@ taking ) — as well as those confronting wider issues , such as the self @-@ explanatory ' War Pigs ' and ' Hand of Doom . ' " Deriving from the genre 's roots in blues music , sex is another important topic — a thread running from Led Zeppelin 's suggestive lyrics to the more explicit references of glam and nu metal bands . 
 The thematic content of heavy metal has long been a target of criticism . According to Jon Pareles , " Heavy metal 's main subject matter is simple and virtually universal . With grunts , moans and <unk> lyrics , it celebrates ... a party without limits .... [ T ] he bulk of the music is stylized and formulaic . " Music critics have often deemed metal lyrics juvenile and banal , and others have objected to what they see as advocacy of misogyny and the occult . During the 1980s , the Parents Music Resource Center petitioned the U.S. Congress to regulate the popular music industry due to what the group asserted were objectionable lyrics , particularly those in heavy metal songs . Music critic Robert Christgau called metal " an expressive mode it sometimes seems will be with us for as long as ordinary white boys fear girls , pity themselves , and are permitted to rage against a world they 'll never beat " . 
 Metal artists have had to defend their lyrics in front of the U.S. Senate and in court . In 1985 , Twisted Sister frontman Dee Snider was asked to defend his song Under the Blade at a U.S. Senate hearing . At the hearing , the PMRC alleged that the song was about sadomasochism and rape ; Snider stated that the song was about his bandmate 's throat surgery . In 1986 , Ozzy Osbourne was sued because of the lyrics of his song Suicide Solution . A lawsuit against Osbourne was filed by the parents of John McCollum , a depressed teenager who committed suicide allegedly after listening to Osbourne 's song . Osbourne was not found responsible for the teen 's death . In 1990 , Judas Priest was sued in American court by the parents of two young men who had shot themselves five years earlier , allegedly after hearing the subliminal statement " do it " in a Priest song . While the case attracted a great deal of media attention , it was ultimately dismissed . In some predominantly Muslim countries , heavy metal has been officially denounced as a threat to traditional values . In countries such as Morocco , Egypt , Lebanon , and Malaysia , there have been incidents of heavy metal musicians and fans being arrested and incarcerated . 
 = = = Image and fashion = = = 
 For certain artists and bands , visual imagery plays a large role in heavy metal . In addition to its sound and lyrics , a heavy metal band 's " image " is expressed in album sleeve art , logos , stage sets , clothing , and music videos . 
 Down @-@ the @-@ back long hair is the " most crucial distinguishing feature of metal fashion . " Originally adopted from the hippie subculture , by the 1980s and 1990s heavy metal hair " symbolised the hate , angst and disenchantment of a generation that seemingly never felt at home " , according to journalist Nader Rahman . Long hair gave members of the metal community " the power they needed to rebel against nothing in general . " 
 The classic uniform of heavy metal fans consists of light colored , ripped frayed or torn blue jeans , black T @-@ shirts , boots and black leather or jeans jackets .... T @-@ shirts are generally emblazoned with the logos or other visual representations of favorite metal bands . " Metal fans also " appropriated elements from the S & M community ( chains , metal studs , skulls , leather and crosses ) . " In the 1980s , a range of sources , from punk and goth music to horror films , influenced metal fashion . Many metal performers of the 1970s and 1980s used radically shaped and brightly colored instruments to enhance their stage appearance . 
 Fashion and personal style was especially important for glam metal bands of the era . Performers typically wore long , dyed , hairspray @-@ teased hair ( hence the nickname , " hair metal " ) ; makeup such as lipstick and eyeliner ; gaudy clothing , including leopard @-@ skin @-@ printed shirts or vests and tight denim , leather , or spandex pants ; and accessories such as headbands and jewelry . Pioneered by the heavy metal act X Japan in the late 1980s , bands in the Japanese movement known as visual kei — which includes many nonmetal groups — emphasize elaborate costumes , hair , and makeup . 
 = = = Physical gestures = = = 
 Many metal musicians when performing live engage in headbanging , which involves rhythmically beating time with the head , often emphasized by long hair . The il <unk> , or devil horns , hand gesture , also widespread , was popularized by vocalist Ronnie James Dio while with Black Sabbath and Dio . Although Gene Simmons of Kiss claims to have been the first to make the gesture on the 1977 Love Gun album cover , there is speculation as to who started the phenomenon . 
 Attendees of metal concerts do not dance in the usual sense . It has been argued that this is due to the music 's largely male audience and " extreme <unk> ideology . " Two primary body movements that substitute for dancing : headbanging and an arm thrust that is both a sign of appreciation and a rhythmic gesture . The performance of air guitar is popular among metal fans both at concerts and listening to records at home . Thrash metal concerts have two elements that are not part of the other metal genres : moshing and stage diving , which " ... were imported from the punk / hardcore subculture . " <unk> participants bump and jostle each other as they move in a circle in an area called the " pit " near the stage . Stage divers climb onto the stage with the band and then jump " ... back into the audience " . 
 = = = Fan subculture = = = 
 It has been argued that heavy metal has outlasted many other rock genres largely due to the emergence of an intense , exclusionary , strongly masculine subculture . While the metal fan @-@ base is largely young , white , male , and blue @-@ collar , the group is " tolerant of those outside its core demographic base who follow its codes of dress , appearance , and behavior " . Identification with the subculture is strengthened not only by the group experience of concert @-@ going and shared elements of fashion , but also by contributing to metal magazines and , more recently , websites . Attending live concerts in particular has been called the “ holiest of heavy metal communions ” . 
 The metal scene has been characterized as a " subculture of alienation " , with its own code of authenticity . This code puts several demands on performers : they must appear both completely devoted to their music and loyal to the subculture that supports it ; they must appear uninterested in mainstream appeal and radio hits ; and they must never " sell out " . For the fans themselves , the code promotes " opposition to established authority , and separateness from the rest of society " . 
 Musician and filmmaker Rob Zombie observes , " Most of the kids who come to my shows seem like really imaginative kids with a lot of creative energy they don 't know what to do with " and that metal is " outsider music for outsiders . Nobody wants to be the weird kid ; you just somehow end up being the weird kid . It 's kind of like that , but with metal you have all the weird kids in one place " . Scholars of metal have noted the tendency of fans to classify and reject some performers ( and some other fans ) as " poseurs " " who pretended to be part of the subculture , but who were deemed to lack authenticity and sincerity " . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The origin of the term " heavy metal " in a musical context is uncertain . The phrase has been used for centuries in chemistry and metallurgy , where the periodic table organizes elements of both light and heavy metals ( e.g. , uranium ) . An early use of the term in modern popular culture was by countercultural writer William S. Burroughs . His 1962 novel The Soft Machine includes a character known as " Uranian Willy , the Heavy Metal Kid " . Burroughs ' next novel , Nova Express ( 1964 ) , develops the theme , using heavy metal as a metaphor for addictive drugs : " With their diseases and orgasm drugs and their sexless parasite life forms — Heavy Metal People of Uranus wrapped in cool blue mist of vaporized bank notes — And The Insect People of <unk> with metal music " . Inspired by Burroughs ' novels , the term was used in the title of the 1967 album Featuring the Human Host and the Heavy Metal Kids by Hapshash and the Coloured Coat , which has been claimed to be its first use in the context of music . The phrase was later lifted by Sandy Pearlman , who used the term to describe The Byrds for their supposed " aluminium style of context and effect " , particularly on their album The Notorious Byrd Brothers ( 1968 ) . 
 Metal historian Ian Christe describes what the components of the term mean in " <unk> " : " heavy " is roughly synonymous with " potent " or " profound , " and " metal " designates a certain type of mood , grinding and weighted as with metal . The word " heavy " in this sense was a basic element of beatnik and later countercultural slang , and references to " heavy music " — typically slower , more amplified variations of standard pop fare — were already common by the mid @-@ 1960s . Iron Butterfly 's debut album , released in early 1968 , was titled Heavy . The first use of " heavy metal " in a song lyric is in reference to a motorcycle in the Steppenwolf song " Born to Be Wild " , also released that year : " I like smoke and lightning / Heavy metal thunder / <unk> ' with the wind / And the feelin ' that I 'm under . " 
 The first documented use of the phrase to describe a type of rock music identified to date appears in a review by Barry Gifford . In the May 11 , 1968 , issue of Rolling Stone , he wrote about the album A Long Time Comin ' by U.S. band Electric Flag : " Nobody who 's been listening to Mike Bloomfield — either talking or playing — in the last few years could have expected this . This is the new soul music , the synthesis of white blues and heavy metal rock . " In January 1970 Lucian K. Truscott IV reviewing Led Zeppelin II for the Village Voice described the sound as " heavy " and made comparisons with Blue Cheer and Vanilla Fudge . 
 Other early documented uses of the phrase are from reviews by critic Mike Saunders . In the November 12 , 1970 issue of Rolling Stone , he commented on an album put out the previous year by the British band Humble Pie : " Safe as Yesterday Is , their first American release , proved that Humble Pie could be boring in lots of different ways . Here they were a noisy , unmelodic , heavy metal @-@ leaden shit @-@ rock band with the loud and noisy parts beyond doubt . There were a couple of nice songs ... and one monumental pile of refuse " . He described the band 's latest , self @-@ titled release as " more of the same 27th @-@ rate heavy metal crap " . 
 In a review of Sir Lord Baltimore 's Kingdom Come in the May 1971 Creem , Saunders wrote , " Sir Lord Baltimore seems to have down pat most all the best heavy metal tricks in the book " . Creem critic Lester Bangs is credited with popularizing the term via his early 1970s essays on bands such as Led Zeppelin and Black Sabbath . Through the decade , heavy metal was used by certain critics as a virtually automatic putdown . In 1979 , lead New York Times popular music critic John Rockwell described what he called " heavy @-@ metal rock " as " brutally aggressive music played mostly for minds clouded by drugs " , and , in a different article , as " a crude exaggeration of rock basics that appeals to white teenagers " . 
 Coined by Black Sabbath drummer , Bill Ward , " downer rock " was one of the earliest terms used to describe this style of music and was applied to acts such as Sabbath and <unk> . Classic Rock magazine described the downer rock culture revolving around the use of Quaaludes and the drinking of wine . Later the term would be replaced by " heavy metal " . 
 The terms " heavy metal " and " hard rock " have often been used interchangeably , particularly in discussing bands of the 1970s , a period when the terms were largely synonymous . For example , the 1983 Rolling Stone Encyclopedia of Rock & Roll includes this passage : " known for its aggressive blues @-@ based hard @-@ rock style , Aerosmith was the top American heavy @-@ metal band of the mid @-@ Seventies " . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Antecedents : 1950s to mid @-@ 1960s = = = 
 Heavy metal 's quintessential guitar style , built around distortion @-@ heavy riffs and power chords , traces its roots to early 1950s Memphis blues guitarists such as Joe Hill Louis , Willie Johnson , and particularly Pat Hare , who captured a " grittier , nastier , more ferocious electric guitar sound " on records such as James Cotton 's " Cotton Crop Blues " ( 1954 ) ; the late 1950s instrumentals of Link Wray , particularly " Rumble " ( 1958 ) ; the early 1960s surf rock of Dick Dale , including " Let 's Go Trippin ' " ( 1961 ) and " Misirlou " ( 1962 ) ; and The Kingsmen 's version of " Louie , Louie " ( 1963 ) which made it a garage rock standard . 
 However , the genre 's direct lineage begins in the mid @-@ 1960s . American blues music was a major influence on the early British rockers of the era . Bands like The Rolling Stones and The Yardbirds developed blues rock by recording covers of many classic blues songs , often speeding up the tempos . As they experimented with the music , the UK blues @-@ based bands — and the U.S. acts they influenced in turn — developed what would become the hallmarks of heavy metal , in particular , the loud , distorted guitar sound . The Kinks played a major role in popularising this sound with their 1964 hit " You Really Got Me " . 
 In addition to The Kinks ' Dave Davies , other guitarists such as The Who 's Pete Townshend and The Yardbirds ' Jeff Beck were experimenting with feedback . Where the blues rock drumming style started out largely as simple shuffle beats on small kits , drummers began using a more muscular , complex , and amplified approach to match and be heard against the increasingly loud guitar . Vocalists similarly modified their technique and increased their reliance on amplification , often becoming more stylized and dramatic . In terms of sheer volume , especially in live performance , The Who 's " bigger @-@ louder @-@ wall @-@ of @-@ Marshalls " approach was seminal . 
 The combination of blues rock with psychedelic rock formed much of the original basis for heavy metal . One of the most influential bands in forging the merger of genres was the British power trio Cream , who derived a massive , heavy sound from unison riffing between guitarist Eric Clapton and bassist Jack Bruce , as well as Ginger Baker 's double bass drumming . Their first two LPs , Fresh Cream ( 1966 ) and Disraeli Gears ( 1967 ) , are regarded as essential prototypes for the future style . The Jimi Hendrix Experience 's debut album , Are You Experienced ( 1967 ) , was also highly influential . Hendrix 's virtuosic technique would be emulated by many metal guitarists and the album 's most successful single , " Purple Haze " , is identified by some as the first heavy metal hit . 
 During the late sixties , many psychedelic singers such as Arthur Brown , began to create outlandish , theatrical and often macabre performances ; which in itself became incredibly influential to many metal acts . Vanilla Fudge , whose first album also came out in 1967 , has been called " one of the few American links between psychedelia and what soon became heavy metal " . 
 = = = Origins : late 1960s and early 1970s = = = 
 Critics disagree over who can be thought of as the first heavy metal band . Most credit either Led Zeppelin or Black Sabbath , with American commentators tending to favour Led Zeppelin and British commentators tending to favour Black Sabbath , though many give equal credit to both . A few commentators — mainly American — argue for other groups including Iron Butterfly , Steppenwolf or Blue Cheer . 
 In 1968 , the sound that would become known as heavy metal began to coalesce . That January , the San Francisco band Blue Cheer released a cover of Eddie Cochran 's classic " Summertime Blues " , from their debut album <unk> <unk> , that many consider the first true heavy metal recording . The same month , Steppenwolf released its self @-@ titled debut album , including " Born to Be Wild " , which refers to " heavy metal thunder " in describing a motorcycle . In July , the Jeff Beck Group , whose leader had preceded Page as The Yardbirds ' guitarist , released its debut record : Truth featured some of the " most molten , barbed , downright funny noises of all time , " breaking ground for generations of metal ax @-@ slingers . In October , Page 's new band , Led Zeppelin , made its live debut . The Beatles ' White Album , which also came out that month , included " Helter Skelter " , then one of the heaviest @-@ sounding songs ever released by a major band . The Pretty Things ' rock opera S.F. Sorrow , released in December , featured " proto heavy metal " songs such as " Old Man Going " and " I See You " . 
 In this counterculture period MC5 , who began as part of the Detroit garage rock scene , developed a raw distorted style that has been seen as a major influence on the future sound of both heavy metal and later punk music . The Stooges also began to establish and influence a heavy metal and later punk sound , with songs such as " I Wanna Be Your Dog " , featuring pounding and distorted heavy guitar power chord riffs . Pink Floyd released two of their heaviest and loudest songs to date ; " Ibiza Bar " and " The Nile Song " , which was regarded as " one of the heaviest songs the band recorded " . King Crimson 's debut album included 21st Century Schizoid Man , which was considered heavy metal by several critics . 
 In January 1969 , Led Zeppelin 's self @-@ titled debut album was released and reached number 10 on the Billboard album chart . In July , Zeppelin and a power trio with a Cream @-@ inspired , but cruder sound , Grand Funk Railroad , played the Atlanta Pop Festival . That same month , another Cream @-@ rooted trio led by Leslie West released Mountain , an album filled with heavy blues rock guitar and roaring vocals . In August , the group — now itself dubbed Mountain — played an hour @-@ long set at the Woodstock Festival . 
 Led Zeppelin defined central aspects of the emerging genre , with Page 's highly distorted guitar style and singer Robert Plant 's dramatic , wailing vocals . Other bands , with a more consistently heavy , " purely " metal sound , would prove equally important in codifying the genre . The 1970 releases by Black Sabbath ( Black Sabbath and Paranoid ) and Deep Purple ( In Rock ) were crucial in this regard . 
 Black Sabbath had developed a particularly heavy sound in part due to an industrial accident guitarist Tony Iommi suffered before <unk> the band . Unable to play normally , Iommi had to tune his guitar down for easier fretting and rely on power chords with their relatively simple fingering . Deep Purple had fluctuated between styles in its early years , but by 1969 vocalist Ian Gillan and guitarist Ritchie Blackmore had led the band toward the developing heavy metal style . In 1970 , Black Sabbath and Deep Purple scored major UK chart hits with " Paranoid " and " Black Night " , respectively . That same year , two other British bands released debut albums in a heavy metal mode : Uriah Heep with Very ' <unk> ... Very ' <unk> and UFO with UFO 1 . <unk> released their self @-@ titled debut album , containing a collection of heavy guitar riffs , gruff style vocals and sadistic and macabre lyrics . Budgie brought the new metal sound into a power trio context . The occult lyrics and imagery employed by Black Sabbath and Uriah Heep would prove particularly influential ; Led Zeppelin also began foregrounding such elements with its fourth album , released in 1971 . 
 On the other side of the Atlantic , the trend @-@ setting group was Grand Funk Railroad , described as " the most commercially successful American heavy @-@ metal band from 1970 until they disbanded in 1976 , [ they ] established the Seventies success formula : continuous touring " . Other bands identified with metal emerged in the U.S. , such as Blue Öyster Cult ( 1972 ) , Aerosmith ( 1973 ) and Kiss ( 1974 ) . In Germany , Scorpions debuted with Lonesome Crow in 1972 . Blackmore , who had emerged as a virtuoso soloist with Deep Purple 's Machine Head ( 1972 ) , quit the group in 1975 to form Rainbow . These bands also built audiences via constant touring and increasingly elaborate stage shows . 
 As described above , there are arguments about whether these and other early bands truly qualify as " heavy metal " or simply as " hard rock " . Those closer to the music 's blues roots or placing greater emphasis on melody are now commonly ascribed the latter label . AC / DC , which debuted with High Voltage in 1975 , is a prime example . The 1983 Rolling Stone encyclopedia entry begins , " Australian heavy @-@ metal band AC / DC " . Rock historian Clinton Walker writes , " Calling AC / DC a heavy metal band in the seventies was as inaccurate as it is today .... [ They ] were a rock ' n ' roll band that just happened to be heavy enough for metal " . The issue is not only one of shifting definitions , but also a persistent distinction between musical style and audience identification : Ian Christe describes how the band " became the stepping @-@ stone that led huge numbers of hard rock fans into heavy metal perdition " . 
 In certain cases , there is little debate . After Black Sabbath , the next major example is Britain 's Judas Priest , which debuted with Rocka Rolla in 1974 . In Christe 's description , 
 " Black Sabbath 's audience was ... left to scavenge for sounds with similar impact . By the mid @-@ 1970s , heavy metal aesthetic could be spotted , like a mythical beast , in the moody bass and complex dual guitars of Thin Lizzy , in the stagecraft of Alice Cooper , in the sizzling guitar and showy vocals of Queen , and in the thundering medieval questions of Rainbow .... Judas Priest arrived to unify and amplify these diverse highlights from hard rock 's sonic palette . For the first time , heavy metal became a true genre unto itself . " 
 Though Judas Priest did not have a top 40 album in the United States until 1980 , for many it was the definitive post @-@ Sabbath heavy metal band ; its twin @-@ guitar attack , featuring rapid tempos and a non @-@ bluesy , more cleanly metallic sound , was a major influence on later acts . While heavy metal was growing in popularity , most critics were not enamored of the music . Objections were raised to metal 's adoption of visual spectacle and other trappings of commercial artifice , but the main offense was its perceived musical and lyrical vacuity : reviewing a Black Sabbath album in the early 1970s , leading critic Robert Christgau described it as " dull and decadent ... dim @-@ witted , amoral exploitation . " 
 = = = Mainstream : late 1970s and 1980s = = = 
 Punk rock emerged in the mid @-@ 1970s as a reaction against contemporary social conditions as well as what was perceived as the overindulgent , overproduced rock music of the time , including heavy metal . Sales of heavy metal records declined sharply in the late 1970s in the face of punk , disco , and more mainstream rock . With the major labels fixated on punk , many newer British heavy metal bands were inspired by the movement 's aggressive , high @-@ energy sound and " lo @-@ fi " , do it yourself ethos . Underground metal bands began putting out cheaply recorded releases independently to small , devoted audiences . 
 Motörhead , founded in 1975 , was the first important band to straddle the punk / metal divide . With the explosion of punk in 1977 , others followed . British music papers such as the NME and Sounds took notice , with Sounds writer Geoff Barton christening the movement the " New Wave of British Heavy Metal " . NWOBHM bands including Iron Maiden , Saxon , and Def Leppard reenergized the heavy metal genre . Following the lead set by Judas Priest and Motörhead , they toughened up the sound , reduced its blues elements , and emphasized increasingly fast tempos . 
 By 1980 , the NWOBHM had broken into the mainstream , as albums by Iron Maiden and Saxon , as well as Motörhead , reached the British top 10 . Though less commercially successful , other NWOBHM bands such as Venom and Diamond Head would have a significant influence on metal 's development . In 1981 , Motörhead became the first of this new breed of metal bands to top the UK charts with No Sleep ' til Hammersmith . 
 The first generation of metal bands was ceding the limelight . Deep Purple had broken up soon after Blackmore 's departure in 1975 , and Led Zeppelin broke up following drummer John Bonham 's death in 1980 . Black Sabbath plagued with infighting and substance abuse , while facing fierce competition with their opening band , the Los Angeles band Van Halen . Eddie Van Halen established himself as one of the leading metal guitarists of the era . His solo on " Eruption " , from the band 's self @-@ titled 1978 album , is considered a milestone . Van Halen 's sound even crossed over into pop music when he was featured on the track " Beat It " by Michael Jackson ( a US number 1 in February 1983 ) . 
 Inspired by Van Halen 's success , a metal scene began to develop in Southern California during the late 1970s . Based on the clubs of L.A. ' s Sunset Strip , bands such as Quiet Riot , Ratt , Mötley Crüe , and W.A.S.P. were influenced by traditional heavy metal of the earlier 1970s . These acts incorporated the theatrics ( and sometimes makeup ) of glam metal or " hair metal " such as Alice Cooper and Kiss Hair / glam metal bands were often visually distinguished by long , overworked hair styles accompanied by wardrobes which were sometimes considered cross @-@ gender . The lyrics of these glam metal bands characteristically emphasized hedonism and wild behavior , including lyrics which involved sexual expletives and the use of narcotics . 
 In the wake of the new wave of British heavy metal and Judas Priest 's breakthrough British Steel ( 1980 ) , heavy metal became increasingly popular in the early 1980s . Many metal artists benefited from the exposure they received on MTV , which began airing in 1981 — sales often soared if a band 's videos screened on the channel . Def Leppard 's videos for Pyromania ( 1983 ) made them superstars in America and Quiet Riot became the first domestic heavy metal band to top the Billboard chart with Metal Health ( 1983 ) . One of the seminal events in metal 's growing popularity was the 1983 US Festival in California , where the " heavy metal day " featuring Ozzy Osbourne , Van Halen , Scorpions , Mötley Crüe , Judas Priest , and others drew the largest audiences of the three @-@ day event . 
 Between 1983 and 1984 , heavy metal went from an 8 percent to a 20 percent share of all recordings sold in the U.S. Several major professional magazines devoted to the genre were launched , including Kerrang ! ( in 1981 ) and Metal Hammer ( in 1984 ) , as well as a host of fan journals . In 1985 , Billboard declared , " Metal has broadened its audience base . Metal music is no longer the exclusive domain of male teenagers . The metal audience has become older ( college @-@ aged ) , younger ( pre @-@ teen ) , and more female " . 
 By the mid @-@ 1980s , glam metal was a dominant presence on the U.S. charts , music television , and the arena concert circuit . New bands such as L.A. ' s Warrant and acts from the East Coast like Poison and Cinderella became major draws , while Mötley Crüe and Ratt remained very popular . Bridging the stylistic gap between hard rock and glam metal , New Jersey 's Bon Jovi became enormously successful with its third album , Slippery When Wet ( 1986 ) . The similarly styled Swedish band Europe became international stars with The Final Countdown ( 1986 ) . Its title track hit number 1 in 25 countries . In 1987 , MTV launched a show , Headbanger 's Ball , devoted exclusively to heavy metal videos . However , the metal audience had begun to <unk> , with those in many underground metal scenes favoring more extreme sounds and disparaging the popular style as " light metal " or " hair metal " . 
 One band that reached diverse audiences was Guns N ' Roses . In contrast to their glam metal contemporaries in L.A. , they were seen as much more raw and dangerous . With the release of their chart @-@ topping Appetite for Destruction ( 1987 ) , they " recharged and almost single @-@ handedly sustained the Sunset Strip sleaze system for several years " . The following year , Jane 's Addiction emerged from the same L.A. hard @-@ rock club scene with its major label debut , Nothing 's Shocking . Reviewing the album , Rolling Stone declared , " as much as any band in existence , Jane 's Addiction is the true heir to Led Zeppelin " . The group was one of the first to be identified with the " alternative metal " trend that would come to the fore in the next decade . Meanwhile , new bands such as New York 's Winger and New Jersey 's Skid Row sustained the popularity of the glam metal style . 
 = = = Other metal genres : 1980s , 1990s , and 2000s = = = 
 Many subgenres of heavy metal developed outside of the commercial mainstream during the 1980s such as crossover thrash . Several attempts have been made to map the complex world of underground metal , most notably by the editors of AllMusic , as well as critic Garry Sharpe @-@ Young . Sharpe @-@ Young 's multivolume metal encyclopedia separates the underground into five major categories : thrash metal , death metal , black metal , power metal , and the related subgenres of doom and gothic metal . 
 In 1990 , a review in Rolling Stone suggested retiring the term " heavy metal " as the genre was " ridiculously vague " . The article stated that the term only fueled " misperceptions of rock & roll bigots who still assume that five bands as different as Ratt , Extreme , Anthrax , Danzig and Mother Love Bone " sound the same . 
 = = = = Thrash metal = = = = 
 Thrash metal emerged in the early 1980s under the influence of hardcore punk and the new wave of British heavy metal , particularly songs in the revved @-@ up style known as speed metal . The movement began in the United States , with Bay Area thrash metal being the leading scene . The sound developed by thrash groups was faster and more aggressive than that of the original metal bands and their glam metal successors . Low @-@ register guitar riffs are typically overlaid with shredding leads . Lyrics often express nihilistic views or deal with social issues using visceral , gory language . Thrash has been described as a form of " urban blight music " and " a <unk> cousin of rap " . 
 The subgenre was popularized by the " Big Four of Thrash " : Metallica , Anthrax , Megadeth , and Slayer . Three German bands , Kreator , Sodom , and Destruction , played a central role in bringing the style to Europe . Others , including San Francisco Bay Area 's Testament and Exodus , New Jersey 's Overkill , and Brazil 's Sepultura and Sarcófago , also had a significant impact . Although thrash began as an underground movement , and remained largely that for almost a decade , the leading bands of the scene began to reach a wider audience . Metallica brought the sound into the top 40 of the Billboard album chart in 1986 with Master of Puppets , the genre 's first platinum record . Two years later , the band 's ... And Justice for All hit number 6 , while Megadeth and Anthrax also had top 40 records on the American charts . 
 Though less commercially successful than the rest of the Big Four , Slayer released one of the genre 's definitive records : Reign in Blood ( 1986 ) was credited for incorporating heavier guitar timbres , and for including explicit depictions of death , suffering , violence and occult into thrash metal 's lyricism . Slayer attracted a following among far @-@ right skinheads , and accusations of promoting violence and Nazi themes have dogged the band . Even though Slayer did not receive substantial media exposure , their music played a key role in the development of extreme metal . 
 In the early 1990s , thrash achieved breakout success , challenging and redefining the metal mainstream . Metallica 's self @-@ titled 1991 album topped the Billboard chart , as the band established international following . Megadeth 's Countdown to Extinction ( 1992 ) debuted at number two , Anthrax and Slayer cracked the top 10 , and albums by regional bands such as Testament and Sepultura entered the top 100 . 
 = = = = Death metal = = = = 
 Thrash soon began to evolve and split into more extreme metal genres . " Slayer 's music was directly responsible for the rise of death metal , " according to MTV News . The NWOBHM band Venom was also an important progenitor . The death metal movement in both North America and Europe adopted and emphasized the elements of blasphemy and diabolism employed by such acts . Florida 's Death and the Bay Area 's Possessed are recognized as seminal bands in the style . Both groups have been credited with inspiring the subgenre 's name , the latter via its 1984 demo Death Metal and the song " Death Metal " , from its 1985 debut album Seven Churches ( 1985 ) . In the late 1980s and early 1990s , Swedish death metal became notable and melodic forms of death metal were created . 
 Death metal utilizes the speed and aggression of both thrash and hardcore , fused with lyrics preoccupied with Z @-@ grade slasher movie violence and Satanism . Death metal vocals are typically bleak , involving guttural " death growls " , high @-@ pitched screaming , the " death rasp " , and other uncommon techniques . Complementing the deep , aggressive vocal style are downtuned , highly distorted guitars and extremely fast percussion , often with rapid double bass drumming and " wall of sound " – style blast beats . Frequent tempo and time signature changes and syncopation are also typical . 
 Death metal , like thrash metal , generally rejects the theatrics of earlier metal styles , opting instead for an everyday look of ripped jeans and plain leather jackets . One major exception to this rule was Deicide 's Glen Benton , who branded an inverted cross on his forehead and wore armor on stage . Morbid Angel adopted neo @-@ fascist imagery . These two bands , along with Death and Obituary , were leaders of the major death metal scene that emerged in Florida in the mid @-@ 1980s . In the UK , the related style of grindcore , led by bands such as Napalm Death and Extreme Noise Terror , emerged from the anarcho @-@ punk movement . 
 = = = = Black metal = = = = 
 The first wave of black metal emerged in Europe in the early and mid @-@ 1980s , led by Britain 's Venom , Denmark 's Mercyful Fate , Switzerland 's Hellhammer and Celtic Frost , and Sweden 's Bathory . By the late 1980s , Norwegian bands such as Mayhem and Burzum were heading a second wave . Black metal varies considerably in style and production quality , although most bands emphasize shrieked and growled vocals , highly distorted guitars frequently played with rapid tremolo picking , a " dark " atmosphere and intentionally lo @-@ fi production , with ambient noise and background hiss . 
 Satanic themes are common in black metal , though many bands take inspiration from ancient paganism , promoting a return to supposed pre @-@ Christian values . Numerous black metal bands also " experiment with sounds from all possible forms of metal , folk , classical music , electronica and avant @-@ garde " . Darkthrone drummer Fenriz explains , " It had something to do with production , lyrics , the way they dressed and a commitment to making ugly , raw , grim stuff . There wasn 't a generic sound . " 
 By 1990 , Mayhem was regularly wearing corpsepaint ; many other black metal acts also adopted the look . Bathory inspired the Viking metal and folk metal movements and Immortal brought blast beats to the fore . Some bands in the Scandinavian black metal scene became associated with considerable violence in the early 1990s , with Mayhem and Burzum linked to church burnings . Growing commercial hype around death metal generated a backlash ; beginning in Norway , much of the Scandinavian metal underground shifted to support a black metal scene that resisted being co @-@ opted by the commercial metal industry . According to former Gorgoroth vocalist <unk> , " Black Metal was never meant to reach an audience .... [ We ] had a common enemy which was , of course , Christianity , socialism and everything that democracy stands for . " 
 By 1992 , black metal scenes had begun to emerge in areas outside Scandinavia , including Germany , France , and Poland . The 1993 murder of Mayhem 's Euronymous by Burzum 's Varg Vikernes provoked intensive media coverage . Around 1996 , when many in the scene felt the genre was stagnating , several key bands , including Burzum and Finland 's <unk> , moved toward an ambient style , while symphonic black metal was explored by Sweden 's Tiamat and Switzerland 's Samael . In the late 1990s and early 2000s decade , Norway 's Dimmu Borgir brought black metal closer to the mainstream , as did Cradle of Filth . 
 = = = = Power metal = = = = 
 During the late 1980s , the power metal scene came together largely in reaction to the harshness of death and black metal . Though a relatively underground style in North America , it enjoys wide popularity in Europe , Japan , and South America . Power metal focuses on upbeat , epic melodies and themes that " appeal to the listener 's sense of valor and loveliness " . The prototype for the sound was established in the mid @-@ to @-@ late 1980s by Germany 's Helloween , which combined the power riffs , melodic approach , and high @-@ pitched , " clean " singing style of bands like Judas Priest and Iron Maiden with thrash 's speed and energy , " <unk> [ ing ] the sonic ingredients of what is now known as power metal " . 
 Traditional power metal bands like Sweden 's HammerFall , England 's DragonForce , and Florida 's Iced Earth have a sound clearly indebted to the classic NWOBHM style . Many power metal bands such as Florida 's Kamelot , Finnish groups Nightwish , <unk> and Sonata Arctica , Italy 's Rhapsody of Fire , and Russia 's Catharsis feature a keyboard @-@ based " symphonic " sound , sometimes employing orchestras and opera singers . Power metal has built a strong fanbase in Japan and South America , where bands like Brazil 's Angra and Argentina 's Rata Blanca are popular . 
 Closely related to power metal is progressive metal , which adopts the complex compositional approach of bands like Rush and King Crimson . This style emerged in the United States in the early and mid @-@ 1980s , with innovators such as Queensrÿche , Fates Warning , and Dream Theater . The mix of the progressive and power metal sounds is typified by New Jersey 's Symphony X , whose guitarist Michael Romeo is among the most recognized of latter @-@ day shredders . 
 = = = = Doom metal = = = = 
 Emerging in the mid @-@ 1980s with such bands as California 's Saint Vitus , Maryland 's The Obsessed , Chicago 's Trouble , and Sweden 's Candlemass , the doom metal movement rejected other metal styles ' emphasis on speed , slowing its music to a crawl . Doom metal traces its roots to the lyrical themes and musical approach of early Black Sabbath . The Melvins have also been a significant influence on doom metal and a number of its subgenres . Doom emphasizes melody , melancholy tempos , and a sepulchral mood relative to many other varieties of metal . 
 The 1991 release of Forest of Equilibrium , the debut album by UK band Cathedral , helped spark a new wave of doom metal . During the same period , the doom @-@ death fusion style of British bands Paradise Lost , My Dying Bride , and Anathema gave rise to European gothic metal , with its signature dual @-@ vocalist arrangements , exemplified by Norway 's Theatre of Tragedy and <unk> . New York 's Type O Negative introduced an American take on the style . 
 In the United States , sludge metal , mixing doom and hardcore , emerged in the late 1980s — Eyehategod and Crowbar were leaders in a major Louisiana sludge scene . Early in the next decade , California 's Kyuss and Sleep , inspired by the earlier doom metal bands , spearheaded the rise of stoner metal , while Seattle 's Earth helped develop the drone metal subgenre . The late 1990s saw new bands form such as the Los Angeles – based <unk> , with a classic stoner / doom sound , and Sunn O ) ) ) , which crosses lines between doom , drone , and dark ambient metal — the New York Times has compared their sound to an " Indian raga in the middle of an earthquake " . 
 = = = 1990s and early 2000s subgenres and fusions = = = 
 The era of metal 's mainstream dominance in North America came to an end in the early 1990s with the emergence of Nirvana and other grunge bands , signaling the popular breakthrough of alternative rock . Grunge acts were influenced by the heavy metal sound , but rejected the excesses of the more popular metal bands , such as their " flashy and virtuosic solos " and " appearance @-@ driven " MTV orientation . 
 Glam metal fell out of favor due not only to the success of grunge , but also because of the growing popularity of the more aggressive sound typified by Metallica and the post @-@ thrash groove metal of Pantera and White Zombie . In 1991 , the band Metallica released their album Metallica , also known as The Black Album , which moved the band 's sound out of the thrash metal genre and into standard heavy metal . The album was certified <unk> Platinum by the RIAA . A few new , unambiguously metal bands had commercial success during the first half of the decade — Pantera 's Far Beyond Driven topped the Billboard chart in 1994 — but , " In the dull eyes of the mainstream , metal was dead " . Some bands tried to adapt to the new musical landscape . Metallica revamped its image : the band members cut their hair and , in 1996 , headlined the alternative musical festival Lollapalooza founded by Jane 's Addiction singer Perry Farrell . While this prompted a backlash among some long @-@ time fans , Metallica remained one of the most successful bands in the world into the new century . 
 Like Jane 's Addiction , many of the most popular early 1990s groups with roots in heavy metal fall under the umbrella term " alternative metal " . Bands in Seattle 's grunge scene such as Soundgarden , credited as making a " place for heavy metal in alternative rock " , and Alice in Chains were at the center of the alternative metal movement . The label was applied to a wide spectrum of other acts that fused metal with different styles : Faith No More combined their alternative rock sound with punk , funk , metal , and hip hop ; Primus joined elements of funk , punk , thrash metal , and experimental music ; Tool mixed metal and progressive rock ; bands such as Fear Factory , Ministry and Nine Inch Nails began incorporating metal into their industrial sound , and vice versa , respectively ; and Marilyn Manson went down a similar route , while also employing shock effects of the sort popularized by Alice Cooper . Alternative metal artists , though they did not represent a cohesive scene , were united by their willingness to experiment with the metal genre and their rejection of glam metal aesthetics ( with the stagecraft of Marilyn Manson and White Zombie — also identified with alt @-@ metal — significant , if partial , exceptions ) . Alternative metal 's mix of styles and sounds represented " the colorful results of metal opening up to face the outside world . " 
 In the mid- and late 1990s came a new wave of U.S. metal groups inspired by the alternative metal bands and their mix of genres . Dubbed " nu metal " , bands such as Slipknot , Linkin Park , Limp Bizkit , Papa Roach , P.O.D. , Korn and Disturbed incorporated elements ranging from death metal to hip hop , often including DJs and rap @-@ style vocals . The mix demonstrated that " <unk> metal could pay off " . Nu metal gained mainstream success through heavy MTV rotation and Ozzy Osbourne 's 1996 introduction of Ozzfest , which led the media to talk of a resurgence of heavy metal . In 1999 , Billboard noted that there were more than 500 specialty metal radio shows in the United States , nearly three times as many as ten years before . While nu metal was widely popular , traditional metal fans did not fully embrace the style . By early 2003 , the movement 's popularity was on the wane , though several nu metal acts such as Korn or Limp Bizkit retained substantial followings . 
 = = = Recent styles : mid – late 2000s and 2010s = = = 
 Metalcore , a hybrid of extreme metal and hardcore punk , emerged as a commercial force in the mid @-@ 2000s decade . Through the 1980s and 1990s , metalcore was mostly an underground phenomenon ; pioneering bands include Earth Crisis , other prominent bands include Converge , Hatebreed and Shai Hulud . By 2004 , melodic metalcore — influenced as well by melodic death metal — was popular enough that Killswitch Engage 's The End of Heartache and Shadows Fall 's The War Within debuted at numbers 21 and 20 , respectively , on the Billboard album chart . 
 Evolving even further from metalcore comes mathcore , a more rhythmically complicated and progressive style brought to light by bands such as The Dillinger Escape Plan , Converge , and Protest the Hero . <unk> 's main defining quality is the use of odd time signatures , and has been described to possess rhythmic comparability to free jazz . 
 Metal remained popular in the 2000s , particularly in continental Europe . By the new millennium Scandinavia had emerged as one of the areas producing innovative and successful bands , while Belgium , The Netherlands and especially Germany were the most significant markets . Established continental metal bands that placed multiple albums in the top 20 of the German charts between 2003 and 2008 , including Finnish band Children of Bodom , Norwegian act Dimmu Borgir , Germany 's Blind Guardian and Sweden 's HammerFall . 
 In the 2000s , an extreme metal fusion genre known as deathcore emerged . Deathcore incorporates elements of death metal , hardcore punk and metalcore . Deathcore features characteristics such as death metal riffs , hardcore punk breakdowns , death growling , " pig squeal " -sounding vocals , and screaming . Deathcore bands include Whitechapel , Suicide Silence , Despised Icon and Carnifex . 
 The term " retro @-@ metal " has been used to describe bands such as Texas @-@ based The Sword , California 's High on Fire , Sweden 's Witchcraft , and Australia 's Wolfmother . The Sword 's Age of Winters ( 2006 ) drew heavily on the work of Black Sabbath and Pentagram , Witchcraft added elements of folk rock and psychedelic rock , and Wolfmother 's self @-@ titled 2005 debut album had " Deep Purple @-@ ish organs " and " Jimmy Page @-@ worthy chordal riffing " . Mastodon , which plays in a progressive / sludge style , has inspired claims of a metal revival in the United States , dubbed by some critics the " New Wave of American Heavy Metal " . 
 By the early 2010s , metalcore was evolving to more frequently incorporate synthesizers and elements from genres beyond rock and metal . The album Reckless & Relentless by British band Asking Alexandria ( which sold 31 @,@ 000 copies in its first week ) , and The Devil Wears Prada 's 2011 album Dead Throne ( which sold 32 @,@ 400 in its first week ) reached up to number 9 and 10 , respectively , on the Billboard 200 chart . In 2013 , British band Bring Me the Horizon released their fourth studio album Sempiternal to critical acclaim . The album debuted at number 3 on the UK Album Chart and at number 1 in Australia . The album sold 27 @,@ 522 copies in the US , and charted at number 11 on the US Billboard Chart , making it their highest charting release in America until their follow @-@ up album That 's the Spirit debuted at no . 2 in 2015 . 
 Also in the 2010s , a metal style called " djent " developed as a spinoff of standard progressive metal . <unk> music uses rhythmic and technical complexity , heavily distorted , palm @-@ muted guitar chords , syncopated riffs and polyrhythms alongside virtuoso soloing . Another typical characteristic is the use of extended range seven , eight , and nine @-@ string guitars . <unk> bands include <unk> and Textures . 
