 While Kammuri was moving ashore , several ships offshore reported winds of over 74 km / h ( 40 mph ) . High rainfall totals spread as far east as Taiwan , where 591 mm ( 23 @.@ 3 in ) was reported in Taitung County ; this was the station 's highest daily total . Stations in Okinawa reported rainfall totals as high as 178 mm ( 7 @.@ 0 in ) . The remnants of Kammuri spread across South Korea with rainfall . 
 = St John 's , Ashfield = 
 St John the Baptist Anglican Church is an active Anglican church located between Alt and Bland Streets , Ashfield , a suburb of Sydney , Australia . Founded in 1840 , on land donated by Elizabeth Underwood , the church building is the oldest authenticated surviving building in Ashfield , having been built at the time when subdivision increased the population density sufficiently to turn Ashfield into a town . It was also the first church built along the Parramatta Road which linked the early colonial towns of Sydney and Parramatta . The earliest remaining parts of the building are one of the first Sydney designs by the colonial architect Edmund Blacket , who later became renowned for his ecclesiastical architecture . 
 The expansive church grounds contain a cemetery dating back to 1845 that contains the remains of many notable Ashfield residents . Australia 's only memorial to Australian Air Force Cadets occupies a prominent position near the entrance to the church . The St John 's site has been listed on the Local Environment Plan Heritage Schedule , and the Register of the National Trust of Australia . 
 St John 's is one of three churches , along with St Albans , Five Dock , and St Oswald 's , Haberfield , which make up Christ Church Inner West , operating within the parish of Ashfield , Five Dock , and Haberfield , as part of the South Sydney Region of the Anglican Diocese of Sydney . The church has had 18 rectors , including William George Hilliard who later became the Bishop of Nelson . Andrew Katay has been rector since early 2005 . 
 = = History = = 
 St John 's was the first church to be established along Parramatta Road between the colonial towns of Sydney and Parramatta ( then known as Rose Hill ) , during a time of rapid church building when many of the oldest churches in Sydney were erected . Since 1810 the Parish of Ashfield had extended from Balmain to Strathfield , and from Enfield to the Parramatta River , and in 1840 this was formalized into an ecclesiastical district . 
 = = = Early contributors = = = 
 The first portion of grounds , an area of 1 acre , 2 roods , and 36 perches ( a total of 0 @.@ 698 ha ) , was provided as a gift by the local landowner Elizabeth Underwood who was subdividing " Ashfield Park " . The Bishop of Australia , William Grant Broughton added urgency by expressing his " intention of having a Place of Worship erected immediately , on the allotment of land appropriated for that purpose " . Another benefactor was William Bland , a doctor and politician who had been sent to the colony having been convicted of manslaughter after pistol duel which left his opponent mortally wounded , and after whom Bland street is named . He gave a donation of £ 200 and land . Fellow local medical practitioner , James Bowman , contributed a " similarly munificent donation " . By mid @-@ 1839 the funds received were thought to be sufficient to commence building . The exact location was determined in February 1840 , and appeals continued to fund a building of sufficient size for the surrounding population . 
 = = = Church building = = = 
 The church was founded on 9 September 1840 . The service on that day was read by the first rector , Joseph Kidd Walpole , who had come to the district from Christ Church , Kelso , and had begun to plan the church building . W. G. Broughton made an address at the ceremony . The anniversary sermon was preached by Robert Allwood . 
 This Foundation Stone of a church dedicated to the honor and worship of Almighty God ! and to be denominated ' The Church of St. John the Baptist ' was laid the 9th day of September , 1840 . By the Right Reverend Father in God William Lord Bishop of Australia In the Fourth Year of the reign of Queen Victoria . Sir George <unk> , Knight . Governor . Rev. Joseph Kidd Walpole , Minister . Among those that are born of women there is not a greater Prophet than John the Baptist ; but he that is last in the Kingdom of God is greater than he . Luke vii , 28 . 
 Building work on the church began in 1841 , but construction came to a standstill due to construction problems and insufficient subscriptions . The following year the colonial architect Edmund Blacket , as one of his first assignments after arriving in Sydney , was requested to inspect the church 's walls , then still under construction . As a result of his report , the walls were demolished and re @-@ erected , although continued funding problems , and the transfer of J. K. Walpole to Windsor caused further delays . The church was licensed for operation on 1 October 1843 . Much of the interior woodwork was carved by the third rector , Frederick Wilkinson . The roof was strengthened in around 1845 by the installation of timber support columns . On 16 August 1845 , at a cost of £ 100 the church purchased an additional 2 @.@ 5 acres ( 1 @.@ 0 ha ) of land from Elizabeth Underwood ( who remained a parishioner until her death , and is buried in a prominent grave within the church cemetery ) . The church was eventually consecrated on 19 August 1845 . 
 After 29 years , as the Bishop of Sydney Frederic Barker put it " the population of Sydney had invaded these sylvan shades " , so an expansion was required . Blacket designed the current stone transept and chancel , to transform the church into a cruciform plan . These were built during the period 1874 – 1875 at a cost of around £ 150 – raised without the help of grants from the government or the English societies . The foundation stone of the addition was laid by Barker on 24 October 1874 , and included a copy of Australian Churchman and the Sydney Morning Herald . At the time this addition accommodated an extra 250 seats , bringing the total capacity to 446 . 
 Construction of the choir vestry and a wooden porch outside the western door were completed in 1885 , and dedicated by Bishop Alfred Barry . This work was overseen by the Blacket brothers , who had followed the trade of their late father . 
 Arthur Blacket then designed the west tower . The eight @-@ bell peal was ordered from England after a generous bequest by one of the " Melanesian boys " , David <unk> , and subsequent fundraising . The tower was then quickly constructed at a cost of around £ 250 in memory of the recently deceased rector James Christian Corlette , and dedicated as The Corlette Memorial Tower on 1 November 1901 . The memorial bells proved depressing amongst the local populace , and were rearranged in 1904 , with louvres added to the previously open arches . This was apparently ineffective , as the bells were removed within a few years . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Prior to the installation of a pipe organ , a <unk> and then an harmonium were used for musical accompaniment . The first organ was installed above the gallery at the western end of the church by William Davidson at the request of the rector J. C. Corlette , and was transferred to the south transept in about 1879 , where it remained until 1882 when it was sold to St Bartholomew 's , Pyrmont , and later St Luke 's , <unk> . 
 The 1883 Hill and Son organ , including 844 pipes , costing a total of £ 550 , was installed in 1884 , and located in the north @-@ east corner of the transept . It is still in use , with original pipework , making it faithful to the original tones . The organ was refurbished and rebuilt in 1950 , 1975 , and 2008 . 
 The 1950 change from mechanical to electrical action was motivated by removing the increasingly noisy pedals and trackers . This refurbishment also included detachment of the console ( to the other side of the transept ) , and replacement of the bellows with a " pressure equaliser " . The façade pipes were sprayed to a dull gold colour , covering over the original diapering , described disparagingly at the time as " all over the pipes without much rhyme or reason ; fleurs @-@ de @-@ lys in profusion , dots , bands , triangles in all the colours of the rainbow rioted in confusion " . This work was carried out by R. A. and D. A. Wiltshire . 
 By 1975 the organ had become unplayable , and a reconversion to mechanical action was undertaken . The console was moved back to the organ side of the transept , with the action going backward under the floor into the organ . This necessitated removal of floor joists and foundation piers , but the unsupported floor caused further problems long term , and during the 2008 rebuild it was re @-@ electrified . 
 Between 2006 – 2008 Sydney firm " John W Parker – Pipe Organ Builders " refurbished the organ , returning the soundboard action to electric , providing a new roll @-@ top ' detached ' console , and an entirely new wind supply and bellows . The swell box which had been discarded in the 1975 rebuild was reinstated , and the pedal Bourdon 16 ' stop was extended to 8 ' pitch . Octave couplers were provided in Sub and Octave pitches on the Swell also . All manual pipework was washed , cleaned and regulated to original Hill standards and tonality . 
 The church had a significant choral history , with significant events often celebrated with a full choir , sometimes accompanied by an orchestra . In the late 19th century the St John 's choir participated in regional choir festivals . 
 = = = Site development = = = 
 A small hall for Sunday school was erected in 1865 by the generosity of L. H. Smythe . By 1895 the hall had fallen into disrepair , and the needs of the children had outgrown it . The current Parish Hall was planned to replace it . The memorial stone for the replacement building was laid by the Primate of Australia , William Saumarez Smith in inclement weather on 2 February 1895 . The architect was E. A. Scott , and his building design was of a " domestic style ... with a highly decorated front " . It cost £ 625 10s , was complete within three months , and seated up to 400 . However , by 1903 , the Sunday school had once again outgrown the space available , and an additional infants classroom was built nearby . This is now called the Small Hall , and is used as a classroom for the St John 's Preschool . 
 A rectory was first provided for the rector J. C. Corlette and his large family in 1879 . A block of land , located on what is now the corner of Rectory Avenue and Alt Street , was purchased for £ 444 , and the foundation stone was laid by Bishop Barker in 1880 . This original rectory was sold in 1922 for £ 1800 . The current rectory , on the main grounds of the church , was founded by Archbishop John Charles Wright in the same year , during the rectorship of William George Hilliard , and built at a cost of £ 2500 . 
 Gravel pathways lined with Phoenix canariensis palms , the lawn in front of the church , and the stone churchyard fence were also constructed in the 1920s . The Alt Street wall was erected in 1922 , and dedicated to the previous rector Alfred Yarnold . The Bland Street wall was dedicated in 1927 by Archdeacon Davies , and commemorates one of the key contributors , R. A. <unk> . 
 The cemetery , which had been in existence since soon after the foundation of the church ( the first interment was Frederick Underwood , Elizabeth 's 11 @-@ month @-@ old grandson , on 1 May 1845 ) , was consecrated by the Archbishop of Sydney , Howard West <unk> <unk> , on 8 September 1934 . By this stage it reportedly already contained the remains of 1 @,@ 396 people . He was asked by the rector of the time to " set apart the area , containing 4 acres and 4 perches ( 1 @.@ 63 ha ) , as a burial @-@ place for the bodies of Christian people living in and about Ashfield " . 
 Australia 's only memorial to Australian Air Force Cadets occupies a prominent position on the grounds , and a memorial service attended by the Cadets has been held annually since it was opened by the State Governor Lieutenant General John Northcott in 1946 . It was built by Squadron Leader Arthur Whitehurst who had commanded a squadron at Ashfield during the period 1941 – 1946 , and whose son Douglas Arthur Whitehurst had died in action in World War II . 
 A children 's playground was installed near the Alt St boundary in 2011 , and opened by Ashfield Municipal Council Mayor Ted Cassidy and Strathfield MP Charles <unk> . 
 = = = Regional influence = = = 
 A number of local street names were derived from the presence of St John 's . Church Street , which ends directly opposite the church entrance , was originally the track used by Burwood residents to reach the church , using a conveniently located fallen tree across Iron Cove Creek . 
 As the population of Sydney 's Inner West grew , many of the Anglican churches in the area were established by the congregation of St John 's ( including four during the final thirty years of the nineteenth century ) . These include Balmain , Burwood , Five Dock , St Thomas ' Enfield ( declared a separate parish in 1868 ) , and St Oswald 's Haberfield ( 1908 ) . Because of this involvement , St John 's was later referred to as the " Mother Church of Western Suburbs " . 
 = = = Rectors = = = 
 St. John 's has had eighteen rectors to date . 
 Joseph Kidd Walpole was the first rector , during the period 1840 – 1842 . He was originally from England , and went on mission to Madras in 1836 , but his health gave way , and he was transferred to New South Wales . He was ordained as a Deacon in 1936 , and as a Priest in 1937 . After disappointing progress on the building , he was transferred to Richmond after two years . 
 William Stone , B.A. was the rector during the period 1842 – 1843 . He grew up in a clerical family in Ireland , married his first cousin , and had nine children , seven of whom joined their parents on the journey to Australia in 1841 . When appointed at St John 's , he set aside a room in their family home , deemed by the Bishop as temporarily licensed as a place of worship since the church was not yet complete . At the time he was also the minister of the Parish of Concord , and earned a government stipend of £ 150 . He was transferred to Sutton Forest in 1843 . 
 Frederick Wilkinson , M.A. , was the rector during the period 1843 – 1854 . He personally carved much of the woodwork in St Johns . During his rectorship , he also organized for St Mary 's church to be built in Balmain , and then St Thomas ' Enfield . Once St Mary 's was built , he presided alternately in Ashfield and Balmain . During his time at Ashfield , the Wilkinsons lived in a " picturesque , many @-@ gabled wooden house called The Meads in Enfield " ( near Burwood road ) , where he had a large workshop for his wood @-@ carving . He also established a private school at The Meads , which enjoyed a " high reputation as the best collegiate school in the colony " . Apart from a return trip to England ( serving as the ship 's chaplain during the journeys ) , he continued his leadership of St John 's until June 1854 when he accepted ' a special commission for the cure ' at Holy Trinity at Millers Point . 
 Thomas <unk> / Hattam Wilkinson was the rector during the period 1854 – 1860 . He had originally come to the colonies in the company of his father 's brother , Frederick . Since then he had been curate @-@ in @-@ charge at Balmain under his uncle , got married to Julia Sarah Underwood ( Elizabeth 's daughter ) at St John 's , served a short period as chaplain to Darlinghurst Gaol and three years as the assistant minister of St John the Baptist , Canberra . After his uncle left St John 's , he became the rector . After leaving St John 's , he moved to Enfield , and later Appin , finally returning for burial in the St John 's cemetery after his death in 1876 . 
 William Lumsdaine was the newly ordained rector during the period 1860 – 1865 . He had come to Australia with his two brothers and a sister in 1836 in the charge of Bishop Broughton . When he became rector , he rented Ashfield Park House , Elizabeth Underwood 's original house as his family residence . Along with Ashfield , he simultaneously held the incumbency for the parishes of Burwood , Enfield , and Five Dock . During his time at St John 's , two of his children died of diphtheria on the same day . After finishing at St John 's , he continued to serve at Five Dock and Burwood . He died in 1902 aged 78 and is buried in the St John 's cemetery . 
 William Cecil Cave @-@ Browne @-@ Cave was the rector during the period 1865 – 1867 . He was a grandson of the ninth Cave @-@ Browne @-@ Cave Baronet . He was recently married when he arrived at St John 's . Later in his career he held the rectorship at St Thomas ' North Sydney . 
 Canon James Christian Corlette , D.D. , was the rector during the period 1867 – 1900 . His previous appointment had been in <unk> . He was married to Frances Edith Manning , a daughter of the politician Sir William Montagu Manning . In 1877 she was elected to the committee of the newly formed Infant 's Home , as an indication of Anglican support . The home cared for abandoned babies , and was the subject of a storm of protest , with the Roman Catholic Cardinal Patrick Francis Moran accusing it of a " vindication of promiscuous practices " . The <unk> ' eight children were all born during his time at St John 's . Perhaps not surprisingly , during this period St John 's first began to provide a residence for the rector . Corlette encouraged Ashfield 's Melanesian population to worship at St John 's , and many later returned to the islands as missionaries . He provided more frequent and regular services than his predecessor , and emphasized Saint 's Days , Communion and music . During the period 1868 – 1884 he concurrently held the precentorship at St Andrew 's Cathedral , and in 1897 again served there as canon . In 1893 he was chaplain to the Bishop of Sydney , and became rural dean of Petersham in 1895 . Along with many of his family , he is buried in the St John 's cemetery . 
 Alfred Yarnold was the rector during the period 1901 – 1916 , which were the final fifteen years of his career . Immediately previously he had spent nineteen years as the rector of Christ Church , Lavender Bay . Overlapping with his time at St John 's , he was also the chaplain to the Archbishop of Sydney , and the rural dean of Petersham . One of Yarnold 's curates was the Rev. Charles Clark , who would later father the Australian historian Manning Clark . Clark 's mother was a teacher in the St John 's Sunday School 
 William George Hilliard , M.A. , was the rector during the period 1916 – 1926 . He was recently ordained when he joined St John 's , having completed only a four @-@ year curacy at Dulwich Hill . His first wife died during his time at St John 's . When he completed his time at St John 's , he became the Headmaster of a local private school , Trinity Grammar School . In 1934 he became the Bishop of Nelson . He was described as " one of the most popular evangelicals in the Church life of Australia , and a forceful preacher " . 
 Ainslie Arthur Yeates , M.A. , was the rector during the period 1927 – 1928 . He came to Ashfield from St John 's Woolwich . Soon after he arrived he suffered a breakdown in his health , was very sick throughout his time at Ashfield , and died after a four @-@ year incumbency . 
 Herbert Stanley Cocks , B.A. Th.L. , was the rector during the period 1931 – 1939 . He brought with him a wide experience of church work . Having been ordained just before World War I he had been a chaplain for the A.I.F. , and after demobilization a missionary , school principal , and chaplain in India . Most recently he had been rector of Holy Trinity , Erskineville . 
 Leonard Neville Sutton , M.A. , was the rector during the period 1939 – 1949 . He was a keen teacher , having previously been principal at St Andrew 's Cathedral School , chaplain at The King 's School , and vice @-@ principal at Brighton Grammar School . He was very interested in the welfare of young people . This enthusiasm led him to start the St John 's Preschool . The Sunday School also had 350 pupils at the time . 
 Frederick Allen Seymour Shaw , B.A. Th.L. , was the rector during the period 1949 – 1966 . He had already served as an assistant clergyman at St John 's during 1930 – 1931 . During that time , he was ordained . Eighteen years later he returned to St John 's as the rector . 
 John R. Seddon , Th.L. <unk> , was the rector from 1966 until he transferred to St Luke 's Mosman in 1973 . 
 Percy William " Bill " George Twine , Th.L. <unk> , was the rector during the period 1973 – 1980 . He had long been an organ player , and inclined toward high church style . He died suddenly whilst still the rector . 
 Stanford Ronald Colefax , R.F.D. <unk> , was the rector during the period 1980 – 1990 . 
 Dennis P. Robinson , Th.L. was the rector during the period 1990 – 2003 . 
 Andrew Katay , B.D. <unk> , became the rector in early 2005 . He was previously a Senior Associate Minister at St. Barnabas , Broadway , and Anglican chaplain at The University of Sydney , while leading the staff team of the Sydney University Evangelical Union . His arrival at the church marked a change from two traditional communion services to congregations with a variety of styles . 
 = = = Acting rectors = = = 
 From time to time , an acting rector or locum tenens has taken on temporary leadership , or filled a gap between rectors . 
 Septimus Hungerford was acting rector in 1879 . He had previously been the rector of St Peter 's Cathedral , Armidale . Later he became the incumbent at St Thomas ' Enfield . 
 William Hough took temporary leadership in 1889 whilst J. C. Corlette undertook the precentorship of Goulburn Cathedral . 
 Arthur Christian Corlette stood in temporarily for his older brother J. C. Corlette in 1898 . 
 Robert William <unk> Montgomery filled in at St John 's after the death of J. C. Corlette , during the period 1900 – 1901 . He was an Irishman who came to Australia as a missionary chaplain in 1891 . After leaving St John 's he took up a position as vicar of Cressy 
 Arthur <unk> M.A. LL.B. , acted as rector during the period 1928 – 1931 . 
 Archdeacon William <unk> Charlton led St John 's for four months in 1939 after the departure of H. S. Cocks . He had already served in Sydney churches for 55 years . 
 James R. Le <unk> , Th.L. was the acting rector during the period 2004 – 2005 . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 In the mid @-@ 1850s St John 's established a Church of England Denominational Day School in a small , plain white stone building near the corner of Charlotte and Bland St , which was reported as being in good repair with 28 pupils in 1867 . However , when the Ashfield public school expanded in 1875 , the church school proved unable to compete , and by 1880 it was closed . The building was sold to the newly begun Ashfield Boy 's College in 1882 , but was demolished in 1885 . 
 Catholic education in the area flourished , and seeing this , J. C. Corlette wrote to England to Miss Ellen Clarke , suggesting that she start a school for young ladies in Ashfield . This went ahead , the school known as Normanhurst School began in a cottage in Bland Street . Although it was officially non @-@ denominational , Normanhurst maintained strong links with St John 's . The school grew , and moved premises to Orpington Street , but eventually closed down in 1941 . 
 = = Land and buildings = = 
 = = = Church = = = 
 Having evolved over a long period , the church building displays elements of a range of styles including Colonial Gothick Picturesque , Victorian and Federation Free Gothic . The transepts and chancel are constructed from Sydney sandstone , whereas the nave and tower are rendered brick . The roofs are all slate . 
 The interior has been described as " architecturally much more satisfying than its exterior " . It has a hammerbeam ceiling with a curved rafter roof with <unk> , plaster walls , and stained glass in every window from a range of periods . The reredos and pulpit are distinctive cedar carvings by the early rector F. Wilkinson . 
 = = = Cemetery = = = 
 The cemetery is geographically aligned with the church , and takes up a large portion of the land area . The oldest graves are on the eastern side of the path , and typically face west . Newer graves on the western side of the path generally face east . 
 A number of notable former Ashfield residents are buried at St John 's . First Fleet convict , John <unk> / <unk> , had been transported for stealing clothing to the value of about one pound , eventually died in 1847 aged 104 . His headstone was defaced by vandals in 1965 . Several members of the Wilkinson and Underwood families were significant in the early European settlement of the Ashfield district . Louise Taplin ( 1855 – 1901 ) was matron of The Infants Home in Ashfield for 15 years until her death , and led the home through the 1890s depression , despite a shortage of salaried staff . Henry Halloran ( 1811 – 1893 ) was a poet and resident of Ashfield , and was married to Elizabeth Underwood 's daughter Elizabeth . Thomas Walker , a banker and philanthropist who owned and developed <unk> Estate , is in a family grave with his wife Jane , and daughter <unk> 's ashes . Samuel Henry Terry , a wealthy landowner and politician is also buried at St Johns , having spent the last part of his life in an Ashfield residence named The Lilacs . Randolph John Want was a solicitor and member of the New South Wales Legislative Council . Edward Thomas Jones Wrench was one of the founding partners of real estate agents Richardson and Wrench . Amy Schauer was a cookery instructor and author . The graveyard also contains members of the Taverner , Uhr and Rodd families , after whom the localities Taverner 's Hill , Uhr 's Point , and Rodd Point are named . There are also graves of three former rectors : T. H. Wilkinson , W. Lumsdaine , and J. C. Corlette , and members of their families , together with a pioneer clergyman , E. Rogers . 
 Beside these prominent figures , many of the St John 's graves contain children . Typhoid and whooping cough epidemics took heavy tolls in the Victorian period . Although Ashfield was known as a healthy area , many families lost two or even three children . 
 Burial rates at St John 's declined rapidly around the turn of the 20th century . The rector 's notes from the time indicate that many funeral services conducted at the church now preceded burial at Rookwood Cemetery . Although the cemetery has never officially been closed , no burial plots have been sold for some years . A memorial garden for the interment of ashes was opened in the time of J. R. Seddon , providing a popular resting place for the Ashfield community . 
 Since the late 1970s day @-@ release prisoners have assisted with maintenance of the cemetery grounds . In Australia 's bicentennial year , 1988 , a $ 16 @,@ 000 grant was awarded for restoration work in the cemetery , at which time some broken gravestones were cemented together , and some illegible ones were ' cut back ' and the letters repainted . 
 = = Ministry = = 
 Andrew Katay became the 18th rector in early 2005 . In 2008 the church was part of an amalgamation with the parish of Five Dock and Haberfield , forming Christ Church Inner West Anglican Community ( <unk> ) with Andrew Katay continuing as the rector of the new parish . There are currently three Sunday services at Ashfield , and two at Five Dock . 
 Since July 2006 it has run a mothers and children group , which discusses Christian parenting issues , and teaches English to those for whom it is not their native language . 
 In 2010 the church began an outdoor film festival showing ghost and horror movies in the historic cemetery . 
 = Colorado recall election , 2013 = 
 The Colorado recall election of 2013 was a successful effort to recall two Democratic members of the Colorado Senate following their support of new gun control legislation . Initially four politicians were targeted , but sufficient signatures could only be obtained for State Senate President John Morse and State Senator Angela Giron . 
 During the petition drive , national organizations on both the gun rights and gun control sides became involved by providing mailings and donations . Once the petitions were submitted , Morse and Giron challenged the effort in court , but were denied the injunction that they had requested from the court . A further court hearing resulted in the election being conducted in @-@ person rather than by mail , which also led to Giron complaining of voter suppression . 
 In the election , held on September 10 , 2013 , both Morse and Giron were recalled by the voters of their districts and replaced with Republicans George Rivera and Bernie Herpin , respectively . It was the first time a state legislator in Colorado had been recalled . In the 2014 Senate elections 13 months later , both Rivera and Herpin were defeated by their Democratic opponents . 
 = = Background = = 
 In early 2013 , the Colorado legislature passed a series of gun control bills following the theater shooting in Aurora , Colorado and the Sandy Hook school shooting in Newtown , Connecticut . The new laws provided for a ban on magazines holding more than fifteen rounds of ammunition , a universal background check , and a requirement that buyers pay a fee for the background check . 
 The initial recall petitions targeted Senate President John Morse and State Representative Mike McLachlan . Two additional petitions were also filed against Senators Evie Hudak and Angela Giron . All four are members of the Colorado Democratic Party . 
 The recall drive against Morse was spearheaded by the Basic Freedom Defense Fund ( BFDF ) and the El Paso County Freedom Defense Committee . The recall drive against Giron was led by Pueblo Freedom and Rights . 
 During the petition drive , groups supporting Morse accused the firm collecting the signatures of hiring convicted felons and gathering personal information . Recall backers said that Morse 's group was misleading the public . In addition , the recall drives brought in support from national groups on both sides of the issue . The National Rifle Association ( NRA ) supported the recall effort with mailers and donations . National groups opposing the recall included America Votes , believed to be financially supported by New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg , as well as California billionaire Eli Broad . 
 = = Submission and certification of petitions = = 
 On June 3 , 2013 , BFDF turned in over 16 @,@ 000 signatures petitioning to recall Morse to the Colorado Secretary of State , Republican Scott Gessler , of which only 7 @,@ 178 needed to be certified in order to force a recall election . In addition , over 13 @,@ 000 signatures were turned in to recall Giron , of which 11 @,@ 285 needed to be certified . Efforts to recall McLachlan failed , collecting only about 8 @,@ 500 signatures of the 10 @,@ 587 needed . Likewise , the efforts to recall Hudak also failed , falling short of the 18 @,@ 962 signatures needed . 
 A group backing Morse alleged that fifty of the signatures on the petitions were forged , including one individual who had been dead for two years . A spokesman for BFDF immediately issued a statement calling for an investigation and stating that if anyone committed fraud the guilty party should be prosecuted " to the fullest extent of the law . " The group calling for the recall also alleged that Morse 's volunteers were harassing those that signed the petition , requesting that they remove their name from the petition . 
 = = = Challenges = = = 
 Immediately after the signatures for recalling Morse were certified , he filed a challenge to the petitions . Mark <unk> , Morse 's attorney , said : " The petitions circulated are as valid as the back of a matchbook . All of the signatures are invalid . " The recall petition was also certified for the effort against Giron . Both Senators claimed the petitions were invalid because they did not use the explicit language that Morse and Giron claim was required under the state constitution . The initial hearings were before the Secretary of State 's Office , which denied the challenges . 
 On July 9 , 2013 , Morse filed suit in the Denver District Court seeking an injunction to block the recall election . At the same time Secretary of State Gessler filed suit to force Democratic Governor John Hickenlooper to set a date for the recall election . On July 18 , 2013 , Denver District Court Judge Robert Hyatt issued a preliminary ruling that the recall process must proceed even while Morse and Giron challenged the process in court . Hickenlooper then set the recall election for September 10 . 
 = = Election = = 
 = = = Campaign = = = 
 Once the election date was set as September 10 , national organizations on both sides of the gun @-@ control debate started to weigh in . On the recall , pro @-@ gun rights side was the National Rifle Association and Americans for Prosperity , while on the gun control side was the Mayors Against Illegal Guns and Mayor Bloomberg . Morse went door @-@ to @-@ door in an effort to gain voter support and both sides of the campaigns accused the other side of mud @-@ slinging . Morse supporters were upset about an ad alleging ethical misconduct by Morse , noting that he had been cleared of those allegations . Giron supporters were accused of misrepresenting the issue as a choice on women 's rights and abortion . 
 Financial donations were also an issue . Bloomberg and Broad donated $ 350 @,@ 000 and $ 250 @,@ 000 , respectively , to support the Senators . The Democratic Legislative Campaign Committee also spent $ 250 @,@ 000 to oppose recall . The NRA spent over $ 108 @,@ 000 to support the recall efforts . In total , the Morse and Giron side spent approximately $ 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 opposing the recall , while the recall supporters spent about $ 500 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Replacement candidates = = = 
 Early in the recall process , Republican George Rivera announced his candidacy for Giron 's senate seat . Rivera was planning to run against Giron in the 2014 elections but stated he would put his name on the ballot during the recall process . Rivera had to turn in a petition with 1 @,@ 000 signatures in order to qualify to be on the ballot and turned in 1 @,@ 500 signatures on July 26 . Sonia Negrete Winn , a Democrat , also sought to be on the ballot to replace Giron , but failed to obtain the required signatures to be a candidate . In Morse 's district , Republican Bernie Herpin announced his interest in replacing Morse and submitted sufficient signatures to qualify for the ballot . 
 = = = Ballot challenge = = = 
 On August 7 , 2013 , the Libertarian Party filed a lawsuit stating that they were denied access to have their candidate on the ballot due to a conflict between state law and the state constitution . State law provided for ten days to obtain ballot petition signatures , while the state constitution provided for fifteen days . On August 12 , Colorado District Court Judge Robert <unk> ruled that the state constitution 's provisions had to be followed , and that prospective candidates had until August 26 to turn in their petitions . The Colorado Supreme Court declined to hear an appeal . The ruling meant that election officials would be unable to conduct the election by mail , as is usual for Colorado , and would have to open up polls for in @-@ person voting . Morse stated that not voting by mail was " bad for everybody . " 
 On August 27 , 2013 , Hickenlooper asked the Colorado Supreme Court to clarify if a voter had to vote for recall in order to vote for a replacement candidate . At the same time , Libertarian Jan Brooks turned in petitions to be on the ballot against Morse while Democrat Richard Anglund announced his write @-@ in candidacy against Giron . On August 28 , the Supreme Court ruled that a voter did not have to vote to recall in order to vote for a replacement , but that the Senators could only be recalled by a majority vote . Secretary of State Gessler announced that Brooks did not have sufficient signatures to qualify for the ballot , leaving only Republican opponents on the ballot . 
 = = = Polling = = = 
 When asked " Will you vote ' yes ' or ' no ' on the question of whether Angela Giron should be recalled from the office of State Senator ? " 
 = = = Results = = = 
 Morse conceded on the evening of September 10 . Initial poll returns seemed to indicate that Giron would win her recall election . The final votes were 9 @,@ 131 to recall Morse and 8 @,@ 812 to keep him , a 1 @.@ 78 % difference . The final results also ousted Giron , 19 @,@ 451 to 15 @,@ 376 , an 11 @.@ 7 % difference . Giron 's recall was more surprising , as the district is 47 % Democratic to 23 % Republican , and news reports stated that Giron was stunned at the results . Other sources stated that Giron remained defiant . Giron has claimed that the recall was due to voter suppression . Giron noted that " We were less than two weeks out and we didn 't know what the rules were , " referring to the change from mail @-@ in ballots to in @-@ person voting . 
 With the recall of Morse and Giron , Herpin and Rivera were elected to the State Senate to replace them , defeating their respective write @-@ in opponents . 
 = = = = District 3 = = = = 
 = = = = District 11 = = = = 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Reactions = = = 
 Giron and Democratic National Committee Chair Debbie Wasserman Schultz claimed that the recall defeat was due to voter suppression . The Denver Post disputed this , saying that the result wasn 't caused by voter suppression but the fact that more people showed up to vote against Giron than to vote for her . Gessler said that the Democrats fared worse where more people turned out . Wasserman Schultz also stated that the money spent by the NRA and the Koch brothers made it impossible for Democrats to win . 
 Charles C. W. Cooke , writing in the National Review Online , stated that it was a grassroots effort , triggered by the perception that the two senators were not listening to the concerns of the public . Ashby Jones of the Wall Street Journal viewed it as a major win for the NRA and a " stinging defeat " for Mayor Bloomberg . 
 Reuters journalist Keith Coffman stated that the defeat was a sign that Democrats who control Colorado government had reached too far , not just on gun @-@ control , but in other areas also , such as not considering religious exemptions for same sex adoptions , or same @-@ day voter registration . 
 = = = Polling = = = 
 Polling firm Public Policy Polling conducted a poll of Giron 's district between September 7 and 9 , asking likely voters if they supported the recall of Giron , whether they supported various components of the gun control bill , whether they approved of the NRA and Governor Hickenlooper , and who they would vote for in a hypothetical 2014 gubernatorial election between Hickenlooper and Republican Tom Tancredo , as well as various methodological questions . The results found voters supported recalling Giron by 54 % to 42 % , with 4 % undecided . 
 However , the firm did not release the poll results before the election . The day after the election , when Giron had been recalled by 12 points , they released the poll and company director Tom Jensen explained why they had not initially done so , citing numerous unusual results . These included the district supporting her recall by such a wide margin , despite having been carried by 20 points by Democratic President Barack Obama in the 2012 election ; voters saying they supported universal background checks by 68 % to 27 % ; and voters being split 47 % to 47 % on limiting high @-@ capacity ammunition magazines to 15 bullets . Jensen opined that the NRA had done a " good job of turning the election more broadly into ' do you support gun rights or are you opposed to them . ' " Their decision not to release the poll caused significant controversy , with some statisticians and journalists criticising them and others supporting them . 
 = = = 2014 elections = = = 
 In the November 2014 Senate elections 13 months later , both Rivera and Herpin were defeated by large margins by their Democratic opponents . Rivera lost to State Representative Leroy Garcia and Herpin lost to State Representative Michael Merrifield , a noted gun control advocate . Despite reclaiming the two seats , the Democrats lost their overall majority in the Colorado Senate . Rivera lost by 22 @,@ 814 votes ( 45 @.@ 06 % ) to 27 @,@ 813 ( 54 @.@ 94 % ) and Herpin lost by 14 @,@ 978 votes ( 41 @.@ 52 % ) to 18 @,@ 815 ( 52 @.@ 16 % ) . 
 = = Campaign to recall Evie Hudak ; her resignation = = 
 On October 4 , 2013 , Colorado Secretary of State Scott Gessler approved a second petition to recall Colorado State Senator Evie Hudak , also an advocate of gun control ; the signature gatherers had 60 days to collect 18 @,@ 300 or more signatures to force a recall election in Colorado Senate District 19 which encompasses Arvada , Colorado and Westminster , Colorado . Hudak later resigned rather than face recall . Because she resigned , the Democrats were able to appoint a replacement ; if she had been recalled , the Republicans could have gained a majority in the state senate . 
 = SMS Bremse = 
 SMS Bremse was a Brummer @-@ class minelaying light cruiser of the German Kaiserliche Marine . She was built by AG Vulcan Stettin in 1915 and launched on 11 March 1916 at Stettin , Germany , the second of the two @-@ ship class after her sister , SMS Brummer . She served during the First World War , operating for most of the time in company with her sister . The two ships took part in an ambush on a convoy in the North Sea , where they sank two destroyers in a surprise attack , before hunting down and sinking nine merchantmen , after which they returned to port unscathed . 
 The Kaiserliche Marine considered sending the two ships to attack convoys in the Atlantic Ocean , but the difficulties associated with refueling at sea convinced the Germans to abandon the plan . Bremse was one of the ships interned at Scapa Flow under the terms of the armistice in November 1918 . On 21 June 1919 , the commander of the interned fleet , Rear Admiral Ludwig von Reuter , ordered the scuttling of the fleet . She was salvaged in 1929 by teams working for Ernest Cox , though they had to contend with large quantities of oil and the risks of fires and explosions . Having been brought back to the surface after a decade underwater , she was then scrapped . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Bremse was ordered under the contract name " D " and laid down at the AG Vulcan shipyard in Stettin in 1915 . She was launched on 11 March 1916 , after which fitting @-@ out work commenced . Completed in less than four months , she was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet on 1 July 1916 . The ship was 140 @.@ 4 meters ( 461 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 13 @.@ 2 m ( 43 ft ) and a draft of 6 m ( 20 ft ) forward . She displaced 5 @,@ 856 t ( 5 @,@ 764 long tons ; 6 @,@ 455 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two sets of steam turbines powered by two coal @-@ fired and four oil @-@ fired Marine @-@ type boilers . These provided a top speed of 28 knots ( 52 km / h ; 32 mph ) and a range of 5 @,@ 800 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 700 km ; 6 @,@ 700 mi ) at 12 kn ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . In service however , the ship reached 34 kn ( 63 km / h ; 39 mph ) . 
 The ship was armed with four 15 cm SK L / 45 guns in single pedestal mounts ; two were arranged side by side forward and two were placed in a superfiring pair aft . These guns fired a 45 @.@ 3 @-@ pound ( 20 @.@ 5 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 840 meters per second ( 2 @,@ 800 ft / s ) . The guns had a maximum elevation of 30 degrees , which allowed them to engage targets out to 17 @,@ 600 m ( 57 @,@ 700 ft ) . They were supplied with 600 rounds of ammunition , for 150 shells per gun . Brummer also carried two 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) L / 45 anti @-@ aircraft guns mounted on the centerline astern of the funnels . She was also equipped with a pair of 50 cm ( 20 in ) torpedo tubes with four torpedoes in a swivel mount amidships . Designed as a minelayer , she carried 400 mines . The ship was protected by a waterline armored belt that was 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) thick amidships . The conning tower had 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick sides , and the deck was covered with 15 mm ( 0 @.@ 59 in ) thick armor plate . 
 = = Career = = 
 Over the period 11 – 20 October 1916 , Bremse and Brummer served with the High Seas Fleet in the North Sea . On 10 January 1917 , the two ships laid a minefield off Norderney . They escorted minesweepers on 1 – 13 March based in Emden and Wilhelmshaven . Their first major offensive operation was an attack on a British convoy in October 1917 . Britain had agreed to ship 250 @,@ 000 t ( 250 @,@ 000 long tons ; 280 @,@ 000 short tons ) tons of coal per month to Norway , and a regular stream of convoys carrying shipments of coal was crossing the North Sea by late 1917 . These were usually weakly escorted by only a couple of destroyers and armed trawlers . Attempts to interdict them with U @-@ boats had to that point been ineffective , so Admiral Reinhard Scheer , the chief of the Admiralstab , decided to deploy a surface force to carry out a surprise attack to supplement the U @-@ boat campaign . In addition to damaging British shipping , Scheer sought to divert escorts from the Atlantic theater , where his U @-@ boats were concentrated . Bremse , commanded by Fregattenkapitän <unk> , and Brummer , commanded by Fregattenkapitän <unk> , were selected for the first such operation . Their high speed and large radius of action , coupled with their resemblance to British light cruisers , made them suited to the task . In preparation for the raid , their crews painted the ships dark gray to further camouflage them as British vessels . 
 Half an hour after dawn on the morning of 17 October , Brummer and Bremse attacked a westbound convoy about 70 nautical miles ( 130 km ; 81 mi ) east of Lerwick . The convoy consisted of twelve merchantmen and was escorted by the destroyers HMS Strongbow and Mary Rose and a pair of armed trawlers which had departed from Bergen . At dawn lookouts aboard Stronghold reported two unidentified ships closing on the convoy . Mistaking them for British cruisers Strongbow flashed recognition signals , but was suddenly fired upon at a range of 2 @,@ 700 m ( 8 @,@ 900 ft ) by a barrage of 15 cm shells . Mary Rose tried to come to her assistance but was also hit ; both ships were quickly sunk . Brummer and Bremse then turned their attention to the convoy , hunting down and sinking nine of the merchantmen , before returning to port . One of the armed trawlers , the Elise , was fired on by Bremse while attempting to pick up survivors . None of the ships were able to send a wireless report , and despite having a squadron of sixteen light cruisers at sea to the south of the convoy , the British did not learn of the attack until 16 : 00 , when it was too late . Admiral David Beatty said of the action that ' luck was against us . ' The Admiralty responded to the raid by adding more and bigger escorts . 
 Late in the war , the Admiralstab considered sending Brummer and Bremse on a commerce raiding mission into the Atlantic . They were to operate off the Azores in concert with an oiler . The central Atlantic was out of the normal range of the U @-@ boats , and convoys were therefore lightly defended in the area . The Admiralstab canceled the plan , however , after it was determined that refueling at sea would be too difficult . Another problem was the tendency of the two ships to emit clouds of red sparks when steaming at speeds over 20 kn ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) ; this would hamper their ability to evade Allied ships at night . On 2 April 1918 , Bremse laid a minefield consisting of 304 mines in the North Sea . She laid another 150 mines in the same area on 11 April . Bremse and her sister ended the month with a fleet sortie with the rest of the battle fleet on 22 – 24 April . On 11 May , Bremse laid another minefield in the North Sea with 400 mines . Three days later , she laid another 420 mines in the North Sea . She was to have been part of the final sortie of the High Seas Fleet in October 1918 , but the operation was cancelled due to the outbreak of mutiny in the German Fleet . 
 = = = Internment and scuttling = = = 
 Along with the most modern units of the High Seas Fleet , Brummer and Bremse were included in the ships specified for internment at Scapa Flow by the victorious Allied powers . The ships steamed out of Germany on 21 November 1918 in single file , commanded by Rear Admiral Ludwig von Reuter . They were met at sea by a combined fleet of 370 British , American , and French warships . The fleet arrived in the Firth of Forth later that day , and between 25 and 27 November , they were escorted to Scapa Flow . Upon arrival , all wireless equipment was removed from the ships and the breech blocks of their heavy guns taken to prevent their use . Crews were reduced to minimum levels . 
 The fleet remained in captivity during the negotiations that ultimately produced the Treaty of Versailles . Reuter believed that the British intended to seize the German ships on 21 June 1919 , which was the deadline for Germany to have signed the peace treaty . Unaware that the deadline had been extended to the 23rd , Reuter ordered the ships to be sunk at the next opportunity . On the morning of 21 June , the British fleet left Scapa Flow to conduct training maneuvers , and at 11 : 20 Reuter transmitted the order to his ships . An armed British naval party had attempted to board Bremse and close her bottom valves , but found that they were already below the rising waterline . Instead they blasted off her anchor chains and she was taken in tow by a tug and the destroyer HMS Venetia , in an attempt to beach her before she sank . They managed to run her bow onto the beach , south of Cava , but the steeply sloping approach meant that her stern settled in deeper water , and she rolled over and sank in 75 ft ( 23 m ) of water at 14 : 30 , leaving her bow visible at low tide . 
 = = Salvage = = 
 Though the Admiralty arranged for some of the ships to be salvaged , most were left at the bottom of the sound until entrepreneur Ernest Cox bought the salvage rights and began to raise the remaining ships in the early 1920s . Bremse presented particular challenges . She had come to rest perched precariously on a rock , which sloped away dramatically , causing fears that she might slip off and sink in deeper water . Cox 's salvage team sealed her bulkheads and divided the hull into watertight compartments . The hull was patched up and an airlock fitted , but the team ran into difficulties with the large amount of oil which covered the wreck , more than had been found in any other of the ships salvaged previously . A three @-@ man team using oxyacetylene torches ignited some oil , causing an explosion . The men escaped without serious injuries , and thereafter small explosions and fires were common over the two months it took to prepare the ship , though no one was injured . 
 By July 1929 the last of the superstructure had been cleared , and Bremse was turned upside down using techniques developed on salvaging some of the destroyers . <unk> were then used to pump air into the hull and bring her to the surface , while she was supported by 9 @-@ inch wires attached to two floating docks anchored on her port shoreward side . The salvage teams had almost raised her when she suddenly toppled onto her side and then heeled over gradually during the night , settling onto the rocks inshore . 
 It was thought that the failure had been caused by there being too much remaining superstructure , and attempts were made to clean out the large quantity of oil that had spilled out during the attempt to raise her . The decision was made to burn off the oil , but the fire spread and had to be brought back under control . She was again patched up and pumped with air , breaking the surface on 29 November . The Bremse was eventually considered too unsafe to tow to Rosyth for scrapping , as had been done with the other ships Cox had salvaged , and instead she was taken to Lyness on 30 November 1929 and broken up there . 
 = Kirby 's Dream Land = 
 Kirby 's Dream Land is a 1992 action @-@ platform video game for the Game Boy , developed by HAL Laboratory and published by Nintendo . It is both the first video game in the Kirby series and the debut of Kirby himself . Being the inaugural Kirby title , it created many conventions that would appear in later games in the series , including Kirby 's basic moves . However , Kirby 's trademark " copy " ability would not appear until Kirby 's Adventure , released less than one year later . Kirby 's Dream Land was designed by Masahiro Sakurai , who intended it to be a simple game that could be easy to pick up and play even by those unfamiliar with action games . He offered additional optional challenges for more advanced gamers such as an unlockable hard mode and the ability to edit Kirby 's maximum HP and starting number of lives . Kirby 's Dream Land was re @-@ released on the Nintendo 3DS via the Virtual Console in 2011 and was also one of the games included in the compilation game Kirby 's Dream Collection for the Wii , released to celebrate Kirby 's 20th anniversary . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The gluttonous King Dedede has stolen all of the food from the inhabitants of Dream Land for a midnight feast , so Kirby , a resident of Dream Land , goes to retrieve the food and stop Dedede . Kirby 's Dream Land plays like other platformers of the 8 @-@ bit and 16 @-@ bit era of video games : Kirby must use various natural abilities and occasionally items or power @-@ ups while heading toward the goal at the end of each level where a boss is fought . All levels are played on a two @-@ dimensional plane , letting Kirby move only left , right , up , and down . Kirby can walk , jump , and fly . Kirby can also inhale objects and enemies , swallowing them or spitting them out as projectiles . 
 Levels are made up of a series of large " rooms " rather than the single long corridors typical of platformers at the time and the doors between these rooms act as checkpoints returning the player to the beginning of a " room " when they die rather than starting the level over . Like many 1980s @-@ era platformers , the player can accumulate points , with an extra life granted when the player has enough points . However , because Kirby lacks a save function , scores are not recorded . Also , there are no save files , so the player has to start over again when the Game Boy is turned off , if the player chooses to return to the title screen after a Game Over , or if the player resets the game . Once the game has been completed , a code is offered to play an optional Extra Game , in which the difficulty is significantly increased . Completing the extra game offered a second code that lets the player adjust lives and vitality settings to play an even easier or harder game , and listen to music and sound effects freely . Since there is no save function , these codes are allowed to be entered even on a new session where the game has not been beaten yet . 
 = = Development = = 
 Kirby 's Dream Land was developed by Masahiro Sakurai of HAL Laboratory . Kirby was a dummy character that the developers used until they could define a more sophisticated image . The designers grew to like Kirby so much that they decided to keep him instead of using a more advanced character . He was originally named Popopo ( <unk> ) , and Kirby 's Dream Land was titled Twinkle Popo ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> Popo ) . Eventually , he was renamed Kirby and the game was renamed Kirby of the Stars . During the development of what was then referred to as Twinkle Popopo , Popopo / Kirby 's color had not been decided upon . Masahiro Sakurai wanted him to be pink , while Shigeru Miyamoto felt that he should be yellow . Eventually , Nintendo decided to make him pink . Although pink is still Kirby 's main color , later games have shown Kirby in a wide variety of colors , including yellow . When Kirby of the Stars was first released in Japan , it featured Kirby as being pink . However , Nintendo of America designed the North American box art and advertisements with a white Kirby based on the game 's grey @-@ scale visuals . 
 The music was composed by Jun Ishikawa . He was the only composer for this game , and has been a regular composer in the Kirby series . His most recent work was on Kirby : Triple Deluxe in 2014 . Certain songs were also reused in the Super Smash Bros. series as the background music of the Dream Land stage in Super Smash Bros. and the Green Greens stage in Super Smash Bros. Melee . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Kirby 's Dream Land has received generally positive reception . It holds an aggregate score of 64 @.@ 83 % on Game Rankings with six reviews , making it the 13th best Game Boy game and the <unk> best video game . By May 28 , 1995 Kirby 's Dream Land had sold 1 @.@ 3 million copies . To date , it has sold in excess of 5 million copies worldwide ; Gamasutra cited its new style of gameplay for its success . At the time , it was HAL Laboratory 's most successful game . Gamasutra 's Osamu Inoue attributed the game 's success to Satoru Iwata , formerly an employee of HAL Laboratory , who Inoue comments has a " simple @-@ minded passion for creating games " . Game Informer 's Ben Reeves called it the 14th best Game Boy game and felt that it was a relaxing game . Author Wendy <unk> used Kirby 's Dream Land 's plot as an example of how early platform games ' plots progressed , which she collectively described as " the main character needing to reach a villain to put right a wrong . " Humongous Life 's Jonathan Wahlgren called it a strong game , but felt it to be " too elementary " . GamesRadar 's Brett Elston did an article on its music , specifically giving praise to the final boss music , stating that it is the " only song in the original Kirby that had a sense of challenge or conflict instead of skipping through a field of floating cakes . " Nadia Oxford of 1UP.com praised it for its unique platforming mechanics , describing it as the start of a " gluttonous legend " . Allgame 's Joshua Crystal called it a " great game for beginner players and ones that enjoy a fun , but short , experience . " . 
 In an article detailing various Kirby series video games , IGN stated that it was a decent platformer , but also very basic compared to later titles . IGN 's Lucas M. Thomas and Craig Harris included Kirby 's Dream Land in their <unk> for a hypothetical " Virtual Console " for the Nintendo 3DS , commenting that its inclusion would be based on nostalgia rather than it feeling " new and sensational " . They also added that original characters like Kirby were the stars of the Game Boy rather than established characters such as Link , Mario , Samus Aran , and Pit . They would again praise Kirby 's Dream Land for being an original game in their " History of the Game Boy " article , adding that while " attitude " was common in new platforming mascots , Kirby was cheery and adorable , while the game featured " breezy , casual gameplay and lighthearted atmosphere " . GameSpy 's Gerald Villoria , Brian <unk> , and Ryan Scott called it " basic " compared to later titles in the series , adding that it lacked a sense of danger because Kirby could fly . Nintendo Power editors George and Bob shared roughly similar opinions of the game ; George stated that it is a really fun game , owing its quality to its excellent play control and well thought out concept , while Bob stated that it is deceptively simple looking , when it in fact features a decent challenge for more experienced gamers . GamesRadar listed Kirby 's Dream Land and its sequel as two of the titles they want in the 3DS Virtual Console . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Kirby 's Dream Land has since spawned dozens of sequels across more than a half @-@ dozen video game consoles . The first direct sequel was Kirby 's Adventure , which was released on the Nintendo Entertainment System console . It introduced the ability to steal powers from enemies , an ability which has been used in the majority of games following it . It was followed by two more Dream Land titles : Kirby 's Dream Land 2 and Kirby 's Dream Land 3 . The series has featured several spin @-@ offs , including the racing game Kirby Air Ride and pinball game Kirby 's Pinball Land . Several other games have featured Kirby 's Dream Land in one way or the other . In Kirby Super Star , the " Spring Breeze " subgame is a shortened remake of Kirby 's Dream Land missing the Castle <unk> level and <unk> boss fight but adding Kirby 's copy ability from later titles . Super Star 's remake Kirby Super Star Ultra features " Revenge of The King " , which takes inspiration from Kirby 's Dream Land 's extra mode . In Super Smash Bros. and Super Smash Bros. Melee , a stage called " Dream Land " appears , taking elements from Dream Land . The Dream Land stage reappeared in Super Smash Bros. for Nintendo 3DS and Wii U as downloadable content in both versions . 
 = Karl Marx = 
 Karl Marx ( / <unk> / ; German : [ <unk> ̯ l <unk> ̯ ks ] ; 5 May 1818 – 14 March 1883 ) was a philosopher , economist , sociologist , journalist , and revolutionary socialist . Born in Prussia to a middle @-@ class family , he later studied political economy and Hegelian philosophy . As an adult , Marx became stateless and spent much of his life in London , England , where he continued to develop his thought in collaboration with German thinker Friedrich Engels and published various works , the most well @-@ known being the 1848 pamphlet The Communist Manifesto . His work has since influenced subsequent intellectual , economic , and political history . 
 Marx 's theories about society , economics and politics — collectively understood as Marxism — hold that human societies develop through class struggle : a conflict between ruling classes ( known as the bourgeoisie ) that control the means of production and working classes ( known as the proletariat ) that work on these means by selling their labour for wages . Through his theories of alienation , value , commodity fetishism , and surplus value , Marx argued that capitalism facilitated social relations and ideology through commodification , inequality , and the exploitation of labour . Employing a critical approach known as historical materialism , Marx propounded the theory of base and superstructure , asserting that the cultural and political conditions of society , as well as its notions of human nature , are largely determined by obscured economic foundations . These economic critiques would result in influential works such as Capital , Volume I ( 1867 ) . 
 According to Marx , states are run in the interests of the ruling class but are nonetheless represented as being in favor of the common interest of all . He predicted that , like previous socioeconomic systems , capitalism produced internal tensions which would lead to its self @-@ destruction and replacement by a new system : socialism . For Marx , class antagonisms under capitalism , owing in part to its instability and crisis @-@ prone nature , would eventuate the working class ' development of class consciousness , leading to their conquest of political power and eventually the establishment of a classless , communist society governed by a free association of producers . Marx actively fought for its implementation , arguing that the working class should carry out organised revolutionary action to topple capitalism and bring about socio @-@ economic emancipation . 
 Marx has been described as one of the most influential figures in human history , and his work has been both lauded and criticised . His work in economics laid the basis for much of the current understanding of labour and its relation to capital , and subsequent economic thought . Many intellectuals , labour unions , artists and political parties worldwide have been influenced by Marx 's work , with many modifying or adapting his ideas . Marx is typically cited as one of the principal architects of modern sociology and social science . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Childhood and early education : 1818 – 1835 = = = 
 Karl Marx was born on 5 May 1818 to Heinrich Marx and Henrietta Pressburg ( 1788 – 1863 ) . He was born at 664 <unk> in Trier , a town then part of the Kingdom of Prussia 's Province of the Lower Rhine . Marx was ancestrally Jewish ; his maternal grandfather was a Dutch rabbi , while his paternal line had supplied Trier 's rabbis since 1723 , a role taken by his grandfather Meier <unk> Marx . Karl 's father , as a child known as Herschel , was the first in the line to receive a secular education ; he became a lawyer and lived a relatively wealthy and middle @-@ class existence , with his family owning a number of Moselle vineyards . Prior to his son 's birth , and to escape the constraints of anti @-@ semitic legislation , Herschel converted from Judaism to Lutheranism , the main Protestant denomination in Germany and Prussia at the time , taking on the German forename of Heinrich over the Yiddish Herschel . 
 Largely non @-@ religious , Heinrich was a man of the Enlightenment , interested in the ideas of the philosophers Immanuel Kant and Voltaire . A classical liberal , he took part in agitation for a constitution and reforms in Prussia , then governed by an absolute monarchy . In 1815 Heinrich Marx began work as an attorney , in 1819 moving his family to a ten @-@ room property near the Porta <unk> . His wife , a Dutch Jewish woman , Henrietta Pressburg , was semi @-@ literate and was said to suffer from " excessive mother love " , devoting much time to her family and insisting on cleanliness within her home . She was from a prosperous business family that later founded the company Philips Electronics : she was great @-@ aunt to Anton and Gerard Philips , and great @-@ great @-@ aunt to Frits Philips . Her sister Sophie <unk> ( 1797 – 1854 ) , was Marx 's aunt and was married to Lion Philips ( 1794 – 1866 ) Marx 's uncle through this marriage , and was the grandfather of both Gerald and Anton Philips . Lion Philips was a wealthy Dutch tobacco manufacturer and industrialist , upon whom Karl and Jenny Marx would later often come to rely for loans while they were exiled in London . In contrast to her husband , Henrietta retained her Jewish faith . 
 Little is known of Karl Marx 's childhood . The third of nine children , he became the oldest son when his brother Moritz died in 1819 . Young Karl was baptised into the Lutheran Church in August 1824 . His surviving siblings , Sophie , Hermann , Henriette , Louise , Emilie and Karoline , were also baptised as Lutherans . Young Karl was privately educated , by Heinrich Marx , until 1830 , when he entered Trier High School , whose headmaster , Hugo <unk> , was a friend of his father . By employing many liberal humanists as teachers , <unk> incurred the anger of the local conservative government . Subsequently , police raided the school in 1832 , and discovered that literature espousing political liberalism was being distributed among the students . Considering the distribution of such material a seditious act , the authorities instituted reforms and replaced several staff during Marx 's attendance . 
 In October 1835 at the age of 17 , Marx travelled to the University of Bonn wishing to study philosophy and literature ; however , his father insisted on law as a more practical field . Due to a condition referred to as a " weak chest " , Karl was excused from military duty when he turned 18 . While at the University at Bonn , Marx joined the Poets ' Club , a group containing political radicals that were monitored by the police . Marx also joined the Trier Tavern Club drinking society ( <unk> der <unk> ) , at one point serving as club co @-@ president . Additionally , Marx was involved in certain disputes , some of which became serious : in August 1836 he took part in a duel with a member of the university 's Borussian Korps . Although his grades in the first term were good , they soon deteriorated , leading his father to force a transfer to the more serious and academic University of Berlin . 
 = = = Hegelianism and early activism : 1836 – 1843 = = = 
 Spending summer and autumn 1836 in Trier , Marx became more serious about his studies and his life . He became engaged to Jenny von Westphalen , an educated baroness of the Prussian ruling class who had known Marx since childhood . Having broken off her engagement with a young aristocrat to be with Marx , their relationship was socially controversial due to the differences between their religious and class origins , but Marx befriended her father , a liberal aristocrat , Ludwig von Westphalen , and later dedicated his doctoral thesis to him . Seven years after their engagement , on 19 June 1843 , Marx married Jenny in a Protestant church in Kreuznach . 
 In October 1836 Marx arrived in Berlin , matriculating in the university 's faculty of law and renting a room in the <unk> . Although studying law , he was fascinated by philosophy , and looked for a way to combine the two , believing that " without philosophy nothing could be accomplished " . Marx became interested in the recently deceased German philosopher G. W. F. Hegel , whose ideas were then widely debated among European philosophical circles . During a convalescence in <unk> , he joined the Doctor 's Club ( <unk> ) , a student group which discussed Hegelian ideas , and through them became involved with a group of radical thinkers known as the Young Hegelians in 1837 ; they gathered around Ludwig Feuerbach and Bruno Bauer , with Marx developing a particularly close friendship with Adolf <unk> . Like Marx , the Young Hegelians were critical of Hegel 's metaphysical assumptions , but adopted his dialectical method in order to criticise established society , politics , and religion from a leftist perspective . Marx 's father died in May 1838 , resulting in a diminished income for the family . Marx had been emotionally close to his father , and treasured his memory after his death . 
 By 1837 , Marx was writing both fiction and non @-@ fiction , having completed a short novel , Scorpion and Felix , a drama , <unk> , and a number of love poems dedicated to Jenny von Westphalen , though none of this early work was published during his lifetime . Marx soon abandoned fiction for other pursuits , including the study of both English and Italian , art history and the translation of Latin classics . He began co @-@ operating with Bruno Bauer on editing Hegel 's Philosophy of Religion in 1840 . Marx was also engaged in writing his doctoral thesis , The Difference Between the <unk> and Epicurean Philosophy of Nature , which he completed in 1841 . It was described as " a daring and original piece of work in which Marx set out to show that theology must yield to the superior wisdom of philosophy " : the essay was controversial , particularly among the conservative professors at the University of Berlin . Marx decided , instead , to submit his thesis to the more liberal University of Jena , whose faculty awarded him his PhD in April 1841 . As Marx and Bauer were both atheists , in March 1841 they began plans for a journal entitled Archiv des <unk> ( Atheistic Archives ) , but it never came to fruition . In July , Marx and Bauer took a trip to Bonn from Berlin . There they scandalised their class by getting drunk , laughing in church , and galloping through the streets on donkeys . 
 Marx was considering an academic career , but this path was barred by the government 's growing opposition to classical liberalism and the Young Hegelians . Marx moved to Cologne in 1842 , where he became a journalist , writing for the radical newspaper Rheinische Zeitung ( " Rhineland News " ) , expressing his early views on socialism and his developing interest in economics . He criticised both right @-@ wing European governments as well as figures in the liberal and socialist movements whom he thought ineffective or counter @-@ productive . The newspaper attracted the attention of the Prussian government censors , who checked every issue for seditious material before printing ; Marx lamented that " Our newspaper has to be presented to the police to be sniffed at , and if the police nose smells anything un @-@ Christian or un @-@ Prussian , the newspaper is not allowed to appear . " After the Rheinische Zeitung published an article strongly criticising the Russian monarchy , Tsar Nicholas I requested it be banned ; Prussia 's government complied in 1843 . 
 = = = Paris : 1843 – 1845 = = = 
 In 1843 , Marx became co @-@ editor of a new , radical leftist Parisian newspaper , the Deutsch @-@ <unk> <unk> ( German @-@ French Annals ) , then being set up by the German socialist Arnold Ruge to bring together German and French radicals , and thus Marx and his wife moved to Paris in October 1843 . Initially living with Ruge and his wife communally at 23 Rue <unk> , they found the living conditions difficult , so moved out following the birth of their daughter Jenny in 1844 . Although intended to attract writers from both France and the German states , the <unk> was dominated by the latter ; the only non @-@ German writer was the exiled Russian anarchist collectivist Mikhail Bakunin . Marx contributed two essays to the paper , " Introduction to a Contribution to the Critique of Hegel 's Philosophy of Right " and " On the Jewish Question , " the latter introducing his belief that the proletariat were a revolutionary force and marking his embrace of communism . Only one issue was published , but it was relatively successful , largely owing to the inclusion of Heinrich Heine 's satirical odes on King Ludwig of Bavaria , leading the German states to ban it and seize imported copies ; Ruge nevertheless refused to fund the publication of further issues , and his friendship with Marx broke down . After the paper 's collapse , Marx began writing for the only uncensored German @-@ language radical newspaper left , Vorwärts ! ( Forward ! ) . Based in Paris , the paper was connected to the League of the Just , a utopian socialist secret society of workers and artisans . Marx attended some of their meetings , but did not join . In Vorwärts ! , Marx refined his views on socialism based upon Hegelian and <unk> ideas of dialectical materialism , at the same time criticising liberals and other socialists operating in Europe . 
 On 28 August 1844 , Marx met the German socialist Friedrich Engels at the Café de la Régence , beginning a lifelong friendship . Engels showed Marx his recently published The Condition of the Working Class in England in 1844 , convincing Marx that the working class would be the agent and instrument of the final revolution in history . Soon Marx and Engels were collaborating on a criticism of the philosophical ideas of Marx 's former friend , Bruno Bauer . This work was published in 1845 as The Holy Family . Although critical of Bauer , Marx was increasingly influenced by the ideas of the Young Hegelians Max Stirner and Ludwig Feuerbach , but eventually Marx and Engels abandoned <unk> materialism as well . 
 During the time that he lived at 38 Rue <unk> in Paris ( from October 1843 until January 1845 ) , Marx engaged in an intensive study of " political economy " ( Adam Smith , David Ricardo , James Mill etc . ) , the French socialists ( especially Claude Henri St. Simon and Charles Fourier ) and the history of France . " The study of political economy is a study that Marx would pursue for the rest of his life and would result in his major economic work — the three @-@ volume series called Capital . Marxism is based in large part on three influences : Hegel 's dialectics , French utopian socialism and English economics . Together with his earlier study of Hegel 's dialectics , the studying that Marx did during this time in Paris meant that all major components of " Marxism " ( or political economy as Marx called it ) were in place by the autumn of 1844 . Although Marx was constantly being pulled away from his study of political economy by the usual daily demands on his time that everyone faces , and the additional special demands of editing a radical newspaper and later by the demands of organising and directing the efforts of a political party during years in which popular uprisings of the citizenry might at any moment become a revolution , Marx was always drawn back to his economic studies . Marx sought " to understand the inner workings of capitalism " . 
 An outline of " Marxism " had definitely formed in the mind of Karl Marx by late 1844 . Indeed , many features of the Marxist view of the world 's political economy had been worked out in great detail . However , Marx needed to write down all of the details of his economic world view to further clarify the new economic theory in his own mind . Accordingly , Marx wrote The Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts . These manuscripts covered numerous topics , detailing Marx 's concept of alienated labour . However , by the spring of 1845 his continued study of political economy , capital and capitalism had led Marx to the belief that the new political economic theory that he was espousing — scientific socialism — needed to be built on the base of a thoroughly developed materialistic view of the world . 
 The Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844 had been written between April and August 1844 . Soon , though , Marx recognised that the Manuscripts had been influenced by some inconsistent ideas of Ludwig Feuerbach . Accordingly , Marx recognised the need to break with Feuerbach 's philosophy in favour of historical materialism . Thus , a year later , in April 1845 , after moving from Paris to Brussels , Marx wrote his eleven " Theses on Feuerbach , " The " Theses on Feuerbach " are best known for Thesis 11 , which states that " philosophers have only interpreted the world in various ways , the point is to change it " . This work contains Marx 's criticism of materialism ( for being contemplative ) , idealism ( for reducing practice to theory ) overall , criticising philosophy for putting abstract reality above the physical world . It thus introduced the first glimpse at Marx 's historical materialism , an argument that the world is changed not by ideas but by actual , physical , material activity and practice . In 1845 , after receiving a request from the Prussian king , the French government shut down Vorwärts ! , with the interior minister , François Guizot , expelling Marx from France . At this point , Marx moved from Paris to Brussels , where Marx hoped to , once again , continue his study of capitalism and political economy . 
 = = = Brussels : 1845 – 1848 = = = 
 Unable either to stay in France or to move to Germany , Marx decided to emigrate to Brussels in Belgium in February 1845 . However , to stay in Belgium , Marx had to pledge not to publish anything on the subject of contemporary politics . In Brussels , he associated with other exiled socialists from across Europe , including Moses Hess , Karl Heinzen , and Joseph <unk> , and soon , in April 1845 , Engels moved from Barmen in Germany to Brussels to join Marx and the growing cadre of members of the League of the Just now seeking home in Brussels . Later , Mary Burns , Engels ' long @-@ time companion , left Manchester , England , to join Engels in Brussels . 
 In mid @-@ July 1845 , Marx and Engels left Brussels for England to visit the leaders of the Chartists , a socialist movement in Britain . This was Marx 's first trip to England and Engels was an ideal guide for the trip . Engels had already spent two years living in Manchester , from November 1842 to August 1844 . Not only did Engels already know the English language , he had developed a close relationship with many Chartist leaders . Indeed , Engels was serving as a reporter for many Chartist and socialist English newspapers . Marx used the trip as an opportunity to examine the economic resources available for study in various libraries in London and Manchester . 
 In collaboration with Engels , Marx also set about writing a book which is often seen as his best treatment of the concept of historical materialism , The German Ideology . In this work , Marx broke with Ludwig Feuerbach , Bruno Bauer , Max Stirner and the rest of the Young Hegelians , and also broke with Karl <unk> and other " true socialists " whose philosophies were still based in part on " idealism " . In German Ideology Marx and Engels finally completed their philosophy , which was based solely on materialism as the sole motor force in history . 
 German Ideology is written in a humorously satirical form . But even this satirical form did not save the work from censorship . Like so many other early writings of his , German Ideology would not be published in Marx 's lifetime and would be published only in 1932 . 
 After completing German Ideology , Marx turned to a work that was intended to clarify his own position regarding " the theory and tactics " of a truly " revolutionary proletarian movement " operating from the standpoint of a truly " scientific materialist " philosophy . This work was intended to draw a distinction between the utopian socialists and Marx 's own scientific socialist philosophy . Whereas the <unk> believed that people must be persuaded one person at a time to join the socialist movement , the way a person must be persuaded to adopt any different belief , Marx knew that people would tend on most occasions to act in accordance with their own economic interests . Thus , appealing to an entire class ( the working class in this case ) with a broad appeal to the class 's best material interest would be the best way to mobilise the broad mass of that class to make a revolution and change society . This was the intent of the new book that Marx was planning . However , to get the manuscript past the government censors , Marx called the book The Poverty of Philosophy ( 1847 ) and offered it as a response to the " petty bourgeois philosophy " of the French anarchist socialist Pierre @-@ Joseph Proudhon as expressed in his book The Philosophy of Poverty ( 1840 ) . 
 These books laid the foundation for Marx and Engels 's most famous work , a political pamphlet that has since come to be commonly known as The Communist Manifesto . While residing in Brussels in 1846 , Marx continued his association with the secret radical organisation League of the Just . As noted above , Marx thought the League to be just the sort of radical organisation that was needed to spur the working class of Europe toward the mass movement that would bring about a working class revolution . However , to organise the working class into a mass movement , the League had to cease its " secret " or " underground " orientation and operate in the open as a political party . Members of the League eventually became persuaded in this regard . Accordingly , in June 1847 the League of the Just was reorganised by its membership into a new open " above ground " political society that appealed directly to the working classes . This new open political society was called the Communist League . Both Marx and Engels participated in drawing the programme and organisational principles of the new Communist League . 
 In late 1847 , Marx and Engels began writing what was to become their most famous work — a programme of action for the Communist League . Written jointly by Marx and Engels from December 1847 to January 1848 , The Communist Manifesto was first published on 21 February 1848 . The Communist Manifesto laid out the beliefs of the new Communist League . No longer a secret society , the Communist League wanted to make aims and intentions clear to the general public rather than hiding its beliefs as the League of the Just had been doing . The opening lines of the pamphlet set forth the principal basis of Marxism , that " The history of all hitherto existing society is the history of class struggles . " It goes on to examine the antagonisms that Marx claimed were arising in the clashes of interest between the bourgeoisie ( the wealthy capitalist class ) and the proletariat ( the industrial working class ) . Proceeding on from this , the Manifesto presents the argument for why the Communist League , as opposed to other socialist and liberal political parties and groups at the time , was truly acting in the interests of the proletariat to overthrow capitalist society and to replace it with socialism . 
 Later that year , Europe experienced a series of protests , rebellions , and often violent upheavals that became known as the Revolution of 1848 . In France , a revolution led to the overthrow of the monarchy and the establishment of the French Second Republic . Marx was supportive of such activity , and having recently received a substantial inheritance from his father of either 6 @,@ 000 or 5 @,@ 000 francs , allegedly used a third of it to arm Belgian workers who were planning revolutionary action . Although the veracity of these allegations is disputed , the Belgian Ministry of Justice accused him of it , subsequently arresting him , and he was forced to flee back to France , where , with a new republican government in power , he believed that he would be safe . 
 = = = Cologne : 1848 – 1849 = = = 
 Temporarily settling down in Paris , Marx transferred the Communist League executive headquarters to the city and also set up a German Workers ' Club with various German socialists living there . Hoping to see the revolution spread to Germany , in 1848 Marx moved back to Cologne where he began issuing a handbill entitled the Demands of the Communist Party in Germany , in which he argued for only four of the ten points of the Communist Manifesto , believing that in Germany at that time , the bourgeoisie must overthrow the feudal monarchy and aristocracy before the proletariat could overthrow the bourgeoisie . On 1 June , Marx started publication of a daily newspaper , the Neue Rheinische Zeitung , which he helped to finance through his recent inheritance from his father . Designed to put forward news from across Europe with his own Marxist interpretation of events , the newspaper featured Marx as a primary writer and the dominant editorial influence . Despite contributions by fellow members of the Communist League , it remained , according to Friedrich Engels , " a simple dictatorship by Marx " . 
 Whilst editor of the paper , Marx and the other revolutionary socialists were regularly harassed by the police , and Marx was brought to trial on several occasions , facing various allegations including insulting the Chief Public Prosecutor , committing a press misdemeanor , and inciting armed rebellion through tax boycotting , although each time he was acquitted . Meanwhile , the democratic parliament in Prussia collapsed , and the king , Frederick William IV , introduced a new cabinet of his reactionary supporters , who implemented counter @-@ revolutionary measures to expunge leftist and other revolutionary elements from the country . Consequently , the Neue Rheinische Zeitung was soon suppressed and Marx was ordered to leave the country on 16 May . Marx returned to Paris , which was then under the grip of both a reactionary counter @-@ revolution and a cholera epidemic , and was soon expelled by the city authorities , who considered him a political threat . With his wife , Jenny , expecting their fourth child , and not able to move back to Germany or Belgium , in August 1849 he sought refuge in London . 
 = = = Move to London and further writing : 1850 – 1860 = = = 
 Marx moved to London in early June 1849 and would remain based in the city for the rest of his life . The headquarters of the Communist League also moved to London . However , in the winter of 1849 – 1850 , a split within the ranks of the Communist League occurred when a faction within it led by August Willich and Karl Schapper began agitating for an immediate uprising . Willich and Schapper believed that once the Communist League had initiated the uprising , the entire working class from across Europe would rise " spontaneously " to join it , thus , creating revolution across Europe . Marx and Engels protested that such an unplanned uprising on the part of the Communist League was " <unk> " and would be suicide for the Communist League . Such an uprising as that recommended by the Schapper / Willich group would easily be crushed by the police and the armed forces of the reactionary governments of Europe . This , Marx maintained , would spell doom for the Communist League itself . Changes in society , Marx argued , are not achieved overnight through the efforts and will power of " a handful of men " . Instead , they are brought about through a scientific analysis of economic conditions of society and by moving toward revolution through different stages of social development . In the present stage of development ( circa 1850 ) , following the defeat of the uprisings across Europe in 1848 , Marx felt that the Communist League should encourage the working class to unite with progressive elements of the rising bourgeoisie to defeat the feudal aristocracy on issues involving demands for governmental reforms , such as a constitutional republic with freely elected assemblies and universal ( male ) suffrage . In other words , the working class must join with bourgeois and democratic forces to bring about the successful conclusion of the bourgeois revolution before stressing the working class agenda and a working class revolution . 
 After a long struggle which threatened to ruin the Communist League , Marx 's opinion prevailed and , eventually , the Willich / Schapper group left the Communist League . Meanwhile , Marx also became heavily involved with the socialist German Workers ' Educational Society . The Society held their meetings in Great Windmill Street , Soho , central London 's entertainment district . This organisation was also racked by an internal struggle between its members , some of whom followed Marx while others followed the Schapper / Willich faction . The issues in this internal split were the same issues raised in the internal split within the Communist League . Marx , however , lost the fight with the Schapper / Willich faction within the German Workers ' Educational Society and , on 17 September 1850 , resigned from the Society . 
 = = = New York Tribune and journalism = = = 
 While in London , Marx devoted himself to the task of revolutionary organising of the working class . For the first few years , he and his family lived in extreme poverty . His main source of income was his colleague , Engels , who derived much of his income from his family 's business . Later Marx and Engels both began writing for six different newspapers around the world , in England , the United States , Prussia , Austria and South Africa . Most of Marx 's journalistic writing , however , was as a European correspondent for the New York Daily Tribune . In earlier years , Marx had been able to communicate with the broad masses of the working class by editing his own newspaper or editing a newspaper financed by others sympathetic to his philosophy . Now , in London , Marx was unable to finance his own newspaper and unable to put together financing from others . Thus , Marx sought to communicate with the public by writing articles for the New York Tribune and other " bourgeois " newspapers . At first Marx 's English @-@ language articles were translated from German by Wilhelm Pieper ; eventually , however , Marx learned English well enough to write without translation . 
 The New York Daily Tribune had been founded in New York City in the United States of America by Horace Greeley in April 1841 . Marx 's main contact on the Tribune was Charles Dana . Later , in 1868 , Charles Dana would leave the Tribune to become the owner and editor @-@ in @-@ chief of the New York Sun , a competing newspaper in New York City . However , at this time Charles Dana served on the editorial board of the Tribune . 
 Several characteristics about the Tribune made the newspaper an excellent vehicle for Marx to reach a sympathetic public across the Atlantic Ocean . Since its founding , the Tribune had been an inexpensive newspaper — two cents per copy . Accordingly , it was popular with the broad masses of the working class of the United States . With a run of about 50 @,@ 000 issues , the Tribune was the most widely circulated journal in the United States . <unk> , the Tribune reflected Greeley 's anti @-@ slavery opinions . Not only did the Tribune have wide readership with the United States and not only did that readership come from the working classes , but the readers seemed to be from the progressive wing of the working class . Marx 's first article for the New York Tribune was on the British elections to Parliament and was published in the Tribune on 21 August 1852 . 
 Marx was just one of the reporters in Europe that the New York Tribune employed . However , with the slavery crisis in the United States coming to a head in the late 1850s and with the outbreak of the American Civil War in 1861 , the American public 's interest in European affairs declined . Thus Marx very early began to write on issues affecting the United States — particularly the " slavery crisis " and the " War Between the States " . 
 From December 1851 to March 1852 , Marx wrote The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Napoleon , a work on the French Revolution of 1848 , in which he expanded upon his concepts of historical materialism , class struggle and the dictatorship of the proletariat , advancing the argument that victorious proletariat has to smash the bourgeois state . 
 The 1850s and 1860s also mark the line between what some scholars see as the idealistic , Hegelian young Marx from the more scientifically minded mature Marx writings of the later period . This distinction is usually associated with the structural Marxism school , and not all scholars agree that it exists . The years of revolution from 1848 to 1849 had been a grand experience for both Marx and Engels . They both became sure that their economic view of the course of history was the only valid way that historic events like the revolutionary upsurge of 1848 could be adequately explained . For some time after 1848 , Marx and Engels wondered if the entire revolutionary upsurge had completely played out . As time passed , they began to think that a new revolutionary upsurge would not occur until there was another economic downturn . The question of whether a recession would be necessary to create a new revolutionary situation in society became a point of contention between Marx and certain other revolutionaries . Marx accused these other revolutionaries of being " <unk> " because of their belief that a revolutionary situation could be created out of thin air by the sheer " will power " of the revolutionaries without regard to the economic realities of the current situation . 
 The downturn in the United States economy in 1852 led Marx and Engels to wonder if a revolutionary upsurge would soon occur . However , the United States ' economy was too new to play host to a classical revolution . The western frontier in America always provided a relief valve for the pent @-@ up forces that might in other countries cause social unrest . Any economic crisis which began in the United States would not lead to revolution unless one of the older economies of Europe " caught the contagion " from the United States . In other words , economies of the world were still seen as individual national systems which were contiguous with the national borders of each country . The Panic of 1857 broke the mould of all prior thinking on the world economy . Beginning in the United States , the Panic spread across the globe . Indeed , the Panic of 1857 was the first truly global economic crisis . 
 Marx longed to return to his economic studies . He had left these studies in 1844 and had been preoccupied with other projects over the last thirteen years . By returning to his study of economics , he felt he would be able to understand more thoroughly what was occurring in the world . 
 = = = The First International and Capital = = = 
 Marx continued to write articles for the New York Daily Tribune as long as he was sure that the Tribune 's editorial policy was still progressive . However , the departure of Charles Dana from the paper in late 1861 and the resultant change in the editorial board brought about a new editorial policy . No longer was the Tribune to be a strong abolitionist paper dedicated to a complete Union victory . The new editorial board supported an immediate peace between the Union and the Confederacy in the Civil War in the United States with slavery left intact in the Confederacy . Marx strongly disagreed with this new political position and , in 1863 , was forced to withdraw as a writer for the Tribune . 
 In 1864 , Marx became involved in the International Workingmen 's Association ( also known as First International ) , to whose General Council he was elected at its inception in 1864 . In that organisation , Marx was involved in the struggle against the anarchist wing centred on Mikhail Bakunin ( 1814 – 1876 ) . Although Marx won this contest , the transfer of the seat of the General Council from London to New York in 1872 , which Marx supported , led to the decline of the International . The most important political event during the existence of the International was the Paris Commune of 1871 , when the citizens of Paris rebelled against their government and held the city for two months . In response to the bloody suppression of this rebellion , Marx wrote one of his most famous pamphlets , " The Civil War in France , " a defence of the Commune . 
 Given the repeated failures and frustrations of workers ' revolutions and movements , Marx also sought to understand capitalism , and spent a great deal of time in the reading room of the British Museum studying and reflecting on the works of political economists and on economic data . By 1857 he had accumulated over 800 pages of notes and short essays on capital , landed property , wage labour , the state , and foreign trade and the world market ; this work did not appear in print until 1939 , under the title Outlines of the Critique of Political Economy . 
 Finally in 1859 Marx published A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy , his first serious economic work . This work was intended merely as a preview of his three @-@ volume Das Kapital ( English title : Capital : Critique of Political Economy ) on which he intended to publish at a later date . In A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy , Marx accepts the labour theory of value as advocated by David Ricardo , but whereas Ricardo drew a distinction between use value and value in commodities , Ricardo always had been unable to define the real relationship between use value and value . The reasoning Marx laid out in his book clearly delineated the true relationship between use value and value . He also produced a truly scientific theory of money and money circulation in the capitalist economy . Thus , A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy created a storm of enthusiasm when it appeared in public . The entire edition of the book was sold out quickly . 
 The successful sales of A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy stimulated Marx in the early 1860s to finish work on the three large volumes that would compose his major life 's work — Das Kapital and the Theories of Surplus Value , which discussed the theoreticians of political economy , particularly Adam Smith and David Ricardo . Theories of Surplus Value is often referred to as the fourth volume book of Das Kapital and constitutes one of the first comprehensive treatises on the history of economic thought . In 1867 the first volume of Das Kapital was published , a work which analysed the capitalist process of production . Here Marx elaborated his labour theory of value , which had been influenced by Thomas Hodgskin . Marx acknowledged Hodgskin 's " admirable work " Labour Defended against the Claims of Capital at more than one point in Capital . Indeed , Marx quoted Hodgskin as recognising the alienation of labour that occurred under modern capitalist production . No longer was there any " natural reward of individual labour . Each labourer produces only some part of a whole , and each part having no value or utility of itself , there is nothing on which the labourer can seize , and say : ' This is my product , this will I keep to myself . ' " In this first volume of Capital , Marx outlined his conception of surplus value and exploitation , which he argued would ultimately lead to a falling rate of profit and the collapse of industrial capitalism . Demand for a Russian language edition of Capital soon led to the printing of 3 @,@ 000 copies of the book in the Russian language , which was published on 27 March 1872 . By the autumn of 1871 the entire first edition of the German language edition of Capital had been sold out and a second edition was published . 
 Volumes II and III of Capital remained mere manuscripts upon which Marx continued to work for the rest of his life . Both volumes were published by Engels after Marx 's death . Volume II of Capital was prepared and published by Engels in July 1893 under the name Capital II : The Process of Circulation of Capital . Volume III of Capital was published a year later in October 1894 under the name Capital III : The Process of Capitalist Production as a Whole . Theories of Surplus Value was developed from the Economic Manuscripts of 1861 – 1863 which comprise Volumes 30 , 31 32 and 33 of the Collected Works of Marx and Engels and from the Economic Manuscripts of 1861 – 1864 which comprises Volume 34 of the Collected Works of Marx and Engels . The exact part of the Economic Manuscripts of 1861 – 1863 which makes up the Theories of Surplus Value are the last part of Volume 30 of the Collected Works , the whole of Volume 31 of the Collected Works , and the whole of Volume 32 of the Collected Works . A German language abridged edition of Theories of Surplus Value was published in 1905 and in 1910 . This abridged edition was translated into English and published in 1951 in London . However , the complete unabridged edition of Theories of Surplus Value was published as the " fourth volume " of Capital in 1963 and 1971 in Moscow . 
 During the last decade of his life , Marx 's health declined and he became incapable of the sustained effort that had characterised his previous work . He did manage to comment substantially on contemporary politics , particularly in Germany and Russia . His Critique of the Gotha Programme opposed the tendency of his followers Wilhelm Liebknecht and August Bebel to compromise with the state socialism of Ferdinand Lassalle in the interests of a united socialist party . This work is also notable for another famous Marx 's quote : " From each according to his ability , to each according to his need . " 
 In a letter to Vera <unk> dated 8 March 1881 , Marx contemplated the possibility of Russia 's bypassing the capitalist stage of development and building communism on the basis of the common ownership of land characteristic of the village mir . While admitting that Russia 's rural " commune is the fulcrum of social regeneration in Russia " , Marx also warned that , in order for the mir to operate as a means for moving straight to the socialist stage without a preceding capitalist stage , it " would first be necessary to eliminate the deleterious influences which are assailing it ( the rural commune ) from all sides " . Given the elimination of these pernicious influences , Marx allowed that " normal conditions of spontaneous development " of the rural commune could exist . However , in the same letter to Vera <unk> , Marx points out that " at the core of the capitalist system ... lies the complete separation of the producer from the means of production . " In one of the drafts of this letter , Marx reveals his growing passion for anthropology , motivated by his belief that future communism would be a return on a higher level to the communism of our prehistoric past . He wrote that " the historical trend of our age is the fatal crisis which capitalist production has undergone in the European and American countries where it has reached its highest peak , a crisis that will end in its destruction , in the return of modern society to a higher form of the most archaic type — collective production and appropriation " . He added that " the vitality of primitive communities was incomparably greater than that of Semitic , Greek , Roman , etc. societies , and , a fortiori , that of modern capitalist societies " . Before he died , Marx asked Engels to write up these ideas , which were published in 1884 under the title The Origin of the Family , Private Property and the State . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Marx and von Westphalen had seven children together , but partly owing to the poor conditions in which they lived whilst in London , only three survived to adulthood . The children were : Jenny Caroline ( m . Longuet ; 1844 – 1883 ) ; Jenny Laura ( m . Lafargue ; 1845 – 1911 ) ; Edgar ( 1847 – 1855 ) ; Henry Edward Guy ( " Guido " ; 1849 – 1850 ) ; Jenny Eveline Frances ( " Franziska " ; 1851 – 1852 ) ; Jenny Julia Eleanor ( 1855 – 1898 ) and one more who died before being named ( July 1857 ) . There are allegations that Marx also fathered a son , Freddy , out of wedlock by his housekeeper , Helene Demuth . 
 Marx frequently used pseudonyms , often when renting a house or flat , apparently to make it harder for the authorities to track him down . While in Paris , he used that of " Monsieur <unk> " , whilst in London he signed off his letters as " A. Williams " . His friends referred to him as " Moor " , owing to his dark complexion and black curly hair , while he encouraged his children to call him " Old Nick " and " Charley " . He also bestowed nicknames and pseudonyms on his friends and family as well , referring to Friedrich Engels as " General " , his housekeeper Helene as " <unk> " or " Nym " , while one of his daughters , <unk> , was referred to as " Qui Qui , Emperor of China " and another , Laura , was known as " <unk> " or " the <unk> " . 
 According to Sylvia Nasar , Marx never learned to properly speak English and never visited an English factory despite living in England during his last thirty years . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Following the death of his wife , Jenny , in December 1881 , Marx developed a catarrh that kept him in ill health for the last 15 months of his life . It eventually brought on the bronchitis and pleurisy that killed him in London on 14 March 1883 ( age 64 ) . He died a stateless person ; family and friends in London buried his body in Highgate Cemetery , London , on 17 March 1883 . There were between nine and eleven mourners at his funeral . 
 Several of his closest friends spoke at his funeral , including Wilhelm Liebknecht and Friedrich Engels . Engels ' speech included the passage : 
 On the 14th of March , at a quarter to three in the afternoon , the greatest living thinker ceased to think . He had been left alone for scarcely two minutes , and when we came back we found him in his armchair , peacefully gone to sleep — but forever . 
 Marx 's surviving daughters Eleanor and Laura , as well as Charles Longuet and Paul Lafargue , Marx 's two French socialist sons @-@ in @-@ law , were also in attendance . He had been predeceased by his wife and his eldest daughter , the latter dying a few months earlier in January 1883 . Liebknecht , a founder and leader of the German Social @-@ Democratic Party , gave a speech in German , and Longuet , a prominent figure in the French working @-@ class movement , made a short statement in French . Two telegrams from workers ' parties in France and Spain were also read out . Together with Engels 's speech , this constituted the entire programme of the funeral . Non @-@ relatives attending the funeral included three communist associates of Marx : Friedrich <unk> , imprisoned for three years after the Cologne communist trial of 1852 ; G. Lochner , whom Engels described as " an old member of the Communist League " ; and Carl <unk> , a professor of chemistry in Manchester , a member of the Royal Society , and a communist activist involved in the 1848 Baden revolution . Another attendee of the funeral was Ray Lankester , a British zoologist who would later become a prominent academic . 
 Upon his own death in 1895 , Engels left Marx 's two surviving daughters a " significant portion " of his $ 4 @.@ 8 million estate . 
 Marx and his family were reburied on a new site nearby in November 1954 . The memorial at the new site , unveiled on 14 March 1956 , bears the carved message : " <unk> OF ALL <unk> UNITE " , the final line of The Communist Manifesto , and from the 11th " Thesis on Feuerbach " ( edited by Engels ) : " The philosophers have only interpreted the world in various ways — the point however is to change it " . The Communist Party of Great Britain had the monument with a portrait bust by Laurence Bradshaw erected ; Marx 's original tomb had only humble adornment . In 1970 there was an unsuccessful attempt to destroy the monument using a homemade bomb . 
 The late Marxist historian Eric Hobsbawm remarked that " One cannot say Marx died a failure " because , although he had not achieved a large following of disciples in Britain , his writings had already begun to make an impact on the leftist movements in Germany and Russia . Within 25 years of his death , the continental European socialist parties that acknowledged Marx 's influence on their politics were each gaining between 15 and 47 per cent in those countries with representative democratic elections . 
 = = Thought = = 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 Marx 's thought demonstrates influences from many thinkers , including but not limited to : 
 Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel 's philosophy ; 
 the classical political economy ( economics ) of Adam Smith and David Ricardo ; 
 French socialist thought , in particular the thought of Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau , Henri de Saint @-@ Simon , Pierre @-@ Joseph Proudhon , and Charles Fourier . 
 earlier German philosophical materialism among the Young Hegelians , particularly that of Ludwig Feuerbach and Bruno Bauer ; as well as the French materialism of the late 18th Century , including Diderot , Claude Adrien <unk> , and d 'Holbach . 
 the working class analysis by Friedrich Engels . As well as the early descriptions of class provided by French liberals and Saint @-@ <unk> such as François Guizot and Augustin Thierry . 
 Marx 's view of history , which came to be called historical materialism ( controversially adapted as the philosophy of dialectical materialism by Engels and Lenin ) certainly shows the influence of Hegel 's claim that one should view reality ( and history ) <unk> . However , Hegel had thought in idealist terms , putting ideas in the forefront , whereas Marx sought to rewrite dialectics in materialist terms , arguing for the primacy of matter over idea . Where Hegel saw the " spirit " as driving history , Marx saw this as an unnecessary mystification , obscuring the reality of humanity and its physical actions shaping the world . He wrote that Hegelianism stood the movement of reality on its head , and that one needed to set it upon its feet . Despite his dislike of mystical terms Marx used Gothic language in several of his works . In Das Kapital he refers to capital as " necromancy that surrounds the products of labour " . 
 Though inspired by French socialist and sociological thought , Marx criticised utopian socialists , arguing that their favoured small @-@ scale socialistic communities would be bound to marginalisation and poverty , and that only a large @-@ scale change in the economic system can bring about real change . 
 The other important contribution to Marx 's revision of Hegelianism came from Engels 's book , The Condition of the Working Class in England in 1844 , which led Marx to conceive of the historical dialectic in terms of class conflict and to see the modern working class as the most progressive force for revolution . 
 Marx believed that he could study history and society scientifically and discern tendencies of history and the resulting outcome of social conflicts . Some followers of Marx concluded , therefore , that a communist revolution would inevitably occur . However , Marx famously asserted in the eleventh of his " Theses on Feuerbach " that " philosophers have only interpreted the world , in various ways ; the point however is to change it " , and he clearly dedicated himself to trying to alter the world . 
 = = = Philosophy and social thought = = = 
 Marx 's polemic with other thinkers often occurred through critique , and thus he has been called " the first great user of critical method in social sciences " . He criticised speculative philosophy , equating metaphysics with ideology . By adopting this approach , Marx attempted to separate key findings from ideological biases . This set him apart from many contemporary philosophers . 
 = = = = Human nature = = = = 
 Like Tocqueville , who described a faceless and bureaucratic despotism with no identifiable despot , Marx also broke with classical thinkers who spoke of a single tyrant and with Montesquieu , who discussed the nature of the single despot . Instead , Marx set out to analyse " the despotism of capital " . Fundamentally , Marx assumed that human history involves transforming human nature , which encompasses both human beings and material objects . Humans recognise that they possess both actual and potential selves . For both Marx and Hegel , self @-@ development begins with an experience of internal alienation stemming from this recognition , followed by a realisation that the actual self , as a subjective agent , renders its potential counterpart an object to be apprehended . Marx further argues that , by moulding nature in desired ways , the subject takes the object as its own , and thus permits the individual to be actualised as fully human . For Marx , then , human nature — <unk> , or species @-@ being — exists as a function of human labour . Fundamental to Marx 's idea of meaningful labour is the proposition that , in order for a subject to come to terms with its alienated object , it must first exert influence upon literal , material objects in the subject 's world . Marx acknowledges that Hegel " grasps the nature of work and comprehends objective man , authentic because actual , as the result of his own work " , but characterises Hegelian self @-@ development as unduly " spiritual " and abstract . Marx thus departs from Hegel by insisting that " the fact that man is a corporeal , actual , sentient , objective being with natural capacities means that he has actual , sensuous objects for his nature as objects of his life @-@ expression , or that he can only express his life in actual sensuous objects . " Consequently , Marx revises Hegelian " work " into material " labour " , and in the context of human capacity to transform nature the term " labour power " . 
 = = = = Labour , class struggle , and false consciousness = = = = 
 The history of all hitherto existing society is the history of class struggles . 
 Marx had a special concern with how people relate to their own labour power . He wrote extensively about this in terms of the problem of alienation . As with the dialectic , Marx began with a Hegelian notion of alienation but developed a more materialist conception . Capitalism mediates social relationships of production ( such as among workers or between workers and capitalists ) through commodities , including labour , that are bought and sold on the market . For Marx , the possibility that one may give up ownership of one 's own labour — one 's capacity to transform the world — is tantamount to being alienated from one 's own nature ; it is a spiritual loss . Marx described this loss as commodity fetishism , in which the things that people produce , commodities , appear to have a life and movement of their own to which humans and their behaviour merely adapt . 
 Commodity fetishism provides an example of what Engels called " false consciousness " , which relates closely to the understanding of ideology . By " ideology " , Marx and Engels meant ideas that reflect the interests of a particular class at a particular time in history , but which contemporaries see as universal and eternal . Marx and Engels 's point was not only that such beliefs are at best half @-@ truths ; they serve an important political function . Put another way , the control that one class exercises over the means of production includes not only the production of food or manufactured goods ; it includes the production of ideas as well ( this provides one possible explanation for why members of a subordinate class may hold ideas contrary to their own interests ) . An example of this sort of analysis is Marx 's understanding of religion , summed up in a passage from the preface to his 1843 Contribution to the Critique of Hegel 's Philosophy of Right : 
 Religious suffering is , at one and the same time , the expression of real suffering and a protest against real suffering . Religion is the sigh of the oppressed creature , the heart of a heartless world , and the soul of soulless conditions . It is the opium of the people . The abolition of religion as the illusory happiness of the people is the demand for their real happiness . To call on them to give up their illusions about their condition is to call on them to give up a condition that requires illusions . 
 Whereas his Gymnasium senior thesis argued that religion had as its primary social aim the promotion of solidarity , here Marx sees the social function of religion in terms of highlighting / preserving political and economic status quo and inequality . 
 = = = = Economy , history , and society = = = = 
 Marx 's thoughts on labour were related to the primacy he gave to the economic relation in determining the society 's past , present and future ( see also economic determinism ) . Accumulation of capital shapes the social system . Social change , for Marx , was about conflict between opposing interests , driven , in the background , by economic forces . This became the inspiration for the body of works known as the conflict theory . In his evolutionary model of history , he argued that human history began with free , productive and creative work that was over time coerced and <unk> , a trend most apparent under capitalism . Marx noted that this was not an intentional process ; rather , no individual or even state can go against the forces of economy . 
 The organisation of society depends on means of production . Literally those things , like land , natural resources , and technology , necessary for the production of material goods and the relations of production , in other words , the social relationships people enter into as they acquire and use the means of production . Together these compose the mode of production , and Marx distinguished historical eras in terms of distinct modes of production . Marx differentiated between base and superstructure , with the base ( or substructure ) referring to the economic system , and superstructure , to the cultural and political system . Marx regarded this mismatch between ( economic ) base and ( social ) superstructure as a major source of social disruption and conflict . 
 Despite Marx 's stress on critique of capitalism and discussion of the new communist society that should replace it , his explicit critique of capitalism is guarded , as he saw it as an improved society compared to the past ones ( slavery and feudal ) . Marx also never clearly discusses issues of morality and justice , although scholars agree that his work contained implicit discussion of those concepts . 
 Marx 's view of capitalism was two @-@ sided . On one hand , Marx , in the 19th century 's deepest critique of the dehumanising aspects of this system , noted that defining features of capitalism include alienation , exploitation , and recurring , cyclical depressions leading to mass unemployment ; on the other hand capitalism is also characterised by " revolutionising , industrialising and <unk> qualities of development , growth and <unk> " ( by which Marx meant industrialisation , urbanisation , technological progress , increased productivity and growth , rationality and scientific revolution ) , that are responsible for progress . Marx considered the capitalist class to be one of the most revolutionary in history , because it constantly improved the means of production , more so than any other class in history , and was responsible for the overthrow of feudalism and its transition to capitalism . Capitalism can stimulate considerable growth because the capitalist can , and has an incentive to , reinvest profits in new technologies and capital equipment . 
 According to Marx , capitalists take advantage of the difference between the labour market and the market for whatever commodity the capitalist can produce . Marx observed that in practically every successful industry , input unit @-@ costs are lower than output unit @-@ prices . Marx called the difference " surplus value " and argued that this surplus value had its source in surplus labour , the difference between what it costs to keep workers alive and what they can produce . Marx 's dual view of capitalism can be seen in his description of the capitalists : he refers to them as vampires sucking worker 's blood , but at the same time , he notes that drawing profit is " by no means an injustice " and that capitalists simply cannot go against the system . The true problem lies with the " cancerous cell " of capital , understood not as property or equipment , but the relations between workers and owners — the economic system in general . 
 At the same time , Marx stressed that capitalism was unstable , and prone to periodic crises . He suggested that over time , capitalists would invest more and more in new technologies , and less and less in labour . Since Marx believed that surplus value appropriated from labour is the source of profits , he concluded that the rate of profit would fall even as the economy grew . Marx believed that increasingly severe crises would punctuate this cycle of growth , collapse , and more growth . Moreover , he believed that in the long @-@ term , this process would necessarily enrich and empower the capitalist class and impoverish the proletariat . In section one of The Communist Manifesto , Marx describes feudalism , capitalism , and the role internal social contradictions play in the historical process : 
 We see then : the means of production and of exchange , on whose foundation the bourgeoisie built itself up , were generated in feudal society . At a certain stage in the development of these means of production and of exchange , the conditions under which feudal society produced and exchanged ... the feudal relations of property became no longer compatible with the already developed productive forces ; they became so many fetters . They had to be burst asunder ; they were burst asunder . Into their place stepped free competition , accompanied by a social and political constitution adapted in it , and the economic and political sway of the bourgeois class . A similar movement is going on before our own eyes ... The productive forces at the disposal of society no longer tend to further the development of the conditions of bourgeois property ; on the contrary , they have become too powerful for these conditions , by which they are fettered , and so soon as they overcome these fetters , they bring order into the whole of bourgeois society , endanger the existence of bourgeois property . 
 Marx believed that those structural contradictions within capitalism necessitate its end , giving way to socialism , or a post @-@ capitalistic , communist society : 
 The development of Modern Industry , therefore , cuts from under its feet the very foundation on which the bourgeoisie produces and appropriates products . What the bourgeoisie , therefore , produces , above all , are its own grave @-@ diggers . Its fall and the victory of the proletariat are equally inevitable . " 
 Thanks to various processes overseen by capitalism , such as urbanisation , the working class , the proletariat , should grow in numbers and develop class consciousness , in time realising that they have to and can change the system . Marx believed that if the proletariat were to seize the means of production , they would encourage social relations that would benefit everyone equally , abolishing exploiting class , and introduce a system of production less vulnerable to cyclical crises . Marx argued in The German Ideology that capitalism will end through the organised actions of an international working class : 
 Communism is for us not a state of affairs which is to be established , an ideal to which reality will have to adjust itself . We call communism the real movement which abolishes the present state of things . The conditions of this movement result from the premises now in existence . " 
 In this new society , the self @-@ alienation would end , and humans would be free to act without being bound by the labour market . It would be a democratic society , enfranchising the entire population . In such a utopian world there would also be little if any need for a state , which goal was to enforce the alienation . He theorised that between capitalism and the establishment of a socialist / communist system , a dictatorship of the proletariat — a period where the working class holds political power and forcibly <unk> the means of production — would exist . As he wrote in his Critique of the Gotha Program , " between capitalist and communist society there lies the period of the revolutionary transformation of the one into the other . Corresponding to this is also a political transition period in which the state can be nothing but the revolutionary dictatorship of the proletariat . " While he allowed for the possibility of peaceful transition in some countries with strong democratic institutional structures ( such as Britain , the US and the Netherlands ) , he suggested that in other countries with strong centralised state @-@ oriented traditions , like France and Germany , the " lever of our revolution must be force " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Marx 's ideas have had a profound impact on world politics and intellectual thought . Followers of Marx have frequently debated amongst themselves over how to interpret Marx 's writings and apply his concepts to the modern world . The legacy of Marx 's thought has become contested between numerous tendencies , each of which sees itself as Marx 's most accurate interpreter . In the political realm , these tendencies include Leninism , Marxism – Leninism , Trotskyism , Maoism , <unk> , and libertarian Marxism . Various currents have also developed in academic Marxism , often under influence of other views , resulting in structuralist Marxism , historical Marxism , phenomenological Marxism , Analytical Marxism and Hegelian Marxism . 
 From an academic perspective , Marx 's work contributed to the birth of modern sociology . He has been cited as one of the nineteenth century 's three masters of the " school of suspicion " , alongside Friedrich Nietzsche and Sigmund Freud , and as one of the three principal architects of modern social science along with Émile Durkheim and Max Weber . In contrast to other philosophers , Marx offered theories that could often be tested with the scientific method . Both Marx and Auguste Comte set out to develop scientifically justified ideologies in the wake of European secularisation and new developments in the philosophies of history and science . Working in the Hegelian tradition , Marx rejected Comtean sociological positivism in attempt to develop a science of society . Karl <unk> considered Marx and Søren Kierkegaard to be the two greatest Hegelian philosophical successors . In modern sociological theory , Marxist sociology is recognised as one of the main classical perspectives . Isaiah Berlin considers Marx the true founder of modern sociology , " in so far as anyone can claim the title " . Beyond social science , he has also had a lasting legacy in philosophy , literature , the arts , and the humanities . 
 In social theory , twentieth- and twenty @-@ first @-@ century thinkers have pursued two main strategies in response to Marx . One move has been to reduce it to its analytical core , known as Analytical Marxism , which came at the cost of sacrificing its most interesting and perplexing ideas . Another , more common move has been to dilute the explanatory claims of Marx 's social theory and to emphasise the " relative autonomy " of aspects of social and economic life not directly related to Marx 's central narrative of interaction between the development of the " forces of production " and the succession of " modes of production " . Such has been , for example , the neo @-@ <unk> theorising adopted by historians inspired by Marx 's social theory , such as E. P. Thompson and Eric Hobsbawm . It has also been a line of thinking pursued by thinkers and activists like Antonio Gramsci who have sought to understand the opportunities and the difficulties of transformative political practice , seen in the light of Marxist social theory . Marx 's ideas would also have a profound influence on subsequent artists and art history , with avant @-@ garde movements across literature , visual art , music , film , and theater . 
 Politically , Marx 's legacy is more complex . Throughout the twentieth century , revolutions in dozens of countries labelled themselves ' Marxist ' , most notably the Russian Revolution , which led to the founding of the USSR . Major world leaders including Vladimir Lenin , Mao Zedong , Fidel Castro , Salvador Allende , Josip Tito , and Kwame Nkrumah all cited Marx as an influence , and his ideas informed political parties worldwide beyond those where ' Marxist revolutions ' took place . The brutal dictatorships associated with some Marxist nations have led political opponents to blame Marx for millions of deaths , but the fidelity of these varied revolutionaries , leaders and parties to Marx 's work is highly contested , and rejected by many Marxists . It is now common to distinguish between the legacy and influence of Marx specifically , and the legacy and influence of those who shaped his ideas for political purposes . 
 = = Selected bibliography = = 
 The Philosophical Manifesto of the Historical School of Law , 1842 
 Critique of Hegel 's Philosophy of Right , 1843 
 " On the Jewish Question , " 1843 
 " Notes on James Mill , " 1844 
 Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 , 1844 
 The Holy Family , 1845 
 " Theses on Feuerbach , " 1845 
 The German Ideology , 1845 
 The Poverty of Philosophy , 1847 
 " Wage Labour and Capital , " 1847 
 Manifesto of the Communist Party , 1848 
 The Class Struggles in France , 1850 
 The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Napoleon , 1852 
 <unk> , 1857 
 A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy , 1859 
 Writings on the U.S. Civil War , 1861 
 Theories of Surplus Value , 3 volumes , 1862 
 " Value , Price and Profit , " 1865 
 Capital , Volume I ( Das Kapital ) , 1867 
 " The Civil War in France , " 1871 
 Critique of the Gotha Program , 1875 
 " Notes on Adolph Wagner , " 1883 
 Capital , Volume II ( posthumously published by Engels ) , 1885 
 Capital , Volume III ( posthumously published by Engels ) , 1894 
 Marx and Engels on the United States ( posthumously published by Progress Publishers , Moscow ) , 1979 
 = = = Articles and entries = = = 
 Dead Labour : Marx and Lenin Reconsidered by Paul Craig Roberts 
 Hegel , Marx , Engels , and the Origins of Marxism , by David North 
 In Praise of Marx Terry Eagleton <unk> his Why Marx was right <unk> 10 April 2011 . 
 Karl Marx : Did he get it all Right ? by Philip Collins , The Times , 21 October 2008 
 Karl Marx , Ernest Mandel 
 Liberalism , Marxism and The State , by Ralph <unk> 
 Marx , Mao and mathematics : the politics of infinitesimals , by Joseph Dauben 
 Marxism and Ethics from International Socialism Paul Blackledge ( 2008 ) 
 <unk> Various essays on misinterpretations of Marx 
 Portraits of Karl Marx ( International Institute of Social History ) 
 Paul Dorn , The Paris Commune and Marx ' Theory of Revolution 
 Karl Marx ( 1818 – 1883 ) . The Concise Encyclopedia of Economics . Library of Economics and Liberty ( 2nd ed . ) ( Liberty Fund ) . 2008 . 
 Marx 's Revenge : How Class Struggle Is Shaping the World . TIME , 25 March 2013 . 
 Marx Was Right : Five Surprising Ways Karl Marx Predicted 2014 . Rolling Stone , 30 January 2014 . 
 Karl Marx Was Right . Chris Hedges for <unk> , 31 May 2015 . 
 = Mont Blanc massif = 
 The Mont Blanc massif ( French : Massif du Mont @-@ Blanc ; Italian : Massiccio del Monte Bianco ) is a mountain range in the Alps , located mostly in France and Italy , but also straddling Switzerland at its northeastern end . It contains eleven major independent summits , each over 4 @,@ 000 metres ( 13 @,@ 123 ft ) in height , and is named after Mont Blanc ( 4 @,@ 808 @.@ 73 metres ( 15 @,@ 776 @.@ 7 ft ) ) , the highest point in western Europe . Because of its considerable overall altitude , a large proportion of the massif is covered by glaciers , which includes the Mer de Glace and the Miage Glacier – the longest glaciers in France and Italy , respectively . 
 Not only does the massif form a watershed between the vast catchments of the Rhône and Po rivers , as well as a tripoint between France , Italy and Switzerland , but it also marks a border between two climate regions by separating the northern and western Alps from the southern Alps . The mountains of the massif consists mostly of granite and gneiss rocks , and at high altitudes the vegetation is an arctic @-@ alpine flora . 
 The valleys that delimit the massif were used as communication routes by the Romans until they left around the 5th century AD . The region has remained of some military importance through to the mid @-@ 20th century . A peasant farming economy operated within these valleys for many centuries until the glaciers and mountains were discovered by the outside world in the 18th century . Word of these impressive sights began to spread , and Mont Blanc was finally climbed in 1786 , marking the start of the sport of mountaineering . The region is now a major tourist destination , drawing in over six million visitors per year . It provides a wide range of opportunities for outdoor recreation and activities such as sight @-@ seeing , hiking , rock climbing , mountaineering and skiing . Around one hundred people a year die across its mountains and , occasionally , bodies have been lost and entombed in its glaciers for decades . 
 Access into the mountains is facilitated by cable cars , mountain railways and mountain huts which offer overnight refuge to climbers and skiers . The long @-@ distance Tour du Mont Blanc hiking trail circumnavigates the whole massif in an 11 @-@ day trek of 170 kilometres ( 110 mi ) . The Mont Blanc Tunnel connects the French town of Chamonix on the northern side with the Italian town of Courmayeur in the south . The high mountains have provided many opportunities for scientific research , including neutrino measurements within the Tunnel and impacts of climate change on its highest slopes . Recent rises in average temperatures have led to significant glacial retreat across the massif and an awareness of the need for better environmental protection , including a call for World Heritage Site status . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The Mont Blanc massif is 46 kilometres ( 29 mi ) long and lies in a southwest to northeasterly direction across the borders of France ( Haute @-@ Savoie and Savoie ) , Italy ( Aosta Valley ) and Switzerland ( western Valais ) . At its widest point the massif is 20 km ( 12 mi ) across . The northern side of the massif lies mostly within France , and is bounded by the valley of the River Arve , containing the towns of Argentière , Chamonix and Les Houches . To the west it is bounded by the Val <unk> , containing the town of Les <unk> @-@ <unk> and Le Bon Nant river which flows northwards to a confluence with the Arve near Saint @-@ Gervais @-@ les @-@ Bains , and thence onwards to the Rhône . 
 The southern side of the massif lies mostly within Italy and is bounded by the Val <unk> and Val Ferret whose watercourses meet just above the town of Courmayeur . From Courmayeur these waters flow southwards as the Dora <unk> towards Aosta , eventually joining the Po river . However , the extreme southwestern end of the massif does lie within France and is bounded by the Vallée des Glaciers ( which connects to the Val <unk> over the watershed of the col de la Seigne ) , and its waters flow southwards towards the Isère river and onwards to the Rhône . The northeastern end of the massif falls within Switzerland , and is bounded by a separate valley , confusingly also called Val Ferret , and which separates it from the Pennine Alps further east . Its watercourse , la <unk> de Ferret , flows northwards to join the Rhône at Martigny . 
 The borders of all three countries converge at a tripoint near the summit of Mont Dolent at an altitude of 3 @,@ 820 metres ( 12 @,@ 533 ft ) . From here the French – Italian border runs southwestwards along a ridge of high summits on the southern side of the massif , many of which are over 4 @,@ 000 metres ( 13 @,@ 123 ft ) in height , including the Grandes <unk> , Rochefort Ridge , Dent du <unk> , Mont Maudit , Mont Blanc and its western satellite , the Aiguille de <unk> . From here the border turns southwards over the <unk> de Miage and Aiguille de Tré la Tête before dropping down to the Col de la Seigne . North of Mont Dolent the border between France and Switzerland meanders roughly north @-@ northwestwards along a ridge @-@ line of slightly lower peaks , including the Aiguille d <unk> , the Aiguille du <unk> and the Aiguille du Tour , before dropping down to the Col de Balme . The Swiss – Italian border runs southwest from Mont Dolent , down to the twin passes of Col Ferret . 
 The massif contains 11 main summits over 4 @,@ 000 metres ( 13 @,@ 123 ft ) in altitude , as well as numerous subsidiary points above this height . Crowning the massif is Mont Blanc ( 4 @,@ 808 @.@ 73 metres ( 15 @,@ 776 @.@ 7 ft ) ) , the highest mountain in the Alps and in western Europe . From the summit of Mont Blanc to the River Arve near Chamonix there is a 3 @,@ 800 metres ( 12 @,@ 500 ft ) drop over a distance of just 8 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) . Because of its great elevation , much of the massif is snow- and ice @-@ covered , and has been deeply dissected by glaciers . The Mer de Glace is the longest glacier in the range as well as the longest in France and the second longest in the Alps . The debris @-@ covered Miage Glacier on the southern side of the massif is the longest in Italy . The summit of Mont Blanc is an ice cap whose thickness varies from year to year . 
 The entire massif can be circumnavigated by the Tour du Mont Blanc , a walking route of approximately 170 kilometres ( 110 mi ) . It usually takes around 11 days to complete , but is also used for an annual mountain ultramarathon , with top competitors expected to complete the whole route in less than 21 hours . 
 The main mountain passes , or cols , that connect different valleys and towns around the Mont Blanc massif are : 
 Col du Bonhomme 2 @,@ 329 m ( 7 @,@ 641 ft ) ( path , links <unk> – Beaufort – Les <unk> ) 
 Col de la Seigne 2 @,@ 516 m ( 8 @,@ 255 ft ) ( path , links Bourg Saint Maurice – Les <unk> – Courmayeur ) 
 Col Ferret 2 @,@ 490 m ( 8 @,@ 169 ft ) ( path , links Courmayeur – <unk> – Trient valley ) 
 Col de Balme 2 @,@ 191 m ( 7 @,@ 188 ft ) ( path , links Trient valley – Chamonix ) 
 Col de la Forclaz 1 @,@ 527 m ( 5 @,@ 010 ft ) ( major road , links Argentière – Martigny ) 
 = = = Summits = = = 
 The first ascent of Mont Blanc in 1786 by Jacques Balmat and Michel Paccard initiated the sport of alpine mountaineering , and it was during the golden age of alpinism ( 1854 – 65 ) and the silver age of alpinism ( 1865 – 82 ) that the majority of the main summits of the massif were first attained . Members of the England @-@ based Alpine Club were instrumental in many of the first ascents , usually accompanied by guides from the towns of Chamonix or Courmayeur , such as Michel Croz , Michel Payot and Émile Rey , as well as the Swiss guide , Christian Almer . Across the massif there are now more than two thousand different mountaineering routes to the summits , ranging greatly in both length and difficulty . These attract climbers from all over the world who , unlike the early <unk> , now have access to numerous climbing guidebooks , modern safety equipment , good information on climbing routes and technical difficulty , as well as weather forecasts and mountain accommodation and food . 
 = = = Glaciers = = = 
 A wide range of glaciers and glacial structures can be found across the Mont Blanc massif , all of which can be easily reached or viewed . Glaciers cover 170 square kilometres ( 66 sq mi ) of the massif , of which 110 km2 ( 42 sq mi ) fall within France . The Mer de Glace is the largest glacier in the western Alps , and the second largest in Europe . It has a total length of 12 km ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) from highest snowfield to terminus and an area of 35 – 40 km ² ( 14 – 15 sq mi ) . 
 At around 10 km ( 6 mi ) in length , the Miage Glacier is Italy 's longest glacier and also the largest debris @-@ covered glacier in Europe . Other large glaciers include the Argentière Glacier ( 9 km ( 5 @.@ 6 mi ) ) , the <unk> Glacier ( 6 km ( 3 @.@ 7 mi ) ) , Trient Glacier ( 4 km ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) ) , and the Bossons Glacier ( c . 4 km ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) ) and <unk> Glacier . Whilst these glaciers appear to show similar fluctuations in length , research shows that each glacier of the Mont Blanc massif has its own individual and distinctive response time to changes in snowfall and climate . The Bossons Glacier is known to respond first , then the Argentière and the Trient Glaciers respond some four to seven years later , with the Mer de Glace reacting last — between eleven and fifteen years after changes are first observed in the movement of ice in the Bossons Glacier . 
 Even the smallest glaciers can have a significant impact on the environment and on human activity . In 1892 , a large body of water which had accumulated under the surface of the Tête Rousse Glacier , burst suddenly on the night of 11 July . It released 200 @,@ 000 cubic metres ( 7 @,@ 100 @,@ 000 cu ft ) of water and ice which flowed down the mountainside , killing 175 people in the town of Saint @-@ Gervais . Recent rediscovery of further build @-@ up of water deep within the glacier are a cause of serious concern to this day . 
 The inexorable downward movement and melting of glaciers can result in objects lost within them reappearing many years later . The first recorded account of a body reappearing from a glacier in the Mont Blanc range was made by Viscount Edmond de <unk> in 1861 . It concerned three alpine guides who were buried in a crevasse during an avalanche on 20 August 1820 near the Rocher Rouges , high up on Mont Blanc , during an expedition organised by Joseph Hamel . Forty years later the remains of two of them were discovered , re @-@ exposed within fissures in the Bossons glacier . They were 3 @,@ 000 metres ( 9 @,@ 800 ft ) lower down from the point where they were lost ; the corpse of the third guide was discovered the following year . In 2014 , a group of climbers found a body on the Glacier du Talèfre , close to the <unk> Hut . It was identified as that of a young Chamonix guide who had been caught in a winter storm during a solo ascent of the Nant Blanc face of the Aiguille Verte in 1982 and was assumed to have fallen into a crevasse . In 2013 , a box of valuable gemstones was found by a climber on the Bossons Glacier . It had re @-@ emerged , having been carried 3 @,@ 048 metres ( 10 @,@ 000 ft ) downhill from the site of one of two Air India plane crashes . These occurred at almost identical locations high up near the summit of Mont Blanc : one in 1950 ( Air India Flight 245 ) , and one in 1966 ( Air India Flight 101 ) . Debris from these crashes is still commonly found on the glacier below . 
 = = Geology = = 
 The Mont Blanc massif consists predominantly of ancient granite rocks . The Alps have their origins some 770 million years ago when upheaval of the earth 's crust lifted up schist , gneiss and limestone rocks . These were destined to form the base of the Alps range , and this period of upheaval ended some 300 million years ago . Granite intrusions and associated metamorphic rocks formed the base of the mountains we now call the Mont Blanc massif as well as the nearby Aiguilles Rouges . But these rocks were then heavily eroded away , eventually being ground down and inundated by the sea , so allowing sedimentary rocks to form . Then , once again , this part of the earth 's crust was uplifted as a result of the collision of continental plates . The huge mountain ranges of today 's Alps began to form . This happened towards the end of the Tertiary period , some 15 million years ago . Finally , came the Quaternary era , when successive ice ages saw vast glaciers advance , retreat , and then advance again . Their movement across the landscape ground down and shaped the mountains and the valleys we see today . 
 Both the Mont Blanc massif , and the Aiguilles Rouges range to its north , now form part of the external zone of the Alps , effectively being the outermost layers of rock . The central granites make up Mont Blanc , the steep slopes of the <unk> , the Grandes <unk> and the Dent du <unk> , and at the highest points are topped by schists , which are visible in places such as Grands Montets and near Mont Blanc 's summit . 
 The granite mountains around Chamonix have been eroded into steep needle @-@ shaped peaks ( known as <unk> ) . Known locally as <unk> , these rocks are lower in the mineral biotite mica and richer in quartz than the granites commonly found elsewhere . 
 A large part of the massif is covered by ice fields and is cut by numerous glaciers , mostly flowing northwestwards on the French side ; southeastwards on the Italian side and eastwards on the Swiss side . With much steeper slopes on the Italian side , many glaciers drop very sharply and some , such as the Miage Glacier and the <unk> Glacier , are very heavily covered in rock debris . The massif is itself defined by broad valleys which formed along fault lines and which have subsequently been shaped by ice during the last glacial period of the ice age . 
 During the mid @-@ 19th century the granite rocks of the Mont Blanc massif were an important source of stone for constructing buildings ; one hundred Italian stonemasons were brought to the Chamonix valley by Charles Albert of Sardinia for reconstructing the towns of Sallanches and <unk> , both of which had at that time just been destroyed by fires . 
 = = = Minerals = = = 
 The massif has been an important source of mineral specimens for crystal @-@ hunters for over 250 years . The mountaineer and explorer , Edward Whymper , noted that the basin of the Glacier de Talèfre was " considered good hunting @-@ ground for crystals " , and that the slopes below les Courtes had yielded many large specimens . He recounted that in 1745 a guide had stated he had collected over 300 pounds ( 136 kg ) of specimens there in just three hours . The first systematic account of the minerals of the Mont Blanc area was published in 1873 by <unk> Payot . His list , entitled " <unk> <unk> des environs du Mt @-@ Blanc " , catalogued 90 mineral types although it also included those present only as very small components of rocks . If these are excluded , it is known today that at least 68 separate mineral species occur across the whole range of the Mont Blanc massif . 
 In order to preserve the mineralogical heritage of Mont Blanc , in 2008 the commune of Chamonix banned all mineral @-@ hunting activities and collection of specimens without a prior permit being issued by the mayor 's office . Use of explosives , heavy machinery or helicopters for removing material were also banned , and a code of practice put in place which requires an annual declaration of all finds to be made . It also gives a right for the Chamonix crystal museum ( Musée des <unk> ) to have first option to acquire specimens of significance for its collections . To further protect the scientific value of material collected , all specimens offered for sale must be labelled with details of where they were found . The crystal museum opened to the public in 2006 and tells the story of the early crystal @-@ hunters ( known as <unk> ) . Many specimens collected from across the massif are displayed there . 
 = = Climate = = 
 Located on the watershed between the Rhône and the Po rivers , the Mont Blanc massif is also situated between the two different climatic regions of the northern and western Alps and that of the southern Alps . Climatic conditions on the Mer de Glace are similar to those found on the northern side of the Swiss Alps . 
 The climate of the Mont Blanc massif is cold and temperate ( Köppen climate classification Cfb ) , and is greatly influenced by altitude . The main valley settlements around the perimeter of the massif are at an altitude ranging between 600 and 1 @,@ 200 metres ( 2 @,@ 000 and 3 @,@ 900 ft ) . Daytime valley temperatures in July and August may range up to 25 ° C ( 77 ° F ) , sometimes reaching 30 ° C ( 86 ° F ) . The greatest snowfall occurs between the months of November and April . 
 The best weather for mountaineering or hiking occurs between late June to early October but , being the highest part of the Alps , the Mont Blanc massif can create its own weather patterns . Temperatures drop as the mountains gain in height , and the summit of Mont Blanc is a permanent ice cap , with temperatures around − 20 ° C ( − 4 ° F ) . The summit is also prone to strong winds and sudden weather changes . Because of the massif 's great overall height , a considerable proportion is permanently glaciated or snow @-@ covered and is exposed to extremely cold conditions . Even on the high passes of the Tour du Mont Blanc , around 2 @,@ 000 to 2 @,@ 500 m ( 6 @,@ 600 to 8 @,@ 200 ft ) , summer temperatures can be between 5 and 15 ° C ( 41 and 59 ° F ) , but feeling much colder because of wind chill in windy or wet conditions . 
 Precipitation is distributed fairly evenly over all months of the year , and mostly originates from a westerly airflow . There is significant variation in precipitation with altitude . For example , Chamonix has an elevation of approximately 1 @,@ 030 metres ( 3 @,@ 380 ft ) and receives around 1 @,@ 020 mm ( 40 in ) of annual precipitation , whilst the Col du Midi , which is at 3 @,@ 500 metres ( 11 @,@ 500 ft ) above sea level , receives significantly more , totalling 3 @,@ 100 mm ( 122 in ) . However , at an even higher altitude ( near to the summit of Mont Blanc ) precipitation is considerably less , with only around 1 @,@ 100 mm ( 43 in ) recorded , despite the latter measurements being taken at a height of 4 @,@ 300 metres ( 14 @,@ 100 ft ) . 
 In the mountains further south of the Mont Blanc range , annual precipitation is significantly less than at equivalent altitudes within the massif . For example , the valleys in the <unk> massif at around 1 @,@ 000 metres ( 3 @,@ 300 ft ) receive only around 600 to 700 mm ( 24 to 28 in ) of precipitation per year , which is significantly less than that in either Courmayeur or Chamonix . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 The massif contains a very rich variety of biodiversity as a result of the huge height range and different habitats found between the valleys and the highest summits . Mild temperatures occur at altitudes between 600 and 1 @,@ 000 metres ( 2 @,@ 000 and 3 @,@ 300 ft ) , whereas arctic conditions occur from 2 @,@ 500 metres ( 8 @,@ 200 ft ) up to the highest point at 4 @,@ 808 @.@ 73 metres ( 15 @,@ 776 @.@ 7 ft ) . 
 Whilst the Mont Blanc massif does not contain any species that are endemic to it , there are many rare and legally protected species found within its four major habitat zones . These are the : montane forests , sub @-@ alpine , alpine and nival zones . The major habitats are coniferous forests , moors , rock and talus slopes , plus glacial moraines . The biological richness is further influenced by the different aspects of the faces , by the geology , and by the influence of man on the lower and middle slopes where forest clearance has created open grassland . The native forest habitats are essential for the survival of many species , with the key conifer species including larch , pine , stone pine and red pine . 
 = = = Flora = = = 
 Over a thousand plant species have been recorded across the massif , from the valley bottoms right up to 3 @,@ 800 m ( 12 @,@ 500 ft ) where the alpine chrysanthemum ( <unk> alpina ) can be found at a record @-@ breaking height . 
 Early explorers , such as Alexander von Humboldt in 1807 , observed a number of notable species in the mountains around Mont Blanc at altitudes above 3 @,@ 100 metres ( 10 @,@ 200 feet ) . This was well above the permanent snow line , but on rocks that were so steep that little snow could rest . These arctic @-@ alpine species included : <unk> <unk> ; <unk> <unk> ; Arabis caerulea ; <unk> <unk> ; Draba <unk> ; Saxifraga <unk> and Silene acaulis ( occurring down to 1 @,@ 500 m ( 4 @,@ 900 ft ) . Between 2 @,@ 500 and 3 @,@ 100 m ( 8 @,@ 200 and 10 @,@ 200 ft ) , Humboldt noted the following species of flowering plants amongst rocky debris around permanent snow fields and the highest alpine glaciers : Achillea nana ; Achillea <unk> ; Gentiana nivalis ; Juncus <unk> ; Ranunculus glacialis ; Saxifraga biflora and Saxifraga oppositifolia . 
 In the mid 1800s , <unk> Payot , a Chamonix naturalist , published a number of articles on the flora around the Mont Blanc area , including a list of the flowering plants , ferns mosses and lichens found at les Grands <unk> and elsewhere in the massif around Chamonix and the Aosta Valley . 
 High up in the middle of the Glacier de Talèfre , completely surrounded by ice , and due south of Les <unk> , lies a large triangular region of steep mountainside containing an unusual mixture of high @-@ alpine vegetation . Known as the Jardin de Talèfre , its name derives from the rich assemblage of plants which occur at great altitude there ( between 2 @,@ 650 and 3 @,@ 000 m ( 8 @,@ 690 and 9 @,@ 840 ft ) ) . Described as " one of the loftiest patches of vegetation in Europe upon an islet of rock in the midst of a wilderness of snow and ice " , it is higher than the adjacent ground by some tens of metres and , as a result , was spared glacial scouring and subsequent loss of its vegetation during the Little Ice Age ( between 1300 and 1850 ) . Nevertheless , it would at that time still have been surrounded by ice on all three sides , as evidenced by the three glacial moraines found there today . Species recorded there include : Achillea nana ; Alchemilla <unk> ; Arenaria biflora ; Arenaria <unk> ; <unk> alpina ; Draba <unk> ; <unk> nigrum ; <unk> alpinum ; <unk> versicolor ; <unk> alpina ; <unk> incana ; Juncus <unk> ; Kalmia procumbens ; Poa <unk> ; Potentilla <unk> ; Ranunculus glacialis ; Ranunculus <unk> ; Saxifraga aspera ; Saxifraga <unk> ; Saxifraga oppositifolia ; Sedum <unk> ; <unk> procumbens and Trifolium alpinum . 
 The <unk> Alpine Botanical Garden above Courmayeur is located at 2 @,@ 173 m ( 7 @,@ 129 ft ) above sea level , and is the highest botanical garden in Europe . It contains around 800 plant species and covers an area of 7 @,@ 000 square metres ( 75 @,@ 000 sq ft ) . It was originally created in 1987 just as a tourist attraction but , with the subsequent designation of the adjacent Pavillon du Mont <unk> as a protected area , it has since increased in scientific importance . It can be reached either from the mid @-@ way station of the Skyway Monte Bianco , or on foot from La <unk> within two hours and an ascent of 800 m ( 2 @,@ 600 ft ) . The botanical garden derives its name from the genus of mountain flowers , <unk> ( Saw @-@ <unk> ) which itself was named after Horace @-@ Bénédict de Saussure , whose enthusiasm for scientific research in the mountains led to the first ascent of Mont Blanc in 1786 . 
 = = = Fauna = = = 
 The mountains around Mont Blanc are home to many mammal species , including ibex , chamois , deer , mountain hare and alpine marmot ( including a small population of albino marmots within Val Ferret ) . Eurasian lynx have been reintroduced into the French Alps and , although present around the Mont Blanc massif , are extremely unlikely to be encountered . Similarly , wolves were extirpated long ago but have also been reintroduced in recent times , and a small number of individuals are reported to have made their way into the Chamonix area . 
 Over 80 different bird species have been recorded on the Italian side of the massif from within Val Ferret , including 63 nesting species and nine regional or national rarities . The following birds have been recorded in different habitats right across the Mont Blanc massif : 
 Valleys and lower pastures : Blackbird ; carrion crow ; chaffinch ; goldfinch ; great tit ; house martin ; house sparrow ; nuthatch ; robin ; swallow ; thrush ; whinchat ; yellowhammer . 
 Rivers : Dipper ; wagtails . 
 Forests : Coal tit ; crested tit ; jay ; marsh tit ; mistle thrush ; nutcracker ; willow tit . 
 Above tree line : Alpine accentor ; alpine chough ; bearded vulture ( rare ) ; black redstart ; <unk> finch ; meadow pipit ; ptarmigan ; redstart ; <unk> ; wallcreeper ; wheatear . 
 Raptors : Buzzard ; golden eagle ; honey buzzard ; kestrel ; peregrine falcon ; sparrowhawk . 
 Seven of the massif 's largest indigenous mammal species are housed in the <unk> Animal Park near Les Houches , including ibex , chamois , marmot , fallow and roe deer . Located 600 metres ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ) above the village , the park was founded in 1968 and contains eighty animal species from mountain habitats around the world . 
 = = Human history = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 The region in which the Mont Blanc massif is located has been occupied by man for at least 70 @,@ 000 years , although , as now — and because of the great height and glaciated nature of the mountains — only the lower parts of the valleys around its perimeter would have been inhabited or used as routes of communication . 
 The Romans , who occupied the region some 2 @,@ 000 years ago , used the main valleys around the massif for military purposes . They gave the name Alpes <unk> , or Poeninae , to the highest parts of the Alps — which extended from Mont Blanc to Monte Rosa . They took over Aosta from the <unk> Celtic tribe in 25 AD and engineered roads which extended northwards into Europe via the Great St Bernard Pass and the Little St Bernard Pass . Courmayeur , on the southern side of the massif , began to develop as a stop @-@ off along their trans @-@ alpine trading routes between Italy and France . Parts of the modern Tour du Mont Blanc walking trail still follow the route of a Roman road along the Col du Bonhomme and the Col de la Seigne . 
 The Romans occupied Martigny to the north of the massif , and their influence spread out well beyond the Alps into much of northern Europe . As a result of aggressive pressure from tribes in the north , the imperial forces of Rome were gradually withdrawn from the alpine regions until , by the 5th century AD , they had left completely . The areas left behind were occupied in the western part by the Burgundian tribes from what is today France , whilst the Alemanni tribes from Germany moved into eastern parts , resulting in the linguistic divide found today across the Alps . 
 For many centuries thereafter , the settlements around the Mont Blanc massif comprised a rural population of peasant mountain farmers , living off animal husbandry , supplemented with a meagre harvest of rye and oats . Some farmers in the valley of Chamonix joined their counterparts from the neighbouring valleys of Maurienne , <unk> and <unk> and crossed the Alps into southern Germany , Austria and northern Italy to sell their products and bring back goods for sale in local markets . 
 = = = Tourist beginnings = = = 
 In 1741 , the <unk> valley and its glaciers on the north side of the massif were discovered and written about by two aristocratic travelling Englishmen , named William Windham and Richard Pococke . The descriptions of their exploits were published across Europe , bringing the mountains of the Mont Blanc range to the attention of a wide audience for the first time . In 1760 , Horace @-@ Bénédict de Saussure offered a large financial prize to the first people who successfully ascended Mont Blanc . The summit was finally attained on 8 August 1786 by two Chamonix men , the guide Jacques Balmat and Dr. Michel Paccard . The decades that followed saw the gradual opening up of Chamonix to the world , as well as the rest of the Mont Blanc massif . The many published accounts of climbs and impressive sights amongst or around the mountain range attracted numerous wealthy and notable visitors , for whom a visit to marvel at the Sea of Ice ( the Mer de Glace ) became a fashionable thing to experience . 
 In July 1816 , Mary Shelley and Percy Bysshe Shelley toured the Alps and visited Chamouni ( as it was then known ) , as well as the Mer de Glace and the Bossons Glacier . They jointly published their accounts and letters in a work entitled : History of a Six Weeks ' Tour through a part of France , Switzerland , Germany , and Holland ; with Letters Descriptive of a Sail Round the Lake of Geneva and of the Glaciers of Chamouni . The book concludes with Mont Blanc , a 144 @-@ line poem by Percy Shelley , written whilst in Chamonix and which was inspired by the river Arve , the snow @-@ covered summits , the chaotic glaciers and the forests that he experienced during their visit . 
 Amongst many other notable visitors were : Goethe ( 1779 ) ; Chateaubriand ( 1805 ) ; Madame de Staël ; Victor Hugo ; Louis Pasteur and Franz Liszt ( 1836 ) , plus two successive wives of Napoleon Bonaparte : Joséphine de Beauharnais ( 1810 ) and Marie Louise of Austria ( 1814 ) . In 1849 , John Ruskin spent a month in Chamonix , from where he painted some of the massif 's mountains before undertaking the Tour of Mont Blanc . When Savoy was eventually annexed to France in 1860 , Napoleon III and Empress Eugénie visited the region to mark the event and undertook to enhance road access leading to the end of the Arve valley . 
 The 19th century saw considerable economic development which turned the small agricultural town of Chamonix into a base for tourists , with luxurious hotels and mountain lodges being built to accommodate them . A trade in selling local items to visiting foreigners soon developed . Crystals collected from across the massif were much in demand , as were locally produced goods such as horn trinkets and honey . 
 In just 50 years the Mont Blanc massif , and Chamonix and Courmayeur in particular , had become a popular destination for many travellers , and its economy changed from 80 % agriculture to 80 % tourism . It saw the emergence and spread of the sport of alpine mountaineering , and visitor numbers increased significantly . By the end of the 18th century , Chamonix was home to around 1 @,@ 500 summer visitors . By 1850 it was welcoming 5 @,@ 000 visitors , and by 1892 those numbers had risen to 24 @,@ 000 a year . In 1906 , the eleventh edition of a guidebook written by Edward Whymper about Chamonix and the Mont Blanc range estimated that 130 @,@ 000 visitors had gone there during the previous season . It also reported that the railway service to Chamonix , which had previously been suspended in winter , was now running throughout the year . The tourist boom to the mountains had started . In 1924 , a Winter Sports Week was held in Chamonix , with patronage from the International Olympic Committee . It attracted over 10 @,@ 000 paying visitors and was retrospectively named as the first Winter Olympic Games . 
 = = = Modern tourism = = = 
 The Mont Blanc massif is now a significant tourist destination . The region attracts over six million people per annum , with around one in five gaining access to its slopes by means of mechanical infrastructure ( cable cars or funicular railways ) . Some surveys have shown that tourists mostly come to the Mont Blanc massif and its environs for winter sports such as skiing as well as summer outdoor activities like hiking , climbing and cycling . 
 The Aiguille du Midi Cable Car in Chamonix attracts 500 @,@ 000 people each year and gives views over much of the massif , and up towards Mont Blanc itself . From Chamonix it rises to the summit of the Aiguille du Midi at 3 @,@ 842 metres ( 12 @,@ 605 ft ) , and holds the world record for the highest vertical ascent of any cable car ( 2 @,@ 807 m ( 9 @,@ 209 ft ) ) . 
 The building of the new Skyway Monte Bianco cable car on the Italian side of the massif is expected to increase visitor numbers to Courmayeur from 100 @,@ 000 to 300 @,@ 000 per annum , following complete replacement of an earlier cable car system in 2015 . It takes tourists from La <unk> up to the Torino Hut at its top on Pointe <unk> . Costing over 105 million euros , the Skyway Monte Bianco is regarded as the world 's most expensive cable car installation . 
 Other recent enhancements to tourist infrastructure across the massif have included construction of a new , and ultra @-@ modern Goûter Hut to accommodate the increasing numbers of mountaineers attempting the popular Goûter Route to the summit of Mont Blanc , and investment of ½ billion euros in Les Grands Montets and other ski areas over a six @-@ year period from 2014 onwards . 
 Increasing numbers of mountain tourists , ease of access into the high mountain environment , plus promotion and encouragement by tour companies offering ascents of Mont Blanc to people with little or no previous alpine experience , have led to an increase in mountain accidents and even inappropriate demands to be rescued . With up to 30 @,@ 000 climbing parties now attempting to ascend Mont Blanc each year , it has gained the reputation of being one of the world 's deadliest mountains . Deaths from mountaineering @-@ related accidents across the Mont Blanc massif average almost 100 a year , with the majority occurring on Mont Blanc itself . There have also been various stunts , some of which the local authorities have decried as reckless or stupid . In recent years , guards have been placed on the most popular route of ascent to Mont Blanc 's summit at peak periods in order to ensure that those entering the mountain environment are adequately equipped and skilled . This has led to calls to limit access to the most popular summits and for the mountains to be treated with greater respect . 
 = = = Scientific research = = = 
 The Mont Blanc massif has provided numerous opportunities for academic research , dating back to the very first ascent of Mont Blanc in 1786 during which Michel Paccard carried scientific equipment to confirm it as the highest summit . In 1820 , an ill @-@ fated expedition led by Dr Hamel included pigeons intended for release at varying altitudes to measure the impact of reduced air density on their ability to fly . In 1890 , Joseph <unk> built a small meteorological observatory at approximately 4 @,@ 350 m ( 14 @,@ 272 ft ) between the Dôme du Goûter and Mont Blanc 's summit from where numerous measurements and scientific experiments were conducted . One study involved taking simultaneous temperature measurements made over many months at Chamonix , the Grands <unk> and at the observatory itself . In 1893 , Pierre Janssen constructed an astronomical observatory on the top of Mont Blanc , partially buried within the summit ice to hold it in place . A 33 cm ( 13 in ) telescope and a spectrograph for measuring the oxygen content of the sun were installed . The observatory was removed when it started to collapse around 1906 . 
 Three examples of modern @-@ day uses of the high mountains for scientific research include neutrino detection , uranium pollution monitoring and climate change : 
 A neutrino detector was installed deep inside the Mont Blanc Tunnel in the early ‑ 1980s in order to take advantage of the shielding from background radiation provided by the 4 @,@ 800 meter water equivalent ( <unk> ) of solid rock surrounding it in every direction . In February 1987 , the underground neutrino observatory reported the detection of a neutrino event , believed to have originated from the explosion of the SN 1987A supernova . 
 In 2005 , the technique of remote laser @-@ scanning ( LiDAR ) was used for the first time in any mountain environment to research the impact of climate change on rock face stability . Seven sites in the Mont Blanc massif were selected , with the Tour Ronde being the first to be analysed . An area of its east face of 67 @,@ 400 m2 ( 725 @,@ 000 sq ft ) was laser @-@ scanned from a distance of 800 metres ( 2 @,@ 625 feet ) . This revealed that over a twelve @-@ month period the face had lost 536 m3 ( 18 @,@ 900 cu ft ) of rock . The project concluded that the high rockfall rate on the Tour Ronde and elsewhere in the massif was linked to the degradation of permafrost . This would formerly have held the mountain together more effectively , but is now exposed to greater weathering through the freeze @-@ thaw cycle of water , with maximum occurrence during warm summers . In 2015 , climbers captured video footage of a huge rockfall on the Tour Ronde 's east face , which suggests that instability continues in this area . 
 In 2001 , researchers from France , Italy and Korea published the results of a study into uranium contamination of the wider environment by wind @-@ borne particles . They analysed an ice core that had been drilled to a depth of 140 m ( 459 ft ) on the Dôme du Goûter , and at an altitude of 4 @,@ 250 m ( 13 @,@ 944 ft ) . It produced an accurate timeline of contamination levels going back 200 years and was the first published uranium concentration data for any alpine or polar icefield . Ice that pre @-@ dated 1940 was shown to contain fairly uniform and low levels of uranium , consistent with natural background contamination . In contrast , ice that had been laid down after World War II showed large excesses . These were attributed to aerial transport of uranium dust , produced by extensive mining and milling operations that occurred in East Germany ( and also in France to a lesser extent ) between 1965 and the end of the 1980s . No evidence was found that either the 1986 Chernobyl disaster or other nuclear power plants had caused the high levels of observed uranium contamination . 
 = = = Modern military history = = = 
 A troop garrison , known as the <unk> , was active for many years at the Col de la Seigne , on the border between France and Italy . In the 1930s , during a period of increased international tension , the Mont Blanc massif was used by both countries wanting to demonstrate their military might , and large drills and troop exercises were undertaken at high altitude . During World War II , at a time when the French army had already been defeated by Nazi Germany , France found itself under attack again , but this time by Italian soldiers in many alpine locations including the area around the Col de la Seigne . Evidence of past fortifications and old firing points are still visible throughout the area 
 Towards the end of World War II , the highest engagement of the entire war occurred on the glaciers above Chamonix . With the Germans nearly defeated , and their garrison in Chamonix surrounded by the liberating forces , a contingent of Austro @-@ German soldier — who were based around the Torino Hut on the Italian side of the massif — launched a dawn bombardment on Chamonix from positions adjacent to the cable car station on the Col du Midi . Their attack was met with fierce opposition from French resistance fighters , and took place at an altitude of 3 @,@ 500 metres ( 11 @,@ 500 feet ) . Nine of the attacking soldiers were killed , including their commander . 
 By 1932 France had established the École de Haute Montagne in Chamonix to train mountain troops , but in 1945 it was reconstituted to provide specialised mountaineering training , skiing and tactical skills to the entire army . It was later renamed as the École Militaire de Haute Montagne ( <unk> ) and it continues to fulfil that role to this day , training approximately 1 @,@ 500 troops every year . 
 = = = Incidents and tragedies = = = 
 A number of noteworthy incidents have occurred across the massif over the last two centuries which stand out from the routine toll of mountain @-@ related deaths , of which there are now approximately 100 per annum . 
 1820 First recorded deaths on Mont Blanc . Three <unk> die in a climbing group led by Dr Hamel . 
 1892 175 people are killed in St Gervais and nearby settlements from the sudden release of meltwater from the Tête Rousse Glacier . 
 1895 Italian mountain guide , Émile Rey , dies during simple descent from Dent du <unk> . 
 1946 A B @-@ 17 Flying Fortress crashes into the Aiguille des Glaciers . All eight crew are killed . 
 1950 Air India Flight 245 crashes close to summit of Mont Blanc . All 48 passengers and crew are killed . 
 1961 French jet fighter plane severs cable on Vallée Blanche Cable Car , killing six tourists and leaving 59 trapped . 
 1966 Air India Flight 101 crashes close to summit of Mont Blanc . All 106 passengers and 11 crew are killed . 
 1997 British mountain guide is successfully sued by six @-@ year @-@ old boy over father 's death in a climbing accident on the Tour Ronde in 1990 . 
 1999 Avalanche kills 12 people and destroys 17 houses in villages of Le Tour and <unk> - the worst incident in Chamonix for 90 years . 
 1999 A lorry fire in the Mont Blanc Tunnel kills 39 people . 
 2012 Ice fall triggers avalanche on Mont Maudit , affecting 28 climbers . Nine climbers killed , nine others injured . 
 = = Access = = 
 The Mont Blanc massif is accessible by road from within France via the A40 – E25 , or from Switzerland via Martigny and the Forclaz pass ( 1 @,@ 527 m ( 5 @,@ 010 ft ) ) , or via <unk> to reach the Swiss Val Ferret . From within Italy the A40 from Aosta leads to Courmayeur , as does the higher mountain route from Bourg @-@ Saint @-@ Maurice via the Col du Petit St. Bernard ( 2 @,@ 188 m ( 7 @,@ 178 ft ) ) . 
 The massif can be quickly crossed in a north – south direction by one of two transport routes , one aimed at through @-@ traffic , the other intended solely for tourists : 
 The 11 @.@ 6 km ( 7 @.@ 2 mi ) long Tunnel du Mont Blanc connects Chamonix and Courmayeur and permits cars and lorries to quickly reach the opposite valley . It took twenty years to complete and opened to vehicle traffic in 1965 . The tunnel is known for an incident in March 1999 , when a lorry caught alight inside ; the resulting fire lasted 53 hours and killed 39 people . The tunnel was renovated in the aftermath , re @-@ opening three years later . By 2008 , some 1 @,@ 600 trucks and 3 @,@ 200 cars were using the tunnel every day ( totalling 1 @.@ 8 million vehicles per year ) – a little less than before the 1999 fire . 
 The Vallée Blanche Cable Car is normally used by visitors travelling from one or other of the tourist centres of Chamonix or Courmayeur and gives views over the glaciated regions of the massif . It crosses the massif in a roughly north – south direction and connects the Aiguille du Midi with the Point <unk> , each of which can themselves be reached by <unk> from Chamonix and Courmayeur , respectively . 
 Elsewhere in the massif , the Montenvers Railway connects Chamonix to Montenvers near the foot of the Mer de Glace , whilst the <unk> du <unk> connects Argentière with Aiguille des Grands Montets , where Les Grand Montets is an important winter skiing area in the region . At 3 @,@ 300 m ( 10 @,@ 827 ft ) , the summit station also provides relatively easy access for climbers to the northeastern peaks of the range , including short introductory rock scrambles and a simple ice @-@ face route on the NW face of the Petite Aiguille Verte . 
 The Mont Blanc Tramway takes tourists and hikers from Saint @-@ Gervais to the <unk> d <unk> , near the Glacier de <unk> . It also provides mountaineers with ready access to the first stage of the Goûter Route for an attempt on the most popular route to the summit of Mont Blanc . 
 From Les Houches , one of two cable cars links to Bellevue plateau ( 1 @,@ 800 m ( 5 @,@ 906 ft ) ) , giving access to walking paths , mountain bike trails and winter ski @-@ runs as well as to a halt on the Mont Blanc Tramway , A second links the town to the adjacent <unk> plateau ( 1 @,@ 900 m ( 6 @,@ 234 ft ) ) . 
 Heli @-@ skiing gives ready access to many remote or off @-@ piste ski routes in the Mont Blanc massif . Because <unk> @-@ skiing is banned across France for environmental reasons , companies offering this service only operate on the Swiss and Italian sides of the range . 
 = = = Mountain huts = = = 
 Since the very early days of alpine mountaineering a number of high @-@ altitude mountain refuges have been positioned strategically across the massif to give climbers easier access to the high summits by permitting an overnight stay . The majority are owned by national mountaineering clubs , and many are <unk> during the summer months , although the smaller bivouac huts are unmanned and have very basic facilities . 
 Those on the most popular routes , such as the Goûter Hut , now require all climbers to pre @-@ book . Some tiny huts , such as the remote Eccles Hut , can also be extremely crowded during good mountaineering weather , and some climbers prefer to bivouac outside . 
 = = Environmental protection = = 
 Weather records show that since the 1960s there has been a trend of less snow at lower altitudes , whilst since the 1990s average mountain temperatures have increased more than at lower levels . Temperatures in Chamonix have risen by 1 @.@ 5 ° C over the last 75 years , and fresh snow build @-@ up has halved there in the last 40 years , and there has been an increase in the melting and retreat of the massif 's glaciers . The Mer de Glace has retreated 2 @,@ 300 m ( 7 @,@ 500 ft ) in length since 1820 and , at Montenvers , has reduced in thickness by 150 m ( 490 ft ) . In the last 20 years the glacier has been retreating at a rate of around 30 m ( 98 ft ) every year . Since 1994 it has lost 500 m ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) in length and 70 m ( 230 ft ) in depth . 
 To help counter these effects , in 2012 the various Chamonix @-@ Mont Blanc authorities introduced a climate and energy action plan , committing the region to a 22 % reduction in its greenhouse gas emissions by 2020 . The plan included proposals to improve air quality by banning those lorries from using the Mont Blanc Tunnel which were deemed to be the most polluting and which , at times , had reduced air quality to levels more usually associated with the streets of Paris . 
 Concerns over the state of the environment around the most popular parts of the Mont Blanc massif , and the need for visitors to better respect it , were reflected in a statement in 2014 by Jean @-@ Marc <unk> , the mayor of Saint @-@ Gervais , who said : 
 Mont Blanc is a heap of garbage ... a mountain covered with the crap , urine and detritus of the last 50 years . The problems are covered up by a nice , white blanket of snow . But I want to confront people with the reality and to reach those people who abuse the mountain . 
 Following the construction of the new Goûter Hut used by most climbers ascending Mont Blanc , the authorities now strictly enforce a ' no wild @-@ camping ' ban above the level of Tête <unk> Hut . Each high altitude hut faces its own individual challenges , often relating to water and energy supply or waste management , and the provision of services to visitors can sometimes conflict with environmental protection . A range of individual solutions for a selection of huts within the massif and elsewhere in the Alps was identified by a project run by Espace Mont Blanc between 2007 and 2013 . 
 = = = Espace Mont Blanc = = = 
 In 1991 , the environment ministers for France , Italy and Switzerland came together to agree the formation of Espace Mont Blanc – a partnership of national authorities and local communities to plan for the future development and protection of the Mont Blanc region . In 1998 , the group was charged with creating a sustainable development scheme for the region ( finally launched in 2005 ) , whilst in 2003 it adopted a plan for safeguarding sensitive environments and landscapes . In 2007 , it produced its position statement regarding the classification of Mont Blanc as a UNESCO World Heritage Site , and in 2009 a <unk> Integrated Plan ( <unk> ) was announced , with the implementation of six regional projects running until 2013 . In 2014 , the group launched " Strategy for the Future " , which is intended to be a strategic tool for ensuring that public policies are consistent across the different territories around the Mont Blanc massif . 
 = = = Protected statuses = = = 
 In 1951 the French portion of the Mont Blanc massif was classified as a Site <unk> ( or ' listed site ' ) and this was extended in 1976 to cover 253 @.@ 54 km2 ( 97 @.@ 89 sq mi ) . By 1989 there had been calls for the creation of an International Park for Mont Blanc . In June 2000 France did add the Mont Blanc Massif to UNESCO 's Tentative List , which is a first step to formal nomination for World Heritage Site status . This was followed in January 2008 by a cross @-@ border submission from Italy , which included France and Switzerland . However , as of 2016 , it had neither a national park designation nor UNESCO World Heritage Site status . As a result of long delays , many environmental groups from France , Italy and Switzerland have worked together under the umbrella organisation , <unk> <unk> , to jointly raise concerns and to put pressure on national governments and the European Union to support and make quicker progress with World Heritage classification . In 2012 the organisation published a detailed assessment and supportive rationale into the state of the Mont Blanc application to be a World Heritage Site . <unk> Blanc also undertakes reviews of a suite of 24 environmental , 24 economic and 10 social indicators across 15 towns around the massif ( seven French , five Italian and three Swiss ) , and monitors and reports on the effectiveness of measures intended to deliver sustainable development across the region . 
 All the French parts of the Mont Blanc massif , plus the neighbouring Aiguille Rouges range , have been listed as a Zone naturelle d <unk> <unk> , <unk> et <unk> ( ZNIEFF ) . This does not give regulatory protection , but is a recognition of the outstanding biodiversity of the area , and of its landscape , geomorphological , geological , historical and scientific importance . The 2011 schedule documents list over 150 species of animals and plants for which the massif is important . In Italy , the whole Val Ferret watershed was designated a Special Protection Area ( Italian : Zone di <unk> <unk> ) in 2003 , and this 90 @.@ 8 km2 ( 35 @.@ 1 sq mi ) area now forms part of the European Union 's Natura 2000 network of protected sites . 
 Despite these individual designations , the Mont Blanc massif as a whole is still regarded by conservationists as representing an important missing link in the wider network of protected areas of the western Alps . 
 = Penda of Mercia = 
 Penda ( died 15 November 655 ) was a 7th @-@ century King of Mercia , the Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdom in what is today the English Midlands . A pagan at a time when Christianity was taking hold in many of the Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdoms , Penda took over the Severn Valley in 628 following the Battle of Cirencester before participating in the defeat of the powerful Northumbrian king Edwin at the Battle of Hatfield Chase in 633 . 
 Nine years later , he defeated and killed Edwin 's eventual successor , Oswald , at the Battle of Maserfield ; from this point he was probably the most powerful of the Anglo @-@ Saxon rulers of the time , laying the foundations for the Mercian supremacy over the Anglo @-@ Saxon Heptarchy . He repeatedly defeated the East Angles and drove Cenwalh the king of Wessex into exile for three years . He continued to wage war against the Bernicians of Northumbria . Thirteen years after Maserfield , he suffered a crushing defeat by Oswald 's successor and brother Oswiu , and was killed at the Battle of the Winwaed in the course of a final campaign against the Bernicians . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The etymology of the name Penda is unknown . Penda of Mercia is the only monarch with this name , but a number of Mercian commoners with the same name are on record . 
 Suggestions for etymologies of the name are essentially divided between a Celtic and a Germanic origin . The names of members of a Northumbrian [ spiritual ] brotherhood are recorded in the ninth century Liber vitae Dunelmensis , the name Penda occurs in this list and is categorised as a British ( Welsh ) name . John T. Koch noted that , " Penda and a number of other royal names from early Anglian Mercia have more obvious Brythonic than German explanations , though they do not correspond to known Welsh names . " These royal names include those of Penda 's father Pybba , and of his son Peada . It has been suggested that the firm alliance between Penda and various British princes might be the result of a " racial cause . " 
 Continental Germanic <unk> for the name include a feminine Penta ( 9th century ) and a toponym <unk> @-@ <unk> , suggesting an underlying personal name <unk> . 
 = = Descent , beginning of reign , and battle with the West Saxons = = 
 Penda was a son of Pybba of Mercia and said to be an <unk> , with a lineage purportedly extending back to Wōden . The Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle gives his descent as follows : 
 Penda was Pybba 's offspring , Pybba was <unk> 's offspring , <unk> <unk> 's offspring , <unk> Cnebba 's offspring , Cnebba Icel 's offspring , Icel <unk> 's offspring , <unk> <unk> 's offspring , <unk> Offa 's offspring , Offa <unk> 's offspring , <unk> <unk> 's offspring , <unk> Woden 's offspring . 
 The Historia Brittonum says that Pybba had 12 sons , including Penda , but that Penda and Eowa of Mercia were those best known to its author . ( Many of these 12 sons of Pybba may in fact merely represent later attempts to claim descent from him . ) Besides Eowa , the pedigrees also give Penda a brother named <unk> from whom two later kings were said to descend , although this may instead represent his brother @-@ in @-@ law Cenwalh of Wessex . 
 The time at which Penda became king is uncertain , as are the circumstances . Another Mercian king , Cearl , is mentioned by Bede as ruling at the same time as the Northumbrian king Æthelfrith , in the early part of the 7th century . Whether Penda immediately succeeded Cearl is unknown , and it is also unclear whether they were related , and if so how closely ; Henry of Huntingdon , writing in the 12th century , claimed that Cearl was a kinsman of Pybba . It is also possible that Cearl and Penda were dynastic rivals . 
 According to the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle , Penda became king in 626 , ruled for 30 years , and was 50 years old at the time of his accession . That he ruled for 30 years should not be taken as an exact figure , since the same source says he died in 655 , which would not correspond to the year given for the beginning of his reign unless he died in the thirtieth year of his reign . Furthermore , that Penda was truly 50 years old at the beginning of his reign is generally doubted by historians , mainly because of the ages of his children . The idea that Penda , at about 80 years of age , would have left behind children who were still young ( his son Wulfhere was still just a youth three years after Penda 's death , according to Bede ) has been widely considered implausible . The possibility has been suggested that the Chronicle actually meant to say that Penda was 50 years old at the time of his death , and therefore about 20 in 626 . 
 Bede , in his Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum , says of Penda that he was " a most warlike man of the royal race of the Mercians " and that , following Edwin of Northumbria 's defeat in 633 ( see below ) , he ruled the Mercians for 22 years with varying fortune . The noted 20th @-@ century historian Frank Stenton was of the opinion that the language used by Bede " leaves no doubt that ... Penda , though descended from the royal family of the Mercians , only became their king after Edwin 's defeat " . The Historia Brittonum accords Penda a reign of only ten years , perhaps dating it from the time of the Battle of Maserfield ( see below ) around 642 , although according to the generally accepted chronology this would still be more than ten years . Given the apparent problems with the dates given by the Chronicle and the Historia , Bede 's account of the length of Penda 's reign is generally considered the most plausible by historians . Nicholas Brooks noted that , since these three accounts of the length of Penda 's reign come from three different sources , and none of them are Mercian ( they are West Saxon , Northumbrian , and Welsh ) , they may merely reflect the times at which their respective peoples first had military involvement with Penda . 
 The question of whether or not Penda was already king during the late 620s assumes greater significance in light of the Chronicle 's record of a battle between Penda and the West Saxons under their kings Cynegils and Cwichelm taking place at Cirencester in 628 . If he was not yet king , then his involvement in this conflict might indicate that he was fighting as an independent warlord during this period — as Stenton put it , " a landless noble of the Mercian royal house fighting for his own hand . " On the other hand , he might have been one of multiple rulers among the Mercians at the time , ruling only a part of their territory . The Chronicle says that after the battle , Penda and the West Saxons " came to an agreement . " 
 It has been speculated that this agreement marked a victory for Penda , ceding to him Cirencester and the areas along the lower River Severn . These lands to the southwest of Mercia had apparently been taken by the West Saxons from the Britons in 577 , and the territory eventually became part of the subkingdom of the Hwicce . Given Penda 's role in the area at this time and his apparent success there , it has been argued that the subkingdom of the Hwicce was established by him ; evidence to support this is lacking , although the subkingdom is known to have existed later in the century . 
 = = Alliance with Cadwallon and the Battle of Hatfield Chase = = 
 In the late 620s or early 630s , Cadwallon ap Cadfan , the British ( Welsh ) king of Gwynedd , became involved in a war with Edwin of Northumbria , the most powerful king in Britain at the time . Cadwallon apparently was initially unsuccessful , but he joined with Penda , who is thought to have been the lesser partner in their alliance , to defeat the Northumbrians in October 633 at the Battle of Hatfield Chase . Penda was probably not yet king of the Mercians , but he is thought to have become king soon afterwards , based on Bede 's characterisation of his position . Edwin was killed in the battle , and one of his sons , Eadfrith , fell into Penda 's hands . 
 One manuscript of the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle says that , following the victory at Hatfield Chase , Cadwallon and Penda went on to ravage " the whole land " of the Northumbrians . Certainly Cadwallon continued the war , but the extent of Penda 's further participation is uncertain . Bede says that the pagans who had slain Edwin — presumably a reference to the Mercians under Penda , although conceivably it could be a derisive misnomer meant to refer to the Christian British — burned a church and town at <unk> , although the time at which this occurred is uncertain . Penda might have withdrawn from the war at some point before the defeat and death of Cadwallon at the Battle of Heavenfield , about a year after Hatfield Chase , since he was not present at this battle . Furthermore , Bede makes no mention of Penda 's presence in the preceding siege and battle in which Osric of Deira was defeated and killed . Penda 's successful participation in the battle of Hatfield Chase would have elevated his status among the Mercians and so enabled him to become king , and he might have withdrawn from the war before Heavenfield to secure or consolidate his position in Mercia . Referring to Penda 's successes against the West Saxons and the Northumbrians , D. P. Kirby writes of Penda 's emergence in these years as " a Mercian leader whose military exploits far transcended those of his obscure predecessors . " 
 = = During the reign of Oswald = = 
 Oswald of Bernicia became king of Northumbria after his victory over Cadwallon at Heavenfield . Penda 's status and activities during the years of Oswald 's reign are obscure , and various interpretations of Penda 's position during this period have been suggested . It has been presumed that Penda acknowledged Oswald 's authority in some sense after Heavenfield , although Penda was probably an obstacle to Northumbrian supremacy south of the Humber . It has been suggested that Penda 's strength during Oswald 's reign could be exaggerated by the historical awareness of his later successes . Kirby says that , while Oswald was as powerful as Edwin had been , " he faced a more entrenched challenge in midland and eastern England from Penda " . 
 At some point during Oswald 's reign , Penda had Edwin 's son Eadfrith killed , " contrary to his oath " . The possibility that his killing was the result of pressure from Oswald — Eadfrith being a dynastic rival of Oswald — has been suggested . Since the potential existed for Eadfrith to be put to use in Mercia 's favour in Northumbrian power struggles while he was alive , it would not have been to Penda 's advantage to have him killed . On the other hand , Penda might have killed Eadfrith for his own reasons . It has been suggested that Penda was concerned that Eadfrith could be a threat to him because Eadfrith might seek vengeance for the deaths of his father and brother ; it is also possible that Mercian dynastic rivalry played a part in the killing , since Eadfrith was a grandson of Penda 's predecessor Cearl . 
 It was probably at some point during Oswald 's reign that Penda fought with the East Angles and defeated them , killing their king <unk> and the former king Sigebert , who had been brought out of retirement in a monastery against his will in the belief that his presence would motivate the soldiers . The time at which the battle occurred is uncertain ; it may have been as early as 635 , but there is also evidence to suggest it could not have been before 640 or 641 . Presuming that this battle took place before the Battle of Maserfield , it may have been that such an expression of Penda 's ambition and emerging power made Oswald feel that Penda had to be defeated for Northumbrian dominance of southern England to be secured or consolidated . 
 Penda 's brother Eowa was also said by the Historia Brittonum and the Annales Cambriae to have been a king of the Mercians at the time of Maserfield . The question of what sort of relationship of power existed between the brothers before the battle is a matter of speculation . Eowa may have simply been a sub @-@ king under Penda and it is also possible that Penda and Eowa ruled jointly during the 630s and early 640s : joint kingships were not uncommon among Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdoms of the period . They may have ruled the southern and northern Mercians respectively . That Penda ruled the southern part is a possibility suggested by his early involvement in the area of the Hwicce , to the south of Mercia , as well as by the fact that , after Penda 's death , his son Peada was allowed to rule southern Mercia while the northern part was placed under direct Northumbrian control . 
 Another possibility was suggested by Brooks : Penda might have lost power at some point after Heavenfield , and Eowa may have actually been ruling the Mercians for at least some of the period as a subject ally or puppet of Oswald . Brooks cited Bede 's statement implying that Penda 's fortunes were mixed during his 22 years in power and noted the possibility that Penda 's fortunes were low at this time . Thus it may be that Penda was not consistently the dominant figure in Mercia during the years between Hatfield and Maserfield . 
 = = Maserfield = = 
 On 5 August 642 , Penda defeated the Northumbrians at the Battle of Maserfield , which was fought near the lands of the Welsh , and Oswald was killed . Surviving Welsh poetry suggests that Penda fought in alliance with the men of Powys — apparently he was consistently allied with some of the Welsh — perhaps including <unk> ap <unk> , of whom it was said that " when the son of <unk> desired , how ready he was " , presumably meaning that he was an ally of Penda , the son of Pybba . If the traditional identification of the battle 's location with Oswestry is correct , then this would indicate that it was Oswald who had taken the offensive against Penda . It has been suggested that he was acting against " a threat posed to his domination of Mercia by a hostile alliance of Penda and Powys . " According to Reginald of Durham 's 12th century Life of Saint Oswald , Penda fled into Wales before the battle , at which point Oswald felt secure and sent his army away . This explanation of events has been regarded as " plausible " but is not found in any other source , and may , therefore , have been Reginald 's invention . 
 According to Bede , Penda had Oswald 's body dismembered , with his head , hands and arms being placed onto stakes ( this may have had a pagan religious significance . ) ; Oswald thereafter came to be revered as a saint , with his death in battle as a Christian king against pagans leading him to be regarded as a martyr . 
 Eowa was killed at Maserfield along with Oswald , although on which side he fought is unknown . It may well be that he fought as a dependent ally of Oswald against Penda . If Eowa was in fact dominant among the Mercians during the period leading up to the battle , then his death could have marked what the author of the Historia Brittonum regarded as the beginning of Penda 's ten @-@ year reign . Thus it may be that Penda prevailed not only over the Northumbrians but also over his rivals among the Mercians . 
 The Historia Brittonum may also be referring to this battle when it says that Penda first freed ( <unk> ) the Mercians from the Northumbrians . This may be an important clue to the relationship between the Mercians and the Northumbrians before and during Penda 's time . There may have existed a " <unk> confederacy " that included the Mercians until Penda broke free of it . On the other hand , it has been considered unlikely that this was truly the first instance of their separation : it is significant that Cearl had married his daughter to Edwin during Edwin 's exile , when Edwin was an enemy of the Northumbrian king Æthelfrith . It would seem that if Cearl was able to do this , he was not subject to Æthelfrith ; thus it may be that any subject relationship only developed after the time of this marriage . 
 The battle left Penda with a degree of power unprecedented for a Mercian king — Kirby called him " without question the most powerful Mercian ruler so far to have emerged in the midlands " after Maserfield — and the prestige and status associated with defeating the powerful Oswald must have been very significant . Northumbria was greatly weakened as a consequence of the battle ; the kingdom became fractured to some degree between Deira in its southern part and Bernicia in the north , with the Deirans acquiring a king of their own , Oswine , while in Bernicia , Oswald was succeeded by his brother , Oswiu . Mercia thus enjoyed a greatly enhanced position of strength relative to the surrounding kingdoms . Stenton wrote that the battle left Penda as " the most formidable king in England " , and observed that although " there is no evidence that he ever became , or even tried to become , the lord of all the other kings of southern England ... none of them can have been his equal in reputation " . 
 = = Campaigns between Maserfield and the Winwaed = = 
 Defeat at Maserfield must have weakened Northumbrian influence over the West Saxons , and the new West Saxon king Cenwealh — who was still pagan at this time — was married to Penda 's sister . It may be surmised that this meant he was to some extent within what Kirby called a " Mercian orbit " . However , when Cenwealh ( according to Bede ) " repudiated " Penda 's sister in favour of another wife , Penda drove Cenwealh into exile in East Anglia in 645 , where he remained for three years before regaining power . Who governed the West Saxons during the years of Cenwealh 's exile is unknown ; Kirby considered it reasonable to conclude that whoever ruled was subject to Penda . He also suggested that Cenwealh may not have been able to return to his kingdom until after Penda 's death . 
 In 654 , the East Anglian king Anna , who had harboured the exiled Cenwealh , was killed by Penda . He was succeeded by a brother , Aethelhere ; since Aethelhere was subsequently a participant in Penda 's doomed invasion of Bernicia in 655 ( see below ) , it may be that Penda installed Aethelhere in power . It has been suggested that Penda 's wars against the East Angles " should be seen in the light of <unk> struggles within East Anglia . " It may also be that Penda made war against the East Angles with the intention of securing Mercian dominance over the area of Middle Anglia , where Penda established his son Peada as ruler . 
 In the years after Maserfield , Penda also destructively waged war against Oswiu of Bernicia on his own territory . At one point before the death of Bishop Aidan ( 31 August 651 ) , Bede says that Penda " cruelly ravaged the country of the Northumbrians far and near " and besieged the royal Bernician stronghold of Bamburgh . When the Mercians were unable to capture it — " not being able to enter it by force , or by a long siege " — Bede reports that they attempted to set the city ablaze , but that it was saved by a sacred wind supposedly sent in response to a plea from the saintly Aidan : " Behold , Lord , how great mischief Penda does ! " The wind is said to have blown the fire back towards the Mercians , deterring them from further attempts to capture the city . At another point , some years after Aidan 's death , Bede records another attack . He says that Penda led an army in devastating the area where Aidan died — he " destroyed all he could with fire and sword " — but that when the Mercians burned down the church where Aidan died , the post against which he was leaning at the time of his death was undamaged ; this was taken to be a miracle . No open battles are recorded as being fought between the two sides before the Winwaed in 655 ( see below ) , however , and this may mean that Oswiu deliberately avoided battle due to a feeling of weakness relative to Penda . This feeling may have been in religious as well as military terms : N. J. Higham wrote of Penda acquiring " a pre @-@ eminent reputation as a god @-@ protected , warrior – king " , whose victories may have led to a belief that his pagan gods were more effective for protection in war than the Christian God . 
 = = Relations with Bernicia ; Christianity and Middle Anglia = = 
 Despite these apparent instances of warfare , relations between Penda and Oswiu were probably not entirely hostile during this period , since Penda 's daughter Cyneburh married Alhfrith , Oswiu 's son , and Penda 's son Peada married <unk> , Oswiu 's daughter . According to Bede , who dates the events to 653 , the latter marriage was made contingent upon the baptism and conversion to Christianity of Peada ; Peada accepted this , and the preaching of Christianity began among the Middle Angles , whom he ruled . Bede wrote that Penda tolerated the preaching of Christianity in Mercia itself , despite his own beliefs : 
 Nor did King Penda obstruct the preaching of the word among his people , the Mercians , if any were willing to hear it ; but , on the contrary , he hated and despised those whom he perceived not to perform the works of faith , when they had once received the faith , saying , " They were contemptible and wretched who did not obey their God , in whom they believed . " This was begun two years before the death of King Penda . 
 Peada 's conversion and the introduction of priests into Middle Anglia could be seen as evidence of Penda 's tolerance of Christianity , given the absence of evidence that he sought to interfere . On the other hand , an interpretation is also possible whereby the marriage and conversion could be seen as corresponding to a successful attempt on Oswiu 's part to expand Bernician influence at Penda 's expense ; Higham saw Peada 's conversion more in terms of political manoeuvring on both sides than religious zeal . 
 Middle Anglia as a political entity may have been created by Penda as an expression of Mercian power in the area following his victories over the East Angles . Previously there seem to have been a number of small peoples inhabiting the region , and Penda 's establishment of Peada as a subking there may have marked their initial union under one ruler . The districts corresponding to Shropshire and Herefordshire , along Mercia 's western frontier near Wales , probably also fell under Mercian domination at this time . Here a king called Merewalh ruled over the <unk> ; in later centuries it was said that Merewalh was a son of Penda , but this is considered uncertain . Stenton , for example , considered it likely that Merewalh was a representative of a local dynasty that continued to rule under Mercian domination . 
 = = Final campaign and the battle of the Winwaed = = 
 In 655 , Penda invaded Bernicia with a large army , reported to have been 30 <unk> , with 30 royal or noble commanders ( duces <unk> , as Bede called them ) , including rulers such as <unk> ap <unk> of Gwynedd and Aethelhere of East Anglia . Penda also enjoyed the support of Aethelwald , the king of Deira and the successor of Oswine , who had been murdered on Oswiu 's orders in 651 ; Bede says Aethelwald acted as Penda 's guide during his invasion . 
 The cause of this war is uncertain . There is a passage in Bede 's Ecclesiastical History that suggests Aethelhere of East Anglia was the cause of the war . On the other hand , it has been argued that an issue of punctuation in later manuscripts confused Bede 's meaning on this point , and that he in fact meant to refer to Penda as being responsible for the war . Although , according to Bede , Penda tolerated some Christian preaching in Mercia , it has been suggested that he perceived Bernician sponsorship of Christianity in Mercia and Middle Anglia as a form of " religious colonialism " that undermined his power , and that this may have provoked the war . Elsewhere the possibility has been suggested that Penda sought to prevent Oswiu from reunifying Northumbria , not wanting Oswiu to restore the kingdom to the power it had enjoyed under Edwin and Oswald . A perception of the conflict in terms of the political situation between Bernicia and Deira could help to explain the role of Aethelwald of Deira in the war , since Aethelwald was the son of Oswald and might not ordinarily be expected to ally with those who had killed his father . Perhaps , as the son of Oswald , he sought to obtain the Bernician kingship for himself . 
 According to the Historia Brittonum , Penda besieged Oswiu at Iudeu ; this site has been identified with Stirling , in the north of Oswiu 's kingdom . Oswiu tried to buy peace : in the Historia Brittonum , it is said that Oswiu offered treasure , which Penda distributed among his British allies . Bede states that the offer was simply rejected by Penda , who " resolved to extirpate all of [ Oswiu 's ] nation , from the highest to the lowest " . Additionally , according to Bede , Oswiu 's son Ecgfrith was being held hostage " at the court of Queen <unk> , in the province of the Mercians " — perhaps surrendered by Oswiu as part of some negotiations or arrangement . It would seem that Penda 's army then moved back south , perhaps returning home , but a great battle was fought near the river Winwaed in the region of <unk> , thought to be somewhere in the area around modern day Leeds , on a date given by Bede as 15 November . The identification of the Winwaed with a modern river is uncertain , but possibly it was a tributary of the Humber . There is good reason to believe it may well have been the river now known as Cock Beck in the ancient kingdom of Elmet . The Cock Beck meanders its way through <unk> Fields , close to an ancient well known as Pen Well on the outskirts of Leeds , before eventually joining the River Wharfe . This same Cock Beck whilst in flood also played a significant role in the much later Battle of Towton in 1461 . Another possibility is the River Went ( a tributary of the River Don , situated to the north of modern @-@ day Doncaster ) . It may be that Penda 's army was attacked by Oswiu at a point of strategic vulnerability , which would help explain Oswiu 's victory over forces that were , according to Bede , much larger than his own . 
 The Mercian force was also weakened by desertions . According to the Historia Brittonum , <unk> of Gwynedd , " rising up in the night , escaped together with his army " ( thus earning him the name <unk> , or " battle @-@ shirker " ) , and Bede says that at the time of the battle , Aethelwald of Deira withdrew and " awaited the outcome from a place of safety " . According to Kirby , if Penda 's army was marching home , it may have been for this reason that some of his allies were unwilling to fight . It may also be that the allies had different purposes in the war , and Kirby suggested that Penda 's deserting allies may have been dissatisfied " with what had been achieved at Iudeu " . At a time when the Winwaed was swollen with heavy rains , the Mercians were badly defeated and Penda was killed , along with the East Anglian king Aethelhere . Bede says that Penda 's " thirty commanders , and those who had come to his assistance were put to flight , and almost all of them slain , " and that more drowned while fleeing than were killed in the actual battle . He also says that Penda 's head was cut off ; a connection between this and the treatment of Oswald 's body at Maserfield is possible . Writing in the 12th century , Henry of Huntingdon emphasised the idea that Penda was suffering the same fate as he had inflicted on others . 
 = = Aftermath and historical appraisal = = 
 With the defeat at the Winwaed , Oswiu came to briefly dominate Mercia , permitting Penda 's son Peada to rule its southern portion . Two of Penda 's other sons , Wulfhere and Æthelred , later ruled Mercia in succession after the overthrow of Northumbrian control in the late 650s . The period of rule by Penda 's descendants came to an end with his grandson Ceolred 's death in 716 , after which power passed to descendants of Eowa for most of the remainder of the 8th century . 
 Penda 's reign is significant in that it marks an emergence from the obscurity of Mercia during the time of his predecessors , both in terms of the power of the Mercians relative to the surrounding peoples and in terms of our historical awareness of them . While our understanding of Penda 's reign is quite unclear , and even the very notable and decisive battles he fought are surrounded by historical confusion , for the first time a general outline of important events regarding the Mercians becomes realistically possible . Furthermore , Penda was certainly of great importance to the development of the Mercian kingdom ; it has been said that his reign was " crucial to the consolidation and expansion of Mercia " . 
 It has been claimed that the hostility of Bede has obscured Penda 's importance as ruler who wielded an imperium similar to that of other prominent 7th century ' overkings ' . Penda 's hegemony included lesser rulers of both Anglo @-@ Saxon and British origins , non @-@ Christian and Christian alike . The relationships between Penda , as hegemon , and his subordinate rulers would have been based on personal as well as political ties , and they would often have been reinforced by dynastic marriages . It has been asserted that Penda 's court would have been cosmopolitan , multi @-@ ethnic , multi @-@ lingual and tolerant . Though a pagan himself , there is evidence that the contemporary Mercian elite contained significant Christian and British elements . Penda must have been intimate with many Britons and may have been bilingual himself . 
 Penda was the last great pagan warrior @-@ king among the Anglo @-@ Saxons . Higham wrote that " his destruction sounded the death @-@ knell of English paganism as a political ideology and public religion . " After Penda 's death , the Mercians were converted to Christianity , and all three of Penda 's reigning sons ruled as Christians . His daughters Cyneburh and Cyneswith became Christian and were saintly figures who according to some accounts retained their virginity through their marriages . There was purportedly even an infant grandson of Penda named <unk> who lived a saintly three @-@ day life of fervent preaching . What is known about Penda is primarily derived from the history written by the Northumbrian Bede , a priest not inclined to objectively portray a pagan Mercian who engaged in fierce conflict with Christian kings , and in particular with Northumbrian rulers . Indeed , Penda has been described as " the villain of Bede 's third book " ( of the Historia Ecclesiastica ) . From the perspective of the Christians who later wrote about Penda , the important theme that dominates their descriptions is the religious context of his wars — for instance , the Historia Brittonum says that Penda prevailed at Maserfield through " diabolical agency " — but Penda 's greatest importance was perhaps in his opposition to the supremacy of the Northumbrians . According to Stenton , had it not been for Penda 's resistance , " a loosely compacted kingdom of England under Northumbrian rule would probably have been established by the middle of the seventh century . " In summarising Penda , he wrote the following : 
 He was himself a great fighting king of the kind most honoured in Germanic saga ; the lord of many princes , and the leader of a vast retinue attracted to his service by his success and generosity . Many stories must have been told about his dealings with other kings , but none of them have survived ; his wars can only be described from the standpoint of his enemies ... 
 = = Portrayals = = 
 In the 1970s , Penda was depicted in two BBC television productions written by David Rudkin . He was played by Geoffrey Staines in Penda 's Fen ( 1974 ) , and by Leo McKern in The Coming of the Cross ( 1975 ) . 
 = Compton – Belkovich Thorium Anomaly = 
 The Compton – Belkovich Thorium Anomaly is a hotspot ( volcanic complex ) on the Moon . It is on the far side of the Moon and was found by a gamma @-@ ray spectrometer in 1998 . It is an area of concentrated thorium , a radioactive element . Lunar rock samples from the Apollo missions reveal that most lunar volcanism occurred around 3 to 4 billion years ago , but could have been as recent as 1 billion years ago due to the unknown history of the moon 's far side . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Compton – Belkovich Thorium Anomaly was found in 1998 by the Gamma Ray Spectrometer ( GRS ) instrument on board the Lunar Prospector ( LP ) and subsequently identified as a hotspot , located around 61 @.@ 1 ° N 99 @.@ 5 ° E ﻿ / 61 @.@ 1 ; 99 @.@ 5 . The estimated thorium concentration reaches 5 @.@ 3 µg / g ( 5 @.@ 3 micrograms per gram ) while the surrounding highland basalts only contain between 0 and 2 µg / g . Compared to the Earth 's thorium concentration of 0 @.@ 06 µg / g , the Compton – Belkovich 's is very high . It has unusually high reflectance , identified by a visible imaging study that was carried out later by the Clementine spacecraft in a Clementine Visible Images study . High resolution images from the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter LRO made it possible to analyze the surface features of the Compton – Belkovich Thorium Anomaly in 2011 . 
 = = = Location = = = 
 The anomaly is between the Bel <unk> crater , which is 214 kilometres ( 133 mi ) wide , and the Compton crater , which is 162 kilometres ( 101 mi ) wide . The region as a whole is 32 kilometres ( 20 mi ) wide and 18 kilometres ( 11 mi ) long . 
 The center of the region is a volcanic complex , 25 kilometres ( 16 mi ) to 35 kilometres ( 22 mi ) across , between the Bel <unk> and the Compton craters . It is 900 kilometres ( 560 mi ) from the extent of the northeastern <unk> KREEP Terrane ( an area which has high abundances of KREEP , a geochemical component of some lunar rocks ) . 
 = = = Features = = = 
 In the center of the elevated region is a depression ; this is bounded by scarps and may be some kind of caldera . Just to the north is a feature called Little Dome , 500 metres ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) in diameter . Further north is an elongated dome , oriented north @-@ south , called Middle Dome . It is 2 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 6 mi ) long and 0 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 37 mi ) wide . Both Little Dome and Middle Dome have boulders on top that may be volcanic blocks . Big Dome is further to the north at the edge of the anomaly . It is 2 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 6 mi ) in diameter with a depression in the top . 
 An extension of the reflective material extends to the south @-@ east from the elevated region by about 7 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) . This may be a pyroclastic flow . This more highly reflective area also matches an area that shows a Christiansen feature with shorter wavelength . It reflects more strongly in the 7 @.@ 1 to 7 @.@ 5 μm range , which indicates quartz or alkali feldspar is the major constituent . 
 Explosive remains also appear scattered to the east for about 300 km covering an area of 70 @,@ 000 km2 . 
 = = = Volcanic slope = = = 
 Volcanic features provide information about the composition of the lava that formed the Compton – Belkovich Thorium Anomaly . On average , many volcanoes on the Moon have slopes of lower than 7 degrees . However , the Compton – Belkovich Thorium Anomaly has a slope which reaches 25 degrees at the highest . This suggests that the region was formed by more viscous lava . 
 = = = Composition = = = 
 Using infrared reflectance data from Clementine at 750 nm and 950 nm , the level of iron oxide was determined to be about 3 % by mass . 
 = = = Formation = = = 
 A direct analysis of Apollo program samples revealed that most lunar volcanism occurred around 3 to 4 billion years ago . However , volcanic activity on the <unk> lunar back side could have occurred around 1 billion years ago . The smoothness of the surface associated with the anomaly indicates that it could possibly have been formed in a more recent event . 
 As the lava cooled , it would have crystallized to produce a silicate structure ; incompatible elements such as thorium would have been excluded from the process and formed thorium @-@ rich pockets in the remaining liquid rock . The eruption associated with the thorium anomaly could have created the elevated features to the west and the low and broad area to the east . The latest possible eruptions of lava would have made domes with steeper slopes , and also would have caused small bulges , as they would barely reach the surface . 
 = That Should Be Me = 
 " That Should Be Me " is a song by Canadian recording artist Justin Bieber , included as the tenth and final track on his first studio album , My World 2 @.@ 0 , released on March 19 , 2010 . The song was written by Bieber alongside Luke Boyd and Nasri Atweh and Adam Messinger of The Messengers , the production team who produced the track . " That Should Be Me " is a teen pop ballad in which Bieber sings about losing his love , and according to Monica Herrera of Billboard , plays the " scorned ex . " Most music critics positively received the song , and it debuted at number ninety @-@ two on the Billboard Hot 100 following the release of My World 2 @.@ 0 . It also serves as the eighth track of Justin 's first remix album My Worlds Acoustic . 
 In December 2010 , it was announced that Bieber would be working with American country band Rascal Flatts on new music , presumably for his second studio album . However it was revealed that " That Should Be Me " was remixed to include vocals from the country group for the release of Bieber 's second remix album , Never Say Never – The Remixes , released to accompany the release of his 3D concert @-@ documentary film Justin Bieber : Never Say Never . A music video was released to accompany the remixed version of the song , which premiered during Rascal Flatts ' ABC special , Rascal Flatts : Nothing Like This Presented by JC Penney . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " That Should Be Me " was co @-@ written by Bieber alongside Luke Boyd , as well as Nasri Atweh and Adam Messinger of The Messengers , with the latter also producing the track . The song was recorded by The Messengers at NH Studios in North Hollywood , California . Instrumentation and all vocal arrangements were done by Atweh and Messinger . Additional engineering was performed by Pat Thrall , while the track was mixed by Manny Marroquin at Larrabee Studios , also in North Hollywood . The mix was assisted by Christian Plata and Erik Madrid , whereas Atweh and Luke Boyd perform background vocals on the song . 
 The song is a down @-@ tempo , teen pop song with R & B , pop rock and country pop influences . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , " That Should Be Me " is set in common time with a moderate tempo of 69 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of C minor and raises up half a step after the bridge with Bieber 's vocal range spanning from the low @-@ note of G3 to the high @-@ note of C ♯ 5 . The song follows in the chord progression of Cm – A ♭ 2 – E ♭ – G / B. Described as a " sobbing " ballad by Monica Hererra of Billboard , Bieber " pleads the girl he left behind to take him back . " Herrera called the ballad " orchestral " and said that Bieber plays the " scorned ex " in the song . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Fraser McAlpine of British Broadcasting Corporation called the song the " grand finale " of My World 2 @.@ 0 , and said it " is going to cause nothing but emotional pandemonium in households and bedrooms all over the land . " While criticizing the amount of features on the album , Chris Richards of The Washington Post said , " Let him go it alone , and he can be quite the tear @-@ jerker , as evidenced on ' That Should Be Me , ' the album 's closing track . " Rudy Klapper of Sputnikmusic criticized Bieber 's constant role as " teenage lothario " on the album , pointing out " That Should Be Me " as an example . After the release of My World 2 @.@ 0 , " That Should Be Me " debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 at number ninety @-@ two , and spent one week on the chart . " That Should Be Me " also appeared on the UK Singles Chart at number 179 . 
 = = Remix = = 
 On December 20 , 2010 , Gary LeVox , frontman of American country band Rascal Flatts , revealed to radio station WSIX that the band was collaborating with Bieber , stating , " [ Justin ] asked us to do a duet with him on his next record . It 's actually a really good song ! The kid is really talented . He plays five or six different instruments really well . " Bieber confirmed LeVox 's statements , " I love @ <unk> and Im honored that they are making music with me . And for those that don 't know ... they have great records like this one . # <unk> . " He then linked a fan video of his with Rascal Flatts ' " My Wish " playing in the background . It was later revealed that the collaboration was for Bieber 's Never Say Never – The Remixes , a remix album that included remixes from My World and My World 2 @.@ 0 , and a musical companion to his film , Justin Bieber : Never Say Never . On the remix , Melinda Newman of HitFix said " Bieber ’ s and LeVox ’ s voices create some nice harmony on an otherwise mundane song . " Derek Evers of AOL Music said Bieber " looks really comfortable belting out a country tune . " 
 = = Music video = = 
 It was first revealed that Bieber and Flatts would be shooting a video for the remix version of the song when TMZ revealed photos on Bieber on set of the video shoot . The photos pictured Bieber after a dramatic haircut , changing his trademark style over the previous two years . The video premiered during the ABC special , Rascal Flatts : Nothing Like This Presented by JC Penney , which aired March 12 , 2011 . The video begins with Rascal Flatts arriving in a Cadillac Escalade to a studio . Inside , they are directed to Bieber , who is playing the keyboard . Bieber then sings his lines , playing guitar , and is joined by Joe Don Rooney also on guitar , and Jay DeMarcus now on keyboard . The woman who directed the band into the studio now directs them and Bieber into another room with lights , to film the video . Gary LeVox then sings his lines , joined by Bieber for the chorus while Rooney is on guitar and DeMarcus playing a grand piano . All are wearing black , with Bieber in particular wearing a leather jacket , his signature dog tag , and grey Supras sneakers . During the sequence of the video , more behind @-@ the @-@ scenes action is shown , before it ends with only Bieber 's silhouette shown , as his jacket is on the ground . 
 The music video won the award for Collaborative Video of the Year at the 2011 CMT Music Awards on June 8 , 2011 . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Songwriting – Justin Bieber , Nasri Atweh , Adam Messinger , Luke Boyd 
 Production – The Messengers 
 Vocal recording – The Messengers 
 Vocal arrangement and instrumentation – The Messengers 
 Engineering – Pat Thrall 
 Mixing – Manny Marroquin , assisted by Christian Plata and Erik Madrid 
 Background vocals – Atweh , Boyd 
 Source 
 = Shea Weber = 
 Shea Michael Weber ( born August 14 , 1985 ) is a Canadian professional ice hockey defenceman who currently plays for the Montreal Canadiens of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . He is an NHL All @-@ Star and a two @-@ time Olympic gold medalist . 
 Drafted in the second round , 49th overall by the Nashville Predators in the 2003 NHL Entry Draft , Weber had spent his entire NHL career with the Predators , until being traded to Montreal . He had previously played for the Sicamous Eagles of the Kootenay International Junior Hockey League ( KIJHL ) , the Kelowna Rockets of the Western Hockey League ( WHL ) and the Milwaukee Admirals of the American Hockey League ( AHL ) . 
 Weber has represented Canada at a number of International Ice Hockey Federation @-@ sanctioned events , winning a World Junior Ice Hockey Championship gold medal in 2005 , an Ice Hockey World Championships gold medal in 2007 , and two Olympic gold medals at the 2010 and 2014 Winter Olympics . 
 Weber was traded to the Montreal Canadiens in exchange for P.K. Subban in 2016 
 = = Early life = = 
 Weber was born on August 14 , 1985 , in Sicamous , British Columbia . His mother , Tracy , was a hairdresser , and his father , James Weber , a sawmill worker . Weber first played organized ice hockey at the age of six . Growing up he played in the Sicamous and District Minor Hockey Association , a division of the British Columbia Amateur Hockey Association ( BCAHA ) , often switching between forward and defenceman positions . In Weber 's second year of bantam , he permanently switched to defence . He credits his father for convincing him to make the switch because he thought Weber would " have a better shot at a pro career as a defenceman " . Between the ages of fourteen and fifteen , Weber grew 5 inches , from 5 @-@ foot @-@ 9 ( 1 @.@ 75 metres ) to 6 @-@ foot @-@ 2 ( 1 @.@ 88 metres ) . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Junior career = = = 
 Weber went unselected in his Western Hockey League ( WHL ) Bantam Draft year , but was placed by the Kelowna Rockets on their protected players list during his second season of bantam . At the end of the season , he moved up to junior " B " ice hockey with his hometown Sicamous Eagles of the Kootenay International Junior Hockey League ( KIJHL ) . Weber 's 42 points in 47 games played helped his team to a near perfect season of 43 – 5 – 1 – 1 , winning both the British Columbian Cyclone Taylor Cup KIJHL league championship and the Western Canadian Keystone Cup . In the Keystone Cup championship game , Weber scored the Eagles ' first goal of the game in a 2 – 1 victory over the Spruce Grove Regals . In addition to his championship run with the Eagles , Weber played in five games for the Kelowna Rockets during their 2001 – 02 WHL season . 
 The following season Weber began his rookie season with the Rockets . Early into the campaign , Weber established a physical presence , often fighting opposing players . Overall he had 167 penalty minutes that season , the most in his entire playing career . Offensively , Weber finished his rookie season with eighteen points in seventy games played . He also scored five points in nineteen playoff games as the Rockets won the franchise 's first Ed Chynoweth Cup as WHL champions , defeating the Red Deer Rebels in the finals . As WHL champions , the Rockets represented the WHL at the 2003 Memorial Cup in Québec City , Québec where they were defeated by the Hull Olympiques 2 – 1 in the semifinal game . At the completion of his rookie WHL season , Weber was eligible to be drafted into the National Hockey League at the 2003 NHL Entry Draft . Heading into the draft , he was ranked 42nd among North American skaters by the NHL Central Scouting Bureau , and 54th overall by International Scouting Services . On June 21 , 2003 , Weber was drafted in the second round , 49th overall , by the Nashville Predators . 
 In his second season with the Rockets , Weber was named to the WHL roster for the 2004 ADT Canada @-@ Russia Challenge in Red Deer and Lethbridge , Alberta . In the two games that were played , he recorded one assist . At the completion of the regular season , Weber had improved his offensive statistics from the previous season , recording 32 points in sixty games played . Weber was named the WHL player of the week for April 6 – 12 , 2004 , after recording one goal and six assists in four Kelowna wins over the Tri @-@ City Americans as the Rockets eliminated the Americans four game to two in the Western Conference semifinals . He finished the WHL playoffs with seventeen points in seventeen games as the Rockets were eliminated four games to three by the Everett Silvertips in the Western Conference finals . Despite being eliminated from the WHL playoffs , the Rockets advanced to their second consecutive Memorial Cup as the host team . At the 2004 Memorial Cup , Weber was named to the tournament all @-@ star team after recording four points in four games played as the Rockets defeated the Gatineau Olympiques 2 – 1 in the championship game to win their first Memorial Cup . At the completion of the season , Weber was named to the WHL Western Conference 's second all @-@ star team . 
 Weber 's final season with the Rockets proved to be his best with the team , despite a late season injury . On March 5 , 2005 , he injured his left knee after colliding with Vancouver Giants left winger Cam Cunning . The injury resulted in Weber missing the remainder of the regular season and the Rockets ' Western Conference quarterfinals series against the Vancouver Giants . Despite the injury , Weber finished the regular season with WHL career bests for goals ( 12 ) , assists ( 29 ) , and points ( 41 ) in 55 games played . After returning from injury , Weber scored nine goals and seventeen points in eighteen playoff games as the Rockets won the Ed Chynoweth Cup en route to their third consecutive Memorial Cup . For his efforts , he was awarded the <unk> Trophy as the most valuable player of the WHL playoffs . At the 2005 Memorial Cup , with what was considered as one of the best tournament fields in Memorial Cup history , the Rockets were eliminated after losing all three of their round robin games . At the completion of the season , Weber was named to the WHL Western Conference first all @-@ star team and was the Western Conference nominee for the Bill Hunter Memorial Trophy as the top defenceman in the WHL , although he ultimately lost the award to Dion Phaneuf . He was also named to the Canadian Major Junior second all @-@ star team . 
 = = = Nashville Predators = = = 
 On September 10 , 2004 , Weber signed a three @-@ year , $ 1 @.@ 425 @-@ million entry level contract with the Nashville Predators . A year and a half later , Weber made his NHL debut on January 6 , 2006 , versus the Detroit Red Wings , recording three shots on goal in 11 : 08 minutes of <unk> . Three months later , on April 6 , 2006 , he scored his first NHL goal against Reinhard Divis of the St. Louis Blues in a 3 – 0 Nashville victory . Weber went on to play in 28 games during his rookie season , finishing with two goals and ten assists . He also scored two goals in four playoff games with the Predators before the team was eliminated in the first round by the San Jose Sharks . With Nashville 's AHL affiliate , the Milwaukee Admirals , still in playoff action , Weber was reassigned to the Admirals roster for the remainder of the AHL playoffs . He compiled six goals and five assists in 14 games during his time with the Admirals , who finished in second place in the Calder Cup , losing to the Hershey Bears in six games in the Calder Cup Finals . 
 It was during his sophomore season that Weber evolved into one of Nashville 's most important players . By the midpoint of the season , Weber already had 26 points , and his play was recognized on January 14 , 2007 , when he was named to the Western Conference roster for the 2007 NHL YoungStars Game in Dallas , Texas . Weber went on to finish the season with 40 points , finishing eighth on the Predators roster in total points . He added an additional three assists in five playoff games before the Predators were eliminated by the San Jose Sharks for the second consecutive season . 
 Weber 's third season with the Predators began with a series of injuries . After playing only 2 : 19 minutes of the first period in Nashville 's season opening game versus the Colorado Avalanche , Weber fell awkwardly and dislocated his kneecap . The injury caused him to miss the next six weeks of play before returning to the Nashville lineup during a game with the St. Louis Blues on November 17 , 2007 . Weber was sidelined again shortly thereafter , injuring his leg and missing another 11 games before he returned during a January 15 , 2008 , game versus the Calgary Flames . Weber finished the season with 20 points in 54 games played . He received a single fifth @-@ place vote to tie for 17th with seven other players in James Norris Memorial Trophy voting as the league 's best defenceman . 
 On June 23 , 2008 , Weber signed a three @-@ year , $ 13 @.@ 5 @-@ million contract extension with the Predators , avoiding restricted free agency . During his first year of the new contract , Weber established himself as one of the top defenceman in the NHL . At the mid @-@ way point of the season , he was among the defencemen statistical leaders , was considered a favourite to win the Norris Trophy , and was named to the Western Conference roster for the 57th National Hockey League All @-@ Star Game in Montreal , Quebec . Weber finished the season with career @-@ highs in all major statistical categories , including games played ( 81 ) , goals ( 23 ) , assists ( 30 ) , points ( 53 ) and penalty minutes ( 80 ) . His 23 goals set a new Predators franchise record for goals by a defenceman in a single season . Although he received no first @-@ place votes , Weber finished fourth in the Norris Trophy voting with 186 voting points , behind winner Zdeno Chára ( 1 @,@ 034 points ) , and runners @-@ up Mike Green ( 982 points ) and Nicklas Lidström ( 733 points ) . Weber narrowly missed being named to the NHL Second All @-@ Star Team after receiving four @-@ first place votes and 172 voting points , a single voting point behind Dan Boyle , the final defenceman selected . 
 Entering his fifth season with the Predators , Weber continued his stellar record . At the February Olympic break , Weber accumulated 35 points in 59 games for the Predators . He also established a strong leadership role and willingness to defend his teammates , highlighted by three consecutive games in March 2010 in which he fought opposing players . Weber 's offensive production slowed after the Olympic break and he finished the season with 43 points in 78 games played . Despite a decrease in offense from the previous season , Weber was a Norris Trophy candidate for the third consecutive year , receiving a single first place vote and 96 voting points to finish as the sixth runner @-@ up behind winner Duncan Keith ( 1 @,@ 096 points ) . Weber also received a single fifth @-@ place vote , tying for 23rd with six other players in Hart Memorial Trophy voting , and was the seventh @-@ ranked defenceman in NHL All @-@ Star Team voting with 83 voting points . 
 On July 8 , 2010 , Weber was named the fifth captain in Nashville Predators history , replacing Jason Arnott , who was traded to the New Jersey Devils . He became the youngest captain in franchise history and the only Predators captain to have been drafted by the team . On January 11 , 2011 , Weber was among 42 players named to the 58th National Hockey League All @-@ Star Game in Raleigh , North Carolina . For the first time in its history , the NHL used a fantasy draft format to select teams for the All @-@ Star Game , and Weber was selected eighth overall by Team Lidstrom . At the game , Weber recorded four assists and was a + 6 , finishing the game tied with Loui Eriksson for most points and second to Nicklas Lidström for best plus / minus . Shortly after his All @-@ Star Game appearance , Weber recorded his 200th career NHL point — an assist — in a game versus the Detroit Red Wings on February 9 , 2011 . During his sixth season with the Predators Weber averaged 25 : 19 in ice time , and set career highs in games played ( 82 ) , assists ( 32 ) and shots on goal ( 25 ) . Weber also contributed three goals and five points in 12 playoff games as the Predators lost to the Vancouver Canucks after advancing to the Western Conference Semifinals for the first time in their history . At the conclusion of the regular season , Weber was named one of three finalists — along with Zdeno Chára and Nicklas Lidström — for the Norris Trophy , the first finalist nomination of his career . He finished second in Norris Trophy voting , losing with 727 voting points to Lidström 's 736 . Weber also finished 25th in Hart Memorial Trophy voting with two fifth @-@ place votes . For the first time in his career , Weber was voted to the NHL First All @-@ Star Team after receiving 445 voting points , second among defencemen to Lidström 's 464 . On July 1 , 2011 , Weber became a restricted free agent ; despite this , Weber had stated he wanted to remain with the Predators . In order to prevent the possibility of other teams signing him to an offer sheet , the Predators filed for salary arbitration with Weber , giving the team and Weber until their hearing to negotiate a new contract . Failing to come to terms on a new contract by their hearing , Weber 's case went to arbitration on August 2 – the first time in NHL history that a team @-@ elected arbitration candidate had reached a hearing . The following day , he was awarded a one @-@ year , $ 7 @.@ 5 million contract , from which the Predators could not walk away , as they , and not Weber , had elected arbitration . 
 In the first month of the 2011 – 12 season , Weber hit forward Jannik Hansen from behind in a game against the Canucks on October 20 , 2011 . While Hansen was uninjured on the play , Weber was fined $ 2 @,@ 500 – the maximum allowable financial penalty – by the league the following day . 
 In Nashville 's first game of the 2012 Stanley Cup Quarter Finals , against Detroit , Weber slammed center Henrik Zetterberg 's head into the glass boards during the closing seconds of the game after being hit by Zetterberg . The force of the blow cracked Zetterberg 's helmet but he suffered no injury and would play in the next game . As punishment , the NHL imposed a $ 2 @,@ 500 fine , the maximum allowable under current collective bargaining agreement , on Weber for retaliatory action . NHL Commissioner Gary Bettman was in attendance at this game . Weber finished the regular season leading all defencemen in shorthanded goals scored , with two . 
 In the 2012 offseason , with the Predators unable to take Weber to arbitration again ( a player can only be subjected to team @-@ elected arbitration once in his career ) , Weber signed a front @-@ loaded $ 110 million , 14 @-@ year offer sheet , $ 68 million of it as a signing bonus , from the Philadelphia Flyers on July 19 . The offer sheet was the richest in NHL history in terms of total money , money per season and length , surpassing the previous offer sheet record set by Thomas Vanek . The Predators , already having lost Weber 's defensive partner Ryan Suter to unrestricted free agency , matched the offer sheet five days later . 
 For the 2013 – 14 season , Weber led all NHL defencemen with 23 goals , which also matched his career high . He broke Kimmo Timonen 's Predator record for single @-@ season points by a defenceman with 56 points , which also led the Predators for the season . On April 28 , Weber was named a finalist for the Norris Trophy for the third time in his career ; the other finalists were Zdeno Chára and Duncan Keith , the latter of which won the award at season 's end . Weber finishing third in voting . 
 Weber was again voted to the NHL Second All @-@ Star Team for the 2014 @-@ 2015 season , his fourth post @-@ season All @-@ Star Team selection . 
 During the 2015 – 16 season , Weber recorded his first career hat trick on December 5 against the Detroit Red Wings , which was also the first ever by a Nashville Predators defenseman . Weber would continue his goal @-@ scoring ways , tying Paul Kariya 's franchise record for power play goals in a season with 14 and finishing with his third 20 + goal season . Weber was also named a finalist for the Mark Messier Leadership Award . , which he would eventually win . 
 = = = Montreal Canadiens = = = 
 On June 29 , 2016 , Weber was traded to the Montreal Canadiens in exchange for defenceman P. K. Subban . The trade surprised many hockey fans because the details to this trade were kept strictly confidential until the deal was already made . 
 = = International play = = 
 Through his career , Weber has represented Canada at several international ice hockey tournaments . Weber 's first experience with Hockey Canada came for the national junior team , when , on December 22 , 2004 , he was named to the roster for the 2005 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships in Grand Forks , North Dakota . There his play with Dion Phaneuf formed the team 's top defensive pair , helping Canada win its first junior gold medal since the 1997 tournament . Despite being held pointless throughout the tournament , Weber finished tied for third among plus @-@ minus leaders with a rating of + 10 . 
 Weber debuted with the national senior team on April 22 , 2007 , accepting an invitation to join the club for the 2007 IIHF World Championship in Russia . Weber 's experience in this tournament , however , was interrupted by an incident for which he was suspended three games . A minute into Canada 's preliminary round game versus Germany , Weber hit <unk> Seidenberg in the chin with his elbow , giving the German a concussion and sidelining him for the remainder of the tournament . After serving his suspension , Weber continued with the tournament , finishing with two points in six games played , including a goal in Canada 's 5 – 1 quarterfinal victory over Switzerland . Canada went on to win the gold medal in the tournament , defeating Finland 4 – 2 . 
 On April 14 , 2009 , Weber was named to the national senior team for the 2009 IIHF World Championship in Switzerland , as one of four alternate captains on the team . In Canada 's final preliminary round game , Weber was named Canada 's VIP after scoring one goal and three assists as Canada defeated Slovakia 7 – 3 . Weber finished the tournament with four goals and eight assists for 12 points in nine games played , leading all defencemen in tournament scoring and finishing tied for third overall among all skaters . Despite being defeated by Russia 2 – 1 in the gold medal game , Weber was named to the tournament all @-@ star team and was awarded the tournament 's Best Defenceman award . 
 On July 2 , 2009 , Weber was invited to the Canadian orientation camp for the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver . On December 30 , 2009 , he was named to the final Canadian roster for the tournament . In Canada 's qualification round game versus Germany , Weber scored Canada 's second goal of the game in an 8 – 2 victory . His shot passed through the mesh net behind German goaltender Thomas <unk> and a video review was required to award the goal . Weber finished the tournament with six points in seven games , ranking second amongst defencemen in terms of scoring , and was named to the tournament 's all @-@ star team , which defeated the United States 3 – 2 in overtime to win the gold medal . Weber , along with his British Columbian teammates from the Olympic team , will be inducted into the BC Sports Hall of Fame in September 2011 . 
 After his Nashville Predators failed to make the Stanley Cup playoffs , Weber was considered a lock for the 2013 World Championship team , but Hockey Canada deemed the cost of insuring his large NHL contract too high and ultimately did not select him . 
 Weber was named an alternate captain for Team Canada in the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi , Russia . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Weber has a brother , Brandon , who is two years younger than him and grew up playing hockey with Shea 's former Predators teammate Cody <unk> . When Weber was 14 , his mother was diagnosed with brain cancer , which surgery mostly removed . She later began suffering from similar symptoms , however , and in early 2010 had a series of seizures . Weber 's mother was placed in an induced coma , and died on August 11 , 2010 . 
 On July 20 , 2013 , Weber married high school sweetheart , Bailey Munro , who he had met while playing junior hockey in Kelowna . During the summer of 2014 , the couple had their first child , a boy named <unk> Weber . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = Awards and achievements = = 
 = = Transactions = = 
 June 21 , 2003 – Drafted in the second round , 49th overall by the Nashville Predators in the 2003 NHL Entry Draft 
 September 10 , 2004 – Signed a three @-@ year , $ 1 @.@ 425 @-@ million entry level contract with the Nashville Predators 
 June 23 , 2008 – Signed a 3 @-@ year , $ 13 @.@ 5 @-@ million contract extension with the Nashville Predators 
 August 3 , 2011 - Awarded 1 @-@ year , $ 7 @.@ 5 @-@ million contract through team @-@ elected salary arbitration 
 July 19 , 2012 - Signed a 14 @-@ year , $ 110 @-@ million offer sheet with the Philadelphia Flyers ( matched by the Predators five days later ) 
 June 29 , 2016 - Traded to the Montreal Canadiens in exchange for P.K. Subban 
 = New York State Route 414 = 
 New York State Route 414 ( NY 414 ) is a north – south state highway in the Southern Tier and Finger Lakes regions of New York in the United States . It extends for 83 @.@ 20 miles ( 133 @.@ 90 km ) from an intersection with NY 352 in the Steuben County city of Corning to a junction with NY 104 in the Wayne County town of Huron . NY 414 spans five counties and roughly parallels NY 14 between Watkins Glen and Huron . It intersects every major east – west arterial in western New York , including the Southern Tier Expressway ( Interstate 86 ( I @-@ 86 ) and NY 17 ) , U.S. Route 20 ( US 20 ) and NY 5 , and the New York State Thruway ( I @-@ 90 ) . The route passes through mostly rural areas as it travels between the several villages and cities along its routing . 
 In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , the portion of modern NY 414 south of Seneca Falls was designated as part of New York State Route 44 , a route extending from Caton to Wolcott , while most of what is now NY 414 north of Seneca Falls became part of NY 89 . NY 44 was renumbered to NY 414 c . 1935 to eliminate numerical duplication with US 44 . NY 414 was shifted onto its current alignment between Seneca Falls and Huron in the late 1950s , placing it on what had been NY 89 north of the hamlet of Magee and New York State Route 89A between Magee and the overlapped routes of US 20 and NY 5 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Steuben and Chemung counties = = = 
 NY 414 begins at an intersection with NY 352 ( Denison Parkway ) in the Steuben County city of Corning . It initially heads north on Cedar Street , following it past two largely commercial blocks that make up part of the Market Street Historic District . Past the district , the route changes names to Centerway and crosses over the Chemung River , which flows east – west through the center of Corning . Across the river , the route traverses more commercial neighborhoods to reach Pulteney Street , designated as NY 415 west of this point . Along this stretch , NY 414 passes the former Corning Armory and the Corning Museum of Glass , the latter located on the southwest corner of the junction with NY 415 . 
 The route continues on , meeting the Southern Tier Expressway ( STE ) at exit 46 . The composition of the exit 's ramps is unorthodox in that the westbound on @-@ ramp for I @-@ 86 and NY 17 is about 0 @.@ 25 miles ( 0 @.@ 40 km ) north of the remainder of the interchange . This layout is caused by several factors , including a nearby wye connecting two Norfolk Southern Railway lines — the east – west Southern Tier Line and the north – south Corning Secondary . Another is the alignment of the STE itself , which runs in close proximity to NY 414 for a short distance as it bypasses northern Corning while avoiding the hilly terrain north of the city . North of the STE , the amount of development along the highway significantly decreases as it follows the Corning Secondary northeastward into the mountains that surround the city of Corning . 
 Over the next 7 miles ( 11 km ) , NY 414 and the rail line head due northeast through a valley surrounding Post Creek , traversing rural , isolated areas as both cross into Chemung County . Past the county line , the valley turns to the north , reflecting a similar curve in the creek 's routing . NY 414 and the Corning Secondary turn to match , and the route passes over the rail line via a bridge just east of the county line . As the highway heads north , it runs parallel to the county line for 4 miles ( 6 km ) and passes through the hamlet of Chambers , the only developed location along an otherwise nondescript and undeveloped stretch that leads to Schuyler County and the town of Dix . 
 = = = Schuyler County = = = 
 In Dix , NY 414 makes a large reverse S @-@ curve , turning to the east and northeast as it follows the Corning Secondary through another creek valley , this one surrounding <unk> Creek . The creek eventually heads east toward Montour Falls ; however , NY 414 and the rail line continue northeast to the outskirts of Watkins Glen , a village located inside of a wide valley holding Seneca Lake . At the western edge of the gully , the Corning Secondary breaks from NY 414 to follow the ridge north through Watkins Glen State Park . The route , meanwhile , descends the side of the valley to enter Watkins Glen , where it merges with NY 14 at the foot of the hill . 
 As one road , NY 14 and NY 414 travel down Franklin Street , the main thoroughfare of Watkins Glen . The routes pass by several blocks of homes as they follow the western base of the ravine and meet the east end of NY 329 , which ascends the side of the valley to serve Watkins Glen State Park . NY 414 continues to follow NY 14 to Watkins Glen 's central business district , where NY 414 splits from the overlap to travel east at an intersection that also acts as the eastern terminus of NY 409 . From this point north , NY 14 and NY 414 follow opposite sides of Seneca Lake , with NY 414 running along the east lake shore . 
 The route initially heads east from Watkins Glen to skirt the southern edge of the lake , but turns north upon exiting the village and passing the southeastern tip of the waterbody . Just outside Watkins Glen , NY 414 comes to a fork . The left fork carries NY 414 to the foot of the valley , bringing it very close to Seneca Lake . The right fork holds NY 79 , which travels up the side of the valley toward the village of Burdett . NY 414 continues to parallel Seneca Lake , but gradually ascends the side of the lake valley as it heads north through the town of Hector and enters Seneca County . 
 = = = Seneca County = = = 
 Soon after entering Seneca County , NY 414 turns to the northeast , traveling away from Seneca Lake . It continues on a northeast alignment across more level terrain to the village of Lodi , where it intersects and forms an overlap with NY 96A . The two routes head due north from Lodi , crossing relatively flat farmland to reach the neighboring village of Ovid . At the northern edge of the community , NY 96A splits from the concurrency at a junction that also features NY 96 . While NY 96A travels to the west , NY 96 — which enters Ovid from the east — forms a concurrency with NY 414 and follows the latter north out of the village . The overlap continues for 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) across more farmland to a junction east of the Seneca Army Depot . NY 96 heads northwest to straddle the eastern border of the depot while NY 414 progresses northward through the sparsely populated towns of Romulus and Varick . 
 At the Varick – Fayette town line 6 @.@ 5 miles ( 10 @.@ 5 km ) north of NY 96 , NY 414 intersects the eastern terminus of NY 336 . The route continues into Fayette , serving the town center and several large farms on its way into the town of Seneca Falls . Just past the town line , the highway connects to Finger Lakes Regional Airport and passes by a large field that hosts the annual Empire Farm Days exhibition every August . North of here is the hamlet of Seneca Falls , where the farmlands are replaced by densely populated residential blocks . The highway follows Ovid Street across the Cayuga – Seneca Canal to the village center , where it intersects US 20 and NY 5 at Fall Street . NY 414 turns west here , following both routes through the northwestern portion of Seneca Falls . Here , the route passes the National Women 's Hall of Fame and the Women 's Rights National Historical Park . 
 West of the village , US 20 , NY 5 , and NY 414 become a major commercial strip as it heads through an area situated between the hamlet of Seneca Falls and the village of Waterloo . Roughly midway between the two communities , NY 414 splits from US 20 and NY 5 , becoming a commercial strip itself as it heads north through the northern portion of the town of Seneca Falls as Mound Road . Near the northern end of the strip , the route crosses the main line of the Finger Lakes Railway at a grade crossing . Past the crossing , the businesses give way to mostly undeveloped areas that persist into the neighboring town of Tyre , where it intersects NY 318 in the small hamlet of Magee as Ridge Road . Just north of this intersection , NY 414 intersects the New York State Thruway ( I @-@ 90 ) at exit 41 . North of the Thruway , NY 414 maintains a constant north @-@ northwest alignment across rolling farmland into Wayne County . 
 = = = Wayne County = = = 
 Across the county line , NY 414 veers slightly to the west and east as it heads north across rural terrain to the village of Clyde , located on the Erie Canal and the CSX Transportation @-@ owned Rochester Subdivision . The route traverses the lightly populated southern half of the village prior to crossing the canal and the railroad to enter the village 's center . As it proceeds through Clyde 's business district , NY 414 intersects NY 31 , overlapping the route for just 150 feet ( 46 m ) as NY 31 moves from Park to Genesee Streets . NY 414 , meanwhile , continues north through the community on Glasgow Street , passing several blocks of homes and the Clyde @-@ Savannah Central School District 's combined middle and high schools before exiting Clyde for more rural regions of Wayne County . 
 North of Clyde , NY 414 intersects a number of roads of local importance as it heads north @-@ northwest across gentle terrain in the mostly open towns of Galen and Rose as Main Street . Aside from Rose and North Rose , the two communities of note along NY 414 between Clyde and the route 's end , NY 414 traverses little more than nondescript cultivated fields . In the latter hamlet , NY 414 crosses the Ontario Midland Railroad at a grade crossing in the center of the community . The route ends about 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) north of North Rose at an intersection with NY 104 in the town of Huron , located at the southern tip of Sodus Bay . While NY 414 ends here , the right @-@ of @-@ way of the highway continues north along the eastern edge of the bay to the Lake Ontario shoreline as the county @-@ maintained Lake Bluff Road . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 In 1908 , the New York State Legislature created Route 36 , an unsigned legislative route extending from Owego to Seneca Falls via Ovid . From Ovid north to Seneca Falls , Route 36 followed what is now NY 414 ( via NY 96 and County Route 148 or CR 148 in Romulus ) . The portion of modern NY 414 between Watkins Glen and Ovid became Route 45 on June 16 , 1911 ; however , the route was realigned one year later to use what is now NY 96A from Lodi to Interlaken instead . When the first set of posted routes in New York were assigned in 1924 , the Owego – Interlaken and Ovid – Romulus segments of legislative Route 36 became part of NY 15 , which continued northwest from Romulus to Rochester . From Interlaken to Ovid , NY 15 initially followed the post @-@ 1912 alignment of legislative Route 45 to Lodi and the pre @-@ 1912 routing of Route 45 to Ovid . 
 The portion of legislative Route 45 south of Lodi remained unnumbered until c . 1927 when it was designated as NY 78 . By 1929 , the route was extended northward over a new highway that followed the eastern edge of Seneca Lake between Ovid and Geneva . Also altered by this time was NY 15 , which was realigned to follow what had been legislative Route 36 from Interlaken to Ovid . The former routing of NY 15 between Lodi and Ovid became part of the extended NY 78 . The remainder of what is now NY 414 south of Watkins Glen and north of Romulus remained unnumbered until the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , even though parts of the highway were state @-@ maintained as early as 1926 . Among these state @-@ maintained but unnumbered segments was the Romulus – Seneca Falls section of the old Route 36 . Another significant section of continuous state maintenance existed from Clyde to Huron . 
 = = = Designation = = = 
 In the 1930 renumbering , NY 78 was split into two new routes . North of Ovid , it served as the basis for NY 15A , which continued southeast to Interlaken over the original alignment of NY 15 . The remainder of NY 78 became part of NY 44 , a lengthy north – south route extending from NY 13 in Caton to Ridge Road ( then NY 3 and later US 104 ) in Wolcott . From Caton to Watkins Glen , NY 44 was assigned to what is now NY 225 and NY 414 . North of Romulus , the route utilized the alignment of legislative Route 36 from Romulus to Seneca Falls and modern NY 89 from a junction east of Seneca Falls to Wolcott . In the vicinity of Seneca Falls , NY 44 overlapped with US 20 and NY 5 . US 44 was assigned c . 1935 ; as a result , NY 44 was renumbered to NY 414 to eliminate numerical duplication with the new U.S. Highway . 
 Also assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering was NY 89 , which utilized modern NY 414 north of the hamlet of Magee and the portion of Lake Bluff Road between the current NY 104 super two and Ridge Road . Between Magee and its current alignment east of the village of Seneca Falls , NY 89 used what is now NY 318 . In the early 1950s , a north – south connector between NY 89 in Magee and a junction with US 20 and NY 5 midway between Waterloo and Seneca Falls was designated NY 89A . This route became part of a larger realignment of NY 414 in the late 1950s . In the rerouting , NY 414 was altered to overlap US 20 and NY 5 west out of Seneca Falls before following what had been NY 89A and NY 89 north to US 104 ( Ridge Road ) near the Huron hamlet of Resort . NY 89 , meanwhile , was realigned to follow the former alignment of NY 414 to Wolcott . 
 NY 414 has been truncated twice over the years . The first of these occurred on January 1 , 1949 , when it was cut back on its southern end to Corning . NY 414 was truncated to its current northern terminus in the mid @-@ 1960s following the construction of the super two highway for US 104 between Sodus and NY 414 . US 104 continued to use the former alignment of NY 414 along Lake Bluff Road to connect to Ridge Road until the remainder of the super two east to Red Creek was completed in the early 1970s . This portion of Lake Bluff Road is now maintained by Wayne County as CR 254 . In Seneca County , NY 414 was realigned slightly in the early 1950s to bypass the hamlet of Romulus to the east , moving it off CR 148 and NY 96 and onto a new road leading directly to Ovid . 
 = = = Corning area = = = 
 In the city of Corning , NY 44 , and later NY 414 , originally entered from the north on Baker Street and met NY 17 at Pulteney Street . The two routes then overlapped along Pulteney Street to Centerway , where they crossed the Chemung River via Centerway and Pine Street . At Market Street , NY 17 and NY 44 turned east and remained concurrent to <unk> Street , where NY 44 headed south to Caton while NY 17 continued east on Market to the hamlet of Gibson . When the overlap through Corning was eliminated in 1949 , NY 414 was truncated to the western end of the overlap at the intersection of Baker and Pulteney Streets . 
 NY 414 was re @-@ extended across the Chemung River in the mid @-@ 1960s after NY 17 was moved onto Denison Parkway , a new divided highway through Corning that bypassed Pulteney Street . NY 414 followed its original routing across the river to Market Street , then continued south on Pine Street for an additional block to intersect NY 17 . The portion of NY 414 south of Pulteney Street was realigned slightly c . 1979 following the completion of the Briscoe Bridge across the Chemung River . Instead of entering downtown Corning on Pine Street , NY 414 used Cedar Street instead . When the Corning Bypass ( part of the Southern Tier Expressway ) was built in the mid @-@ 1990s , Baker Street was split into two segments . NY 414 was subsequently rerouted onto its current alignment through the city . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Boy ( I Need You ) = 
 " Boy ( I Need You ) " is a song by American singer @-@ songwriter Mariah Carey , taken from her ninth studio album , Charmbracelet ( 2002 ) . It was written by Carey , Justin Smith , Norman Whitfield and Cameron Giles , and produced by the former and Just Blaze . The song was released as the album 's second single on November 26 , 2002 . Initially , " The One " had been chosen as the second single from the album , however , halfway through the filming of a music video for it , the singer decided to release " Boy ( I Need You ) " instead . Considered by Carey as one of her favorites , the track is a reworked version of rapper Cam 'ron 's song " Oh Boy " released earlier that year . 
 The song was met with generally mixed reviews from contemporary critics . Many praised Carey 's versatility and considered it as one of the stand @-@ out tracks of Charmbracelet for having a different production when compared to the others . However , the sample hook of the song was described as " annoying " . The single failed to make much impact on the charts around the world ; it reached number 68 on the US Billboard Hip @-@ Hop / R & B Songs chart and number 57 on the US Hot Singles Sales chart . Elsewhere , the song reached the top 20 in the United Kingdom , while peaking within the top 40 in Australia , the Netherlands , Ireland and New Zealand . 
 The music video , directed by Joseph Kahn , incorporates elements of Japanese culture and features Carey 's alter @-@ ego Bianca . It was also the first time that Carey worked with Kahn in a music video , which premiered on an episode of MTV 's Making the Video in 2003 . Following the release of " Through the Rain " , Carey embarked on several stateside , European and Asian promotional tours in support of Charmbracelet , as well as its accompanying singles . Carey performed " Boy ( I Need You ) " live on several television shows appearances around the world . 
 = = Background = = 
 After she received Billboard 's Artist of the Decade Award and the World Music Award for Best @-@ Selling Female Artist of the Millennium in 2000 , Carey parted from Columbia Records and signed a record @-@ breaking $ 100 million five @-@ album recording contract with Virgin Records America America ( EMI ) . She often stated that Columbia had regarded her as a commodity , with her separation from Tommy Mottola exacerbating her relations with label executives . Just a few months later , in July , 2001 , it was widely reported that Carey had suffered a physical and emotional breakdown , and her relationship with the Latin icon Luis Miguel ended . In an interview the following year , she said , " I was with people who didn 't really know me and I had no personal assistant . I 'd do interviews all day long and get two hours of sleep a night , if that . " Carey began posting a series of disturbing messages on her official website , and displayed erratic behavior on several live promotional outings . On July 19 , 2001 , Carey made a surprise appearance on the MTV program Total Request Live ( TRL ) . As the show 's host Carson Daly began taping following a commercial break , Carey came out pushing an ice cream cart while wearing a large men 's shirt , and began a striptease , in which she shed her shirt to reveal a tight yellow and green ensemble . While she later revealed that Daly was aware of her presence in the building prior to her appearance , Carey 's appearance on TRL garnered strong media attention . 
 Only days later , Carey began posting irregular voice notes and messages on her official website : " I 'm trying to understand things in life right now and so I really don 't feel that I should be doing music right now . What I 'd like to do is just a take a little break or at least get one night of sleep without someone popping up about a video . All I really want is [ to ] just be me and that 's what I should have done in the first place ... I don 't say this much but guess what , I don 't take care of myself . " Following the quick removal of the messages , Berger commented that Carey had been " obviously exhausted and not thinking clearly " when she posted the letters . On July 26 , she was hospitalized , citing " extreme exhaustion " and a " physical and emotional breakdown " . News websites and programs began reporting how Carey threatened to commit suicide by slitting her wrists the night before , and how Patricia , Carey 's mother , hastily called for help . When questioned regarding Carey 's suicidal rumor , Berger claimed she had broken dishes out of desperation , and as a result , accidentally cut her hands and feet . Carey was inducted at an un @-@ disclosed hospital in Connecticut , and remained hospitalized and under doctor 's care for two weeks , followed by an extended absence from the public . Following the heavy media coverage surrounding Carey 's publicized breakdown and hospitalization , Virgin Records America and 20th Century Fox delayed the release of both Glitter , as well as its soundtrack of the same name . 
 Critics panned Glitter , as well as its accompanying soundtrack ; both were unsuccessful commercially . The accompanying soundtrack album , Glitter , became Carey 's lowest @-@ selling album to that point . The St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch dismissed it as " an absolute mess that 'll go down as an annoying blemish on a career that , while not always critically heralded , was at least nearly consistently successful . " Following the negative cloud that was ensuing Carey 's personal life at the time , as well as the project 's poor reception , her unprecedented $ 100 million five @-@ album record deal with Virgin Records America ( EMI Records ) was bought out for $ 50 million . Soon after , Carey flew to Capri , Italy for a period of five months , in which she began writing material for her new album , stemming from all the personal experiences she had endured throughout the past year . Carey later said that her time at Virgin was " a complete and total stress @-@ fest [ ... ] I made a total snap decision which was based on money and I never make decisions based on money . I learned a big lesson from that . " Later that year , she signed a contract with Island Records , valued at more than $ 24 million , and launched the record label MonarC . To add further to Carey 's emotional burdens , her father , with whom she had little contact since childhood , died of cancer that year . 
 = = Recording and release = = 
 Carey started writing songs for then untitled Charmbracelet in 2002 , before she signed the record deal . She decided to concentrate on " getting some much @-@ needed rest " and traveled to Capri and moved into the studio , which she had reserved to record the album . While at Capri , Carey could focus on her writing and recording , without being subjected to any stress or pressure . According to her , she would write the songs in her apartment upstairs , and would record them at the studio downstairs , at night . Thus , most of the album was recorded in Capri although she traveled to Atlanta , New York and Philadelphia to record a few tracks . The result was that Charmbracelet was her " most personal album " she had ever made . 
 While Carey paved a lot of the album with slower and autobiographical ballads , she also attempted at making an album with a mixture of several different genres . According to Jon Pareles of The New York Times , the album showed off Carey 's musical and vocal versatility , especially when viewing the differences in the record 's first and second singles , " Ms. Carey is known for her voice , of course : she can hit high notes that barely sound human , and few singers leap around the octaves as gracefully as she does . But as she tries to regain her audience , her greatest weapon may be her versatility : Ms. Carey also knows how to make a hip @-@ hop hit by holding back and letting the beat shine . " Carey decided to work with Just Blaze after she heard the song " Oh Boy " he had produced for Cam 'ron . Together they produced " Boy ( I Need You ) " , a remake of " Oh Boy " , and " You Got Me " . Carey described the former as one of her favorites on the album . " It 's definitely one of my favorites , ' cause I love the original . It was cool to have him out there doing his thing in such a random environment , " she said . " Boy ( I Need You ) " was released as the second single from the album on November 26 , 2002 . Initially , " The One " was scheduled to be released as the second single and the music video was shot for the song . However , halfway through the filming , the track was changed to " Boy ( I Need You ) " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Boy ( I Need You ) " received mostly mixed reviews from contemporary critics . Jon Pareles of The New York Times complimented the track on its differences with most of the content on Charmbracelet . Entertainment Weekly writer Tom <unk> said that " the herky @-@ jerky [ track ] , on which Cam 'ron guests , [ adds ] some welcome energy " to the album . Michael Paoletta of Billboard considered it as one of Charmbracelet 's stand @-@ out tracks , while Slant Magazine 's Sal Cinquemani said " Boy ( I Need You ) " , along with " You Got Me " , " provide further evidence that Carey should keep her rappers on the remix . " Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic noted that Carey did not " completely abandon hip @-@ hop , but whenever it rears its head on Charmbracelet , it 's utterly jarring " citing the song as an example , while describing the sampled vocal hook as " annoying " . Erlewine , however , selected it as a Track Pick from the album review . The single failed to make much impact on the charts around the world ; it reached number 68 on the US Billboard Hip @-@ Hop / R & B Songs chart and number 57 on the US Hot Singles Sales chart . Elsewhere , the song reached number 17 in the United Kingdom , while peaking within the top 40 in Australia , the Netherlands , Ireland and New Zealand . 
 = = Music video and live performances = = 
 Described as " Speed Racer meets Hello Kitty meets me and Cam 'ron " by Carey , the video was directed by Joseph Kahn , stars actor Will Yun Lee and incorporates elements of Japanese culture and features Carey 's alter @-@ ego Bianca . When asked about the music video , Kahn replied , " To me , videos aren 't movies , they 're their own art form @-@ like poetry . If you 're a poet , you want to make poetry . " Carey also revealed that the music video marked the first time she worked with Kahn . The music video production and recording was shown in a MTV 's Making the Video episode in 2003 . The video was likened to a " clear extension of Janet 's " Doesn 't Really Matter " for its similar settings and theme of Japanese pop culture . Following the release of " Through the Rain " , Carey embarked on several stateside , European and Asian promotional tours in support of Charmbracelet , as well as its accompanying singles . Three days prior to the album 's stateside release , a one @-@ hour special titled Mariah Carey : Shining Through the Rain aired on MTV , in which Carey was interviewed and sang several songs from Charmbracelet and of her catalog . During the interview , Carey addressed rumors of her breakdown and its cause , as well as of the album and its inspiration , followed by a question and answer with fans . During the album 's month of release , Carey appeared on several television talk shows , launching her promotional tour on Today , where she performed a four song set @-@ list at Mall of America for a crowd of over 10 @,@ 000 . Carey also performed the song on Top of the Pops and on The Graham Norton Show . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 CD single — part 1 
 " Boy ( I Need You ) " 
 " Boy ( I Need You ) " [ Remix ] 
 " Boy ( I Need You ) " [ <unk> Remix ] 
 " Boy ( I Need You ) " [ Enhanced Music Video ] 
 CD single — part 2 
 " Boy ( I Need You ) " 
 " Boy ( I Need You ) " [ Street Remix ] 
 " Boy ( I Need You ) " [ <unk> L8 Mix ] 
 " Boy ( I Need You ) " [ <unk> <unk> Mix ] 
 12 " Vinyl " 
 " Boy ( I Need You ) " [ Radio Edit ] 
 " Boy ( I Need You ) " [ LP Version ] 
 " Boy ( I Need You ) " [ Instrumental ] 
 " Boy ( I Need You ) " [ Acapella ] 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Joseph Priestley = 
 Joseph Priestley FRS ( / <unk> / ; 24 March [ O.S. 13 March ] 1733 – 6 February 1804 ) was an 18th @-@ century English theologian , dissenting clergyman , natural philosopher , chemist , educator , and Liberal political theorist who published over 150 works . He is usually credited with the discovery of oxygen , having isolated it in its gaseous state , although Carl Wilhelm Scheele and Antoine Lavoisier also have a claim to the discovery . 
 During his lifetime , Priestley 's considerable scientific reputation rested on his invention of soda water , his writings on electricity , and his discovery of several " airs " ( gases ) , the most famous being what Priestley dubbed " dephlogisticated air " ( oxygen ) . However , Priestley 's determination to defend phlogiston theory and to reject what would become the chemical revolution eventually left him isolated within the scientific community . 
 Priestley 's science was integral to his theology , and he consistently tried to fuse Enlightenment rationalism with Christian theism . In his metaphysical texts , Priestley attempted to combine theism , materialism , and determinism , a project that has been called " audacious and original " . He believed that a proper understanding of the natural world would promote human progress and eventually bring about the Christian Millennium . Priestley , who strongly believed in the free and open exchange of ideas , advocated toleration and equal rights for religious Dissenters , which also led him to help found Unitarianism in England . The controversial nature of Priestley 's publications combined with his outspoken support of the French Revolution aroused public and governmental suspicion ; he was eventually forced to flee in 1791 , first to London and then to the United States , after a mob burned down his home and church . He spent the last ten years of his life living in Northumberland County , Pennsylvania . 
 A scholar and teacher throughout his life , Priestley also made significant contributions to pedagogy , including the publication of a seminal work on English grammar , books on history , and he prepared some of the most influential early timelines . These educational writings were some of Priestley 's most popular works . It was his metaphysical works , however , that had the most lasting influence : leading philosophers including Jeremy Bentham , John Stuart Mill , and Herbert Spencer credit them among the primary sources for utilitarianism . 
 = = Early life and education ( 1733 – 55 ) = = 
 Priestley was born to an established English Dissenting family ( i.e. they did not conform to the Church of England ) in <unk> , near Batley in the West Riding of Yorkshire . He was the oldest of six children born to Mary Swift and Jonas Priestley , a finisher of cloth . To ease his mother 's burdens , Priestley was sent to live with his grandfather around the age of one . He returned home , five years later , after his mother died . When his father remarried in 1741 , Priestley went to live with his aunt and uncle , the wealthy and childless Sarah and John Keighley , 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) from <unk> . Because Priestley was precocious — at the age of four he could flawlessly recite all 107 questions and answers of the Westminster Shorter Catechism — his aunt sought the best education for the boy , intending him for the ministry . During his youth , Priestley attended local schools where he learned Greek , Latin , and Hebrew . 
 Around 1749 , Priestley became seriously ill and believed he was dying . Raised as a devout Calvinist , he believed a conversion experience was necessary for salvation , but doubted he had had one . This emotional distress eventually led him to question his theological upbringing , causing him to reject election and to accept universal salvation . As a result , the elders of his home church , the Independent Upper Chapel of <unk> , refused him admission as a full member . 
 Priestley 's illness left him with a permanent stutter and he gave up any thoughts of entering the ministry at that time . In preparation for joining a relative in trade in Lisbon , he studied French , Italian , and German in addition to Aramaic , and Arabic . He was tutored by the Reverend George <unk> , who first introduced him to higher mathematics , natural philosophy , logic , and metaphysics through the works of Isaac Watts , Willem ' s <unk> , and John Locke . 
 = = = Daventry Academy = = = 
 Priestley eventually decided to return to his theological studies and , in 1752 , matriculated at Daventry , a Dissenting academy . Because he had already read widely , Priestley was allowed to skip the first two years of coursework . He continued his intense study ; this , together with the liberal atmosphere of the school , shifted his theology further leftward and he became a Rational Dissenter . <unk> dogma and religious mysticism , Rational Dissenters emphasised the rational analysis of the natural world and the Bible . 
 Priestley later wrote that the book that influenced him the most , save the Bible , was David Hartley 's Observations on Man ( 1749 ) . Hartley 's psychological , philosophical , and theological treatise postulated a material theory of mind . Hartley aimed to construct a Christian philosophy in which both religious and moral " facts " could be scientifically proven , a goal that would occupy Priestley for his entire life . In his third year at Daventry , Priestley committed himself to the ministry , which he described as " the noblest of all professions " . 
 = = Needham Market and Nantwich ( 1755 – 61 ) = = 
 Robert Schofield , Priestley 's major modern biographer , describes his first " call " in 1755 to the Dissenting parish in Needham Market , Suffolk , as a " mistake " for both Priestley and the congregation . Priestley yearned for urban life and theological debate , whereas Needham Market was a small , rural town with a congregation wedded to tradition . Attendance and donations dropped sharply when they discovered the extent of his heterodoxy . Although Priestley 's aunt had promised her support if he became a minister , she refused any further assistance when she realised he was no longer a Calvinist . To earn extra money , Priestley proposed opening a school , but local families informed him that they would refuse to send their children . He also presented a series of scientific lectures titled " Use of the Globes " that was more successful . 
 Priestley 's Daventry friends helped him obtain another position and in 1758 he moved to Nantwich , Cheshire ; this time there was happier . The congregation cared less about Priestley 's heterodoxy and he successfully established a school . Unlike many schoolmasters of the time , Priestley taught his students natural philosophy and even bought scientific instruments for them . Appalled at the quality of the available English grammar books , Priestley wrote his own : The Rudiments of English Grammar ( 1761 ) . His innovations in the description of English grammar , particularly his efforts to dissociate it from Latin grammar , led 20th @-@ century scholars to describe him as " one of the great grammarians of his time " . After the publication of Rudiments and the success of Priestley 's school , Warrington Academy offered him a teaching position in 1761 . 
 = = Warrington Academy ( 1761 – 1767 ) = = 
 In 1761 , Priestley moved to Warrington and assumed the post of tutor of modern languages and rhetoric at the town 's Dissenting academy , although he would have preferred to teach mathematics and natural philosophy . He fitted in well at Warrington , and made friends quickly . On 23 June 1762 , he married Mary Wilkinson of Wrexham . Of his marriage , Priestley wrote : 
 This proved a very suitable and happy connexion , my wife being a woman of an excellent understanding , much improved by reading , of great fortitude and strength of mind , and of a temper in the highest degree affectionate and generous ; feeling strongly for others , and little for herself . Also , greatly excelling in every thing relating to household affairs , she entirely relieved me of all concern of that kind , which allowed me to give all my time to the prosecution of my studies , and the other duties of my station . 
 On 17 April 1763 , they had a daughter , whom they named Sarah after Priestley 's aunt . 
 = = = Educator and historian = = = 
 All of the books Priestley published while at Warrington emphasised the study of history ; Priestley considered it essential for worldly success as well as religious growth . He wrote histories of science and Christianity in an effort to reveal the progress of humanity and , paradoxically , the loss of a pure , " primitive Christianity " . 
 In his Essay on a Course of Liberal Education for Civil and Active Life ( 1765 ) , Lectures on History and General Policy ( 1788 ) , and other works , Priestley argued that the education of the young should anticipate their future practical needs . This principle of utility guided his unconventional curricular choices for Warrington 's aspiring middle @-@ class students . He recommended modern languages instead of classical languages and modern rather than ancient history . Priestley 's lectures on history were particularly revolutionary ; he narrated a <unk> and naturalist account of history , arguing that the study of history furthered the comprehension of God 's natural laws . Furthermore , his millennial perspective was closely tied to his optimism regarding scientific progress and the improvement of humanity . He believed that each age would improve upon the previous and that the study of history allowed people to perceive and to advance this progress . Since the study of history was a moral imperative for Priestley , he also promoted the education of middle @-@ class women , which was unusual at the time . Some scholars of education have described Priestley as the most important English writer on education between the 17th @-@ century John Locke and the 19th @-@ century Herbert Spencer . Lectures on History was well received and was employed by many educational institutions , such as New College at Hackney , Brown , Princeton , Yale , and Cambridge . Priestley designed two Charts to serve as visual study aids for his Lectures . These charts are in fact timelines ; they have been described as the most influential timelines published in the 18th century . Both were popular for decades , and the trustees of Warrington were so impressed with Priestley 's lectures and charts that they arranged for the University of Edinburgh to grant him a Doctor of Law degree in 1764 . 
 = = = = History of Electricity = = = = 
 The intellectually stimulating atmosphere of Warrington , often called the " Athens of the North " ( of England ) during the 18th century , encouraged Priestley 's growing interest in natural philosophy . He gave lectures on anatomy and performed experiments regarding temperature with another tutor at Warrington , his friend John Seddon . Despite Priestley 's busy teaching schedule , he decided to write a history of electricity . Friends introduced him to the major experimenters in the field in Britain — John Canton , William Watson , and the visiting Benjamin Franklin — who encouraged Priestley to perform the experiments he wanted to include in his history . In the process of replicating others ' experiments , Priestley became intrigued by unanswered questions and was prompted to undertake experiments of his own design . ( Impressed with his Charts and the manuscript of his history of electricity , Canton , Franklin , Watson , and Richard Price nominated Priestley for a fellowship in the Royal Society ; he was accepted in 1766 . ) 
 In 1767 , the 700 @-@ page The History and Present State of Electricity was published to positive reviews . The first half of the text is a history of the study of electricity to 1766 ; the second and more influential half is a description of contemporary theories about electricity and suggestions for future research . Priestley reported some of his own discoveries in the second section , such as the conductivity of charcoal and other substances and the continuum between conductors and non @-@ conductors . This discovery overturned what he described as " one of the earliest and universally received maxims of electricity " , that only water and metals could conduct electricity . This and other experiments on the electrical properties of materials and on the electrical effects of chemical transformations demonstrated Priestley 's early and ongoing interest in the relationship between chemical substances and electricity . Based on experiments with charged spheres , Priestley was among the first to propose that electrical force followed an inverse @-@ square law , similar to Newton 's law of universal gravitation . However , he did not generalise or elaborate on this , and the general law was enunciated by French physicist Charles @-@ Augustin de Coulomb in the 1780s . 
 Priestley 's strength as a natural philosopher was qualitative rather than quantitative and his observation of " a current of real air " between two electrified points would later interest Michael Faraday and James Clerk Maxwell as they investigated electromagnetism . Priestley 's text became the standard history of electricity for over a century ; Alessandro Volta ( who later invented the battery ) , William Herschel ( who discovered infrared radiation ) , and Henry Cavendish ( who discovered hydrogen ) all relied upon it . Priestley wrote a popular version of the History of Electricity for the general public titled A Familiar Introduction to the Study of Electricity ( 1768 ) . He marketed the book with his brother Timothy , but unsuccessfully . 
 = = Leeds ( 1767 – 73 ) = = 
 Perhaps prompted by Mary Priestley 's ill health , or financial problems , or a desire to prove himself to the community that had rejected him in his childhood , Priestley moved with his family from Warrington to Leeds in 1767 , and he became Mill Hill Chapel 's minister . Two sons were born to the Priestleys in Leeds : Joseph junior on 24 July 1768 and William three years later . Theophilus Lindsey , a rector at Catterick , Yorkshire , became one of Priestley 's few friends in Leeds , of whom he wrote : " I never chose to publish any thing of moment relating to theology , without consulting him . " Although Priestley had extended family living around Leeds , it does not appear that they communicated . Schofield conjectures that they considered him a heretic . Each year Priestley travelled to London to consult with his close friend and publisher , Joseph Johnson , and to attend meetings of the Royal Society . 
 = = = Minister of Mill Hill Chapel = = = 
 When Priestley became its minister , Mill Hill Chapel was one of the oldest and most respected Dissenting congregations in England ; however , during the early 18th century the congregation had fractured along doctrinal lines , and was losing members to the charismatic Methodist movement . Priestley believed that by educating the young , he could strengthen the bonds of the congregation . 
 In his magisterial three @-@ volume Institutes of Natural and Revealed Religion ( 1772 – 74 ) , Priestley outlined his theories of religious instruction . More importantly , he laid out his belief in Socinianism . The doctrines he explicated would become the standards for Unitarians in Britain . This work marked a change in Priestley 's theological thinking that is critical to understanding his later writings — it paved the way for his materialism and <unk> ( the belief that a divine being acts in accordance with necessary metaphysical laws ) . 
 Priestley 's major argument in the Institutes was that the only revealed religious truths that could be accepted were those that matched one 's experience of the natural world . Because his views of religion were deeply tied to his understanding of nature , the text 's theism rested on the argument from design . The Institutes shocked and appalled many readers , primarily because it challenged basic Christian orthodoxies , such as the divinity of Christ and the miracle of the Virgin Birth . Methodists in Leeds penned a hymn asking God to " the Unitarian fiend expel / And chase his doctrine back to Hell . " Priestley wanted to return Christianity to its " primitive " or " pure " form by eliminating the " corruptions " which had accumulated over the centuries . The fourth part of the Institutes , An History of the Corruptions of Christianity , became so long that he was forced to issue it separately in 1782 . Priestley believed that the Corruptions was " the most valuable " work he ever published . In demanding that his readers apply the logic of the emerging sciences and comparative history to the Bible and Christianity , he alienated religious and scientific readers alike — scientific readers did not appreciate seeing science used in the defence of religion and religious readers dismissed the application of science to religion . 
 = = = Religious controversialist = = = 
 Priestley engaged in numerous political and religious pamphlet wars . According to Schofield , " he entered each controversy with a cheerful conviction that he was right , while most of his opponents were convinced , from the outset , that he was willfully and maliciously wrong . He was able , then , to contrast his sweet reasonableness to their personal rancor " , but as Schofield points out Priestley rarely altered his opinion as a result of these debates . While at Leeds he wrote controversial pamphlets on the Lord 's Supper and on Calvinist doctrine ; thousands of copies were published , making them some of Priestley 's most widely read works . 
 Priestley founded the Theological Repository in 1768 , a journal committed to the open and rational inquiry of theological questions . Although he promised to print any contribution , only like @-@ minded authors submitted articles . He was therefore obliged to provide much of the journal 's content himself ( this material became the basis for many of his later theological and metaphysical works ) . After only a few years , due to a lack of funds , he was forced to cease publishing the journal . He revived it in 1784 with similar results . 
 = = = Defender of Dissenters and political philosopher = = = 
 Many of Priestley 's political writings supported the repeal of the Test and Corporation Acts , which restricted the rights of Dissenters . They could not hold political office , serve in the armed forces , or attend Oxford and Cambridge unless they subscribed to the Thirty @-@ nine Articles of the Church of England . Dissenters repeatedly petitioned Parliament to repeal the Acts , arguing that they were being treated as second @-@ class citizens . 
 Priestley 's friends , particularly other Rational Dissenters , urged him to publish a work on the injustices experienced by Dissenters ; the result was his Essay on the First Principles of Government ( 1768 ) . An early work of modern liberal political theory and Priestley 's most thorough treatment of the subject , it — unusually for the time — distinguished political rights from civil rights with precision and argued for expansive civil rights . Priestley identified separate private and public spheres , contending that the government should only have control over the public sphere . Education and religion , in particular , he maintained , were matters of private conscience and should not be administered by the state . Priestley 's later radicalism emerged from his belief that the British government was infringing upon these individual freedoms . 
 Priestley also defended the rights of Dissenters against the attacks of William Blackstone , an eminent legal theorist , whose Commentaries on the Laws of England ( 1765 – 69 ) had become the standard legal guide . Blackstone 's book stated that dissent from the Church of England was a crime and that Dissenters could not be loyal subjects . Furious , Priestley lashed out with his Remarks on Dr. Blackstone 's Commentaries ( 1769 ) , correcting Blackstone 's interpretation of the law , his grammar ( a highly politicised subject at the time ) , and history . Blackstone , chastened , altered subsequent editions of his Commentaries : he rephrased the offending passages and removed the sections claiming that Dissenters could not be loyal subjects , but he retained his description of Dissent as a crime . 
 = = = Natural philosopher : electricity , Optics , and soda water = = = 
 Although Priestley claimed that natural philosophy was only a hobby , he took it seriously . In his History of Electricity , he described the scientist as promoting the " security and happiness of mankind " . Priestley 's science was eminently practical and he rarely concerned himself with theoretical questions ; his model was Benjamin Franklin . When he moved to Leeds , Priestley continued his electrical and chemical experiments ( the latter aided by a steady supply of carbon dioxide from a neighbouring brewery ) . Between 1767 and 1770 , he presented five papers to the Royal Society from these initial experiments ; the first four papers explored coronal discharges and other phenomena related to electrical discharge , while the fifth reported on the conductivity of charcoals from different sources . His subsequent experimental work focused on chemistry and pneumatics . 
 Priestley published the first volume of his projected history of experimental philosophy , The History and Present State of Discoveries Relating to Vision , Light and Colours ( referred to as his Optics ) , in 1772 . He paid careful attention to the history of optics and presented excellent explanations of early optics experiments , but his mathematical deficiencies caused him to dismiss several important contemporary theories . Furthermore , he did not include any of the practical sections that had made his History of Electricity so useful to practising natural philosophers . Unlike his History of Electricity , it was not popular and had only one edition , although it was the only English book on the topic for 150 years . The hastily written text sold poorly ; the cost of researching , writing , and publishing the Optics convinced Priestley to abandon his history of experimental philosophy . 
 Priestley was considered for the position of astronomer on James Cook 's second voyage to the South Seas , but was not chosen . Still , he contributed in a small way to the voyage : he provided the crew with a method for making soda water , which he erroneously speculated might be a cure for scurvy . He then published a pamphlet with Directions for <unk> Water with Fixed Air ( 1772 ) . Priestley did not exploit the commercial potential of soda water , but others such as J. J. <unk> made fortunes from it . In 1773 , the Royal Society recognised Priestley 's achievements in natural philosophy by awarding him the Copley Medal . 
 Priestley 's friends wanted to find him a more financially secure position . In 1772 , prompted by Richard Price and Benjamin Franklin , Lord Shelburne wrote to Priestley asking him to direct the education of his children and to act as his general assistant . Although Priestley was reluctant to sacrifice his ministry , he accepted the position , resigning from Mill Hill Chapel on 20 December 1772 , and preaching his last sermon on 16 May 1773 . 
 = = Calne ( 1773 – 80 ) = = 
 In 1773 , the Priestleys moved to Calne in Wiltshire , and a year later Lord Shelburne and Priestley took a tour of Europe . According to Priestley 's close friend Theophilus Lindsey , Priestley was " much improved by this view of mankind at large " . Upon their return , Priestley easily fulfilled his duties as librarian and tutor . The workload was intentionally light , allowing him time to pursue his scientific investigations and theological interests . Priestley also became a political adviser to Shelburne , gathering information on parliamentary issues and serving as a liaison between Shelburne and the Dissenting and American interests . When the Priestleys ' third son was born on 24 May 1777 , they named him Henry at the lord 's request . 
 = = = <unk> philosopher = = = 
 Priestley wrote his most important philosophical works during his years with Lord Shelburne . In a series of major metaphysical texts published between 1774 and 1780 — An Examination of Dr. Reid 's Inquiry into the Human Mind ( 1774 ) , Hartley 's Theory of the Human Mind on the Principle of the Association of Ideas ( 1775 ) , <unk> relating to Matter and Spirit ( 1777 ) , The Doctrine of Philosophical Necessity Illustrated ( 1777 ) , and Letters to a Philosophical Unbeliever ( 1780 ) — he argues for a philosophy that incorporates four concepts : determinism , materialism , causation , and <unk> . By studying the natural world , he argued , people would learn how to become more compassionate , happy , and prosperous . 
 Priestley strongly suggested that there is no mind @-@ body duality , and put forth a materialist philosophy in these works ; that is , one founded on the principle that everything in the universe is made of matter that we can perceive . He also contended that discussing the soul is impossible because it is made of a divine substance , and humanity cannot perceive the divine . Despite his separation of the divine from the mortal , this position shocked and angered many of his readers , who believed that such a duality was necessary for the soul to exist . 
 Responding to Baron d 'Holbach 's Système de la Nature ( 1770 ) and David Hume 's Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion ( 1779 ) as well as the works of the French philosophers , Priestley maintained that materialism and determinism could be reconciled with a belief in God . He criticised those whose faith was shaped by books and fashion , drawing an analogy between the scepticism of educated men and the credulity of the masses . 
 Maintaining that humans had no free will , Priestley argued that what he called " philosophical necessity " ( akin to absolute determinism ) is consonant with Christianity , a position based on his understanding of the natural world . Like the rest of nature , man 's mind is subject to the laws of causation , Priestley contended , but because a benevolent God created these laws , the world and the people in it will eventually be perfected . Evil is therefore only an imperfect understanding of the world . 
 Although Priestley 's philosophical work has been characterised as " audacious and original " , it partakes of older philosophical traditions on the problems of free will , determinism , and materialism . For example , the 17th @-@ century philosopher Baruch Spinoza argued for absolute determinism and absolute materialism . Like Spinoza and Priestley , Leibniz argued that human will was completely determined by natural laws ; however , unlike them , Leibniz argued for a " parallel universe " of immaterial objects ( such as human souls ) so arranged by God that its outcomes agree exactly with those of the material universe . Leibniz and Priestley share an optimism that God has chosen the chain of events benevolently ; however , Priestley believed that the events were leading to a glorious Millennial conclusion , whereas for Leibniz the entire chain of events was optimal in and of itself , as compared with other conceivable chains of events . 
 = = = Founder of Unitarianism = = = 
