 When Priestley 's friend Theophilus Lindsey decided to found a new Christian denomination that would not restrict its members ' beliefs , Priestley and others hurried to his aid . On 17 April 1774 , Lindsey held the first Unitarian service in Britain , at the newly formed Essex Street Chapel in London ; he had even designed his own liturgy , of which many were critical . Priestley defended his friend in the pamphlet Letter to a Layman , on the Subject of the Rev. Mr. Lindsey 's Proposal for a Reformed English Church ( 1774 ) , claiming that only the form of worship had been altered , not its substance , and attacking those who followed religion as a fashion . Priestley attended Lindsey 's church regularly in the 1770s and occasionally preached there . He continued to support institutionalised Unitarianism for the rest of his life , writing several Defenses of Unitarianism and encouraging the foundation of new Unitarian chapels throughout Britain and the United States . 
 = = = Experiments and Observations on Different Kinds of Air = = = 
 Priestley 's years in Calne were the only ones in his life dominated by scientific investigations ; they were also the most scientifically fruitful . His experiments were almost entirely confined to " airs " , and out of this work emerged his most important scientific texts : the six volumes of Experiments and Observations on Different Kinds of Air ( 1774 – 86 ) . These experiments helped repudiate the last vestiges of the theory of four elements , which Priestley attempted to replace with his own variation of phlogiston theory . According to that 18th @-@ century theory , the combustion or oxidation of a substance corresponded to the release of a material substance , phlogiston . 
 Priestley 's work on " airs " is not easily classified . As historian of science Simon Schaffer writes , it " has been seen as a branch of physics , or chemistry , or natural philosophy , or some highly idiosyncratic version of Priestley 's own invention " . Furthermore , the volumes were both a scientific and a political enterprise for Priestley , in which he argues that science could destroy " undue and usurped authority " and that government has " reason to tremble even at an air pump or an electrical machine " . 
 Volume I of Experiments and Observations on Different Kinds of Air outlined several discoveries : " nitrous air " ( nitric oxide , NO ) ; " vapor of spirit of salt " , later called " acid air " or " marine acid air " ( anhydrous hydrochloric acid , HCl ) ; " alkaline air " ( ammonia , NH3 ) ; " diminished " or " dephlogisticated nitrous air " ( nitrous oxide , N2O ) ; and , most famously , " dephlogisticated air " ( oxygen , O2 ) as well as experimental findings that showed plants revitalised enclosed volumes of air , a discovery that would eventually lead to the discovery of photosynthesis . Priestley also developed a " nitrous air test " to determine the " goodness of air " . Using a pneumatic trough , he would mix nitrous air with a test sample , over water or mercury , and measure the decrease in volume — the principle of <unk> . After a small history of the study of airs , he explained his own experiments in an open and sincere style . As an early biographer writes , " whatever he knows or thinks he tells : doubts , perplexities , blunders are set down with the most refreshing candour . " Priestley also described his cheap and easy @-@ to @-@ assemble experimental apparatus ; his colleagues therefore believed that they could easily reproduce his experiments . Faced with inconsistent experimental results , Priestley employed phlogiston theory . This , however , led him to conclude that there were only three types of " air " : " fixed " , " alkaline " , and " acid " . Priestley dismissed the burgeoning chemistry of his day . Instead , he focused on gases and " changes in their sensible properties " , as had natural philosophers before him . He isolated carbon monoxide ( CO ) , but apparently did not realise that it was a separate " air " . 
 = = = = Discovery of oxygen = = = = 
 In August 1774 he isolated an " air " that appeared to be completely new , but he did not have an opportunity to pursue the matter because he was about to tour Europe with Shelburne . While in Paris , however , Priestley managed to replicate the experiment for others , including French chemist Antoine Lavoisier . After returning to Britain in January 1775 , he continued his experiments and discovered " vitriolic acid air " ( sulphur dioxide , SO2 ) . 
 In March he wrote to several people regarding the new " air " that he had discovered in August . One of these letters was read aloud to the Royal Society , and a paper outlining the discovery , titled " An Account of further Discoveries in Air " , was published in the Society 's journal Philosophical Transactions . Priestley called the new substance " dephlogisticated air " , which he made in the famous experiment by focusing the sun ’ s rays on a sample of mercuric oxide . He first tested it on mice , who surprised him by surviving quite a while entrapped with the air , and then on himself , writing that it was " five or six times better than common air for the purpose of respiration , inflammation , and , I believe , every other use of common <unk> air " . He had discovered oxygen gas ( O2 ) . 
 Priestley assembled his oxygen paper and several others into a second volume of Experiments and Observations on Air , published in 1776 . He did not emphasise his discovery of " dephlogisticated air " ( leaving it to Part III of the volume ) but instead argued in the preface how important such discoveries were to rational religion . His paper narrated the discovery chronologically , relating the long delays between experiments and his initial <unk> ; thus , it is difficult to determine when exactly Priestley " discovered " oxygen . Such dating is significant as both Lavoisier and Swedish pharmacist Carl Wilhelm Scheele have strong claims to the discovery of oxygen as well , Scheele having been the first to isolate the gas ( although he published after Priestley ) and Lavoisier having been the first to describe it as purified " air itself entire without alteration " ( that is , the first to explain oxygen without phlogiston theory ) . 
 In his paper " Observations on Respiration and the Use of the Blood " , Priestley was the first to suggest a connection between blood and air , although he did so using phlogiston theory . In typical Priestley fashion , he prefaced the paper with a history of the study of respiration . A year later , clearly influenced by Priestley , Lavoisier was also discussing respiration at the Académie des sciences . Lavoisier 's work began the long train of discovery that produced papers on oxygen respiration and culminated in the overthrow of phlogiston theory and the establishment of modern chemistry . 
 Around 1779 Priestley and Shelburne had a rupture , the precise reasons for which remain unclear . Shelburne blamed Priestley 's health , while Priestley claimed Shelburne had no further use for him . Some contemporaries speculated that Priestley 's outspokenness had hurt Shelburne 's political career . Schofield argues that the most likely reason was Shelburne 's recent marriage to Louisa Fitzpatrick — apparently , she did not like the Priestleys . Although Priestley considered moving to America , he eventually accepted Birmingham New Meeting 's offer to be their minister . 
 Both Priestley and Shelburne 's families upheld their Unitarian faith for generations . In December 2013 , it was reported that Sir Christopher Bullock - the direct descendant of Shelburne 's brother , Thomas Fitzmaurice ( MP ) , had married his wife , Lady Bullock , née Barbara May Lupton , at London 's Unitarian Essex Church in 1917 . Barbara Lupton was the second cousin of Olive Middleton , née Lupton - the great grandmother of Catherine , Duchess of Cambridge . In 1914 , Olive and Noel Middleton had married at Leeds ' Mill Hill Chapel , which Priestly , as its minister , had once guided towards Unitarianism . 
 = = Birmingham ( 1780 – 91 ) = = 
 In 1780 the Priestleys moved to Birmingham and spent a happy decade surrounded by old friends , until they were forced to flee in 1791 by religiously motivated mob violence in what became known as the Priestley Riots . Priestley accepted the ministerial position at New Meeting on the condition that he be required to preach and teach only on Sundays , so that he would have time for his writing and scientific experiments . As in Leeds , Priestley established classes for the youth of his parish and by 1781 , he was teaching 150 students . Because Priestley 's New Meeting salary was only 100 guineas , friends and patrons donated money and goods to help continue his investigations . He was elected a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1782 . 
 = = = Chemical Revolution = = = 
 Many of the friends that Priestley made in Birmingham were members of the Lunar Society , a group of manufacturers , inventors , and natural philosophers who assembled monthly to discuss their work . The core of the group included men such as the manufacturer Matthew Boulton , the chemist and geologist James Keir , the inventor and engineer James Watt , and the botanist , chemist , and geologist William Withering . Priestley was asked to join this unique society and contributed much to the work of its members . As a result of this stimulating intellectual environment , he published several important scientific papers , including " Experiments relating to <unk> , and the seeming Conversion of Water into Air " ( 1783 ) . The first part attempts to refute Lavoisier 's challenges to his work on oxygen ; the second part describes how steam is " converted " into air . After several variations of the experiment , with different substances as fuel and several different collecting apparatuses ( which produced different results ) , he concluded that air could travel through more substances than previously surmised , a conclusion " contrary to all the known principles of hydrostatics " . This discovery , along with his earlier work on what would later be recognised as gaseous diffusion , would eventually lead John Dalton and Thomas Graham to formulate the kinetic theory of gases . 
 In 1777 , Antoine Lavoisier had written Mémoire sur la combustion en général , the first of what proved to be a series of attacks on phlogiston theory ; it was against these attacks that Priestley responded in 1783 . While Priestley accepted parts of Lavoisier 's theory , he was unprepared to assent to the major revolutions Lavoisier proposed : the overthrow of phlogiston , a chemistry based conceptually on elements and compounds , and a new chemical nomenclature . Priestley 's original experiments on " dephlogisticated air " ( oxygen ) , combustion , and water provided Lavoisier with the data he needed to construct much of his system ; yet Priestley never accepted Lavoisier 's new theories and continued to defend phlogiston theory for the rest of his life . Lavoisier 's system was based largely on the quantitative concept that mass is neither created nor destroyed in chemical reactions ( i.e. , the conservation of mass ) . By contrast , Priestley preferred to observe qualitative changes in heat , color , and particularly volume . His experiments tested " airs " for " their solubility in water , their power of supporting or extinguishing flame , whether they were respirable , how they behaved with acid and alkaline air , and with nitric oxide and inflammable air , and lastly how they were affected by the electric spark . " 
 By 1789 , when Lavoisier published his Traité <unk> de Chimie and founded the Annales de Chimie , the new chemistry had come into its own . Priestley published several more scientific papers in Birmingham , the majority attempting to refute Lavoisier . Priestley and other Lunar Society members argued that the new French system was too expensive , too difficult to test , and unnecessarily complex . Priestley in particular rejected its " establishment " aura . In the end , Lavoisier 's view prevailed : his new chemistry introduced many of the principles on which modern chemistry is founded . 
 Priestley 's refusal to accept Lavoisier 's " new chemistry " — such as the conservation of mass — and his determination to adhere to a less satisfactory theory has perplexed many scholars . Schofield explains it thus : " Priestley was never a chemist ; in a modern , and even a <unk> , sense , he was never a scientist . He was a natural philosopher , concerned with the economy of nature and obsessed with an idea of unity , in theology and in nature . " Historian of science John McEvoy largely agrees , writing that Priestley 's view of nature as coextensive with God and thus infinite , which encouraged him to focus on facts over hypotheses and theories , prompted him to reject Lavoisier 's system . McEvoy argues that " Priestley 's isolated and lonely opposition to the oxygen theory was a measure of his passionate concern for the principles of intellectual freedom , epistemic equality and critical inquiry . " Priestley himself claimed in the last volume of Experiments and Observations that his most valuable works were his theological ones because they were " superior [ in ] dignity and importance " . 
 = = = Defender of English Dissenters and French revolutionaries = = = 
 Further information : Joseph Priestley and Dissent ; see also : Commons : Joseph Priestley Cartoons 
 Although Priestley was busy defending phlogiston theory from the " new chemists " , most of what he published in Birmingham was theological . In 1782 he published the fourth volume of his Institutes , An History of the Corruptions of Christianity , describing how he thought the teachings of the early Christian church had been " corrupted " or distorted . Schofield describes the work as " derivative , disorganized , wordy , and repetitive , detailed , exhaustive , and devastatingly argued " . The text addresses issues ranging from the divinity of Christ to the proper form for the Lord 's Supper . Priestley followed up in 1786 with the provocatively titled book , An History of Early Opinions concerning Jesus Christ , compiled from Original Writers , proving that the Christian Church was at first Unitarian . Thomas Jefferson would later write of the profound effect that these two books had on him : " I have read his Corruptions of Christianity , and Early Opinions of Jesus , over and over again ; and I rest on them ... as the basis of my own faith . These writings have never been answered . " Although a few readers such as Jefferson and other Rational Dissenters approved of the work , it was harshly reviewed because of its extreme theological positions , particularly its rejection of the Trinity . 
 In 1785 , while Priestley was engaged in a pamphlet war over Corruptions , he also published The Importance and Extent of Free Enquiry , claiming that the Reformation had not really reformed the church . In words that would boil over into a national debate , he challenged his readers to enact change : 
 Let us not , therefore , be discouraged , though , for the present , we should see no great number of churches <unk> unitarian .... We are , as it were , laying gunpowder , grain by grain , under the old building of error and superstition , which a single spark may hereafter inflame , so as to produce an instantaneous explosion ; in consequence of which that edifice , the erection of which has been the work of ages , may be overturned in a moment , and so effectually as that the same foundation can never be built upon again .... 
 Although discouraged by friends from using such inflammatory language , Priestley refused to back down from his opinions in print and he included it , forever branding himself as " Gunpowder Joe " . After the publication of this seeming call for revolution in the midst of the French Revolution , pamphleteers stepped up their attacks on Priestley and he and his church were even threatened with legal action . 
 In 1787 , 1789 , and 1790 , Dissenters again tried to repeal the Test and Corporation Acts . Although initially it looked as if they might succeed , by 1790 , with the fears of revolution looming in Parliament , few were swayed by appeals to equal rights . Political cartoons , one of the most effective and popular media of the time , skewered the Dissenters and Priestley . In Parliament , William Pitt and Edmund Burke argued against the repeal , a betrayal that angered Priestley and his friends , who had expected the two men 's support . Priestley wrote a series of Letters to William Pitt and Letters to Burke in an attempt to persuade them otherwise , but these publications only further inflamed the populace against him . 
 Dissenters such as Priestley who supported the French Revolution came under increasing suspicion as scepticism regarding the revolution grew . In its propaganda against " radicals " , Pitt 's administration used the " gunpowder " statement to argue that Priestley and other Dissenters wanted to overthrow the government . Burke , in his famous Reflections on the Revolution in France ( 1790 ) , tied natural philosophers , and specifically Priestley , to the French Revolution , writing that radicals who supported science in Britain " considered man in their experiments no more than they do mice in an air pump " . Burke also associated republican principles with alchemy and insubstantial air , mocking the scientific work done by both Priestley and French chemists . He made much in his later writings of the connections between " Gunpowder Joe " , science , and Lavoisier — who was improving gunpowder for the French in their war against Britain . Paradoxically , a secular statesman , Burke , argued against science and maintained that religion should be the basis of civil society , whereas a Dissenting minister , Priestley , argued that religion could not provide the basis for civil society and should be restricted to one 's private life . 
 = = = Birmingham riots of 1791 = = = 
 The animus that had been building against Dissenters and supporters of the American and French Revolutions exploded in July 1791 . Priestley and several other Dissenters had arranged to have a celebratory dinner on the anniversary of the storming of the Bastille , a provocative action in a country where many disapproved of the French Revolution and feared that it might spread to Britain . Amid fears of violence , Priestley was convinced by his friends not to attend . Rioters gathered outside the hotel during the banquet and attacked the attendees as they left . The rioters moved on to the New Meeting and Old Meeting churches — and burned both to the ground . Priestley and his wife fled from their home ; although their son William and others stayed behind to protect their property , the mob overcame them and torched Priestley 's house " Fairhill " at Sparkbrook , destroying his valuable laboratory and all of the family 's belongings . Twenty @-@ six other Dissenters ’ homes and three more churches were burned in the three @-@ day riot . Priestley spent several days hiding with friends until he was able to travel safely to London . The carefully executed attacks of the " mob " and the farcical trials of only a handful of the " leaders " convinced many at the time — and modern historians later — that the attacks were planned and condoned by local Birmingham magistrates . When George III was eventually forced to send troops to the area , he said : " I cannot but feel better pleased that Priestley is the sufferer for the doctrines he and his party have instilled , and that the people see them in their true light . " 
 = = Hackney ( 1791 – 94 ) = = 
 Unable to return to Birmingham , the Priestleys eventually settled in Lower Clapton , a district in Hackney , Middlesex where he gave a series of lectures on history and natural philosophy at the Dissenting academy , the New College at Hackney . Friends helped the couple rebuild their lives , contributing money , books , and laboratory equipment . Priestley tried to obtain restitution from the government for the destruction of his Birmingham property , but he was never fully reimbursed . He also published An Appeal to the Public on the Subject of the Riots in Birmingham ( 1791 ) , which indicted the people of Birmingham for allowing the riots to occur and for " violating the principles of English government " . 
 The couple 's friends urged them to leave Britain and emigrate to either France or the new United States , even though Priestley had received an appointment to preach for the Gravel Pit Meeting congregation . Priestley was minister between 1793 and 1794 and the sermons he preached there , particularly the two Fast Sermons , reflect his growing millenarianism , his belief that the end of the world was fast approaching . After comparing Biblical prophecies to recent history , Priestley concluded that the French Revolution was a harbinger of the Second Coming of Christ . Priestley 's works had always had a millennial cast , but after the beginning of the French Revolution , this strain increased . He wrote to a younger friend that while he himself would not see the Second Coming , his friend " may probably live to see it ... It cannot , I think be more than twenty years [ away ] . " 
 Daily life became more difficult for the family : Priestley was burned in effigy along with Thomas Paine ; vicious political cartoons continued to be published about him ; letters were sent to him from across the country , comparing him to the devil and Guy Fawkes ; tradespeople feared the family 's business ; and Priestley 's Royal Academy friends distanced themselves . As the penalties became harsher for those who spoke out against the government , Priestley examined options for removing himself and his family from England . 
 Joseph Priestley 's son William was presented to the French Assembly and granted letters of naturalization on 8 June 1792 . Priestley learned about it from the Morning Chronicle . A decree of 26 August 1792 by the French National Assembly conferred French citizenship on Joseph Priestley and others who had " served the cause of liberty " by their writings . Priestley accepted French citizenship , considering it " the greatest of honours " . In the French National Convention election on 5 September 1792 , Joseph Priestley was elected to the French National Convention by at least two departments , ( Orne and Rhône @-@ et @-@ Loire ) . However , he declined the honor , on the grounds that he was not fluent in French . 
 As relations between England and France worsened , however , a removal to France became impracticable . Following the declaration of war of February 1793 , and the Aliens Bill of March 1793 , which forbade correspondence or travel between England and France , William Priestley left France for America . Joseph Priestley 's sons Harry and Joseph chose to leave England for America in August 1793 . Finally Priestley himself followed with his wife , boarding the Sansom at Gravesend on 7 April 1793 . Five weeks after Priestley left , William Pitt 's administration began arresting radicals for seditious libel , resulting in the famous 1794 Treason Trials . 
 = = Pennsylvania ( 1794 – 1804 ) = = 
 The Priestleys arrived in New York City in 1794 , where they were fêted by various political factions vying for Priestley 's endorsement . Priestley declined their entreaties , hoping to avoid political discord in his new country . Before travelling to a new home in the backwoods of Northumberland County , Pennsylvania , at Point township ( now Northumberland borough ) , Dr and Mrs Priestley lodged in Philadelphia , where Priestley gave a series of sermons which led to the founding of the First Unitarian Church of Philadelphia . Priestley turned down an opportunity to teach chemistry at the University of Pennsylvania . 
 Priestley 's son Joseph Priestley Jr. was a leading member of a consortium that had purchased 300 @,@ 000 acres of virgin woodland between the forks of Loyalsock Creek , which they intended to lease or sell in 400 @-@ acre plots , with payment deferred to seven annual instalments , with interest . His brothers , William and Henry , bought a 284 @-@ acre plot of woodland which they attempted to transform into a farm , later called " Fairhill " , felling and uprooting trees , and making lime to sweeten the soil by building their own lime kilns . Henry Priestley died 11 December 1795 , possibly of malaria which he may have contracted after landing at New York . Mary Priestley 's health , already poor , deteriorated further ; although William 's wife , Margaret Foulke @-@ Priestley , moved in with the couple to nurse Mary twenty @-@ four hours a day , Mary Priestley died 17 September 1796 . Dr Priestley now moved in with his elder son , Joseph Jr . , and wife Elizabeth Ryland @-@ Priestley . Thomas Cooper , whose son , Thomas Jr . , was living with the Priestleys , was a frequent visitor . 
 Since his arrival in America , Priestley had continued to defend his Christian Unitarian beliefs ; now , falling increasingly under the influence of Thomas Cooper and Elizabeth Ryland @-@ Priestley , he was unable to avoid becoming embroiled in political controversy . In 1798 , when , in response to the Pinckney affair , a belligerent President Adams sought to enlarge the navy and mobilise the militia into what Priestley and Cooper saw as a ' standing army ' , Priestley published an anonymous newspaper article : Maxims of political arithmetic , which attacked Adams , defended free trade , and advocated a form of Jeffersonian isolationism . In the same year , a small package , addressed vaguely : " Dr Priestley in America , " was seized by the Royal Navy on board a neutral Danish boat . It was found to contain three letters , one of which was signed by the radical printer John Hurford Stone . These intercepted letters were published in London , and copied in numerous papers in America . One of the letters was addressed to " MBP " , with a note : " I <unk> a note for our friend MBP — but , as ignorant of the name he bears at present among you , I must beg you to seal and address it . " This gave the intercepted letters a tinge of intrigue . Fearful lest they be taken as evidence of him being a ' spy in the interest of France ' , Priestley sent a clumsy letter to numerous newspaper editors , in which he naively named " MBP " ( Member of the British Parliament ) as Mr. Benjamin Vaughan , who " like me , thought it necessary to leave England , and for some time is said to have assumed a feigned name . " William Cobbett , in his Porcupine 's Gazette , 20 August 1798 , added that Priestley " has told us who Mr MBP is , and has confirmed me in the opinion of their both being spies in the interest of France . " 
 Joseph Priestley Jr. left on a visit to England at Christmas 1798 , not returning until August 1800 . In his absence , his wife Elizabeth Ryland @-@ Priestley and Thomas Cooper became increasing close , collaborating in numerous political essays . Priestley allowed himself to fall too heavily under Elizabeth and Cooper 's influences , even helping hawk a seditious handbill Cooper had printed , around Point township , and across the Susquehanna at Sunbury . In September 1799 , William Cobbett printed extracts from this handbill , asserting that : " Dr Priestley has taken great pains to circulate this address , has travelled through the country for the purpose , and is in fact the patron of it . " He challenged Priestley to " clear himself of the accusation " or face prosecution . " Barely a month later , in November and December 1799 , Priestley stepped forward in his own defence , with his Letters to the inhabitants of Northumberland . 
 Priestley ’ s son , William , now living in Philadelphia , was increasingly embarrassed by his father 's actions . He confronted his father , expressing John and Benjamin Vaughan ’ s unease , his own wife 's concerns about Elizabeth Ryland @-@ Priestley 's dietary care , and his own concerns at the closeness of Elizabeth Ryland @-@ Priestley and Thomas Cooper 's relationship , and their adverse influence on Dr Priestley ; but this only led to a further estrangement between William and his sister @-@ in @-@ law . When , a while later , Priestley 's household suffered a bout of food poisoning , perhaps from puking sickness or a bacterial infection , Elizabeth Ryland @-@ Priestley , falsely accused William of having poisoned the family 's flour . Although this allegation has attracted the attention of some modern historians , it is believed to be without foundation . 
 Priestley continued the educational projects that had always been important to him , helping to establish the " Northumberland Academy " and donating his library to the fledgling institution . He exchanged letters regarding the proper structure of a university with Thomas Jefferson , who used this advice when founding the University of Virginia . Jefferson and Priestley became close , and when he had completed his General History of the Christian Church , he dedicated it to President Jefferson , writing that " it is now only that I can say I see nothing to fear from the hand of power , the government under which I live being for the first time truly favourable to me . " 
 Priestley tried to continue his scientific investigations in America with the support of the American Philosophical Association . He was hampered by lack of news from Europe ; unaware of the latest scientific developments , Priestley was no longer on the forefront of discovery . Although the majority of his publications focused on defending phlogiston theory , he also did some original work on spontaneous generation and dreams . Despite Priestley 's reduced scientific output , his presence stimulated American interest in chemistry . 
 By 1801 , Priestley had become so ill that he could no longer write or experiment . He died on the morning of 6 February 1804 , aged seventy and was buried at Riverview Cemetery in Northumberland , Pennsylvania . 
 Priestley 's epitaph reads : 
 Return unto thy rest , O my soul , for the 
 Lord hath dealt <unk> with thee . 
 I will lay me down in peace and sleep till 
 I awake in the morning of the resurrection . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 By the time he died in 1804 , Priestley had been made a member of every major scientific society in the Western world and he had discovered numerous substances . The 19th @-@ century French naturalist George Cuvier , in his eulogy of Priestley , praised his discoveries while at the same time lamenting his refusal to abandon phlogiston theory , calling him " the father of modern chemistry [ who ] never acknowledged his daughter " . Priestley published more than 150 works on topics ranging from political philosophy to education to theology to natural philosophy . He led and inspired British radicals during the 1790s , paved the way for utilitarianism , and helped found Unitarianism . A wide variety of philosophers , scientists , and poets became <unk> as a result of his redaction of David Hartley 's Observations on Man , including Erasmus Darwin , Coleridge , William Wordsworth , John Stuart Mill , Alexander Bain , and Herbert Spencer . Immanuel Kant praised Priestley in his Critique of Pure Reason ( 1781 ) , writing that he " knew how to combine his paradoxical teaching with the interests of religion " . Indeed , it was Priestley 's aim to " put the most ' advanced ' Enlightenment ideas into the service of a rationalized though heterodox Christianity , under the guidance of the basic principles of scientific method " . 
 Considering the extent of Priestley 's influence , relatively little scholarship has been devoted to him . In the early 20th century , Priestley was most often described as a conservative and dogmatic scientist who was nevertheless a political and religious reformer . In a historiographic review essay , historian of science Simon Schaffer describes the two dominant portraits of Priestley : the first depicts him as " a playful innocent " who stumbled across his discoveries ; the second portrays him as innocent as well as " warped " for not understanding their implications better . Assessing Priestley 's works as a whole has been difficult for scholars because of his wide @-@ ranging interests . His scientific discoveries have usually been divorced from his theological and metaphysical publications to make an analysis of his life and writings easier , but this approach has been challenged recently by scholars such as John McEvoy and Robert Schofield . Although early Priestley scholarship claimed that his theological and metaphysical works were " distractions " and " obstacles " to his scientific work , scholarship published in the 1960s , 1970s , and 1980s maintained that Priestley 's works constituted a unified theory . However , as Schaffer explains , no convincing synthesis of his work has yet been expounded . More recently , in 2001 , historian of science Dan <unk> has argued that efforts to create a " synoptic view " have resulted only in a rationalisation of the contradictions in Priestley 's thought , because they have been " organized around philosophical categories " and have " separate [ d ] the producers of scientific ideas from any social conflict " . 
 Priestley has been remembered by the towns in which he served as a reforming educator and minister and by the scientific organisations he influenced . Two educational institutions have been named in his honour — Priestley College in Warrington and Joseph Priestley College in Leeds ( now part of Leeds City College ) — and an asteroid , <unk> Priestley , discovered in 1986 by Duncan Waldron . In <unk> , the Leeds City Square , and in Birmingham , he is memorialised through statues , and plaques commemorating him have been posted in Birmingham , Calne and Warrington . Also , since 1952 Dickinson College , Pennsylvania , has presented the Priestley Award to a scientist who makes " discoveries which contribute to the welfare of mankind " . The main undergraduate chemistry laboratories at the University of Leeds were refurbished as part of a £ 4m refurbishment plan in 2006 and renamed as the Priestley Laboratories in his honour as a prominent chemist from Leeds . 
 Additional recognition for Priestley 's work is marked by a National Historic Chemical Landmark designation for his discovery of oxygen , made on 1 August 1994 , at the Priestley House in Northumberland , Penn . , by the American Chemical Society . Similar international recognition was made on 7 August 2000 , at Bowood House in Wiltshire , UK . 
 = = Selected works = = 
 The Rudiments of English Grammar ( 1761 ) 
 A Chart of Biography ( 1765 ) 
 Essay on a Course of Liberal Education for Civil and Active Life ( 1765 ) 
 The History and Present State of Electricity ( 1767 ) 
 Essay on the First Principles of Government ( 1768 ) 
 A New Chart of History ( 1769 ) 
 Institutes of Natural and Revealed Religion ( 1772 – 74 ) 
 Experiments and Observations on Different Kinds of Air ( 1774 – 77 ) 
 <unk> relating to Matter and Spirit ( 1777 ) 
 The Doctrine of Philosophical Necessity Illustrated ( 1777 ) 
 Letters to a Philosophical Unbeliever ( 1780 ) 
 An History of the Corruptions of Christianity ( 1782 ) 
 Lectures on History and General Policy ( 1788 ) 
 Theological Repository ( 1770 – 73 , 1784 – 88 ) 
 = = = Primary materials = = = 
 = = = Biographies = = = 
 = = = Secondary materials = = = 
 = 2006 Kolkata leather factory fire = 
 The 2006 Kolkata leather factory fire was a deadly industrial fire that occurred in West Bengal , India , on 22 November 2006 . The fire broke out in a leather bag factory located in the <unk> International , Topsia , in the South 24 Parganas district in Greater Kolkata area , and generated a wave of criticism of the poor safety standards in place among the country 's sweatshops . 
 The industrial fire claimed the lives of at least ten people , who were unable to escape because the doors were locked shut illegally . Authorities , in response to local residents ' angry criticism , admitted that the emergency response to the accident was substandard . Two separate investigations were launched . One inquiry focused on the fire itself , while the other sought to ascertain criminal responsibility for the disaster as well as the operation of the illegal factory . The results of both are either pending or have yet to be released to the general public . 
 = = Background = = 
 Investigators confirmed that the site of the fire had been used as an illegal factory to manufacture leather bags . The factory was located on the third floor of a four @-@ story building , which also featured residential units . Investigators determined that the first and second floors of the structure housed additional illegal factories . The factory destroyed in the fire was found to be owned and operated by Tenex Exports , and all of the people who were killed or injured in the fire slept in the factory at night , a situation that is not considered unusual in India . There was had just one emergency exit , and 40 workers were housed in the structure at the time of the fire , and the owner had locked the factory at night to prevent workers from running away with leather goods . The building was located in the <unk> International , Topsia , in the South 24 Parganas district of Greater Kolkata region . 
 = = Event and emergency response = = 
 The fire broke out in the factory at around 2 : 30 IST , as workers slept . Once they became aware of the blaze , the employees found they were unable to break through the factory 's locked doors . Five fire tenders were sent to the scene , but by the time they arrived , local residents had broken down two locked gates and already rescued the surviving workers . These impromptu Rescue efforts were delayed however , when an individual carrying keys to open the door nervously dropped them while attempting to open the gate . At least 10 people were dead by the time rescuers reached the factory 's interior , with a further eighteen injured . The survivors , many suffering from burns over 70 percent of their bodies , were taken to the National Medical College and Hospital , where victims had to be left on the floor due to a shortage of beds . The hospital did not have a burns unit , and the only treatments available at the hospital were ointments and saline drips . The patients were eventually moved to other hospitals . Local MLA Javed Khan later said that the death toll is actually at least twelve , but there has been no official confirmation of this . The Rapid Action Force was also deployed to maintain calm . 
 = = = Criticisms of the emergency response = = = 
 People living in the vicinity of the illegal factory said that the number of deaths might have been reduced had the fire service responded promptly . They claimed that the fire brigade failed to send personnel or equipment to the scene until more than an hour after the brigade first received word of the fire . Residents also claimed that it was only after the police arrived and requested fire service backup that any help was sent . In addition , some on the scene reported an inadequate number of ambulances . The city 's mayor admitted to this lapse the following morning . Local people also complained that the victims should never have been taken to the Calcutta National Medical College , but that they should have been transported directly to hospitals with burns units . 
 = = Investigations = = 
 = = = Accident investigation = = = 
 An investigation has been launched to determine the cause of the fire as well as the reason the building had been locked from the outside . To this end , the building was inspected by the KMC , and was subsequently scheduled to be demolished on Thursday , November 23 . However , the structure is standing as of 2007 . Although no actual cause of the fire has been established , it has been noted that large quantities of inflammable materials , such as adhesives , were stored inside the building . It was also revealed that the factory experienced a similar fire two years previously , but on that occasion there were no fatalities . 
 = = = Criminal investigation = = = 
 A separate criminal investigation focused on the illegal factory itself . Almost all factories and homes in the area were illegal and unauthorised , and do not follow building codes and sanctions . Mayor <unk> Ranjan Bhattacharya said action would be taken against the owners of the factory and house , and Superintendent of Police of South 24 Parganas S. N. Gupta said that the owners of the building would be arrested . Investigation has shown that the Kolkata Municipal Corporation ( KMC ) issued notices to the building on three separate occasions , in 1988 , 1989 , and 1992 , yet took no further action . It has been shown , however , that the KMC also approved trade licences for two businesses to operate from the building . The owner of the building , Khurshid Alam , has had a police complaint filed against him by the fire department for illegal construction charges . Mohammed <unk> Ahmed and Mohammed Asif , the owners of Tenex Exports , also face related charges . Both investigations are ongoing . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The day after this tragedy , workers in the unorganized leather industry of Topsia area held protest rallies demanding compensation for the relatives of the deceased workers , better working conditions and a probe into the fire mishap . The mayor of Kolkata convened an all @-@ party meeting to discuss the incident and also promised to initiate a drive demolish illegal constructions in the area . The labour inspectors inspected the building and declared the factory as illegal . Even though the building was declared illegal and unsafe , a month later , the police raided the house and found that another leather factory was operating behind closed doors in the ground floor of the building . The civic officials issued a notice to stop any work in the building . Though local residents alleged that clandestine work started in the building with the help of local MLA , <unk> Khan , Khan himself blamed it rather on the police . 
 In 2008 , two more fire mishaps occurred in the leather industries in the area , one in the month of March and the other in June : a total of nine people got injured in these two incidents . Even though fire safety licenses and insurances for the workers of the leather factories were made mandatory after the fire incident of 2006 , none of the authorities — the municipal corporation , the services department of the state government , and the police — ensured that these were actually followed by the factories . The local residents claimed that the owner of the factory that was impacted in the fire incident of 2006 , now operates from another address of the same area . According to fire brigade officials , the Topsia area along with nearby <unk> and <unk> forms the most fire @-@ prone area of the city , and that around three to four fires break out every week , though they do not get reported in the media as there is no loss of life . 
 = Embassy of the United States , Mogadishu = 
 The Embassy of the United States of America to Somalia was a diplomatic mission of the United States in Mogadishu , Somalia from 1960 to 1991 . In 1957 , the US opened a Consulate @-@ General in Mogadishu — the capital of the Trust Territory of Somalia , a UN trusteeship under Italian administration . The consulate was upgraded to embassy status in July 1960 , when the US recognized Somalia 's independence and appointed an ambassador . The embassy served to counter Soviet influence during the Cold War and also served as a base for the United States Agency for International Development , which had a large presence in the country . In 1989 , the embassy moved from a dilapidated building in central Mogadishu to a new compound on the outskirts of the city . 
 Violence quickly enveloped the city in late December 1990 , during the Somali Civil War , and on 1 January 1991 , the ambassador contacted the State Department to request the closure and evacuation of the embassy . Approval was given the following day , but violence and the collapse of the central government prevented the US , and several other countries , from airlifting their diplomats and civilians through Mogadishu International Airport . The USS Guam and USS Trenton , which were stationed off the coast of Oman , were dispatched to airlift staff from the embassy ; American civilians and many foreign diplomats also gathered at the embassy , seeking evacuation . The embassy closed on January 5 , 1991 and 281 American and foreign diplomats and civilians were airlifted by helicopter from the embassy compound to Guam and Trenton . 
 In December 1992 , the embassy compound was reoccupied and repaired to serve as a headquarters for US personnel within the Unified Task Force and , following the transition to UN control , a base for UNOSOM . The US worked with various parties in Somalia to establish peace and formally recognized the newly established Federal Government of Somalia in January 2013 . In May 2015 , US Secretary of State John Kerry visited Somalia and stated that the US plans to reopen its embassy soon ; the Somali government presented him with the real estate deed for land reserved for the new US embassy compound in Mogadishu . The move came three months after President Obama nominated Katherine <unk> to the post of US ambassador to Somalia , who would have been the first US ambassador to Somalia since 1991 , but she withdrew three months later . 
 = = History = = 
 The State Department sent two consuls to Mogadishu in 1956 to establish a diplomatic post and on July 1 , 1957 , the United States Consulate @-@ General in Mogadishu opened . The consulate was an offshoot of the US embassy to Italy . At the time , Mogadishu was the capital of the Trust Territory of Somalia , a United Nations Trust Territory under Italian administration that was scheduled to become independent in 1960 . In addition to establishing a presence , the consulate staff were also charged with political research and developing relations with future Somali leaders . 
 On July 1 , 1960 , the Trust Territory of Somalia ( the former Italian Somaliland ) became independent and united , as planned , with the briefly extant State of Somaliland ( the former British Somaliland ) to form the Somali Republic ( Somalia ) . The United States recognized and established diplomatic relations with the Somali Republic the same day . The Consulate @-@ General was elevated to embassy status and its Chargé d 'affaires , Andrew G. Lynch , was appointed ambassador on July 5 . He presented his credentials on 11 July , at which point he officially became the first US ambassador to Somalia . 
 Like most US diplomatic posts in Africa during the Cold War , a primary purpose of the embassy was to counter Soviet influence in the region and contain the spread of communism . For a time after the Sino @-@ Soviet split , China was also actively competing for influence in the developing world , including activities in Somalia . Beginning in the 1960s , the US engaged in development projects in Somalia to counter the influence of communism . Staff from the United States Agency for International Development ( USAID ) , which carried out most of these projects , comprised a substantial number of the embassy 's staff during the next three decades . Educational programs were also given emphasis by the embassy in the years after independence , and there was a sizable Peace Corps presence . 
 The US became the protecting power for the United Kingdom in Somalia after Somalia severed diplomatic relations with the United Kingdom in 1963 , due to a dispute over the administration of the ethnic @-@ Somali Northern Frontier District . Besides providing consular assistance for Britons , the embassy was also tasked with the protection of the British embassy compound and its properties . The US opened a consulate in Hargeisa the following year to assist Peace Corps activities and represent British interests in the northwestern region of Somalia , which had been under British administration from 1884 @-@ 1960 . In 1967 , the embassy went into a lock down during the Six @-@ Day War between Israel and neighboring Arab countries , which Somalia supported . The US was viewed as Israel 's protector by Somalis and the embassy was subjected to some minor demonstrations . 
 During the 1969 coup d 'état which brought Siad Barre to power , the embassy was blockaded by soldiers , who prevented the movement of persons into or out of the compound for over 24 hours . Only the ambassador managed to briefly visit the embassy en route to the Foreign Ministry , where he made a formal complaint against the embassy 's blockade . In the wake of the coup , the Somalian government became patrons of the Soviet Union and China . Three days after the coup , the Peace Corps was ordered to leave within three days . This soon extended to one week , and many of the volunteers were housed in the homes of embassy staff before being evacuated by a US Air Force plane . The Foreign Assistance Act prohibited foreign assistance to nations whose ships engaged in trade with Vietnam . After Somali @-@ flagged vessels were observed at port in Hanoi , US development assistance to Somalia was terminated . The Barre government responded by expelling the US military attaché , prohibiting local residents from visiting the embassy , and restricting travel by embassy staff to within 40 kilometres ( 25 mi ) of Mogadishu . The consulate in Hargeisa was closed and the USAID program , which had more staff than the rest of the embassy , ended . However , in the late 1970s , the Soviets became patrons of Ethiopia and in the wake of the Ogaden War between Somalia and Ethiopia , Somalia turned to the West for support . The US sought access to airports and ports in Somalia in exchange for military equipment and economic aid . 
 In July 1989 , the embassy moved to a new , 80 @-@ acre ( 32 ha ) compound on the outskirts of Mogadishu — the largest US embassy in Sub @-@ Saharan Africa . The site had been acquired by the US in the mid @-@ 1960s and later turned into a golf course that was frequented by embassy staff . 
 = = = Prelude to closure = = = 
 In the late 1980s , there was increasing rebellion against the rule of President Siad Barre and by 1990 , the country began to descend into civil war . Criminal violence was also increasing . 
 In 1990 , seasoned diplomat James K. Bishop was appointed US Ambassador to Somalia . In 1967 , Bishop was at the US Embassy in Beirut , Lebanon when the Six @-@ Day War erupted , which prompted the evacuation of about 3 @,@ 600 Americans in 33 hours ; Bishop was one of 26 diplomats and Marines that remained in the city during the conflict . Ambassador Bishop also gained valuable experience organizing evacuations of several embassies in the 1980s while serving as Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Africa . In his previous post , as US ambassador to Liberia , Bishop was overseeing the voluntary evacuation of embassy staff and civilians as a civil war in Liberia spread , when he left in March 1990 . Ambassador Bishop returned to Washington to prepare for his new appointment to Somalia , but he was soon appointed to a taskforce to deal with the crisis in Liberia , which included a gradual evacuation of American civilians and a rapid closure of the embassy in August . 
 Aware of the violence going on in the Somali countryside , Ambassador Bishop felt " the odds were better than even that we would have to leave Mogadishu under less than favorable circumstances . " On August 1 , Ambassador Bishop visited United States Central Command — the military command for the Middle East and Northeast Africa — where he worked with military experts to review the embassy 's Emergencies and Evacuation ( E & E ) plan until he was " satisfied ... that [ Central Command ] realized that it might have to conduct an evacuation from Mogadishu and was prepared to do that . " A few hours after his visit , Iraq invaded Kuwait . The US was mobilizing assets for a response when Ambassador Bishop arrived in Mogadishu on September 6 . The primary interest of the Ambassador was to maintain the US military 's permission and access to airfields and ports in Mogadishu and Berbera , which the US had negotiated in 1979 . This was especially important given the mobilization for intervention in Kuwait , Somalia 's strategic location near the Arabian Peninsula and the mouth of the Red Sea , and because Saudi Arabia would not allow US troops on their soil . The embassy was also home to a large number of USAID staff , although the spread of unrest into the countryside was making their work increasingly difficult . 
 The Somali Civil War spread through the country during 1990 and late in the year there was an increasing level of criminal violence in Mogadishu . By December , the security situation began to deteriorate significantly and on December 5 , Ambassador Bishop told an audience at a standing @-@ room only meeting that he was recommending the voluntary evacuation of all dependents ( i.e. children and spouses of diplomatic staff ) and non @-@ essential personnel . By December 19 , the number of official US personnel in the city was reduced from 147 to 37 and of the 90 private Americans in the city , half were estimated to have left . Small @-@ arms fire became a daily occurrence and stray bullets and shells were landing in the embassy complex . 
 On December 30 , violence escalated significantly as rebel groups entered the city , although the ambassador claimed the nature and extent of the violence was not immediately clear . On December 30 – 31 , diplomats , including many stationed in offices elsewhere in the city , were collected and housed in the ambassador 's residence , the marine house , and the K @-@ 7 compound located across Afgoy Road . On the morning of December 31 , the defense attaché was nearly killed when his vehicle was sprayed with bullets and that evening , a soldier at a roadblock shot the tires of a vehicle carrying another defense official . Attempts by the US and other nations ' diplomats , in particular the Italian embassy , to negotiate a ceasefire for foreigners to leave were unsuccessful . Afgoy Road became a " shooting gallery , " preventing those in safe @-@ havens outside the embassy to reach it . On New Year 's Day , the first American civilians began to seek refuge at the embassy . 
 = = = Closure and evacuation = = = 
 Ambassador Bishop requested an evacuation of the American community on January 1 , 1991 , indicating that the evacuation could be with the planned Italian , French , or German evacuation efforts , but that he preferred an evacuation by the US military . The State Department authorized the evacuation on 2 January and Ambassador Bishop specifically requested an evacuation by the US military , thereby initiating Operation Eastern Exit . Ambassador Bishop had spent a considerable amount of time discussing contingency plans for evacuation with other diplomatic posts . Ultimately , ten heads of missions — eight ambassadors and two <unk> d 'affaires — along with their staff sought refuge in the US embassy compound and were evacuated . 
 Initial plans called for the United States Air Force to dispatch two transport aircraft to Mogadishu International Airport , but diplomats were unable to contact anyone in the Somali government to obtain clearance for the aircraft to land at the airport and it also became clear that it was too dangerous to travel from the embassy to the airport . Meanwhile , the USS Guam and USS Trenton began transit from the coast of Oman towards Mogadishu with forces from the 4th Marine Expeditionary Brigade . 
 On January 4 , several incidents , including several exchanges of gunfire , suggested that the embassy 's security detail was insufficient to hold off armed Somalis until the USS Guam and USS Trenton arrived with their helicopters and soldiers , at that time scheduled to arrive on January 7 . The embassy had just six Marine guards , whose job was limited to protecting the chancery . Ambassador Bishop made an urgent request to Washington for two platoons of soldiers to parachute into the embassy to defend it until the ships arrived . The request was denied , but the Ambassador was told that an advance element of Marines from the vessels would reach the embassy the following morning . 
 Two helicopters carrying a 60 @-@ man security detail — 51 Marines and 9 US Navy SEALs — reached the embassy compound on the morning of January 5 and left with 61 evacuees . Throughout the day US and foreign nationals seeking evacuation arrived at the embassy compound , including the Soviet ambassador and 38 of his staff from the Soviet Union 's embassy . Meanwhile , the embassy compound was prepared for the main evacuation , which occurred in the early morning hours of January 6 . The first of four waves of helicopters — three for civilians and the fourth for the security detail and ambassador — left the ships at midnight ( UTC + 4 ) . The final wave reached the ships at 03 : 43 . A total of 281 evacuees were taken from the embassy , including eight ambassadors ( and two other heads of missions ) and 61 Americans . 
 Armed looters were observed entering the embassy compound as the final wave departed . The doors of the chancery — the main building of the embassy — were reportedly blown open by rocket @-@ propelled grenades within two hours of the embassy 's evacuation . Somali employees of the embassy — known as foreign service nationals ( FSNs ) — could not be evacuated . Local banks had been closed for some time and the embassy was unable to pay the FSNs . The Ambassador left the FSNs with keys to the commissary and warehouse on the embassy compound and they were permitted to take anything they needed . 
 = = Embassy compound = = 
 The first US consuls in Mogadishu set up their initial office in a small room in the city 's Public Works Department building . Shortly thereafter , an Italian contractor built the first US chancery in downtown Mogadishu . According to John Blane , the vice consul in Mogadishu from 1956 to 1957 , the first chancery was a " a rather miserable effort . " He " felt that if it stood up for five years , we would be extremely lucky , " but the building remained the US chancery for three decades . By the time it closed , the old chancery was one of the most dilapidated buildings the State Department had , according to Ambassador Bishop . 
 In July 1989 , the embassy was relocated to a new , 80 @-@ acre ( 32 ha ) compound along Afgoy Road in the local K @-@ 7 district . The grounds consisted of the Chancery , the Joint Administrative Office ( <unk> ) , Marine House ( for the Marine Security Guards ) , the ambassador 's residence , a building for the United States Information Service , an American school , a recreational complex for the local expatriate community , a 102 @-@ foot ( 31 m ) water tower , and various storage and maintenance buildings . The recreational complex , which comprised about half of the compound , included a pool , tennis courts , and a golf course . Outside the walled embassy , the US maintained the K @-@ 7 complex , an apartment complex for embassy staff located across Afgoy Road , as well as the Office for Military Cooperation . Both were situated one and a half blocks from the embassy proper . The ambassador 's residence was largely constructed in glass , had no protective barriers , and its top story overlooked the embassy 's walls . Ambassador Bishop therefore ordered that some bars be installed across the glass as an additional security protective measure . 
 = = = After closure = = = 
 After the failure of UNOSOM in 1991 @-@ 2 , the US led a multinational mission — UNITAF — which included military forces to ensure aid was distributed to Somalis . The US military entered Mogadishu on December 9 , 1992 and moved to quickly secure the abandoned embassy , along with the airport and port . The following day , key military staff moved into the embassy to establish headquarters for the UNITAF mission , with the main headquarters located within the chancery . The embassy complex itself was in disrepair ; buildings had been stripped bare , a foot ( 0 @.@ 3 m ) of debris and trash covered the floors of the chancery , and bodies were found in some areas on the premises . Personnel promptly set out cleaning the compound 's living spaces and work areas to make room for the arrival and assembly area . Old warehouses were razed , and new barracks , heads and galleys were erected in their place . US Navy support elements that arrived later also imported extra materials . 
 US President George H. W. Bush visited the headquarters at the former embassy during his three @-@ day visit to Somalia from December 31 to January 2 . A Somali @-@ language radio station — Radio Rajo — broadcast from the former embassy compound . On May 4 , 1993 , the mission transitioned from US to UN control and the name changed from UNITAF ( Operation Restore Hope ) to UNOSOM II ( Operation Provide Comfort ) . Accordingly , the embassy premises were occupied by UN personnel to serve as headquarters for UNOSOM II . The US military withdrew from the mission in March 1994 and all UN and US personnel were withdrawn in March 1995 . 
 = = United States ' diplomatic mission to Somalia = = 
 The US has not had a diplomatic mission in Somalia since the closure of the embassy in 1991 . Nonetheless , the US never officially severed diplomatic relations with Somalia . The US embassy in Nairobi , Kenya serves as a base for the US diplomatic mission to Somalia , which is currently led by the US Special Representative on Somalia James <unk> . 
 The US worked with various parties throughout Somalia to establish peace and a centralized government . On 17 January 2013 , the US formally recognized the Federal Government of Somalia , which was established in August 2012 . In June 2014 , the State Department announced that the United States would reopen its diplomatic mission , without specifying a timeline but only that it would be " soon " . In February 2015 , U.S. President Barack Obama nominated Foreign Service veteran Katherine <unk> to become the new Ambassador of the United States to Somalia , but her nomination was withdrawn the following May . 
 US Secretary of State John Kerry visited Mogadishu in May 2015 and announced that the US planned to reopen an embassy in Mogadishu . He indicated that , although there was no set timetable for the premises ' relaunch , the US government has begun upgrading its diplomatic representation in the country . President of Somalia Hassan Sheikh Mohamud and Prime Minister Omar Abdirashid Ali Sharmarke presented to Kerry the real estate deed for land reserved for the new US embassy compound . 
 = 1994 Black Hawk shootdown incident = 
 The 1994 Black Hawk shootdown incident , sometimes referred to as the Black Hawk Incident , was a friendly fire incident over northern Iraq that occurred on 14 April 1994 during Operation Provide Comfort ( OPC ) . The pilots of two United States Air Force ( USAF ) F @-@ 15 fighter aircraft , operating under the control of a USAF airborne warning and control system ( AWACS ) aircraft , misidentified two United States Army UH @-@ 60 Black Hawk helicopters as Iraqi Mil Mi @-@ 24 " Hind " helicopters . The F @-@ 15 pilots fired on and destroyed both helicopters , killing all 26 military and civilians aboard , including personnel from the United States , United Kingdom , France , Turkey , and the Kurdish community . 
 A subsequent USAF investigation blamed the accident on several factors . The F @-@ 15 pilots were faulted for <unk> the helicopters as hostile . Also , the crew members of the AWACS aircraft were blamed for their inaction in failing to exercise appropriate control and for not intervening in the situation . In addition , the identification friend or foe ( IFF ) systems had not functioned to identify the helicopters to the F @-@ 15 pilots . Furthermore , USAF leaders had failed to adequately integrate U.S. Army helicopter operations into overall OPC air operations . As a result of the investigation several USAF officers received administrative discipline but only one , Jim Wang , an AWACS crew member , was tried by military court @-@ martial , in which he was acquitted . 
 As a result of complaints by family members of the victims and others that the military was failing to hold its personnel accountable , the U.S. Senate and U.S. House conducted their own investigations into the shootdown and the U.S. military 's response to it . Also , Ronald R. Fogleman , the USAF 's new Chief of Staff , conducted his own review of the actions taken by the USAF against the officers involved in the incident . 
 Fogleman 's investigation led to several of the officers involved in the incident receiving further administrative discipline . The U.S. Department of Defense ( DoD ) subsequently refused U.S. Senate subpoenas for four USAF officers to be interviewed for the Senate investigation , which was never publicly released . The U.S. House investigation , conducted in part by the Government Accountability Office ( GAO ) , found that the military investigative and judicial systems had operated mostly as designed , but also noted that the DoD had refused access to key witnesses . 
 = = Background = = 
 On 7 April 1991 , Iraq accepted United Nations ( UN ) cease @-@ fire conditions and resolutions , thereby officially ending the Gulf War . This same day , a large multinational , multiple @-@ agency humanitarian effort under the authority of UN Security Council Resolution No. 688 began to aid the approximately 500 @,@ 000 Kurdish refugees who had fled from Iraqi military forces into the hills of northern Iraq . On 18 April 1991 , John Shalikashvili took command of the U.S.-led operation to ensure security for UN relief operations and the Kurdish refugees , called Operation Provide Comfort ( OPC ) . 
 OPC took place in an area of northern Iraq above the 36th parallel . This area , approximately 160 by 70 kilometres ( 99 by 43 mi ) in size , was designated a " no @-@ fly " security zone by UN coalition forces , enforced by a combined task force ( CTF ) of daily armed aircraft patrols from participating nations , including the United Kingdom , France , Turkey , and the United States . The United States Army was tasked with assisting civilian relief agencies to build communities and facilities for the Kurds in Northern Iraq . Over the next three years , 27 @,@ 000 fixed @-@ wing and 1 @,@ 400 helicopter coalition flights took place in the zone to support humanitarian operations without interference from Iraqi aircraft or other military units . 
 In April 1994 OPC was co @-@ commanded by USAF Brigadier General Jeffrey Pilkington . The OPC combined air forces were commanded by Colonel Curtis H. Emery , USAF . Colonel Douglas J. Richardson , USAF , was the director of operations for the combined air forces . 
 = = Incident = = 
 On 14 April 1994 , at 07 : 36 local time , a USAF E @-@ 3 AWACS aircraft from the <unk> Airborne Air Control Squadron ( based at Tinker Air Force Base , Oklahoma ) departed Incirlik Air Base ( AB ) , Turkey in support of OPC . The AWACS , with its 19 @-@ member crew under the mission crew command of Major Lawrence Tracy , was to provide airborne threat warning and air control for all OPC aircraft during its time aloft . The AWACS crew reported on station at its assigned surveillance orbit altitude of 32 @,@ 000 feet ( 9 @,@ 750 m ) located inside Turkey just north of the northern border of Iraq at 08 : 45 . The weather that day was fair and clear over northern Iraq . 
 At 08 : 22 , two U.S. Army UH @-@ 60 Black Hawk helicopters from the 6th Battalion , 159th Aviation Regiment ( based in Giebelstadt , Germany ) , called Eagle Flight , departed Diyarbakır , near <unk> Air Base , Turkey headed for the OPC military coordination center ( MCC ) located 150 miles ( 240 km ) away in <unk> , Iraq . Both helicopters were fitted with external , 230 @-@ US @-@ gallon ( 870 L ) fuel tanks on sponsons mounted beside each side door with each tank emblazoned with large American flags . In addition to the flags on the fuel tanks , each helicopter was marked with American flags on each side door , on the nose , and on the belly . The lead Black Hawk was piloted by U.S. Army Captain Patrick McKenna , commander of the Eagle Flight detachment of six helicopters . 
 At 09 : 21 , the Black Hawks reported their entry into the no @-@ fly zone by radio on the en route frequency to the AWACS en route controller , Lieutenant Joseph Halcli , and then landed six minutes later at the MCC . Halcli and his superior officer , Captain Jim Wang , the AWACS 's senior director , added " friendly helicopter " tags to their radar scopes , noted that both helicopters were displaying identification friend or foe ( IFF ) Mode I and Mode II signals , and then suspended the radar symbols after the Black Hawks disappeared from their scopes upon landing at the MCC at 09 : 24 . Although the helicopters were squawking ( signalling ) the wrong IFF Mode I code for the no @-@ fly zone ( called the Tactical Area of Responsibility or TAOR ) , neither Wang nor Halcli informed the Black Hawk pilots of that ( both helicopters , however , were squawking the correct Mode II codes ) . Wang and Halcli also neglected to direct the Black Hawks to begin using the TAOR radio frequency instead of the en route frequency . 
 At the MCC , the Black Hawks picked up 16 members of the UN Provide Comfort coalition leadership team including four Kurdish civilians , one Chaldean @-@ Catholic civilian , three Turkish , two British , and one French military officers , plus five U.S. civilian and military officials . At 09 : 54 , the helicopters departed the MCC for Erbil , Iraq , a distance of 120 miles ( 190 km ) . The Black Hawks reported their departure , flight route , and destinations by radio which was acknowledged by Halcli . Halcli then re @-@ initiated the friendly helicopter track on his scope . Two of the Black Hawk passengers were Colonel Jerry Thompson , U.S. Army , commander of the MCC , and his replacement , Colonel Richard Mulhern , U.S. Army . At Arbil and later at Salah ad Din , Iraq , Thompson planned to introduce Mulhern to two prominent Kurdish leaders , Masoud <unk> and Jalal Talabani , as well as to UN representatives . Halcli placed tags on his radar screen to show the two Black Hawks ' track and notified Wang of the helicopters ' movement . In addition to Halcli 's screen , the friendly helicopter symbols were visible on the radar screens of Wang , Tracy , and USAF Major Doug Martin . Martin was the " Duke " or " ACE " airborne command element on the AWACS , meaning that he was a rated aircrew member assigned to the crew to ensure that all engagement ( combat ) mandates were adhered to and executed as written in OPC policies . 
 En route to Arbil , at 10 : 12 , the Black Hawks entered mountainous terrain and their radar returns disappeared from the AWACS 's scopes . Captain Dierdre Bell , an air surveillance officer on the AWACS , noticed that the Black Hawks ' radar and IFF returns had disappeared and sent an electronic " attention arrow " to Wang 's scope . Wang took no action and the large blinking green arrow automatically disappeared from his screen after one minute . 
 Meanwhile , at 09 : 35 , two USAF F @-@ 15C fighter aircraft from the 53d Fighter Squadron , piloted by Captain Eric Wickson and Lieutenant Colonel Randy W. May , departed Incirlik AB . Their mission was to perform an initial fighter sweep of the TAOR to clear the area of any hostile aircraft prior to the entry of coalition forces . The air tasking order ( ATO ) that was supposed to list all scheduled coalition aircraft missions for that day and which the two pilots reviewed before takeoff , mentioned that U.S. Army Black Hawk helicopters would be operating in the TAOR that day but did not list takeoff times , routes , or flight durations for them . At 10 : 15 , Wickson radioed Martin on the AWACS and asked if he had any information to pass to them to which Martin replied in the negative . 
 At 10 : 20 , Wickson , the F @-@ 15C flight lead , reported entering northern Iraq to the AWACS controller responsible for air traffic inside the TAOR , USAF Lieutenant Ricky Wilson . The TAOR frequency that the F @-@ 15s were using was different from the en @-@ route frequency being used by the two Black Hawks . Wilson , however , was monitoring both frequencies and being able to see both Black Hawks on his radar scope before they disappeared at 10 : 12 . Wilson and the other AWACS crew members , many of whom were monitoring the F @-@ 15s ' radio frequency , did not inform the F @-@ 15s that Black Hawks were currently operating in the TAOR . At 10 : 21 , Wilson , believing that the Black Hawks had landed again , asked Wang if he could drop the friendly helicopter symbols from the AWACS 's scopes and Wang approved the request . An AWACS crew instructor , Captain Mark Cathy , who was on the mission to assist the AWACS crew and supervise Wilson on this , his first mission into the TAOR , had retired to the back of the airplane at 10 : 00 to take a nap . 
 At 10 : 22 , Wickson , flying at 27 @,@ 000 feet ( 8 @,@ 230 m ) , reported a radar contact on a low @-@ flying , slow @-@ moving aircraft 40 miles ( 64 km ) southeast of his current position . Wilson acknowledged Wickson 's report with a " clear there " response , meaning that he had no radar contacts in that area . Unknown to the two F @-@ 15 pilots , the unidentified aircraft were the two U.S. Army Black Hawks . Contrary to standard procedure , neither Tracy nor Wang spoke up at this point to request that the AWACS crew members attempt to identify the F @-@ 15s ' radar contacts . 
 Both F @-@ 15 pilots then electronically interrogated the radar target with their on @-@ board IFF systems across two different modes ( Mode I and Mode IV ) . Their IFF systems responded negatively to the attempt to identify the contact on Mode I. The Mode IV momentarily gave a positive response , but thereafter responded negatively and the F @-@ 15s moved to intercept the unidentified aircraft . Intermittent IFF Mode I and Mode II returns from the Black Hawks now began to show on Wilson 's and other AWACS crew members ' scopes and friendly helicopter symbols reappeared on Wang 's scope . After closing to 20 miles ( 32 km ) of the radar contacts , at 10 : 25 the F @-@ 15s again reported the contact to the AWACS and Wilson this time responded that he now had a radar contact at that reported location . Although the Black Hawk intermittent radar and now steady IFF returns on the AWACS scopes were in the same location as the unidentified contacts being tracked by the F @-@ 15s , none of the AWACS controllers advised Wickson or May that the contacts they were tracking might be friendly helicopters . 
 The two F @-@ 15s now initiated a visual identification ( VID ) pass of the contact . The VID pass entailed violating one of OPC 's rules of engagement , which prohibited fighter aircraft from operating below 10 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 050 m ) above the ground . At this time the two Black Hawks had entered a deep valley and were cruising at a speed of 130 knots ( 150 mph ; 240 km / h ) about 200 feet ( 60 m ) above the ground . Wickson 's VID pass was conducted at a speed of about 450 knots ( 520 mph ; 830 km / h ) , 500 feet ( 150 m ) above and 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) to the left of the helicopters . At 10 : 28 Wickson reported " Tally 2 Hinds " and then passed the two Black Hawks . " Hind " is the NATO designation for the Mil Mi @-@ 24 helicopter , a helicopter that the Iraqi and Syrian militaries operated and was usually configured with armament on small , side @-@ mounted wings . Wilson responded with " Copy , Hinds " and asked Wang , " Sir , are you listening to this ? " Wang responded , " Affirmative " but offered no further guidance or comments . 
 May then conducted his own VID pass about 1 @,@ 500 feet ( 500 m ) above the helicopters and reported , " Tally 2 . " May later stated to a USAF accident investigation board that his " Tally 2 " call meant that he saw two helicopters but did not mean that he was confirming Wickson 's identification of them as Hinds . Neither F @-@ 15 pilot had been informed that U.S. Army Black Hawks participating in OPC often carried auxiliary fuel tanks mounted on wings nor had either been instructed in the paint scheme that Iraqi Hind helicopters used , light brown and desert tan , which was different from the dark green color used by the Black Hawks . Wickson later stated that , " I had no doubt when I looked at him that he was a Hind . . . . The Black Hawk did not even cross my mind . " 
 Following their VID passes , Wickson and May circled back behind the helicopters approximately 10 miles ( 16 km ) . Because aircraft from various nations sometimes operated unannounced in the northern Iraq area , the OPC rules of engagement required the F @-@ 15 pilots to attempt to verify the nationality of the helicopters . Instead , at 10 : 28 , Wickson notified the AWACS that he and May were " engaged " and instructed May to " arm hot . " At 10 : 30 , Wickson fired an AIM @-@ 120 AMRAAM missile at the trail helicopter from a range of about 4 nautical miles ( 10 km ) . The missile hit and destroyed the trailing helicopter seven seconds later ( 36 ° 46 ′ N 44 ° 05 ′ E ) . In response , the lead Black Hawk , piloted by McKenna , immediately turned left and dived for lower altitude in an apparent attempt to evade the unexpected attack . About 20 seconds later , May fired an AIM @-@ 9 Sidewinder missile at the lead helicopter from a range of about 1 @.@ 5 nautical miles ( 2 @.@ 8 km ) , hitting and shooting it down also about 1 @.@ 2 miles ( 2 km ) northeast of the trail helicopter ( 36 ° 55 ′ N 43 ° 30 ′ E ) . All 26 people on board the two Black Hawks were killed . After flying over the wreckage of the two helicopters lying burning on the ground , May radioed Wickson , " Stick a fork in them , they 're done . " 
 = = Air Force accident investigation = = 
 By 13 : 15 local time , Kurdish civilians notified the MCC that they had witnessed the two Black Hawks being shot down 40 miles ( 64 km ) north of Arbil and that there were no survivors . The news was quickly picked up by the media and broadcast by CNN . 
 Within hours , U.S. President Bill Clinton was briefed on the shootdown and called the heads of government of the United Kingdom and France , John Major and François Mitterrand , to express regret and sympathy for the deaths of their citizens in the incident . Clinton then appeared a few hours later in a televised news conference in which he stated that he had directed the U.S. Department of Defense ( DoD ) to lead an inquiry into the accident . Clinton further stated , " We will get the facts , and we will make them available to the American people and to the people of Britain , France , and Turkey , our partners in Operation Provide Comfort . " 
 General Robert C. Oaks , USAF , Commander of United States Air Forces in Europe , immediately appointed an Air Force Regulation ( AFR ) 110 @-@ 14 accident investigation board composed of a board president , 11 board members from the USAF and U.S. Army , three associate members from France , Turkey , and the United Kingdom , four legal advisers , and 13 technical advisers . The board president was Major General James G. Andrus , USAF . An AFR 110 @-@ 14 investigation 's findings are publicly released and the testimony of witnesses in the investigation can be used against them in military disciplinary proceedings . For this reason , after serious mishaps the USAF usually also conducts a separate safety investigation , in which the results are not publicly released and witness testimony is immune from prosecution . In this case , however , for unknown reasons the USAF decided not to conduct a safety investigation . 
 After interviewing 137 witnesses and conducting numerous tests , the 27 @-@ volume , 3 @,@ 630 @-@ page AFR 110 @-@ 14 investigation report was publicly released on 13 July 1994 , although some report 's details had been leaked to the media by unknown defense officials two weeks earlier . The board made seven general findings about what they believed caused the shootdown to occur : 
 1 . Wickson misidentified the Black Hawk helicopters and May failed to notify Wickson that he had been unable to confirm the identity of the helicopters . 
 2 . The IFF transponders on the F @-@ 15s and / or the Black Hawks did not operate correctly for unknown reasons . 
 3 . Misunderstandings existed throughout the OPC forces as to how coalition air operations procedures and responsibilities applied to MCC helicopter operations . 
 4 . The AWACS crew commander , Lawrence Tracy , was not currently qualified in accordance with USAF regulations and he and the other AWACS crewmembers committed mistakes . 
 5 . OPC personnel in general were not properly trained in the rules of engagement for the northern Iraq no fly zone . 
 6 . The Black Hawks were not equipped with more modern radios which would have allowed them to communicate with the F @-@ 15s . 
 7 . The shootdown " was caused by a chain of events which began with the breakdown of clear guidance from the Provide Comfort Combined Task Force to its component organizations . " 
 The board report stated that , " There is no indication that the AWACS Senior Director ( Wang ) , the Mission Crew Commander ( Tracy ) and / or the <unk> ( Martin ) made any radio calls throughout the intercept , or that they issued any guidance to either the AWACS crew or the F @-@ 15 pilots . " Although the OPC ROE did task the AWACS with controlling and monitoring helicopter operations in the TAOR , the board found that the AWACS crew believed that they had no responsibility for controlling U.S. Army Black Hawks or ensuring that other coalition aircraft were aware of Black Hawks operating in the TAOR . When questioned by board investigators as to who was responsible for tracking the helicopters , Tracy said , " I cannot tell you that . I honestly don 't know . " When Wang was asked the same question by the investigators , he replied , " No one is responsible . " When the investigators asked Martin what action he took when the F @-@ 15s called a visual identification on two Hind helicopters , Martin stated , " I did nothing . " 
 The board found that combined OPC forces , led by Pilkington , Emery , Richardson , and other USAF officers , had failed to integrate helicopters into aircraft operations in the TAOR . An Eagle Flight officer later testified that he had been told by the CTF 's chief of staff , a USAF officer , that the army Black Hawk unit was not considered to be part of OPC . Thus , the CTF staff , under the direction of Colonel James Rusty O 'Brien , USAF , had not tried to coordinate the U.S. Army Black Hawk missions into the daily <unk> . In fact , neither O 'Brien nor his predecessors had established any type of procedure for communicating information on Black Hawk missions to the Combined Forces Air Component ( <unk> ) . The MCC commander , Colonel Thompson , had personally called O 'Brien on the night of 13 April to tell him about the next day 's Black Hawk mission into northern Iraq , a mission that had been specifically and personally approved by Pilkington earlier that day . O 'Brien or his staff apparently did not attempt to communicate specific information on this mission to the AWACS or F @-@ 15 fighter units at Incirlik , the <unk> , the ground @-@ based mission director , or to the " Duke " on board the AWACS . 
 For reasons that USAF officers were unable to explain , two versions of each day 's ATO were published , one for the USAF units at Incirlik , and another for the Eagle Flight unit at <unk> . The ATO version sent to Eagle Flight , for unknown reasons , gave a wrong IFF Mode I code for the TAOR . Although army Black Hawks had been operating for almost two years in the TAOR while squawking a wrong code and observed doing so by numerous AWACS crews , no one ever told them that they were using a wrong code . On the day of the shootdown , the F @-@ 15s had interrogated the Black Hawks on two different IFF Modes ( Mode I and Mode IV ) . The first responded negatively because the Black Hawks were squawking the wrong code . The second mode responded negatively for technical reasons that the investigation was unable to conclusively determine . 
 The board did not investigate whether any USAF institutional factors , such as a lack of crew resource management training for the involved aircrews , might have been a factor . Also , the board did not attempt to determine if Wickson and May had violated any of the existing OPC rules of engagement as defined by the ATO or other written instructions . 
 The United States Secretary of Defense , William Perry , later summarized the " errors , omissions , and failures " contributing to the accident as , " The F @-@ 15 pilots misidentified the Black Hawks , the AWACS crew failed to intervene , Eagle Flight and their operations were not integrated into the Task Force , and the IFF systems failed . " General Shalikashvili , now serving as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff , added that , " There were a shocking number of instances where people failed to do their job properly . " 
 = = = Actions taken = = = 
 On 8 September 1994 the DoD announced the actions it would take in response to the investigation 's findings . May was charged with 26 counts of negligent homicide by military legal authorities . Martin , Tracy , Wang , Halcli , and Wilson were charged with dereliction of duty . All of those charged faced an Article 32 hearing in which it would be decided if they should be tried by court @-@ martial or the matter disposed of otherwise . Martin , Tracy , Wang , Halcli , and Wilson faced a joint Article 32 hearing while May 's hearing was separate . Wickson was not charged . Although not explicitly stated by USAF leaders , it appears that Wickson was not charged but May was because Wickson had testified that he was sure of his identification of the two Black Hawks as hostile Hinds , while May had stated that he was not sure of Wickson 's identification but had allowed the engagement to proceed anyway . 
 Martin and Halcli waived their rights to the Article 32 hearing , meaning that their cases could move immediately to court @-@ martial or administrative action . Wickson was given immunity by USAF Lieutenant General Eugene Santarelli , commander of the 17th Air Force , to testify at the hearings . The AWACS crew members ' hearing , which began on 19 October 1994 at Tinker Air Force Base , Oklahoma was an open hearing and presided over by Colonel William Colwell , USAF , under the legal jurisdiction of Lieutenant General Stephen Croker , USAF , commander of the 8th Air Force . May 's hearing , beginning on 7 November 1994 at Sembach Air Base , Germany was a closed hearing and presided over by Colonel Edward M. Starr , USAF , under the legal jurisdiction of Santarelli . Pilkington , Emery , Richardson , and O 'Brien declined requests to testify at either hearing . 
 On 17 November 1994 the USAF announced that Colwell had recommended to Croker that Wang face court @-@ martial and that Halcli receive nonjudicial administrative action on the dereliction of duty charges . Colwell recommended that the formal dereliction of duty charges be dropped against the other AWACS crew members , but that they could still face nonjudicial action . Croker accepted Colwell 's recommendation and ordered Wang to face court @-@ martial and dismissed the criminal charges against the other AWACS crew members except Halcli , who was offered Article 15 action . 
 At his hearing , May changed his testimony from what he gave to the accident investigation board , stating that he had positively identified the two helicopters as Iraqi Hinds . Brigadier General John R. Dallager , an F @-@ 15 pilot and Wickson 's and May 's wing commander ( 52nd Fighter Wing ) and regimental court @-@ martial 303 inquiry officer , stated that he found May 's errors in the shootdown " reasonable . " Starr recommended that the charges against May be dropped , stating that he found May 's testimony to be believable . On 27 December 1994 the USAF announced that Santarelli , an F @-@ 15 pilot , had dismissed the charges against May and had decided not to pursue criminal disciplinary actions against any other OPC personnel under his legal jurisdiction , including Wickson , Pilkington , Emery , Richardson , and O 'Brien . In January 1995 a USAF flying board returned Wickson and May , who had been grounded since the incident , to flying status . Subsequently , Wickson was transferred to Randolph Air Force Base , Texas , to undergo instructor pilot training with a follow @-@ on assignment to Columbus Air Force Base , Mississippi . 
 The USAF later announced the administrative actions taken against the other personnel involved in the shootdown . Pilkington , Emery , and Richardson received letters of admonishment . Martin , May , O 'Brien , Tracy , Wickson , and Wilson received letters of reprimand . Halcli accepted an Article 15 action which resulted in his receiving a letter of reprimand . The personnel involved were allowed to petition for the removal of the letters from their records at a future time . The reprimands were placed in " unfavorable information files " for each individual and were normally removed after two years . General George <unk> , U.S. Army , Supreme Allied Commander , Europe , removed Pilkington as commander of OPC but the USAF retained him as commander of the 86th Airlift Wing at Ramstein Air Base , Germany . O 'Brien and Emery were transferred to staff positions at the Pentagon . Richardson was transferred to a staff position at Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe . Emery had been promoted to brigadier general on 15 July 1994 and his promotion was allowed to stand . 
 = = = Wang 's court @-@ martial = = = 
 Wang 's court @-@ martial took place , beginning on 2 June 1995 , at Tinker Air Force Base . Wang was tried on three counts of dereliction of duty . Most of the personnel involved in the incident , except May , were called to testify , including the AWACS crew members , Wickson , and Pilkington . Most of the 40 witnesses testified with a grant of immunity . 
 During the trial , evidence was presented that Wang often had trouble staying awake during AWACS missions . In fact , the problem was considered serious enough that the military had referred Wang to medical authorities to be checked for narcolepsy . Wang had also previously failed two check rides . 
 Pilkington , an F @-@ 16 pilot , testified that as commander of OPC he had sent numerous aircrew members , the majority of them F @-@ 15 pilots , back to their home bases for violating OPC rules or procedures or for displaying a lack of good judgment . In response to questions on the F @-@ 15 pilot 's actions resulting in the shootdown , Pilkington stated , " I don 't understand and I will probably never understand Wickson 's mindset . " When asked if Wickson and May violated OPC rules of engagement in the incident , Pilkington responded , " Yes . " AWACS crew members added in their testimonies that once Wickson and May visually identified the helicopters as hostile , all responsibility for the shootdown passed to the F @-@ 15 pilots . 
 Frank Spinner , Wang 's civilian attorney , argued that USAF Chief of Staff General Merrill McPeak , a career fighter pilot , had made clear that he did not want Wickson and May punished for their actions in the shootdown . Cited as evidence for this was a Los Angeles Times report , published also in the European Stars and Stripes newspaper on 18 June 1994 that stated that McPeak " strongly opposed " court @-@ martial action for Wickson or May . Pilkington stated that he had heard rumors that McPeak had said something to that effect , but could not confirm if they were true or not . 
 On 20 June 1995 the USAF announced a " nullification " verdict by Wang 's 10 @-@ member court @-@ martial jury , effectively acquitting Wang of the charges . Nullification is not a finding of innocence , but instead it is a refusal to convict on the stated charges . After the verdict , Wang stated , " I want to say the fight is nowhere near over for me . I want a congressional hearing or investigation into why I was the only person charged . " Major General Nolan Sklute , the USAF 's top legal officer , stated , " An incident like this does not necessarily mean that the conduct of all those involved rises to the level of criminal culpability . I 'm satisfied with the handling of the case . " Secretary of the Air Force Sheila Widnall added , " The Black Hawk helicopters were downed as a result of a tragic series of errors and unfortunate events involving numerous people . The mishap was not the result of any one individual 's actions ; the conduct of numerous officers and the system itself contributed . " 
 = = Additional investigations and actions = = 
 On 17 July 1995 , U.S. Senator William Roth , chairman of the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations , authorized a Senate investigation into the incident , primarily in response to complaints from family members of the shootdown victims that it appeared that the U.S. military was not holding anyone seriously accountable for the shootdown . Also in response to complaints about the DoD 's response to the incident , the U.S. House of Representatives ' Armed Services Subcommittee on Military Personnel scheduled a hearing on the incident for 3 August 1995 to examine the accident investigation and the judicial actions that followed . In addition , on 24 July the DoD ordered the USAF to reexamine the disciplinary and administrative actions for the personnel involved in the shootdown and for the Joint Chiefs of Staff to review the corrective actions taken against those involved and determine whether further action was necessary . Widnall requested that the new USAF chief of staff , Ronald R. Fogleman begin his own review of accountability for the incident . 
 The House Committee on National Security hearing on 3 August was presided over by Congressman Bob Dornan and lasted one day . At the hearing , Pilkington and Andrus explained how the USAF accident investigation was conducted and emphasized that Wickson and May violated the OPC rules of engagement by conducting a VID pass of the Black Hawks that was inadequate to determine the helicopter 's national origin . Andrus stated , " Sir , as a pilot , I would have made another pass . You would never fire until you know what you are shooting at . " Retired USAF colonel and pilot Jerry Cox expressed concern to the Committee with the F @-@ 15 pilots for not taking responsibility for their actions . 
 On 10 August 1995 Fogleman spoke at a press conference at the Pentagon in which he announced the conclusions reached by his review into the accountability of USAF personnel involved in the shootdown incident . He stated that his investigation found that not all the performance evaluations for the individuals involved in the shootdown reflected the fact that they had received administrative action related to the incident . Fogleman stated , 
 " The fact that the conduct of some individuals did not give rise to criminal prosecution or conviction should not end the inquiry into the appropriateness of their actions . Air Force standards require that people display the extraordinary discipline , judgment , and training that their duties require and that the American people expect . " 
 Fogleman then announced that he had directed that Wickson , May , Wang , Halcli , and Wilson be disqualified from aviation service duties for at least three years . Also , Fogleman wrote and placed " letters of evaluation " in the permanent personnel files of Wickson , May , Wang , Halcli , Wilson , Pilkington , and Emery that stated that each had failed " to meet Air Force standards in job knowledge , judgment and leadership " . In addition , a military decoration awarded to O 'Brien for his service during OPC was rescinded . A videotape in which Fogleman described his actions related to the incident and his views on standards and accountability was distributed throughout the USAF and all USAF officers , senior non @-@ commissioned officers , and Senior Executive Service civilians were ordered to view it . Fogleman further stated that he had found that the military justice system had " worked as it was designed to work " . 
 = = = Senate investigation = = = 
 Beginning in September 1995 and continuing for more than one year , Roth 's Senate inquiry into the shootdown , led by Eric Thorson , investigated the incident . Thorson later stated his belief that the USAF accident investigation report and subsequent proceedings had been manipulated in order to avoid holding Wickson and May accountable for their actions . Thorson also stated that he believed that Starr had submitted an inaccurate and misleading report on May 's Article 32 hearing to the USAF commanding officers , including Dallager and Santarelli . With regard to the AWACS personnel , Thorson added that , " We know some of the AWACS crew were incompetent beyond belief , and there is more than adequate evidence to conclude that several crewmembers were grossly negligent . " 
 In August 1996 , Roth 's investigation board asked the DoD to produce the last four witnesses it wished to interview : Santarelli , Starr , Dallager , and Colonel C. G. Mangin . Mangin was Santarelli 's legal adviser during the Wickson and May inquiry . The DoD refused the request to provide access to the four officers . A short time later , John White , U.S. Deputy Secretary of Defense , wrote a letter to Roth in which he asked that those four officers not be deposed . 
 After further refusals from the USAF and DoD to provide the four officers for interview , Roth 's committee gave the DoD and USAF until 14 : 30 on 31 October 1996 to provide the officers . The deadline passed without the officers appearing before the board . The next day the board sent senate subpoenas directly to the USAF headquarters office at the Pentagon , which refused to accept them . After learning that the senate was now planning to individually serve the four subpoenas directly to the four officers , the associate chief of the Air Force litigation division accepted the subpoenas . 
 On 13 November 1996 the day the first subpoenaed USAF officer was scheduled to appear , the DoD delivered a letter to Roth , signed by its general counsel , Judith Miller , stating that the DoD believed the subpoenas were invalid because they were issued " after the adjournment of sine die of the 104th Congress " and was therefore not going to honor the subpoenas by providing the four officers for interview . Roth replied to the DoD that only the Senate 's legal counsel could determine the validity of congressional subpoenas because of the " separation of powers " principle in the U.S. Constitution and thus , the subpoenas were valid . The DoD , on 20 November in another letter signed by Miller again refused to produce the witnesses . Roth , whose committee chairmanship was scheduled to end the next month , was told by the U.S. Department of Justice that the U.S. Attorney General , Janet Reno , would not support him if he chose to take the dispute with the DoD to court . Also , many of Roth 's senate colleagues , including John McCain , were asking him to " back off " . Thus , Roth decided to drop the matter and continue preparing the report without the testimony of Santarelli , Dallager , Starr , and Mangin . For the first time in U.S. history , the DoD had refused to comply with a U.S. Senate subpoena . 
 In January 1997 U.S. Senator Fred Thompson became chairman of the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations and terminated the Black Hawk investigation . The senate investigation report was never publicly released . Asked in 2001 about the DoD 's refusal to honor the Senate subpoenas , Thorson responded , " Basically they told the United States Senate to go to hell . " 
 = = = GAO investigation = = = 
 In September 1995 the House National Security Subcommittee on Military Personnel , chaired by Bob Dornan , requested that the Government Accountability Office ( GAO ) conduct its own investigation into the shootdown incident . Specifically , the GAO was asked to determine if the USAF accident investigation board had met its objectives , if the subsequent military justice investigations had followed established guidelines , and if the DoD and / or USAF had improperly or unlawfully influenced these investigations . 
 The GAO released its investigation report on 12 November 1997 . The investigation determined that the USAF accident investigation was properly convened and met its assigned objectives . The GAO report , however , found that the USAF investigation had failed to note that Wickson and May neglected to report their contact with unidentified aircraft to the Duke ( Martin ) aboard the AWACS as required by the ROE . Furthermore , the USAF investigation report incorrectly stated that Martin had no authority to terminate the engagement when , in fact , he did . The GAO report added that the failure of Wickson and May to report their contact to Martin was indicative of a well @-@ known , general lack of discipline among F @-@ 15 aircrews involved in OPC and this was not discussed in the USAF report . 
 The GAO investigation also uncovered evidence that a rivalry between F @-@ 15 and F @-@ 16 pilots may have contributed to Wickson 's and May 's " urgency to engage hostile aircraft " but was not discussed in the USAF investigation . During the GAO 's investigation , USAF OPC officers confirmed that the rivalry between the F @-@ 15 and F @-@ 16 communities was particularly pronounced and intense partly due to the fact that F @-@ 16 aircraft had scored all the air @-@ to @-@ air combat kills in Iraq and Bosnia since the end of the Gulf War . Pilkington stated to the GAO that , " the shootdown pilots ' haste was due in part to the planned entry of two F @-@ 16s into the TAOR 10 to 15 minutes after the F @-@ 15s and that if the F @-@ 15 pilots had involved the chain of command , the pace would have slowed down , ruining the pilots ' chances for a shootdown . " The GAO concluded that if the evidence of a lack of mission discipline by Wickson and May had been included in the USAF report , such information " could have been useful in subsequent administrative and disciplinary actions . " 
 Another aspect that the GAO investigation revealed was that the training F @-@ 15 pilots received for identifying helicopters was not adequate . Visual ID training was accomplished by reviewing slides on a 35mm projector . Helicopters only made up about 5 % of the training slides and nearly all the pictures depicted helicopters from the ground looking up because the pictures were provided by the U.S. Army . Investigators also learned from interviewing other F @-@ 15 pilots that helicopter recognition was not regarded as an important skill within the F @-@ 15 pilot community because helicopters are not considered a threat to F @-@ 15s in air @-@ to @-@ air combat . 
 The GAO found no evidence of improper or unlawful command influence by USAF leaders on the investigation or subsequent administrative and military justice actions . The GAO noted , however , that it was unable to obtain complete confirmation of this finding because the DoD denied the GAO request to interview key USAF officials including Santarelli , Dallager , Starr , and Mangin . 
 = = Compensation = = 
 On 26 August 1994 , the U.S. Department of Defense announced that it would pay US $ 100 @,@ 000 ( ex gratia ) in compensation to the families of each of the non @-@ U.S. personnel killed in the incident . At this time , the U.S. government , citing the Feres precedent , did not offer compensation to the families of the U.S. victims . This was the first time that the U.S. had offered compensation to the victims of a friendly fire incident . 
 In 1998 Congressman Lamar S. Smith , chairman of the Subcommittee on Immigration and Claims , held hearings on the compensation issue . He questioned the DoD representatives as to why compensation had not also been offered to the U.S. family members . In November 1999 the U.S. Congress passed legislation authorizing payment of compensation to the families of the American Black Hawk victims . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Five days after the shootdown , USAF OPC officials began including Black Hawk flight times in the daily ATO and included the correct IFF code in the ATO provided to Eagle Flight . OPC officially ended on 31 December 1996 . Over the six years of the operation , coalition participants flew a total of 62 @,@ 000 fixed @-@ wing and rotary @-@ wing sorties . The Black Hawk shootdown was the only serious accident to occur during the operation . 
 Wickson resigned and May retired from the USAF soon after Fogleman 's investigation was completed . Lawrence Tracy retired immediately after Wang 's court @-@ martial on an early ( 15 @-@ year ) retirement option . As of May 2005 Jim Wang was still serving in the USAF , but he remained at the rank of captain , having been denied promotion . Interviewed in 2005 about the shootdown , Tracy stated , " Jim ( Wang ) and all of us at first were held up as scapegoats . I think that was to cover up for the pilots . They had their fangs out . They wanted to kill something because it had been ages since an F @-@ 15 had shot anything down . We were held accountable for their actions . " 
 Andrus retired from the USAF in 1995 , Pilkington in 1996 , Emery in 1997 , and Santarelli in 1998 , all at the same rank they held at the time of the shootdown , except Emery , who retired as a brigadier general . Richardson was promoted to brigadier general on 1 July 1999 and retired on 1 September 2001 . Dallager was appointed as superintendent of the USAF Academy in June 2000 and was promoted to lieutenant general on 1 August of the same year . Dallager 's appointment and promotion were criticized by observers because of his involvement in the controversial shootdown after @-@ actions and refusal to testify for the senate investigation . Dallager retired on 1 September 2003 , but at the rank of major general . 
 A monument to the 26 victims of the shootdown was constructed at Giebelstadt Army Airfield , Germany and dedicated on 14 April 1996 . After U.S. military presence ceased at Giebelstadt , due to base closures , the monument was moved to Fort Rucker , Alabama on 10 March 2006 , and rededicated on 14 April 2007 . 
 " The 53rd FS ' Tigers ' never fully recovered from the dark blemish on their otherwise exemplary record . The only way the USAF could make the issue and the pain go away was by closing the unit . This was done on March 10 , 1999 , leaving USAFE with only one Eagle squadron for the next war in its theater . " 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Diehl , Alan E. ( 2003 ) . Silent Knights : Blowing the Whistle on Military Accidents and Their Cover @-@ Ups . Potomac Books . ISBN 1 @-@ 57488 @-@ 544 @-@ 8 . 
 Hall , Allen L. ( 2002 ) . Michael , My Son , and the Story of the Eagle Flight Detachment . New York : Vantage Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 533 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 Piper , Joan L. ( 2001 ) . Chain of Events : The Government Cover @-@ up of the Black Hawk Incident and the Friendly @-@ fire Death of Lt. Laura Piper . Brassey 's . ISBN 1 @-@ 57488 @-@ 344 @-@ 5 . 
 Snook , Scott A. ( 2000 ) . Friendly Fire : The Accidental Shootdown of U.S. Black Hawks over Northern Iraq . Princeton University Press . 
 = = = Web = = = 
 Arana @-@ <unk> , Louis A. ( 1996 ) . " Black hawk incident " tragic series of errors " " . Retrieved 16 February 2007 . 
 Bacon , Kenneth H. ( 1995 ) . " DoD News Briefing : Mr. Kenneth H. Bacon , <unk> PA " . <unk> . Retrieved 1 March 2007 . 
 CBS News ( 27 February 2001 ) . " ' A Great Deal of Arrogance ' " . CBS News . Retrieved 16 November 2007 . 
 Chu Lin , Sam ( 2005 ) . " Friendly Fire Doesn 't Shoot Down Wang " . <unk> Retrieved 16 February 2007 . 
 " Eagle Flight Detachment Memorial Monument Friends " . 1994 – 2007 . Retrieved 16 February 2007 . 
 General Accounting Office ( GAO ) ( 1998 ) . " Operation Provide Comfort : Review of U.S. Air Force Investigation of Black Hawk <unk> Incident " . Archived from the original on 2 March 2007 . Retrieved 1 March 2007 . 
 Moran , Michael ( 2005 ) . " Battling friendly fire : Military pins hopes on new technologies as fratricide proves a stubborn foe " . <unk> Retrieved 1 January 2008 . 
 Novak , Robert ( 2000 ) . " Article 3 : Past Fiasco dims General 's new Third Star " . Soldiers for the Truth . Retrieved 1 March 2007 . 
 Peterson , Iver ( 3 June 1995 ) . " Court @-@ Martial Begins in ' Friendly Fire ' Deaths in Iraq " ( Newspaper article ) . New York Times . Retrieved 20 December 2007 . 
 Schmitt , Eric ( 1 July 1994 ) . " Copter Deaths : Pentagon Finds Human Failure " ( Newspaper article ) . New York Times . Retrieved 20 December 2007 . 
 Schmitt , Eric ( 15 August 1995 ) . " Chief of Air Force Grounds 5 Pilots " ( Newspaper article ) . New York Times . Retrieved 20 December 2007 . 
 Sklute , Nolan ( 1995 ) . " DoD <unk> : Major General Nolan Sklute , AF / <unk> " . <unk> . Archived from the original on 14 January 2007 . Retrieved 1 March 2007 . 
 United States Air Force ( 1995 ) . " Major General James G. Andrus " . Air Force Link . Archived from the original on 19 March 2007 . Retrieved 16 February 2007 . 
 United States Air Force ( 1996 ) . " Lieutenant General Stephen B. Croker " . Air Force Link . Archived from the original on 19 March 2007 . Retrieved 16 February 2007 . 
 United States Air Force ( 2003 ) . " Lieutenant General John R. Dallager " . Air Force Link . Archived from the original on 19 March 2007 . Retrieved 16 February 2007 . 
 United States Air Force ( 1997 ) . " Brigadier General Curtis H. Emery " . Air Force Link . Archived from the original on 19 March 2007 . Retrieved 16 February 2007 . 
 United States Air Force ( 1996 ) . " Brigadier General Jeffrey S. Pilkington " . Air Force Link . Archived from the original on 19 March 2007 . Retrieved 16 February 2007 . 
 United States Air Force ( 2000 ) . " Brigadier General Douglas J. " Doug " Richardson " . Air Force Link . Archived from the original on 19 March 2007 . Retrieved 16 February 2007 . 
 United States Air Force ( 1998 ) . " Lieutenant General Eugene D. Santarelli " . Air Force Link . Archived from the original on 19 March 2007 . Retrieved 16 February 2007 . 
 <unk> , Sam Howe ( 21 June 1995 ) . " Air Force Officer Is Acquitted in Downing of Army Aircraft " ( Newspaper article ) . New York Times . Retrieved 20 December 2007 . 
 Washington , Mark Thomas ( 3 July 1995 ) . " So , Who 's to Blame ? " . Time . Retrieved 1 March 2007 . 
 Weiner , Tim ( 15 April 1995 ) . " Court @-@ Martial <unk> in Case of Helicopters Shot Down " ( Newspaper article ) . New York Times . Retrieved 20 December 2007 . 
 = Alphonse Elric = 
 Alphonse Elric ( Japanese : アルフォンス ・ エルリック , Hepburn : <unk> <unk> ) , commonly called Al ( <unk> , Aru ) , is a fictional character and one of the protagonists in the Fullmetal Alchemist manga series and its adaptations created by Hiromu Arakawa . Alphonse is a child who lost his body during an alchemical experiment to bring his deceased mother back to life and had his soul attached to a suit of armor by his older brother Edward . As a result , Alphonse is almost invulnerable as long as the armor 's seal is not erased , but is unable to feel anything . To recover their bodies , the Elrics travel around their country Amestris to obtain the Philosopher 's Stone — an alchemical object that could restore them . In the animated adaptations of Fullmetal Alchemist , Alphonse is voiced by Rie Kugimiya in Japanese . In the English adaptations , he is voiced by Aaron Dismuke in the first series and by Maxey Whitehead in the second . 
 As a result of appearing in the series mostly in his armor , Arakawa has been focused on searching ways to make it appear as Alphonse is expressing emotions despite not having a body . Alphonse has also appeared in materials related to the manga , including video games and light novels that follow his journey . His character has been well received by readers of the series ; he has consistently appeared in the top ten series ' popularity polls . The character has received positive remarks from critics , with some commending his design and his relationship with Edward . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 Alphonse is one of the protagonists from the series alongside his older brother Edward . Alphonse loses his entire body while he and Edward are trying to revive his mother Trisha using alchemy . Edward sacrifices his right arm to seal Alphonse 's soul into a suit of armor . Edward later becomes an alchemist from the state military of Amestris , and starts traveling with Alphonse to search for a method to recover Alphonse 's body . They seek the Philosopher 's Stone , which would allow them to restore their physical forms . Besides being a powerful alchemist , Alphonse is a skilled hand @-@ to @-@ hand fighter ; having been trained by Izumi Curtis . While Alphonse cannot feel anything because he has no body , he is nearly invincible as long as the blood mark made by Edward on his armor to contain his soul is not defaced . 
 Believing that the immortal creatures known as the homunculi will lead them to more clues to recover their bodies , the Elrics try to use them . However , they meet the homunculi 's creator " Father " , who secretly controls the military and blackmails the Elrics into working under him . Seeking to protect their friends , the Elrics travel to the northern area of the country in order to request help from General Olivier Mira Armstrong . After the two are successful in their plan , Alphonse 's original body tries to recover the soul resulting in him losing consciousness several times . Separated from his brother to assist his friends ' escape from the military men serving Father , Alphonse is captured by the homunculus Pride to use him against Edward . Joining forces with his father Van Hohenheim , Alphonse traps Pride and himself within a cave where the homunculus remains powerless . State Alchemist Solf J. Kimblee later comes to Pride 's aid , and Alphonse is rescued by some of his comrades . 
 Seeking to transmute the whole country , Father transports the Elrics to his base to use them as two of the five sacrifices required to achieve his goal . At the same moment , Alphonse finds his original body , but refuses to recover it because its weakened state would not help them to fight the homunculi . In the final fight against Father , Alphonse requests help from the alchemist May Chang to return Edward 's right arm in exchange for Alphonse 's soul . As Edward , with his restored arm , fights Father , Alphonse 's soul disappears from the armor . Following Father 's defeat , Edward sacrifices his ability to use alchemy to restore Alphonse 's soul and original body . The two return to Resembool , where they live until they decide to separate to study alchemy . Alphonse joins with two chimera comrades and they travel to the country of Xing to learn more alchemy with May 's help . 
 = = = In the first anime = = = 
 The first half of the anime 's plot follows that of the manga , but the plots severely diverge from each other near the middle of the story . After Kimblee uses alchemy to transform Al 's armor into explosive material , Scar transfers all of his incomplete Philosopher 's Stone into Al to save his life . As a result , Alphonse 's armor becomes the Philosopher 's Stone . Because he houses the Stone in his body , he becomes the primary target of the homunculi 's leader Dante , who is trying to cheat death . Once captured by the homunculi for Dante , Al is to be eaten by Gluttony to complete the Stone inside Gluttony 's body . But when he sees his brother killed trying to save him , Al uses the stone 's power to heal Edward 's body and re @-@ bind his soul to it . This destroys Al 's own body as he uses up the whole of the Philosopher 's Stone in the transmutations . Then Edward , using his own body , resurrects Alphonse . As a result , Edward disappears and Alphonse continues studying alchemy to find him . 
 In the film sequel Fullmetal Alchemist the Movie : Conqueror of Shamballa , Alphonse continues searching for his brother until learning that he is in a parallel world . With help from the homunculus Wrath , Alphonse opens the gate to the parallel world , but at the same time causes a soldier named <unk> Eckhart , who is from the parallel world , to start attacking Amestris . Joining forces with Edward , Alphonse defeats Eckhart and decides to stay with his brother to live in the parallel world . 
 = = = In other media = = = 
 Aside from the initial anime and manga , Alphonse appears in almost all the Fullmetal Alchemist original video animations ( OVAs ) . In the first one , he appears as a chibi version of himself at the movie 's wrap @-@ up party , and in the fourth OVA , he plays a part in the battle against the homunculi . Alphonse also appears in all Fullmetal Alchemist video games on all platforms , which feature his and Ed 's journey to find the Philosopher 's Stone . In the film The Sacred Star of Milos Alphonse goes with his brother to search for the criminal Melvin Voyager who broke free from a prison in their country . Makoto Inoue 's Fullmetal Alchemist light novels also feature the Elrics ' journey , but in all of them they encounter different characters to those from the video games . Two character CDs with tracks based on Alphonse were released under the name of Hagaren Song File – Alphonse Elric ( Hagaren Song File - アルフォンス ・ エルリック ) and Theme of Alphonse Elric . The tracks from the CD are performed by <unk> 's Japanese voice actress , Rie Kugimiya . He is also featured in several of the Fullmetal Alchemist Trading Card Games . 
 = = Creation and conception = = 
 In a prototype from the series , Alphonse 's soul was sealed in a flying squirrel instead of armor as a result of human transmutation . He appeared as the father to the other protagonist , Edward , in their searching for a way to recover their bodies . To match the designs from the manga magazine Monthly Shōnen Gangan , the two characters were redesigned . Alphonse was given a huge suit of armor to contrast him with Edward 's short stature . Since Alphonse mostly appears with his armor , Arakawa tends to make sketches of his human form so that she would not forget how to draw him . Some events from the Elrics ' lives are social problems she integrated into the plot . Their journey across the country to help people is meant to gain an understanding of the meaning of family . As Alphonse is mostly seen with his armor , during various chapters from the manga Arakawa was unable to draw him crying . During Chapter 40 , Arakawa saw his conversation with Edward as a way to let him express his feeling and to make him appear as though he is crying . When comparing the two brothers during the time Alphonse obtained the ability to use alchemy without a circle like Edward , Arakawa stated nobody was better at alchemy as the two had different preferences in the same way as other alchemists appearing in the series . When making <unk> , Arakawa tends to draw Alphonse doing something comical to contrast him with the other characters . She states that she does it because Alphonse may enjoy making fun of other people . 
 In the Japanese animated adaptations of Fullmetal Alchemist , Alphonse was voiced by Rie Kugimiya . For the English version , Aaron Dismuke took the role for the first anime , Conqueror of Shamballa and some of the OVAs . He has found Alphonse to be his favorite character , and likes the way he " sticks up for people " . He also said that he tries to be like Alphonse when voicing him , though he added , " I don 't really see a lot of myself in him " . In Fullmetal Alchemist Brotherhood , Dismuke was replaced by Maxey Whitehead , as Dismuke 's voice had changed with age . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In popularity polls from the manga made by Monthly Shōnen Gangan , Alphonse was initially ranked in the third place , while later polls placed him fourth . He has also been highly ranked in the Animage 's Anime Grand Prix polls in the category of best male characters in both 2004 . Merchandise based on Alphonse 's appearance , including figurines , keychains and plush toys , has been marketed . UGO Networks listed one of his statues tenth in their article of " <unk> Expensive Comic Book Collectibles We 'd Blow Our Wad On . " 
 Several publications for manga , anime , and other pop culture media have both praised and criticized Alphonse 's character . Chis Beveridge from Mania Entertainment has praised Al for being " quite the likeable character " and liked his role in the first series . The character 's madness and disbelief over his own existence has been praised ; Beveridge said it " could make up a series all by itself .. " In a later volume review , Beveridge said the series ' change of focus to Alphonse " as an actual young boy " was " a nice change of pace . " T.H.E.M. Anime Reviews ' Samuel Arbogast wrote that the interaction between the Elric brothers as they travel is interesting and that Alphonse 's armor was of the most notable characters designs from the series . The brothers were also noted to " becoming men " by Active 's Anime Holly Ellingwood after the first appearance of Van Hohenheim in the manga as the two investigate ways to recover their bodies . Lydia <unk> said Al 's character is as important as his brother to the series after commenting on Edward as she considered Al to be Edward 's yang . 
 Rebecca Silverman from Anime News Network praised Alphonse 's development in the manga , especially where he refuses to recover his weakened body and instead helps his friends . As a result , Silverman brought a comparison between the two brothers and wondered whether Edward would have done the same . Chris Beveridge found the character 's growth in Conqueror in Shamballa appealing as he starts visually resembling Edward . After Aaron Dismuke 's voice matured , Anime News Network writer Justin Sevakis criticized him for his part in the Fullmetal Alchemist : Premium OVA Collection , writing that " he simply no longer sounds like Alphonse " . 
 = Chad Mottola = 
 Charles Edward " Chad " Mottola ( born October 15 , 1971 ) is an American retired professional baseball player who played five seasons in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) as an outfielder . Considered a journeyman , Mottola played professionally from 1992 through 2007 , appearing in 59 MLB games and 1 @,@ 801 minor league games . He was the hitting coach for the Toronto Blue Jays during the 2013 season , but his contract was not renewed for 2014 . 
 Mottola is an alumnus of the University of Central Florida ( UCF ) , where he played college baseball for the UCF Knights baseball team . A highly regarded prospect , Mottola was selected by the Cincinnati Reds with the fifth overall selection of the 1992 MLB Draft . 
 Mottola played in minor league baseball for different organizations , receiving major league playing time with the Cincinnati Reds in 1996 , the Toronto Blue Jays in 2000 and 2006 , the Florida Marlins in 2001 and the Baltimore Orioles in 2004 . As he received less playing time in 2007 , he began to mentor younger teammates , which helped him transition into a coaching career . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Amateur career = = = 
 Mottola attended St. Thomas Aquinas High School in Fort Lauderdale , Florida , graduating in 1989 . After leading all Broward County high school players in batting average ( <unk> ) , home runs ( 14 ) and runs batted in ( RBIs ) ( 48 ) as a senior , Mottola was named to Florida 's Class 3A All @-@ State first team . Out of high school , the Baltimore Orioles selected Mottola in the tenth round of the 1989 Major League Baseball Draft , with the 243rd overall selection . Mottola did not sign with the Orioles , opting to pursue a college baseball career . 
 Mottola then enrolled at the University of Central Florida ( UCF ) , which he chose to attend over the University of New Orleans , as it was closer to his home . At UCF , he played for the UCF Knights baseball team in NCAA 's Division I. As a freshman , he hit .321 in 57 games , but did not hit a home run . He gained 30 pounds ( 14 kg ) for his sophomore season . As a sophomore , Mottola was named the American South Conference 's Player of the Week on April 3 , 1991 , after batting .542 with one home run and eight RBIs in six games . During the season , he batted .343 with nine home runs and 54 RBIs . During the college offseason , he played collegiate summer baseball in the Cape Cod Baseball League . 
 In his junior season , he batted .345 with 14 home runs , tying the UCF single @-@ season record . Professional scouts considered him a first round prospect , due to his intelligence , size , ability to hit for power , his strong throwing arm , running speed , instincts and polish . 
 = = = Professional career = = = 
 The Cincinnati Reds drafted Mottola in the first round of the 1992 Major League Baseball Draft with the fifth overall selection , one selection ahead of Derek Jeter . He signed with the Reds the day of the draft , receiving a signing bonus of $ 400 @,@ 000 , as he attended the United States national baseball team tryouts for the 1992 Summer Olympics , and did not want to have his contract status on his mind during the tryouts . He was the first UCF athlete to be selected in the first round of an MLB draft . 
 In his first professional season , Mottola led the Billings Mustangs to the Pioneer League championship , batting .286 with 12 home runs and 37 runs batted in ( RBIs ) . Baseball America rated Mottola as the 71st best prospect in baseball before the 1993 season . Playing a full season for the first time in 1993 , he batted .280 for the Winston @-@ Salem Spirits with 21 home runs and led the Class @-@ A Advanced Carolina League with 91 RBIs . He was named a Carolina League All @-@ Star outfielder after the 1993 season . Prior to the 1994 season , Baseball America rated Mottola as the 43rd best prospect in baseball . 
 Mottola started the 1995 season with the Chattanooga Lookouts of the Class @-@ AA Southern League , receiving a promotion to the Class @-@ AAA Indianapolis Indians of the International League that season . Despite his minor league success , Mottola 's path to the Reds was blocked by outfielders Reggie Sanders , Curtis Goodwin , Eric Davis , Vince Coleman , Mike Kelly , Steve Gibraltar and Eric Anthony , all of whom the Reds had in spring training that season . General Manager Jim Bowden commented that Mottola needed more minor league seasoning before he would be promoted to the Reds . He made his major league debut with the Cincinnati Reds on April 22 , 1996 . In 35 games for the Reds , Mottola batted .215 with three home runs and six RBIs . For Indianapolis , he batted .262 with 9 home runs , 47 RBIs and nine stolen bases in 102 games . 
 Though he was considered a top prospect , the Reds held him out of winter league baseball during the 1995 – 96 offseason . The Reds added Deion Sanders and Rubén Sierra to their outfield competition for the 1997 season , prompting Mottola to question the Reds commitment to him . After he spent the 1997 season in the minors , the Reds traded Mottola to the Texas Rangers for a player to be named later in April 1998 . He spent most of the 1998 season with the Oklahoma City RedHawks of the Class @-@ AAA Pacific Coast League ( PCL ) , but suffered a broken thumb that required surgery , limiting his season . 
 Granted free agency after the 1998 season , Mottola signed with the Chicago White Sox for the 1999 season . He batted .321 with 164 hits , 32 doubles and 20 home runs for the Charlotte Knights . With the Syracuse <unk> , the Class @-@ AAA affiliate of the Toronto Blue Jays , in 2000 , Mottola batted .309 in 134 games with 505 at @-@ bats , 156 hits , 85 runs , 25 doubles , 3 triples , 33 home runs , 102 RBI , 37 walks , 30 stolen bases and 99 strikeouts . He led the league in home runs and also in slugging percentage , had the second highest RBI , was fourth in the league in hits and extra @-@ base hits , and had the seventh highest batting average . He was named an International League All @-@ Star outfielder in 2000 , and won the International League Most Valuable Player Award . He was also named the Blue Jays minor league player of the year that season , and earned a promotion to the Blue Jays in September . 
 After the 2000 season , the Blue Jays traded Mottola to the Florida Marlins for a player to be named later or cash . He played for the Marlins ' Class @-@ AAA affiliate , the Calgary Cannons of the PCL , and appeared in five games for the Marlins . In 2002 , Mottola returned to Syracuse . He began the 2003 season with the Tampa Bay Devil Rays organization , playing for the Class @-@ AAA Durham Bulls , but was released . He signed with the Boston Red Sox on June 12 to replace Julio Zuleta , who had signed to play in Japan , on the Class @-@ AAA Pawtucket Red Sox . Mottola signed with the Orioles for the 2004 season , splitting his time between MLB and the Class @-@ AAA Ottawa Lynx . In 2005 , he returned to the Blue Jays organization , playing with Syracuse . He was promoted to MLB in 2006 , but spent the majority of the 2005 through 2007 seasons with Syracuse . 
 = = = Transition to coaching = = = 
 Mottola retired after the 2007 season . During his final seasons , Mottola began to play less and serve as a mentor to younger players , making for a transition into a coaching career . After the 2007 season , Mottola accepted a job as the hitting coach of the Gulf Coast Blue Jays of the Rookie @-@ level Gulf Coast League . On October 6 , 2008 , Mottola was announced as the Blue Jays roving minor league hitting instructor for the 2009 season . From 2010 to 2012 , he was the hitting coach for the Las Vegas 51s , Toronto 's Triple @-@ A affiliate at the time . 
 On November 24 , 2012 , Mottola was promoted to be the Toronto Blue Jays hitting coach for the 2013 season . On October 7 , 2013 , the Blue Jays announced that Mottola would not be returning for the 2014 season . 
 In November 2013 , Mottola was hired by the Tampa Bay Rays as their minor @-@ league hitting co @-@ ordinator . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Mottola was born in Augusta , Georgia and grew up in Pembroke Pines , Florida . When Mottola signed with the Reds in 1992 , he bought his parents a house . Mottola 's father , Chuck , died of a heart attack at the age of 50 in October 1995 . His mother , Elaine , works as an administrative assistant at St. Bernadette 's School in Davie , Florida . 
 Mottola met his wife , Emily , at UCF . She played for the school 's volleyball team . They had their first son , Luke , in 2005 . 
 = Yellowhammer = 
 The yellowhammer ( Emberiza citrinella ) is a passerine bird in the bunting family that is native to Eurasia and introduced to New Zealand , Australia , Uruguay , Brazil , Argentina , Chile , the Falkland Islands , South Africa , United States and Canada . Most European birds remain in the breeding range year @-@ round , but the eastern subspecies is partially migratory , with much of the population wintering further south . The male yellowhammer has a bright yellow head , streaked brown back , chestnut rump and yellow underparts . Other plumages are duller versions of the same pattern . The yellowhammer is common in open areas with some scrubs or trees , and forms small flocks in winter . It has a characteristic song with an " A little bit of bread and no cheese " rhythm . The song is very similar to that of its closest relative , the pine bunting , with which it interbreeds . 
 Breeding commences mainly in April and May , with the female building a lined cup nest in a concealed location on or near the ground . The 3 – 5 eggs are patterned with a mesh of fine dark lines , giving rise to the old name for the bird of " scribble lark " . The female incubates the eggs for 12 – 14 days to hatching , and broods the altricial downy chicks until they fledge 11 – 13 days later . Both adults feed the chick in the nest and raise two or three broods each year . The nest may be raided by rodents or corvids , and the adults are hunted by birds of prey . Yellowhammers feed on the ground , usually in flocks outside the breeding season . The diet is mainly seeds , supplemented by invertebrates in the breeding season . Changes to agricultural practices have led to population declines in western Europe , but its large numbers and huge range mean that the yellowhammer is classed as being of least concern by the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) . 
 This conspicuous yellow bird has inspired poems by Robbie Burns and John Clare , and its characteristic song has influenced works by Beethoven and Messiaen . The children 's writer Enid Blyton helped to popularise the standard English representation of the song . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The bird family <unk> contains around 300 seed @-@ eating species , the majority of which are found in the Americas , although the genus Emberiza , with more than forty members , is confined to the Old World . Within its genus , the yellowhammer is most closely related to the pine bunting , with which it forms a superspecies ; they have at times been considered as one species . The white @-@ capped and cirl buntings are also near relatives of the species pair . Where their ranges meet , the yellowhammer and pine bunting interbreed ; the yellowhammer is dominant , and the hybrid zone is moving further east . 
 The yellowhammer was described by Linnaeus in his Systema Naturae in 1758 under its current scientific name . Emberiza is derived from the German <unk> , a bunting , and citrinella is the Italian for a small yellow bird . The English name is thought to have come from <unk> , another German word for a bunting , and was first recorded in 1553 as <unk> . 
 = = = Subspecies = = = 
 There are three recognised subspecies . E. c. citrinella ( Linnaeus , 1758 ) , the nominate subspecies , occurs in southeast England and most of Europe east to the northwestern corner of Russia and western Ukraine , E. c. caliginosa ( Clancey , 1940 ) is the form found in Ireland , the Isle of Man and Great Britain ( except southeast England ) , and E. c. erythrogenys ( Brehm , 1855 ) breeds from Russia , central Ukraine and the eastern Balkans eastwards to Siberia and northwest Mongolia , and also has isolated populations to the east of the Black Sea and in the Caucasus . 
 = = Description = = 
 The yellowhammer is a large bunting , 16 – 16 @.@ 5 cm ( 6 @.@ 3 – 6 @.@ 5 in ) long , with a 23 – 29 @.@ 5 cm ( 9 @.@ 1 – 11 @.@ 6 in ) wingspan ; it weighs 20 – 36 @.@ 5 g ( 0 @.@ 71 – 1 @.@ 29 oz ) . The male of the nominate subspecies E. c. citrinella has a bright yellow head , heavily streaked brown back , rufous rump , yellow underparts , and white outer tail feathers . The female is less brightly coloured , and more streaked on the crown , breast and flanks . Both sexes are less strongly marked outside the breeding season , when the dark fringes on new feathers obscure the yellow plumage . The juvenile is much duller and less yellow than the adults , and often has a paler rump . 
 After breeding , adults have a complete moult which takes at least eight weeks ; males acquire more yellow in the plumage each time they moult . Juveniles have a partial moult not long after fledging , replacing the head , body and some covert feathers . 
 Differences between the subspecies are small and geographically gradual . On average , the male of E. c. caliginosa is slightly smaller and darker than the same sex of the nominate subspecies , and also has more streaking on its back , a greenish tint to the yellow of the head and more chestnut on the flanks . The male of the eastern form , E. c. erythrogenys , is paler and less streaked than E. c. citrinella . Its flanks , undertail and wing bars are usually whiter , and its crown and throat are brighter yellow . It is not usually possible to distinguish females of the three subspecies using plumage features . 
 Females and juveniles , especially of the pale eastern subspecies , E. c. erythrogenys , may be confused with pine buntings , but they always have a yellow tint to their plumage , a paler rufous rump and more uniform upperparts than that species . Young and female yellowhammers can be distinguished from cirl buntings by the grey @-@ brown rump of the latter species . Male hybrids with pine bunting are typically white @-@ faced and have some yellow on the head , underparts or flight feathers , but females are usually indistinguishable from yellowhammers . 
 = = = Voice = = = 
 The song of the cock yellowhammer is a series of short notes , gradually increasing in volume and followed by one or two more protracted notes . It is often represented as " A little bit of bread and no cheese " , and the full version can be confused with the almost identical song of the pine bunting . If the final notes are omitted , confusion with the cirl bunting is possible . Other vocalisations include a zit contact call , a see alarm , and a trilled <unk> given in flight . 
 Yellowhammer males learn their songs from their fathers , and over the course of time regional dialects have developed , with minor differences to the conclusion of the basic song ; all are mutually recognised by birds from different areas . Each male has an individual repertoire of song variants within its regional dialect ; females tend to mate with males that share their dialect , and prefer those with the largest repertoires . 
 The pine bunting and yellowhammer are so closely related that each responds to the other 's song . The male yellowhammer 's song is more attractive to females , and is one reason for the dominance of that species where the ranges overlap . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The yellowhammer breeds across Eurasia between the 16 – 20 ° C ( 61 – 68 ° F ) July isotherms . It is the commonest and most widespread European bunting , although it is absent from high mountains , Arctic regions , the western Netherlands , most of Iberia and Greece , and low @-@ lying regions of other countries adjoining the Mediterranean Sea . It breeds in Russia east to Irkutsk , and in most of Ukraine . The Asian range extends into northwest Turkey , the Caucasus and northern Kazakhstan . 
 Most European yellowhammers winter within their breeding range , only the far north being vacated , although some birds move south of their breeding range in Spain , Italy and other Mediterranean countries . Distances travelled can be up to 500 km ( 310 mi ) for northern birds . Asian birds are more strongly migratory , deserting much of the north to winter in Iraq , Iran and southern Central Asia . The yellowhammer has occurred as a vagrant in the United Arab Emirates , Egypt , Kuwait , Morocco , Malta , the Himalayas ( winter vagrant from northern Afghanistan to central Nepal ) , the Balearic Islands , Iceland and the Faroes . 
 Yellowhammers of the British and Irish race , E. c. caliginosa were introduced to New Zealand by local acclimatisation societies in 1862 , and soon spread over the main islands . They sometimes visit New Zealand 's subantarctic islands , although rarely staying to breed , and have reached Australia 's Lord Howe Island on a number of occasions . At the beginning of the 20th century , this bunting was seen as a serious agricultural pest in its adopted country . 
 The yellowhammer is a bird of dry open country , preferably with a range of vegetation types and some trees from which to sing . It is absent from urban areas , forests and wetlands . Probably originally found at forest edges and large clearing , it has benefited from traditional agriculture , which created extensive open areas with hedges and clumps of trees . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 Breeding normally starts in early May , but often in April in the south of the range . Yellowhammers are monogamous and breed when aged one year . The males establish territories along hedges or woodland fringes and sing from a tree or bush , often continuing well into July or August . The male displays to the female by raising his wings and running towards her . The nest is built by the female on or near the ground , and is typically well hidden in tussocks , against a bank or low in a bush . It is constructed from nearby plant material , such as leaves , dry grass and stalks , and lined with fine grasses and sometimes animal hair . It is 11 @.@ 5 – 13 cm ( 4 @.@ 5 – 5 @.@ 1 in ) across with a cup 4 – 4 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 1 @.@ 8 in ) deep . 
 The clutch is usually three to five whitish eggs , typically patterned with a network of fine dark lines . The eggs average 21 mm × 16 mm ( 0 @.@ 83 in × 0 @.@ 63 in ) in size and weigh 2 @.@ 9 g ( 0 @.@ 10 oz ) , of which 6 % is shell . The female incubates the eggs for 12 – 14 days to hatching , and broods the altricial downy chicks until they fledge 11 – 13 days later . Both adults feed the chick in the nest and two or three broods are raised each year . 
 The adult annual survival rate in the UK is around 54 % , and that for juveniles in their first year is 53 % . The typical lifespan is three years , although there are records from Great Britain and Germany of birds surviving for more than 13 years . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 Foraging is mainly on the ground , and the bird 's diet consists mainly of seeds . Oily seeds , such as those of brassicas , are ignored in favour of more starchy items . Typical food plants include common nettle , docks , common <unk> , fat hen , common chickweed and yarrow . Grasses are also important , particularly cereals , and grain makes up a significant part of the food consumed in autumn and winter , wheat and oats being preferred to barley . When not breeding , yellowhammers forage in flocks which can occasionally number hundreds of birds , and often contain other buntings and finches . 
 The yellowhammer adds invertebrates to its diet in the breeding season , particularly as food for its growing chicks . A wide range of species is taken , including springtails , grasshoppers , flies , beetles , caterpillars , earthworms , spiders and snails . 
 = = Predators and parasites = = 
 Predators of the yellowhammer include the sparrowhawk , northern goshawk , lesser spotted eagle and hobby . It is not a significant host of the common cuckoo , a brood parasite , although as a ground @-@ nesting bird its eggs and chicks are vulnerable to predation from small mammals such as mice and other rodents . Nests are also raided by crows , Eurasian jays and Eurasian magpies . Predation accounted for more than 60 % of nest failures in a 2012 survey in Germany . 
 Thirteen species of fleas in the genera Ceratophyllus and Dasypsyllus have been found on this bunting , and internal parasites include <unk> <unk> . The yellowhammer may carry <unk> blood parasites such as Haemoproteus <unk> . Males with high parasite levels produced fewer offspring ( there is no such effect for females ) , and tend to be less brightly coloured . The striking plumage of the male may therefore have arisen as a signal of fitness to breed . Yellowhammers infected with Haemoproteus may have lower winter survival rates due to a tendency to having shorter wings . 
 = = Status = = 
 The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) estimates the European population of the yellowhammer to be from 54 – 93 million individuals , suggesting a Eurasian total of 73 – 186 million birds . Although the population appears to be in a decline , the decrease is not rapid enough to trigger the IUCN vulnerability criteria . The large numbers and huge breeding range of about 12 @.@ 9 million km2 ( 5 million sq mi ) , mean that this bunting is classified by the IUCN as being of least concern . 
 Populations have declined in recent decades in western Europe , including the British Isles , Belgium , the Netherlands , Austria and Italy . The yellowhammer is a red @-@ list ( severely declining ) species in Ireland and the UK . In eastern Europe , numbers appear to be stable , although the trend in Russia is unknown . Changes to agricultural practices are thought to be responsible for reduced breeding densities . The introduced population in New Zealand has been very successful , with breeding densities much higher than in the UK . 
 = = In culture = = 
 The yellowhammer is a conspicuous , vocal and formerly common country bird , and has attracted human interest . <unk> Wood and <unk> Hill , near Dorchester , both derive their names from the bird . Robbie Burns ' poem " The Yellow , Yellow <unk> ' " gets its title from a Scottish name for the yellowhammer , which is given an obvious sexual connotation : I met a pretty maid , an ' unto her I said , / " I wad fain fin ' your yellow , yellow <unk> ' . " More factual descriptions of the bird and its behaviour can be found in John Clare 's " The Yellowhammer 's Nest " and " The Yellowhammer " , whose final lines read : 
 Enid Blyton helped to popularise the bird 's song as " little bit of bread and no cheese " in books such as The Ship of Adventure and Five Go Off in a Caravan , and wrote a poem called " The Yellow @-@ hammer " . 
 Beethoven 's student , Carl Czerny , and biographer Anton Schindler , both suggested that the composer got the idea for the first four notes of his 5th symphony from the yellowhammer 's call , although it is more likely that the opening of the 4th Piano Concerto was actually the work in question . Beethoven also used the yellowhammer theme in two piano sonatas , no . 21 in C major ( the " Waldstein " , <unk> ) and No. 23 in F minor ( the " Appassionata " , <unk> ) . 
 Olivier Messiaen often used birdsong as an inspiration for his music , and the yellowhammer features in Chronochromie , Catalogue d 'oiseaux , La fauvette des jardins and Méditations sur le mystère de la Sainte Trinité , appearing in four movements of the last piece . 
 An old legend links the yellowhammer to the Devil . Its tongue was supposed to bear a drop of his blood , and the intricate pattern on the eggs was said to carry a concealed , possibly evil , message ; these satanic associations sometimes led to the persecution of the bird . The unusual appearance of the eggs also led to " scribble lark " , an old name for the bird . 
 = Remain in Light = 
 Remain in Light is the fourth studio album by American new wave band Talking Heads , released on October 8 , 1980 , on Sire Records . It was recorded at locations in the Bahamas and the United States between July and August 1980 and was produced by the quartet 's long @-@ time collaborator Brian Eno . The album peaked at number 19 on the Billboard 200 in the US and at number 21 on the UK Albums Chart . Two singles were released from Remain in Light : " Once in a Lifetime " and " Houses in Motion " as well as promotional single " Crosseyed and Painless " . The record was certified Gold in the US and in Canada during the 1980s . 
 The members of Talking Heads wanted to make an album that dispelled notions of frontman and chief lyricist David Byrne leading a back @-@ up band . They decided to experiment with African polyrhythms and , with Eno , recorded the instrumental tracks as a series of samples and loops , a novel idea at the time . Additional musicians were frequently used throughout the studio sessions . The lyric @-@ writing process slowed Remain in Light 's progress , but was concluded after Byrne drew inspiration from academic literature on Africa . The artwork for the album 's cover was crafted with the help of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology 's computers and designing company M & Co . Following the album 's completion , Talking Heads expanded to nine members for promotional concerts . 
 Remain in Light was widely acclaimed by critics . Praise centred on its cohesive merging of disparate genres and sonic experimentation . The record has been featured in several publications ' lists of the best albums of the 1980s and the best albums of all time , and it is often considered Talking Heads ' magnum opus . In 2006 , it was remastered and reissued with the addition of four unfinished outtakes . 
 = = Origins = = 
 In January 1980 , the members of Talking Heads returned to New York City after the tours in support of their 1979 critically acclaimed third album , Fear of Music , and decided to take time off to pursue personal interests . Byrne worked with Eno , the record 's producer , on an experimental collaboration named My Life in the Bush of Ghosts . Jerry Harrison produced an album for soul singer Nona Hendryx at the Sigma Sound Studios branch in New York City ; the singer and the location were later used during the recording of Remain in Light on Harrison 's advice . Husband and wife Chris Frantz and Tina Weymouth discussed the possibility of leaving the band after the latter suggested that Byrne 's level of control was excessive . Frantz was not open to the idea of ending Talking Heads , and the two decided to take a long vacation in the Caribbean to ponder the state of the band and their marriage . During the trip , the couple became involved in Haitian Vodou religious ceremonies and practised with several types of native percussion instruments . While in Jamaica they socialised with the famous reggae rhythm section of Sly and Robbie . 
 Frantz and Weymouth ended their holiday by purchasing an apartment above Compass Point Studios in Nassau , the Bahamas , where the band had recorded their second album More Songs About Buildings and Food . Byrne joined the duo and Harrison there in the spring of 1980 . The band members realised that it had been solely up to Byrne to bear the creative burden of crafting songs even though the tracks were performed as a quartet . The conception of Remain in Light occurred partly because they tired of the notion of a singer leading a back @-@ up band ; the ideal they aimed for , according to Byrne , was " sacrificing our egos for mutual cooperation " . The frontman additionally wanted to escape " the psychological paranoia and personal torment " of what he had been writing and feeling in 1970s New York City . Instead of the band writing music to Byrne 's lyrics , Talking Heads performed instrumental jam sessions without words , using the Fear of Music song " I <unk> " as a starting point . 
 Eno arrived in the Bahamas three weeks after Byrne and was at first reluctant to work with the band again after collaborating on the previous two full @-@ length releases . He changed his mind after hearing the instrumental demo tapes and noted , " I absolutely love the direction you 're going in . " Both parties decided to experiment with the communal African way of making music , in which individual parts mesh as polyrhythms to create a cohesive whole . Afrodisiac , the 1973 Afrobeat record from Nigerian musician Fela Kuti , became the template for the album . Weymouth has commented that the advent of the 1980s marked the beginnings of hip @-@ hop music , which made Talking Heads realise that the musical landscape was changing . Before the studio sessions , long @-@ time friend David Gans instructed the band members that " the things one doesn 't intend are the seeds for a more interesting future " . He encouraged them to experiment and improvise when recording and to make use of " mistakes " . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 Recording sessions started at Compass Point Studios in July 1980 . The album 's creation required the use of additional musicians , particularly extra percussionists . Talking Heads used the working title Melody Attack throughout the studio process after watching a Japanese game show of the same name . Harrison has commented that the ambition was to blend rock and African genres , rather than simply imitate African music . Eno 's production techniques and personal approach were key to the record 's conception . The process was geared to promote the expression of instinct and spontaneity without overtly focusing on the sound of the final product . Sections and instrumentals were recorded one at a time in a discontinuous process . Samples and loops played a key part at a time when computer programs could not yet adequately perform such functions . The band 's performances and jam sessions acted as sampling and looping mechanisms . Eno has compared the creative process to " looking out to the world and saying , ' What a fantastic place we live in . Let 's celebrate it . ' " 
 After a few sessions in the Bahamas , engineer Rhett Davies left following an argument with the producer over the fast speed of recording . Steven Stanley , who since the age of 17 had engineered for musicians such as Bob Marley , stepped in to cover the workload . He is credited by Frantz with helping create the track " Once in a Lifetime " , which was later released as a single . A Lexicon 224 digital reverb effects unit , obtained by engineer and mixer Dave Jerden , was used on the album . The machine was one of the first of its kind and able to simulate environments such as echo chambers and rooms through interchangeable programs . Like Davies , Jerden was unhappy with the fast pace at which Eno wanted to record sonically complicated compositions , but did not complain . The basic tracks focused wholly on rhythms and were all performed in a minimalist method using only one chord . Each section was recorded as a long loop to enable the creation of compositions through the positioning or merging of loops in different ways . 
 The tracks made Byrne rethink his vocal style and he tried singing to the instrumental songs , but sounded " stilted " . Few vocal sections were recorded in the Bahamas . The writing process for the lyrics occurred when the band returned to the US and was split between New York City and California . Harrison booked Talking Heads into Sigma Sound , which focused primarily on R & B music , after convincing the owners that the band 's work could bring them a new type of clientele . In New York City , Byrne struggled with writer 's block . Harrison and Eno spent their time tweaking the compositions recorded in the Bahamas , while Frantz and Weymouth often did not show up at the studio . Doubts began to surface about whether the album would be completed . The recording sessions only built up pace after the recruitment of guitarist Adrian Belew at the request of Byrne , Harrison and Eno . He was advised to add guitar solos to the Compass Point tracks , making use of a Roland guitar synthesiser . 
 Byrne recorded all the tracks , as they were after Belew had performed on them , in a cassette and looked to Africa to break his writer 's block . He realised that , when African musicians forget words , they often improvise and make new ones up . The lyricist used a portable tape recorder and tried to create onomatopoeic rhymes in the style of Eno , who believed that lyrics were never the center of a song 's meaning . Byrne continuously listened to his recorded scatting until convinced that he was no longer " hearing nonsense " . After the frontman was satisfied , Harrison invited Nona Hendryx to Sigma Sound to record backing vocals for the album . She was advised extensively on her vocal delivery by Byrne , Frantz , and Weymouth , and often sang in a trio with Byrne and Eno . The voice sessions were followed by the overdubbing process . Brass player Jon Hassell , who had been working on parts of My Life in the Bush of Ghosts , was hired to perform trumpet and horn sections . In August 1980 , half of the album was mixed by Eno and engineer John <unk> in New York City with the assistance of Harrison , while the other half was mixed by Byrne and Jerden at Eldorado Studios in Los Angeles . 
 = = Packaging and title = = 
 The cover art was conceived by Weymouth and Frantz with the help of Massachusetts Institute of Technology researcher Walter Bender and his MIT Media Lab team . Using Melody Attack as inspiration , the couple created a collage of red warplanes flying in formation over the Himalayas . The planes are an artistic depiction of Grumman Avenger planes in honour of Weymouth 's father , Ralph Weymouth , who was a US Navy Admiral . The idea for the back cover included simple portraits of the band members . Weymouth attended MIT regularly during the summer of 1980 and worked with Bender 's colleague , Scott Fisher , on the computer renditions of the ideas . The process was tortuous because computer power was limited in the early 1980s and the mainframe alone took up several rooms . Weymouth and Fisher shared a passion for masks and used the concept to experiment with the portraits . The faces ( except for eyes , noses and mouths ) were blotted out with blocks of red colour . Weymouth considered superimposing Eno 's face on top of all four portraits to insinuate his egotism — the producer wanted to be on the cover art together with Talking Heads — but decided against it in the end . 
 The rest of the artwork and the liner notes were crafted by the graphic designer Tibor Kalman and his company M & Co . Kalman was a fervent critic of formalism and professional design in art and advertisements . He offered his services for free to create publicity , and discussed using unconventional materials such as sandpaper and velour for the LP sleeve . Weymouth , who was sceptical of hiring a designing firm , vetoed Kalman 's ideas and held firm on the MIT computerised images . The designing process made the band members realise that the title Melody Attack was " too flippant " for the music recorded , and they adopted Remain in Light instead . Byrne has noted , " Besides not being all that melodic , the music had something to say that at the time seemed new , transcendent , and maybe even revolutionary , at least for funk rock songs . " The image of the warplanes was relegated to the back of the sleeve and the doctored portraits became the front cover . Kalman later suggested that the planes were not removed altogether because they seemed appropriate during the Iranian hostage crisis of 1979 – 81 . 
 Weymouth advised Kalman that she wanted simple typography in a bold sans serif font . M & Co. followed the instructions and came up with the idea of inverting the " A " s in " <unk> <unk> " . Weymouth and Frantz decided to use the joint credit acronym C / T for the artwork , while Bender and Fisher used initials and code names because the project was not an official MIT venture . The design credits read " HCL , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> GP , <unk> , C / T " . The final mass @-@ produced version of Remain in Light boasted one of the first computer @-@ designed record jackets . Psychoanalyst Michael A. Brog has called its front cover a " disarming image , which suggests both splitting and obliteration of identity " and which introduces the listener to the album 's recurring theme of " identity disturbance " ; he states , " The image is in bleak contrast to the title with the obscured images of the band members unable to ' remain in light ' . " 
 = = Promotion and release = = 
 Brian Eno advised Talking Heads that the music on Remain in Light was too dense for a quartet to perform . The band expanded to nine musicians for the tours in support of the album . The augmenting members recruited by Harrison were Belew , Funkadelic keyboardist Bernie Worrell , bassist Busta " Cherry " Jones , Ashford & Simpson percussionist Steven Scales , and backing vocalist <unk> MacDonald . The larger group performed sound checks in Frantz and Weymouth 's loft by following the rhythms established by Worrell , who had studied at the New England Conservatory and Juilliard School . Their first appearance was on 23 August 1980 at the Heatwave festival in Canada in front of 70 @,@ 000 people ; Robert Hilburn of the Los Angeles Times called the band 's new music a " rock @-@ funk sound with dramatic , near show @-@ stopping force " . On August 27 , the expanded Talking Heads performed a showcase of tracks to an audience of 125 @,@ 000 at the <unk> Rink in New York City 's Central Park . The Canada and New York gigs were the only ones initially planned , but Sire Records decided to support the nine @-@ member band on an extended tour . 
 Remain in Light was released worldwide on October 8 , 1980 . Talking Heads and Eno originally agreed to credit all songs in alphabetical order to " David Byrne , Brian Eno , Chris Frantz , Jerry Harrison and Tina Weymouth " after failing to devise an accurate mathematical formula for the split , but the album was released with the credits " David Byrne , Brian Eno , Talking Heads " . Frantz , Harrison , and Weymouth disputed Byrne and Eno 's attempt to claim sole credits , especially for a process they had partly funded . According to Weymouth , Byrne told Kalman to doctor the credits on Eno 's advice . Later editions rectified the error . Remain in Light received its world premiere airing in its entirety on 10 October 1980 on <unk> . It was certified Gold by the Canadian Recording Industry Association in February 1981 after shipping 50 @,@ 000 copies , and by Recording Industry Association of America in September 1985 after shipping 500 @,@ 000 copies . Over one million copies have been sold worldwide . 
 = = Content = = 
 = = = Lyrics = = = 
 Remain in Light contains eight songs that possess a " striking free @-@ associative feel " according to psychoanalyst Michael A. Brog , in that there is no long @-@ lasting coherent thought process that can be followed in the stream @-@ of @-@ consciousness lyrics . David Gans instructed Byrne to be freer with his lyrical content by advising him that " rational thinking has its limits " . The frontman included a bibliography with the album press kit along with a statement that explained how the album was inspired by African mythologies and rhythms . The release stressed that the major inspiration to the lyrics was Professor John Miller Chernoff 's African Rhythm and African Sensibility , which examined the musical enhancement of life in the continent 's rural communities . The academic travelled to Ghana in 1970 to study native percussion and wrote about how Africans have complicated conversations through drum patterns . One of the songs , " The Great Curve " , exemplifies the African theme by including the line " The world moves on a woman 's hips " , which Byrne used after reading Professor Robert Farris Thompson 's book African Art in Motion . He additionally studied straight speech , from John Dean 's Watergate testimony to the stories of African American former slaves . 
 Like all the other tracks , album opener " Born Under Punches ( The Heat Goes On ) " borrows from " preaching , shouting and ranting " . The expression " And the Heat Goes On " , used in the title and repeated in the chorus , is based on a New York Post headline Eno read in the summer of 1980 whilst Byrne rewrote the song title " Don 't Worry About the Government " from Talking Heads ' debut album , Talking Heads : 77 , into the lyric " Look at the hands of a government man " . The " rhythmical rant " in " Crosseyed and Painless " — " Facts are simple and facts are straight . Facts are lazy and facts are late . " — is influenced by old school rap , specifically Kurtis Blow 's " The Breaks " given to Byrne by Frantz . " Once in a Lifetime " borrows heavily from preachers ' diatribes . Some critics have suggested that the song is " a kind of prescient jab at the excesses of the 1980s " . Byrne disagreed with the categorisation and commented that its lyrics are meant to be taken literally ; he stated , " We 're largely unconscious . You know , we operate half awake or on autopilot and end up , whatever , with a house and family and job and everything else , and we haven 't really stopped to ask ourselves , ' How did I get here ? ' . " 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Byrne has described the album 's final mix as a " spiritual " piece of work , " joyous and ecstatic and yet it 's serious " ; he has pointed out that , in the end , there was " less Africanism in Remain in Light that we implied ... but the African ideas were far more important to get across than specific rhythms " . According to Eno , the record uniquely blends funk and punk rock or new wave music . None of the compositions include chord changes and instead rely on the use of different harmonics and notes . " <unk> riffs " and layered tracks of bass and percussion are used extensively throughout the album . The first side contains the more rhythmic songs recorded — " Born Under Punches ( The Heat Goes On ) " , " Crosseyed and Painless " , and " The Great Curve " — which include long instrumental interludes . The last @-@ named track contains extended synthesiser @-@ treated guitar solos from Adrian Belew . 
 The second side of Remain in Light features more introspective songs . " Once in a Lifetime " pays homage to early rap techniques and the music of art rock band The Velvet Underground . The track was originally called " Weird Guitar Riff Song " because of its composition . It was conceived as a single riff before the band added a second , boosted riff over the top of the first . Eno alternated eight bars of each riff with corresponding bars of its counterpart . " Houses in Motion " incorporates lengthy brass performances from Jon Hassell , while " Listening Wind " features Arabic music elements . The final track on the album , " The Overload , " was Talking Heads ' attempt to emulate the sound of British post @-@ punk band Joy Division . The song was made despite no band member having heard the music of Joy Division ; rather , it was based on an idea of what the British quartet might sound like based on descriptions in the music press . The track features " tribal @-@ cum @-@ industrial " beats created primarily by Harrison and Byrne . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The album has attained widespread acclaim from media outlets since its release . Ken Tucker of Rolling Stone explained that it was a brave and absorbing attempt to locate a common ground in the early 1980s divergent and often hostile musical genres ; he concluded , " Remain in Light yields scary , funny music to which you can dance and think , think and dance , dance and think , ad infinitum . " Robert Christgau , writing in The Village Voice , described the record as one " in which David Byrne conquers his fear of music in a visionary <unk> synthesis — clear @-@ eyed , detached , almost mystically optimistic " . Michael Kulp of The Daily Collegian commented that the album deserves the tag " classic " like each of the band 's three previous full @-@ length releases , while John Rockwell , writing in The New York Times , suggested that it confirmed Talking Heads ' position as " America 's most venturesome rock band " . Sandy Robertson of Sounds praised the record 's innovative nature , while Billboard wrote , " Just about every LP Talking Heads has released in the last four years has wound up on virtually every critics ' best of list . Remain in Light should be no exception . " 
 AllMusic 's William Ruhlmann noted that Talking Heads ' musical transition , first witnessed in Fear of Music , comes to full fruition in Remain in Light ; he stated , " Talking Heads were connecting with an audience ready to follow their musical evolution , and the album was so inventive and influential . " In the 1995 Spin Alternative Record Guide , Eric Weisbard praised Eno 's production effort which helped rein in any excessive appropriations of African music by Talking Heads . In 2004 , Slant Magazine 's Barry Walsh labelled its results as " simply magical " after the band turned rock music into a more global entity in terms of its musical and lyrical scope . In a 2008 review , Sean Fennessey of Vibe concluded , " Talking Heads took African polyrhythms to NYC and made a return trip with elegant , alien post @-@ punk in tow . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Remain in Light was named the best album of 1980 by Sounds , ahead of The Skids ' The Absolute Game , and by Melody Maker , while The New York Times included it in its unnumbered shortlist of the 10 best records issued that year . It figured highly in other end @-@ of @-@ year best album lists , notably at number two , behind The Clash 's London Calling , by Robert Christgau , and at number six by NME . It featured at number three — behind London Calling and Bruce Springsteen 's The River — in The Village Voice 's 1980 Pazz & Jop critics ' poll , which aggregates the votes of hundreds of prominent reviewers . 
 In 1989 , Rolling Stone named Remain in Light as the fourth best album of the decade . In 1993 , it was included at number 11 in NME 's list of The 50 Greatest Albums Of The ' 80s , and at number 68 in the publication 's Greatest Albums Of All Time list . In 1997 , The Guardian collated worldwide data from renowned critics , artists , and radio DJs , which placed the record at number 43 in the list of the 100 Best Albums Ever . In 1999 , it was included by Vibe as one of its 100 Essential Albums Of The 20th Century . In 2002 , Pitchfork Media featured Remain in Light at number two behind Sonic Youth 's Daydream Nation in its Top 100 Albums Of The 1980s list . In 2003 , VH1 named the record at number 88 during its 100 Greatest Albums countdown , while Slant magazine included it in its unnumbered shortlist of 50 Essential Pop Albums . Rolling Stone placed it at number 129 in its December 2015 issue of " The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time " , higher than three other Talking Heads releases . In 2006 , Q ranked Remain in Light at number 27 in its list of the 40 Best Albums of the 80s . In 2012 , Slant listed the album at number six on its list of the " Best Albums of the 1980s " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by David Byrne , Brian Eno , Chris Frantz , Jerry Harrison , and Tina Weymouth . 
 The remastered reissue was produced by Andy Zax with the help of Talking Heads . 
 The DVD portion of the European reissue contains videos of the band performing " Crosseyed and Painless " and " Once in a Lifetime " on German music show <unk> in 1980 . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Those involved in the making of Remain in Light were : 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = Louboutins ( song ) = 
 " Louboutins " is a song recorded by American entertainer Jennifer Lopez . Written and produced by Terius " The @-@ Dream " Nash and C. " Tricky " Stewart , the record was recorded by fellow recording artist and label @-@ mate Brandy Norwood , but was given to Lopez following Norwood 's departure from Epic Records . Lopez originally released the song as the lead single from her seventh studio album , Love ? ; however , after Lopez herself moved record labels to Island Records , the new lead single , " On the Floor " , was released and " Louboutins " was not included on the album . The electro @-@ R & B song uses the celebrity footwear brand Louboutins as metaphor for female empowerment , with the lyrics focusing on women who need to leave their bad relationships with their heads held high . 
 Lopez premiered " Louboutins " at the American Music Awards on November 22 , 2009 , where she accidentally fell on her rear @-@ end in the middle of the performance . Ryan Seacrest and will.i.am praised Lopez 's showmanship and professionalism for swiftly recovering from the fall to continue the performance . It made its radio premiere a day later on KIIS @-@ FM 's On Air With Ryan Seacrest before being sent for radio adds on December 8 , 2009 . It was then released as a digital download on December 21 , 2009 in the United States and Canada . 
 " Louboutins " eventually topped the US Hot Dance Club Songs chart but failed to chart on the Billboard Hot 100 as it garnered little airplay . Subsequently in 2010 , Lopez announced that her ten @-@ year partnership with Sony Music was over , making the single her last release under Epic Records . A video for the single was never filmed and further promotion of the song was cancelled . 
 = = Background = = 
 During an interview with Vibe magazine in November 2009 , Tricky Stewart revealed that he was working on records for Lopez 's upcoming album . He then revealed that he and The @-@ Dream had originally produced " Louboutins " for R & B singer Brandy Norwood . She recorded the song after her 2008 album , Human . Norwood released a statement in which she admitted that the song was once hers : " It is true I had a song called ' Louboutins ' that I loved and still love to pieces , but God never blesses you with another person 's blessing " . Stewart later revealed that when Norwood lost her deal , the song was left over and neither he nor The @-@ Dream wanted the record to " die " . " Louboutins " was subsequently offered to Lopez , who fell in love with the song . Christian Louboutin said he was " flattered " that Lopez had recorded a song about his shoe designs and was grateful that she had asked if she was pronouncing the name correctly . 
 = = Writing and composition = = 
 " Louboutins " is a song which " tells the story of a woman stuck in a dead @-@ end relationship with a man who clearly does not deserve her , and with her journey to realizing that and eventually walking out on him " , and her frustration that her man is not 100 % committed . The introduction was said to be similar to " 4 Minutes " by Madonna and Justin Timberlake , though the melody is " backed with trumpets and synth beats " . A reviewer from Prefix said that the record didn 't sound like a typical Tricky Stewart and The @-@ Dream production . 
 Stewart told Vibe how he and The @-@ Dream came up with the song 's concept . He said " That was Dream and I just getting in the room and clicking , ... We were both on two different keyboards , two different drum machines and once again just got behind the mic and the rest is history . " Lyrics include lines like , " But it 's the last time , I 'm movin ' on / I 'm throwing on my Louboutins . " Lopez described the idea behind the song as " that point in a bad relationship and you 're like , ' Damn , I really have to leave . It 's just not good for me , ' ... It 's not the girl who 's like , ' I 'm gonna take my stuff , and I 'm gonna put on my sweatpants , and I 'm gonna cry , ' ... This girl is like putting on her hottest dress and her sexiest Louboutin shoes , and leaving your ass " . In the chorus Lopez singles " I 'm throwing on my Louboutins " eight times and overall the word " Louboutins " is spoken thirty @-@ two times across the song . Prefix magazine said that " Louboutins " is used as a metaphor for female empowerment . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Louboutins " received mixed reception from critics . Elana Gorgan of Softpedia focused on the single cover and concept of the song . She said " While the idea of the track is original , critics and fans alike say , the artwork is lackluster at best ... There is a certain old vibe to the cover , what with the font of the writing and the shot in itself , but it 's not helping the singer in any way garner much interest in the release . " Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly said " [ Louboutins ] does for the ultra high @-@ end shoe brand what Crocs do for sexy . " She pointed out how the song was not as good as Lopez 's previous material and at one point even called the song " Poo " . Further to this , Peter Gicas of E ! Online was also critical of the song , suggesting that the song leaked online before its official debut to warn fans of what Lopez was about to inflict on them . " The track begins with the singer insisting , " I 'm taking back my love . " Personally , we wish we could take back the last three minutes and 49 seconds . " Tom Stacks of Entertainment Weekly was less than impressed saying " J. Lo needs to move on from her recording career . She had some fun , catchy songs ( ' If You Had My Love , ' ' Love Don 't Cost a Thing ' ) , but trying to regain musical relevance by singing about pricey high @-@ heels just seems a little sad . I say focus on getting the movie career back on track ... " 
 Becky Bain of ' Idolator ' was more positive of the song saying she " actually forgot Lopez is still considered a singer , what with her two @-@ year hiatus to focus on all her fragrances and clothing lines and babies and such . It 's nice to have her back — yes , not every J @-@ Lo song was a hit , but we all danced to ' If You Had My Love ' and ' Waiting for Tonight ' back in the day . ' Louboutins ' ... definitely has the catchiest chorus she 's had in years . This could actually bring Jennifer out of the pit her last album Brave dug her into . " Nick Levine from Digital Spy described the track as " a Tricky and The @-@ Dream @-@ produced club banger with a chorus that succeeds through sheer attrition , with a proper Janet Jackson @-@ style dance break . [ ... ] Truth be told , it 's not a J.Lo classic to rival ' Play ' or ' Love Don 't Cost a Thing ' , and it 's about as original as starting your day with a bowl of Kellogg 's <unk> , but it does burrow into your brain after a few spins . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 MTV was first to name Lopez as one of the many performers to take to the stage at the 2009 American Music Awards. which aired on November 22 , 2009 . She later confirmed this on a KIIS @-@ FM interview with DJ <unk> , saying that the performance would debut her new single , " Louboutins " . The performance took on a boxing theme , and featured famous ring announcer Michael Buffer introducing Lopez to the stage . Lopez performed in a boxing @-@ like outfit and had a costume change halfway through the performance . The performance began in the ring and ended with Lopez walking through the audience . However the performance did not go as planned when the choreographed " dramatic stunt of climbing up a human pyramid of semi @-@ naked male dancers " went wrong . " She lost her balance after jumping off a dancer 's back , and landed on her <unk> . " In E ! Online 's " Top Five Worst Concert Diggers " , Lopez 's fall was ranked at number five . However , according to The Daily Mail 's Natalie Trombetta , Lopez responded in a professional way , " ever the professional , Jennifer quickly recovered her poise and carried on with the show . " Close friend and American TV presenter Ryan Seacrest , agreed calling it " the greatest recovery ever ! " According to MTV , " the tumble was edited out of the West Coast feed of the show , out of respect for Lopez , by the show 's producers " . Becky Bain of ' Idolator ' suggested that the tumble was more talked about than the actually single itself , which was confirmed when MTV reported that it was one of the most searched things on the internet . After the incident will.i.am praised Lopez for being a true entertainer . " That shows she 's a true entertainer and devoted , She came out of it and still rocked it . It doesn 't matter how you fall – just how you get up . She got up . " 
 Lopez reprised the performance on The Ellen DeGeneres Show on December 3 , 2009 where she also laughed and joked about the incident . She also performed on the season six @-@ finale of So You Think You Can Dance on December 16 , 2009 . The performance took on a holiday theme and was choreographed by the show 's team . Lopez 's final performance of the song came on December 31 , 2009 where she performed " Louboutins " along with a medley of previous hits including " Waiting For Tonight " and " Let 's Get Loud " at Dick Clark 's New Year 's Rockin ' Eve with Ryan Seacrest . Lopez 's choice of outfit , a shimmering skin @-@ tight catsuit , received attention from the media with the NY Daily News praising her for her " flawless physique " . 
 = = Music video = = 
 Christian Louboutin said that he would dedicate his time to creating some " scene @-@ stealing designs for the single 's video " , out of his appreciation for the song . According to Rap @-@ Up , Lopez was scheduled to film the music video for the song in January 2010 . She outlined the concept of the video in a radio interview , where she said : " It 's gonna be a lot of dancing , I definitely want to do some dancing because it 's been a while and I want to do a dance video , and it 's going to be really empowering . It 's going to be about that woman , you know when you have that moment when you realize you have to really get out of here that 's the moment we 're trying to <unk> in the video . Even when you know that it 's gonna hurt later , you feel good about making the decision , so you 're like " I decided ! I 'm walking up out the house right now " and that 's the part we 're gonna do in the video except I 'm gonna dance my way out the house . " 
 However following Lopez 's departure from Epic Records in 2010 , the video was never filmed . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital download 
 " Louboutins " – 3 : 48 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Louboutins " was to be the second consecutive song from Lopez 's seventh album , Love ? , to top the Hot Dance Club Songs chart following " Fresh Out the Oven " , however , neither of the songs were included on the album 's final track listing . According to Billboard , " Louboutins " failed to attain enough airplay to enter the Billboard charts . Later in 2010 , the New York Daily News suggested that this lack of success played a role in Lopez 's departure from Epic Records and Sony Music in earlier in the year . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Mycenastrum = 
 Mycenastrum is a fungal genus in the family Agaricaceae . The genus is monotypic , containing one widely distributed species , Mycenastrum corium , known by various common names : the giant pasture puffball , leathery puffball , or tough puffball . The roughly spherical to turnip @-@ shaped puffball @-@ like fruit bodies grow to a diameter of 6 – 24 cm ( 2 – 9 in ) . Initially covered by a thick , felted , whitish layer , the puffballs develop a characteristic checkered skin ( peridium ) in age . When the internal spore mass , the gleba , is firm and white , the puffball is edible , although some individuals may suffer mild gastrointestinal symptoms after eating it . As the spores mature , the gleba turns first yellowish then purplish brown . Spores are released when the peridium eventually splits open into irregularly shaped sections . Microscopically , the gleba consists of spherical , dark brown spores with rounded bumps on their surfaces , and a capillitium — intricately branched fibers that form long thorn @-@ like spines . The puffball grows on or in the ground in prairie or desert habitats . Although widely distributed , it is not commonly encountered . Mycenastrum corium is a threatened species in Europe . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The species was originally described in 1805 as Lycoperdon corium in the second volume of Augustin Pyramus de Candolle and Jean @-@ Baptiste Lamarck 's Flore Française . They attributed authorship to French botanist Louis Ben <unk> , who discovered it in an alfalfa field between the town of La <unk> and Rouen in northern France . Synonyms include Scleroderma corium published by Arthur <unk> Graves in 1830 , and <unk> corium published by Elias Magnus Fries in 1849 . The species was given its current name by Nicaise Auguste Desvaux in 1842 , who circumscribed the genus Mycenastrum to contain it . Generic synonyms are <unk> <unk> <unk> 's 1845 <unk> and Stephan <unk> von <unk> 's 1876 <unk> . 
 In 1948 , Sanford Myron Zeller circumscribed the new family Mycenastraceae , containing both Mycenastrum as the type genus , and Bovista . A 2001 molecular study supported the inclusion of Mycenastrum corium in the <unk> , where it was traditionally placed . In a more recent ( 2008 ) cladistic analysis , Mycenastrum was shown to be a sister group to the Lycoperdaceae ; authors Larsson and Jeppson agreed with Zeller ( 1949 ) and <unk> 's ( 1958 ) decision to regard <unk> as a monotypic genus in the separate family Mycenastraceae . Despite this , several taxonomic authorities prefer to fold Mycenastraceae into the Agaricaceae . 
 It is commonly known as the " leathery puffball " , the " tough puffball " , or the " giant pasture puffball " . 
 María <unk> & Jorge E. Wright published the variety Mycenastrum corium var. diabolicum in 1973 from South America . M. corium subspecies ferrugineum was described in 2005 from Jefferson County , Colorado , by Orson K. Miller . 
 = = = Former Mycenastrum = = = 
 Most species historically named as Mycenastrum have since been transferred to other genera , usually Scleroderma , but also <unk> , Bovista , and Gastropila . Many , including those species that have not been reclassified are poorly known ; the nomenclatural authority Index Fungorum considers only four of these former Mycenastrum species to be currently valid : Bovista <unk> , B. lycoperdoides , Gastropila fragilis , and <unk> <unk> . 
 = = Description = = 
 The fruit body usually grows to a diameter of 6 – 15 cm ( 2 – 6 in ) , although extremes of 3 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) and 27 cm ( 11 in ) have been reported . Its shape ranges from roughly spherical , to obovate ( egg @-@ shaped ) or pyriform ( pear @-@ shaped ) , sometimes plicate ( crumpled , wrinkled ) around a somewhat fibrous , persistent tuft of mycelium . The puffball is initially covered by a thick , felted , whitish layer ( the exoperidium ) . This is continuous at first but eventually cracks and peels away in thin flakes , exposing a leathery to corky , nearly smooth , light brown to dark pinkish @-@ brown surface . This tough layer of tissue ( the endoperidium ) measures about 2 mm thick , encloses the gleba . In maturity , the endoperidium opens by irregular splits that eventually extend towards the base in a star @-@ shaped manner . These torn segments of endoperidium sometimes turn inside out , sometimes drying rigid , exposing a felt @-@ like internal surface . The gleba is white when young and has a cheesy appearance and consistency . As the puffball matures , it undergoes a lytic process involving water loss . Subsequently , the gleba becomes olivaceous , olive @-@ brown , and finally dark olive when dry , and then develops a characteristic pungent smell . Fruit bodies that grow underground have a conspicuously different morphology – a smooth , chocolate @-@ brown coloured surface that lacks the patches characteristic of above @-@ ground fruit bodies , and their capillitia are bifurcate with stumpy spines . The fungus is edible when the gleba is white . Its odor and taste have been described as pungent or earthy and its taste astringent . 
 Its spores are spherical , measuring 8 – 13 µm , and have a surface of irregular , coarse warts . The capillitium refers to late @-@ maturing , thick @-@ walled cells in the gleba . The main axes of these branched cells are 20 – 30 µm thick , and they are covered with numerous spines . 
 Mycenastrum corium subsp. ferrugineum has a deep rusty red to reddish orange gleba , clearly distinguishing it from the glebal coloring of the main subspecies . M. corium var. diabolicum has an extremely spiny capillitium . 
 = = = Uses = = = 
 The puffball is edible when the gleba is still firm and white . They are reportedly consumed by the tribal people of Madhya Pradesh . In Mexico , a large collection was consumed by several people who confused the species with Calvatia , a puffball genus containing popular edible members . Of the five who ate the fungus , two had gastrointestinal symptoms including stomachache , flatulence , and diarrhea ; the other three did not have symptoms . The large European bird great bustard ( Otis tarda ) has been recorded feeding on the puffball . 
 Because of their thick outer peridium , Mycenastrum corium puffballs can withstand hard blows without breaking , and children have used them as replacements for balls . The puffballs have also been used medicinally in Mexico as a hemostatic , as a throat and lung tonic , and for their purported anti @-@ inflammatory properties . 
 = = <unk> maturation = = 
 The manner in which the puffball splits open ( dehisces ) has been described by 19th @-@ century American mycologist William Henry Long . The thick and leathery peridium of the mature puffball remains unopened for several months without splitting . After several alternating cycles of wetting and drying , fissures develop across the top . These fissures usually radiate from a common center near the top of the fruit body and finally produce very irregular star @-@ like teeth . In time , the entire upper half of the puffball is open and exposed during dry weather . In this condition , the spores are blown out by the wind and widely distributed . During every rainy spell the puffball promptly closes only to open again when dry weather returns . At each alternate opening and closing the peridium is split more and more , until finally it is expanded into a flat shape , or even curls backward . In the puffball , the outer layer of the peridium comprises cells arranged so that when wet they adsorb water and expand , thus closing the top of the puffball . Upon drying , these outer cells lose water and gradually shrink , thus producing an unequal tension between the outer and inner cells of the peridium . This tension causes the irregular star @-@ like pieces of the peridium to gradually separate and curve outward , thus opening the top of the puffball during dry weather . 
 = = Ecology and distribution = = 
 Mycenastrum corium is a saprobic species , consuming dead organic debris . It is usually found fruiting on the ground singly , scattered , in rings , or in clusters , but is can also grow underground . Fruiting occurs at low elevations in groups in open habitats dominated by sagebrush and <unk> , or in grassy or shrubby wet areas in dry prairie . Other reported habitats include old haystacks , on silage , and roadsides . Mature fruit bodies can be broken loose from attachment to the substrate and be rolled around by wind , similar to some Bovista puffballs . Although the species is not frequently encountered , it has been suggested that this is because it grows in locations " rather seldom visited by mycologists " . M. corium could be a useful indicator species for climate change . 
 The puffball is widely distributed , and has been recorded in Africa ( Zimbabwe ) , Asia ( China , India , Iran , Mongolia , and Yemen ) , South America ( Argentina , Chile and Uruguay ) , North America , Australia , and New Zealand . In Europe it is found in southern Scandinavia and is widespread to the south of the continent . Although it was reported in Scotland in 2010 ( its first appearance on the British mainland ) , the grassland habitat where it was found has since become heavily eroded , and may be unsuitable for future appearances of the species . Mycenastrum corium is a threatened species in Europe , and is listed as vulnerable in the Regional Red List of Poland . In North America , it is most common in western regions of the United States and Canada , but it has also been recorded in eastern Canada . Poorly known in Mexico , it has been recorded from Baja California , Chihuahua , Nuevo León , San Luis Potosi , Sonora , Mexico City . The variety M. corium var. diabolicum occurs in Sub @-@ Saharan Africa , tropical Asia , the Caribbean , and South America . 
 = New York State Route 30 = 
 New York State Route 30 ( NY 30 ) is a state highway in the central part of New York in the United States . It extends for 300 @.@ 71 miles ( 483 @.@ 95 km ) from an interchange with NY 17 in the Southern Tier to the Canadian border in the state 's North Country , where it continues into Quebec as Route 138 . On a regional level , the route serves to connect the Catskill Park to the Adirondack Park . In the latter , NY 30 is known as the Adirondack Trail . Aside from the state parks , the route serves the city of Amsterdam ( where it meets the New York State Thruway ) and several villages . 
 NY 30 was assigned in the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York to most of its modern routing south of Wells , replacing a series of designations that had been assigned to the highway in the 1920s . The portion of what is now NY 30 north of Speculator was initially part of NY 10 . When that route was truncated to Arietta c . 1960 , NY 30 was extended northward over NY 10 's former alignment by way of an overlap with NY 8 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The New York State Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) maintains all but 0 @.@ 97 miles ( 1 @.@ 56 km ) of NY 30 's 301 @-@ mile ( 484 km ) alignment . The only section not maintained by the state is located in the city of Amsterdam , where the route is locally maintained from Prospect Street ( two blocks north of NY 67 ) to the northern city line . 
 = = = Hancock to Schoharie = = = 
 NY 30 begins at an interchange with NY 17 in the town of Hancock adjacent to the confluence of the East Branch of the Delaware River and the Beaverkill River . The route follows the East Branch northeast to Downsville , where it meets NY 206 . NY 206 follows NY 30 across the East Branch into Catskill Park , where the routes split near Brock Mountain . NY 30 exits the park , runs along the south side of the <unk> Reservoir , before crossing over to the north side of the river . Near Margaretville , NY 30 briefly overlaps NY 28 before turning northward toward Roxbury , where the route passes the John Burroughs Memorial State Historic Site . New York Governor David Paterson designated the stretch of NY 30 within Delaware County the " David C. Brinkerhoff Memorial Highway " , after the New York State Trooper who was slain in pursuit of Travis Trimm near the village on April 25 , 2007 . 
 From Roxbury , NY 30 follows the East Branch to Grand Gorge in northeastern Delaware County , where the East Branch comes to an end amidst the mountains . NY 30 , meanwhile , intersects NY 23 in the center of the hamlet . 
 North of Grand Gorge , NY 30 crosses into Schoharie County and intersects NY 990V , one of four reference routes in New York erroneously signed as a touring route , near the northeastern edge of the Schoharie Reservoir in Gilboa . From NY 990V northward , NY 30 follows the Schoharie Creek through Schoharie County to Middleburgh , where it intersects NY 145 . To the north in Schoharie , NY 30 meets NY 443 before splitting into NY 30 and NY 30A north of the village , with Schoharie Creek largely following NY 30A . While NY 30A connects to Interstate 88 ( I @-@ 88 ) by way of an interchange a short distance to the north , NY 30 has no connection to the freeway . Just past I @-@ 88 , NY 30 intersects NY 7 . Shortly after passing NY 7 , NY 30 enters Schenectady County . 
 = = = Schoharie to Adirondack Park = = = 
 In Schenectady County , Schoharie Creek breaks from NY 30A and returns to the vicinity of NY 30 as it intersects U.S. Route 20 ( US 20 ) in Esperance . From Esperance northward , the creek becomes roughly equidistant from both NY 30 and NY 30A as all three entities cross into Montgomery County . Near the northeastern corner of the county , NY 30 enters the city of Amsterdam . The route meets the New York State Thruway ( I @-@ 90 ) and NY 5S via separate interchanges before heading downhill as a four @-@ lane divided highway approaching the Mohawk River ( here part of the Erie Canal ) . Historically , the bridge over the river was a straight line to Market Street , which is visible as one approaches northbound . Segments of downtown Market Street remain in use today . With the 1977 creation of the Amsterdam Mall , NY 30 , together with NY 5 and NY 67 , were re @-@ routed onto splits . After the splits rejoin , NY 30 continues on Market Street and leaves the city and , for all purposes , the county . 
 In adjacent Fulton County , NY 30 crosses NY 29 near <unk> , then curves gently to the east after an intersection with County Route 155 ( CR 155 ) , a historical routing of NY 29 . 0 @.@ 25 miles ( 0 @.@ 40 km ) , NY 30 turns left toward Mayfield ; CR 155 continues eastward . The concurrency between the two routes is unsigned . 
 NY 30 historically followed School Street through the village of Mayfield . The new routing has it heading toward Riceville , where NY 30A rejoins NY 30 . Here , the Adirondack Trail begins as NY 30 turns right , following the right @-@ of @-@ way of NY 30A into Adirondack Park shortly before entering Mayfield . 
 = = = Adirondack Park and Franklin County = = = 
 NY 30 runs through the Adirondacks , accessing communities such as Speculator , Blue Mountain Lake , and Tupper Lake as a scenic byway named the Adirondack Trail . From Wells to Speculator , NY 30 is concurrent to NY 8 , then with NY 28 from Indian Lake to Blue Mountain Lake . Between Blue Mountain Lake and Long Lake , NY 30 is concurrent with the western third of NY 28N . 
 Near Tupper Lake , it skirts the boundary between Franklin and Saint Lawrence for a considerable distance before entering Tupper Lake and intersecting NY 3 . The two routes overlap to Harrietstown , where NY 30 splits from NY 3 and heads north along a series of lakes , including Upper Saranac Lake and Meacham Lake . North of Duane , NY 30 exits Adirondack Park and heads north towards Malone . Within the village , NY 30 briefly overlaps US 11 . The Adirondack Trail ends at the east end of the overlap . The route continues north out of the village to the Canadian border in Constable , where it becomes Route 138 upon entering Quebec at the Trout River Border Crossing . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Old roads = = = 
 Route 30 made up part of the privately owned Middletown and Roxbury Turnpike . The turnpike , which accessed the villages of Middletown and Roxbury , was created in 1808 . The highway was about 23 miles ( 37 km ) long , as that is the current stretch of Route 30 from Middletown to Roxbury . 
 The stretch of Route 30 from Middleburgh to Schoharie was also once part of the Middleburgh and Schoharie Plank Road . 
 = = = Designation = = = 
 Prior to 1930 , the modern routing of NY 30 carried a large number of designations . Between Margaretville and Grand Gorge in the town of Roxbury , what is now NY 30 was designated as part of NY 19 . From Mayfield north to Malone , most of the current routing of NY 30 carried a designation . The portion from the modern junction of NY 30 and NY 30A in Mayfield to Speculator was part of NY 54 . From Speculator to Indian Lake , NY 30 was the northernmost segment of NY 80 . Between Indian Lake and Long Lake , NY 30 comprised the western half of NY 10A . Past Long Lake , NY 30 was part of NY 10 north to the modern junction of NY 30 and NY 186 west of Harrietstown . From NY 186 to modern NY 86 in Paul Smiths , the present alignment of NY 30 was unnumbered . Between Paul Smiths and Malone , NY 30 was part of NY 3 . The remainder of NY 30 was unnumbered . 
 In the 1930 renumbering , NY 30 was largely assigned to its current alignment between the Hancock hamlet of East Branch and Wells , where it terminated at NY 8 . Past Wells , the modern alignment of NY 30 was designated as NY 8 to Spectator and as NY 10 north to the Canadian border . NY 10 was truncated southward to NY 8 in Arietta c . 1960 , at which time NY 30 was extended north to Quebec along the former alignment of NY 10 . 
 = = = Realignments = = = 
 NY 30 has been realigned in two areas along its routing . The first realignment was in the Schoharie Valley near the hamlets of Breakabeen and Fultonham . NY 30 was originally routed along the base of <unk> Mountain near Fultonham and along a pair of village streets in Breakabeen . In the 1950s , a proposal was made to reroute NY 30 onto a new routing in the base of the valley surrounding Schoharie Creek . The proposal was approved , and the new alignment of NY 30 opened c . 1970 . The former routing of NY 30 from Max V. Shaul State Park near Breakabeen to Fultonham , still visible from the modern alignment of the route , was closed to the public and guardrails were installed to stop motor traffic from using the route . However , biking and walking was still allowed , and the old highway is now a 1 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) long trail known as " Old Route 30 " . The trail is not maintained ; thus , the quality of the <unk> along Old Route 30 has deteriorated over the years . There are significant potholes and overhanging trees , but the path is still traversable . 
 The second realignment of NY 30 was in the vicinity of the village of Northville . NY 30 originally entered the village by way of Bridge Street and followed Bridge , Main , and Reed streets through the village . It continued along the eastern bank of the Great Sacandaga Lake on what is now Old State Road and Old Northville Road and rejoined its modern alignment in the town of Hope . The route was realigned c . 1961 to follow a new highway along the western lakeshore , bypassing Northville entirely . The portion of Bridge Street from NY 30 to the Northville village line remains state @-@ maintained as NY <unk> , an unsigned reference route 0 @.@ 23 miles ( 0 @.@ 37 km ) in length . Farther north , the portion of Old Northville Road from the Fulton – Hamilton county line to its junction with NY 30 is maintained by Hamilton County as CR 15 . 
 = = NY 30A = = 
 NY 30A ( 34 @.@ 86 miles or 56 @.@ 10 kilometres ) is a loop of NY 30 , running west of NY 30 from north of Schoharie to south of Mayfield through <unk> , Fonda , Johnstown , and Gloversville . It was assigned in the late 1950s . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Joseph Merrick = 
 Joseph Carey Merrick ( 5 August 1862 – 11 April 1890 ) , sometimes named incorrectly as John Merrick , was an English man with severe deformities who was exhibited as a human curiosity named the Elephant Man . He became well known in London society after he went to live at the London Hospital . Merrick was born in Leicester , and began to develop abnormally during the first few years of his life . His skin appeared thick and lumpy , he developed enlarged lips , and a bony lump grew on his forehead . One of his arms and both of his feet became enlarged and at some point during his childhood he fell and damaged his hip , resulting in permanent lameness . When he was 11 , his mother died from bronchopneumonia , and his father soon remarried . Merrick left school at the age of 13 and had difficulty finding employment . Rejected by his father and stepmother , he left home . In late 1879 , Merrick , aged 17 , entered the Leicester Union Workhouse . 
 In 1884 , after four years in the workhouse , Merrick contacted a showman named Sam Torr and proposed that Torr should exhibit him . Torr agreed and arranged for a group of men to manage Merrick , whom they named the Elephant Man . After touring the East Midlands , Merrick travelled to London to be exhibited in a penny gaff shop on Whitechapel Road which was rented by showman Tom Norman . Norman 's shop , directly across the street from the London Hospital , was visited by a surgeon named Frederick Treves , who invited Merrick to be examined and photographed . Soon after Merrick 's visits to the hospital , Tom Norman 's shop was closed by the police , and Merrick 's managers sent him to tour in Europe . 
 In Belgium , Merrick was robbed by his road manager and abandoned in Brussels . He eventually made his way back to London ; unable to communicate , he was found by the police to have Dr. Treves 's card on him . Treves came and took Merrick back to the London Hospital . Although his condition was incurable , Merrick was allowed to stay at the hospital for the remainder of his life . Treves visited him daily , and the pair developed quite a close friendship . Merrick also received visits from the wealthy ladies and gentlemen of London society , including Alexandra , Princess of Wales . 
 Aged 27 , Merrick died on 11 April 1890 . The official cause of death was asphyxia , although Treves , who dissected the body , said that Merrick had died of a dislocated neck . He believed that Merrick , who had to sleep sitting up because of the weight of his head , had been attempting to sleep lying down to " be like other people " . 
 The exact cause of Merrick 's deformities is unclear . The dominant theory throughout much of the 20th century was that Merrick suffered from neurofibromatosis type I. In 1986 , a new theory emerged that he had Proteus syndrome . In 2001 , it was proposed that Merrick had suffered from a combination of neurofibromatosis type I and Proteus syndrome . DNA tests conducted on his hair and bones have proven inconclusive . 
 In 1979 , Bernard Pomerance 's play about Merrick called The Elephant Man debuted , and David Lynch 's film , also called The Elephant Man , was released the following year . In late 2014 and early 2015 , Bradley Cooper starred in a Broadway revival of The Elephant Man , directed by Scott Ellis . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 Joseph Carey Merrick was born 5 August 1862 at 50 Lee Street in Leicester , to Joseph Rockley Merrick and his wife Mary Jane ( née Potterton ) . Joseph Rockley Merrick ( c . 1838 – 1897 ) was the son of London @-@ born weaver Barnabas Merrick ( c . 1791 – 1856 ) who moved to Leicester during the 1820s or 1830s , and his third wife Sarah Rockley . Mary Jane Potterton ( c . 1837 – 1873 ) had been born at <unk> , Leicestershire , her father being William Potterton , who was described as an agricultural labourer in the 1851 census of <unk> , Leicestershire . She is said to have had some form of physical disability and as a young woman worked as a domestic servant in Leicester before marrying Joseph Rockley Merrick , then a <unk> driver , in 1861 . 
 The following year , Joseph Carey Merrick was born , apparently healthy , and had no outward symptoms of any disorder for the first few years of his life . Named after his father , he was given the middle name Carey by his mother , a Baptist , after the preacher William Carey . The Merricks had three more children , John Thomas ( born 21 April 1864 , died of smallpox 24 July of the same year ) , William Arthur ( born January 1866 ) who died of scarlet fever on 21 December 1870 aged four and Marion Eliza ( born 28 September 1867 ) , who was born with physical disabilities and died of myelitis and " seizures " in 1891 . When writing of Joseph in his book The Elephant Man : A Study in Human Dignity , Ashley Montagu states that " John Thomas [ sic ] Merrick was born on 21 April 1864 " . Montagu believed Treves 's statement in his book The Elephant Man and Other Reminiscences that Merrick 's first name was John , not Joseph , and confused him with his younger brother . 
 A pamphlet titled " The Autobiography of Joseph Carey Merrick " , produced c . 1884 to accompany his exhibition , states that he started to display symptoms at approximately five years of age , with " thick lumpy skin ... like that of an elephant , and almost the same colour " . According to a 1930 article in the Illustrated Leicester Chronicle , he began to develop swellings on his lips at the age of 21 months , followed by a bony lump on his forehead and a loosening and <unk> of the skin . As he grew , a noticeable difference between the size of his left and right arms appeared and both his feet became significantly enlarged . The Merrick family explained his symptoms as the result of Mary 's being knocked over and frightened by a fairground elephant while she was pregnant with Joseph . The concept of maternal impression — that the emotional experiences of pregnant women could have lasting physical effect on their unborn children — was still common in 19th century Britain . Merrick held this belief about the cause of his affliction for his entire life . 
 In addition to his deformities , at some point during his childhood , Merrick suffered a fall and damaged his left hip . This injury became infected and left him permanently lame . Although affected by his physical deformities , Merrick attended school and enjoyed a close relationship with his mother . She was a Sunday school teacher , and his father worked as an engine driver at a cotton factory , as well as running a haberdashery business . On 19 May 1873 , less than three years after the death of her youngest son William , Mary Jane Merrick died from bronchopneumonia . Joseph Rockley Merrick moved with his two children to live with Mrs. Emma Wood Antill , a widow with children of her own . They married on 3 December 1874 . 
 = = Employment and the workhouse = = 
 Merrick left school aged 13 , which was usual for the time . His home @-@ life was now " a perfect misery " , and neither his father nor his stepmother demonstrated affection towards him . He ran away " two or three " times , but was brought back by his father each time . At 13 , he found work rolling cigars in a factory , but after three years , his right hand deformity had worsened and he no longer had the dexterity required for the job . Now unemployed , he spent his days wandering the streets , looking for work and avoiding his stepmother 's taunts . 
 Merrick was becoming a greater financial burden on his family and eventually , his father secured him a hawker 's licence which enabled him to earn money selling items from the haberdashery shop , door to door . This endeavour was unsuccessful , since Merrick 's facial deformities rendered his speech increasingly unintelligible and prospective customers reacted with horror to his physical appearance . Housewives refused to open doors for him and now people not only stared at him but began to follow him out of curiosity . Merrick failed to make enough money as a hawker to support himself . On returning home one day in 1877 , he was severely beaten by his father and he left home for good . 
 Merrick was now homeless on the streets of Leicester . His uncle , a barber named Charles Merrick , heard of his nephew 's situation , sought him out and offered him accommodation in his home . Merrick continued to hawk around Leicester for the next two years but his efforts to earn a living met with little more success than before . Eventually , his disfigurement drew such negative attention from members of the public that the Commissioners for Hackney Carriages withdrew his licence when it came up for renewal . With young children to provide for , Charles could no longer afford to support his nephew . In late December 1879 , now 17 years old , Merrick entered the Leicester Union Workhouse . 
 Merrick became one of 928 residents in the workhouse . The group was segregated by age and gender , and therefore Merrick was housed with the other men between 16 and 60 . On 22 March 1880 , only 12 weeks after entering , Merrick signed himself out of the workhouse and spent two days looking for work . With no more success than before , he found himself with no option but to return to the workhouse . This time he stayed for four years . Around 1882 , Merrick underwent surgery on his face . The protrusion from his mouth had grown to 8 – 9 inches and severely inhibited his speech and made it difficult to eat . He was operated on at the Leicester Infirmary and had a large part of the mass removed . 
 = = Life as a curiosity = = 
 Merrick concluded that his only escape from the workhouse might be through the world of human novelty exhibitions . He knew of a Leicester music hall comedian and proprietor named Sam Torr . Merrick wrote to Torr , who came and visited him at the workhouse . Torr decided that he could make money exhibiting Merrick ; although , to retain Merrick 's novelty , he would have to be a travelling exhibit . To this end , he organised a group of managers for Merrick : music hall proprietor J. Ellis , travelling showman George Hitchcock , and fair owner Sam Roper . On 3 August 1884 , Merrick departed the workhouse to start his new career . 
 The showmen named Merrick the Elephant Man , and advertised him as " Half @-@ a @-@ Man and Half @-@ an @-@ Elephant " . They showed him around the East Midlands , including in Leicester and Nottingham , before moving him on to London for the winter season . George Hitchcock contacted an acquaintance , showman Tom Norman , who ran penny gaff shops in London 's East End exhibiting human curiosities . Without a meeting , Norman agreed to take over Merrick 's management and in November , Hitchcock travelled with Merrick to London . 
 When Tom Norman first saw Merrick , he was dismayed by the extent of his deformities , fearing his appearance might be too horrific to be a successful novelty . Nevertheless , he exhibited Merrick in the back of an empty shop on Whitechapel Road . Merrick had an iron bed with a curtain drawn around to afford him some privacy . Norman observed Merrick asleep one morning and learned that he always slept sitting up , with his legs drawn up and his head resting on his knees . His enlarged head was too heavy to allow him to sleep lying down and , as Merrick put it , he would risk " waking with a broken neck " . Norman decorated the shop with posters that had been created by Hitchcock , depicting a monstrous half @-@ man , half @-@ elephant . A pamphlet titled " The Autobiography of Joseph Carey Merrick " was created , outlining Merrick 's life to date . This biography , whether written by Merrick or not , provided a generally accurate account of his life . It contained an incorrect date of birth but , throughout his life , Merrick was vague about when he was born . 
 Norman gathered an audience by standing outside the shop and drawing a crowd through his showman patter . He would then lead his onlookers into the shop , explaining that the Elephant Man was " not here to frighten you but to enlighten you . " Drawing aside the curtain , he allowed the onlookers — often visibly horrified — to observe Merrick up close , while describing the circumstances leading to his present condition , including his mother 's alleged accident with an elephant . 
 The Elephant Man exhibit was moderately successful , and made money primarily from the sales of the autobiographical pamphlet . Merrick was able to put his share of the profits aside , hoping to earn enough to one day buy a home of his own . The shop on Whitechapel Road was directly across the road from the London Hospital , an excellent location , as medical students and doctors visited the shop , curious to see Merrick . One visitor was a young house surgeon named Reginald Tuckett . Like his colleagues , Tuckett was intrigued by the Elephant Man 's deformities and told his senior colleague Frederick Treves . 
 Frederick Treves first met Merrick that November at a private viewing , before Norman opened the shop for the day . Treves later recalled in his 1923 Reminiscences that Merrick was " the most disgusting specimen of humanity that I had ever seen ... at no time had I met with such a degraded or perverted version of a human being as this lone figure displayed . " The viewing lasted no more than 15 minutes after which Treves returned to work . Later that day , he sent Tuckett back to the shop to ask if Merrick might be willing to come to the hospital for an examination . Norman and Merrick agreed . To enable him to travel the short distance without drawing undue attention , Merrick wore a costume consisting of an oversized black cloak and a brown cap with a burlap sack that covered his face , and rode in a cab hired by Treves . 
 At the hospital , Treves examined Merrick , observing that he was " shy , confused , not a little frightened , and evidently much cowed . " At this point , Treves assumed that the Elephant Man was an " imbecile " . He measured Merrick 's head circumference at the large size of 36 inches ( 91 cm ) , his right wrist at 12 inches ( 30 cm ) and one of his fingers at 5 inches ( 13 cm ) in circumference . He noted that his skin was covered in <unk> ( warty growths ) , the largest of which exuded an unpleasant smell . The subcutaneous tissue appeared to be weakened and caused a loosening of the skin , which in some areas hung away from the body . There were bone deformities in the right arm , both legs , and , most conspicuously , in the large skull . Despite the corrective surgery to his mouth in 1882 , Merrick 's speech remained barely intelligible . His left arm and hand were not large and were not deformed . His penis and scrotum were normal . Apart from his deformities and the lameness in his hip , Treves concluded that Merrick appeared to be in good general health . Norman later recalled that Merrick went to the hospital for examination " two or three " times and during one of their meetings , Treves gave Merrick his calling card . On one of the visits , Treves had photographs taken , and he provided Merrick with a set of copies which were later added to his autobiographical pamphlet . On 2 December , Treves presented Merrick at a meeting of the Pathological Society of London in Bloomsbury . Eventually , Merrick told Norman that he no longer wanted to be examined at the hospital . According to Norman , he said he was " stripped naked and felt like an animal in a cattle market . " 
 During this time in Victorian Britain , tastes were changing in regard to freak show exhibitions like the Elephant Man . Shows like Norman 's were a cause for public concern , both on the grounds of decency and due to the disruption caused by crowds gathering outside them . Not long after Merrick 's last examination with Frederick Treves , the police closed down Norman 's shop on Whitechapel Road , and Merrick 's Leicester managers withdrew him from Norman 's care . In 1885 , Merrick went on the road with Sam Roper 's travelling fair . He befriended two other performers , " Roper 's Midgets " — Bertram Dooley and Harry Bramley — who on occasion defended Merrick from public harassment . 
 = = Europe = = 
 The dampening of public enthusiasm for freak shows and human oddities continued and the police and magistrates became increasingly vigilant in closing shows down . Merrick remained a horrifying spectacle for his viewers and Roper grew nervous about the negative attention the Elephant Man drew from local authorities . Merrick 's group of managers decided that he should go on tour in Continental Europe , with the hope that authorities there would be more lenient . Merrick 's management was assumed by an unknown man ( possibly named Ferrari ) and they left for the Continent . The Elephant Man was no more successful there than in Britain , and similar action was taken by authorities to move him out of their jurisdictions . In Brussels , Merrick was deserted by this new manager , who stole Merrick 's £ 50 ( 2015 equivalent £ 4 @,@ 900 ) savings . Abandoned , Merrick made his way by train to Ostend , where he attempted to board a ferry for Dover but was refused passage . He travelled to Antwerp and was able to board a ship bound for Harwich in Essex . From there , he travelled by train to London and arrived at Liverpool Street station . 
 Merrick arrived at Liverpool Street Station on 24 June 1886 , safely back in his own country , but with nowhere to go . He was not eligible to enter a workhouse in London for more than one night and would be accepted only by Leicester Union , where he was a permanent resident . Leicester was still 98 miles ( 158 km ) away . He approached strangers for help , but his speech was unintelligible and appearance repugnant . He drew a crowd of curious onlookers until a policeman helped him into an empty waiting room , where he huddled in a corner , exhausted . Unable to make himself understood , his only identifying possession was Frederick Treves 's card . The police contacted Treves , who went to the station . Recognising Merrick , Treves took him in a hansom cab to the London Hospital . Merrick was admitted for bronchitis , washed , fed and put to bed in a small isolation room in the hospital 's attic . 
 = = London Hospital = = 
 With Merrick admitted into the hospital , Treves now had time to conduct a more thorough examination . He discovered that Merrick 's physical condition had deteriorated over the previous two years and that he had become quite crippled by his deformities . Treves also suspected that Merrick now suffered from a heart condition and that he had only a few years left to live . Merrick 's general health improved over the next five months under the care of the hospital staff . Although some nurses were initially upset by his appearance , they overcame this and cared for him . The problem of his unpleasant odour was mitigated through frequent bathing and Treves gradually developed an understanding of Merrick 's speech . A new set of photographs was taken . The question of Merrick 's long @-@ term care had to be addressed . Francis Carr Gomm , the chairman of the hospital committee , had supported Treves in his decision to admit Merrick , but by November , long @-@ term plans needed to be made . The London Hospital was not equipped or staffed to provide care for the incurable , which Merrick clearly was . 
 Carr Gomm contacted other institutions and hospitals more suited to caring for chronic cases , but none would accept Merrick . Gomm wrote a letter to The Times , printed on 4 December , outlining Merrick 's case and asking readers for suggestions . The public response — in letters and donations — was significant , and the situation was even covered by the British Medical Journal . With the financial backing of the many donors , Gomm was able to make a convincing case to the committee for keeping Merrick in the hospital . It was decided that he would be allowed to stay there for the remainder of his life . He was moved from the attic to two rooms in the basement adjacent to a small courtyard . The rooms were adapted and furnished to suit Merrick , with a specially constructed bed and — at Treves 's instruction — no mirrors . 
 Merrick settled into his new life at the London Hospital . Treves visited him daily and spent a couple of hours with him every Sunday . Now that Merrick had found someone who understood his speech , he was delighted to carry on long conversations with the doctor . Treves and Merrick built a friendly relationship , although Merrick never completely confided in him . He told Treves that he was an only child , and Treves had the impression that Merrick 's mother , whose picture Merrick always carried with him , had abandoned him as a baby . Merrick was also reluctant to talk about his exhibition days , although he expressed gratitude towards his former managers . It did not take Treves long to realise that , contrary to his initial impressions , Merrick was not intellectually impaired . 
 Treves observed that Merrick was very sensitive and showed his emotions easily . At times Merrick was bored and lonely , and demonstrated signs of depression . He had spent his entire adult life segregated from women , first in the workhouse and then as an exhibit . The women he met were either disgusted or frightened by his appearance . His opinions about women were derived from his memories of his mother and what he read in books . Treves decided that Merrick would like to be introduced to a woman and it would help him feel normal . The doctor arranged for a friend of his named Mrs. Leila Maturin , " a young and pretty widow " , to visit Merrick . She agreed and with fair warning about his appearance , she went to his rooms for an introduction . The meeting was short , as Merrick quickly became overcome with emotion . He later told Treves that Maturin had been the first woman ever to smile at him , the first to shake his hand . She kept in contact with him and a letter written by Merrick to her , thanking her for the gift of a book and a brace of grouse ( a pair of birds ) , is the only surviving letter written by Merrick . This first experience of meeting a woman , though brief , instilled in Merrick a new sense of self @-@ confidence . He met other women during his life at the hospital , and appeared taken with them all . Treves believed that Merrick 's hope was to go to live at an institution for the blind , where he might meet a woman who could not see his deformities . 
 Merrick wanted to know about the " real world " , and questioned Treves on a number of topics . One day he expressed a desire to see inside what he considered a " real " house and Treves obliged , taking him to visit his Wimpole Street townhouse and meet his wife . At the hospital Merrick filled his days with reading and constructing models of buildings out of card . He entertained visits from Treves and his house surgeons . He rose each day in the afternoon and would leave his rooms to walk in the small adjacent courtyard , after dark . 
 As a result of Carr Gomm 's letters to The Times , Merrick 's case attracted the notice of London 's high society . One person who took a keen interest was actress Madge Kendal . Although she probably never met him in person , she was responsible for raising funds and public sympathy for Merrick . She sent him photographs of herself and employed a basket weaver to go to his rooms and teach him the craft . Other ladies and gentlemen of high society did visit him however , bringing gifts of photographs and books . He reciprocated with letters and hand made gifts of card models and baskets . Merrick enjoyed these visits and became confident enough to converse with people who passed his windows . A young man , Charles Taylor , the son of the engineer responsible for modifying Merrick 's rooms , spent time with him , sometimes playing the violin . Occasionally , he grew bold enough to leave his small living quarters and would explore the hospital . When he was discovered , he was always hurried back to his quarters by the nurses , who feared that he might frighten the patients . 
 On 21 May 1887 , two new buildings were completed at the hospital and the Prince and Princess of Wales came to open them officially . Princess Alexandra wished to meet the Elephant Man , so after a tour of the hospital , the royal party went to his rooms for an introduction . The princess shook Merrick 's hand and sat with him , an experience that left him overjoyed . She gave him a signed photograph of herself , which became a prized possession , and she sent him a Christmas card each year . 
 On at least one occasion , Merrick was able to fulfill a long @-@ held desire to visit the theatre . Treves , with the help of Madge Kendal , arranged for him to attend the Christmas pantomime at the Theatre Royal , Drury Lane . Treves sat with some nurses , concealed in Baroness Burdett @-@ Coutts 's private box . According to Treves , Merrick was " awed " and " enthralled " . " The spectacle left him speechless , so that if he were spoken to he took no heed . " For weeks following the show Merrick talked about the pantomime , reliving the story as if it had been real . 
 = = Last years = = 
 On three occasions Merrick left the hospital and London on holiday , spending a few weeks at a time in the countryside . Through elaborate arrangements that allowed Merrick to board a train unseen and have an entire carriage to himself , he travelled to Northamptonshire to stay at <unk> Hall , the estate of Lady Knightley . He stayed at the gamekeeper 's cottage and spent the days walking in the estate 's woods , collecting wild flowers . He befriended a young farm labourer who later recalled Merrick as an interesting and well @-@ educated man . Treves called this " the one supreme holiday of [ Merrick 's ] life " , although in fact there were three such trips . 
 Merrick 's condition gradually deteriorated during his four years at the London Hospital . He required a great deal of care from the nursing staff and spent much of his time in bed , or sitting in his quarters , with diminishing energy . His facial deformities continued to grow and his head became even more enlarged . He died on 11 April 1890 , at the age of 27 . At around three o 'clock in the afternoon , Treves 's house surgeon visited Merrick and found him lying dead across his bed . His body was formally identified by his uncle , Charles Merrick . An inquest was held on 15 April by Wynne Edwin Baxter , who had come to notoriety conducting inquests for the Whitechapel murders of 1888 . 
 Merrick 's death was ruled accidental and the certified cause of death was asphyxia , caused by the weight of his head as he lay down . Treves , who performed an autopsy on the body , said that Merrick had died of a dislocated neck . Knowing that Merrick had always slept sitting upright out of necessity , Treves came to the conclusion that Merrick must have " made the experiment " , attempting to sleep lying down " like other people " . 
 Treves dissected Merrick 's body and took plaster casts of his head and limbs . He took skin samples , which were later lost during the Second World War , and mounted his skeleton , which remains in the pathology collection at the Royal London Hospital . Although the skeleton has never been on public display , there is a small museum dedicated to his life , housing some of his personal effects . 
 = = Medical condition = = 
 Ever since Joseph Merrick 's days as a novelty exhibit on Whitechapel Road , his condition has been a source of curiosity for medical professionals . His appearance at the meeting of the Pathological Society of London in 1884 drew interest from the doctors present , but none of the answers nor the attention that Treves had hoped for . The case received only a brief mention in the British Medical Journal , and the Lancet declined to mention it at all . Four months later , in 1885 , Treves brought the case before the meeting for a second time . By then , Tom Norman 's shop on Whitechapel Road had been closed , and the Elephant Man had moved on . Without Merrick , Treves made do with the photographs he had taken during his examinations . One of the doctors present at the meeting was Henry Radcliffe Crocker , a dermatologist who was an authority on skin diseases . After hearing Treves 's description of Merrick , and viewing the photographs , Crocker proposed that Merrick 's condition might be a combination of <unk> , <unk> and an unnamed bone deformity , all caused by changes in the nervous system . Crocker wrote about Merrick 's case in his 1888 book Diseases of the Skin : their Description , Pathology , Diagnosis and Treatment . 
 In 1909 , dermatologist Frederick Parkes Weber wrote an article about von Recklinghausen disease ( now known as neurofibromatosis type I ) in the British Journal of Dermatology . He gave Merrick as an example of the disease , which German pathologist Friedrich Daniel von Recklinghausen had described in 1882 . Symptoms of this genetic disorder include tumours of the nervous tissue and bones , and small warty growths on the skin . One characteristic of neurofibromatosis is the presence of light brown pigmentation on the skin called café au lait spots . These were never observed on Merrick 's body . <unk> type I was the accepted diagnosis through most of the 20th century , although other suggestions included <unk> syndrome and <unk> fibrous dysplasia ( Albright 's disease ) . 
 In a 1986 article in the British Medical Journal , Michael Cohen and <unk> <unk> put forward the theory that Merrick had suffered from Proteus syndrome , a congenital disorder identified by Cohen in 1979 . They cited Merrick 's lack of reported café au lait spots and the absence of any histological proof that he had suffered from neurofibromatosis type I. Unlike neurofibromatosis , Proteus syndrome affects tissue other than nerves , and it is a sporadic disorder rather than a genetically transmitted disease . Cohen and <unk> said that Merrick showed the following signs of Proteus syndrome : " macrocephaly ; hyperostosis of the large skull ; hypertrophy of long bones ; and thickened skin and subcutaneous tissues , particularly of the hands and feet , including plantar hyperplasia , <unk> , and other unspecified subcutaneous masses . " 
 In a letter to Biologist in June 2001 , British teacher and Chartered Biologist Paul <unk> , speculated that Merrick might have suffered from a combination of neurofibromatosis type I and Proteus syndrome . This hypothesis was reported by Robert Matthews , a correspondent for The Sunday Telegraph . The possibility that Merrick had both conditions formed the basis for a 2003 documentary film entitled The Curse of The Elephant Man that was produced for the Discovery Health Channel by Natural History New Zealand . During 2002 , genealogical research for the film led to a BBC appeal to trace Merrick 's maternal family line . In response to the appeal , a Leicester resident named Pat Selby was discovered to be the granddaughter of Merrick 's uncle George Potterton . A research team took DNA samples from Selby in an unsuccessful attempt to diagnose Merrick 's condition . During 2003 , the filmmakers commissioned further diagnostic tests using DNA that was extracted from Merrick 's hair and bone . However , the results of these tests proved inconclusive and therefore the precise cause of Merrick 's medical condition remains unknown . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In 1923 , Frederick Treves published a volume entitled The Elephant Man and Other Reminiscences , in which he detailed what he knew of Merrick 's life and their personal interactions . This account is the source of much of what is known about Merrick , but there were several inaccuracies in the book . Merrick never completely confided in Treves about his early life , so these details were consequently sketchy in Treves 's Reminiscences . A more mysterious error is that of Merrick 's first name . Treves , in his earlier journal articles as well as his book , insisted on calling him John Merrick . The reason for this is unclear ; Merrick clearly signed his name as " Joseph " in the examples of his handwriting that remain . In the handwritten manuscript for The Elephant Man and Other Reminiscences , Treves began his account by writing " Joseph " and then crossed it out and replaced it with " John " . Whatever the reason for the error , it is one that persisted throughout much of the 20th century ; later biographers who based their work on Treves 's book have continued the error . 
 Treves 's depiction of Tom Norman , the showman who had exhibited Merrick , was that of a cruel drunk who had ruthlessly exploited his charge . In a letter to the World 's Fair newspaper , and later in his own memoirs , Norman denied this characterisation and said that he provided his show attractions with a way of earning a living , and that at the London Hospital , Merrick was still on display , but with no control over how or when he was viewed . According to Nadja <unk> , author of The Spectacle of Deformity : Freak Shows and Modern British Culture , Norman 's view gives an insight into the Victorian freak show 's function as a means of survival for poor people with deformities , as well as the attitude of medical professionals of the time . <unk> cautions that both Treves 's and Norman 's memoirs must be understood as " narrative reconstructions ... that reflect personal and professional prejudices and cater to the demands and expectations of their very different audiences " . 
 In 1971 , anthropologist Ashley Montagu published The Elephant Man : A Study in Human Dignity which drew on Treves 's book and explored Merrick 's character . Montagu reprinted Treves 's account alongside various others such as Carr Gomm 's letter to the Times and the report on Merrick 's inquest . He pointed out inconsistencies between the accounts and sometimes disputed Treves 's version of events ; he noted , for example , that while Treves claimed Merrick knew nothing of his mother 's appearance , Carr Gomm refers to Merrick carrying a painting of his mother with him , and he criticised Treves 's assumption that Merrick 's mother was " worthless and inhuman " . However , Montagu also perpetuated some of the errors in Treves 's work , including his use of the name " John " rather than " Joseph " . 
 Between 1979 and 1982 , Merrick 's life story became the basis of several works of dramatic art ; these were based on the accounts of Treves and Montagu . In 1979 , a Tony Award @-@ winning play , The Elephant Man , by American playwright Bernard Pomerance was staged . The character based on Merrick was played by Philip Anglim , and later by David Bowie and Mark Hamill . In 1980 , a film also titled The Elephant Man , directed by David Lynch , was released ; it received eight Academy Award nominations . Merrick was played by John Hurt and Frederick Treves by Anthony Hopkins . In 1982 , US television network ABC broadcast an adaptation of Pomerance 's play , starring Anglim . Merrick also appears in two episodes of the second season of the BBC historical crime drama Ripper Street , portrayed by actor Joseph Drake . 
 In 1980 , Michael Howell and Peter Ford published The True History of the Elephant Man , presenting the fruits of their detailed archival research . Howell and Ford brought to light a large amount of new information about Merrick . In addition to proving that his name was Joseph , not John , they were able to describe in more detail his life story . They refuted some of the inaccuracies in Treves 's account , showing that Merrick 's mother did not abandon him , and that Merrick deliberately chose to exhibit himself to make a living . 
 = R U Professional = 
 " R U Professional " is a 2009 satirical song by the American indie rock band The Mae Shi , inspired by a July 2008 outburst by actor Christian Bale on the set of Terminator Salvation . Bale was filming with actress Bryce Dallas Howard when he berated director of photography , Shane Hurlbut , for walking into his line of sight . An audio recording of the incident appeared on website TMZ on February 2 , 2009 . The Mae Shi composed and recorded the song later in the same day , and released it the next day . The group stated that the piece was created to honor Bale . The song parodies Bale by sampling his voice from the 2008 diatribe . The chorus incorporates Bale 's use of the word professional from his flare @-@ up . The lyrics reference several films the actor starred in , including Newsies , Swing Kids , American Psycho , and The Dark Knight . 
 The song was made available on YouTube and via download on MediaFire the next day . " R U Professional " received a generally positive reception , and was praised as an effective parody of Bale 's on @-@ set disturbance . MTV compared its style to new wave groups like Devo . The Los Angeles Times described it as a lively pop music tribute to the actor . USA Today categorized the song as fun dance music and called it creatively motivated . The Toronto Sun wrote positively of its creative lyrics and use of audio from the Bale oration . El País classed the piece as an electropop song that contributed to the viral spread of the Bale rant online . Dose placed the song within the genre of an electro jam session . Publications including The A.V. Club and Pitchfork Media were impressed with the group 's ability to compose and release the song twenty @-@ four hours after the audio of the incident appeared online . The Irish Independent wrote that they thought the group may have used a melody they already had and adapted it for the song to release it so quickly . 
 = = Background = = 
 In July 2008 , actor Christian Bale was immersed in shooting a scene for the film Terminator Salvation in New Mexico . While performing with actress Bryce Dallas Howard , Bale shouted at the film 's director of photography , Shane Hurlbut , for walking into his line of sight . Hurlbut responded calmly , apologized to Bale , and continued shooting for seven hours after the incident . 
 An audio recording of the incident appeared on the website TMZ on February 2 , 2009 . During the four @-@ minute audio recording , Bale can be heard shouting and swearing at Hurlbut and threatening to quit the film if Hurlbut did it again and was not fired . Prior to releasing the audio on the internet , TMZ had reported on the incident on their website in July 2008 . TMZ reported that film executives for Terminator Salvation had sent a copy of the audio recording to the film 's insurance company in case Bale quit the film . 
 In a statement to Los Angeles radio station KROQ @-@ FM on February 6 , 2009 , Bale said he had behaved inappropriately , and that he and Hurlbut had talked after the incident and fully resolved the issue . Bale acknowledged that the two worked together for several hours after the incident , and for a month afterwards as well . He noted that he had viewed a draft version of the film and praised the cinematography work done by Hurlbut . 
 = = Inspiration and composition = = 
 The Mae Shi explained the group 's inspiration to write the song in a statement . The group felt Bale 's outburst was irrational and was motivated to write a piece about it . The Mae Shi emphasized in their statement that this was not a traditional song associated with their group 's normal work , but rather a homage to Bale . 
 The Mae Shi drummer Brad Breeck commented in an interview that the band decided to make a song about the incident late in the evening of February 2 , 2009 . Breeck noted that they listened to the audio of the Bale diatribe and put together their tribute piece within a span of two hours before putting it online . Jacob Cooper , another drummer in the band , commented to The Arizona Daily Star that he was surprised how popular their piece became when they had devoted relatively little time to composing and recording it . 
 The lyrics of the song include references to films Bale appeared in including Newsies , Swing Kids , American Psycho , and The Dark Knight . The song begins with the phrase , " He is the Dark Knight , he is professional . " The piece incorporates audio clips from the incident through the use of sampling . The chorus of the song references Bale 's use of the word professional in his altercation : " Oh , whoo wow / He is professional / But I think he 's lost control " . Lyrics include : " Swing Kid with a violent streak " , " Step back , stay out of his light / Better not try to put up a fight / Newsies will get you tonight / ' Cause they 're professional ! " , and " Don 't look too deep in his eyes / he can 't hide what 's inside of his mind / and it might get a little bit ugly / and you might meet an American Psycho " . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 " R U Professional " was made available on YouTube and MediaFire on February 3 , 2009 . The video description on YouTube by the group stated , " Song By The Mae Shi celebrating the life and work of <unk> Bale . Bale 's performance as John Connor in the upcoming Terminator 4 ' Redemption ' Film will no doubt be one of the greatest of all time . He will win every Oscar for his performance , even the special effects and animation ones . " The Independent reported that the band would appear at a music festival , " The Fans Strike Back " , and requested they perform " R U Professional " . 
 Several media outlets attempted to place the work within a particular genre . MTV compared the song 's style to the group Devo and new wave music . El País described the piece as an electropop song that contributed to the viral spread of the Christian Bale rant after its release on the Internet . Dose described it as an electro jam session which made adept use of sampling from the audio of Bale 's rhetoric . The Los Angeles Times called the piece a lively pop music tribute to the actor . USA Today called the song fun dance music and creatively motivated . The Toronto Sun praised its original lyrics and use of audio from the incident , and described the piece as a fusion of electro @-@ pop styles and a good song for dancing . New Musical Express recommended the piece , and described it as electro @-@ rock which astutely sampled Bale throughout the song . The St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch described the piece as a form of new wave music which used the most spasmodic segments of the incident , and commented that the end product was comedic . The Arizona Daily Star described the piece as a pop music dance song . 
 Multiple sources remarked upon the speed with which The Mae Shi were able to put the song together and release it . The A.V. Club highlighted the song among Internet memes inspired by the Bale melee , and wrote that though the piece was put together quickly it was quite entertaining and inventive . The Irish Independent was surprised at the speed multiple different satirical adaptations of the Bale commotion audio including " R U Professional " were put together . The newspaper questioned whether the song was composed in one day , and speculated that the melody might have been written by the group previously and modified to use with audio from the Bale incident . Pitchfork Media was impressed that " R U Professional " was made in twenty @-@ four hours . 
 Various websites commented that the song was a unique way to pay tribute to Christian Bale and his body of work . Boing Boing called the song an amusing homage to Bale . <unk> commented that the song was hilarious and dedicated to Bale 's odd behavior . The Celebrity Cafe wrote that the piece was better than " Bale Out " by RevoLucian which also dealt with the incident . <unk> wrote that the song by The Mae Shi was their favorite of the Christian Bale remixes . Chico News & Review called the piece a caring accolade to Bale 's on @-@ set tirade . 
 = Louis Howe = 
 Louis McHenry Howe ( January 14 , 1871 – April 18 , 1936 ) was an American reporter for the New York Herald best known for acting as an early political advisor to President Franklin D. Roosevelt . 
 Born to a wealthy family in Indianapolis , Indiana , Howe was a small , sickly , and asthmatic child . The family moved to Saratoga , New York , after serious financial losses , and Howe became a journalist with a small paper that his father purchased . Howe married Grace Hartley and spent the next decade freelancing for the New York Herald and working various jobs . He was assigned to cover the New York state legislature in 1906 , and soon became a political operative for Thomas Mott Osborne , a Democratic opponent of the Tammany Hall political machine . 
 After Osborne fired Howe in 1909 , Howe attached himself to rising Democratic star Franklin D. Roosevelt , with whom he would work for the rest of his life . Howe oversaw Roosevelt 's campaign for the New York State Senate , worked with him in the Navy Department , and acted as an advisor and campaign manager during Roosevelt 's 1920 vice presidential run . After Roosevelt contracted polio in 1921 , resulting in partial paralysis , Howe became Roosevelt 's public representative , keeping his political career alive during his recovery . He arranged Roosevelt 's 1924 " Happy Warrior " convention speech that returned him to the public eye , and helped to run Roosevelt 's narrowly successful 1928 campaign to become Governor of New York . Howe then spent the next four years laying the groundwork for Roosevelt 's landslide 1932 presidential victory . Named Roosevelt 's secretary , Howe helped the president to shape the early programs of the New Deal , particularly the Civilian Conservation Corps . Howe grew ill shortly after Roosevelt 's election , and died before the end of his first term . 
 Howe also acted as a political advisor to Franklin 's wife , Eleanor , and he encouraged her to take an active role in politics , introducing her to women 's groups and coaching her in public speaking . Eleanor later called Howe one of the most influential people in her life . Franklin Roosevelt biographer Jean Edward Smith called Howe " a backroom man without equal in Democratic politics " , and Roosevelt publicly credited Howe and James Farley for his first election to the presidency in 1932 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Howe was born in 1871 in Indianapolis , Indiana , to wealthy parents , Eliza and Edward P. Howe , who owned a store and part of a wholesale business . Edward P. Howe , originally from Cincinnati , Ohio , had been a captain with the Union Army in the Civil War and made an unsuccessful run for the Indiana State Senate as a Democrat before Louis ' birth . Louis had two stepsisters , Maria and Cora , from his mother 's previous marriage . Howe was sickly and fragile as a child , suffered from asthma , and was generally kept home by his parents ; he would never grow to more than five feet tall . Fearing to expose Howe to public school , his parents instead enrolled him in an all @-@ girls seminary . 
 Edward speculated heavily in real estate , and gradually lost the family 's wealth in the depression that followed the Panic of 1873 . When Louis was seven , the family lost their home , moving to Saratoga , New York , with help from Eliza 's family . Edward 's health collapsed , but he nonetheless took a job as a reporter for a Saratoga newspaper , later purchasing a small Democratic paper of his own , The Saratoga Sun . Louis 's health , in contrast , improved during his teenage years , allowing him to leave the house more often and consider attending Yale University . On his way to a cousin 's wedding rehearsal , he suffered a bicycle accident in which he fell into gravel , permanently scarring his face . Ultimately , the dual obstacles of his still @-@ questionable health and finances caused him to abandon his university ambitions and instead take a job with his father 's paper . 
 In 1896 , he met Grace Hartley , a well @-@ off twenty @-@ year @-@ old who was on vacation with her mother at one of Saratoga 's <unk> . Though she was initially unimpressed with him , Howe courted her assiduously for two years , and the couple became engaged in 1898 , marrying the following year . The pair had three children , one of whom died in infancy . 
 = = Journalism and early political career = = 
 Howe hoped to travel to Cuba to cover the 1898 Spanish – American War for the New York Herald , but the war ended before he could secure the paper 's approval . Not long after , the Howes ' marriage ran into trouble as the financial difficulties of Howe 's father again threatened the family 's position . Grace 's mother had given the couple a large house for a wedding present , which Louis mortgaged in an attempt to save his father 's newspaper from bankruptcy . The Sun was nonetheless sold , and Louis fired in 1901 , though he soon after successfully begged to return to his job . Louis continued working as a freelancer for the Herald ; one of his most notable stories was to interview Vice President Theodore Roosevelt on his return to Washington , D.C. after the death of President William McKinley . During this period , Grace went to live with her mother , where she gave birth to the couple 's first child , Mary . 
 In 1903 , after a failed attempt to make a living writing fiction , Howe worked for a time as a manager for a Saratoga country club . In January 1906 , Howe began covering the New York State Legislature in Albany for the Herald . Later that year , Howe was hired by Thomas Mott Osborne , a rich Democrat , as a political operative . Osborne was a member of the " <unk> " , a group opposed to the influence of the Tammany Hall political machine in New York politics . He employed Howe to oppose the gubernatorial candidacy of William Randolph Hearst , the Democratic nominee , newspaper magnate , and ally of Tammany . Howe and Osborne 's other operatives successfully spread dissent and chaos among the Democratic campaign , and Hearst lost the election to Charles Evans Hughes . 
 Howe biographer Julie M. Fenster describes the anti @-@ Hearst campaign as a " personal turning point " for Howe , in which he got his first taste of politics , learned the practical mechanics of party organization , and had an opportunity to make news rather than simply reporting it . He pursued a permanent position with Osborne , declining an opportunity to go to Jamaica as a correspondent for the Herald , and was hired in November 1906 . For the next three years , Howe blended his two jobs — reporter and political operative — using information from each in service of the other . Osborne intended eventually to run for governor himself . However , he was made a nonviable candidate by his unusual propensity to travel in a variety of disguises and his close friendship with a young handyman , with whom Osborne was rumored to have a homosexual relationship . Howe lost interest in Osborne as a patron and began searching for another upcoming name with whom to associate ; Osborne fired him in 1909 . 
 = = Assistant to Roosevelt = = 
 Howe first met Franklin D. Roosevelt when Roosevelt was a freshman New York state senator leading a movement to block Tammany Hall nominee William F. Sheehan from the US Senate . Roosevelt was successful , marking him as the new leader of the anti @-@ Tammany " insurgents " . Howe interviewed Roosevelt for the Herald , and they began to regularly meet to discuss politics , becoming good friends in the process . In 1912 , Roosevelt became ill with typhoid fever during his re @-@ election campaign , and hired Howe to campaign on his behalf . Howe managed the final six weeks of Roosevelt 's campaign , focusing particularly on rural areas that he felt politicians traditionally neglected . His initiatives included a mass mailing to farmers telling them that Roosevelt was likely to become chairman of the Senate Agricultural Committee . In November , Roosevelt was re @-@ elected by a larger margin than in his previous race . 
 After the election , the administration of President Woodrow Wilson appointed Roosevelt to be Assistant Secretary of the Navy . Roosevelt brought Howe with him as his chief of staff . Though previously ignorant on naval matters , Howe studied diligently and was soon considered an expert . Through patronage positions and the hosting of visiting state officials , Howe and Roosevelt also began to build a national network of Democratic supporters to support an eventual presidential run . Howe also helped Roosevelt make connections with labor leaders by encouraging Roosevelt to personally inspect work conditions and meet with workers . In 1914 , Howe managed a brief Roosevelt campaign for the US Senate , but Roosevelt was easily defeated by Tammany candidate James W. Gerard in the Democratic primary . Howe appears to have been opposed to Roosevelt 's run for the Senate , feeling that Roosevelt was moving too fast ; Howe described his role as " to provide the toe weights " to slow down the ambitious younger man . In 1918 , the relationship between Howe and Roosevelt became briefly strained when the Roosevelts ' marriage nearly ended over Franklin 's affair with his wife Eleanor 's secretary , Lucy Mercer ; a divorce would have meant the end of Franklin 's political career , and therefore Howe 's as well . 
 By 1920 , Roosevelt , on Howe 's advice , had made peace with Tammany boss Charles Murphy , and again sought New York state office . In July , however , he was drafted by the Democratic National Convention as the vice presidential nominee on a ticket with Ohio governor James M. Cox . Roosevelt selected Howe as his campaign manager . The Cox — Roosevelt ticket lost overwhelmingly to Republicans Warren G. Harding and Calvin Coolidge , but both Roosevelt and Howe saw themselves as having successfully built Roosevelt a national reputation ; not long after the election , Howe boasted to several friends that Roosevelt would soon occupy the White House , taking Howe with him . 
 = = = Roosevelt 's polio = = = 
 In mid @-@ 1921 , Howe was vacationing with the Roosevelts at Campobello Island when Franklin began to run a high fever and reported paralysis in his legs . A doctor was sent for , and Roosevelt was diagnosed with poliomyelitis . Howe remained by Roosevelt 's bedside throughout the early days of his illness , cheering him up , tending to his needs , and even changing his <unk> . By September of that year , Howe had been formally invited to join the Roosevelt household , and began visiting his own family only on weekends . 
 In the months that followed , Howe became Roosevelt 's " advance man " . As described by historian Hazel Rowley , Howe " had to boost Franklin 's spirits , help Eleanor in every way possible , be Franklin 's stand @-@ in at work , and keep up <unk> 's political prospects " . Howe emphasized the need for everyone to keep the extent of Roosevelt 's paralysis a secret , setting in motion a campaign of concealment that would last for the rest of Roosevelt 's life . In collaboration with Roosevelt 's secretary Marguerite LeHand , Howe wrote a series of letters to the press , supposedly written by Roosevelt , assuring the public that Roosevelt would not suffer any " permanent effect " from his illness . Howe also encouraged Eleanor to become active in politics herself through women 's suffrage organizations ; to this end , he introduced her to Marion Dickerman , who would become one of Eleanor 's closest friends . Eleanor later titled the chapter of her memoirs about Franklin 's polio and its aftermath , " Louis Howe Takes Charge " . 
 In 1924 , Howe and Eleanor collaborated to arrange for Franklin to give the speech to nominate New York governor Alfred E. Smith as a presidential candidate at the 1924 Democratic National Convention . Franklin initially felt the idea was too risky , knowing that if he fell down before the convention due to his limited mobility , his political career would be effectively over , but Howe and Eleanor persuaded him to attempt it . When the convention came , Franklin successfully walked to the podium with the aid of crutches and his son James Roosevelt and received an ovation from the crowd . The walk to the podium and Franklin 's speech , in which he famously nicknamed Smith the " Happy Warrior , " has been regarded by later historians as the key moment in Franklin 's political resurgence . 
 = = = Gubernatorial and presidential elections = = = 
 After the success of the nomination speech , Howe and Roosevelt planned that the latter would run for Governor of New York in 1932 and President in 1936 . However , Governor Smith was named the Democratic presidential candidate in 1928 , and persuaded the state convention to draft Roosevelt . Howe predicted disaster , feeling that a Republican challenger was sure to beat Roosevelt in what was expected to be nationally a Republican year . Though Howe remained Roosevelt 's unofficial campaign manager , he was technically subordinate to a state campaign manager selected by Smith , as well as Smith 's personal campaign manager , Belle Moskowitz , with whom Howe frequently clashed . In the fall election , Roosevelt won the governorship by a small margin , though Smith was defeated by Herbert Hoover both nationally and in New York State . 
 After the election , rather than take a job with Roosevelt 's administration in Albany , Howe remained in New York City to prepare for Roosevelt 's 1932 presidential run . During this period , he worked closely with James Farley , chairman of the New York State Democratic Committee and another devoted Roosevelt supporter . Roosevelt would later publicly credit the pair with being the two men who had done the most to secure his election . 
 In 1931 , Howe began raising money for the campaign from Democrats like Henry Morgenthau , Sr. and Joseph P. Kennedy as well as recruiting delegates for the 1932 national convention . Roosevelt 's main rival at the convention was Smith , who was seeking his second consecutive nomination . Howe suffered from severe asthma attacks throughout the convention , but remained in telephone contact with Roosevelt — who was not present , per the custom of the day — and continued to meet with delegates who were brought to visit him . Roosevelt was nominated by the convention after agreeing to make another rival , John Nance Garner , his vice presidential candidate , and after some of Smith 's Tammany Hall supporters , led by William Gibbs McAdoo , began to defect . 
 In the election that followed , Roosevelt faced unpopular incumbent Herbert Hoover . The onset of the Great Depression , for which Hoover 's Republicans were widely blamed , meant that Roosevelt 's victory was virtually assured , and in November , he was elected by a landslide . 
 = = Roosevelt presidency = = 
 During the administration Howe 's official title was Secretary to the President , a role equivalent to the current White House Chief of Staff posting . After FDR 's inauguration , Howe took up residence in the White House Lincoln Bedroom . Howe described his role in the administration as the president 's " no @-@ man " , checking Roosevelt 's natural enthusiasm and preventing unsound proposals from reaching wider discussion . He was also a strong supporter of the Civilian Conservation Corps , one of the many public works programs of Roosevelt 's " New Deal " . Howe persuaded the Governor of Kentucky to name him an honorary colonel , echoing the name of President Wilson 's famous advisor , Colonel House ; later , Howe printed business cards containing all his nicknames , reading : " Colonel Louis Rasputin Voltaire Talleyrand Simon Legree Howe " . 
 Howe 's health declined in 1934 , and he was hospitalized for heart problems and breathing difficulties . He spent the last two years of his life in and out of Bethesda Naval Hospital . Though he experienced increasing periods of confusion , he continued to give orders to his staff by telephone ; Roosevelt had instructed them to treat Howe 's calls with courtesy , but to double @-@ check his instructions with himself and other staff . Howe died on April 18 , 1936 . Roosevelt gave him a state funeral three days later in the White House East Room . 
 = = Influence on Eleanor Roosevelt = = 
 Eleanor Roosevelt had initially disliked Howe , particularly his chain @-@ smoking , but became friends with him in the course of campaigning . During the long train rides in Franklin 's 1920 vice presidential campaign , Howe encouraged her to become interested in politics herself and coached her in how to talk with reporters . Eleanor later wrote that Howe 's interest during this campaign sparked a major change in her life : 
 In later years I learned that he had always liked me and thought I was worth educating , and for that reason he made an effort on this trip to get to know me . He did it cleverly . He knew that I was bewildered by some of the things expected of me as a candidate 's wife ... Largely because of Louis ' early interpretation of the standards and ethics of the newspaper business , I came to look with interest and confidence on the writing fraternity ... I did receive an intensive education on this trip , and Louis Howe played a great part in this education from that time on . 
 In the 1920s , Howe introduced her to representatives of women 's political organizations , with which she became active , and watched and critiqued her speeches to these groups . The pair even developed a system of hand signals that Howe would use while she spoke to warn her if she was lapsing into a bad habit . He encouraged her to express herself in print as well , and acted for a time as her literary agent . 
 After Franklin 's 1932 election , Howe told Eleanor that given ten years , he could make her president as well . He encouraged her to break with her predecessors as First Lady and make the role more active and political . In a 1951 magazine article , Eleanor listed Howe as one of the seven people who had most influenced her life . 
 = = Fictional portrayals = = 
 Howe was portrayed by Ed Flanders in the 1976 television miniseries Eleanor and Franklin , Walter McGinn in Eleanor and Franklin : The White House Years the 1977 American made @-@ for @-@ television film and a sequel to Eleanor and Franklin ( 1976 ) and by Hume Cronyn in the 1960 movie Sunrise at Campobello . David <unk> portrayed Howe in the 2005 movie Warm Springs , alongside Kenneth Branagh as Roosevelt . 
 = M @-@ 94 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 94 is a state trunkline in the Upper Peninsula of the US state of Michigan . It runs for 86 @.@ 983 miles ( 139 @.@ 986 km ) from K. I. Sawyer to Manistique . The highway is part of the Lake Superior Circle Tour during a concurrency with M @-@ 28 . M @-@ 94 crosses the Siphon Bridge in Manistique , unique for the fact that the bridge roadway is below water level . 
 M @-@ 94 has been realigned several times . It has had its own roadway between the M @-@ 28 junctions in Munising and Shingleton . Other changes have flip @-@ flopped M @-@ 94 with M @-@ 28 between Harvey and Munising and extended it across the former K.I. Sawyer Air Force Base . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 94 begins at an intersection with M @-@ 553 and crosses the former K. I. Sawyer AFB . Then it overlaps US 41 for a little over a mile near Skandia . East of Skandia , M @-@ 94 runs through forest lands and serves the communities of Sundell and <unk> before entering Eben Junction . There M @-@ 94 intersects the southern section of H @-@ 01 . Further east is Chatham where there are junctions with the northern section of H @-@ 01 and M @-@ 67 . M @-@ 94 turns southerly briefly before returning to an east – west direction to head to the community of Forest Lake and ultimately Munising . There M @-@ 94 joins a concurrency with M @-@ 28 and the Lake Superior Circle Tour from Munising to Shingleton . Until the turn at Shingleton , the route is more decidedly east – west than north – south . Between Shingleton and Manistique , M @-@ 94 is more north – south . 
 South of Shingleton , M @-@ 94 runs through forest lands as a part of the Great Manistique Swamp . Along the way are national forest campgrounds located near Steuben . South of Crooked Lake , M @-@ 94 curves to the east before turning almost due south to the Manistique area . In Manistique , M @-@ 94 enters town on North 5th St before turning to follow Deer Street and River Street . On River Street , the trunkline uses the Siphon Bridge to cross the Manistique River and then uses Elk and Maple streets before terminating at US 2 at Lakeshore Drive . 
 = = = Siphon Bridge = = = 
 In Manistique , M @-@ 94 crosses the Manistique River on the " Siphon Bridge " . Built as a part of a raceway flume on the river , the water level actually used to be higher than the road surface . This produced a siphon effect , giving the bridge its nickname . The Manistique Pulp and Paper Company was organized in 1916 and needed a dam on the Manistique River to supply their mill . This dam would have needed to flood a large section of the city . The shallow river banks meant difficulties in any bridge construction . Instead of expensive dikes , a concrete tank was built lengthwise in the river bed . The sides of this tank provided man @-@ made banks higher than the natural banks . The Michigan Works Progress Administration described the bridge as having , " concrete bulkheads , formed by the side spans of the bridge , [ that ] allow the mill to maintain the water level several feet above the roadbed . " The bridge acted as a siphon because the water level was above the roadway , and the structure has been featured in Ripley 's Believe It or Not ! 
 = = History = = 
 The December 1927 Michigan State Highway Department Official Highway Service Map shows M @-@ 94 routed from Au Train west to Munising and further along its current routing to Manistique . In 1928 or 1929 , M @-@ 94 was rerouted to run along Munising @-@ Van Meer @-@ Shingleton Road ( now H @-@ 58 and H @-@ 15 ) and southerly to Shingleton . This routing was abandoned on November 7 , 1963 . It was later extended westward to Harvey in 1939 . In 1941 , the portion of M @-@ 94 west from Munising to Harvey was made a part of M @-@ 28 , and M @-@ 94 was extended along its current routing from Munising to US 41 . M @-@ 94 was extended for the last time in 1998 over US 41 and through the old K. I. Sawyer Air Force Base to end at a newly designated M @-@ 553 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Hudson Bay expedition = 
 The Hudson Bay expedition of Jean @-@ François de Galaup , comte de La Pérouse was a series of military raids on the lucrative fur trading posts and fortifications of the Hudson 's Bay Company on the shores of Hudson Bay by a squadron of the French Royal Navy . Setting sail from Cap @-@ Français in 1782 , the expedition was part of a global naval war between France and Great Britain during the American Revolutionary War . 
 Operating under secret orders from the Marquis de Castries , France 's marine minister , La Pérouse sailed from Cap @-@ Français in May 1782 , and arrived before the Prince of Wales Fort in early August . That fort and York Factory both surrendered without a fight , although some of the stored furs at York were spirited away by a company ship that evaded the French fleet . 
 Many of the British prisoners were put on a sloop which they sailed back to England . Men on La Pérouse 's fleet , which had sailed with minimal winter provisioning to maintain secrecy , suffered from scurvy and other diseases because of their hardships . The Hudson 's Bay Company finances suffered because of the raid , and it contributed to reductions in the native population that did business with the company . 
 = = Background = = 
 Jean @-@ François de Galaup , comte de La Pérouse , a captain in the French Navy , first proposed the idea of an expedition against the fur trading posts of the Hudson 's Bay Company to Charles Pierre Claret de Fleurieu , the French minister of ports , during a visit to France in late 1780 . France 's marine minister , the Marquis de Castries , and King Louis XVI approved the plan , and Castries issued La Pérouse secret orders that could override those of any fleet commander La Pérouse served under in the event an opportunity presented itself for such an expedition . The idea was to organize a small fleet in secret and make as rapid as possible a journey north to Hudson Bay from either Newport , Rhode Island or Boston , Massachusetts , the most northerly ports of North America open to French ships . 
 La Pérouse 's duties during the 1781 campaign season did not provide him with any chances to exercise his secret orders , but the aftermath of the disastrous French loss in the April 1782 Battle of the Saintes presented him with the opportunity . France and Spain had been planning an assault on Jamaica , but the losses incurred during the battle , including the capture of Admiral Paul , Comte de Grasse and his flagship Ville de Paris , led them to call off the expedition . La Pérouse , on his arrival at Cap @-@ Français after the battle , raised the idea with de Grasse 's successor , Louis @-@ Philippe de Vaudreuil . Vaudreuil approved of the plan , and provided La Pérouse with three ships : a ship of the line Sceptre ( 74 guns ) , and the frigates Astrée ( 38 ) and Engageante ( 34 ) . Astrée was under the command of Paul Antoine Fleuriot de Langle , and Engageante was led by Lieutenant André Charles de la <unk> . 
 Preparations for the expedition were carried out secretly and in some haste , since the French were aware of the short season in the far north . The ships ' crews and most of their officers were not informed of the fleet 's destination , and La Pérouse , seeking to avoid all suspicion , even avoided carrying cold @-@ weather clothing . Admiral Vaudreuil recorded the fleet 's destination in his records as France , with possible stops in Newport or Boston , and Langle and la <unk> were given sealed orders to be opened only upon reaching the latitude of Nova Scotia . The fleet took on 250 regular infantry from the Régiment <unk> , 40 gunners , 4 field guns , and two mortars . These troops were told they were being sent to supplement the French army at Newport . After two weeks of preparation , the fleet sailed from Cap @-@ Français on May 31 , 1782 . 
 = = Expedition = = 
 The fleet reached Resolution Island at the entrance to the Hudson Strait without incident on July 17 , and proceeded through the strait and into Hudson Bay . While sailing in the bay , the fleet encountered the company ship Seahorse , which was making sail for Fort Prince of Wales . La Pérouse sent one of the frigates to chase after her . Seahorse 's captain , William Cristopher , suspecting from its behavior that the French ship lacked good charts for the bay , escaped by a ruse . He gave orders to have his sails furled as if he was preparing to anchor ; this prompted the French captain , believing shallow waters to lie ahead , to actually drop his anchor . Once he had done so , Cristopher raised his sails and sped off before the Frenchman could raise the anchor again . 
 = = = Prince of Wales Fort = = = 
 On August 8 La Pérouse arrived at Prince of Wales Fort , an impressive but crumbling stone fortress that was defended by 39 civilians . Its governor , Samuel Hearne , surrendered the fort without firing a shot when the size of the French force became evident the next day . He did so despite requests from some of his men to " allow them to mow down the French troops with the heavy guns loaded with grapeshot " . After resupplying his ships and confiscating the fort 's guns , the French proceeded to loot the premises . According to Hearne , the French took more than 7 @,@ 500 beaver skins , 4 @,@ 000 marten pelts , and 17 @,@ 000 goose quills . They also spent two days trying to destroy the fort , but were only able to destroy the gun mounts and damage the upper ramparts . Many of the prisoners were put aboard the company sloop Severn , which had been anchored by the fort ; others were taken aboard the French ships , and some were incorporated into the French crews . 
 = = = York Factory = = = 
 La Pérouse then collected most of the company 's small boats , and sailed for York Factory , a company outpost on a peninsula between the Hayes and Nelson Rivers , on August 11 . According to Pérouse 's report , he arrived in the area , about 5 leagues ( 15 miles ; 24 km ) from York , on August 20 . The fort 's defenses faced the Hayes River , where the company ship King George was anchored , and the fast @-@ flowing Hayes River would have made an approach there impractical in the face of that opposition . 
 La Pérouse sailed into the mouth of the Nelson , and moved the troops to the smaller company ships on August 21 to prepare for an amphibious landing , with the plan of approaching the fort from the rear , a distance of about 16 miles ( 26 km ) . He then proceeded with his engineer to take soundings in the Nelson River , and discovered that even the smaller boats would have difficulty approaching proper land due to its shallowness . His small boat then became mired in mud by the receding tide , and did not become freed until 3 am the next morning . Captain Langle then proposed to Major Rostaing , the commander of the troops , that they cross the muddy shallows on foot . He was agreeable , and the troops then set out to across the shallows . Unknown to them , conditions improved only marginally once land was reached , and they spent the next two days wading through bogs and muck to reach the fort . While they did this , La Pérouse returned to the fleet , because bad weather was threatening the safety of the fleet . Both frigates lost their anchors when sharp rocks underwater cut through their cables in the turbulent conditions . 
 York Factory was occupied by 60 white men and 12 Indians . When the French ships were spotted , Governor Humphrey Marten loaded trade goods onto the King George so they would not fall into French hands . When the French arrived on August 24 , Marten surrendered the fort . ( Although La Pérouse sent a frigate after the King George when she sailed off during the night after the fleet 's arrival , her captain , Jonathan Fowler , successfully eluded the pursuit due to his superior knowledge of the shallow waters of the bay . ) Major Rostaing took the British of the garrison prisoner , destroyed what goods he could not take , and burned the wooden fort to the ground . He was careful to preserve a cache of supplies for use by Indians that came to fort to trade . ( These acts of kindness and others by La Pérouse in the treatment of his captives brought him recognition from Hearne , Louis XVI , and the British government . ) 
 La Pérouse did not learn of the capitulation until August 26 , and continuing bad weather and difficulties with the frigates meant that he did not effect a junction with Rostaing until August 31 . The terms of capitulation included the surrender of Fort Severn , another small outpost . He chose not to actually go to Fort Severn on account of the lateness of the season and the poor condition of his ships and men , who were suffering from scurvy and other maladies . During the process of loading goods and supplies onto the fleet , five small boats overturned and 15 men drowned . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 La Pérouse then began the journey back to the Atlantic , towing the Severn as far as Cape Resolution . There she was cut loose to make her way back to England , while La Pérouse sailed for Cadiz with Sceptre and Engageante ; Astrée made sail for Brest to deliver news of the expedition 's success to Paris . The expedition took a tremendous toll on his ships ' crews . By the time the ships returned to Europe , Sceptre had only 60 men ( out of an original complement , including land troops , of almost 500 ) fit to work ; about 70 men died of scurvy . Engageante had suffered 15 deaths from scurvy , and almost everyone was sick with one malady or another . Both ships had also suffered damage due to cold weather and battering by ice floes . Fleuriot de Langle received a brevet promotion to capitaine de vaisseau upon his arrival in Brest in late October . 
 According to the company , the goods taken at Prince of Wales alone were worth more than £ 14 @,@ 000 , and La Pérouse 's raid so damaged the company finances that it paid no dividends until 1786 . When peace finally came with the 1783 Treaty of Paris , the French agreed to compensate the company for its losses . The raid did permanent damage to the company 's trading relationships . The <unk> who traded with the company suffered severely due to the company 's inability to provision them , and by an ongoing smallpox epidemic that was ravaging Indian populations throughout North America ; the <unk> lost half their population by some estimates . The company 's inability to trade with them for two season drove many survivors to develop trading relationships with Montreal . 
 Neither Hearne nor Marten was sanctioned by the company for surrendering ; both returned to their posts the following year . When the French took Prince of Wales Fort , they found Samuel Hearne 's journal , which La Pérouse claimed as a prize . The journal contained Hearne 's accounts of his explorations of the northern reaches of North America . Hearne pleaded with La Pérouse for its return , a request the latter granted on condition that it be published . Whether Hearne had intended to publish it anyway is unclear , but by 1792 , the year of Hearne 's death , he had prepared a manuscript , and submitted it for publication . It was published in 1795 as A Journey from Prince of Wale 's Fort in Hudson 's Bay to the Northern Ocean . 
 La Pérouse was rewarded by King Louis with a rise in pay of 800 livres ; the exploit also drew popular acclaim in Europe and North America . His next major assignment was to lead a voyage of exploration into the Pacific Ocean in 1785 . His fleet , in which Fleuriot de Langle served as second in command , was last seen in the vicinity of Australia in spring 1788 ; although remnants of the expedition have been found , his fate is unknown . 
 = Cocktails ( The Office ) = 
 " Cocktails " is the eighteenth episode of the third season of the US version of The Office . It was written by actor Paul Lieberstein and directed by Lost series creator J. J. Abrams , his first such credit for The Office . NBC hired Abrams and Joss Whedon to each direct an episode during their February sweeps week . Michael Patrick McGill , Dan Cole , Owen Daniels , and Jean Villepique guest starred . 
 In the episode , Michael , Dwight , Jim and Karen attend a cocktail party at CFO David Wallace 's house . While there , Michael and Jan make their relationship public , Karen makes Jim uncomfortable by pointing out all of her ex @-@ boyfriends in attendance , and Dwight inspects the home . Meanwhile , the rest of the office goes to a bar and Pam tries to be more honest with Roy . 
 The first American broadcast of " Cocktails " occurred on February 22 , 2007 to an estimated 8 @.@ 3 million viewers . The episode was positively received by television critics , with one believing it was one of the best of the season . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Jan ( Melora Hardin ) , Michael ( Steve Carell ) , Dwight ( Rainn Wilson ) , Jim ( John Krasinski ) , and Karen ( Rashida Jones ) attend a cocktail party hosted by Dunder @-@ Mifflin 's CFO David Wallace ( Andy Buckley ) . Jan and Michael choose to make their relationship public at this event . With the branch managers away , the remainder of the office goes to happy hour at Poor Richard 's . Pam ( Jenna Fischer ) reminds Roy ( David Denman ) that , as her boyfriend , he needs to attend as well . Understanding that he needs to be a better boyfriend , Roy shows up along with his brother , Kenny . 
 At the party , Karen plays a joke on Jim by identifying many people at the party as former boyfriends . Dwight takes it upon himself to give the house a thorough inspection , and spends the night criticizing the layout of the Wallaces ' house , while Michael 's public displays of affection make Jan uncomfortable . Towards the end of the evening , David invites Jim to play basketball in the backyard . As Michael and Jan drive home together , they have an awkward argument regarding their future together . 
 At Poor Richard 's , Pam tells Roy she wants a fresh start in their relationship and tells him about the " Casino Night " kiss . Roy reacts violently , and , along with his brother , begins destroying the bar . Pam , seeing his destructive response , immediately calls off their relationship for good . After Roy 's brother uses the jet ski money to pay off the bar for damages , Roy stares off into the distance , saying , " I am gonna kill Jim Halpert . " 
 = = Production = = 
 " Cocktails " was written by Paul Lieberstein , who plays Human Resources representative Toby Flenderson on the series . Lost series creator J. J. Abrams was hired on as episode director , his first such credit for the series . Abrams disliked the American series when it first premiered , due to his love for the original British series . The director explained , " I resented it before I saw it , because I thought , ' well , how are you going to do what Ricky and Steve did . In fact , the first season I didn 't get into it at all . In the second season , they really found their voice . And that 's despite having to make 22 episodes , which is twice the length of what the BBC show did . And I thought that the show became brilliant . I was really impressed by how it worked . " 
 Abrams had been rumored as director since December 2006 , and NBC confirmed this the following month . He and Buffy the Vampire Slayer creator Joss Whedon were both hired to direct an episode during February sweeps week . Abrams had known cast member Kate Flannery years before , when he used to write in a restaurant where Flannery worked as a waitress . The two were reunited on The Office set , where he stated that he was pleased with her success . 
 Jenna Fischer found her character 's break @-@ up scene with Roy " really dark , " as she is friends with David Denman outside of the show . She explained , " To see him turn like that , for me it was even more shocking because I know him as a big teddy bear . He played it so well and I think that cliffhanger of ' I ’ m gonna kill Jim Halpert ' is one of the best last lines of our episodes ever . " " Cocktails " included recurring guest star Michael Patrick McGill as Kenny Anderson , who called working on The Office " a blast . " Other guest stars included Dan Cole as Dan Gore , Owen Daniels as the Wallaces ' son , and Jean Villepique as Rachel Wallace . 
 The season three DVD contains a number of deleted scenes . Notable cut scenes included Stanley reacting violently when he sees Ryan talking to his daughter Melissa ; Pam and Roy talking about her Dunder Mifflin painting , the talking head interview with Jan over relationships , Dwight 's upstairs house inspection , and his conversation with the CFO 's son ; and Michael showing off his framed " love contract " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Cocktails " first aired in the United States on February 22 , 2007 . An estimated 8 @.@ 3 million viewers tuned in to the episode , a drop of less than 10 percent from the previous week . Among adults aged 18 – 49 , The Office earned a 4 @.@ 2 / 10 ratings share , an increase of seventeen percent from its lead @-@ in . 
 Television critics tended to view " Cocktails " positively . Kevin Fitzpatrick of UGO Networks praised the episode 's writing and directing , explaining that " <unk> [ sic ] of the credit goes to Paul Lieberstein for his ruthlessly funny writing , but ol ' J.J. really knows how to run with the material and make awkward situations just that much more painful with his direction , one of the best episodes of the series . " Buddy TV writer Oscar Dahl noted that " besides a couple of crafty camera moves , his work was mostly invisible , which is exactly what you want from a director on The Office . " IGN 's Brian Zoromski appreciated the spotlight on female characters Jan , Pam , and Karen , and thought there were " quite a few great little moments this episode , " including " a great Creed moment as he revealed he runs a fake ID company out of his car . " Entertainment Weekly columnist Abby West enjoyed Karen conning Jim at the party , called Rashida Jones ' performance " brilliantly played " ; West also liked Pam 's newfound confidence , but believed she was " dumb " for telling Roy of her kiss with Jim . 
 = Wars of the Delian League = 
 The Wars of the Delian League ( 477 – 449 BC ) were a series of campaigns fought between the Delian League of Athens and her allies ( and later subjects ) , and the Achaemenid Empire of Persia . These conflicts represent a continuation of the Greco @-@ Persian Wars , after the Ionian Revolt and the first and second Persian invasions of Greece . 
 The Greek alliance , centered on Sparta and Athens , that had defeated the second Persian invasion had initially followed up this success by capturing the Persian garrisons of Sestos and Byzantium , both in Thrace , in 479 and 478 BC respectively . After the capture of Byzantium , the Spartans elected not to continue the war effort , and a new alliance , commonly known as the Delian League , was formed , with Athens very much the dominant power . Over the next 30 years , Athens would gradually assume a more hegemonic position over the league , which gradually evolved into the Athenian Empire . 
 Throughout the 470s BC , the Delian League campaigned in Thrace and the Aegean to remove the remaining Persian garrisons from the region , primarily under the command of the Athenian politician Cimon . In the early part of the next decade , Cimon began campaigning in Asia Minor , seeking to strengthen the Greek position there . At the Battle of the Eurymedon in Pamphylia , the Athenians and allied fleet achieved a stunning double victory , destroying a Persian fleet and then landing the ships ' marines to attack and rout the Persian army . After this battle , the Persians took an essentially passive role in the conflict , anxious not to risk battle where possible . 
 Towards the end of the 460s BC , the Athenians took the ambitious decision to support a revolt in the Egyptian satrapy of the Persian empire . Although the Greek task force achieved initial success , they were unable to capture the Persian garrison in Memphis , despite a 3 year long siege . The Persians then counterattacked , and the Athenian force was itself besieged for 18 months , before being wiped out . This disaster , coupled with ongoing warfare in Greece , dissuaded the Athenians from resuming conflict with Persia . In 451 BC , a truce was agreed in Greece , and Cimon was able to lead an expedition to Cyprus . However , whilst besieging Kition Cimon died , and the Athenian force decided to withdraw , winning another double victory at the Battle of Salamis @-@ in @-@ Cyprus in order to extricate themselves . This campaign marked the end of hostilities between the Delian League and Persia , and some ancient historians claim that a peace treaty , the Peace of Callias , was agreed to cement the final end of the Greco @-@ Persian Wars . 
 = = = Chronology = = = 
 Thucydides provides a succinct list of the main events occurring between the end of the second Persian invasion and the outbreak of the Peloponnesian War , but almost no chronological information . Various attempts have been made to reassemble the chronology , but there is no definitive answer . The assumption central to these attempts is that Thucydides is describing the events in the appropriate chronological order . The one firmly accepted date is 465 BC for the beginning of the Siege of Thasos . This is based on an anonymous ancient scholiast 's annotations to one of the existing manuscripts of Aeschines 's works . The scholiast notes that the Athenians met disaster at ' Nine @-@ Ways ' in the archonship of <unk> ( known to be 465 / 464 BC ) . Thucydides mentions this attack on the ' Nine @-@ Ways ' in connection with the beginning of the Siege of Thasos , and since Thucydides says that the siege ended in its third year , the Siege of Thasos therefore dates to c . 465 – 463 BC . 
 Similarly , the anonymous scholiast provides a probable date for the Siege of Eion . This annotation places the fall of Eion in the archonship of Phaidon ( known to be 476 / 475 BC ) . The Siege may therefore have been between either 477 – 476 BC or 476 – 475 BC ; both have found favour . The Battle of Eurymedon may be dated to 469 BC by Plutarch 's anecdote about the Archon <unk> ( 469 / 468 BC ) choosing Cimon and his fellow generals as judges in a competition . The implication is that Cimon had recently achieved a great victory , and the most likely candidate is Eurymedon . However , since the Battle of Eurymedon seems to have occurred after the Athenian siege of Naxos ( but before the Siege of Thasos ) , the date of Eurymedon is clearly constrained by the date of Naxos . Whilst some accept a date of 469 or earlier for this Naxos , another school of thought places it as late as 467 BC . Since the Battle of Eurymedon seems to have occurred before Thasos , the alternative date for this battle would therefore be 466 BC . 
 The dating of Naxos is intimately connected with two other events in the Greek world which occurred at the same time . Thucydides claims that Pausanias , having been stripped of his command after the Siege of Byzantium , returned to Byzantium as a private citizen soon after and took command of the city until he was expelled by the Athenians . He then crossed the Bosporus and settled in <unk> in the Troad , until he was accused of collaborating with the Persians and was recalled by the Spartans for trial ( after which he starved himself to death ) . Thucydides again provides no chronology of these events . Shortly afterwards , the Spartans accused the Athenian statesman Themistocles , then in exile in Argos , of complicity in Pausanias 's treason . As a result , Themistocles fled from Argos , eventually to Asia Minor . Thucydides states that on his journey , Themistocles inadvertently ended up at Naxos , at that time being besieged by Athenians . The three events , Pausanias 's treason , Themistocles 's flight and the Siege of Naxos therefore occurred in close temporal sequence . These events certainly happened after 474 BC ( the earliest possible date for Themistocles 's ostracism ) , and have generally been placed in around 470 / 469 BC . However , there are several incongruities in the story of Themistocles if this date is accepted . A much later date for Pausanias 's expulsion from Byzantium has been proposed , and if accepted , this pushes these three events into c . 467 BC , which resolves the problems regarding Themistocles , and also probably explains some incidental details mentioned in Plutarch 's biography of Cimon . However , this modified timeline is not universally accepted by historians . 
 The Egyptian and Cyprian campaigns are somewhat easier to date . Thucydides says that the Egyptian campaign lasted six years and that three years later , the Athenians and Spartans signed a five @-@ year truce . This treaty is known to date to 451 BC , so the Egyptian campaign dates from c . 460 – 454 BC . The Cyprian campaign , which directly followed the truce , thus dates to 451 – 450 BC . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Greco @-@ Persian Wars had their roots in the conquest of the Greek cities of Asia Minor , and in particular Ionia , by the Persian Empire of Cyrus the Great shortly after 550 BC . The Persians found the Ionians difficult to rule , eventually settling for sponsoring a tyrant in each Ionian city . While Greek states had in the past often been ruled by tyrants , this was a form of government on the decline . By 500 BC , Ionia appears to have been ripe for rebellion against these Persian place @-@ men . The simmering tension finally broke into open revolt due to the actions of the tyrant of Miletus , Aristagoras . Attempting to save himself after a disastrous Persian @-@ sponsored expedition in 499 BC , Aristagoras chose to declare Miletus a democracy . This triggered similar revolutions across Ionia , and indeed Doris and Aeolis , beginning the Ionian Revolt . 
 The Greek states of Athens and Eretria allowed themselves to be drawn into this conflict by Aristagoras , and during their only campaigning season ( 498 BC ) they contributed to the capture and burning of the Persian regional capital of Sardis . After this , the Ionian Revolt carried on ( without further outside aid ) for a further 5 years , until it was finally completely crushed by the Persians . However , in a decision of great historic significance , the Persian king Darius the Great decided that , despite successfully subduing the revolt , there remained the unfinished business of exacting punishment on Athens and Eretria for supporting the revolt . The Ionian Revolt had severely threatened the stability of Darius 's empire , and the states of mainland Greece would continue to threaten that stability unless dealt with . Darius thus began to contemplate the complete conquest of Greece , beginning with the destruction of Athens and Eretria . 
 In the next two decades there would be two Persian invasions of Greece , including some of the most famous battles in history . During the first invasion , Thrace , Macedon and the Aegean islands were added to the Persian Empire , and Eretria was duly destroyed . However , the invasion ended in 490 BC with the decisive Athenian victory at the Battle of Marathon . Between the two invasions , Darius died , and responsibility for the war passed to his son Xerxes I. Xerxes then led the second invasion personally in 480 BC , taking an enormous ( although oft @-@ exaggerated ) army and navy to Greece . Those Greeks who chose to resist ( the ' Allies ' ) were defeated in the twin battles of Thermopylae and Artemisium on land and at sea respectively . All of Greece except the Peloponnesus thus fell into Persian hands , but then seeking to finally destroy the Allied navy , the Persians suffered a decisive defeat at the Battle of Salamis . The following year , 479 BC , the Allies assembled the largest Greek army yet seen and defeated the Persian invasion force at the Battle of Plataea , ending the invasion and the threat to Greece . 
 According to tradition , on the same day as Plataea , the Allied fleet defeated the demoralised remnants of the Persian fleet in the Battle of Mycale . This action marks the end of the Persian invasion , and the beginning of the next phase in the Greco @-@ Persian wars , the Greek counterattack . After Mycale , the Greek cities of Asia Minor again revolted , with the Persians now powerless to stop them . The Allied fleet then sailed to the Chersonesos , still held by the Persians , and besieged and captured the town of Sestos . The following year , 478 BC , the Allies sent a force to capture the city of Byzantium ( modern day Istanbul ) . The siege was successful , but the behaviour of the Spartan general Pausanias alienated many of the Allies , and resulted in Pausanias 's recall . The siege of Byzantium was the last action of the Hellenic alliance which had defeated the Persian invasion . 
 = = Delian League = = 
 After Byzantium , Sparta was eager to end her involvement in the war . The Spartans were of the view that , with the liberation of mainland Greece , and the Greek cities of Asia Minor , the war 's purpose had already been reached . There was also perhaps a feeling that obtaining long @-@ term security for the Asian Greeks would prove impossible . In the aftermath of Mycale , the Spartan king Leotychides had proposed transplanting all the Greeks from Asia Minor to Europe as the only method of permanently freeing them from Persian dominion . Xanthippus , the Athenian commander at Mycale , had furiously rejected this ; the Ionian cities were originally Athenian colonies , and the Athenians , if no @-@ one else , would protect the Ionians . This marked the point at which the leadership of the Hellenic alliance effectively passed to the Athenians ; with the Spartan withdrawal after Byzantium , the leadership of the Athenians became explicit . 
 The loose alliance of city states which had fought against Xerxes 's invasion had been dominated by Sparta and the Peloponnesian league . With the withdrawal of these states , a congress was called on the holy island of Delos to institute a new alliance to continue the fight against the Persians . This alliance , now including many of the Aegean islands , was formally constituted as the ' First Athenian Alliance ' , commonly known as the Delian League . According to Thucydides , the official aim of the League was to " avenge the wrongs they suffered by ravaging the territory of the king . " In reality , this goal was divided into three main efforts - to prepare against any future invasion , to seek revenge against Persia , and to organize a means of dividing spoils of war . The members were given a choice of either offering armed forces or paying a tax to the joint treasury ; most states chose the tax . League members swore to have the same friends and enemies , and dropped ingots of iron into the sea to symbolize the permanence of their alliance . The ingots of iron were cast into the ocean because the oath the league members swore stipulated that their allegiance would not end , or be otherwise broken , until the iron floated to the surface . In other words , that they had made a pact perceived to be eternal . The Athenian politician Aristides would spend the rest of his life occupied in the affairs of the alliance , dying ( according to Plutarch ) a few years later in Pontus , whilst determining what the tax of new members was to be . 
 = = Non @-@ Persian campaigns = = 
 = = = Military Expansion of the League = = = 
 Thucydides provides just one example of the use of force to extend membership of the League , but since his account seems to be selective , there were presumably more ; certainly , Plutarch provides details of one such instance . Karystos , which had collaborated with the Persians during the second Persian invasion , was attacked by the League at some point in the 470s BC , and eventually agreed to become a member . Plutarch mentions the fate of Phaselis , which Cimon compelled to join the league during his Eurymedon campaign . 
 = = = Internal Rebellions = = = 
 Naxos attempted to leave the League c . 470 / 467 BC but was attacked by the Athenians and forced to remain a member . A similar fate awaited the Thasians after they tried to leave the League in 465 BC . Thucydides does not provide more examples , but from archaeological sources it is possible to deduce that there were further rebellions in the following years . Thucydides leaves us under no illusions that the behaviour of the Athenians in crushing such rebellions led firstly to the hegemony of Athens over the league , and eventually to the transition from the Delian League to the Athenian Empire . 
 = = = Conflicts in Greece = = = 
 During the period 479 – 461 , the mainland Greek states were at least outwardly at peace with each other , even if divided into pro @-@ Spartan and pro @-@ Athenian factions . The Hellenic alliance still existed in name , and since Athens and Sparta were still allied , Greece achieved a modicum of stability . However , over this period , Sparta became increasingly suspicious and fearful of the growing power of Athens . It was this fear , according to Thucydides , which made the second , larger ( and more famous ) Peloponnesian War inevitable . 
 Athens sent troops in 462 BC to aid Sparta with the Messenian Revolt ( c . 465 – 461 BC ) , under the terms of the old Hellenic alliance . The Spartans however , in the fear that Athens might interfere in the political situation between the Spartans and their helots , sent the Athenians home . This event directly led to the ostracism of Cimon ( who had been leading the troops ) , the ascendancy of the radical democrats ( led by Ephialtes and Pericles ) over the previously dominant aristocratic faction ( led by Cimon ) in Athens , and the First Peloponnesian War between Athens and Sparta ( and their respective allies ) . 
 This conflict was really the Athenians ' own struggle , and need not have involved the Delian allies . After all , the League members had signed up to fight against the Persians , not fellow Greeks . Nevertheless , it does seem that at least at the Battle of Tanagra , a contingent of Ionians fought with the Athenians . The conflicts in Greece during these years are , however , not directly relevant to the history of the Delian League . 
 It can be seen , however , that the First Peloponnesian War may have hastened the transition of the Delian League from an Athenian @-@ dominated alliance to an Athenian @-@ ruled empire . During the early years of the war , Athens and her non @-@ Delian allies scored a series of victories . However , the collapse of the simultaneous Delian League expedition in Egypt in 454 BC caused panic in Athens , and resulted in decreased military activity until 451 BC , when a five @-@ year truce was concluded with Sparta . During the panic , the treasury of the League was moved from Delos to the perceived safety of Athens in 454 BC . Although Athens had in practice had a hegemonic position over the rest of the league since the rebellion of Naxos ( 470 / 467 BC ) was put down , the process by which the Delian league gradually transformed into the Athenian Empire accelerated after 461 BC . The transfer of the treasury to Athens is sometimes used as an arbitrary demarcation between the Delian League and the Athenian Empire . An alternative ' end @-@ point ' for the Delian League is the final end of hostilities with the Persians in 450 BC , after which , despite the fact that the stated aims of the League were fulfilled , the Athenians refused to allow member states to leave the alliance . 
 = = Campaigns against Persia = = 
 = = = Thrace = = = 
 = = = = Siege of Eion = = = = 
 According to Thucydides , the League 's opening campaign was against the city of Eion , at the mouth of the Strymon river . Since Thucydides does not provide a detailed chronology for his history of the league , the year in which this campaign took place is uncertain . The siege seems to have lasted from autumn of one year into the summer of the next , with historians supporting either 477 – 476 BC or 476 – 475 BC . Eion seems to have been one of the Persian garrisons left in Thrace during and after the second Persian invasion , along with Doriskos . The campaign against Eion should probably be seen as part of a general campaign aimed at removing the Persian presence from Thrace . Even though he does not directly cover this period , Herodotus alludes to several failed attempts , presumably Athenian , to dislodge the Persian governor of Doriskos , <unk> . Eion may have been worthy of particular mention by Thucydides because of its strategic importance ; abundant supplies of timber were available in the region , and there were nearby silver mines . Furthermore , it was near the site of the future Athenian colony of Amphipolis , which was the site of several future disasters for the Athenians . 
 The force which attacked Eion was under the command of Cimon . Plutarch says that Cimon first defeated the Persians in battle , whereupon they retreated to the city , and were besieged there . Cimon then expelled all Thracian collaborators from the region in order to starve the Persians into submission . Herodotus indicates that the Persian commander , <unk> , was offered terms upon which he might be allowed to evacuate the city and return to Asia . However , not wanting to be thought a coward by Xerxes , he resisted to the last . When the food in Eion ran out , <unk> threw his treasure into the Strymon , killed his entire household and then immolated them , and himself , on a giant pyre . The Athenians thus captured the city and enslaved the remaining population . 
 = = = = Skyros = = = = 
 Following the action at Eion , and possibly in the same campaign , the Athenians , still under Cimon , attacked the island of Skyros . This was not an anti @-@ Persian action , but a pragmatic assault on a native population that had lapsed into piracy . As a result of this action , the Athenians " liberated the Aegean " , and they sent colonists to the island to prevent the island returning to piracy . 
 = = = = Chersonesos = = = = 
 Cimon returned a decade later to complete the expulsion of Persian forces from Europe . This action seems to have occurred concurrently with the Siege of Thasos , and so is generally dated to 465 BC . Evidently , even at this point , some Persian forces were holding ( or had re @-@ taken ) some part of the Chersonesos with the help of native Thracians . Cimon sailed to the Chersonesos with just 4 triremes , but managed to capture the 13 ships of the Persians , and then proceeded to drive them out of the peninsula . Cimon then turned the Chersonesos ( of which his father , Miltiades the Younger , had been tyrant before the Greco @-@ Persian Wars began ) over to the Athenians for colonisation . 
 = = = Asia Minor = = = 
 Once the Persian forces in Europe had largely been neutralised , the Athenians seem to have gone about starting to extend the League in Asia Minor . The islands of Samos , Chios and Lesbos seem to have become members of the original Hellenic alliance after Mycale , and presumably were also therefore original members of the Delian League . However , it is unclear exactly when the other Ionian cities , or indeed the other Greek cities of Asia Minor , joined the league , though they certainly did at some point . 
 Cimon 's Eurymedon campaign itself seems to have begun in response to the assembly of a large Persian fleet and army at Aspendos , near the mouth of the Eurymedon River . It is usually argued that the Persians were the would @-@ be aggressors , and that Cimon 's campaign was launched in order to deal with this new threat . Cawkwell suggests that the Persian build @-@ up was the first concerted attempt to counter the activity of the Greeks since the failure of the second invasion . It is possible that internal strife with the Persian empire had contributed to the length of time it took to launch this campaign . Cawkwell suggests that the Persian forces gathered at Aspendos were aiming to move along the southern coast of Asia Minor , capturing each city , until eventually the Persian navy could begin operating in Ionia again . 
 Plutarch says that upon hearing that the Persian forces were gathering at Aspendos , Cimon sailed from Cnidus ( in Caria ) with 200 triremes . It is highly likely that Cimon had assembled this force because the Athenians had had some warning of a forthcoming Persian campaign to re @-@ subjugate the Asiatic Greeks . According to Plutarch , Cimon sailed with these 200 triremes to the Greek city of Phaselis ( in Lycia ) but was refused admittance . He therefore began ravaging the lands of Phaselis , but with the mediation of the Chian contingent of his fleet , the people of Phaselis agreed to join the league . They were to contribute troops to the expedition , and to pay the Athenians ten talents . By capturing Phaselis , the furthest east Greek city in Asia Minor ( and just to the west of the Eurymedon ) , he effectively blocked the Persian campaign before it had begun , denying them the first naval base they needed to control . Taking further initiative , Cimon then moved to directly attack the Persian fleet at Aspendos . 
 = = = = Battle of the Eurymedon = = = = 
 Thucydides gives only the barest of details for this battle ; the most reliable detailed account is given by Plutarch . According to Plutarch , the Persian fleet was anchored off the mouth of the Eurymedon , awaiting the arrival of 80 Phoenician ships from Cyprus . Several different estimates for the size of the Persian fleet are given . Thucydides says that there was a fleet of 200 Phoenician ships , and is generally considered the most reliable source . Plutarch gives numbers of 350 from Ephorus and 600 from <unk> . 
 Cimon , sailing from Phaselis , made to attack the Persians before the reinforcements arrived , whereupon the Persian fleet , eager to avoid fighting , retreated into the river itself . However , when Cimon continued to bear down on the Persians , they accepted battle . Regardless of their numbers , the Persian battle line was quickly breached , and the Persian ships then turned about , and made for the river bank . Grounding their ships , the crews sought sanctuary with the army waiting nearby . Despite the weariness of his troops after this first battle , Cimon landed the marines and proceeded to attack the Persian army . Initially the Persian line held the Athenian assault , but eventually , as at Battle of Mycale , the heavily armoured hoplites proved superior , and routed the Persian army . Thucydides says that 200 Phoenician ships were captured and destroyed . It is highly unlikely that this occurred during the apparently brief naval battle , so these were probably grounded ships captured after the battle and destroyed with fire , as has been the case at Mycale . According to Plutarch , Cimon then sailed with the Greek fleet as quickly as possible , to intercept the fleet of 80 Phoenician ships which the Persians had been expecting . Taking them by surprise , he captured or destroyed the entire fleet . However , Thucydides does not mention this subsidiary action , and some have cast doubt on whether it actually happened . 
 According to Plutarch , one tradition had it that the Persian king ( who at the time would still have been Xerxes ) had agreed a humiliating peace treaty in the aftermath of the Eurymedon ( see below ) . However , as Plutarch admits , other authors denied that such a peace was made at this time , and the more logical date for any peace treaty would have been after the Cyprus campaign . The alternative suggested by Plutarch is that the Persian king acted as if he had made a humiliating peace with the Greeks , because he was so fearful of engaging in battle with them again . It is generally considered unlikely by modern historians that a peace treaty was made in the aftermath of Eurymedon . The Eurymedon was a highly significant victory for the Delian League , which probably ended once and for all the threat of another Persian invasion of Greece . It also seems to have prevented any Persian attempt to reconquer the Asiatic Greeks until at least 451 BC . The accession of further cities of Asia Minor to the Delian league , particularly from Caria , probably followed Cimon 's campaign there . The Greeks do not appear to have pressed their advantage home in a meaningful way . If the later date of 466 BC for the Eurymedon campaign is accepted , this might be because the revolt in Thasos meant that resources were diverted away from Asia Minor to prevent the Thasians seceding from the League . The Persian fleet was effectively absent from the Aegean until 451 BC , and Greek ships were able to ply the coasts of Asia Minor with impunity . 
 = = = Egypt = = = 
 The Egyptian campaign , as discussed above , is generally thought to have begun in 460 BC . Even this date is subject to some debate however , since at this time Athens was already at war with Sparta in the First Peloponnesian War . It has been questioned whether Athens would really commit to an Egyptian campaign under these circumstances , and therefore suggested that this campaign began before the war with Sparta , in 462 BC . However , this date is generally rejected , and it seems that the Egyptian campaign was , on the part of Athens , simply a piece of political opportunism . 
 The Egyptian satrapy of the Persian Empire was particularly prone to revolts , one of which had occurred as recently as 486 BC . In 461 or 460 BC , a new rebellion began under the command of Inaros , a Libyan king living on the border of Egypt . This rebellion quickly swept the country , which was soon largely in the hands of Inaros . Inaros now appealed to the Delian League for assistance in their fight against the Persians . There was a League fleet of 200 ships already campaigning in Cyprus at this time , which the Athenians then diverted Egypt to support the revolt . Indeed , it is possible that the fleet had been dispatched to Cyprus in the first place because , with Persian attention focused on the Egyptian revolt , it seemed a favourable time to campaign in Cyprus . This would go some way towards explaining the apparently reckless decision of the Athenians to fight wars on two fronts . Thucydides seems to imply that the whole fleet was diverted to Egypt , although it has also been suggested that such a large fleet was unnecessary , and some proportion of it remained of the coast of Asia Minor during this period . Ctesias suggests that the Athenians sent 40 ships , whereas Diodorus says 200 , in apparent agreement with Thucydides . Fine suggests a number of reasons that the Athenians may have been willing to engage themselves in Egypt , despite the ongoing war elsewhere ; the opportunity to weaken Persia , the desire for a naval base in Egypt , the access to the Nile 's huge grain supply , and from the viewpoint of the Ionian allies , the chance to restore profitable trading links with Egypt . 
 At any rate , the Athenians arrived in Egypt , and sailed up the Nile to join up with Inaros 's forces . The Persian king Artaxerxes I had in the meantime assembled a relief force to crush the revolt , under his uncle Achaemenes . Diodorus and Ctesias give numbers for this force of 300 @,@ 000 and 400 @,@ 000 respectively , but these numbers are presumably over @-@ inflated . 
 = = = = Battle of Pampremis ( 460 BC ) = = = = 
 According to Diodorus , the only detailed source for this campaign , the Persian relief force had pitched camp near the Nile . Although Herodotus does not cover this period in his history , he mentions as an aside that he " saw too the skulls of those Persians at <unk> who were killed with Darius ' son Achaemenes by Inaros the Libyan " . This provides some confirmation that this battle was factual , and provides a name for it , which Diodorus does not . Pampremis ( or <unk> ) seems to have been a city on the Nile delta , and a cult centre for the Egyptian equivalent of Ares / Mars . Diodorus tells us that once the Athenians had arrived , they and the Egyptians accepted battle from the Persians . At first the Persians ' superior numbers gave them the advantage , but eventually the Athenians broke through the Persian line , whereupon the Persian army routed and fled . Some proportion of the Persian army found refuge in the citadel of Memphis ( called the ' White Castle ' ) , however , and could not be dislodged . Thucydides 's rather compressed version of these events is : " and making themselves masters of the river and two @-@ thirds of Memphis , addressed themselves to the attack of the remaining third , which is called White Castle " . 
 = = = = Siege of Memphis ( 459 @-@ 455 BC ) = = = = 
 The Athenians and Egyptians thus settled down to besiege the White Castle . The siege evidently did not progress well , and probably lasted for at least four years , since Thucydides says that their whole expedition lasted 6 years , and of this time the final 18 months was occupied with the Siege of <unk> . 
 According to Thucydides , at first Artaxerxes sent <unk> to try and bribe the Spartans into invading Attica , to draw off the Athenian forces from Egypt . When this failed , he instead assembled a large army under ( confusingly ) Megabyzus , and dispatched it to Egypt . Diodorus has more or less the same story , with more detail ; after the attempt at bribery failed , Artaxerxes put Megabyzus and Artabazus in charge of 300 @,@ 000 men , with instructions to quell the revolt . They went first from Persia to Cilicia and gathered a fleet of 300 triremes from the Cilicians , Phoenicians and Cypriots , and spent a year training their men . Then they finally headed to Egypt . Thucydides does not mention Artabazus , who is reported by Herodotus to have taken part in the second Persian invasion ; Diodorus may be mistaken about his presence in this campaign . It is clearly possible that the Persian forces did spend some prolonged time in training , since it took four years for them to respond to the Egyptian victory at Pampremis . Although neither author gives many details , it is clear that when Megabyzus finally arrived in Egypt , he was able to quickly lift the Siege of Memphis , defeating the Egyptians in battle , and driving the Athenians from Memphis . 
 = = = = Siege of Prosopitis ( 455 BC ) = = = = 
 The Athenians now fell back to the island of Prosopitis in the Nile delta , where their ships were moored . There , Megabyzus laid siege to them for 18 months , until finally he was able to drain the river from around the island by digging canals , thus " joining the island to the mainland " . In Thucydides 's account the Persians then crossed over to the former island , and captured it . Only a few of the Athenian force , marching through Libya to Cyrene survived to return to Athens . In Diodorus 's version , however , the draining of the river prompted the Egyptians ( whom Thucydides does not mention ) to defect and surrender to the Persians . The Persians , not wanting to sustain heavy casualties in attacking the Athenians , instead allowed them to depart freely to Cyrene , whence they returned to Athens . Since the defeat of the Egyptian expedition caused a genuine panic in Athens , including the relocation of the Delian treasury to Athens , Thucydides 's version is probably more likely to be correct . 
 = = = = Battle of <unk> = = = = 
 As a final disastrous coda to the expedition , Thucydides mentions the fate of a squadron of fifty triremes sent to relieve the Siege of Prosopitis . Unaware that the Athenians had finally succumbed , the fleet put in at the <unk> mouth of the Nile , where it was promptly attacked from the land , and from the sea by the Phoenician navy . Most of the ships were destroyed , with only a handful managing to escape and return to Athens . 
 = = = Cyprus = = = 
 In 478 BC the Allies had , according to Thucydides , sailed to Cyprus and " subdued most of the island " . Exactly what Thucydides means by this is unclear . Sealey suggests that this was essentially a raid to gather as much booty as possible from the Persian garrisons on Cyprus . There is no indication that the Allies made any attempt to actually take possession of the island , and shortly after they sailed to Byzantium . Certainly , the fact that the Delian League repeatedly campaigned in Cyprus suggests that the island was not garrisoned by the Allies in 478 BC , or that the garrisons were quickly expelled . 
 The next time Cyprus is mentioned is in relation to c . 460 BC , when a League fleet was campaigning there , before being instructed to head to Egypt to support Inaros 's rebellion , with the fateful consequences discussed above . The Egyptian disaster would eventually lead the Athenians to sign a five @-@ year truce with Sparta in 451 BC . Thereby freed from fighting in Greece , the League was again able to dispatch a fleet to campaign in Cyprus in 451 BC , under the recently recalled Cimon . 
 = = = = Siege of Kition = = = = 
 Cimon sailed for Cyprus with a fleet of 200 ships provided by the Athenians and their allies . However , 60 of these ships were sent to Egypt at the request of <unk> , the so @-@ called " King of the Marshes " ( who still remained independent of , and opposed to Persian rule ) . The rest of the force besieged Kition in Cyprus , but during the siege , Cimon died either of sickness or a wound . The Athenians lacked provisions , and apparently under the death @-@ bed instructions of Cimon , the Athenians retreated towards Salamis @-@ in @-@ Cyprus . 
 = = = = Battles of Salamis @-@ in @-@ Cyprus = = = = 
