 Cimon 's death was kept a secret from the Athenian army . 30 days after leaving Kition , the Athenians and their allies were attacked by a Persian force composed of Cilicians , Phoenicians , and <unk> , whilst sailing off Salamis @-@ in @-@ Cyprus . Under the ' command ' of the deceased Cimon , they defeated this force at sea , and also in a land battle . Having thus successfully extricated themselves , the Athenians sailed back to Greece , joined by the detachment which had been sent to Egypt . 
 These battles formed the end of the Greco @-@ Persian Wars . 
 = = Peace with Persia = = 
 After the Battles of Salamis @-@ in @-@ Cyprus , Thucydides makes no further mention of conflict with the Persians , simply saying that the Greeks returned home . Diodorus , on the other hand , claims that in the aftermath of Salamis , a full @-@ blown peace treaty ( the " Peace of Callias " ) was agreed with the Persians . Diodorus was probably following the history of Ephorus at this point , who in turn was presumably influenced by his teacher Isocrates — from whom we have the earliest reference to the supposed peace , in 380 BC . Even during the 4th century BC the idea of the treaty was controversial , and two authors from that period , Callisthenes and Theopompus appear to reject its existence . 
 It is possible that the Athenians had attempted to negotiate with the Persians previously . Plutarch suggests that in the aftermath of the victory at the Eurymedon , Artaxerxes had agreed a peace treaty with the Greeks , even naming Callias as the Athenian ambassador involved . However , as Plutarch admits , Callisthenes denied that such a peace was made at this point ( c . 466 BC ) . Herodotus also mentions , in passing , an Athenian embassy headed by Callias , which was sent to Susa to negotiate with Artaxerxes . This embassy included some Argive representatives and can probably be therefore dated to c . 461 BC ( after forging of the alliance between Athens and Argos ) . This embassy may have been an attempt to reach some kind of peace agreement , and it has even been suggested that the failure of these hypothetical negotiations led to the Athenian decision to support the Egyptian revolt . The ancient sources therefore disagree as to whether there was an official peace or not , and if there was , when it was agreed . 
 Opinion amongst modern historians is also split ; for instance , Fine accepts the concept of the Peace of Callias , whereas Sealey effectively rejects it . Holland accepts that some kind of accommodation was made between Athens and Persia , but no actual treaty . Fine argues that Callisthenes 's denial that a treaty was made after the Eurymedon does not preclude a peace being made at another point . Further , he suggests that Theopompus was actually referring to a treaty that had allegedly been negotiated with Persia in 423 BC . If these views are correct , it would remove one major obstacle to the acceptance of the treaty 's existence . A further argument for the existence of the treaty is the sudden withdrawal of the Athenians from Cyprus in 450 BC , which makes most sense in the light of some kind of peace agreement . On the other hand , if there was indeed some kind of accommodation , Thucydides 's failure to mention it is odd . In his digression on the <unk> his aim is to explain the growth of Athenian power , and such a treaty , and the fact that the Delian allies were not released from their obligations after it , would have marked a major step in the Athenian ascendancy . Conversely , it has been suggested that certain passages elsewhere in Thucydides 's history are best interpreted as referring to a peace agreement . There is thus no clear consensus amongst modern historians as to the treaty 's existence . 
 The ancient sources which give details of the treaty are reasonably consistent in their description of the terms : 
 All Greek cities of Asia were to ' live by their own laws ' or ' be autonomous ' ( depending on translation ) . 
 Persian satraps ( and presumably their armies ) were not to travel west of the Halys ( Isocrates ) or closer than a day 's journey on horseback to the Aegean Sea ( Callisthenes ) or closer than three days ' journey on foot to the Aegean Sea ( Ephorus and Diodorus ) . 
 No Persian warship was to sail west of Phaselis ( on the southern coast of Asia Minor ) , nor west of the <unk> rocks ( probably at the eastern end of the Bosporus , on the north coast ) . 
 If the terms were observed by the king and his generals , then the Athenians were not to send troops to lands ruled by Persia . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 As already noted , towards the end of the conflict with Persia , the process by which the Delian League became the Athenian Empire reached its conclusion . The allies of Athens were not released from their obligations to provide either money or ships , despite the cessation of hostilities . In Greece , the First Peloponnesian War between the power @-@ blocs of Athens and Sparta , which had continued on @-@ off since 460 BC , finally ended in 445 BC , with the agreement of a thirty @-@ year truce . However , the growing enmity between Sparta and Athens would lead , just 14 years later , into the outbreak of the Second Peloponnesian War . This disastrous conflict , which dragged on for 27 years , would eventually result in the utter destruction of Athenian power , the dismemberment of the Athenian empire , and the establishment of a Spartan hegemony over Greece . However , not just Athens suffered — the conflict would significantly weaken the whole of Greece . 
 Repeatedly defeated in battle by the Greeks , and plagued by internal rebellions which hindered their ability to fight the Greeks , after 450 BC Artaxerxes and his successors instead adopted a policy of divide @-@ and @-@ rule . Avoiding fighting the Greeks themselves , the Persians instead attempted to set Athens against Sparta , regularly bribing politicians to achieve their aims . In this way , they ensured that the Greeks remained distracted by internal conflicts , and were unable to turn their attentions to Persia . There was no open conflict between the Greeks and Persia until 396 BC , when the Spartan king Agesilaus briefly invaded Asia Minor ; as Plutarch points out , the Greeks were far too busy overseeing the destruction of their own power to fight against the " barbarians " . 
 If the wars of the Delian League shifted the balance of power between Greece and Persia in favour of the Greeks , then the subsequent half @-@ century of internecine conflict in Greece did much to restore the balance of power to Persia . In 387 BC , Sparta , confronted by an alliance of Corinth , Thebes and Athens during the Corinthian War , sought the aid of Persia to shore up her position . Under the so @-@ called " King 's Peace " which brought the war to an end , Artaxerxes II demanded and received the return of the cities of Asia Minor from the Spartans , in return for which the Persians threatened to make war on any Greek state which did not make peace . This humiliating treaty , which undid all the Greek gains of the previous century , sacrificed the Greeks of Asia Minor so that the Spartans could maintain their hegemony over Greece . It is in the aftermath of this treaty that Greek orators began to refer to the Peace of Callias ( whether fictional or not ) , as a counterpoint to the shame of the King 's Peace , and a glorious example of the " good old days " when the Greeks of the Aegean had been freed from Persian rule by the Delian League . 
 = Michael Chabon = 
 Michael Chabon ( / <unk> / <unk> @-@ bon ; born May 24 , 1963 ) is an American novelist and short story writer . 
 Chabon 's first novel , The Mysteries of Pittsburgh ( 1988 ) , was published when he was 25 . He followed it with a second novel , Wonder Boys ( 1995 ) , and two short @-@ story collections . In 2000 , Chabon published The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier & Clay , a novel that John Leonard , in a 2007 review of a later novel , called Chabon 's magnum opus . It received the Pulitzer Prize for Fiction in 2001 ( see : 2001 in literature ) . 
 His novel The Yiddish Policemen 's Union , an alternate history mystery novel , was published in 2007 and won the Hugo , Sidewise , Nebula and <unk> awards ; his serialized novel Gentlemen of the Road appeared in book form in the fall of that same year . Chabon 's most recent novel , Telegraph Avenue , published in 2012 and billed as " a twenty @-@ first century Middlemarch , " concerns the tangled lives of two families in the Bay Area of San Francisco in the year 2004 . 
 His work is characterized by complex language , the frequent use of metaphor along with recurring themes , including nostalgia , divorce , abandonment , fatherhood , and most notably issues of Jewish identity . He often includes gay , bisexual , and Jewish characters in his work . Since the late 1990s , Chabon has written in an increasingly diverse series of styles for varied outlets ; he is a notable defender of the merits of genre fiction and plot @-@ driven fiction , and , along with novels , he has published screenplays , children 's books , comics , and newspaper serials . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Michael Chabon ( pronounced , in his words , " Shea as in Shea Stadium , Bon as in Bon Jovi " , i.e. , / <unk> / ) was born in Washington , DC to Robert Chabon , a physician and lawyer , and Sharon Chabon , a lawyer . Chabon said he knew he wanted to be a writer when , at the age of ten , he wrote his first short story for a class assignment . When the story received an A , Chabon recalls , " I thought to myself , ' That 's it . That 's what I want to do . I can do this . ' And I never had any second thoughts or doubts . " Referring to popular culture , he wrote of being raised " on a hearty diet of crap " . His parents divorced when Chabon was 11 , and he grew up in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , and Columbia , Maryland . Columbia , where Chabon lived nine months of the year with his mother , was " a progressive planned living community in which racial , economic , and religious diversity were actively fostered . " He has written of his mother 's marijuana use , recalling her " sometime around 1977 or so , sitting in the front seat of her friend Kathy 's car , passing a little metal pipe back and forth before we went in to see a movie . " . He grew up hearing Yiddish spoken by his mother 's parents and siblings . 
 Chabon attended Carnegie Mellon University for a year before transferring to the University of Pittsburgh , where he studied under Chuck Kinder and received a Bachelor of Arts in 1984 . He then went to graduate school at the University of California , Irvine , where he received a Master of Fine Arts in creative writing . 
 = = = The Mysteries of Pittsburgh and initial literary success = = = 
 Chabon 's first novel , The Mysteries of Pittsburgh , was written as his UC Irvine master 's thesis . Without telling Chabon , his professor , Donald <unk> ( better known by his pen name , MacDonald Harris ) , sent it to a literary agent , who got the author an impressive $ 155 @,@ 000 advance on the novel ( most first @-@ time novelists receive advances ranging from $ 5 @,@ 000 to $ 7 @,@ 500 . ) The Mysteries of Pittsburgh appeared in 1988 and became a bestseller , instantly catapulting Chabon to the status of literary celebrity . Among Chabon 's major literary influences in this period were Donald Barthelme , Jorge Luis Borges , Gabriel García Márquez , Raymond Chandler , John Updike , Philip Roth and F. Scott Fitzgerald . As Chabon remarked in 2010 , " I just copied the writers whose voices I was responding to , and I think that 's probably the best way to learn . " 
 Chabon was ambivalent about his new @-@ found fame . He turned down offers to appear in a Gap ad and to be featured as one of People 's " 50 Most Beautiful People . " He later said , of the People offer , " I don 't give a shit [ about it ] ... I only take pride in things I 've actually done myself . To be praised for something like that is just weird . It just felt like somebody calling and saying , ' We want to put you in a magazine because the weather 's so nice where you live . ' " 
 In 2001 , Chabon reflected on the success of his first novel by saying that while " the upside was that I was published and I got a readership , ... [ the ] downside ... was that , emotionally , this stuff started happening and I was still like , ' Wait a minute , is my thesis done yet ? ' It took me a few years to catch up . " In 1991 , Chabon published A Model World , a collection of short stories , many of which had been published previously in The New Yorker . 
 = = = Fountain City and Wonder Boys = = = 
 After the success of The Mysteries of Pittsburgh , Chabon spent five years working on a second novel . Called Fountain City , the novel was a " highly ambitious opus ... about an architect building a perfect baseball park in Florida , " and it eventually ballooned to 1 @,@ 500 pages , with no end in sight . The process was frustrating for Chabon , who , in his words , " never felt like I was conceptually on steady ground . " 
 At one point , Chabon submitted a 672 @-@ page draft to his agent and editor , who disliked the work . Chabon had problems dropping the novel , though . " It was really scary , " he said later . " I 'd already signed a contract and been paid all this money . And then I 'd gotten a divorce and half the money was already with my ex @-@ wife . My instincts were telling me , This book is fucked . Just drop it . But I didn 't , because I thought , What if I have to give the money back ? " " I used to go down to my office and fantasize about all the books I could write instead . " 
 When he finally decided to abandon Fountain City , Chabon recalls staring at his blank computer for hours , before suddenly picturing " a ' straitlaced , troubled young man with a tendency toward melodrama ' trying to end it all . " He began writing , and within a couple of days , had written 50 pages of what would become his second novel , Wonder Boys . Chabon drew on his experiences with Fountain City for the character of Grady Tripp , a frustrated novelist who has spent years working on an immense fourth novel . The author wrote Wonder Boys in a dizzy seven @-@ month streak , without telling his agent or publisher he 'd abandoned Fountain City . The book , published in 1995 , was a commercial and critical success . 
 In late 2010 , " An annotated , four @-@ chapter fragment " from the unfinished 1 @,@ 500 page manuscript Fountain City " complete with cautionary introduction and postscript " written by Chabon was included in McSweeney 's 36 . 
 = = = The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier & Clay = = = 
 Among the supporters of Wonder Boys was The Washington Post critic Jonathan Yardley ; however , despite declaring Chabon " the young star of American letters , " Yardley argued that , in his works to that point , Chabon had been preoccupied " with fictional explorations of his own ... It is time for him to move on , to break away from the first person and explore larger worlds . " Chabon later said that he took Yardley 's criticism to heart , explaining , " It chimed with my own thoughts . I had bigger ambitions . " In 1999 he published his second collection of short stories , Werewolves in their Youth , which included his first published foray into genre fiction , the grim horror story " In the Black Mill . " 
 Shortly after completing Wonder Boys , Chabon discovered a box of comic books from his childhood ; a reawakened interest in comics , coupled with memories of the " lore " his Brooklyn @-@ born father had told him about " the middle years of the twentieth century in America . ... the radio shows , politicians , movies , music , and athletes , and so forth , of that era , " inspired him to begin work on a new novel . In 2000 , he published The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier & Clay , an epic historical novel that charts 16 years in the lives of Sammy Clay and Joe Kavalier , two Jewish cousins who create a wildly popular series of comic books in the early 1940s , the years leading up to the entry of the U.S. into World War II . The novel received " nearly unanimous praise " and became a New York Times Best Seller , eventually winning the 2001 Pulitzer Prize for Fiction . Chabon reflected that , in writing Kavalier & Clay , " I discovered strengths I had hoped that I possessed — the ability to pull off multiple points of view , historical settings , the passage of years — but which had never been tested before . " 
 = = = Summerland , The Final Solution , Gentlemen of the Road , and The Yiddish Policemen 's Union = = = 
 In 2002 , Chabon published Summerland , a fantasy novel written for younger readers that received mixed reviews but sold extremely well , and won the 2003 <unk> Fantasy Award . Two years later , he published The Final Solution , a novella about an investigation led by an unknown old man , whom the reader can guess to be Sherlock Holmes , during the final years of World War II . His Dark Horse Comics project The Amazing Adventures of the Escapist , a quarterly anthology series that was published from 2004 to 2006 , purported to cull stories from an involved , fictitious 60 @-@ year history of the Escapist character created by the protagonists of The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier & Clay . It was awarded the 2005 Eisner Award for Best Anthology and a pair of Harvey Awards for Best Anthology and Best New Series . 
 In late 2006 , Chabon completed work on Gentlemen of the Road , a 15 @-@ part serialized novel that ran in The New York Times Magazine from January 28 to May 6 , 2007 . The serial ( which at one point had the working title " Jews with Swords " ) was described by Chabon as " a swashbuckling adventure story set around the year 1000 . " Just before Gentlemen of the Road completed its run , the author published his latest novel , The Yiddish Policemen 's Union , which he had worked on since February 2002 . A hard @-@ boiled detective story that imagines an alternate history in which Israel collapsed in 1948 and European Jews settled in Alaska , the novel was launched on May 1 , 2007 to enthusiastic reviews , and spent six weeks on the New York Times Best Seller list . The novel also won the 2008 Hugo Award . 
 = = = Manhood for Amateurs and Telegraph Avenue = = = 
 In May 2007 , Chabon said that he was working on a young @-@ adult novel with " some fantastic content . " A month later , the author said he had put plans for the young @-@ adult book on hold , and instead had signed a two @-@ book deal with HarperCollins . 
 The first a book @-@ length work of non @-@ fiction called Manhood for Amateurs : The Pleasures and Regrets of a Husband , Father , and Son published in spring 2009 ( 2010 in Europe ) ; the work discusses " being a man in all its complexity — a son , a father , a husband . " The collection was nominated for a 2010 Northern California Book Award in the Creative Nonfiction category . This was Chabon 's second published collection of essays and non @-@ fiction . McSweeney 's published Maps and Legends , a collection of Chabon 's literary essays , on May 1 , 2008 . Proceeds from the book benefited 826 National . Also in 2008 , Chabon received the Peggy V. Helmerich Distinguished Author Award , presented annually by the Tulsa ( Oklahoma ) Library Trust . 
 During a 2007 interview with the Washington Post , Chabon discussed his second book under the contract , saying , " I would like it to be set in the present day and feel right now the urge to do something more mainstream than my recent work has been . " During a Q & A session in January 2009 , Chabon added that he was writing a " naturalistic " novel about two families in Berkeley . In a March 2010 interview with the Guardian newspaper , Chabon added that " So far there 's no overtly genre content : it 's set in the present day and has no alternate reality or anything like that . " 
 Telegraph Avenue , adapted from an idea for a TV series pilot that Chabon was asked to write in 1999 , is a social novel set on the borders between Oakland and Berkeley in the summer of 2004 that sees a " large cast of characters grapple with infidelity , fatherhood , crooked politicians , racism , nostalgia and buried secrets . " Chabon said upon publication in an interview with the San Francisco Chronicle that the novel concerns " the possibility and impossibility of creating shared community spaces that attempt to transcend the limits imposed on us by our backgrounds , heritage and history . " Five years in gestation , Telegraph Avenue had a difficult birth , Chabon telling the Guardian newspaper , " I got two years into the novel and got completely stymied and felt like it was an utter flop .... I had to start all over again , keeping the characters but reinventing the story completely and leaving behind almost every element . " After starting out with literary realism with his first two novels and moving into genre @-@ fiction experiments from The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier and Clay onward , Chabon feels that Telegraph Avenue is a significant " unification " of his earlier and later styles , declaring in an interview , " I could do whatever I wanted to do in this book and it would be OK even if it verged on crime fiction , even if it verged on magic realism , even if it verged on martial arts fiction .... I was open to all of that and yet I didn 't have to repudiate or steer away from the naturalistic story about two families living their everyday lives and coping with pregnancy and birth and adultery and business failure and all the issues that might go into making a novel written in the genre of mainstream quote @-@ unquote realistic fiction , that that was another genre for me now and I felt free to mix them all in a sense . " The novel has been optioned by film producer Scott Rudin ( who previously optioned and produced Wonder Boys ) , and Cameron Crowe is adapting the novel into a screenplay , according to Chabon . 
 In a public lecture and reading of the novel in Oakland , California , Chabon listed creative influences as broad as Sir Arthur Conan Doyle , Robert Altman , and William Faulkner . 
 Chabon 's next novel , <unk> , concerns friendship , faith , and creation , and is due for publication in June 2016 . 
 Despite his success , Chabon continues to perceive himself as a " failure , " noting that " anyone who has ever received a bad review knows how it outlasts , by decades , the memory of a favorable word . " 
 In June 2010 he wrote an op @-@ ed piece for the New York Times in which he noted the role of exceptionalism in Jewish identity , in relation to the " <unk> " of Israel 's botched Gaza flotilla raid and the explanations that followed . 
 = = = Amazon vs. Hachette controversy = = = 
 In 2014 , Amazon.com , a leading book distributor , was in a dispute with Hachette , a publisher . Hundreds of authors , Chabon included , condemned Amazon in an open letter because Amazon stopped taking pre @-@ orders for books published by Hachette . 
 = = = Personal life = = = 
 In 1987 , Chabon married the poet Lollie Groth . After the publication of The Mysteries of Pittsburgh , he was mistakenly featured in a Newsweek article on up @-@ and @-@ coming gay writers ( Pittsburgh 's protagonist has liaisons with people of both sexes ) . The New York Times later reported that " in some ways , [ Chabon ] was happy " for the magazine 's error , and quoted him as saying , " I feel very lucky about all of that . It really opened up a new readership to me , and a very loyal one . " In a 2002 interview , Chabon added , " If Mysteries of Pittsburgh is about anything in terms of human sexuality and identity , it 's that people can 't be put into categories all that easily . " In " On The Mysteries of Pittsburgh , " an essay he wrote for the New York Review of Books in 2005 , Chabon remarked on the autobiographical events that helped inspire his first novel : " I had slept with one man whom I loved , and learned to love another man so much that it would never have occurred to me to want to sleep with him . " 
 According to Chabon , the popularity of The Mysteries of Pittsburgh had adverse effects ; he later explained , " I was married at the time to someone else who was also a struggling writer , and the success created a gross imbalance in our careers , which was problematic . " He and Groth divorced in 1991 , and he married the writer Ayelet Waldman in 1993 . They currently live together in Berkeley , California with their four children , Sophie Waldman Chabon ( born 1994 ) , Ezekiel " Zeke " Napoleon Waldman Chabon ( born 1997 ) , Ida @-@ Rose Waldman Chabon ( born June 1 , 2001 ) , and Abraham Wolf Waldman Chabon ( born March 31 , 2003 ) . Chabon has said that the " creative free @-@ flow " he has with Waldman inspired the relationship between Sammy Clay and Rosa Saks toward the end of The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier & Clay , and in 2007 , Entertainment Weekly declared the couple " a famous — and famously in love — writing pair , like Nick and Nora Charles with word processors and not so much booze . " 
 In a 2012 interview with Guy Raz of Weekend All Things Considered , Chabon said that he writes from 10 p.m. to 3 a.m. each day , Sunday through Thursday . He tries to write 1 @,@ 000 words a day . Commenting on the rigidity of his routine , Chabon said , " There have been plenty of self @-@ destructive rebel @-@ angel novelists over the years , but writing is about getting your work done and getting your work done every day . If you want to write novels , they take a long time , and they 're big , and they have a lot of words in them .... The best environment , at least for me , is a very stable , structured kind of life . " 
 = = Interest in genre fiction = = 
 In a 2002 essay , Chabon decried the state of modern short fiction ( including his own ) , saying that , with rare exceptions , it consisted solely of " the contemporary , quotidian , plotless , moment @-@ of @-@ truth revelatory story . " In an apparent reaction against these " plotless [ stories ] sparkling with epiphanic dew , " Chabon 's post @-@ 2000 work has been marked by an increased interest in genre fiction and plot . While The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier and Clay was , like The Mysteries of Pittsburgh and Wonder Boys , an essentially realistic , contemporary novel ( whose plot happened to revolve around comic @-@ book superheroes ) , Chabon 's subsequent works — such as The Final Solution , his dabbling with comic @-@ book writing , and the " swashbuckling adventure " of Gentlemen of the Road — have been almost exclusively devoted to mixing aspects of genre and literary fiction . Perhaps the most notable example of this is The Yiddish Policemen 's Union , which won five genre awards , including the Hugo award and Nebula award . Chabon seeks to " annihilate " not the genres themselves , but the bias against certain genres of fiction such as fantasy , science fiction and romance . 
 Chabon 's forays into genre fiction have met with mixed critical reaction . One science fiction short story by Chabon , " The Martian Agent , " was described by a reviewer as " enough to send readers back into the cold but reliable arms of The New Yorker . " Another critic wrote of the same story that it was " richly plotted , action @-@ packed , " and that " Chabon skilfully elaborates his world and draws not just on the steampunk worlds of William Gibson , Bruce Sterling and Michael Moorcock , but on alternate histories by brilliant SF mavericks such as Avram Davidson and Howard Waldrop . The imperial politics are craftily resonant and the story keeps us hanging on . " While The Village Voice called The Final Solution " an ingenious , fully imagined work , an expert piece of literary ventriloquism , and a mash note to the beloved boys ' tales of Chabon 's youth , " The Boston Globe wrote , " [ T ] he genre of the comic book is an anemic vein for novelists to mine , lest they squander their brilliance . " The New York Times states that the detective story , " a genre that is by its nature so constrained , so <unk> , seems unlikely to appeal to the real writer , " but adds that " ... Chabon makes good on his claim : a successful detective story need not be lacking in literary merit . " 
 In 2005 , Chabon argued against the idea that genre fiction and entertaining fiction should not appeal to " the real writer , " saying that the common perception is that " Entertainment ... means junk .... [ But ] maybe the reason for the <unk> of so much of what pretends to entertain us is that we have accepted — indeed , we have helped to articulate — such a narrow , debased concept of entertainment .... I 'd like to believe that , because I read for entertainment , and I write to entertain . Period . " 
 One of the more positive responses to Chabon 's brand of " trickster literature " appeared in Time magazine , whose Lev Grossman wrote that " This is literature in mid @-@ transformation .... [ T ] he highbrow and the lowbrow , once kept chastely separate , are now hooking up , [ and ] you can almost see the future of literature coming . " Grossman classed Chabon with a movement of authors similarly eager to blend literary and popular writing , including Jonathan Lethem ( with whom Chabon is friends ) , Margaret Atwood , and Susanna Clarke . 
 On the other hand , in Slate in 2007 , Ruth Franklin said , " Michael Chabon has spent considerable energy trying to drag the decaying corpse of genre fiction out of the shallow grave where writers of serious literature abandoned it . " 
 = = = The Van Zorn persona = = = 
 For some of his own genre work , Chabon has forged an unusual horror / fantasy fiction persona under the name of August Van Zorn . More elaborately developed than a pseudonym , August Van Zorn is purported to be a pen name for one Albert Vetch ( 1899 – 1963 ) . In Chabon 's 1995 novel Wonder Boys , narrator Grady Tripp writes that he grew up in the same hotel as Vetch , who worked as an English professor at the ( nonexistent ) Coxley College and wrote hundreds of pulp stories that were " in the gothic mode , after the manner of Lovecraft ... but written in a dry , ironic , at times almost whimsical idiom . " A horror @-@ themed short story titled " In the Black Mill " was published in Playboy in June 1997 and reprinted in Chabon 's 1999 story collection Werewolves in Their Youth , and was attributed to Van Zorn . 
 Chabon has created a comprehensive bibliography for Van Zorn , along with an equally fictional literary scholar devoted to his oeuvre named Leon Chaim Bach . Bach 's now @-@ defunct website ( which existed under the auspices of Chabon 's ) declared Van Zorn to be , " without question , the greatest unknown horror writer of the twentieth century , " and mentioned that Bach had once edited a collection of short stories by Van Zorn titled The Abominations of <unk> . ( The name " Leon Chaim Bach " is an anagram of " Michael Chabon , " as is " Malachi B. Cohen , " the name of a fictional comics expert who wrote occasional essays about the Escapist for the character 's Dark Horse Comic series . ) In 2004 , Chabon established the August Van Zorn Prize , " awarded to the short story that most faithfully and disturbingly embodies the tradition of the weird short story as practiced by Edgar Allan Poe and his literary descendants , among them August Van Zorn . " The first recipient of the prize was Jason Roberts , whose winning story , " 7C , " was then included in McSweeney 's Enchanted Chamber of Astonishing Stories , edited by Chabon . 
 A scene in the film adaptation of Chabon 's novel The Mysteries of Pittsburgh shows two characters in a bookstore stocking August Van Zorn books . 
 = = The Chabon universe = = 
 Chabon has provided several subtle hints throughout his work that the stories he tells take place in a shared fictional universe . One recurring character , who is mentioned in three of Chabon 's books but never actually appears , is Eli Drinkwater , a fictional catcher for the Pittsburgh Pirates who died abruptly after crashing his car on Mt . Nebo Road . The most detailed exposition of Drinkwater 's life appears in Chabon 's 1990 short story " Smoke , " which is set at Drinkwater 's funeral , and refers to him as " a scholarly catcher , a redoubtable batsman , and a kind , affectionate person . " Drinkwater was again referred to ( though not by name ) in Chabon 's 1995 novel Wonder Boys , in which narrator Grady Tripp explains that his sportswriter friend Happy Blackmore was hired " to ghost the autobiography of a catcher , a rising star who played for Pittsburgh and hit the sort of home runs that linger in the memory for years . " 
 Tripp explains that Blackmore turned in an inadequate draft , his book contract was cancelled , and the catcher died shortly afterwards , " leaving nothing in Happy 's notorious ' files ' but the fragments and scribblings of a ghost . " In Chabon 's children 's book Summerland ( 2002 ) , it is suggested that Blackmore was eventually able to find a publisher for the biography ; the character Jennifer T. mentions that she has read a book called Eli Drinkwater : A Life in Baseball , written by Happy Blackmore . Drinkwater 's name may have been selected in homage to contemporary author John Crowley , whom Chabon is on the record as admiring . Crowley 's novel Little , Big featured a main character named Alice Drinkwater . 
 There are also instances in which character surnames reappear from story to story . Cleveland Arning , a character in Chabon 's 1988 debut novel , The Mysteries of Pittsburgh , is described as having come from a wealthy family , one that might be expected to be able to endow a building . Near the end of Wonder Boys ( 1995 ) , it is mentioned that , on the unnamed college campus at which Grady Tripp teaches , there is a building called Arning Hall " where the English faculty kept office hours . " Similarly , in Chabon 's 1989 short story " A Model World , " a character named Levine discovers , or rather plagiarizes , a formula for " <unk> " ( or cloud control ) that wins him respect and prominence in the meteorological field . In The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier & Clay ( 2000 ) , a passing reference is made to the " massive Levine School of Applied Meteorology , " ostensibly a building owned by New York University . 
 = = Experiences with Hollywood = = 
 Although Michael Chabon has described his attitude toward Hollywood as " pre @-@ emptive cynicism , " for years the author has nevertheless engaged in sustained , and often fruitless , efforts to bring both adapted and original projects to the screen . In 1994 , Chabon pitched a screenplay entitled The Gentleman Host to producer Scott Rudin , a romantic comedy " about old Jewish folks on a third @-@ rate cruise ship out of Miami . " Rudin bought the project and developed it with Chabon , but it was never filmed , partly due to the release of the similarly themed film Out to Sea in 1997 . In the nineties , Chabon also pitched story ideas for both the X @-@ Men and the Fantastic Four movies , but was rejected . 
 When Scott Rudin was adapting Wonder Boys for the screen , the author declined an offer to write the screenplay , saying he was too busy writing The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier and Clay . Directed by Curtis Hanson and starring Michael Douglas , Wonder Boys was released in 2000 to critical acclaim and financial failure . Having bought the film rights to The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier and Clay , Rudin then asked Chabon to work on that film 's screenplay . Although Chabon spent 16 months in 2001 and 2002 working on the novel 's film adaptation , the project has been mired in pre @-@ production for years . 
 Chabon 's work , however , remains popular in Hollywood , with Rudin purchasing the film rights to The Yiddish Policemen 's Union , then titled <unk> , in 2002 , five years before the book would be published . The same year , Miramax bought the rights to Summerland and Tales of Mystery and Imagination ( a planned collection of eight genre short stories that Chabon has not yet written ) , each of which was optioned for a sum in the mid @-@ six figures . Chabon also wrote a draft for 2004 's Spider @-@ Man 2 , about a third of which was used in the final film . Soon after Spider @-@ Man 2 was released , director Sam Raimi mentioned that he hoped to hire Chabon to work on the film 's sequel , " if I can get him , " but Chabon never worked on Spider @-@ Man 3 . 
 In October 2004 , it was announced that Chabon was at work writing Disney 's Snow and the Seven , a live @-@ action martial arts retelling of Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs to be directed by master Hong Kong fight choreographer and director Yuen Wo Ping . In August 2006 , Chabon said that he had been replaced on Snow , sarcastically explaining that the producers wanted to go in " more of a fun direction . " 
 Although Chabon was uninvolved with the project , director Rawson Marshall Thurber shot a film adaptation of The Mysteries of Pittsburgh in fall 2006 . The film , which stars Sienna Miller and Peter Sarsgaard , was released in April 2008 . In February 2008 , Scott Rudin reported that a film adaptation of The Yiddish Policemen 's Union was in pre @-@ production , to be written and directed by the Coen brothers . 
 In April 2009 , Chabon confirmed he had been hired to do revisions to the script for Disney 's John Carter . In 2014 , Chabon was also involved in writing lyrics for Mark Ronson 's album Uptown Special . 
 = = Honors = = 
 1997 IMPAC Literary Award longlist ( for Wonder Boys ) 
 1999 <unk> Award Third Prize ( for " Son of the Wolfman " ) 
 2000 National Book Critics Circle Award finalist ( Fiction ) for ( for The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier and Clay ) 
 2001 Pulitzer Prize for Fiction ( for The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier and Clay ) 
 2000 California Book Award ( Fiction ) ( for The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier and Clay ) 
 2001 PEN / Faulkner Award finalist ( for The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier and Clay ) 
 2002 IMPAC Literary Award longlist ( for The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier and Clay ) 
 2007 Sidewise Award for Alternate History ( for The Yiddish Policemen 's Union ) 
 2007 Salon Book Award ( for The Yiddish Policemen 's Union ) 
 2007 California Book Award ( Fiction ) ( for The Yiddish Policemen 's Union ) 
 2008 Hugo Award for Best Novel ( for The Yiddish Policemen 's Union ) 
 2008 Nebula Award for Best Novel ( for The Yiddish Policemen 's Union ) 
 2009 Premio <unk> Award for Best Foreign Novel ( for The Yiddish Policemen 's Union ) 
 2009 IMPAC Literary Award longlist ( for The Yiddish Policemen 's Union ) 
 2009 Entertainment Weekly " End @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Decade " Best of list ( for The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier and Clay ) 
 2010 Northern California Book Award ( General Nonfiction ) nomination ( for Manhood for Amateurs 
 2010 Elected Chairman of the Board , the MacDowell Colony 
 2012 Inducted into the American Academy of Arts and Letters 
 2012 Telegraph Best Books of 2012 list ( for Telegraph Avenue ) 
 2012 London Evening Standard Books of the Year 2012 list ( for Telegraph Avenue ) 
 2012 Kansas City Star Top 100 Books of 2012 List ( fiction ) ( for Telegraph Avenue ) 
 2012 Hollywood.com Best Books of 2012 List ( for Telegraph Avenue ) 
 2012 New York Times 100 Notable Books of 2012 List ( Fiction & Poetry ) ( for Telegraph Avenue ) 
 2012 Good Reads Choice Awards 2012 finalist , Best Fiction ( for Telegraph Avenue ) 
 2013 Los Angeles Times Book Prize 2012 ( fiction ) finalist ( for Telegraph Avenue ) 
 2013 California Book Award ( Fiction ) finalist ( for Telegraph Avenue ) 
 2013 Fernanda <unk> Award for American Literature 
 2014 IMPAC Literary Award longlist ( for Telegraph Avenue ) 
 = = Criticism and interpretation = = 
 Costello , Brannon ( ed . ) . Conversations with Michael Chabon . University Press of Mississippi , 2015 . [ Collection of interviews with Chabon between 1995 and 2012 ] 
 Dewey , Joseph . Understanding Michael Chabon . University of South Carolina Press , 2014 . 
 Gibbs , Alan . Contemporary American Trauma Narratives . Edinburgh University Press , 2014 . [ contains a chapter discussing trauma in relation to contemporary counterfactual history novels , discussing The Yiddish Policemen 's Union alongside Philip Roth 's The Plot Against America and Paul Auster 's Man in the Dark ] 
 Huber , <unk> . Literature After Postmodernism : <unk> Fantasies . Palgrave Macmillan , 2014 . [ contains a chapter on history as escape in relation to The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier and Clay ] 
 <unk> , Jesse and Batchelor , Bob ( eds . ) . Michael Chabon 's America : Magical Words , Secret Worlds , and Sacred Spaces . Rowman & Littlefield , 2014 . [ collection of essays considering various aspects of Chabon 's body of work up to Telegraph Avenue ] 
 Levine , Daniel B. " Josef Kavalier 's Odyssey : Homeric Echoes in Michael Chabon 's The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier & Clay " . International Journal of the Classical Tradition , vol . 17 , no . 4 ( December 2010 ) , pp. 526 – 555 . 
 Scanlan , Margaret . " Strange Times to Be a Jew : Alternate History after 9 / 11 " in Duvall , John and <unk> , Robert ( eds . ) . <unk> 9 / 11 : Fantasies of State , Security , and Terrorism . Johns Hopkins University Press , 2015 . [ contains discussion of The Yiddish Policemen 's Union ] 
 = Krista Branch = 
 Krista Branch is an American singer whose 2010 song " I Am America " has been called the anthem of the Tea Party movement . Branch produced " I Am America " with her husband , who wrote the song , to protest the treatment of the Tea Party by Democrats . After being uploaded to YouTube , the song was aired on Glenn Beck 's radio show and it quickly grew in popularity . It was subsequently performed on Fox News and at events across the country . A former American Idol contestant , Branch was eliminated early in the process . 
 Branch was born in Mount Pleasant , Texas and later lived in Bixby , Oklahoma . She married Michael Branch in 2000 , and together they have three children . Early in the marriage her family faced serious financial difficulties , and later , while they were living in Colorado , faced the near death of their youngest daughter . 
 The Branches became supporters of 2012 presidential candidate Herman Cain after performing at several events where he was a keynote speaker , and " I Am America " was made the official theme song of the campaign . Another song released by Branch , " Remember Who We Are " , was made the official campaign anthem of Rick Santorum 's presidential campaign . 
 Branch 's music regularly expresses religious and political themes emphasizing American exceptionalism . Her music has been well received among conservative commentators and members of the Tea Party movement for its political message . The use of Branch 's music in the campaigns of Cain and Santorum has been seen as an indication of its appeal among outsider candidates . She has released nine singles and an EP , and is working on her debut album for release in 2013 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Branch was born in Mount Pleasant in East Texas , and began singing in her youth at church along with her four siblings . She also lived in Oklahoma for part of her childhood . Branch moved out of Texas with her family at the age of 14 , but remained proud of her Texas heritage . In order to focus on her music career , Branch and her family moved to Nashville , Tennessee in 2010 . 
 She married Michael Branch in 2000 , and they have since had three children together . Early in their marriage they had a low income , and Branch 's husband took on several odd jobs , in addition to his work as a youth pastor , in order to make a living . He describes living with Branch in a " shabby place " in Tulsa , Oklahoma where they struggled to pay $ 480 a month in rent . Later they bought a house in Tulsa , and rented it out while they were living in Colorado ; they got into financial difficulties when the tenants stopped paying the rent , and they accepted the bank 's decision to foreclose the mortgage , as that cleared their debt . They appeared on the Christian news magazine program , the 700 Club , talking about an incident in which their baby daughter was revived after drowning in their bathtub , and they attributed their child 's survival to the power of prayer , having been inspired after seeing The Passion of the Christ a few days earlier . 
 = = Career = = 
 While living in Bixby , Oklahoma , Branch auditioned for the seventh season of American Idol and was chosen by the judges to move on to the preliminary round in Hollywood . Footage of her performance was not included on the show , but she appeared in a montage at the end of the episode . A week later she was eliminated from the competition . Branch told The New York Times her decision to enter the contest was not due to a desire to " be somebody " , but because she felt she should take any opportunity with the belief that God would bless her efforts . 
 Two years later , the video for Branch 's fourth single " I Am America " was released on YouTube . Her husband , Michael Branch , wrote the song partly in response to criticism of the Tea Party protests from Democrats , while also drawing on his own difficulties in life . In an interview for Billy Kelly of the Washington Times ' Tea Party Report , Branch told how soon after her husband wrote the song he had her quickly learn the lyrics and then recorded her performing the song . She originally felt the song was too confrontational for her , but decided the message was so important that she should record the song . In the music video , footage of Tea Party rallies is interspersed with scenes of Branch singing on a sound stage and kids holding signs containing political messages and scripture . " I Am America " was played on the July 7 , 2010 , broadcast of Glenn Beck 's radio show and a week later Fox News host Bill O 'Reilly devoted a portion of his “ <unk> and Patriots ” segment to the song , saying that " for honoring legitimate protest " Branch was a patriot . About 21 days after being uploaded the video had nearly 475 @,@ 000 views . " I Am America " soon became a popular song with the Tea Party movement and has been described as the movement 's anthem . The New York Times described Branch as having a " dynamic presence " on stage when singing the song . 
 Glenn Beck played another Krista Branch song titled " Remember Who We Are " on his Insider Extreme radio program early in August 2010 and the song was featured in a video from Branch promoting Beck 's Restoring Honor rally . The lyrics for " Remember Who We Are " contain a mixture of defiant metaphors with a Christian rock style of music . Branch 's husband said he wrote the song to " remind us of who Americans are in the wake of the most trying of times . " He stated that Americans stand up and come together in the face of adversity , saying he prayed the song would bring people hope . Calling it an " inspiring patriotic song " , the video for the song was made the " Video of the Day " on Glenn Beck 's site on September 3 2010 . 
 Her first EP I Am America was released on September 3 , 2010 by <unk> Publishing , a company established by Branch 's husband . The EP included " Remember Who We Are " as well as " I Am America " and " Foreign Land " , a song about departed American soldiers . Jeremiah Holdsworth of <unk> felt the songs were strong , noting their patriotic themes and subtle religious subtext , and said the song " Foreign Land " particularly moved him . Branch released a new single on July 22 , 2011 , called " Lead Me On " , a cover of the Amy Grant song and released a video for the song a month later . The song was described as pro @-@ Israel with the music video containing imagery related to the history of the Jewish people , including a prominent emphasis on the Holocaust . 
 In addition to her performances in the United States , Branch has performed for teens in Guatemala and Slovakia . She performed at the 2011 Sunbelt Ag Expo in conjunction with the American Bible Society , singing patriotic songs to support American soldiers and performing the national anthem for the Expo . Branch attended the Washington Times ' 30th anniversary celebration on October 3 , 2012 , and performed several songs for the event . Branch regularly performs with Oklahoma jazz saxophonist Grady Nichols . She is working on her debut album , which is scheduled to be released in early 2013 . 
 = = = 2012 Republican presidential primaries = = = 
 Branch 's music has gained prominence as a result of its use during the 2012 Republican presidential primary . When she was performing " I Am America " at events across the country , Herman Cain was often the keynote speaker . Branch and her husband came to appreciate his political views and her husband signed on with Cain 's campaign . " I Am America " was later adopted by the candidate as his campaign 's official theme . Cain said when interviewed about the song , " The first time I heard that song , the message was so right @-@ on I felt goose bumps just listening to it . " The song was later described by the National Journal as having " underscored Cain 's anti @-@ elitist appeal " with its lyrics . Campaign ads featuring " I Am America " gave the song increased exposure . A campaign ad using " I Am America " that included Cain 's chief of staff was the subject of numerous parodies also featuring the song . On The Colbert Report , comedian Stephen Colbert satirically claimed Cain got the line " I Am America " from Colbert 's book , I Am America ( And So Can You ! ) . Several parodies of the ad were then shown on the program using the song . 
 Rick Santorum announced in March 2012 that he has adopted Branch 's song " Remember Who We Are " as an official theme song for his campaign , having been without a theme song prior to the announcement . Santorum said he chose the song because " few songs express the beauty and strength of who we are as free Americans better than Krista ’ s . " The song is seen as representing the emotion of his campaign effort . David Weigel described Branch as the " muse of the insurgent conservative candidate " due to her songs being used by Cain and Santorum in their primary campaigns . 
 = = Politics = = 
 Branch has said her patriotism and admiration for America is the unifying principle of her music . She suggests the Tea Party is animated not by rebelliousness , but by patriotism and love of freedom . Her music often incorporates political themes and religious views that have led to her songs resonating with Tea Party supporters and commentators such as Glenn Beck and Bill O 'Reilly . 
 The artist has performed at political rallies led by Beck , and at campaign rallies for Herman Cain . Her husband joined Cain 's presidential campaign as state director for Tennessee after hearing him speak at events where Branch performed . Branch said Cain was a natural choice for her and her husband because she felt their beliefs aligned with Cain 's . Since 2010 , she received three payments that totaled $ 10 @,@ 000 for live entertainment services provided at political rallies from several political action committees associated with Cain 's campaign . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = Cause and Effect ( Star Trek : The Next Generation ) = 
 " Cause and Effect " is the 18th episode of the fifth season of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : The Next Generation , the 118th overall . It was originally released on March 23 , 1992 , in broadcast syndication . It was written by Brannon Braga , who sought to write an unusual type of time travel related plot , and directed by cast member Jonathan Frakes . 
 Set in the 24th century , the series follows the adventures of the crew of the Federation starship Enterprise . In this episode , the Enterprise is caught in a time loop which results in the destruction of the ship and the loss of all hands after a collision with the USS Bozeman . As events re @-@ occur , they begin to feel a sense of déjà vu and upon investigating , realize their predicament . Lt. Commander Data ( Brent Spiner ) realizes how to a pass a brief message to himself in the next loop , which allows him to save the ship from destruction . 
 Cheers actor Kelsey Grammer was offered the role of Captain Morgan Bateson and accepted . Due to scheduling conflicts , Kirstie Alley was unable to appear in her Star Trek II : The Wrath of Khan role as Lt. Saavik . Plans for the USS Bozeman were changed due to the budget , which resulted in a modification to the USS Reliant model created for The Wrath of Khan and the use of the movie @-@ era Enterprise bridge . " Cause and Effect " received Nielsen ratings of 13 @.@ 0 percent , making it the sixth most watched episode of the season . Critics praised the episode , specifically the opening sequence in which the Enterprise is destroyed , the writing of Braga and the direction of Frakes . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The viewer is shown through the episode that Enterprise is caught in a time loop ( referred to in @-@ universe as a " temporal causality loop " ) . The loop begins with the senior members of the crew playing poker and continues for about a day when they discover a spatial anomaly . While studying the anomaly , a ship suddenly emerges from it , and though Captain Jean @-@ Luc Picard ( Patrick Stewart ) takes Lt. Commander Data 's ( Brent Spiner ) advice over Commander William T. Riker 's ( Jonathan Frakes ) for avoiding a collision , the new ship clips the warp nacelle , causing a critical failure and the destruction of the Enterprise moments later , at which point the loop restarts . 
 Initially , the crew are unaware of the loop . However , Dr. Beverly Crusher ( Gates McFadden ) begins to hear noises before she goes to bed following the poker game . Having a sense of déjà vu during the poker game and able to predict the cards Data will deal during a subsequent loop , Crusher takes a tricorder with her to her room , records the voices , and later analyzes them to discover they are the panicked commands and broadcasts of the crew . The senior staff work out that they are stuck in the loop ; the voices they are hearing are those of themselves from the previous loop just prior to the destruction of the ship . They evaluate the voices to determine that the loop is restarted due to the collision of the two ships but do not know how to avoid that collision in the first place . Data suggests that his <unk> brain can be used to send a short message to himself in the next loop which may help them to avoid the collision . When they arrive at the anomaly , and after the collision , Data sends the message . 
 On the following loop , Crusher again has a feeling of déjà vu during the poker game , but when Data deals the next hand , all the cards are threes , followed by a hand where all players have three of a kind . The number 3 begins appearing throughout other parts of the ship 's operations while , again , they determine they are stuck in a time loop . When they reach the anomaly and the ship appears from it , Data suddenly realizes that the 3 stands for the number of command pips on Riker 's uniform , and executes Riker 's option instead of his own . This allows Enterprise to safely clear the oncoming ship . The anomaly disappears and the time loop ends , and the crew realize they have been trapped in the loop for over 17 days , while the other ship , the USS Bozeman , has been missing for over 90 years . Picard welcomes the Bozeman 's crew to the 24th century . 
 = = Production = = 
 The script was written by Brannon Braga , who sought to write a time @-@ travel related episode without using a " screwed up time @-@ lines " type plot . Braga called it the most enjoyable episode he wrote all season , as he had never seen a <unk> episode before but he did not know how to get the crew out of the loop , nor what the message was which would be passed to a future loop . The poker game was not in the original plan , which he attributed to a sugar rush after eating pancakes . He felt that the destruction of the Enterprise was the best possible teaser for the episode , and he was pleased how he managed to tie the poker game into the overall plot . Braga named the USS Bozeman for his hometown of Bozeman , Montana , while the registration number of NCC @-@ 1941 was a reference to the 1979 film 1941 . 
 Cast member Jonathan Frakes directed the episode , having prepared for it while shooting the episode " The Outcast " . He said that he was not involved in the casting process , as they had offered the role of Captain Morgan Bateson to Kelsey Grammar , who 'd accepted . Grammar was a Star Trek fan , and in his role as Frasier Crane on Cheers , he filmed on the Paramount lot near where The Next Generation was produced . Frakes found it a challenge to film the same scenes with the same dialogue over and over but in a way which made them look different . Marvin V. Rush , the director of photography , worked with cameraman Waverly Smothers to develop an attachment for a camera using a bungee cord which allowed for a different style of shooting . Frakes also worked while at home planning out shots in order to ensure that there was a variety to each loop . Executive producer had made it clear that Frakes could not re @-@ use footage and each loop needed to be filmed fresh , in order to prevent the episode from looking like a clip show . 
 Several changes took place to the script because of filming and casting difficulties . The crew planned planned to make the USS Bozeman a Star Trek : The Original Series @-@ era Constitution class ship , similar to the original USS Enterprise . However , no model was available to use and the costs in creating a new one , along with costumes and props , was prohibitive enough that the plan was scrapped . Instead , the USS Reliant model created for Star Trek II : The Wrath of Khan was used . Greg Jein and Michael Okuda made the relevant changes , removing the <unk> and adding sensor arrays , resulting in it being described as a Soyuz class vessel . The bridge of the Bozeman was a re @-@ dressed version of the film series Enterprise bridge . It was then intended to get Kirstie Alley in a cameo role behind Grammer in the USS Bozeman shots , reprising her role as Lt. Saavik from the movie The Wrath of Khan , but could not do so due to scheduling difficulties . Rob Legato organized the large scale miniature effects for the episode on set 10 , with large scale but low detailed versions of the Enterprise created along with just nacelle models for the Bozeman to collide with . 
 = = Reception and home media release = = 
 The episode aired during the week commencing May 10 , 1992 , in broadcast syndication . According to Nielsen Media Research , it received ratings of 13 @.@ 0 percent . This means that it was watched by 13 percent of all households watching television during its timeslot . It was the sixth most watched episode of the season , behind both parts of " Unification " , " A Matter of Time " , " Power Play " and " The Game " . 
 James Van Hise in his book The Unauthorized Trek : The Complete Next Generation , said that the episode " fascinated " him due to the " experimental " nature . He praised the direction of Frakes , who saved it from being a series of " potentially boring repetition [ s ] " , adding that he " clearly has a firm grasp on the series . " Juliette Harrisson listed " Cause and Effect " as the seventh most groundbreaking episode of the series in 2012 for Den of Geek . Keith DeCandido reviewed the episode for Tor.com , giving it a rating of nine out of ten . He praised the means in which Frakes made each repetition different , and the writing by Braga which he described as a " tour de force " . He said that " Cause and Effect " had " the best teaser in the history of Star Trek " , and summed it up by saying " This is an absolute triumph of craft from both Braga and Frakes , and just a fun episode , with the added bonus of Captain Frasier Crane at the end . I almost didn 't need to rewatch this one , as it ’ s one of my go @-@ to episodes when I want to watch a Star Trek episode for the heck of it , and I have yet to tire of it . " 
 Zack Handlen gave " Cause and Effect " a grade of A in his review for The A.V. Club . He called the opening sequence " strong " , and said that one of the " tricks " of this episode was that it does not break its own rules in finding a resolution . He summarized by saying " Once again , TNG does what it does best : You take an ostensibly goofy idea , and then you make it sting by thinking through the consequences . " In a list of the top 100 episodes of the Star Trek franchise , " Cause and Effect " was placed in 62nd place by Charlie Jane Anders at io9 . 
 Viviane Casimir published an article in the Winter 1997 issue of the journal Extrapolation that used Lieutenant Commander Data 's ability to transmit a message to himself as an example of assigning special mental abilities to a cyborg . In Computers Of Star Trek Lois <unk> and Robert Weinberg noted a contradiction between the description of Data being built around a neural net and examples of traditional von Neumann architecture . They noted how , in " Cause and Effect " , when a crew member removed the cover to Data 's " brain " , it exposed flashing lights reminiscent of the large computers of the fifties and sixties , that reflected the values in the CPUs accumulator and other registers . 
 " Cause and Effect " was first released on VHS cassette in the United States and Canada on June 10 , 1997 . The episode was later released in the United States on September 3 , 2002 , as part of the Star Trek : The Next Generation season four DVD box set . The first Blu @-@ ray release was in the United Kingdom on July 29 , 2013 , followed by the United States on July 30 . Elements of the episode were expanded upon in several non @-@ canon novels . In Ship of the Line by Diane Carey followed up on the events of " Cause and Effect " . Captain Bateson also appears in several more books set before and after the events of this episode , including The Captain 's Daughter by Peter David and the Star Trek : Destiny novel Lost Souls . 
 = Japanese cruiser Kasuga = 
 Kasuga ( <unk> ) was the name ship of the Kasuga @-@ class armored cruisers of the Imperial Japanese Navy , built in the first decade of the 20th century by Gio . Ansaldo & C. , Sestri Ponente , Italy , where the type was known as the Giuseppe Garibaldi class . The ship was originally ordered by the Argentine Navy during the Argentine – Chilean naval arms race , but the lessening of tensions with Chile and financial pressures caused the Argentinians to sell her before delivery . At this time tensions between the Empire of Japan and the Russian Empire were rising , and the ship was offered to both sides before she was purchased by the Japanese . 
 During the Russo @-@ Japanese War of 1904 – 05 , Kasuga participated in the Battle of the Yellow Sea and was lightly damaged during the subsequent Battle of Tsushima . In addition she frequently bombarded the defenses of Port Arthur . The ship played a limited role in World War I and was used to escort Allied convoys and search for German commerce raiders in the Indian Ocean and Australasia . Kasuga became a training ship in the late 1920s and was then disarmed and hulked in 1942 for use as a barracks ship . The ship was sunk shortly before the end of World War II in 1945 and was salvaged three years later and broken up for scrap . 
 = = Background = = 
 Kasuga was the next @-@ to @-@ last of the 10 Giuseppe Garibaldi @-@ class armored cruisers to be built . The first ship had been completed in 1895 and the class had enjoyed considerable export success , and had been gradually improved over the years . The last two ships of the class were ordered on 23 December 1901 by the Argentine Navy in response to the order by Chile for two second @-@ class battleships . The possibility of war between Argentina and Chile , however , abated before the vessel was completed , and a combination of financial problems and British pressure forced Argentina to dispose of Bernardino Rivadavia and her sister ship Mariano Moreno . The Argentine government attempted to sell the ships to Russia , but negotiations failed over the price demanded by the Argentinians . The Japanese government quickly stepped in and purchased them due to increasing tensions with Russia despite the high price of ¥ 14 @,@ 937 @,@ 390 ( £ 1 @,@ 530 @,@ 000 ) for the two sisters . Already planning to attack Russia , the government delayed their surprise attack on Port Arthur that began the Russo @-@ Japanese War until the ships had left Singapore and could not be delayed or interned by any foreign power . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Kasuga had an overall length of 111 @.@ 73 meters ( 366 ft 7 in ) , a beam of 18 @.@ 71 meters ( 61 ft 5 in ) , a molded depth of 12 @.@ 1 meters ( 39 ft 8 in ) and a deep draft ( ship ) of 7 @.@ 31 meters ( 24 ft 0 in ) . She displaced 7 @,@ 700 metric tons ( 7 @,@ 600 long tons ) at normal load . The ship was powered by two vertical triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving one shaft , using steam from 8 coal @-@ fired Scotch marine boilers . Designed for a maximum output of 13 @,@ 500 indicated horsepower ( 10 @,@ 100 kW ) and a speed of 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) , Kasuga barely exceeded this , reaching a speed of 20 @.@ 05 knots ( 37 @.@ 13 km / h ; 23 @.@ 07 mph ) during her sea trials on 20 September 1903 despite 14 @,@ 944 ihp ( 11 @,@ 144 kW ) produced by her engines . She had a cruising range of 5 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 200 km ; 6 @,@ 300 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . Her complement consisted of 560 officers and enlisted men . 
 Her main armament consisted of one 40 @-@ caliber Armstrong Whitworth 10 @-@ inch / 40 Type 41 gun in a single turret forward and two 8 @-@ inch / 45 Type 41 guns , in a twin @-@ gun turret aft . Ten of the quick @-@ firing ( QF ) 6 @-@ inch / 40 Type 41 guns that comprised her secondary armament were arranged in casemates amidships on the main deck ; the remaining four guns were mounted on the upper deck . Kasuga also had ten QF 3 @-@ inch / 40 Type 41 guns and six QF 3 @-@ pounder Hotchkiss guns to defend herself against torpedo boats . She was fitted with four submerged 457 mm ( 18 @.@ 0 in ) torpedo tubes , two on each side . 
 In 1924 two of her 3 in / 40 guns were removed , as were all of her QF 3 @-@ pounder Hotchkiss guns , and a single 8 cm / 40 3rd Year Type anti @-@ aircraft gun was added . By August 1933 , all ten of her casemated 6 @-@ inch guns had been removed in addition to four more 3 in / 40 guns . 
 The ship 's waterline armor belt had a maximum thickness of 150 millimeters ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) amidships and tapered to 70 millimeters ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) towards the ends of the ship . Between the main gun barbettes it covered the entire side of the ship up to the level of the upper deck . The ends of the central armored citadel were enclosed by transverse bulkheads 120 millimeters ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) thick . The forward barbette , the conning tower , and gun turrets were also protected by 150 @-@ millimeter armor while the aft barbette only had 100 millimeters ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) of armor . Her deck armor ranged from 20 to 40 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 8 to 1 @.@ 6 in ) thick and the 6 @-@ inch guns on the upper deck were protected by gun shields . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 The ship 's keel was laid down on 10 March 1902 with the temporary name of San Mitra and she was launched on 22 October 1902 and renamed Bernardino Rivadavia by the Argentinians . The vessel was sold to Japan on 30 December 1903 and renamed Kasuga , after Kasuga Shrine in Nara prefecture , on 1 January 1904 . Kasuga and her newly renamed sister Nisshin were formally turned over to Japan and commissioned on 7 January . The sisters departed Genoa on 9 January under the command of British captains and manned by British seamen and Italian stokers . When they arrived at Port Said , Egypt , five days later , they encountered the Russian protected cruiser Aurora and reached Suez on the 16th , accompanied by the British armored cruiser King Alfred . The Japanese ships reached Singapore on 2 February where they were slightly delayed by a coolie strike . 
 = = = Russo @-@ Japanese War = = = 
 Kasuga and Nisshin reached Yokosuka on 16 February just as Japan initiated hostilities with its surprise attack on Port Arthur , and began working up with Japanese crews . The sisters were assigned to reinforce the battleships of the 1st Division of the 1st Fleet under the overall command of Admiral Tōgō Heihachirō on 11 April . In an effort to block the Russian ships in Port Arthur , Togo ordered a minefield laid at the mouth of the harbor on 12 April and Kasuga and Nisshin were tasked to show themselves " as a demonstration of our power " . Tōgō successfully lured out a portion of the Russian Pacific Squadron , including Vice Admiral Stepan Makarov 's flagship , the battleship Petropavlovsk . When Makarov spotted the five Japanese battleships and Kasuga and Nisshin , he turned back for Port Arthur and his flagship ran into the minefield just laid by the Japanese . The ship sank in less than two minutes after one of her magazines exploded , and Makarov was one of the 677 killed . In addition to this loss , the battleship Pobeda was damaged by a mine . Emboldened by his success , Tōgō resumed long @-@ range bombardment missions , making use of the long @-@ range capabilities of Kasuga and Nisshin 's guns to blindly bombard Port Arthur on 15 April from Pigeon Bay , on the southwest side of the Liaodong Peninsula , at a range of 9 @.@ 5 kilometers ( 5 @.@ 9 mi ) . In early May , the sisters fired at ranges up to 18 kilometers ( 11 mi ) although this proved to be ineffective . 
 On 15 May , the battleships Yashima and Hatsuse were sunk by Russian mines . That same day , off Port Arthur , Kasuga collided in the fog with the protected cruiser Yoshino , which capsized and sank with the loss of 318 officers and enlisted men . With a third of Japan 's battleships lost , Tōgō decided to use Kasuga and Nisshin in the line of battle together with his four remaining battleships . The first test of this decision would have occurred on 23 June when the Pacific Squadron sortied in an abortive attempt to reach Vladivostok , but the new squadron commander , Rear Admiral Wilgelm Vitgeft , ordered the squadron to return to Port Arthur when it encountered the Japanese battleline ( including Kasuga and Nisshin ) shortly before sunset , as he did not wish to engage his numerically superior opponents in a night battle . On 27 July , the sisters forced a Russian force of one battleship and several cruisers and gunboats to return to port because of long @-@ range gun fire after they sortied to provide fire support to the Russian Army . 
 Kasuga and Nisshin participated in the Battle of the Yellow Sea on 10 August , but only played a minor role as they were in the rear of the Japanese battleline . During the battle , the ship 's executive officer was Kantarō Suzuki , later Prime Minister of Japan . Kasuga was not significantly damaged , although she was hit three times with 11 crewmen wounded . Kasuga fired 33 ten @-@ inch shells along with an unknown number of eight @-@ inch shells during the battle . After the battle the sisters returned to Pigeon Bay where they engaged the Russian fortifications . 
 At the Battle of Tsushima on 26 May 1905 , Kasuga was fifth in the line of battle . At about 14 : 10 , Kasuga opened fire on the battleship Oslyabya , the lead ship in the second column of the Russian fleet . Due the limited visibility and heavy smoke during the battle detailed knowledge is not available about her activities during the rest of the day 's action . The surviving Russian ships had been located near the Liancourt Rocks by the Japanese the following morning and Tōgō reached them about 10 : 00 . Heavily outnumbering the Russians , he opted for a long @-@ range engagement to minimize any losses and Kasuga opened fire at the obsolete battleship Imperator Nikolai I at a range of 9 @,@ 100 meters ( 10 @,@ 000 yd ) . The ship hit her target 's funnel on her third salvo and the Russians surrendered shortly afterwards . 
 During the course of the battle , Kasuga fired 50 ten @-@ inch and 103 eight @-@ inch shells ; due to the poor visibility and sinking of many Russian ships , the only confirmed hits made by the ship were two against the battleship Oryol with ten @-@ inch shells , one of which broke up on the armor of the aft twelve @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) turret . In return she was struck by one 12 @-@ inch , one 6 @-@ inch , and one unidentified shell , none of which significantly damaged her . 
 Shortly after the Battle of Tsushima , Kasuga was assigned to the 3rd Fleet ) for the invasion and occupation of Sakhalin in July – August . On 2 September 1911 , the ship escorted the ex @-@ Russian torpedo depot ship <unk> to Vladivostok to be returned to the Russians . At the start of 1914 , Kasuga was overhauled with her boilers replaced by 12 Kampon Type 1 water @-@ tube boilers . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 Kasuga served as the flagship of Destroyer Squadron ( Suiraisentai ) 3 from 13 December 1915 to 13 May 1916 and 12 September 1916 to 13 April 1917 . After the incursion of the German commerce raider SMS Wolf into the Indian Ocean in March 1917 , the British Admiralty requested that the Japanese government reinforce its ships already present , there and in Australian waters . The ship was sent south and escorted Allied shipping between Colombo , Ceylon and Freemantle , Australia in April – May . She was based at Singapore through November . On 11 January 1918 , Kasuga ran aground on a sandbank in the Bangka Strait , in the Dutch East Indies , where she was stuck until June , when she could finally be refloated for repairs . 
 = = = Interwar years and World War II = = = 
 Kasuga arrived in Portland , Maine on 3 July 1920 for the centennial celebrations of the State of Maine and then made port visits in New York City and Annapolis , Maryland . In August 1920 Kasuga visited the city of Cristobal in the Republic of Panama , after transiting the Panama Canal , from 22 – 25 August 1920 , with an official reception for the crew before heading to San Francisco . 
 She was used to transport Japanese soldiers and supplies to Siberia in 1922 as part of Japan 's Siberian Intervention . During the time , Kasuga was commanded by Mitsumasa Yonai , another future Prime Minister of Japan . On 15 June 1926 , the ship helped to rescue the crew of the freighter SS City of Naples that struck a rock off the coast of Japan and broke up . Two of her crewmen were later awarded silver medals for gallantry during the rescue by King George V. 
 From 1927 to 1942 , Kasuga was used as a training vessel for navigators and engineers . On 27 July 1928 she rescued the crew of the semi @-@ rigid airship N3 after it exploded in heavy weather during fleet maneuvers . In January – February 1934 , Kasuga ferried 40 scientists to Truk to observe a total solar eclipse on 14 February . She was hulked and disarmed in July 1942 and used as a floating barracks for the rest of the Pacific War . Kasuga capsized at her mooring at Yokosuka on 18 July 1945 during an air raid by United States Navy aircraft from TF @-@ 38 . Her wreck was salvaged in August 1948 and broken up for scrap by the Uraga Dock Company . 
 = Qutayba ibn Muslim = 
 Qutaiba ibn Muslim ( Arabic : <unk> بن <unk> , full name : أبو <unk> <unk> بن أبي <unk> <unk> بن <unk> <unk> Abū <unk> Qutaiba ibn Abī <unk> Muslim ibn ʿAmr al @-@ <unk> ) ( 669 – 715 / 716 ) was an Arab commander of the Umayyad Caliphate army who became governor of Khurasan and distinguished himself in the conquest of Transoxiana ( Arabic : <unk> al @-@ Nahr ) during the reign of al @-@ Walid I ( 705 – 715 ) . A capable soldier and administrator , he consolidated Muslim rule in the area and expanded the Caliphate 's border to include most of Transoxiana . From 705 to ca . 710 he consolidated Muslim control over the native principalities of Tokharistan and conquered the principality of Bukhara , while in 710 – 712 he conquered Khwarizm and completed the conquest of Sogdiana with the capture of Samarkand . The latter opened the road to the Jaxartes valley , and during the last years of his life Qutaiba led annual campaigns there , extending Muslim control up to the Ferghana Valley . To increase his strained manpower , Qutaiba initiated the wide @-@ scale levy of native Khurasani and Transoxianian soldiers who fought alongside the Arab Muslim troops . Following Walid 's death , Qutaiba , insecure of his position under the new regime , rebelled but failed to secure the support of his army , and was defeated and killed . Most of his conquests in Transoxiana were lost in the years after his death ; only in the 740s was the Muslim position restored to the line reached by Qutaiba , and only after the Battle of Talas in 751 did the region come solidly under Muslim control . 
 = = Origin and early life = = 
 Qutayba was born in 669 CE in Basra , where his family was influential . His father , Muslim ibn ʿAmr , had enjoyed the favour of the Umayyads , and fell at the Battle of <unk> at the close of the Second Islamic Civil War . Qutayba rose at first as the protege of Anbasa ibn Sa 'id , but was noticed by the powerful governor of Iraq and the East , al @-@ Hajjaj ibn Yusuf , during the suppression of the revolt of Abd al @-@ Rahman ibn Muhammad ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath in 700 / 701 . Under al @-@ Hajjaj 's patronage , he took Rayy from the rebel Umar ibn Abi 'l @-@ Salt in 701 , and became the city 's governor . 
 Then , in late 704 or early 705 , Caliph Abd al @-@ Malik ibn Marwan appointed Qutayba as governor of Khurasan . The choice of Qutayba , who hailed from the relatively weak <unk> tribe , was intended by al @-@ Hajjaj to heal the destructive feud between the South Arab or " Yemeni " ( Azd and Rabi 'ah ) and North Arab ( Qaysi ) tribal confederations in Khurasan by providing a governor who did not belong to either . The <unk> were neutral between the two groups , but generally allied themselves to the Qays , thus furthering al @-@ Hajjaj 's policy of emasculating Azdi power , which had been dominant in Khurasan during the governorship of Yazid ibn al @-@ Muhallab . Furthermore , as Qutayba lacked a strong tribal base of his own , he could be expected to remain firmly attached to his patron . Qutayba would spend the next ten years of his life in Central Asia , consolidating and expanding Muslim rule there . In this endeavour , both his military and diplomatic and organisational abilities came him in good stead ; most importantly , he was able to enlist the support of the local Iranian population and the powerful <unk> ( the Iranian " gentry " ) class . 
 = = Conquests in Central Asia = = 
 The Arabs had reached Central Asia in the decade after their decisive victory in the Battle of <unk> in 642 , when they completed their conquest of the former Sassanid Empire by seizing Sistan and Khurasan . The first Arab attacks across the Oxus ranged as far as Shash ( Tashkent ) and Khwarizm , but they were little more than raids aiming at seizing booty and extracting tribute , and were interrupted by the intertribal warfare that broke out in Khurasan during the Second Islamic Civil War ( 683 – 692 ) . Subsequent governors , most notably Sa 'id ibn Uthman and al @-@ Muhallab ibn Abi <unk> , made attempts to conquer territory across the river , but they failed . The native princes , for their part , tried to exploit the Arabs ' rivalries , and with the aid of the Arab renegade Musa ibn Abdallah ibn <unk> , who in 689 seized the fortress of Tirmidh for his own domain , they managed to eject the Arabs from their holdings . Nevertheless , the Transoxianian princes remained riven by their own feuds , and failed to unite in the face of the Arab conquest , a fact which would be suitably exploited by Qutayba after 705 . 
 = = = Conquest of Tokharistan and Bukhara = = = 
 The first task which Qutayba set himself was the suppression of the rebellion in Lower Tokharistan , which was accomplished swiftly with the reconquest of Balkh . Qutayba then secured the submission of the local princes in the upper Oxus valley , most notably of Tish , king of al @-@ Saghaniyan , who invited Qutayba to aid him in his dispute with the ruler of nearby <unk> ( or <unk> ) and Shuman , in the northern mountainous districts of Tokharistan . After extensive negotiations led by Sulaym the Persian , the tarkhan Nizak , ruler of the Hephthalite principality of <unk> , surrendered to Qutayba , and pledged to accompany him in his expeditions . 
 In 706 – 709 , Qutayba occupied himself with the long and bloody conquest of Sogdia . The Sogdians were at the time divided by civil war in which Bukhara had been seized by the ruler of nearby <unk> , the Wardan Khudah , while another local magnate , <unk> Khudah , had declared himself king of Bukhara ( <unk> Khudah ) . Taking advantage of the conflict , Qutayba was able to easily capture the city of Baykand after a two @-@ month siege . He left a small garrison there and departed , but the inhabitants launched a revolt soon after . The Arab army then turned back and proceeded to sack the city . The men of fighting age were executed , the women and children sold off as slaves , and enormous booty amassed , especially in armour and weapons , which equipped the Arab army . The brutal punishment meted out to Baykand shocked the region : the Sogdians patched up their quarrels and the Sogdian princes of Kish and Nasaf united behind the Wardan Khudah . Arab accounts mention the participation of Turgesh troops as well , but this is probably an anachronism . In the campaign of 707 , Qutayba was able to capture two outlying towns , <unk> and <unk> , before he was threatened in his rear by the allied Sogdian army . Qutayba avoided a battle , and engaged in negotiations to gain time , before executing a rapid retreat to safety through the Iron Gate to beyond the Oxus , crossing the river at Tirmidh . The campaign of 708 was also a failure , which drew the ire of al @-@ Hajjaj . For 709 , al @-@ Hajjaj drew up a new plan for his subordinate : the Arabs launched a direct attack on Bukhara , which caught the alliance — possibly weakened by the death of its leader , the Wardan Khudah — by surprise . The city was taken by storm , a tribute of 200 @,@ 000 dirhams imposed , and an Arab garrison installed . In its direct aftermath , <unk> , the ruler of Samarkand sent envoys to Qutayba and became a tributary vassal to the Caliphate . 
 This success was followed however by the rebellion in the autumn of 709 of much of Lower Tokharistan under Nizak of <unk> , with the support of the principalities of <unk> and <unk> , and the city of Balkh . In an effort to raise the entire region in revolt , Nizak also forced the nominal suzerain of Tokharistan , the Yabghu , to join the uprising . The year was too advanced for a direct confrontation and the Muslim levy @-@ based army mostly disbanded , but Qutayba ordered his brother Abd al @-@ Rahman to take the garrison of Merv , some 12 @,@ 000 men , and head to Balkh to secure the Muslim position there . This move proved effective in discouraging the rebellion of more local princes , and in spring , Abd al @-@ Rahman was able to re @-@ establish Muslim control over Tokharistan almost without bloodshed . Most of the rebel rulers fled or capitulated , and finally , Nizak was captured and executed on al @-@ Hajjaj 's orders , despite promises of pardon , while the Yabghu was exiled to Damascus and kept there as a hostage . Tokharistan was more firmly incorporated into the Caliphate , as Arab district representatives were appointed alongside the local princes , who were gradually relegated to secondary positions . Qutayba 's brother Abd al @-@ Rahman ibn Muslim was installed with a garrison near Balkh to oversee the affairs of the province . Despite the swift end of Nizak 's revolt , the king of Shuman and <unk> decided to rebel as well . Qutayba led his forces against him , besieged his citadel and took it . The king fell in battle , and his supporters were executed . Qutayba then marched west over the Iron Gate , taking Kish and Nasaf and visiting Bukhara , where he settled relations between the Arabs and the locals , installed the young Sogdian prince <unk> in the position of <unk> Khudah and established an Arab military colony in the city . Later , in 712 / 713 , Qutayba built a mosque in the city 's citadel , but although the Arab authorities encouraged the conversion of the native population by paying them to attend prayers , Islamization proceeded slowly . 
 At the same time , Qutayba began to adopt a measure that marked a radical departure from previous practice in the East : he ordered the raising of native Khurasani auxiliary levies , usually some ten to twenty thousand strong and mostly composed of non @-@ converts , to supplement the Arab tribal army , the muqatila . This measure was later expanded to include the newly conquered territories in Sogdiana and Khwarizm . Gibb suggests that this move may be seen as an answer to the need for more troops to control the conquered territories and continue Muslim expansion , as well as a means of placing the local manpower in Arab service and depleting it at the same time , reducing the risk of anti @-@ Arab revolts . Gibb also suggests that the creation of an indigenous force may have been an attempt by Qutayba to establish a power base of his own . From ca . 712 , Qutayba also appears to have recruited a special corps , known as the " Archers " , from among the Khurasani , <unk> and Sogdian nobility . Their skill was such that they were known as <unk> al @-@ <unk> ( " archers who pierce the pupils of the eyes " ) , and they apparently served as a bodyguard . Among the local Khurasani converts , Hayyan an @-@ Nabati emerged as the foremost leader , and appears frequently in Tabari 's account both as the main military leader of the Khurasani conscripts and as chief negotiator with the Sogdians . 
 Later in 711 , al @-@ Hajjaj ordered Qutayba to march against the Hephthalite kingdom of Zabulistan , whose ruler , titled Zunbil , had long remained an indomitable thorn in the Arabs ' side and menaced their province of Sistan . Repeated expeditions against him had failed , and a truce had been agreed in exchange for tribute . In addition , the existence of a free <unk> kingdom was a threat to the security of Muslim control over the Hephthalite principalities of Tokharistan , who might be encouraged to seek support from it . Thus Qutayba led a large army south , but the Zunbil readily offered his submission and the payment of tribute . Satisfied with this easy success , and unwilling to hazard a campaign in the mountains of Zabulistan , Qutayba departed . No garrisons were installed , and as soon as the Arab army had departed , the Zunbil ceased the payment of tribute . Qutayba 's victories , parallel with the conquests of Muhammad ibn Qasim in northwestern India , awoke such enthusiasm and hopes among the Muslims that al @-@ Hajjaj is reputed to have offered the governorship of China to whomever of the two first reached it . 
 = = = Conquest of Khwarizm and the expeditions in the Jaxartes valley = = = 
 Taking advantage of Qutayba 's absence in the south , the inhabitants of Samarkand overthrew their ruler <unk> due to his passive stance towards the Arabs , and installed the prince Ghurak in his stead . As Qutayba prepared to march against Samarkand during the winter of 711 / 712 , he received envoys from the king of Khwarizm ( the Khwarizmshah ) . Khwarizm had been previously subdued in the mid @-@ 690s by Umayya ibn Abdallah , but as soon as his forces departed , the Khwarizmshah had renounced the treaty , and subsequent efforts by Yazid ibn al @-@ Muhallab against Khwarizm had failed . The Khwarizmshah , whose name is given as <unk> or <unk> by Bal 'ami , faced a rebellion by his younger brother <unk> and a powerful rival , the king of <unk> , and asked Qutayba for help , offering recognition of the Caliphate 's suzerainty , money , livestock and the payment of tribute in exchange . Qutayba , after announcing that he would head for Sogdia , advanced with his troops in a lightning campaign to the Khwarizmian capital <unk> . His brother Abd al @-@ Rahman defeated and killed <unk> 's troops in battle and took 4 @,@ 000 prisoners , who were then executed . <unk> and his followers were also captured and executed . The <unk> however rebelled shortly after Qutayba 's departure and killed the Khwarizmshah . Qutayba replaced the governor , Iyas ibn Abdallah ibn Amr , with his own brother Abdallah ibn Muslim , but the revolt persisted until , after the capture of Samarkand , a strong force under al @-@ <unk> ibn Abdallah could be sent to subdue the region . The local <unk> dynasty was left in place , with <unk> II , the son of <unk> II , as the new Khwarizmshah , but the conquest of Khwarizm was accompanied by great brutality : the 11th @-@ century Khwarizmian scholar al @-@ Biruni compares the events with a barbarian sack , as the Arabs proceeded to massacre most of the upper classes who had fomented the revolt , and destroyed a great many objects of Khwarizmian culture , including manuscripts . 
 After leaving Khwarizm , Qutayba initially turned towards Merv , for his army had grown weary and demanded an end to the campaign . During the march , however , Qutayba suddenly turned the army around towards Samarkand . The Sogdians had disbanded most of their forces , and the Arabs , reinforced with levies from Bukhara and Khwarizm , were able to brush aside the local resistance and advance straight to the city itself and lay siege to it . Ghurak and the inhabitants of the city resisted the Arabs with determination , and called upon the rulers of Shash and the Ferghana Valley for aid . The ruler of Shash indeed sent a strong army to aid them , but it was ambushed and destroyed by the Arabs . The news of this arrived at the time where the Arab siege weapons had effected a breach in the city walls , forcing Ghurak to sue for peace . Qutayba initially granted surprisingly lenient terms : the payment of an annual tribute and the provision of an auxiliary corps as with Bukhara and Khwarizm , as well as the construction of a mosque inside the city and the celebration of prayers there by the Arab army . Once inside the city however , Qutayba proceeded to occupy and garrison it . One of his brothers ( accounts differ between Abd al @-@ Rahman and Abdallah ) was left as governor , and orders were given prohibiting any non @-@ Muslim access to the city citadel . Ghurak and his retinue left the city and founded a new town , <unk> , further to the north . This treachery enabled Qutayba to bring most of Transoxiana under his ( albeit tentative ) control , but it also considerably tarnished his prestige among the Sogdians . 
 Arab sources indicate that at about his time , the Sogdian princes called upon the Western Turks or the Turgesh for help against the Arabs , although the chronology and veracity of these accounts is open to question . At any rate , over the next two years Qutayba engaged in an effort to push the Caliphate 's borders further and gain control of the Jaxartes valley . A large force , supported by some 20 @,@ 000 Transoxianian levies , marched into the valley in early 713 . The native levies were dispatched against Shash , which was reportedly taken , while Qutayba with the Arabs marched in the direction of Khujand and Ferghana . Little is known of these expeditions , although successful battles are recorded before Khujand and at <unk> in <unk> , and the dispatch of an Arab embassy to the Chinese court is verified by Chinese sources . Al @-@ Tabari reports that Qutayba marched into Chinese @-@ held territory up to Kashgar , but this claim is dismissed by modern scholars . In 714 , Qutayba renewed his expeditions along the Jaxartes , probably with Shash as his base , but his campaign was cut short upon receiving the news of the death of al @-@ Hajjaj . Unsure of his position now that his patron was gone , he disbanded the army and returned to Merv . 
 = = = Rebellion and death = = = 
 Caliph Walid quickly re @-@ confirmed Qutayba as governor , and even made his province independent from the governor of Iraq , but Qutayba 's position was not secure : the Arab army was tired of constant campaigning and was still riven by factional rivalries , while Qutayba himself had alienated the most powerful Arab tribal groups . He was generally popular among the native Iranians , but the leader of the native auxiliaries , Hayyan an @-@ Nabati , had secretly turned against him . Qutayba was completely unaware of the situation however , and began preparations for the campaign of 715 , during which he intended to finally capture the Ferghana Valley and complete the subjugation of the Jaxartes valley . His only concern was that his old rival , Yazid ibn al @-@ Muhallab , might be restored to the Caliph 's favour after al @-@ Hajjaj 's death , and he took few precautions except for removing his family and belongings from Merv to Shash and placing a guard on the Oxus . 
 His campaign against Ferghana was under way when news reached the army of Caliph Walid 's death and the accession of his brother Sulayman ibn Abd al @-@ Malik to the throne . The new Caliph was a bitter enemy of Qutayba , for the latter had argued in favour of excluding him from the succession . Although Sulayman re @-@ confirmed him in his position as governor , Qutayba feared that he would soon be removed . At the last , after negotiations with the new regime in Damascus failed , Qutayba resolved to rebel . The Khurasani Arabs refused to support him , and the native auxiliaries , although favourably disposed towards him , were prevented from declaring their support by Hayyan al @-@ Nabati . Only his family , his fellow Bahili tribesmen and his bodyguard , the Archers , remained faithful . The opposition , led by the Tamim tribe , coalesced around their leader Waki ibn Abi Sud al @-@ Tamimi . In August 715 ( according to al @-@ Tabari ) or early 716 ( according to Ibn Qutaybah ) , Qutayba and other members of his family were killed at Ferghana by Arab soldiers . Waki ibn Abi Sud succeeded him as governor , and ordered the army to return to Merv , where it was disbanded . 
 After Qutayba 's death , the Arab position in Transoxiana swiftly crumbled . His successors did not command his prestige among the local population and were unable to maintain his conquests in the face of local revolts and invasion by the Turgesh khaganate , and most of Transoxiana was abandoned or became hotly contested territory in the years after his death . During this period , the Arabs suffered the grave defeats of the " Day of Thirst " and the Battle of the Pass and were weakened by internal conflicts as well . Only after 738 , under Nasr ibn Sayyar , were the Umayyads able to restore the Caliphate 's control over most of Transoxiana , and only with the decisive victory of the new Abbasid Caliphate against the Chinese armies at the Battle of Talas in 751 did the local princes accept Muslim control as final . In the south too , the Zunbil of <unk> ceased his payment of tribute to the Caliphate and remained resolutely independent for decades after . 
 Qutayba 's role in the conquest and gradual Islamization of Central Asia was crucial , and in later times , a number of locations in Ferghana where his tomb was supposedly located ( <unk> and Jamal <unk> ) were venerated by pilgrims . His descendants too continued to hold influential positions : his son Qatan served as governor of Bukhara , Salm , another son , governed Basra and Rayy , and his nephew Muslim was governor of Balkh . His grandsons , especially the numerous sons of Salm , continued in high office under the Abbasids until well into the 9th century . 
 = Bahrain Thirteen = 
 The Bahrain Thirteen are thirteen Bahraini opposition leaders , rights activists , bloggers and Shia clerics arrested between 17 March and 9 April 2011 in connection with their role in the national uprising . In June 2011 , they were tried by a special military court , the National Safety Court , and convicted of " setting up terror groups to topple the royal regime and change the constitution " ; they received sentences ranging from two years to life in prison . A military appeal court upheld the sentences in September . The trial was " one of the most prominent " before the National Safety Court . A retrial in a civilian court was held in April 2012 but the accused were not released from prison . The sentences were upheld again on 4 September 2012 . On 7 January 2013 , the defendants lost their last chance of appeal when the Court of Cassation , Bahrain 's top court upheld the sentences . 
 The thirteen are Abdulhadi al @-@ Khawaja , Abdulhadi al @-@ Mukhodher , Abduljalil al @-@ Miqdad , Abduljalil al @-@ Singace , Abdulla al @-@ Mahroos , Abdulwahab Hussain , Hasan Mushaima , Ibrahim Sharif , Mohamed Habib al @-@ Miqdad , Mohamed Hasan Jawad , Mohamed Ismail , Sa ’ <unk> al @-@ Nuri and Salah al @-@ Khawaja . They were originally twenty @-@ one , but seven were tried in absentia and one was released in April 2012 . The thirteen became popular heroes in Bahrain , and analysts speculated that the government was concerned that their release might re @-@ energize the protest movement and frustrate government supporters who oppose any royal pardons . 
 The trial , conviction and sentencing of the Bahrain Thirteen drew expressions of concern from European Union , Denmark , France , Ireland , United Kingdom and United States , and international organizations including the United Nations , Amnesty International , Human Rights Watch , Reporters Without Borders , Committee to Protect Journalists and Human Rights First . The government of Bahrain maintained that trials were fair . The Bahrain Independent Commission of Inquiry ( BICI ) , an independent inquiry commissioned by the King of Bahrain , concluded in November 2011 that there had been a discernible pattern of mistreatment to the defendants while in prison . 
 = = Background = = 
 In February 2011 the Bahraini authorities sought to repress pro @-@ democracy protests around the Pearl Roundabout , a traffic circle near the financial district in Bahrain 's capital Manama ( part of the wider Arab Spring movement ) . On 17 February , in an attack by police that subsequently became known as Bloody Thursday ; four protesters died and more than 300 were injured . Protests involving up to one fifth of the population continued over the next month until the government called in Gulf Cooperation Council troops and police and declared a three @-@ month state of emergency . Despite the brutal crack @-@ down that followed , smaller @-@ scale protests and clashes continued , mostly outside Manama 's business districts . By April 2012 , more than 80 people had died during the uprising . As of December 2012 , protests are ongoing . 
 = = = Naming = = = 
 Amnesty International coined the name " Bahrain 13 " to refer to the men , which was later adopted by some media sources . Their case is known locally as the Case of Icons ( Arabic : <unk> <unk> ) and the Group of 21 ( Arabic : <unk> <unk> ) . They were originally twenty @-@ one , but seven were tried in absentia and one was released in April 2012 . The seven tried in absentia were either hiding or outside the country . 
 = = Role in the Bahraini uprising = = 
 The Bahrain Thirteen played an important role in mobilizing the public opinion against the government , organizing protests and shaping political demands . Some of the group were already in detention when the uprising began , having been arrested in the Manama incident the previous August , and were released on 22 February 2011 . Abdulwahab Hussain and Hassan Mushaima , leaders of opposition parties Al Wafa ' and Haq Movement respectively , were among the leaders of the 1990s uprising in Bahrain . 
 Mushaima was a leading member in Al Wefaq opposition group until resigning in 2005 due to their decision to run in 2006 parliamentary election . He then founded the Haq Movement . In 2010 , the London @-@ based activist was sentenced in absentia over an alleged plot to overthrow the government , however the charges were dropped in February 2011 as a part of government concessions to the opposition . This allowed Mushaima to return to Bahrain on 26 February and join the protest movement . Abduljalil al @-@ Singace , a blogger and once the chair of University of Bahrain Engineering Department followed Mushaima 's path ; he resigned from his position in Al Wefaq as public relations chief and joined Haq in 2005 as the head of human rights department . He was among the arrested in August 2010 and joined the uprising when he was released on 22 February . The Haq Movement supported protest plans . 
 Abdulwahab Hussain was also a member of Al Wefaq who resigned in 2005 . Unlike Mushaima and al @-@ Singace , Hussain left politics in 2005 . He returned in 2009 when he co @-@ founded Al Wafa ' opposition group and became its official spokesperson . He played a bigger role in the uprising ; he was not arrested when the uprising began nor was he outside the country . Hussain led the first demonstration in the uprising in the early hours of 14 February . He is also credited with suggesting autonomous action and total decentralization of the protest movement which was adopted by February 14 Youth Coalition , the group behind the call for an uprising in order to avoid getting infiltrated by government . 
 Abduljalil al @-@ Miqdad is a prominent Shia and political activist , and a co @-@ founder of Al Wafa ' . He resigned from the Bahrain Ulama Council in 2005 . The relationship between al @-@ Miqdad and Al Wafa ' is comparable to that of Isa Qassim and Al Wefaq ; its unofficial spiritual leader . Sa <unk> al @-@ Nori is a religious , political activist and vocal critic of the government , and member of Al Wafa ' . He was among the arrested in August 2010 . Mohamed Ismail is a political activist with close relations to Abdulwahab Hussain . 
 In March 2011 , Haq , Al Wafa ' and Bahrain Freedom Movement formed a " Coalition for a [ Bahraini ] Republic " , calling for the downfall of the current regime by escalation of peaceful protests and the establishment of a democratic republic . While they accepted a western @-@ style constitutional monarchy in principle , saying it was " not very different from a republic " , they doubted the regime would voluntarily implement such a radical change and argued that toppling it was unavoidable . The newly found coalition supported a controversial , yet peaceful protest heading to the Royal Court in Riffa . The rally ended in chaos after it was dispersed by security forces and " pro @-@ government Sunni vigilantes " . 
 Abdulhadi al @-@ Khawaja , described by the Index on Censorship as one of the best @-@ known human rights activists in the world , is the co @-@ founder of the Bahrain Centre for Human Rights and a vocal critic of the government . Al @-@ Khawaja was arrested in 2004 and 2007 , and reportedly beaten in 2005 over his opposition activities . He holds Danish and Bahraini dual citizenship . His role in the uprising was much less ; his activities were limited to " organising peaceful awareness @-@ raising and human rights education " . He said he had intentionally kept himself away from the Pearl Roundabout in order to avoid " giv [ ing ] the authorities any reason to arrest " him . Salah al @-@ Khawaja is a former member of Islamic Action Society ( Amal ) and brother of Abdulhadi al @-@ Khawaja . During the uprising , he sought to document events and contact international media . 
 Ibrahim Sharif is an opposition leader and president of the secular , leftist , cross @-@ sectarian National Democratic Action Society ( Wa 'ad ) . Wa 'ad is allied with Al Wefaq opposition group . They organized many protests calling for an elected government and a constitutional monarchy . Sharif is the only Sunni member of Bahrain Thirteen , the rest being Shia . His Sunni identity undermines the attempts of government of Bahrain to visualize the protest movement as a sectarian and pro @-@ Iranian plot , and shows that it has support from parts of the Sunni community . Ten days before the uprising , Sharif demanded " local reform " in a rally in solidarity with the 2011 Egyptian Revolution , however Wa 'ad only announced a day before the protests that it supported " the principle of the right of the youth to demonstrate peacefully " . 
 Mohamed Habib al @-@ Miqdad <unk> of Abduljalil al @-@ <unk> is a prominent religious and political leader , president of al @-@ <unk> Society for Orphans and holds Bahraini and Swedish dual citizenship . Al @-@ Miqdad is also a vocal critic of the government . Abdulla al @-@ Mahroos is a religious and political activist , vice president of al @-@ <unk> Society for Orphans and a vocal critic of the government . Abdulhadi al @-@ Mukhodher is a Shia cleric . Mohamed Hasan Jawad is a rights activist . He is also an uncle of Nabeel Rajab , a Bahraini opposition leader , and a father of Hussain Jawad , a prominent human rights defender , arrested in February 2015 . All of the four ( Mohamed Habib al @-@ Miqdad , Abdulla al @-@ Mahroos , Abdulhadi al @-@ Mukhodher and Mohamed Hasan Jawad ) were among the arrested in August 2010 . 
 = = Arrests = = 
 The arrests of the Bahrain Thirteen took place between 17 March 2011 and 9 April , due to their role in the uprising . The first to be arrested were Abdulhadi al @-@ Mukhodher , Abduljalil al @-@ Singace , Abdulwahab Hussain , Ibrahim Sharif , Hassan Mushaima and Saeed al @-@ Nuri , and the last was Abdulhadi al @-@ Khawaja . Most were arrested by security forces during the night . According to the Bahrain Centre for Human Rights , no warrants were shown and many of the detainees were beaten during their arrest . They were held in al @-@ <unk> military prison and on 28 November they were transferred to Jaw prison . 
 = = Torture = = 
 Following their arrest the activists were kept in solitary confinement for weeks during which they were allegedly subjected to torture by Bahrain National Security Agency ( NSA ) officers seeking to secure confessions and for punishment . This reportedly included sexual assaults . 
 In April , a patient in the Military Hospital saw Ibrahim Sharif with his face swollen , raising concerns that he may have been tortured . According to Amnesty International , Abdulhadi al @-@ Khawaja suffered fractures of the jaw and head and bruising of the arms during his first month in detention , allegedly as a result of torture . After a six @-@ day hospitalization during which he underwent several operations , torture was reportedly resumed . According to Human Rights Watch ( HRW ) signs of mistreatment were visible on al @-@ Khawaja 's face during the first trial session in May and Hassan Mushaima and Abdulwahab Hussain were seen to have noticeable limps . Bahrain Centre for Human Rights published detailed allegations of the torture allegedly inflicted on the Bahrain Thirteen . 
 On 8 May 2011 , the authorities declared that none of the Bahrain Thirteen had been subjected to torture , stating that information from the Military Hospital and the Salmaniya Medical Complex showed that neither hospital had admitted or treated any of the detainees . Rumours of admissions and hospitalization were said to have been fabricated and politically motivated . 
 The Bahrain Independent Commission of Inquiry , established by the King of Bahrain in June 2011 , which found that hundreds of detainees had been subjected to torture and other forms of physical and psychological abuse , observed a discernible pattern of mistreatment with regard to 14 political leaders including the Bahrain Thirteen . According to the Commission 's report , torture at al @-@ <unk> prison , where the Bahrain Thirteen were held , stopped after 10 June . 
 = = Trial , conviction , and retrial = = 
 = = = Military courts = = = 
 The Bahrain Thirteen were sent for trial initially by the National Safety Court , a special military court set up in March 2011 to try protesters , opposition leaders , rights activists , health workers and other supporters or perceived supporters of the Bahraini uprising . The trial was " one of the most prominent " before the National Safety Court . The first hearing on 8 May 2011 marked the first time the fourteen defendants originally charged had seen their families since their arrest and for some it was the first time they had met with their lawyers . All fourteen denied the charges against them . 
 The two main charges were of " setting up terror groups to topple the royal regime and change the constitution " and of " collaborating with a foreign state " , an apparent reference to Iran , and other charges included " insulting the army , inciting hatred , disseminating false information and taking part in rallies without notifying the authorities . " Front Line Defenders and Human Rights First observers were denied entry to the trial , but a few Bahraini NGO observers were present . According to Human Rights Watch all of the activities with which the fourteen were charged " related to speech and peaceful assembly " and none were criminal offenses . 
 On 22 June , seven of the defendants were sentenced to life imprisonment , four to fifteen years in prison , two to five years and one to two years . After they protested loudly when the sentence was read , they were forcibly removed from the court . Amnesty International concluded that an appeal session on 6 September had heard no evidence to support charges . The military appeal court hearing on 28 September took a few minutes before the court upheld all the convictions . In November , the Bahrain Independent Commission of Inquiry asked for a retrial in civilian courts , because they were convicted in military courts . 
 On 29 January the fourteen began a one @-@ week hunger strike which was joined , according to rights activist Mohamed al @-@ Maskati , by another 150 prisoners . The object of the hunger strike was to demand an end to the political crackdown , protest against their trials and demand the release of prisoners of conscience . Abdulhadi al @-@ Khawaja subsequently went on a new 110 @-@ day hunger strike . He was transferred to hospital in April as he kept reducing the amount of his glucose intake . On 30 April 2012 , the Court of Cassation reduced Al @-@ Hur Yousef al @-@ <unk> 's sentence from two years to six months and he was released as he had already served his sentence . The court also announced that the thirteen other defendants would be retried by a ( civilian ) criminal court of appeal , but they were not released from prison , leading to criticism from the United Nations . 
 = = = Civilian courts = = = 
 The first hearing before the High Criminal Court of Appeal , due to take place on 8 May , was postponed to 22 May . Abdulhadi al @-@ Khawaja , on the ninetieth day of his hunger strike , was brought to court in a wheelchair . All the defendants pleaded not guilty . Al @-@ Khawaja and Abdulwahab Hussain told of being subjected to torture during the initial weeks of their detention , the former stating that he had been sexually assaulted and the latter that he had been forced to sign a written statement . On 19 June , defence lawyers asked the court to disregard confessions that the BICI report had suggested were obtained by torture but the public prosecutor insisted on their inclusion in the evidence . According to Bahrain Centre for Human Rights , these confessions were the sole evidence submitted to the court . 
 During the same session , cleric Mohamed Habib al @-@ Miqdad made a long testimony in which he described alleged torture and renounced his accusation that Nasser Al Khalifa , the son of the king had tortured him in person . The thirteen asked their defense lawyers to stop representing them after the judge decided to continue hearings in secret and subsequently banned media coverage of the case , due to " national security reasons " . New lawyers were appointed by court and the judge declared that the final judgment would be given even if the defendants refused to attend . The Court originally expected to give its final verdict on 14 August was attended by a number of foreign diplomats , but the session was deferred until 4 September with no specific reason given . The verdict was expected to have a significant impact on the course of the uprising and analysts suggested that the government was uncertain how to deal with the defendants who became popular heroes , given that their release was likely to give new impetus to the protest movement . 
 A few days prior to the expected verdict on 4 September , which was also the expected day of the verdict of 28 health workers and Zainab al @-@ Khawaja , Human Rights First said it could be a " transformative day for human rights " in Bahrain " if the right decisions are made " . On 4 September , the appeal court upheld the sentences on all of the Thirteen ; who did not attend the session . Analysis said the decision was likely to fuel political tensions and street clashes , and highlight the low chances of any reconciliation in near future . Witnesses reported that protesters set tires on fire and clashed with security forces in several Shia villages following the verdict and one protester was severely injured by a stun grenade . 
 On 7 January , the Cassation Court , Bahrain 's top court upheld the sentences . With the court decision the thirteen defendants ( who did not attend the trial ) had exhausted their last chance to appeal . The only avenue that remains for their release is a royal pardon . 
 = = Reactions = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = = = Supranational bodies = = = = 
 EU – Catherine Ashton , the High Representative of European Union said she was " disappointed and concerned " by the sentences . " I am disappointed and concerned at the decision of the Bahraini Court of Appeal to uphold the harsh sentences against Mr Abdulhadi Khawaja and nineteen other individuals , " she added . 
 GCC - <unk> Al Zayani the secretary @-@ general of Gulf Cooperation Council supported the verdict and affirmed that judiciary of Bahrain was independent . " [ C ] <unk> verdicts have to be respected by all , " he added . 
 UN – Ban Ki @-@ moon , Secretary @-@ General of the United Nations , said he was deeply concerned by what he described as " the harsh sentences " and urged the government of Bahrain to allow all defendants to exercise their right to appeal and to act in strict accordance with its international human rights obligations , including the right to due process and a fair trial . Following 4 September verdict , he expressed his concern and asked government of Bahrain to fulfill implementation of BICI report and to engage in a meaningful dialogue that " addresses the legitimate aspirations of all Bahrainis " . 
 Navi Pillay , the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights ( <unk> ) , expressed serious concern at the trials , which bore the marks of " political persecution " . She called for an immediate end to trials of civilians in the Court of National Safety and the immediate release of all peaceful demonstrators arrested in connection with the February protest movement . Rupert Colville , spokesperson for <unk> , also referred to the sentences as " harsh " and expressed deep concern over " serious due process irregularities " . Four United Nations Special Rapporteurs demanded immediate release of Abdulhadi al @-@ Khawaja . 
 = = = = States = = = = 
 Denmark – Villy <unk> , Denmark 's Foreign Minister said the appeal court sentence was " very disappointing " and that further international action would be taken to secure release of al @-@ Khawaja and " the other human rights and democracy fighters in Bahrain " . Jeppe <unk> , the Foreign policy spokesperson asked the Danish parliament to discuss possible sanctions on Bahrain . Eight parties in the Danish parliament appealed to king of Bahrain to release Abdulhadi al @-@ Khawaja and his daughter , Zainab . 
 France - A spokesperson for the French Foreign Office said he was especially concerned by the sentence of al @-@ Khawaja and hoped that it will be reviewed on appeal . He affirmed the right of freedom of expression and urged authorities to implement Bahrain Independent Commission of Inquiry 's recommendations . 
 Iran - Spokesman of the Foreign Ministry criticized the verdicts saying they would only serve to " complicate the situation even further " . " The only solution to the crisis in Bahrain and to restore calm and stability is to respond to the legitimate demands of the population , " he added . 
 Ireland - Eamon Gilmore , the deputy prime minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade criticized the sentence of al @-@ Khawaja and expressed his great concerns . " I have strongly and actively supported international efforts urging the Bahraini government to exercise clemency and to allow his release on humanitarian grounds , particularly in light of clear findings documented by the Bahraini International Commission of Inquiry as to how Mr al @-@ Khawaja was seriously ill @-@ treated following his initial detention , " he added . 
 UK – The United Kingdom Foreign Office Minister Alistair Burt expressed extreme concerned about the process that surrounded the sentencing of 21 opposition members as well as the nature of many of the charges . He found it deeply worrying that civilians were being tried before tribunals chaired by a military judge , with reports of abuse in detention , lack of access to legal counsel and coerced confessions . Following 4 September sentences , the minister said he was " very disappointed " by the verdict . 
 United States – The United States expressed its concern at the severity of the sentences handed down to the Bahrain Thirteen . Barack Obama said keeping them in jail meant starting a real dialogue was impossible . Although avoiding direct reference to the Thirteen , the US called for the release of " those imprisoned for their political views " . A State Department Deputy Spokesman , referring to President Obama 's observation that such steps were at odds with the universal rights of Bahrain ’ s citizens , noted that the cases would go through an appeals process and urged the Bahraini government to abide by its commitment to transparent judicial proceedings . Amnesty International criticized the US for its " indifference and soft approach " and urged it to demand the detainees ' release instead of engaging in wishful thinking about the appeal process . 
 = = = = Non @-@ governmental organizations = = = = 
 A number of rights groups criticized the sentences . Amnesty International designated the Thirteen prisoners of conscience and called for their immediate and unconditional release . It also called for an independent investigation of their allegations of mistreatment and urged that those responsible should be brought to justice , criticizing the Bahraini authorities for what it called a travesty of justice and said sentences were yet another proof that Bahrain was not on the path of reforms . Human Rights Watch demanded the prisoners ' immediate release ; according to HRW 's Middle East and North Africa Deputy Director Joe Stork , the military court ’ s original verdict was " absolutely mind @-@ boggling " , failing to mention a single actual criminal offense beyond acts relating to the defendants ' basic human rights . 
 Reporters Without Borders was shocked by the lengthy sentences and very worried about the physical condition of al @-@ Singace whose release it demanded , along with that of all the other prisoners of conscience . The Committee to Protect Journalists condemned the sentences and dismissed the charges as political score @-@ settling . The Arabic Network for Human Rights Information condemned the sentences as vindictive . The International Federation for Human Rights and the World Organization Against Torture expressed their " utmost concern " at the sentences and demanded the immediate and unconditional release of the Bahrain Thirteen . Human Rights First criticized what it called a " large political show trial " and declared that the sentences revealed the " travesty " of Bahrain ’ s military courts . Upon reading the appeal sentence , it criticized it and said reform claims were " sham " . 
 English PEN said it was shocked by the lengthy sentence handed down to al @-@ Singace and demanded his release along with all of those imprisoned for peaceful expression of opinion . Jane Kinninmont of Chatham House said that the government " may be trying to show their strength ahead of a planned dialogue with political societies " and that western pressure is limited due to Saudi support . Front Line Defenders , who 's al @-@ Khawaja was its Middle East Protection Coordinator for three years condemned his sentence and demanded his immediate and unconditional release . Brazilian political cartoonist , Carlos <unk> produced a cartoon labeled " The Lady Justice of Bahrain " depicting king of Bahrain holding a blood stained sword in a hand and dropping Scales of Justice in the trash with the other . 
 = = = Domestic = = = 
 The government of Bahrain said that trials were fair and judiciary independent . " The court provided all assurances of a fair trial through a team of 17 defense attorneys selected by the defendants . The trial was attended by many diplomats of various nationalities ... as well as representatives of human rights and other civil society organizations , " Information Affairs Authority said . Responding to the various international reactions , the Human Rights Affairs Ministry rejected " any intervention by any state or organization " . Government supporters praised the sentences asking for no pardons to be given to the thirteen . Mohammed Khalid , a former MP and a hard @-@ line cleric wrote " God is great ! God is great ! " on Twitter . 
 Many Sunnis ( who compromise a substantial minority ) support the government and see the Thirteen as dangerous revolutionaries that would destabilize the country should they succeed in toppling the monarchy . Government hardliners and Sunni political groups often call for harsh and no compromise approach , including calling for no pardons and death sentences . To their many supporters ( in Bahrain and abroad ) however , the Thirteen are heroes and prisoners of conscience jailed unfairly for nothing more than calling for democracy . Their faces appear daily in banners during protests . 
 Isa Qassim , Bahrain 's top Shia cleric criticized the trials as unfair . He said the sentences were " like a dam preventing people from participating in dialogue " . The prominent human rights activist al @-@ Khawaja family did not welcome the retrial . Maryam al @-@ Khawaja considered it " sad news not good news " , describing the court as a tool used by the regime against its people . She said she was not shocked by the civil court sentence , as there were " no international consequences and accountability for the Bahrain regime " . Al @-@ Khawaja 's wife found the decision ridiculous and said that the government was " playing for time " . Bahrain Centre for Human Rights maintained that the sentences were based on confessions extracted under torture and the testimony of the alleged torturers . Its head , Nabeel Rajab , criticized the military trial sentence as unfair and falling short of international standards . 
 Bahrain Youth Society for Human Rights expressed its concern at what it called " violations " against the Bahrain Thirteen . The Al Wefaq political party said that the sentences were hindering efforts at dialogue and damaging the country 's international reputation . It rejected the appeal sentence and said they were contradictory to solving the crisis . The Bahraini Press Association described the verdict as " unfair and outrageous " and " marred by abuses and violations of all legal and human rights standards " . Human rights lawyer Mohamed al @-@ <unk> said the appeal verdict was " shocking " and that " [ t ] he judge dismissed the appeal " . In an op @-@ ed in Al Wasat , Kassim Hussain argued that the most remembered words about the case of Bahrain Thirteen would be Ibrahim Sharif 's words : " These [ political ] trials are trials of ideas " . 
 = Dunstanburgh Castle = 
 Dunstanburgh Castle is a 14th @-@ century fortification on the coast of Northumberland in northern England , located between the villages of Craster and Embleton . The castle was built by Earl Thomas of Lancaster between 1313 and 1322 , taking advantage of the site 's natural defences and the existing earthworks of a former Iron Age fort . Thomas was a leader of a baronial faction opposed to King Edward II , and probably intended Dunstanburgh to act as a secure refuge , should the political situation in southern England deteriorate . The castle also served as a statement of the earl 's wealth and influence , and would have invited comparisons with the neighbouring royal castle of Bamburgh . Thomas probably only visited his new castle once , before being captured at Battle of Boroughbridge as he attempted to flee royal forces for the safety of Dunstanburgh . Thomas was executed , and the castle became the property of the Crown , before passing into the Duchy of Lancaster . 
 Dunstanburgh 's defences were expanded in the 1380s by John of Gaunt , the Duke of Lancaster , in the light of the threat from Scotland and the peasant uprisings of 1381 . The castle was maintained in the 15th century by the Crown , and formed a strategic northern stronghold in the region during the Wars of the Roses , exchanging hands between the rival Lancastrian and Yorkist factions several times . The fortress never recovered from the sieges of these campaigns , and by the 16th century the Warden of the Scottish Marches described it as having fallen into " <unk> great decaye " . As the Scottish border became more stable , the military utility of the castle steadily diminished , and King James I finally sold the property off into private ownership in 1604 . The Grey family owned it for several centuries ; increasingly ruinous , it became a popular subject for artists , including Thomas Girtin and J. M. W. Turner , and formed the basis for a poem by Matthew Lewis in 1808 . 
 By the 1920s , the castle 's then owner , Sir Arthur Sutherland , could no longer afford to maintain the property , and he placed it into the guardianship of the state in 1930 . When the Second World War broke out in 1939 , measures were taken to defend the Northumberland coastline from a potential German invasion . The castle was used as an observation post and the site was refortified with trenches , barbed wire , pill boxes and a mine field . The Dunstanburgh Castle golf course was built around the property in 1900 , and expanded by Sutherland in 1922 . In the 21st century the castle is owned by the National Trust and run by English Heritage . The ruins are protected under UK law as a Grade I listed building , and are part of a Site of Special Scientific Interest , forming an important natural environment for birds and amphibians . 
 Dunstanburgh Castle was built in the center of a designed medieval landscape , surrounded by three artificial lakes called meres covering a total of 4 @.@ 25 hectares ( 10 @.@ 5 acres ) . The curtain walls enclose 9 @.@ 96 acres ( 4 @.@ 03 ha ) , making it the largest castle in Northumberland . The most prominent part of the castle is the Great Gatehouse , a massive three @-@ storey fortification , considered by historians Alastair Oswald and Jeremy Ashbee to be " one of the most imposing structures in any English castle " . Multiple rectangular towers protect the walls , including the Lilburn Tower , which looks out towards Bamburgh Castle , and the Egyncleugh Tower , positioned above Queen Margaret 's Cove . Three internal complexes of buildings , now ruined , supported the earl 's household , the castle constable 's household and the running of the surrounding estates . A harbour was built to the south @-@ east of the castle , of which only a stone quay survives . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Prehistory - 13th century = = = 
 The site of Dunstanburgh Castle in north @-@ east Northumberland was probably first occupied in prehistoric times . A promontory fort with earthwork defences was built on the same location at the end of the Iron Age , possibly being occupied from the 3rd century BC into the Roman period . By the 14th century , however , the defences had been long abandoned , and the land was being used for arable crops . Dunstanburgh formed part of the barony of Embleton , a village that lay inland to the west , traditionally owned by the earls of Lancaster . 
 The origins and the earliest appearance of the name " Dunstanburgh " are uncertain . Versions of the name , " <unk> " and " <unk> " were in use by the time of the castle 's construction , however , and Dunstanburgh may stem from a combination of the name of the local village of Dunstan , and the Old English word " burh " , meaning fortress . 
 = = = Early 14th century = = = 
 = = = = Construction = = = = 
 Dunstanburgh Castle was constructed by Thomas , the Earl of Lancaster , between 1313 and 1322 . Thomas was an immensely powerful English baron , the second richest man in England after the King , with major land holdings across the kingdom . He had a turbulent relationship with his cousin , King Edward II , and had been a ringleader in the capture and killing of Edward 's royal favourite , Piers Gaveston in 1312 . 
 It is uncertain exactly why Thomas decided to build Dunstanburgh . Although it was located on a strong defensive site , it was some distance from the local settlements and other strategic sites of value . Thomas held some lands in Northumberland , but they were insignificant in comparison to his other estates in the Midlands and Yorkshire , and up until 1313 he had paid them little attention . 
 In the years following Gaveston 's death , however , civil conflict in England rarely seemed far away , and it is currently believed that Thomas probably intended to create a secure retreat , a safe distance away from Edward 's forces in the south . He also probably hoped to erect a prominent status symbol , illustrating his wealth and authority , and challenging that of the King 's . He may perhaps also have hoped to create a planned town alongside the castle , possibly intending to relocate the population of Embleton there . 
 Building work on the castle had commenced by May 1313 , with labourers beginning the process of excavating the moat and starting to construct the castle buildings . Some of the outer wall may have been built by workers from Embleton as part of their feudal dues to Thomas . The operations were overseen by a mason , Master Elias , possibly Elias de Burton , who had been previously involved in the construction of Conwy Castle in North Wales . Iron , Newcastle coal and Scandinavian wood was brought in for use in the project . By the end of the year £ 184 had been spent , and work continued for several years . A licence to crenellate - a form of royal authorisation for a new castle - was issued by Edward II in 1316 , and a castle constable was appointed in 1319 , charged with defending both the castle and the surrounding manors of Embleton and Stamford . By 1322 the castle was probably complete . 
 The resulting castle was huge , protected on one side by the sea cliffs , with a stone curtain wall , a massive gatehouse and six towers around the outside . A harbour was built on the south side of the fortress , enabling access from the sea . Northumbria was a lawless region in this period , suffering from the activities of thieves and <unk> , a type of border brigand , many of whom were members of Edward II 's household , and the harbour may have represented a safer way to reach the castle than land routes . 
 = = = = Loss = = = = 
 Thomas of Lancaster made little use of his new castle ; the only time he might have visited it was in 1319 , when he was on his way north to join Edward 's military campaign against Scotland . Civil war then broke out in 1321 between Edward and his enemies among the barons . After the initial royalist successes , Thomas fled the south of England for Dunstanburgh in 1322 , but was intercepted on route by Sir Andrew Harclay , resulting in the Battle of Boroughbridge , in which Thomas was captured and then later executed . 
 The castle passed into royal control , and Edward considered it a useful fortress for protection against the threat from Scotland . Initially it was managed by Robert de <unk> , a merchant from Newcastle , and protected by a garrison of 40 men at arms and 40 light horsemen . Roger <unk> , a politically rehabilitated former member of Thomas 's army , was appointed as constable , followed by Sir John de Lilburn , a Northumberland <unk> in 1323 , who was in turn replaced by Roger Heron . 
 <unk> and the castle 's garrison took part in the Battle of Old Byland in 1322 , and the garrison was subsequently increased to 130 men , predominantly light horsemen , and formed a key part of the northern defences against the Scots . By 1326 , the castle was given back to Thomas 's brother , Henry of Lancaster , with Lilburn returning as its constable , and continued to be of use in defence against the Scottish invasions over the next few decades . 
 = = = Late 14th century = = = 
 Dunstanburgh Castle was acquired by John of Gaunt through his marriage to Henry of Lancaster 's granddaughter , Blanche , in 1362 . Gaunt was the younger brother of King Edward III and , as the Duke of Lancaster , was one of the wealthiest men of his generation . He became the Lieutenant of the Scottish Marches and visited his castle in 1380 . 
 Dunstanburgh Castle was not a primary strategic target for Scottish attack , as it was positioned away from the main routes through the region , but it was kept well garrisoned during the Scottish wars . The surrounding manor of Embleton had nonetheless suffered from Scottish raids and Gaunt had concerns over the condition of the castle 's defences , ordering the building of additional fortifications around the gatehouse . Part of the surrounding lands around the castle may have been brought into agricultural production at this time , either to feed a growing garrison , or to protect the crops against Scottish attacks . 
 In 1381 the Peasants ' Revolt broke out in England , during which Gaunt was targeted by the rebels as an especially hated member of the administration . He found himself stranded in the north of England in the early part of the revolt but considered Dunstanburgh insufficiently secure to function as a safe haven , and was forced to turn to Alnwick Castle instead , which refused to let him in , fearing that his presence would invite a rebel attack . 
 The experience encouraged Gaunt to further expand Dunstanburgh 's defences over the next two years . A wide range of work was carried out under the direction of the constable , Thomas of <unk> , and the mason Henry of Holme , including blocking up the entrance in the gatehouse to turn it into a keep . In 1384 a Scottish army attacked the castle but they lacked siege equipment and were unable to take the defences . Gaunt lost interest in the property after he gave up his role as the Lieutenant of the Marches . Dunstanburgh Castle remained part of the Duchy of Lancaster , but the Duchy was annexed to the Crown when Gaunt 's son , Henry IV , took the throne of England in 1399 . 
 = = = 15th - 16th centuries = = = 
 The Scottish threat persisted , and in 1402 Dunstanburgh Castle 's constable , probably accompanied by its garrison , took part in the Battle of <unk> Hill . Henry VI inherited the throne in 1422 and during the next few decades , numerous repairs were undertaken to the property 's buildings and outer defences , which had fallen into disrepair . The Wars of the Roses , a dynastic conflict between the rival houses of Lancaster and York , broke out in the middle of the 15th century . The castle was initially held by the Lancastrians , and the castle 's constable , Sir Ralph <unk> , died at the Battle of St Albans in 1455 , fighting for the Lancastrian Henry VI . 
 The castle formed part of a sequence of fortifications protecting the eastern route into Scotland , and in 1461 King Edward IV attempted to break the Lancastrian stranglehold on the region . Sir Ralph Percy , one of the joint constables , defended the castle until September 1461 , when he surrendered it to the Yorkists . In 1462 , Henry VI 's wife , Margaret of Anjou , invaded England with a French army , landing at Bamburgh ; Percy then switched sides and declared himself for the Lancastrians . 
 Another Yorkist army was dispatched north in November under the joint command of the earls of Warwick and Worcester , and Sir Ralph Grey . They besieged the castle , which surrendered that Christmas . Percy was left in charge of Dunstanburgh as part of Edward IV 's attempts at reconciliation , but the next year he once again switched sides , returning the castle to the Lancastrians . Percy died at the Battle of <unk> Moor in 1464 , and the Earl of Warwick reoccupied the castle that June following a short siege . 
 The castle was probably damaged during the wars , but , other than minor repairs in 1470 , nothing was spent on repairs and it fell into disrepair . It was used as a base for piracy in 1470 , and by the 1520s its roof was robbed for lead for use at the castle at Wark @-@ upon @-@ Tweed , and further lead and timber were taken for the moot hall in Embleton . By 1538 it was described in a royal report to Henry VIII as " a very ruinous house and of small strength " , and it was observed that only the gatehouse was still habitable . Some repairs were carried out to the walls by Sir William Ellerker , the King 's receiver , but a 1543 survey showed it to still be in poor condition . 
 In 1550 the Warden of the Middle and Eastern Marches , Sir Robert Bowes , described Dunstanburgh as being " in <unk> great decaye " . A report in 1584 suggested that it would cost Queen Elizabeth I £ 1 @,@ 000 to restore the castle , but argued that it was too far from the Scottish border to be worth repairing . Alice Craster , a wealthy widow , occupied the castle from 1594 to 1597 , probably living in the gatehouse , where she carried out restoration work , and farming the surrounding estate . For much of the 16th century , local farmers bought the right to use the outer bailey of the castle to store their cattle in the event of Scottish raids , at the price of six pence a year . 
 = = = 17th - 19th centuries = = = 
 In 1603 , the unification of the Scottish and English crowns eliminated the need for any residual need for Dunstanburgh Castle as a royal fortress . The following year , King James I sold the castle to Sir Thomas <unk> , Thomas <unk> and William Blake , who in turn sold it onto Sir Ralph Grey , a nearby landowner , the following year . Ralph 's son , William Lord Grey , was affirmed as the owner of the castle in 1625 . 
 The Grey dynasty maintained their ownership of the castle , which passed into Lady Mary Grey 's side of the family following a law case in 1704 . The lands around the castle and the outer bailey were used for growing wheat , barley and oats , and the walls were robbed of their stone for other building work . A small settlement , called Novia Scotia , was built on the site of the castle 's harbour , possibly by Scottish immigrants . Several engravings were published of the castle in the 18th century , including a somewhat inaccurate depiction by Samuel and Nathaniel Buck in 1720 , and by Francis Grose and William Hutchinson in 1773 and 1776 respectively . 
 Mary 's descendants , the earls of Tankerville , owned the property until the heavily <unk> Charles Bennet , the 6th earl , sold it for £ 155 @,@ 000 in 1869 to the trustees of the estate of the late Samuel <unk> . There had been some attempts at restoration in the early 19th century , and the passageway through the gatehouse was modified and reopened in 1885 . The historian Cadwallader Bates undertook fieldwork at the castle in the 1880s , publishing a comprehensive work in 1891 , and a professional architectural plan of the ruins was produced in 1893 . Nonetheless , a representative of the estate expressed his concern to the Society of Antiquities in Newcastle upon Tyne about the condition of the castle in 1898 , noting the poor repair of much of the stonework and the importance of the ongoing preservation work that the estate was undertaking . 
 Dunstanburgh 's ruins became a popular topic for artists from the end of the 18th century onwards . Thomas Girtin toured the region , and painted the castle , his picture dominated by what art historian <unk> <unk> describes as " the forces of nature unleashed " , with " wild waves " and dark clouds swirling around the ruins . J. M. W. Turner was influenced by Girtin , and when he first painted the castle in 1797 he similarly focused on the wind and the waves around the ancient ruins , taking some artistic licence with the view of the castle to reinforce its sense of isolated and former grandeur . Turner drew on his visit to produce further works in oils , watercolours , etchings and sketches , through until the 1830s , making the castle one of the most common subjects in his corpus of work . 
 = = = 20th and 21st centuries = = = 
 A golf course was constructed alongside the castle in 1900 , and the estate was later sold to Sir Arthur Sutherland , a wealthy shipowner , in 1919 . Sutherland opened an additional course at the castle in 1922 , designed by the Scottish golfer , James Braid . The costs of maintaining the property became too much for him and , after undertaking eight years of clearance work in the 1920s , he placed the castle into the guardianship of the state in 1930 , with the Commissioners of Works taking control of the property . Archaeological investigations were carried out as part of the clearance work by H. Honeyman in 1929 , exposing more of the main gatehouse , and further work was carried out under Robert Bosanquet in the 1930s . Aerial photography was carried out by Walter de Aitchison for the Ordnance Survey . 
 Shortly after the outbreak of the Second World War , concerns grew in the British government about the threat of German invasion along the east coast of England . The bays just to the north of Dunstanburgh Castle were vulnerable targets for an enemy amphibious landing , and efforts were made to fortify the castle and the surrounding area in 1940 , as part of a wider line of defences erected by Sir Edmund Ironside . 
 The castle itself was occupied by a unit of the Royal Armoured Corps , who served as observers ; the soldiers appear to have relied on the stone walls for protection rather than trenches , and , unusually , no additional firing points were cut out of the stonework , as typically happened elsewhere . The surrounding beaches were defended with lines of barbed wire , slit trenches and square weapons pits , reinforced by concrete pillboxes to the north and south of the castle , at least partially laid down by the 1st Battalion Essex Regiment . 
 A 20 @-@ foot ( 6 m ) wide ditch was dug at the north end of the moat to prevent tanks from breaking through and following the track south past the castle , and a 545 @-@ foot by 151 @-@ foot ( 166 m by 46 m ) wide anti @-@ personnel minefield was laid to the south @-@ west to prevent infantry soldiers from circumventing the castle 's defences and advancing down into Craster . After the end of the war , the barbed wire was cleared away from the beaches by local Italian prisoners of war , although the two pillboxes , the remnants of the anti @-@ tank ditch and some of the trenches and weapons pits still remain . 
 In 1961 , Arthur 's son , Sir Ivan Sutherland , passed the estate to the National Trust . Archaeological surveys were carried out in 1985 , 1986 and 1989 by Durham University , and between 2003 and 2006 researchers from English Heritage carried a major archaeological investigation of 35 hectares ( 86 acres ) of land around the castle . 
 In the 21st century , the castle remains owned by the National Trust and is managed by English Heritage . The site is a Scheduled Ancient Monument and the ruins are protected under UK law as a Grade I listed building . It lies within the Northumberland Coast Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty , and is part of a Site of Special Scientific Interest , with parts of the site comprising a Special Protection Area for the conservation of wild birds . The National Trust has encouraged the land around the outside of the castle to remain waterlogged to enable the conservation of amphibians and bird species , and the inside of the castle is protected from grazing animals to encourage nesting birds . 
 = = Architecture and landscape = = 
 = = = Landscape = = = 
 Dunstanburgh Castle occupies a 68 @-@ acre ( 27 @.@ 5 ha ) site within a larger 610 @-@ acre ( 246 ha ) body of National Trust land along the coast . The castle is situated on a prominent headland , part of the Great <unk> Sill geological formation . On the south side of the castle there is a gentle slope across low @-@ lying , boggy ground , but along the northern side , the Gull Crag cliffs form a natural barrier up to 30 @-@ metre ( 98 ft ) high . The cliffs are punctuated by various defiles , formed from weaknesses in the black basalt rock , including the famous Rumble Churn . 
 The landscape around the castle was carefully designed in the 14th century as a deer park or planned borough , and would have looked similar to those at the contemporary castles of Framlingham , Kenilworth , Leeds and Whittington ; in particular , Kenilworth may have been a specific model for Dunstanburgh . The area around the castle was dominated by three shallow artificial lakes , called meres , and accessed by three gates on the north , west and south sides . The meres were fed from a fresh water spring 2 @,@ 000 feet ( 600 m ) inland , linked to the meres by an underground stone channel . The meres were originally bounded by a sod @-@ cast boundary bank and ditch ; today this is heavily eroded , and up to 3 @-@ foot 3 inches ( 1 m ) high . The main route by land into the castle would have been from the village of Embleton , through the West Gate . 
 The North Mere is 5 @.@ 6 @-@ acres ( 2 @.@ 25 ha ) large , and is blocked off on its northern end by a sod @-@ cast bank , adjacent to the site of the North Gate . The southern half takes the form of a 331 @-@ foot ( 101 m ) long moat , which was recorded as being 18 @-@ foot ( 5 @.@ 5 m ) deep in the medieval period , terminating in the West Gate . The northern part of this mere occasionally floods in the 21st century , creating a temporary lake , and the moated section usually still contains some standing water . The West Mere , covering 2 @.@ 25 @-@ acres ( 1 ha ) , stretches away from the location of West Gate and is blocked at the far end by a small , stone dam . Three rectangular fishponds were built alongside the West Mere , the smallest , probably a stew pond for raising young fish , being fed with water from the lake . A protective earthen bank , probably originally reinforced by a timber palisade , ran for approximately 490 feet ( 150 m ) along either side of the West Gate , where a gatehouse was probably built . At the far end of the lake complex was the South Mere , 2 @.@ 25 @-@ acres ( 1 ha ) in size , with the South Gate positioned in its eastern corner . 
 A harbour was built south @-@ east of the castle , which would originally have been used to receive first building materials , then later senior members of the castle household or important guests . All that remains of the harbour is its 246 @-@ foot ( 75 m ) quay , built from basalt boulders , and it may not have been in frequent use during the medieval period , since it could only have been safely used during periods of good weather . West of the castle is a later <unk> , the earthwork remains of a longhouse . South of this is a rectangular earthwork , with walls over 3 @-@ foot 3 inches ( 1 m ) high , which may have been a siege fortification from 1462 . If this is in fact such a siegework , it would be a unique survival in England from this period . 
 = = = Architecture = = = 
 Dunstanburgh Castle 's buildings are located around the outside of the fortification 's outer bailey , enclosed by a stone curtain wall , which enclose 9 @.@ 96 acres ( 4 @.@ 03 ha ) , making it the largest castle in Northumberland . Possibly from the very start of the castle , and certainly by the 1380s , the castle buildings formed three distinct complexes supporting the Earl 's household , the castle 's constable and the administration of the Embleton barony respectively . The inside of the bailey still shows the marks of former strip farming , which can be seen in winter . 
 The southern and western parts of the walls were originally faced with a local ashlar sandstone with a core of basalt rubble ; the sandstone was mostly quarried at Howick . The sandstone has since been stripped from the western parts of the wall , and the sandstone along the eastern end of the walls gives way to small limestone blocks , originally only laid 11 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 3 m ) high with a 4 @-@ foot 11 inches ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) parapet , but later raised in height with additional basalt boulders , probably during the Wars of the Roses . It is uncertain if the curtain wall originally extended above the cliffs along the northern edge of the castle . 
 Moving counter @-@ clockwise around the curtain wall from the north @-@ west , the rectangular Lilburn Tower looks out across Embleton beach . The tower was named after an early castle constable , John de Lilburn , but may have been built under Thomas of Lancaster ; it was intended as a high @-@ status residence , 59 @-@ foot ( 18 m ) high , 30 @-@ foot ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) square with 6 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) thick walls , with a guardroom for soldiers on the ground floor . The rectangular towers at Dunstanburgh reflects the local tradition in Northumberland , and are similar to those at nearby Alnwick . Further along the wall there are the remains of a small tower , called <unk> 's House by local tradition . Earthworks around the inside of the curtain wall suggest that there may once have been a complex of buildings stretching between Lilburn Tower and <unk> 's House . 
 On the south @-@ west corner of the walls are the castle gatehouses . The most prominent of these is the Great Gatehouse , a massive three @-@ storey fortification , comprising two drum @-@ shaped towers of ashlar stone ; originally 79 @-@ foot ( 24 m ) high . This was heavily influenced by the Edwardian gatehouses in North Wales , such as that at Harlech , but contains unique features , such as the frontal towers , and is considered by historians Alastair Oswald and Jeremy Ashbee to be " one of the most imposing structures in any English castle " . In the 1380s this gatehouse was further strengthened with a 31 @-@ foot ( 9 @.@ 4 m ) long barbican , of which only the rubble foundations now survive , around 2 @-@ foot 4 inches ( 0 @.@ 7 m ) high . 
 The passageway through the gatehouse was protected by a portcullis and possibly a set of wooden gates . The ground floor contained two guardrooms , each 21 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 4 m ) wide , and latrines , with spiral staircases in the corner of the gatehouse running up to the first floor , where relatively well @-@ lit chambers with fireplaces probably accommodated the garrison 's officers . The staircases continued up to the second floor , containing the castle 's great hall , an antechamber and bedchamber , originally intended for the use of Thomas of Lancaster and his family . Four towers extended above the gatehouse 's lead @-@ covered roof for an additional two storeys of height , giving extensive views of the surrounding area . This design may have influenced the construction of Henry IV 's gatehouse at Lancaster Castle . 
 Immediately to the west of the Great Gatehouse is John of Gaunt 's Gatehouse , originally either two or three storeys tall , but now only surviving at the foundation level . This gatehouse replaced the Great Gatehouse as the main entrance , and would have contained a porter 's lodge , defended by a combination of a portcullis and a 82 @-@ foot ( 25 m ) long barbican . A inner bailey was approximately 50 @-@ foot by 75 @-@ foot ( 23 m by 15 m ) , defended by a 20 @-@ foot ( 6 m ) high mantlet wall , was constructed in the 1380s behind John of Gaunt 's Gatehouse and the Great Gatehouse . This complex comprised a vaulted inner gatehouse , 30 @-@ foot ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) square , and six buildings , including an antechamber , kitchen and bakehouse . 
 Further along the south side of the walls is the Constable 's Tower , a square tower containing comfortable accommodation for the castle 's constable , including stone window seats . On the inside of the walls are the foundations of a hall and chamber , built before 1351 , part of a larger complex of buildings used by the constable and his household , approximately 60 @-@ foot ( 18 m ) square . To the west of the Constable 's Tower is a small turret that projects from the upper wall - an unusual feature , similar to that at Pickering Castle - and a mural garderobe ; and to the east a small oblong turret with a single chamber , 10 @.@ 75 @-@ foot by 7 @.@ 5 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 28 m by 2 @.@ 3 m ) . 
 In the south @-@ east corner of the walls , the Egyncleugh Tower - whose name means " eagle 's ravine " in the Northumbrian dialect - overlooks Queen Margaret 's Cove below . A three storey , square building , 25 @-@ foot ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) across , Egyncleugh Tower was designed to house a castle official , and included a small gateway and drawbridge into the castle , either for the use of the castle constable , or possibly for the local people . 
 There is a postern gate in the eastern wall , added in the 1450s , and a further gateway in the north @-@ eastern corner , which gave access to Castle Point and Gull Crag below . Along the inside of the curtain walls are the foundations of a yard , 200 @-@ foot by 100 @-@ foot ( 61 m by 30 m ) , and a large rectangular building , usually identified as a grange or a barn . This would have probably supported the administration of the Embleton estates , and have included the auditor 's chamber and other facilities . 
 = = = Interpretation = = = 
 Early analysis of Dunstanburgh Castle focused on its qualities as a military , defensive site , but more recent work has emphasised the symbolic aspects of its design and the surrounding landscape . Although the castle was intended as a secure bolt @-@ hole for Thomas of Lancaster should events go awry in the south of England , it was however " clearly not an inconspicuous hiding place " , as the English Heritage research team have pointed out : it was a spectacular construction , located in the centre of a huge , carefully designed medieval landscape . The meres surrounding the castle would have reflected the castle walls and towers , turning the outcrop into a virtual island and producing what the historians Oswald and Ashbee have called " an awe @-@ inspiring and beautiful sight " . 
 The different elements of the castle were also positioned for particular effect . Unusually , the huge Great Gatehouse faced south @-@ east , away from the main road , hiding its extraordinary architectural features . This may have been because Thomas intended to establish a new settlement in front of it , but the gatehouse was also probably intended to be viewed from the harbour , where the most senior visitors were expected to arrive . The Lilburn Tower was positioned so as to be clearly - and provocatively - visible to Edward II 's castle at Bamburgh , 9 miles ( 15 km ) away along the coast , and would have been elegantly framed by the entranceway to the Great Gatehouse for any visitors . It was also positioned on a set of natural basalt pillars , which - although inconvenient to build upon - would have enhanced its dramatic appearance and reflection in the meres . 
 The design of the castle may also have alluded to Arthurian mythology , which were a popular set of ideals and beliefs among the English ruling classes at the time . Thomas appears to have had an interest in the Arthurian legends , and used the pseudonym " King Arthur " in his correspondence with the Scots . Dunstanburgh , with an ancient fort at its center encircled by water , may have been an allusion to Camelot , and in turn to Thomas 's claim to political authority over the failing Edward II , and was also strikingly similar to contemporary depictions of Sir Lancelot 's castle of " Joyous Garde " . 
 = = Folklore = = 
 Dunstanburgh Castle has closely associated with the legend of Sir Guy the Seeker since at least the early 19th century . Different versions of the story vary slightly in their details , but typically involve a knight , Sir Guy , arriving at Dunstanburgh Castle , where he was met by a wizard and led inside . There he comes across a noble lady imprisoned inside a crystal tomb and guarded by a sleeping army . The wizard offers Guy a choice of either a sword or a hunting horn to help free the lady ; he incorrectly chooses the horn , which wakes the sleeping knights . Sir Guy finds himself outside Dunstanburgh Castle , and spends the rest of his life attempting to find a way back inside . 
 It is unclear when the story first emerged , but similar stories , possibly inspired by medieval Arthurian legends , exist at the nearby locations of Hexham and the Eildon Hills . Matthew Lewis wrote a poem , Sir Guy the Seeker , popularising the story in 1808 , with subsequent versions produced by W. G. Thompson in 1821 and James Service in 1822 . The tale continues to be told as part of the local oral tradition . 
 Several other oral traditions about the castle survive . One of these involves a child prisoner within the castle , who escaped , throwing the key to her dungeon into a nearby field , sometimes argued to be an outcrop of land north @-@ west of the castle , which from then onwards was infertile . Another centres on a man called Gallon who was left in charge of the castle by Margaret of Anjou and entrusted with a set of valuables ; captured by the Yorkists , he escaped and later returned to reclaim six <unk> glasses . The historian Katrina Porteous has noted that in the 14th century there are records of receivers and bailiffs at the castle called <unk> , potentially linked to the origins of the Gallon of this story . 
 There are local stories of tunnels stretching from Dunstanburgh Castle to Craster Tower , Embleton and Proctor <unk> , as well as a tunnel running from the castle well to the west of the castle . These stories may be linked to the presence of the drainage system around the castle . 
 = Ogre ( game ) = 
 Ogre is a board wargame first released in 1977 as the first Metagaming Concepts <unk> , designed by Steve Jackson . It is an asymmetrical forces game , set in the late 21st century . One player has a single giant robot tank ( called an " Ogre " ) pitted against a second player 's headquarters , defended by a mixture of conventional tanks , infantry , and artillery . The concept was strongly influenced by Keith <unk> 's novel Bolo ( 1976 ) , and Colin Kapp 's short story " <unk> " ( 1969 ) . The Ogre itself is named after the large and strong mythological beast ogre . 
 Since its initial release in 1977 Ogre has been reprinted many times , most recently in 2014 . After Jackson founded his own company , Steve Jackson Games , Ogre , its sequel G.E.V. , and further expansions were published in the Pocket Box format . On March 8 , 2008 , Steve Jackson Games announced the planned production of Ogre 6th Edition . In 2012 , a new version of Ogre successfully completed funding on <unk> , for release in November 2012 . After multiple delays , the elaborate 29 pound Designer 's edition was shipped to all Kickstarter backers in November 2013 . 
 = = Game description = = 
 Ogre uses a hex map depicting barren terrain with only ridgelines and large , radioactive craters as obstacles . The defender sets up his forces in the more congested part of the map and the Ogre enters the opposite side at the beginning of the game . The basic version of the game has the attacker using a single Ogre heavy tank ( referred to as a " Mark III Ogre " ) , while the advanced scenario gives the attacker the larger , more powerful " Mark V Ogre " tank versus an increased number of defenders . The defender is allocated a certain number of infantry and ' armor units ' , but gets to decide the exact composition of his own armored forces . 
 The different types of units encourage a combined @-@ arms approach with each type being better than the others in different aspects . Heavy tanks have high attack and defense with moderate speed and low range . Missile tanks have moderate attack and defense with moderate range and low speed . <unk> ( " ground effect vehicles " — roughly , heavily armored hovercraft ) have very high speed ( moving twice per turn ) , low attack , low range , and moderate defense . Howitzers have very high attack and range but are easily destroyed ( once an attacker has managed to get close enough ) , immobile , and expensive . However , according to the game 's designer , this balanced mix of units was not quite right in the first edition ; the second edition sped up heavy tanks , slowed down <unk> , and changed the defender 's purchasing from " attack factors " to " armor units " ( everything is considered equivalent , except howitzers , which are worth two of anything else ) . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Martin Easterbrook began his 1977 review of Ogre ( first edition ) by saying " Be warned : this game could become a craze " adding that " the idea of the microgames themselves is remarkable enough in itself " . He rated the game 8 out of 10 but criticized the game 's title and " flimsy equipment , weak infantry " . 
 Reviewing the first Steve Jackson Games editions of Ogre ( after the designer had moved away from Metagaming ) , Tony Watson called Ogre " a legend in the ranks of SF <unk> , and deservedly so ... as well as being a lot of fun to play , it 's an interesting extrapolation on high @-@ tech armoured warfare " . It was noted that the rules had remained essentially the same in the new edition , and the most significant changes being to the physical design — with larger ( still black and white ) counters , and full colour maps by Denis Loubet . Watson also welcomed the retention of the original artwork alongside new pieces — " no one draws a <unk> or Ogre like Mr. Chung " . 
 Reviewing the combined edition of 1991 , Allen Varney stated : " [ Ogre and G.E.V. : ] two simulation board games of armored combat on a future battlefield are among the best the field has ever seen : fast , elegant , and endlessly replayable " . Whilst praising the production values of the 2 @-@ color playing pieces Varney found the box somewhat ' flimsy ' . 
 In his 2007 essay , game designer Erick <unk> said " I think [ Ogre 's ] success really boils down to four essentials : Ogre is fast , ... asymmetrical , ... open @-@ ended , ... [ and ] is a teaching tool . Ogre had restructured my mind pretty completely ... but it wasn 't until 2002 ... that I realized how effective Ogre is at getting across so many important component mechanisms of play and design . " 
 = = Editions = = 
 The first and second editions of Ogre were released in 1977 . The first edition featured artwork by Winchell Chung , while the second had a much larger print run and rulebook artwork by Clark Bradly rather than Chung . The third edition , released in 1982 , introduced double @-@ sided counters . 
 An edition called OGRE : Deluxe Edition was released in 1987 . The rulebook cover artwork was the Denis Loubet illustration that was also used for the Ogre computer game ( see Spinoffs below ) . The board was sturdier than the previous edition 's paper map , and the counters were provided with stand @-@ up plastic bases . G.M. magazine 's 1989 review of OGRE : Deluxe Edition highlighted the game 's ease of introduction and short playing time , but pointed out that most gamers either like the game or loathe it . 
 In 1990 , Ogre was combined with another game called G.E.V. ( an Ogre sequel ) in a Ogre / G.E.V. box . The Ogre rules were designated as 4th edition and the G.E.V. rules were designated as 3rd edition . Ogre / G.E.V. was released into a single 5 3 / 8 " x 8 1 / 2 " box , and the rules were combined into a single 4 " x 7 " booklet . The rules were printed so that the booklet was flipped over to see the other rules . Counters were in green and white ( 2 @-@ sided ) , and maps were the same as the 3rd edition maps for both Ogre and G.E.V. , but printed in the same sheet . In 2000 , Ogre / G.E.V. was released again and designated as 5th edition , with new cover art by Phillip Reed , sold in a VHS box , but rules still in a 4 " x 7 " , 44 @-@ page booklet and counters in black , red and white ( 2 @-@ sided ) . 
 A " new " Deluxe Ogre ( 2000 ) was a re @-@ issued version of the original Ogre , packaged with miniatures rather than counters , and the original " crater " map printed on a larger scale . Deluxe Ogre won the Wargamer Award for Excellence in 2001 . 
 In 2011 Steve Jackson announced a sixth edition , The Ogre Designer 's Edition , combining Ogre and G.E.V. with larger full color flat counters for most units and constructible cardboard figures for the Ogres . 
 Steve Jackson Games released a reprinted version of the original 1977 game in 2014 . It was sold at the game 's original price of $ 2 @.@ 95 . 
 = = Kickstarter Project = = 
 In May 2012 , a new designers edition of Ogre was funded on <unk> The original goal was $ 20 @,@ 000 and the final funding was a total of $ 923 @,@ 680 . As the funding grew , more and more options and upgrades were added , with the final game weighing over 25 pounds ( 11 kg ) . It began shipping to its Kickstarter supporters in October 2013 , and is expected to arrive at retail stores on December 6 , 2013 . 
 = = Spinoffs = = 
 Ogre spawned a sequel , G.E.V. , focusing on the G.E.V. <unk> and the other " conventional " armor and infantry types . 
 Other games based on Ogre include : 
 Shockwave , an expansion that introduced new unit types including cruise missiles and a map that could be used with the G.E.V. map . 
 Ogre Miniatures , an adaptation of the game to miniature wargaming , using 1 : 285 scale miniatures . This adaptation won the 1992 Origins Award for Best Miniatures Rules . In addition to miniatures from Steve Jackson Games , a set of Ogre miniatures was also developed by Ral Partha which won the 1992 Origins Award for Best Vehicular Miniatures Series . The first set of Ogre miniatures , produced by Martian Metals under license of Metagaming Concepts in 1979 , won the H.G. Wells Award for Best Vehicular Model Series of 1979 . 
 <unk> : Ogre , a paper dice game by <unk> Games . 
 Computer adaptations , including the 1986 Ogre release by Origin Systems , Inc. for Apple II , Amiga , Atari 8 @-@ bit , Atari ST , Commodore 64 , DOS , and Macintosh . 
 = = Books = = 
 The OGRE Book ( 1982 ) was a collection of articles and rules variants from The Space Gamer . It was reissued in 2001 , expanded from 40 pages to 128 with further retrospective from Steve Jackson . 
 GURPS Ogre ( 2000 ) was a supplement for the role @-@ playing game GURPS . 
 = Music of Final Fantasy XII = 
 The music of the video game Final Fantasy XII was composed primarily by Hitoshi Sakimoto . Additional music was provided by Masaharu Iwata and Hayato Matsuo , who also orchestrated the opening and ending themes . Former regular series composer Nobuo Uematsu 's only work for this game was " Kiss Me Good @-@ Bye " , the theme song sung by Angela Aki . The Final Fantasy XII Original Soundtrack was released on four Compact Discs in 2006 by Aniplex . A sampling of tracks from the soundtrack was released as an album entitled Selections from Final Fantasy XII Original Soundtrack , and was released in 2006 by Tofu Records . Additionally , a promotional digital album titled The Best of Final Fantasy XII was released on the Japanese localization of iTunes for download only in 2006 . " Kiss Me Good @-@ Bye " was released by Epic Records as a single in 2006 , and Symphonic Poem " Hope " , the complete music from the game 's end credits , was released by Hats Unlimited in 2006 . An abridged version of the latter piece , which originally accompanied a promotional video for the game , was included in the official soundtrack album . An album of piano arrangements , titled Piano Collections Final Fantasy XII , was released by Square Enix in 2012 . 
 The soundtrack received mixed reviews from critics ; while several felt that it was an excellent album , others disagreed , finding it to be a good soundtrack but lacking in substance . Common complaints about the album were the large number of filler tracks , which seemed to be uninspired and hurt the soundtrack as a whole . However , several reviewers commented on " Kiss Me Good @-@ bye " , finding it to be one of the soundtrack 's strongest areas . The singles for the soundtrack were very well received by critics , who found them to be very enjoyable but short in duration , and the piano album was considered by reviewers to be one of the best in the series . The game 's soundtrack was nominated for a British Academy of Film and Television Arts award for Best Original Score . 
 = = Creation and influence = = 
 Hitoshi Sakimoto composed most of the game 's soundtrack ; Nobuo Uematsu , following his departure from Square Enix in 2004 , only contributed the theme song , " Kiss Me Good @-@ Bye " , sung by Angela Aki . Uematsu noted that Aki 's style of playing the keyboard while singing reminded him of his childhood idol , Elton John , which was one of the reasons he chose her . Aki was approached for the role three years before the release of the game . She based her words for the song on " a scene of a new journey after good @-@ bye " , which was the sense she had gotten from Uematsu 's melody , and was encouraged by Uematsu not to limit herself in her lyrics to what she thought the producers wanted . Sakimoto was brought in to compose the soundtrack to the game by Yasumi Matsuno , the producer of the game , five months before the game was officially announced . Sakimoto experienced difficulty following in Uematsu 's footsteps , but he decided to create a unique soundtrack in his own way , although he cites Uematsu as his biggest musical influence . 
 Sakimoto did not meet with Uematsu for direction on creating the soundtrack and tried to avoid copying Uematsu 's style from previous Final Fantasy soundtracks . However , he did attempt to ensure that his style would mesh with Uematsu 's " Kiss Me Good @-@ Bye " and the overall vision of the series . The soundtrack also includes songs composed by Uematsu for previous Final Fantasy games , with new arrangements by Sakimoto . These tracks include " Final Fantasy ~ FFXII Version ~ " , " Victory Fanfare ~ FFXII Version ~ " , " Chocobo FFXII Arrange Ver . 1 " , " Chocobo ~ FFXII Version ~ " , and " Clash on the Big Bridge ~ FFXII Version ~ " . Of these , all but " Clash on the Big Bridge " are recurring pieces used in almost every Final Fantasy game . " Clash on the Big Bridge " plays during the battle with Gilgamesh , as it did in Final Fantasy V. Sakimoto created the music for the game based on the atmosphere of the game and the emotional changes of the characters , rather than the story , so that the music would not be affected by changes in the development of the game . Sakimoto stated in an interview included in a bonus disc of the collector 's edition of the game that his favorite pieces from the soundtrack are the " world " themes in the outdoor areas , and that his overall favorite is " The <unk> Steppe " . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 Final Fantasy XII Original Soundtrack is the soundtrack album of Final Fantasy XII , containing musical tracks from the game , and was composed and produced by Hitoshi Sakimoto . Additional music was provided by Masaharu Iwata and Hayato Matsuo , who also orchestrated the opening and ending themes . The soundtrack spans four discs and 100 tracks , covering a duration of 4 : 54 : 34 . It was released on May 31 , 2006 in Japan by Aniplex , bearing the catalog numbers SVWC @-@ <unk> ~ 4 . The limited edition of the soundtrack included a 28 @-@ page booklet featuring artwork for the game and providing information about the soundtrack . 
 An album entitled Selections from Final Fantasy XII Original Soundtrack was released on October 31 , 2006 by Tofu Records containing 31 tracks from the full Final Fantasy XII soundtrack . The tracks were the same versions as on the full soundtrack , although some tracks that repeated were cut shorter . The album covers a duration of 73 : 23 and has a catalog number of TOF @-@ 033 . Additionally , a promotional digital album titled The Best of Final Fantasy XII was released on the Japanese localization of iTunes for download only on March 15 , 2006 . The album contains 11 tracks handpicked by Hitoshi Sakimoto , including versions of " Theme of Final Fantasy XII " and " Chocobo FFXII Arrange Ver . 1 " that were ultimately not used in the game . 
 The game 's soundtrack was nominated for a British Academy of Film and Television Arts award for Best Original Score . Final Fantasy XII Original Soundtrack has sold 31 @,@ 000 copies as of January 2010 . It reached # 7 on the Japanese Oricon charts , and stayed on the charts for six weeks . The album received mixed reviews from critics . Jared 's review from Square Enix Music Online cited that the soundtrack " utilizes ambiance , power , intensity and beauty " and termed the album to be " amazing " , though he felt that the lack of melody " hurts this soundtrack " and that some of the tracks were " bare of inspiration " . Meghan Sullivan of IGN thought that the composer was " trying too hard to evoke emotion " and that many of the songs were " over @-@ the @-@ top and bombastic " , though she did feel that there were certain tracks that " manage [ d ] to be stirring " . She also stated that Uematsu 's only work for the soundtrack , " Kiss Me Good @-@ bye " , is a " strong end to a surprisingly trite collection " . Greg Kasavin of GameSpot , on the other hand , felt that it was a " beautifully composed soundtrack " that sounded " fantastic " . Patrick Gann of RPGFan found it to be " a great work " , but " somewhat lacking in substance " , concluding that he had " a lot of mixed feelings about it " , while Ben Schweitzer of RPGFan disagreed , enjoying the soundtrack and finding it to be an " excellent " album , and " better than [ he ] could have expected " . 
 Track list 
 = = = Piano album = = = 
 Piano Collections Final Fantasy XII is an album of piano arrangements of music from the game . The thirteen tracks on the album , totaling 1 : 01 : 48 in length , were composed by Sakimoto and arranged and performed by Casey Ormond . The album was released by Square Enix on November 7 , 2012 with the catalog number SQEX @-@ <unk> , and was also published that same day as part of Final Fantasy XII OST & Piano Collections , a pack containing the album and the original soundtrack album with the catalog numbers SQEX @-@ <unk> ~ 52 . A book of sheet music for the album has also been released . 
 Sakimoto originally heard of Ormond due to an arrangement he had made of " The Skycity of Bhujerba " in 2009 , which , after discussion between the two about several other arrangements Ormond made of Sakimoto 's work , lead to the two officially working together on Valkyria Chronicles Piano Pieces , an album of piano arrangements for Valkyria Chronicles . The style of arrangements on the Final Fantasy XII album range from classical to a " moody piece with plenty of sultry jazz tones " , one of the two pieces located at the end of the album which Ormond had arranged prior to officially beginning the project . Many of the pieces contain an " improvisational " sense , even when not technically jazz @-@ based , and several depart notably from the style of the original works . Ormond based many of the changes in theme or mood of his arrangements off of where the pieces were used in the original game , attempting to highlight the perspectives of different characters or ideas from the scenes they were played in . 
 The album was well received by reviewers , with Don Kotowski of Square Enix Music Online calling it one of the best Final Fantasy piano arrangement albums , a claim echoed by Derek Heemsbergen of RPGFan . Heemsbergen added that " Ormond shows reverence for Sakimoto 's original material while exploring musical ideas in a style all his own " and praised the variety of the music . Kotowski praised both the " variety of moods " covered by the pieces as well as the overall cohesiveness of the album . 
 = = Singles = = 
 = = = Kiss Me Good @-@ Bye = = = 
 Kiss Me Good @-@ Bye is the theme song of Final Fantasy XII , and is the third Japanese single by Angela Aki . The only vocal piece in the game , it was set to tunes composed by Nobuo Uematsu , arranged by Kenichiro Fukui and produced by Motoki Matsuoka . The single was released by Epic Records in Japan on March 15 , 2006 , covering a duration of 19 : 59 and bearing the catalog number <unk> @-@ <unk> . A limited edition was also released bearing the catalog number <unk> @-@ 2808 featuring a DVD containing the Kiss Me Good @-@ Bye video clip which included both shots of Aki performing the single and clips from the video game . Unlike previous Final Fantasy games , the theme song is sung in English in both the Japanese and North American versions of the game . The version featured on the CD single has a slightly different arrangement and Japanese lyrics ; however , the English version that was featured in the game is included as a bonus track . An English version of the single was released as a digital single on May 16 , 2006 under the title Kiss Me Good @-@ Bye [ EP ] in North America through Tofu Records . 
 " Kiss Me Good @-@ bye " reached # 6 on the Oricon charts and remained on the charts for 18 weeks . The release was seen by critics as an excellent single , with Gann feeling that both the Final Fantasy XII and non @-@ game tracks held their weight equally . 
 = = = Symphonic Poem " Hope " = = = 
 Symphonic Poem " Hope " ( <unk> 「 <unk> 」 , <unk> " Kibō " ) is a single released by violinist Taro Hakase and is the full version of the game 's ending credits music . The piece has been described as a " mini @-@ symphony " for Final Fantasy XII inspired by the main theme for the game . The single contains five tracks , arranged by Taro Hakase and Yuji Toriyama and produced by Taro Hakase , and features performance by the London Philharmonic Orchestra . A shorter edit blending the first , second and fifth movements of the symphonic poem was used in a promotional video for the game , and appears as a single track in the official soundtrack release . Symphonic Poem " Hope " was released on March 1 , 2006 by Hats Unlimited bearing the catalog number <unk> @-@ <unk> . 
 Hope was found by critics to be an enjoyable single , though at only 9 minutes long , Gann felt he could have " gotten by without it " , although he said that for other listeners , their " collection may not be complete without this little gem " . Dave of Square Enix Music Online concurred with that sentiment , saying that " despite the length of the album , it easily grew on " him . " Hope " reached # 15 on the Oricon charts and remained on the charts for 16 weeks . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 " Kiss Me Good @-@ bye " was performed by the Chicagoland Pops Orchestra and Angela Aki for Play ! A Video Game Symphony , a worldwide video game music orchestral concert series . The Eminence Symphony Orchestra performed " Victory Fanfare " , " Clan Headquarters " , and " Penelo 's Theme " at the three " Passion " concerts held in Australia and Singapore in December 2006 . " Penelo 's Theme " was again played at the Fantasy Comes Alive concert in Singapore on April 30 , 2010 . Selections of music from the game also appear on Japanese remix albums , called dojin music , and on English remixing websites . 
 = Maryland Route 500 = 
 Maryland Route 500 ( MD 500 ) is a state highway in the U.S. state of Maryland . Known as Queens Chapel Road , the highway runs 2 @.@ 22 miles ( 3 @.@ 57 km ) from Michigan Avenue at the District of Columbia boundary in Chillum north to MD 410 in Hyattsville . MD 500 connects Washington with the northwestern Prince George 's County cities of Mount Rainier and Hyattsville . The state highway also connects those communities with a pair of stations on the Green Line of the Washington Metro . Queens Chapel Road was constructed as the original MD 210 from Washington to Hyattsville in the 1910s . MD 500 was built from Hyattsville through University Park to U.S. Route 1 ( US 1 ) in the early 1930s . MD 500 assumed the course of MD 210 in the mid @-@ 1940s . The highway was relocated in West Hyattsville and expanded to a divided highway toward Washington in the early 1950s . MD 500 was truncated at MD 410 when University Park took over the highway prior to the construction of the Metro Green Line through the town in the late 1980s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 MD 500 begins at an intersection with Eastern Avenue at the District of Columbia boundary in Chillum . On the other side of the border , the highway heads into Washington as Michigan Avenue . MD 500 heads northeast as a four @-@ lane divided highway . The highway veers north and forms the western boundary of Mount Rainier as the highway intersects Chillum Road , which heads west as MD 501 . MD 500 crosses the Northwest Branch Anacostia River and enters the city of Hyattsville . The state highway veers to the northeast and Ager Road splits to the north ; the county highway which leads to the West Hyattsville station on the Washington Metro 's Green Line . There is no direct access from southbound Ager Road to northbound MD 500 . The missing connection is provided at the intersection with Hamilton Street , which heads east as MD 208 . MD 500 continues northeast through the intersection with Queensbury Road and Belcrest Road ; the latter provides access to the Prince George 's Plaza Metro Station . The highway reaches its northern terminus at MD 410 ( East – West Highway ) . County @-@ maintained Adelphi Road continues north on the other side of the intersection . 
 = = History = = 
 Queens Chapel Road is named for the Queen 's Chapel , a Catholic church founded on the estate of the Queen family in 1722 in what is now the Langdon neighborhood of Washington . In addition to the extant portion of Queens Chapel Road in Maryland , the road continued into the District of Columbia along what are now Michigan Avenue and 18th Street to Brentwood Road just north of US 1 in the city 's <unk> neighborhood . The segment of Queens Chapel Road from the District of Columbia boundary to just south of Ager Road was paved as a 14 @-@ foot @-@ wide ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) concrete road by Prince George 's County with state aid by 1915 . The pavement was extended to Ager Road when that road and Hamilton Street were paved by the Maryland State Roads Commission in 1923 . The segment of Queens Chapel Road from Hamilton Street to US 1 in University Park was paved in concrete between 1930 and 1933 . 
 The portions of Queens Chapel Road south of Ager Road and north of Hamilton Street were originally designated MD 210 and MD 500 , respectively . The portion of modern Queens Chapel Road from south of Ager Road to Hamilton Street originally did not exist . Instead , Queens Chapel Road turned north along what is now Jamestown Road , then made a sharp curve east onto modern Hamilton Street . The highway had a T intersection with Ager Road and continued east to another T intersection where the road turned north while Hamilton Street continued east into Hyattsville . Ager Road , Hamilton Street , and the portion of Queens Chapel Road connecting them were part of MD 209 , which was renumbered as an extension of MD 410 by 1946 ; MD 210 was renumbered as an extension of MD 500 at the same time . 
 By 1942 , the Maryland State Roads Commission proposed relocating Queens Chapel Road near Northwest Branch to eliminate the highway 's circuitous course and extend Ager Road to the new highway . MD 500 was relocated from Northwest Branch to Hamilton Street as the first carriageway of an ultimate divided highway in 1949 . The second carriageway of the new highway was added in 1951 and 1952 . The portion of the state highway from the District of Columbia to Northwest Branch was expanded to a divided highway in 1951 and 1952 ; this work included rebuilding the highway 's bridge across Northwest Branch to carry the expanded highway . In addition , the remainder of MD 500 from Hamilton Street to US 1 was widened and resurfaced in 1951 . The divided highway was extended northeast from Hamilton Street to MD 410 in 1973 . MD 500 was reduced from six lanes to four lanes when the highway was re @-@ striped in 2005 . 
 The Maryland State Highway Administration transferred maintenance of Queens Chapel Road from MD 410 to US 1 to the town of University Park in August 1988 ahead of the construction of the Washington Metro 's Green Line underneath the town ; the town subsequently closed the road through town . A 1991 traffic study showed the majority of traffic along the University Park segment of Queens Chapel Road was through traffic before it was closed , and recommended the highway be closed at the southern end of town and only allow traffic to exit the town onto US 1 . After Metro construction was completed in the summer of 1992 , the University Park Town Council elected to keep the road closed to through traffic ; this measure was affirmed by a town referendum in January 1993 . Today , there is a cul @-@ de @-@ sac at the southwest end of town adjacent to the MD 500 – MD 410 intersection ; the intersection with US 1 at the northeast end of town only allows traffic to exit Queens Chapel Road . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 The entire route is in Prince George 's County . 
 = Tonga at the 2011 Commonwealth Youth Games = 
 Tonga competed in the 2011 Commonwealth Youth Games held in the British Crown Dependency of Isle of Man from 7 to 13 September 2011 . Their participation marked their second Commonwealth Youth Games appearance . The delegation of Tonga consisted of three officials and four competitors ( two men and two women ) participating in three different sports — athletics , boxing and swimming . This was a decrease in the number of athletes from the nation 's last appearance at the Games , when nine athletes were sent to the 2008 Commonwealth Youth Games in Pune . Heamasi Sekona won a bronze in the light heavyweight class of boxing without winning a single bout . Sekona was the only medalist from Tongan side . None of the rest three athletes advanced past the qualifying stages , and thus did not win any medals . Katiloka ranked eighth overall in the qualifying round for triple jump ; middleweight boxer , Pomale , lost to Cody Crowley of Canada in his first round match . Additionally , Prescott ranked 18th and 13th in the heat rounds of 50 m and 100 m backstroke events respectively . Sekona 's was the first medal for Tonga in the history of the Games . 
 = = Background = = 
 Independent Tonga became a member of the Commonwealth of Nations in 1970 , and debuted in the Commonwealth Games in 1974 in Christchurch , New Zealand . Tonga did not participate in first two — 2000 Edinburgh and 2004 Bendigo — Commonwealth Youth Games . It entered nine athletes ( two men and seven women ) in the 2008 Commonwealth Youth Games in Pune , India , competed in athletics , table tennis and tennis ; but failed to win any medal . Tonga was one of the 63 nations that participated in the 2011 Commonwealth Youth Games held in the British Crown Dependency of Isle of Man from 7 to 13 September 2011 , making its second Commonwealth Youth Games appearance . Tonga finished last in the medal table , in 22nd , sharing the position with nine other Commonwealth Games Associations . 
 = = Delegation = = 
 The Tonga Association of Sports and National Olympic Committee selected a delegation consisting of three officials and four competitors for the 2011 Commonwealth Youth Games . None of the athletes had previously participated in the Commonwealth Youth Games . The first , Ana Katiloka , was the sole athlete to represent the nation in athletics . Two pugilists — Tevita Pomale and Heamasi Sekona — competed in the middleweight and light heavyweight classes . Irene Prescott , as the only swimmer from Tongan side , participated in two events . Also in the delegation as a chef de mission of Tonga for the Games was Hiko <unk> . The delegation was also accompanied by the head boxing coach Lolo <unk> . The final member of the delegation was Sione Prescott as an extra official . 
 = = Athletics = = 
 Athletics events were held in the National Sports Center Athletics Stadium . Ana Katiloka represented Tonga in the triple jump event of athletics . This event took place on 11 September 2011 . Katiloka 's best jump in the event was 10 @.@ 41 m , and she finished last ( eighth ) in the final standings . The gold medal in this event was won by Nat <unk> of Australia with a best jump of 12 @.@ 55 m . 
 = = Boxing = = 
 Tonga 's boxing squad consisted of two pugilists , Tevita Pomale and Heamasi Sekona , who participated in the middleweight and light heavyweight classes , respectively . Pomale was eliminated in the first round after losing to Cody Crowley of Canada . Sekona won a bronze medal in the light heavyweight class without winning a single match . He received a bye in his first match ( quarterfinals ) , and lost to Calum Evans of Wales in the semifinals by a points difference of 23 – 14 . The semifinal appearance of Sekona guaranteed him a bronze medal , which he shared with Jack Massey of England — another semifinalist who lost to gold medalist of the event , Brandon Allan of Australia . 
 Bye = Athlete received a bye . 
 = = Swimming = = 
 Irene Prescott was the sole swimmer in the delegation of Tonga . She competed in two events , the 50 – and 100 m <unk> . Prescott took a time of 33 @.@ 52 to complete her preliminary heat of the 50 m backstroke and finished in 18th place , not high enough to ensure a berth in the final . She was also eliminated in the preliminary heat of 100 m backstroke after ranking 13th with a time of 1 : 13 @.@ 42 . 
 = Italian cruiser Puglia = 
 Puglia was a protected cruiser of the Italian Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) . She was the last of six Regioni @-@ class ships , all of which were named for regions of Italy . She was built in Taranto between October 1893 and May 1901 , when she was commissioned into the fleet . The ship was equipped with a main armament of four 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) and six 12 cm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) guns , and she could steam at a speed of 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) . 
 Puglia served abroad for much of her early career , including periods in South American and East Asian waters . She saw action in the Italo @-@ Turkish War in 1911 – 12 , primarily in the Red Sea . During the war she bombarded Ottoman ports in Arabia and assisted in enforcing a blockade on maritime traffic in the area . She was still in service during World War I ; the only action in which she participated was the evacuation of units from the Serbian Army from Durazzo in February 1916 . During the evacuation , she bombarded the pursuing Austro @-@ Hungarian Army . 
 After the war , Puglia was involved in the occupation of the Dalmatian coast , and in 1920 her captain was murdered in a violent confrontation in Split with Croatian nationalists . The old cruiser was sold for scrapping in 1923 , but much of her bow was preserved at the Vittoriale degli italiani museum . 
 = = Design = = 
 Puglia was slightly larger than her sister ships . 88 @.@ 25 meters ( 289 @.@ 5 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 12 @.@ 13 m ( 39 @.@ 8 ft ) and a draft of 5 @.@ 45 m ( 17 @.@ 9 ft ) . She displaced up to 3 @,@ 110 metric tons ( 3 @,@ 060 long tons ; 3 @,@ 430 short tons ) at full load . Her propulsion system consisted of a pair of vertical triple @-@ expansion engines , with steam supplied by four cylindrical water @-@ tube boilers . Puglia was capable of steaming at a top speed of 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) . The ship had a cruising radius of about 2 @,@ 100 nautical miles ( 3 @,@ 900 km ; 2 @,@ 400 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . She had a crew of between 213 – 78 . 
 Puglia was armed with a main battery of four 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) L / 40 guns mounted singly , with two side by side forward and two side by side aft . Six 12 cm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) L / 40 guns were placed between them , with three on each broadside . Light armament included eight 57 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) guns , eight 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) guns , and a pair of machine guns . She was also equipped with two 45 cm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes . Puglia was protected by a 25 mm ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) thick deck , unlike her sisters which all had decks twice as thick . Her conning tower had 50 mm thick sides . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Puglia was built by the new Regia Marina shipyard in Taranto , the first major warship to be built there . Her keel was laid down in October 1893 , and she was launched on 22 September 1898 . Fitting @-@ out work proved to be a lengthy process , and she was not ready for service until 26 May 1901 . By this time , her design was over ten years old and the ship was rapidly becoming obsolescent ; in comparison , Germany had already commissioned the world 's first light cruisers , the Gazelle class , which were significantly faster and better armed . This new type of ship rapidly replaced protected cruisers like Puglia . 
 Puglia was immediately deployed to East Asian waters following her commissioning . In July , she was in Australia during the visit of the British Prince George , son of then @-@ King Edward VI . The ship was still on the China station as of 1904 . Puglia was present in Rio de Janeiro in January 1908 when the Great White Fleet arrived in the port . She greeted the American fleet with a 15 @-@ gun salute . The German cruiser SMS Bremen was also moored in the harbor at the time , as was the Brazilian fleet . 
 = = = Italo @-@ Turkish War = = = 
 At the outbreak of Italo @-@ Turkish War in September 1911 , Puglia was stationed in eastern Africa , where Italy had colonies in Eritrea and Somaliland . She was joined there by her sisters Italian cruiser Elba and Liguria and the cruisers Piemonte and Etna . Puglia and the cruiser Calabria , which had recently arrived from Asian waters , bombarded the Turkish port of Aqaba on 19 November to disperse a contingent of Ottoman soldiers there . Hostilities were temporarily ceased while the British King George V passed through the Red Sea following his coronation ceremony in India — the ceasefire lasted until 26 November . 
 In early 1912 , the Italian Red Sea fleet searched for a group of seven Ottoman gunboats thought to be planning an attack on Eritrea , though they were in fact immobilized due to a lack of coal . Puglia and Calabria carried out diversionary bombardments against Jebl Tahr , and Al Luḩayyah , while Piemonte and the destroyers Artigliere and Garibaldino searched for the gunboats . On 7 January , they found the gunboats and quickly sank four in the Battle of Kunfuda Bay ; the other three were forced to beach to avoid sinking as well . Puglia and the rest of the Italian ships returned to bombarding the Turkish ports in the Red Sea before declaring a blockade of the city of Al Hudaydah on 26 January . The cruiser fleet in the Red Sea then began a campaign of coastal bombardments of Ottoman ports in the area . A blockade was proclaimed of the Ottoman ports , which included Al Luḩayyah and Al Hudaydah . The Ottomans eventually agreed to surrender in October , ending the war . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 Italy declared neutrality at the start of World War I , but by July 1915 , the Triple Entente had convinced the Italians to enter the war against the Central Powers . Admiral Paolo Thaon di Revel , the Italian naval chief of staff , believed that Austro @-@ Hungarian submarines could operate too effectively in the narrow waters of the Adriatic , which could also be easily seeded with minefields . The threat from these underwater weapons was too serious for him to use the fleet in an active way . Instead , Revel decided to implement blockade at the relatively safer southern end of the Adriatic with the main fleet , while smaller vessels , such as the MAS boats , conducted raids on Austro @-@ Hungarian ships and installations . 
 The closest Puglia came to engaging a hostile vessel came on 27 January 1915 , when while patrolling off Durazzo , she encountered the Austro @-@ Hungarian scout cruiser Novara , but the Austro @-@ Hungarian ship retreated without either vessel firing a shot . In late February 1916 , Puglia and the cruiser Libia covered the withdrawal of elements of the Serbian Army from Durazzo . The Austro @-@ Hungarian Army was pursuing the retreating Serbians , and Puglia provided gunfire support to delay the Austro @-@ Hungarian advance . She was converted into a minelayer later that year . She entered service in this role on 1 July , and she remained on active duty through the early 1920s . 
 After the war , Puglia had been assigned to patrol the Dalmatian coast . On 11 July 1920 , men from the ship became involved in the unrest in Split . During a violent confrontation with a group of Croats , the ship 's captain and a sailor were shot and killed . Puglia was sold for scrapping on 22 March 1923 . While the ship was being dismantled , the Italian dictator Benito Mussolini donated the ship 's bow section to the writer and ardent nationalist Gabriele D 'Annunzio , who had it installed at his estate as part of the Vittoriale degli italiani museum . 
 = Star Trek : Insurrection = 
 Star Trek : Insurrection is a 1998 American science fiction film released by Paramount Pictures . It is the ninth feature film in the Star Trek film franchise , and is the third film in the series to star the cast of the television series Star Trek : The Next Generation . In addition to that cast , F. Murray Abraham , Donna Murphy and Anthony Zerbe also appeared in main roles . The crew of the USS Enterprise @-@ E rebel against Starfleet after they discover a conspiracy with a species known as the Son 'a to steal the peaceful Ba 'ku 's planet for its rejuvenating properties . 
 Paramount Studios sought a change in pace after the previous film , Star Trek : First Contact . Michael Piller was asked to write the script , which was created from story ideas by Piller and executive producer Rick Berman . The story 's first drafts featured the Romulans , and the Son 'a and Ba 'ku were introduced in the third draft . After Ira Steven Behr reviewed the script , Piller revised it and added a subplot involving a romantic interest for Jean @-@ Luc Picard . The ending was further revised after test screenings . 
 The special effects depicting outer space were completely computer generated , a first for a Star Trek film . The Ba 'ku village was fully built on location at Lake Sherwood , California , but suffered weather damage . Sets from the television series Star Trek : Voyager and Star Trek : Deep Space Nine were reused and redressed . Michael Westmore created the make @-@ up for the new alien races , and Robert Blackman revised the Starfleet dress uniform designs . Sanja <unk> Hayes created costumes for the Ba 'ku from cellulose fibers , which were baked and glued together . Jerry Goldsmith produced the film 's score ; his fourth for the franchise . 
 Insurrection was the highest @-@ grossing film on its opening weekend , making US $ 22 @.@ 4 million . The film made over $ 70 @.@ 1 million in the United States and an additional $ 42 @.@ 4 million in other territories , for a theatrical run of about $ 112 @.@ 5 million worldwide . Critical responses to the film were mixed ; the performance of Patrick Stewart and the directing of Jonathan Frakes were praised , while other critics compared it to an extended episode of television series . Insurrection was nominated for both a Saturn Award and a Hugo Award , but the only award it received was a Youth in Film Award for Michael Welch . The film has been released on videotape , DVD and Blu @-@ ray home video formats . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Lieutenant Commander Data ( Brent Spiner ) is temporarily transferred to an undercover mission observing the peaceful Ba 'ku people . While on their planet , he malfunctions and reveals the presence of the joint Federation – Son 'a task force observing the Ba 'ku . Admiral Matthew Dougherty ( Anthony Zerbe ) contacts the USS Enterprise @-@ E to obtain Data 's schematics but adamantly states the presence of the Enterprise is not needed . Captain Picard decides to ignore these orders and takes the Enterprise to capture Data . After stopping Data , Captain Jean @-@ Luc Picard ( Patrick Stewart ) becomes suspicious of Dougherty 's insistence that the Enterprise is no longer needed . His crew investigates the cause of Data 's malfunction . They discover that the Ba 'ku are technologically advanced , but have rejected its use to live simpler lives . Due to unique radiation or " <unk> particles " emanating from their planet 's rings , they are effectively immortal . Dougherty 's allies , the Son 'a , are a decrepit race who use medical techniques to prevent death ; their excessive use of cosmetic surgery gives them a mummified appearance . The Enterprise crew also begin to experience the rejuvenation effects of the planet : Lt. Commander Geordi La Forge ( LeVar Burton ) finds his eyes have regenerated and he no longer requires ocular implants ; Commander William Riker ( Jonathan Frakes ) and Counselor Deanna Troi ( Marina Sirtis ) rekindle their long @-@ abandoned relationship ; and Picard develops a romantic relationship with the Ba 'ku woman Anij ( Donna Murphy ) . 
 Data and Picard discover a submerged and cloaked Federation ship containing a gigantic holodeck set up to recreate the Ba 'ku village . Data 's malfunction stems from a Son 'a attack , received when he discovered the vessel . Picard confronts Dougherty and learns that top Federation officers and the Son 'a secretly planned to deceptively move the Ba 'ku to the ship and forcibly relocate them to another planet , allowing the Son 'a to collect the rejuvenating radiation ( but poisoning the planet in the process ) . Dougherty orders the Enterprise to leave . Picard states the rejuvenation benefit of the radiation does not justify Dougherty 's plans for the Ba 'ku and violates the Prime Directive . He plans to alert the Federation of the forced relocation . 
 Picard is joined by some of his crew to help the Ba 'ku escape from being abducted while Riker takes the Enterprise to a transmission range and communicate the violation to Star Fleet . The Son 'a send robotic probes to locate and capture the fleeing Ba 'ku . The Son 'a leader , <unk> Ru 'afo ( F. Murray Abraham ) , convinces Dougherty to allow two Son 'a ships to attack the Enterprise . Riker defeats the attacking ships and the Enterprise escapes . Their plan exposed , Ru 'afo insists upon harvesting the radiation source immediately . Picard , Anij , and several Ba 'ku are transported as prisoners onto the Son 'a ship . Picard reveals to Dougherty that the Son 'a and the Ba 'ku are the same race and involving the Federation in a blood feud . The Son 'a are a splinter faction of Ba 'ku who gave up their bucolic existence a century earlier to embrace the use of technology . They attempted to seize power but failed , and the Ba 'ku elders exiled them from the planet , denying them the rejuvenating effects of the rings . The Son 'a developed an artificial and imperfect means to extend their lives at the cost of disfigurement . Ru 'afo kills Admiral Dougherty when he backs out of the plan and Ru 'afo proceeds with his plan . 
 While Picard is escorted to be executed , he convinces the Son 'a Gallatin ( Gregg Henry ) to help him stop Ru 'afo . Picard masterminds a ruse to transport Ru 'afo and his bridge crew to the <unk> and shutdown the harvester . Ru 'afo discovers the deception and transports to the radiation harvester ship to manually restart the process . Picard follows and sets the harvester to self @-@ destruct , which kills Ru 'afo while Picard is rescued by the Enterprise . The remaining Son 'a are forgiven and welcomed back by the Ba 'ku . Picard arranges a meeting between Gallatin and his Ba 'ku mother . The Enterprise crew take a moment to enjoy their rejuvenated selves before returning to their previous mission . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Patrick Stewart thought that the first Next Generation film , Star Trek Generations , was too much like a television episode but thought that his character , Captain Jean @-@ Luc Picard , was redefined as a " movie hero " in Star Trek : First Contact . He was concerned that in the new film , the character would return to that scene in the television series . Michael Piller said that he felt that in order to be a hero , Picard " should be acting out of a moral and ethical mindset , and stand for principles that are important to mankind " . Stewart was later pleased with the film 's romantic sub @-@ plot , calling it " charming " and saying that he was " feeling very good about it . " He thought that the film had a lighter tone than previous films , saying , " It shows our crew having a little more fun than we normally see them doing " . Stewart was disappointed that a scene in which Picard and Anij kiss was cut from the final version of the film , saying that " It was a studio decision , but still somewhat inexplicable to me as I feel the audience were waiting for some kind of romantic culmination to the relationship , which did happen and was extremely pleasant . " Stewart received a producer 's credit on the film . 
 Jonathan Frakes appeared as Commander William Riker , and as with First Contact he directed the project . Brent Spiner starred as Lieutenant Commander Data . Spiner had asked for his character to be killed off in Insurrection because he was concerned that he was getting too old to play the role . His copy of the script came with a note from the production team saying , " Sorry , kill you later " . The underwater scene required Spiner to wear more make @-@ up than usual because it needed to be waterproof . LeVar Burton reprised his role of Lieutenant Commander Geordi La Forge ; a month before the release of Insurrection he appeared in the role in a guest appearance in the Star Trek : Voyager episode " Timeless " . 
 Michael Dorn returned as Lieutenant Commander Worf ; Dorn had portrayed that character in Deep Space Nine since 1995 . Reprising her role as Doctor Beverly Crusher , Gates McFadden said that " Shooting Star Trek and getting paid to do it is great . But what 's actually changed my life the most is travelling around and ... being a tiny little part of this huge mythology that has changed people 's lives , in many ways for the better . " Marina Sirtis appeared once more as Counselor Deanna Troi . She was positive about the film , saying " we 've been involved with this for eleven years , we 've done 179 episodes , three movies , and there are still surprises . There are more layers in this movie , it 's not as black and white . It goes back to a lot of what Gene Roddenberry felt about Star Trek – I think he 's going to be very happy up there when he sees this movie . " 
 Before the casting process , no actors had been considered for the roles of the Son 'a leader , the Ba 'ku woman , and the Starfleet admiral . The Son 'a leader , <unk> Ru 'afo , was portrayed by F. Murray Abraham , who won an Academy Award for his performance in Amadeus . Abraham was given the role without an audition . Abraham said of the franchise , " I was around when the series was first introduced to television and it was a hoot " , He praised his make @-@ up and prosthetics , saying " The idea that you can be somebody else behind the mask is an extraordinary feeling – it 's very primitive and mysterious . A gap opens somewhere in the brain and it encourages wildness . It had me chewing at the scenery " . He was particularly pleased to be working with Patrick Stewart . 
 Donna Murphy played the Ba 'ku woman Anij , who is Picard 's love interest . Eighty actresses auditioned for the role , which was awarded to Murphy who had previously won two Tony Awards for her roles in the Broadway musicals Passion and The King and I. Murphy was such a favorite of Frakes and the producers that after auditioning , only a small number of other actresses were seen . She said of the role , " I feel a great honor and responsibility to be a part of this film , because I know that the Star Trek audience has such a devotion to and affection for these richly drawn characters . " 
 Anthony Zerbe originally auditioned for the role of Ru 'afo , and was considered to be the best choice for it . However , the production team decided instead to cast him in the role of Admiral Matthew Dougherty . During Zerbe 's audition , instead of reading the lines provided , he recited Dante 's Inferno before seamlessly moving into the script . Frakes and the producers unanimously decided to award him the part of Dougherty . In the film 's smaller roles , Stephanie <unk> played Ensign Kell Perim and Daniel Hugh Kelly appeared as <unk> . Gregg Henry appeared as Gallatin , and child actor Michael Welch played the Ba 'ku child <unk> . Michael Horton returned as the tactical officer he portrayed in First Contact ; his character was called Lieutenant Daniels in this film . Rage Against the Machine and Audioslave guitarist Tom Morello played a Son 'a warrior . Morello 's make @-@ up regime began at 5am , at which time he said he would normally " be crawling back into my coffin " . 
 Several of the film 's actors had previously appeared in the Star Trek franchise . Bruce French , who portrayed Son 'a Officer Number 1 , appeared as Sabin <unk> in the The Next Generation episode " The Drumhead " and as the Ocampa doctor in the Voyager pilot episode . Son 'a Officer Number 3 was played by Joseph Ruskin , who appeared in four episodes across the Star Trek franchise : The Original Series episode " The Gamesters of Triskelion " , and the Deep Space Nine episodes " Improbable Cause " and " Looking for par 'Mach in All the Wrong Places " and the Voyager episode " Gravity " . McKenzie Westmore , daughter of make @-@ up supervisor Michael Westmore , played a Ba 'ku woman . She previously appeared as a child in The Next Generation season one episode " When the Bough Breaks " and as Ensign Jenkins in the Voyager episode " Warhead " . Scenes cut from the film would have featured two of the actors who played Ferengi on Deep Space Nine : Max Grodénchik , more familiar as Rom , was to have appeared as a Trill in the library scene . Armin Shimerman reprised his role as Quark in a scene in which he tries to set up <unk> on the Ba 'ku planet at the end of the film . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development and writing = = = 
 Following the success of First Contact , Paramount Pictures wanted a change in pace to give the follow @-@ up film a lighter tone . Since Star Trek IV : The Voyage Home was light in tone , yet was the most successful of all the Star Trek films at the box office , Paramount reasoned that this success could be repeated with the new film . Michael Piller was asked to write the script , and accepted the position . Piller was in development hell with another project which he wished to get out of . He wanted to give the crew a feeling of family , with a story featuring overtones of the Joseph Conrad novel Heart of Darkness . Rick Berman wanted to see Picard undertake a rescue mission in a similar manner to the 1937 film , The Prisoner of Zenda . Berman also originated an idea to have Picard kidnapped , and replaced with a surgically modified imposter . Piller was doubtful about Berman 's idea , reasoning that the audience would not want to see an entire film in which Picard is not the lead star – the character would look like Patrick Stewart but would be different . A further idea from Berman would have seen the return of Lore , last seen in the episode " Descent " , in a film which was described as similar in tone to Star Trek II : The Wrath of Khan . 
 Piller initially thought to write a Fountain of Youth @-@ type story , later saying , " Everybody 's consumed with images of youth . There 's commercials , plastic surgery – our culture seems obsessed with youth . " He called the initial treatment " Heart of Lightness " . Eric A. Stillwell was Piller 's executive assistant and script coordinator . When Piller agreed to write a book about the making of Insurrection , Pocket Books hired Stillwell as Piller 's typist and research assistant . The book went unpublished , and it was alleged that Paramount Pictures suppressed it . Following Piller 's death in 2005 , the book was published on the internet . 
 Piller created a first draft treatment for the film entitled Star Trek : Stardust , with the title taken from the song by Hoagy Carmichael after hearing Nat King Cole 's version on the radio . The treatment featured Picard resigning from Starfleet after he is sent to retrieve a population and their youth @-@ giving power , and bring them to an alien government , and included a betrayal by Picard 's rogue colleague . The draft went through several versions with only the crew 's mission and the Briar Patch – named after the area from the Br 'er Rabbit stories – remaining . Berman suggested that Data become the renegade crew @-@ member that Picard must deal with . The plot was similar to The Next Generation episode " Homeward " in that a people were being relocated through use of a holodeck . The use of a duck blind to observe cultures was previously used in the episode " Who Watches the Watchers " . 
 In one draft , Picard kills Data early in the film , and the android is later resurrected to help the Captain in the finale . The first two drafts featured the Romulans as the protagonists , since they had never prominently appeared in a Star Trek film . The second draft was seen by Jonathan Dolgen at the studio ; Dolgen was not pleased and Patrick Stewart thought that it would have been only suitable for a television episode . In the third draft , the Son 'a were introduced as the children of the Ba 'ku and the alien race that wanted to plunder the planet . That version also included the crew sub @-@ plots , such as the Troi @-@ Riker romance and the regeneration of La Forge 's eyes . Stewart , who was concerned that the film was a step back in scope from First Contact , was consulted on the treatments . 
 Piller drafted the first version of the script and asked Ira Steven Behr , executive producer of Star Trek : Deep Space Nine , to review it . Behr was critical of the script , describing the Son 'a as " paper tigers " . Piller said that " I knew he was right . There 's no question that first draft was trying to tell two stories , and that 's one too many for a movie . " Piller re @-@ drafted the script , adding a romantic subplot for Picard in the shape of Anij , a Ba 'ku woman . He added gravitas to the Son 'a to make them more menacing , and the ending was changed to include a massive Son 'a collector ship and a confrontation between Picard and Ru 'afo aboard the ship . A version of the script was subsequently leaked onto the internet . At the same time , Piller and Berman were exploring titles for the film – including Prime Directive , The Directive , The Resignation , The Enemy Within , Breach of Promise , Dereliction of Duty and Apostasy – because they reasoned that they could not submit it to the studio under the title of Stardust . They could not settle on a title so they submitted it as Star Trek IX . 
 The studio was pleased with the post @-@ Behr version of the script , which was the first version of the script they saw – having previously only seen pre @-@ script treatments . In a memo to Piller , it was described as " easily the funniest and sexiest Star Trek story to date " . They gave Piller a series of directions , including a request for a resolution to the Troi and Riker romance and for the character of Reginald Barclay to be replaced with expanded roles either for Beverley Crusher , Worf , or a new character . 
 Patrick Stewart sought a change to the script to have the crew defend the Ba 'ku village in the manner of the Battle of the Alamo instead of fleeing into the mountains . Piller could not find a feasible way to include this in the script , and the budget ruled out the creation of Alamo @-@ like structures in the mountains . Several titles were considered for the film as shooting approached . Star Trek : Where Time Stands Still , Star Trek : Forever and Star Trek : Beyond Paradise were all considered but were rejected . Piller 's favorite was Star Trek : Sacred Honor , but the studio rejected this because they were concerned that it sounded too religious . When shooting began , the film was still called Star Trek IX . 
 The final version of the script was distributed to the cast , but Patrick Stewart did not receive a copy . Berman was concerned that if anyone had a problem with it , they would call Stewart to complain and it would appear as though Stewart was being left out because he had criticized the story . LeVar Burton called Stewart to praise the script . Stewart was sent a copy and requested a meeting to discuss changes . Piller feared the worst , but after a twenty @-@ minute meeting with Stewart , who requested several dialogue changes , the script was finalized . During pre @-@ production , the marketing department wanted to decide a title , preferring Star Trek : Revolution . Alan Spencer – a friend of Piller – suggested Insurrection , which was selected from a choice of Insurrection , Rebellion , High Treason and Act of Treason . 
 After filming was complete , test screenings were held , and the production team became aware of a problem with the ending . In the original ending , Ru 'afo is ejected into space from the Son 'a collector ship and de @-@ ages rapidly as he floats amongst the rings of the planet Ba 'ku . The revised ending saw the Enterprise swoop in at the last minute to save Picard and destroy the collector ship with Ru 'afo aboard . The studio liked the new ending but wanted a bigger space battle . The production team agreed providing they could postpone the release to allow enough time for this . Because the studio wanted Insurrection to be released in time for Christmas , no further revisions were made to the ending . 
 = = = Visual effects = = = 
 Insurrection was the first Star Trek film with space @-@ based effects produced entirely using computer @-@ generated imagery ( CGI ) . While CGI had been used for specific effects since Star Trek II : The Wrath of Khan ; Insurrection was the first Star Trek film to be made without using physical models of spacecraft . Santa Barbara Studios produced the effects , which included CGI starship models . The texture on the model of the Enterprise @-@ E was created from a series of close @-@ up photographs of the model Enterprise which had been used in First Contact . The planet @-@ based effects , such as phaser fire , transporter effects and the Son 'a drones were created by Blue Sky Studios . Peter Lauritson was the co @-@ producer for post @-@ production . 
 Herman Zimmerman was the production designer , and had three months to design and construct 55 full sets for the film – eighteen more than used in the previous film in the series . Zimmerman said that it was " probably the most scenery we 've built for a Star Trek motion picture since the first one , when everything was brand new " . The Ba 'ku village was built in full scale on location at Lake Sherwood , California , with architectural designs combining Thai , Balinese and Polynesian styles . The village included a bakery , a farm with a full irrigation system , a city hall , and a city square which was referred to as the " rotunda " . The location shoot lasted for six weeks . The buildings included sections built with styrofoam , which were cut out using computer aided design and computer @-@ aided manufacturing techniques . These were covered in <unk> to make them look as though they were made from stone , but they were not made waterproof . The set suffered water damage following record @-@ levels of rainfall during the spring of 1998 . The foam warped as it dried out in the sun , causing delays in shooting while repairs were made . 
 Sets built for use in Star Trek : Voyager were redressed to appear as the Enterprise @-@ E in Insurrection ; Captain Janeway 's quarters became Picard 's , the Voyager briefing room became Riker 's quarters , and part of the Voyager engineering set became the Enterprise library . The interior of the <unk> manned by Data was originally the cockpit of the Voyager 's shuttlecraft , while the interior of the Enterprise shuttlecraft used the interior set from a Star Trek : Deep Space Nine Runabout . Filming began on March 31 , 1998 and concluded on July 2 . According to Frakes , half of the time shooting was spent on location . The scenes in which the Enterprise crew and the Ba 'ku take refuge in the mountains were shot on location above Lake Sabrina in the Sierra Nevada in locations which could only be reached by helicopter . The location was around 10 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 000 m ) above sea level , and a medic was on standby with oxygen if the cast or crew required it . 
 After filming , parts of the interior sets of the So 'na ships were added using CGI . Stage 15 on the Paramount lot was used for the climactic scene between Picard and Ru 'afo . Because of the dangers of the four @-@ story scaffolding @-@ like set , the actors were attached by safety cables at all times . Paramount 's B tank – which was used to represent San Francisco Bay in Star Trek IV : The Voyage Home – was used to shoot footage of Picard , Data and Anij at the Ba 'ku lake . For a scene in which Data walks along a lake @-@ bed , the actor 's tricorder prop was covered with plastic to make it watertight . 
 = = = Costumes and make @-@ up = = = 
 Make @-@ up supervisor Michael Westmore aimed to create a look for the Son 'a that was not exaggerated . He consulted several sculptors ; Dean Jones , who was on the production staff for Star Trek : Deep Space Nine , created the look . The prosthetics for Ru 'afo consisted of overlapping layers that were stretched over Abraham 's head . Westmore said Abraham 's prosthetics was " like a rubber band , F. Murray Abraham could turn his head and the skin would look translucent . It was so thin , and the layers were pulling on each other . " The two other aliens on the Son 'a vessels also had specific prosthetic make @-@ up designs created . The Tarlac 's look was based reptilian skin , while the Ellora required only nose and forehead prosthetics . 
 The film also gave costume designer Robert Blackman an opportunity to address issues with the Starfleet dress uniforms , which Blackman had changed on several occasions during The Next Generation . The uniforms appeared for the first time in the episode " Lonely Among Us " , and were based on the 18th century designs for the Royal Navy . For Insurrection , Blackman initially thought of creating a uniform with short jackets in blue , red and gold , which he later said was " not a good idea " . His eventual design removed the color palettes for specific divisions . Blackman said , " No matter what , white over black has a formal look to it . " Sanja <unk> Hayes created the remaining new costumes for the film . She avoided making the Ba 'ku look too cute , and used material made from cellulose fiber specifically created for Insurrection . She said it was organic , and was simply cooked and then glued together . The Son 'a costumes were made from layers of crushed velvet and metal strips . The female bodysuits were made of latex ; Hayes wanted them to appear " sexy , but not vulgar " and described the outfits as " very conservative " . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The score for Insurrection was composed by Jerry Goldsmith ; his fourth score for the franchise . Goldsmith continued using the march and Klingon themes written for Star Trek : The Motion Picture in 1979 , adding new themes and variations . Insurrection opens with Alexander Courage 's Star Trek : The Original Series fanfare , introducing a six @-@ note motif used in many of the film 's action sequences . The Ba 'ku are scored with a pastoral theme with repeating harps , string sections and a woodwind solo . The Ba 'ku 's ability to slow time was accompanied with a variation of this music . 
 Goldsmith used quick bursts of brass music to accompany the starship sequences . For scenes in which observers are watching the Ba 'ku unseen , Goldsmith used a " spying theme " that resembles his conspiracy theme from Capricorn One . Composed of a piano , timpani percussion , and brass , the theme builds until it is interrupted by the action theme as Data opens fire . Goldsmith did not write a motif for the Son 'a , but scored the action sequence without designating the Son 'a as an antagonist , suggesting the film 's revelation that the Son 'a and Ba 'ku are related . The film 's climax is scored with the action theme , which is balanced with " sense of wonder " music similar to cues from The Motion Picture . 
 One scene in the film shows Patrick Stewart and Brent Spiner conducting a duet of A British Tar from the Gilbert and Sullivan comic @-@ opera H.M.S. Pinafore . This replaced the original idea of Picard and Data reciting scenes from Shakespeare 's play King Lear . Stewart had suggested that they sing Three Little Maids from School are we from The Mikado instead , but the producers described this as " too vulgar " . Stewart and Spiner had previously sung together on Spiner 's 1991 album Ol ' Yellow Eyes Is Back . 
 In 2013 , GNP Crescendo Records re @-@ released the soundtrack for the film as an expanded collector 's edition [ <unk> <unk> ] , featuring previously unreleased tracks by Goldsmith plus four bonus tracks . 
 Track listing for the expanded edition ( tracks in italics also on the original release ) : 
 Ba 'ku Village ( 6 : 53 ) 
 Out of Orbit / Take Us In ( 1 : 44 ) 
 Come Out ( 2 : 34 ) 
 In Custody ( 1 : 14 ) 
 Warp Capability / The Planet / Children 's Story ( 2 : 33 ) 
 The Holodeck ( 4 : 35 ) 
 How Old Are You / New Sight ( 6 : 14 ) 
 Lost Ship / Prepare the Ship ( 2 : 39 ) 
 As Long As We Can ( 1 : 40 ) 
 Not Functioning / Send Your Ships ( 2 : 55 ) 
 Growing Up / Wild Flowers / Photon Torpedo ( 2 : 55 ) 
 The Drones Attack ( 4 : 15 ) 
 The Riker Maneuver ( 3 : 15 ) 
 Stay With Me ( 1 : 48 ) 
 The Same Race ( 2 : 50 ) 
 The Collector ( 1 : 10 ) 
 No Threat ( 4 : 18 ) 
 Tractor Beam ( : 38 ) 
 The Healing Process ( revised ) ( 5 : 04 ) 
 The Healing Process ( original version ) ( 7 : 17 ) 
 End Credits ( 5 : 30 ) 
 Ba 'ku Village ( alternate ending ) ( 3 : 53 ) 
 The Holodeck ( alternate opening ) ( 1 : 12 ) 
 Growing Up ( alternate ) ( 1 : 21 ) 
 Tractor Beam ( alternate ) ( : 38 ) 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Release = = = 
 The world premiere of Insurrection launched the 1998 <unk> film festival . It went on general release in North America on December 11 , 1998 . The film grossed $ 22 @.@ 4 million over the opening weekend ; the most of any film during that period . It averaged a total of $ 8 @,@ 417 per location across 2 @,@ 620 theaters , but fell short of the opening weekend takings of both First Contact and Generations , which were $ 30 @.@ 7 million and $ 23 @.@ 1 million respectively . 
 Insurrection was the highest @-@ grossing film during the first week of its release in the United States , and stayed in the top ten for a further three weeks . During its first week of release in the UK , it was the highest @-@ grossing film , exceeding the takings of the Will Smith film Enemy of the State . It went on to gross $ 70 @,@ 187 @,@ 658 in the US and $ 42 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 overseas for a total of $ 112 @,@ 587 @,@ 658 worldwide against a $ 58 million budget . It was the first Star Trek film to be promoted through the official website , which was called the " Star Trek Continuum " at the time . Following the success of the film , Rick Berman said that he wanted to release the next film in the series three years after Insurrection . Referencing Stanley Kubrick 's 2001 : A Space Odyssey , he said , " The notion of releasing a science fiction film in the year 2001 is very seductive . " 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The critical response to Insurrection was mixed . Review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes gave the film a score of 55 % based on 67 reviews , with critic consensus being that , " Although not terrible , the sluggishly paced Insurrection plays like an extended episode of the TV series . " The Los Angeles Daily News said that the film had the " bare bones of one of those pseudo @-@ philosophical political allegories Trek has always done so entertainingly . But the movie blows it . " It praised the directing of Jonathan Frakes and the computer generated special effects and gave the film two and a half stars overall . The Daily Herald also gave the film two and a half stars , describing it as a " slickly made " movie with a plot " scaled down to its TV roots " , and criticized the " frivolous " romance between Riker and Troi . The Washington Times gave the film one and a half stars , saying that it was " consistently flat @-@ footed and slow on the uptake " , and that there was " ramshackle confusion during the climactic scenes " . 
 The Daily Mail praised the moral point the film was attempting to raise as well as the acting abilities of Patrick Stewart , giving the movie four stars . The Scottish Daily Record praised F. Murray Abraham and described Anthony Zerbe as " ever @-@ dependable " . It said the plot was good , but that it was simply an extended episode of The Next Generation , and gave it a score of six out of ten . The British newspaper The People also said it was an extended television episode . 
 The Independent said that Insurrection " never stops being familiarly jolly and antiquated " , and called the entire Star Trek film franchise " old @-@ fashioned " . The Washington Post also called the film old fashioned , but " in the best sense of the word " , and said that the film did what the " doctor – make that Dr. ' Bones ' McCoy – ordered " . British journalist Simon Rose , writing for The Daily Mirror was more critical of the film , saying that it failed to break the odd @-@ numbered Star Trek film curse , and that it was " feeble " , " moribund " and " tedious " . However , Josh Spiegel writing for The Buffalo News said that Insurrection broke the odd @-@ numbered film rule . Further criticism came from the Birmingham Evening Mail , which said that it was " an adult form of entertainment equivalent to Teletubbies for babies " , and that there were " lots of repetition , rubbery faces , gibberish dialogue , characters leaping up and down in funny suits and some very basic effects " . The reviewer gave the film two stars for fans , and none for non @-@ fans . In Folklore / Cinema : Popular Film as Vernacular Culture , the actions of Data and the Ba 'ku child <unk> in Insurrection are seen as " a metamorphosis motif where a child becomes <unk> and a computer / android becomes more childlike " . Data specifically " is a metaphor for a child who seeks to understand what being human means and then , like the velveteen rabbit , wishes to become . From confronting his father and evil brother to finding his mother , Data also represents the potential within all of us to quest for a fuller humanity " . 
 = = = Accolades and nominations = = = 
 The film was nominated for the Saturn Award for Best Science Fiction Film at the 25th Saturn Awards ; the prize was shared by Armageddon and Dark City . In 1999 , it was nominated for the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation , which went to The Truman Show . It was nominated for Best Family Feature Film : Drama at the 20th Youth in Film Awards and won the individual award for Best Performance in a Feature Film : Supporting Young Actor for Michael Welch . 
 = = Home media = = 
 The first home media release of the film was made simultaneously on VHS and DVD on May 11 , 1999 , in the United States , and outside the US on VHS later that year . The film was released on June 5 , 2000 , in the United Kingdom , and was one of the first titles to be released on DVD by Paramount Home Entertainment International in Europe and Japan . 
 A video game which followed up on the events of Insurrection was released in 2000 . Entitled Star Trek : Hidden Evil , it was set nine months after the events depicted in the film . In its narrative , Son 'a colony has been created on Ba 'ku , and an archaeological discovery which shares similarities with The Next Generation episode " The Chase " is made . The game was developed by Presto Studios and published by Activision . 
 An Insurrection " Special Collector 's Edition " two @-@ disc set was released in 2005 at the same time as three other Next Generation films and Star Trek : Enterprise 's fourth season , marking the first time that every film and episode of the franchise was available on home video . The film was presented with the same technical specifications as the previous release and a new DTS soundtrack , but it shipped without an audio commentary . The DVD includes a text track by Michael and Denise Okuda that provides production trivia and relevant facts about the Star Trek universe . The second disc contains six " making @-@ of " videos , including one about the construction of the Ba 'ku village and one about Michael Westmore 's make @-@ up designs for the film . 
 As part of a collection of Star Trek : The Next Generation films , Insurrection was released on Blu @-@ ray and DVD on September 22 , 2009 . The Blu @-@ ray transfer is presented in 1080p high definition enhanced for widescreen television and features 5 @.@ 1 Dolby TrueHD audio in English , French and Spanish . The release also contains " Creating the Illusion " featurettes and new commentary by Jonathan Frakes and Marina Sirtis . 
 Insurrection was released on Netflix streaming on July 1 , 2015 . 
 = Polish legislative election , 1957 = 
 Parliamentary elections were held in Poland on 20 January 1957 . They were the second election to the Sejm – the bicameral parliament of the People 's Republic of Poland , and the third ever in the history of Communist Poland . It took place during the liberalization period , following Władysław Gomułka 's ascension to power . Although freer than previous elections , they were not a free election . Polish voters of 1957 were given the right to vote against some official candidates ; de facto having a small chance to express a vote of no confidence against the government and the Party , but no possibility to elect any real opposition , whose members were not allowed to run in the elections . The elections resulted in a predictable victory for the Front of National Unity coalition dominated by the ruling Polish communist party – the Polish United Workers ' Party ( PZPR ) , and communist leader , Władysław Gomułka . 
 The elections , while victorious for Gomułka , did not guarantee lasting changes in the Polish society . The new regime was much more liberal than its Stalinist predecessor , and enjoyed moderate support during the first few years after the election in the " little stabilization " period of 1957 – 1963 . However , by mid @-@ 1960s it faced opposition from the competing factions in the communist party itself . Coupled with growing popular opposition to the communist rule , Gomułka would be removed from power in the aftermath of the 1968 political crisis and the Polish 1970 protests . 
 The previous elections in Poland were held in 1952 . These were followed by the 1961 elections . 
 = = Background = = 
 The elections were originally planned for the December of 1956 but due to significant political changes in the government , resulting from Władysław Gomułka 's ascension to power , they were delayed until early 1957 . Among the various promises made by First Secretary Gomułka , during the Polish October peaceful revolution , to the restless Polish population was that of free elections . He knew that this was a promise that he could not keep without seeing his party defeated . In the January 1957 elections the new ' democratic ' aspect was the reintroduction of the secret ballot , and more importantly , there were more candidates than available seats in the parliament ; in the 1952 elections the number of candidates equaled the number of seats in the Sejm . Another liberalizing factor was that unlike in previous elections , intimidation by the secret police ( Służba Bezpieczeństwa ) and the government against the opposition was limited . 
 The candidates were divided into two groups - one officially supported by the party and the ' independents ' ( broadly following the communist party line but not declared members of the party ) . The latter would be only considered if over half of the registered voters in the district voted against the official candidates ; otherwise all seats from the district ( on average between 3 and 6 ) would be awarded to the official candidates . 
 Over 60 @,@ 000 candidates were registered for the 459 seats in the Sejm . The government was not prepared to release its hold on power , so the candidates were screened and only 720 or 723 out of 60 @,@ 000 were finally allowed to participate and be published on the official list by the Front of National Unity ( Polish : Front Jedności Narodu , FJN ) , the only organization allowed to put forth candidates in Polish elections . Factors such as the number of signatures in support of a candidate were deemed to be irrelevant . 
 According to an official government press agency dispatch , about half of the candidates ( approx . 360 ) were PZPR members . A majority of the remainder belonged to PZPR allies ( Democratic Party ( SD ) , United People 's Party ( ZSL ) ) . There was no opposition party in Poland since all political groupings had to support the program of the PZPR . As a result , no real opposition candidates were permitted to run in the elections , but in theory the Polish voters could have stripped the communists from their claimed legitimacy by abstaining from voting . Another means of preventing the PZPR from obtaining a political victory would have occurred if all of the PZPR candidates were struck out , leaving only 100 to be elected . 
 Despite the lack of genuine opposition , the liberalized election format allowed for various power struggles to be played out , primarily between the communist party candidates . A particularly notable case was the rivalry between certain candidates from the main communist party ( PZPR ) and one of the lesser communist parties ( ZSL ) . 
 A day before the elections , Gomułka appealed to Polish citizens not to vote against the Party 's candidates , asserting that ' crossing them out would equal crossing Poland off the map of Europe ' and would bring upon Poland the fate of Hungary . The fear of a possible Soviet intervention , in case of Gomułka 's loss , was also repeated by Radio Free Europe , which noted that Gomułka 's argument while " cruel " , is likely " entirely correct . " Gomułka also persuaded the Catholic Church to urge voters to go to the polls and declare a vote of confidence in the government . Supporting him , Cardinal Stefan Wyszyński officially declared his support for the ' no crossing ' policy . 
 = = Results = = 
 The Polish United Workers ' Party ( PZPR ) won 237 ( 239 after by @-@ elections ) seats out of 459 while the remainder went its satellite parties ( Democratic Party and United People 's Party ) and a few independents . PZPR 237 seats gave it 51 @.@ 7 % of total , ZSL with 120 ( 118 after by @-@ elections ) had 26 @.@ 1 % , the independents with 63 had 14 % ( non @-@ party faction , 51 , and Catholics from the Znak association , 12 ) and SD with 39 had 8 @.@ 5 % . The FJN alliance was victorious , with 80 @.@ 8 % of the seats . 
 Overall , the FJN alliance gained 8 seats compared to its 1952 results , but the independents nearly doubled their presence , from 37 to 63 ( this is explained as the Sejm of 1957 had 459 seats , an increase of 34 from the 1952 , which had only 425 seats ) . PZPR was the biggest loser , with 34 seats less than in 1952 , ZSL gained 28 , and SD , 14 . However , as the other parties and " independents " were in fact subordinate to PZPR , its control of the Sejm was , in fact , total . The representational pattern in the Sejm would be nearly stable for the next 30 years , following a slight swing from the independents to PZPR in 1961 . 
 According to official data , turnout was 94 @.@ 14 % , which are considered to be somewhat suspect considering heavy snowfalls and unfavorable weather conditions prevailing in Poland at the time , and 98 @.@ 4 % of votes were cast for official candidates . Approximately 10 @.@ 6 % of the voters disobeyed the calls for " no crossing " , but in the end only one seat ( in Nowy Sącz ) remained unfilled due to no candidate achieving absolute majority . 
 The new Sejm had its first session on 20 February . Its senior marshal ( speaker ) was Bolesław <unk> ; its Sejm marshal was Czesław <unk> . Only 12 % of the new deputies were members of the previous , 1952 , Sejm . 
 Two by @-@ elections were held after the main election . The first took place on 17 March 1957 at Nowy Sącz . The second took place at Wieluń on 5 May 1957 to replace the incumbent who died on February 5 . Those by @-@ elections were won by the PZPR and the ZSL respectively . Two more by @-@ elections took place on October 19 , 1958 in <unk> and Oleśnica . In those by @-@ elections , ZSL lost the seats to PZPR . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Despite Gomułka 's hopes , the elections , while victorious for him , did not mean the end of opposition to the communist rule . For a while , support for the Gomułka @-@ led communist party ran high . Reflecting this , the period 1957 @-@ 1963 is known as " little stabilization " . While his regime was much more liberal than the one he succeeded , this gave <unk> to an opposition within the PZPR party , as some communist politicians , like General Mieczysław Moczar , saw Gomułka as " too soft . " Meanwhile , dissension with the communist rule would grow , and the Polish 1970 protests , soon after the 1968 Polish political crisis , would eventually cause him to lose support with the PZPR party ; suffering from nervous exhaustion , Gomułka would be forced to resign and replaced by Edward Gierek . 
 = Enlighten Canberra = 
 Enlighten Canberra is an outdoor annual art and cultural festival held in Canberra , Australia featuring illuminating light installations and projections , performances from local and interstate musicians , dining and film events . 
 The festival is an Australian Capital Territory ( ACT ) Government initiative held annually in early March , encouraging people to " See Canberra in a whole new light . " The centrepiece of Enlighten Canberra is the illuminating of Canberra 's cultural institutions after dark , including Old Parliament House , Parliament House and the National Gallery of Australia ( since the 2011 event ) as well as the National Portrait Gallery and Questacon ( since the 2012 event ) . There is also live music , film screenings and after @-@ hours tours . 
 Since its inception , Enlighten has become increasingly popular , attracting 115 @,@ 000 visitors in 2013 and 131 @,@ 500 in 2014 . Attendance rose again in 2015 , to 287 @,@ 874 visitors . 
 = = History of the event = = 
 = = = 2008 – 11 : Lead @-@ up to the first Enlighten = = = 
 In 2008 ACT Labor made an election promise to deliver a new autumn event for Canberra , Australia — this was the beginnings of Enlighten Canberra . In December 2010 , Andrew Barr , then Australian Capital Territory ( ACT ) Minister for Tourism , Sport and Recreation , announced the ACT Government Enlighten would be a major annual event , commencing in March 2011 . He said national attractions that would participate with lit facades after dark included the National Gallery of Australia , Parliament House and Old Parliament House . <unk> events were also announced , including headline international acts in concert . 
 = = = 2011 : The first Enlighten = = = 
 In its first year , along with other events , Enlighten hosted rock band INXS , jazz guitarist George Benson , and world @-@ music supergroup Afro Celt Sound System . To help promote Enlighten , INXS arrived in Canberra in a helicopter , landing on the lawns of Old Parliament House two weeks before their concert appearance . INXS band member Kirk <unk> told reporters that the show planned for Enlighten 2011 was " probably the biggest production that we 've put on at any show in Australia . " As part of the festival , cultural institutions in the Parliamentary triangle were illuminated after dark , including Old Parliament House , Parliament House and the National Gallery of Australia . 
 Despite the big @-@ ticket performances and media stunts , the inaugural festival cost $ 2 @.@ 4 million , and there was poor community interest , with just 8600 visitors . The first Enlighten did however attract 2400 visitors from interstate or overseas who came to Canberra specifically for Enlighten or extended their stay because of it . 
 The slogan for Enlighten , announced in December 2010 , is " See Canberra in a whole new light " 
 = = = 2012 : Enlighten made a part of the Canberra Festival = = = 
 In its second year , Enlighten was made a part of the Canberra Festival . The merging of the festivals was met with criticism from the Canberra branch of the Liberal Party of Australia , with Canberra Liberal Brendan Smyth describing the Labor Government 's attempt to create a new festival as " embarrassing " . The Enlighten entertainment lineup featured in the 2012 event was scaled back significantly from the 2011 event to instead feature local Canberra artists including Owen Campbell . Of the nearly 100 artists contracted to perform in the 2012 festival , 53 per cent were local artists , paid 11 @.@ 5 per cent of the Enlighten programming budget that year . In 2012 Questacon and the National Portrait Gallery became canvasses for projection for the first time — they had not been lit in the 2011 Enlighten festival . 
 = = = 2013 – 14 : the <unk> joins Enlighten = = = 
 In 2013 , along with the large @-@ scale building illuminations featured in the previous two events , Enlighten hosted a <unk> for the first time . The tent put on dozens of shows featuring comics , acrobats and musicians . The festival also included Canberra 's first Dîner en Blanc , a pop @-@ up picnic in which all guests dress in white and bring their own food , table , table @-@ setting and chair . More than 700 people attended the picnic , the third Dîner en Blanc to be held in Australia . Dîner en Blanc was repeated in 2014 , with over 800 people attending , but the dinner was not included as part of Enlighten 2015 . Film screenings and after hours tours were also offered , and American soul singer Charles Bradley performed as part of the 2014 festival . 
 = = = 2015 – 16 : Enlighten debuts the Night Noodle Markets in Canberra = = = 
 In November 2014 , the ACT Government announced the Night Noodle Markets would be coming to Canberra during the Enlighten Festival in 2015 . The Night Noodle Markets feature Asian @-@ themed street @-@ food vendors . ACT Tourism Minister Andrew Barr told media that Canberra 's Night Noodle Markets were expected to host up to 25 hawker style food stalls , and that the ACT Government had committed $ 200 @,@ 000 to bring the 2015 noodle markets to the city . Around 156 @,@ 000 peoples visited the inaugural Enlighten Night Noodle Markets — of whom 24 @,@ 000 visited on the opening night , far exceeding expectations . 
 In 2016 , alongside the Night Noodle Markets , Enlighten featured an installation by Amanda Parer of five illuminated white rabbits standing at 7 metres ( 23 ft ) . Parer described the rabbits as metaphors for the mismanagement of the environment . Free concerts held over the consecutive weekends featured indie rock Australian band Augie March and American alternative country musical group Calexico . 
 = = Projections = = 
 For its first six years , the large @-@ scale projections for Enlighten were coordinated by Electric Canvas . Electric Canvas 's managing director Peter Milne has also worked on the 2000 Sydney Olympic Games and the 2006 Melbourne Commonwealth Games . 
 = = Budget , attendance and visitor expenditure = = 
 Since its inception , Enlighten has become increasingly popular , attracting 115 @,@ 000 visitors in 2013 and 131 @,@ 500 in 2014 . Attendance rose again in 2015 , to 287 @,@ 874 visitors . 
 = = Energy usage = = 
 In 2012 , projections for Enlighten were predominantly powered using diesel generators and consumed <unk> litres of diesel , resulting in an estimated 7 @.@ 0 tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent greenhouse gas emissions . 
 = Ginetta Sagan = 
 Ginetta Sagan ( June 1 , 1925 – August 25 , 2000 ) was an Italian @-@ born American human rights activist best known for her work with Amnesty International on behalf of prisoners of conscience . 
 Born in Milan , Italy , Sagan lost her parents in her teenage years to the Black Brigades of Benito Mussolini . Like her parents , she was active in the Italian resistance movement , gathering intelligence and supplying Jews in hiding . She was captured and tortured in 1945 , but escaped on the eve of her execution with the help of Nazi defectors . 
 After studying in Paris , she attended graduate school in child development in the US and married Leonard Sagan , a physician . The couple then resettled in Atherton , California , where Sagan founded the first chapter of Amnesty International in the western US . She later toured the region , helping to establish more than 75 chapters , and organized events to raise money for political prisoners . 
 In 1984 , Sagan was elected the honorary chair of Amnesty International USA . US President Bill Clinton awarded her the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 1996 , and Italy later awarded her the rank of Grand Ufficiale Ordine al Merito della Repubblica Italiana ( Grand Official Order of Merit of the Italian Republic ) . Amnesty International founded an annual Ginetta Sagan Award for activists in her honor . 
 = = Childhood and World War II = = 
 Ginetta Sagan was born Ginetta Moroni in Milan , Italy , to a Catholic father and a Jewish mother . Both of her parents were doctors . Facing rising antisemitism in Europe , her parents arranged false papers identifying her as Christian to hide her Jewish roots . 
 When World War II began , both of her parents became active in the Italian resistance movement opposing fascist rule , only to be arrested in 1943 by Mussolini 's Black Brigades . Her father was later shot in a staged " attempted escape " , and her mother sent to Auschwitz , where she died . 
 Ginetta , then seventeen years old , was already active in the resistance movement , delivering food coupons and clothing to Jews who were in hiding . Following her parents ' disappearance , she became a courier for resistance forces in Northern Italy , as well as helping to print and distribute antigovernment pamphlets . On one occasion , she dressed as a cleaning lady to steal letterhead from government offices so that it could be used to forge letters of safe passage to Switzerland . Due to her energy and small size ( she never grew to more than five feet tall ) , she received the nickname Topolino ( " Little Mouse " ) . 
 In late February 1945 , Sagan was betrayed by an informer in the movement and , like her parents , arrested by the Black Brigades . During her 45 days of imprisonment , she was beaten , raped , and tortured , leading up to a scheduled April 23 execution . At one point , a jailer tossed her a loaf of bread that contained a matchbox with the word <unk> ( " courage " ) written inside , a moment which would motivate much of her later work on behalf of prisoners . On the day of her scheduled execution , she was being beaten by guards in a villa in <unk> , Italy , when a pair of German officers forced her Italian captors to release her into their custody . She later recalled watching the stars from the window of their car and thinking , " I will never see another dawn . " However , the Germans revealed themselves to be Nazi defectors collaborating with her resistance comrades , and they delivered Sagan safely to a Catholic hospital . Sagan annually celebrated the date of April 23 for the rest of her life . 
 = = Post @-@ war life = = 
 After Sagan recuperated , she lived in Paris for a time with her godfather , attending the Sorbonne . In 1951 , she emigrated to the US to study at the University of Illinois at Chicago , majoring in child development . While there , she met Leonard Sagan , then a young medical student . The couple were married the following year , and would remain together until Leonard 's death in 1997 . Following their marriage , the pair moved to Washington , D.C. for Leonard 's work . Sagan also worked part @-@ time teaching cooking classes to the wives of US Congressmen . 
 The couple later lived in Boston and Japan before settling in Atherton , California in 1968 . Sagan lived there until her death from cancer on August 25 , 2000 . Ginetta is survived by her three <unk> Duncan , Loring , and Stuart . 
 = = Involvement with Amnesty International = = 
 Though Amnesty International ( AI ) had a growing reputation in the UK , at this time , the organization was still in largely unknown in the US . Only eighteen chapters of AI USA had been formed by 1968 , all of them in the eastern US , totaling less than a thousand members . Sagan had been involved in the organization in Washington , D.C. , and when she arrived in Atherton , she founded the US 's 19th chapter , holding its meetings in her living room . The chapter later grew into AI USA 's first West Coast regional office . 
 In 1971 , Sagan organized a concert with singer Joan Baez , one of her Atherton neighbors , in order to raise money for Greek political prisoners ; the concert drew more than 10 @,@ 000 people . In her memoirs , Baez described Sagan during the period as having " the gifts of an active mind , a love of life and beauty , an <unk> spirit , and a faith in people very much like that of Anne Frank . " In the three years that followed , Sagan traveled throughout the American West , founding 75 more AI chapters . By 1978 , AI USA 's membership had increased to 70 @,@ 000 , more than 100 times that of a decade before . An AI spokesman later attributed Sagan with doing more than anyone to establish Amnesty International in the US , adding that " I think she has probably organized more people than anyone else in the human rights movement globally " . She also founded the organization 's first newsletter , Matchbox , in 1973 . 
 Sagan became a figure of controversy from the right and later from the left in the 1970s when she and Baez shifted their focus from protesting abuses by American forces in the Vietnam War to protesting the abuses of North Vietnamese reeducation camps following the war . A colleague remembers fellow anti @-@ war activists being " furious " that Sagan would criticize the new Vietnamese communist regime in the same terms she had criticized the US Armed Forces , and Sagan later recalled accusations that she was a fascist or undercover CIA operative . Over the next decade , she also advocated on behalf of prisoners in Chile , the USSR , Poland , and Greece . She served on the AI USA National Board of Directors from 1983 @-@ 87 . In 1994 , she was elected the organization 's Honorary Chair of the Board . 
 In addition to her work with Amnesty International , Sagan founded the Aurora Foundation , which investigates and publicizes incidents of human rights abuses . 
 = = Awards = = 
 In 1987 , Sagan won a Jefferson Award for Public Service in the category of " Greatest Public Service Benefiting the Disadvantaged " . 
 In 1996 , US President Bill Clinton awarded Sagan the Presidential Medal of Freedom , the highest civilian honor of the US . In the citation , he stated that " Ginetta Sagan 's name is synonymous with the fight for human rights around the world . She represents to all the triumph of the human spirit over tyranny . " The same year , she was awarded the Grand Ufficiale Ordine al Merito della Repubblica Italiana , Italy 's highest honor . 
 = = Ginetta Sagan Fund = = 
 Amnesty International created the Ginetta Sagan Fund in 1994 in Sagan 's honor . The fund grants a $ 10 @,@ 000 annual award to a woman or women " who are working to protect the liberty and lives of women and children in areas where human rights violations are widespread " . 
 Previous winners of the award include the following : 
 2014 : Magda Alli and Suzan <unk> , Egypt 
 2012 : Jenni Williams , Zimbabwe 
 2010 : Rebecca <unk> <unk> , Democratic Republic of Congo 
 2009 : Yolanda Becerra Vega , Colombia 
 2008 : Betty <unk> , Zimbabwe 
 2007 : Lydia <unk> Ribeiro , Mexico 
 2006 : <unk> <unk> , Serbia and Montenegro 
 2005 : Hawa Aden Mohamed , Somalia 
 2004 : <unk> <unk> , Turkey 
 2003 : Sonia Pierre , Dominican Republic 
 2002 : Jeannine <unk> , Democratic Republic of Congo 
 2000 : Helen <unk> , Uganda ; Giulia Tamayo Leon , Peru ; Hina Jilani , Pakistan 
 1999 : Sima Wali , Afghanistan 
 1999 : Adriana Portillo @-@ Bartow , El Salvador 
 1998 : Beatrice <unk> , Rwanda 
 1997 : Mangala Sharma , Bhutan 
 = Mythology of Carnivàle = 
 Carnivàle is an American television series set in the United States during the Great Depression . The series traces the disparate storylines of a young carnival worker named Ben Hawkins and Brother Justin Crowe , a preacher in California . The overarching story is built around a good and evil theme , which serves as a human @-@ scaled metaphor within a complex structure of myth and allegory . Samson , the carnival 's dwarf manager , sets up the show 's mythology with a prologue in the pilot episode , talking of " a creature of light and a creature of darkness " being born " to each generation " preparing for a final battle . 
 Most mythological elements in Carnivàle relate to so @-@ called Avatars ( or Creatures of Light and Darkness ) , fictional human @-@ like beings with supernatural powers who embody good and evil . In its first season Carnivàle does not reveal its characters as Avatars beyond insinuation , and makes the nature of suggested Avatars a central question . By the second season it is established that Ben is a Creature of Light and Brother Justin a Creature of Darkness . Other than through the characters , the show 's good @-@ and @-@ evil theme manifests in the series ' contemporary religion , the Christian military order Knights Templar , tarot divination , and in historical events like the <unk> and humankind 's first nuclear test . Show creator Daniel Knauf did not respond to questions about the mythology but did provide hints about the mythological structure to online fandom both during and after the two @-@ season run of Carnivàle . Nevertheless , many of the intended clues remained unnoticed by viewers . Knauf left fans a production summary of Carnivàle 's first season two years after cancellation . This so @-@ called Pitch Document , originally written to give HBO and Knauf 's co @-@ writers an overview of the intended storyline , backed up and expanded upon the assumed mythological rules . 
 = = Avatars = = 
 The term Avatar ( also spelled Avatara ) originates in Hindu mythology , where it most commonly refers to the incarnation ( bodily manifestation ) of a higher being or the Supreme Being on Earth . Carnivàle 's story never clearly establishes the meaning of this term , yet HBO and the writers used the term interchangeably with the Creatures of Light and Darkness of the series ' opening monologue . The series portrays Avatars as human @-@ like beings with supernatural powers who embody good and evil , and whose constant and age @-@ long struggle serves to explain the Dark Ages and Ages of Enlightenment in humanity 's history in the real world . Carnivàle represents this Avataric duality as Light and Dark in several instances . The surnames of the main characters , Ben Hawkins and Justin Crowe , suggest a symbolic link to hawks and crows , the winged Creatures of Light and Dark . The last two Tarot cards seen in the Carnivàle 's opening title sequence are " The Sun " and " The Moon " , standing for God and the Devil . By the same token , the show 's title card and the logo of the carnival depict a sun placed opposite a moon . Show creator Daniel Knauf designed this logo . 
 = = = Characteristics = = = 
 The characters Ben Hawkins and Brother Justin Crowe are revealed to be Avatars through the usage of their supernatural powers ; however , viewers did not find it immediately apparent whether a suspected Avatar served as good or evil . The series gave clues , such as depicting the Creatures of Darkness with coal @-@ black eyes ( according to Daniel Knauf , Creatures of Light have an invisible aura ) . An Avatar 's nature is determined by the type and application of his powers . As the Pitch Document states , Avatars draw their talents and powers from the same pool . These abilities may vary in type and strength , and include but are not limited to the manipulation and transfer of life force , spiritual healings , telekinesis and telepathy , and granting small measures of powers to a mortal . Although the series showed the powers of Ben and Brother Justin , reviewers were still unsure about the main characters ' Avataric nature by the end of the first season . When Ben 's good nature and Justin 's dark heritage became clearer in Season 2 , reviewers began to describe Carnivàle 's underlying message as " essentially the opposite of spiritual belief : fatalism " . Daniel Knauf disputed any theory of determinism , and repeatedly pointed to the characters ' free will to overcome their destiny . Free choice allows the story to portray Avatars as deliberately not making use of their powers or as acting contrary to their nature ; an Avatar would however still have to put consistent effort into not lapsing back into his defined moral behavior . 
 The Pitch Document described Avatars as sharing the ability to envision the past , present and future , both literally and symbolically . Accessing this plane of pure truth is given as an Avatar 's birthright and can be improved through study and practice . Avatars can manipulate and transmit the resulting visions through dreams to others . As far as established , only Creatures of Darkness suffer physical weakness or pain when their opposite makes use of his powers . Avatars can sense the existence of their moral opponent , but are unable to detect or identify them outside of close physical proximity . They can , however , easily detect and locate an Avatar of like kind over great distances with great accuracy . These abilities contribute to the convergence of the two storylines in Carnivàle . 
 = = = Terms and order of succession = = = 
 Daniel Knauf overlaid the Avatars of the fictional universe with an elaborate order of succession by blood , similar to the ascent of royal families . The descriptors Royals , King and Prince are replaced in the series with Vectori , Prophet and Prince . Female royals like Queens and Princesses do not have a fictional counterpart and are instead replaced with the concepts of the Alpha , the Omega and the Usher . These Wild Card Avatars have special rules in addition to , or replacing , the normal ones . Reviewers rarely focused on the significance of the mentioned Avataric terms and their implied characteristics in the story , despite detailed explanations by Knauf and the later public availability of Carnivàle 's Pitch Document , setting out the complex mythological structure . 
 The first Prophet in the mythology of Carnivàle is the Alpha . This creature is never mentioned in the series , but Knauf described her as a female who lived before the Flood and whose story was lost with the destruction of the Royal Library of Alexandria . The Alpha spawned the first pair of Avatara , manifestations of some higher power or House ; one is Light and the other Dark . A Creature of Light and a Creature of Darkness have been born to each generation since , and unlike the Alpha , they have always been male . 
 The Avataric Blood travels within families forming a dynasty . The first @-@ born son of an Avatar receives a so @-@ called mantle at birth that manifests him as an Avatar of a new generation ; whether the new Avatar is Light or Dark is chance . Therefore , there is one Avatar to each House per generation . Giving birth to a new Avatar leaves the mother barren and insane . Before that time , she can give birth to an unlimited number of females from an Avatar . These children as well as their respective offspring are called Vectori , beings with Avataric Blood who are not themselves Avatara , and who thus become generationally further removed from an Avatar in the bloodline . While Vectori cannot become Avatara , as that mantle is only conveyed upon birth , they can still exhibit some minor powers and often show signs of insanity . 
 The eldest generational Avatar within a House is dominant and called the Prophet . He possesses blue blood , also called Vitae Divina . The next in line is the Ascendant Prince . Any additional Avatara within the House are Princes ranked by generation . Although Avatara form blood dynasties from father to son , House affiliations can be mixed within a dynasty . If the youngest Prince in a dynasty dies , the dynasty is ended . Most dynasties only last on average three generations , since typical Avatara can be killed by any means . When a dynasty ends , the first male child born elsewhere in the world with the most Avataric blood will be a new Prince starting a new dynasty . 
 When a Prophet dies while an Ascendant Prince also lives , one of two things happens . If the Prophet is killed by his Ascendant Prince , the Prince will gain the mantle of the Prophet with a boon ( full measure of power ) . For the boon to be passed , the Prophet must be of sound mind , and either willingly pass on the boon , or be taken by surprise so that he cannot put up a psychic defense . If however the Prophet is impaired , the Ascendant Prince may be driven insane . If a Prophet dies in any other way , the Ascendant Prince will be automatically raised to Prophet in his stead , without chance of a boon . 
 Two unique Avatars join the Alpha as an exception to the Avataric rule . Carnivàle 's Avataric mythology prophesied the Usher of Destruction throughout the ages as a harbinger of the End Times to usher in the Armageddon . He is known by a thousand names in a thousand books , but can only manifest once . He appears as the Tattooed Man in visions , and he can only be killed with a weapon infused with the Vitae Divina that is thrust into the bough of his tree tattoo where his dark heart dwells . Injuries from such anointed weapons are said to never fully heal . Also prophesied is the Omega ( known in the Pitch Document as Omega The Destroyer and the Antichrist ) , whom Carnivàle 's occult characters had assumed for a long time to be one and the same with the Usher . The Omega is , like the Alpha , a female and the only other known exception to the male restriction in Avatar succession , and because of the allusion to " the Beginning and the End " in naming , the Omega is commonly accepted as the last Avatar . 
 = = = Manifestation in the series = = = 
 Certain characters have seemingly supernatural abilities from the beginning of the series . Ben Hawkins and Brother Justin Crowe not only have common visions of two soldiers ( one of them also appearing in a tuxedo ) and a man with a tattooed tree on his chest , but also of each other . Ben can heal and resurrect beings at the cost of others ' life , while Brother Justin can read and manipulate people 's minds . Ben and Lodz , a blind mentalist of the carnival , experience visions of the medieval Knights Templar . Carnival fortuneteller Sofie can communicate telepathically with her catatonic mother , whom she once sees being raped by the Tattooed Man . The progressing story increases the importance of the two mysterious soldiers , who are revealed as Henry Scudder and Management . Strange words of unknown meaning appear throughout the series . Variations of the phrase " Every Prophet in his House " are repeated , seemingly without context . Ben finds the repeating letter string <unk> in a mineshaft , which he is later able to interpret as Avatar . Season 2 introduces the word Usher in particular relation to Brother Justin . Management repeats this term to Ben in two instances . After Management 's death , Ben has sudden knowledge about Princes , Prophets and the Usher , even knowing to whom these terms apply , respectively . The sentence " Sofie is the Omega " is seen once , written across a mirror without further explanation . Sofie demonstrates powers and attributes similar to those of Ben and Brother Justin in the last Carnivàle episode . 
 The context for some of these events is provided by the ( fictionally used ) Gospel of Matthias , a book in Season 2 that connects the Templars to Ben 's father . Written in archaic English , reminiscent of the King James Bible translation , it contains parts of Samson 's Season 1 prologue , mentions the Avatara , and alludes to an apocalyptic passage in the Book of Revelation . It also contains etchings of a gnarled and bent tree , which in one image is attacked by a Knight Templar holding a knife . Wilfred Talbot Smith interprets this book to Brother Justin , quoting , " By the hand of the Prince , the Prophet dies . Upon his death , the Prince shall rise , " and " [ Beware the Usher . A dark heart dwells where branches meet . ] Anointed dagger plunge thee deep . " Management and Ben repeat these verses independently of Smith . 
 = = = = What is an Avatar ? = = = = 
 As confirmed by Daniel Knauf and the Pitch Document , the Avatars of the current generation ( at the end of Season 2 ) are Ben as the Creature of Light and Brother Justin as the Creature of Darkness . Justin is also the Usher , spiritually represented by the Tattooed Man . Their respective fathers were Avatars of the previous generation : Henry Scudder was the Creature of Darkness , and Lucius Belyakov ( Management ) was the Creature of Light . At each time , an Avatar 's blood color mirrored his status . Ben 's and Brother Justin 's blood were red when they were Princes , and upon becoming Prophets , their blood turned into Vitae Divina ( blue blood ) . Scudder 's father Hilton was an Avatar of undisclosed nature . The mentalist of the carnival , Lodz , was merely a mortal who had once received Avataric skills from Scudder in exchange for his sense of sight . 
 Several women in Carnivàle are tied to Avatars , but only two have Avataric blood : Belyakov 's daughter Iris is a <unk> by definition , and Justin 's daughter Sofie is the Omega . Although Sofie is two years older than Ben , her father 's Avataric generation places her in the next Avataric generation . The other affected women are human mothers who began to suffer from mental illness or strange behavior after giving birth to an Avatar . Ben 's mother Flora was a religious fanatic who would not touch her son . Scudder 's mother Emma cut her eyes out and killed several of her family members the night Scudder was born . Sofie 's mother Apollonia became catatonic after Sofie 's birth . Justin 's and his older sister Iris 's mother receives no special mention in the series , but the Pitch Document mentions her chronic paranoid schizophrenia after Justin 's birth . As far as known , none of these mothers became pregnant after giving birth to an Avatar . 
 Knauf hinted at more Avatars in a February 2005 chat : " What do Jesus , Caligula , Alexander the Great , Caesar , Buddha , Vlad the Impaler , Brother Justin , Ben Hawkins , <unk> [ sic ] Belyakov , Hilton Scudder , and Henry Scudder have in common ? " The Pitch Document stated , " If an Avatar was dedicated to developing and mastering his power , he could direct it with the precision of a scalpel . Such was the case with many of the Prophets , with Buddha , Jesus and Mohammed , with Caligula and Vlad <unk> . " In this early plot summary , Rasputin and the Borgias were Avatars as well . But like other Avatars in Carnivàle , none of these historical figures were explicitly revealed as such on the show . 
 = = = = The Tattooed Man and the tree = = = = 
 A man with a tattooed tree on his chest and back is introduced in the opening minutes of Carnivàle 's pilot episode , and appears in many other Avataric visions and dreams : in Ben 's and Brother Justin 's common recurring dreams chasing Henry Scudder in a cornfield , in Ben 's <unk> @-@ like visions , in Sofie 's visions of the rape of her mother , and in an extended vision of Brother Justin foreshadowing his dark future . Ben encounters a little boy with a similar tree painted to his chest and back late in Season 1 . Brother Justin finds this tree grown on a hill early in Season 2 , which prompts him to get his chest and back tattooed accordingly . The tree is also depicted in the show 's Gospel of Matthias book , in a painting at the Templar Hall in Loving , New Mexico , and on many images in the room of Templar chaplain Kerrigan . Management and Wilfred Talbot Smith imply the tree 's significance for the resolution of Carnivàle . 
 Show creator Daniel Knauf stated that the tree in Carnivàle is the iconic Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil in the Garden of Eden . Its implied meaning and power prompted him to place it on the Tattooed Man 's chest because " this is where you will build your empire . This is what it all boils down , [ ... ] and it just had a certain power . " Played by Don Swayze , the Tattooed Man is often depicted without a focus on his face , although a few frames in the pilot episode show him played by Clancy Brown ( Brother Justin ) . Knauf confirmed the Tattooed Man as the spiritual representation of the Usher of Destruction . 
 = = Historical and cultural allusions = = 
 = = = Dust Bowl = = = 
 The story of Carnivàle takes place in the mid @-@ 1930s during the worst of the Great Depression , a time of massive social and political upheaval . Unemployment rates were high , and European fascism was on the rise , in the years leading up to the Second World War . People in the Great Plains suffered from the effects of the Dust Bowl . Farmers often not only ran into debt and lost their properties but also risked their health ; dust pneumonia was a common cause of death . 
 Carnivàle is a retrospective interpretation of these times . Okie Ben loses his mother and his farm to the dust when a carnival picks him up . While the carnival travels throughout the Southwestern United States , California preacher Brother Justin tends to the needs of Dust Bowl refugees , who slowly become his biggest supporters . Although Carnivàle replaces the real sociological @-@ scientific reasons for the drought conditions with fantasy elements and the presence of the Devil , it still addresses the Dust Bowl situation repeatedly . Samson 's catch phrases are variations of " Let 's shake some dust ! " The episode " Black Blizzard " focuses on Ben and the carnival coping with a major dust storm . Rain only occurs twice in the show . The first occurrence is when Ben and Sofie copulate ; the writers wanted to highlight that Avataric sex " affects the heavens " . The second is when Brother Justin forcibly takes the Boon from Henry Scudder in the episode " Cheyenne , <unk> " . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 A major part of Carnivàle 's story is religion . Samson 's prologue in the pilot episode is based on a few introduction paragraphs on the Pitch Document 's cover sheet that were initially not planned to be performed . But whereas Samson 's prologue only shortly mentions the Genesis creation narrative before introducing the fictional mythology , the original segment put more emphasis on the battle between God and Satan : 
 " Before the Beginning , after the great celestial war that rocked the very foundation of Heaven and Hell , God and Satan established an uneasy truce . Never again would they face each other in direct confrontation . So God created the Earth , inhabiting it with the crafty ape he called Man . And henceforth , to each generation was born a creature of Light and a creature of Darkness , and they would gather to them men of ilk nature and thus , by proxy , carry on the war between Good and Evil . " 
 Show creator Daniel Knauf believed Carnivàle 's religious aspects stemmed from the epic of good and evil as a major fabric of the 1930s , while executive producer Ronald D. Moore regarded religion as a way to express the struggle of good versus evil , faith , and the nature of humanity . Neither the audience nor the actors were given advice on how to interpret the show 's biblical imagery . Clancy Brown , the actor who portrayed Brother Justin , did not know whether his character was the Creature of Light or Darkness during the first season . He however thought that the visions made Brother Justin believe to be on a righteous mission of God until late in the first season . Compared to Brother Justin , Brown stated he practiced religion in moderate ways . 
 Daniel Knauf felt that Brother Justin shares patterns with certain religious leaders who were often persecuted for their delusional visions . Historical figures like Father Coughlin , Aimee Semple McPherson and Brigham Young served as inspiration , although the writers refrained from re @-@ telling their particular stories . Daniel Knauf originally thought of making Brother Justin a Protestant minister , but when the producers needed to decide on a specific religious affiliation , Knauf contested their plans to make him a Catholic priest . Knauf , a Catholic himself , settled on the Methodist denomination , which he perceived as significantly less clichéd , suspicious or controversial . When asked whether God had influenced him to write the story , Knauf replied no . 
 Carnivàle relies on other religious symbols and parallels for its mythology . The National Shrine of the Little Flower , funded by Father Coughlin in the 1930s , was an inspiration for the temple in Brother Justin 's vision in the episode " Los <unk> " . This vision foreshadows the world that Justin will potentially build as he comes to power as a radio preacher . The producers planned to use radio towers instead of regular steeples for the temple ; the design also incorporated Eastern European domes and Western European cathedrals . In the same vision , the Tattooed Man appears near a tree that resembles the iconic Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil , and implies that Justin is the Usher . According to Knauf , the Usher represents a " timeless character who shows up in all different cultures " , and who is " there to usher in the Armageddon " as " the harbinger of End times " . 
 = = = Knights Templar = = = 
 Carnivàle introduces the Knights Templar , a medieval Christian military order , in the late Season 1 episode " Lonnigan , TX " , where Ben meets the freak finder Boffo Phineas . When Ben comes in contact with Boffo 's ring , he experiences a powerful series of visions of the Knights Templar practicing rituals , putting heads on spikes , and being burned at the stake . The ring bears a red @-@ crossed symbol , and when Samson passes a <unk> with the same symbol to Lodz , the mentalist has the same visions as Ben and falls to the floor chanting " in hoc signo <unk> " ( " in this sign you will conquer " ) . The Knights Templar remain a recurring subplot until Ben discovers the symbol 's significance in early Season 2 . The Lodge of the Benevolent Order of Templar has its last appearance in the mid @-@ Season @-@ 2 episode " Old Cherry Blossom Road " , where the escaped convict Varlyn Stroud uses it to track Ben . When Wilfred Talbot Smith asks for the location of the Saunière manuscript late in Season 2 , Scudder answers that it is hidden in Rennes @-@ le @-@ Château . 
 Despite being of only tangential importance to the series ' two seasons , the Knights Templar have an elaborate backstory that was left untold due to the cancellation . The Pitch Document described the fictional Order , then simply called the " Order Templar " , as a fraternity of fellow travelers that was once charged by the Roman Catholic Church with locating and aiding the Avatars . Knauf said both Henry Scudder and his father Hilton were members of the Templars ; Scudder was so because he wanted access to their knowledge and library . The Saunière manuscript would have been " mildly relevant " for the future storyline . 
 = = = Trinity = = = 
 The Season 2 episode " Los <unk> " has Management urge Ben to seek Scudder ; Ben needs to learn the name of the preacher of his dreams ( Brother Justin ) to prevent a future catastrophe . An induced vision transports Ben into a desert where he suddenly hears an alarm @-@ like noise . A massive explosion occurs , followed by a rising mushroom cloud . When Ben opens his eyes from the blast of dust , Justin kneels in front of him and asks " Ye offspring of serpents , who warned you to flee from the wrath to come ? " Ben drives past this location one episode later in " Alamogordo , NM " . In a shared vision in the episode " Creed , OK " , Ben and Sofie kiss in a desert , surrounded by bright light and swirling dust . Season 2 takes place in 1935 . 
 Reviews interpreted these visions as Ben 's challenge to find and defeat Brother Justin ; Ben has to ultimately stop the creation of the atomic bomb as " the world 's march towards doomsday . " The Season 1 prologue already suggested this interpretation , mentioning " a false sun <unk> [ ing ] over Trinity , " at which point " man forever traded away wonder for reason . " The Trinity test near Alamogordo , New Mexico was humankind 's first test of a nuclear weapon in 1945 , and Daniel Knauf would have finished Carnivàle 's six @-@ year run with the explosion of an atomic bomb as the beginning of the " Age of Reason " . Still , Knauf 's story is " not about the deployment of the bomb , it 's more about the invention of the bomb , " with the focus " around Alamogordo and the Trinity test site rather than Hiroshima and Nagasaki . " Much research was put into the visual effects of the explosion . Stock footage of the first beats of nuclear explosions and a self @-@ created explosion of 300 gallons of gasoline were used for reference . The ground effects and blowing dust were created with combinations of volumetric computer graphics smoke , and the fireball of the nuclear explosion was built from Hubble images of the Sun . Knauf left the interpretation of the kiss vision open to both the characters and the audience . 
 = = = Tarot divination = = = 
 The tarot readings of fortunetellers Sofie and her mother Apollonia advance the plot significantly . Sofie 's readings in the pilot episode induce visions in Ben that give insight into his healing powers of his childhood . Season 2 shows Sofie 's attempts to leave her former job , which is repeatedly interrupted by tarot cards reappearing . Another of her readings sets Ben on a journey to Scudder , the man he has been looking for since the beginning of the series . 
 When incorporating tarot symbolism into the show , show creator Daniel Knauf started with the Rider @-@ Waite tarot deck and then took liberties in interpretation . The same deck was used in the series and in several web games , as tarot divination played a significant part in Carnivàle 's online marketing . The producers had wished to provide a " personalized , interactive tarot @-@ card reading experience similar to what is depicted in the series " . The official HBO website collaborated with RealNetworks to offer Fate : The Carnivàle Game , a downloadable game based on tarot symbolism available for trial and purchase . 
 Carnivàle 's opening title sequence features tarot cards that are panned in and out of in camera perspective ; these cards were digitally designed based on paintings and are not available for purchase . As the creative team behind the opening titles stated , it was their goal " to create a title sequence that grounded viewers in the mid @-@ 1930s , but that also allowed people to feel a larger presence of good and evil over all of time . " The creators offered a detailed interpretation of the tarot cards in the opening titles , and covered topics like good and bad , heaven and hell , wars , and the age of science as the <unk> in the 1930s . The following list specifies the tarot cards featured in the opening sequence , the provided keywords and the used artwork . 
 " The World " — Completion . Perfection . Eternal life . – The Last Judgment by Michelangelo . 
 " Ace of Swords " — Ardent love . Ardent hate . A <unk> is born . – Destruction of Leviathan by Gustave Doré . 
 " Death " — Transition . Change . Death . – The Last Day of Pompeii by Karl <unk> . 
 " King of Swords " — A powerful commander . A wise counselor . A judge . – St. Michael Victorious by Raphael . 
 " Temperance " — Moderation . Balance . Harmony . – The Peasant Dance by Pieter Bruegel the Elder . 
 " The Magician " — Originality . Confidence . Skill . – Crucifixion by Josse <unk> . 
 " The Tower " — Sudden change . Disruption . Downfall . – The Battle between the Romans and the Carthaginians by Jean Fouquet . 
 " Judgement " — Renewal . Rebirth . 
 " The Moon " — Deception . Disillusionment . 
 " The Sun " — Success . Joy . – Creation of the Sun and Moon by Michelangelo . 
 = = Reception , interpretation and legacy = = 
 Executive producer Ronald D. Moore was confident that Carnivàle was one of the most complicated shows on television , while show creator Daniel Knauf admitted that " you may not understand everything that goes on but it does make a certain sense . " In stating that Carnivàle was meant to be a demanding show with a lot of subtext , Knauf refrained from giving explicit clues . He did not wish his intent as an author to supersede the viewer 's interpretation . 
 = = = Interpretations during the run of Carnivàle = = = 
 Reviewers of the first three episodes interpreted Carnivàle 's story as being full of myth and allegory . The show was seen as more than just a human @-@ scaled metaphor of good and evil , with the power of spirits as one of the show 's strongest elements . Some reviewers were deeply confused and described almost everything as " mysterious " – the characters and their powers and abilities , characters and scenarios within visions , the whole carnival – wondering how it all fit together . The visions of the two main characters were shortly addressed , distinguishing between violent and benign visions , but parallels between the visions and the beings of good and evil were not necessarily drawn . The characters ' stories were described as unfolding in " zig @-@ zagging starts , moving back and forth in time and space , dropping oblique clues along the way . " 
 Carnivàle 's central premise was considered " cloudy " , " unconventional " , and filled with " convoluted symbolic interpretations of historical events " after Daniel Knauf had told TV critics that he regarded the 1930s as " the last great age of magic " being ended by an atomic bomb to herald the Age of Reason . Many reviews quoted and commented on Samson 's prologue to explain both the apocalyptic premise and the mythology of the show . Some reviews asserted that the good and evil creatures described in the prologue were Ben and Justin , preparing for a final battle . Still , many reviews were reluctant to state who of the main characters was good and who was evil , aware that it might take some time until this question was answered for sure . Ben and his healing powers led most reviewers to believe that he was the good creature , and that Justin was a demon or at least a dangerous zealot who received instructions from either God or Satan . Some reviews described the question of Ben 's parentage as one of the big puzzles and the show 's driving mystery , but refrained from defining further details of the series . The lack of revelation of the characters ' roles was apparent by the end of the first season , although critics expected Sofie to gain significance later in the story . 
 DVD reviews for Season 1 and previews for the Season 2 premiere had the advantage of retrospective on the first season , and some reviewers continued to consider the show 's mythology convoluted , circuitous , " peek @-@ a @-@ boo " and silly . The significance of the prologue was emphasized again , while previous reviewers ' character descriptions , the good @-@ versus @-@ evil theme and the assumed story merge were generally repeated . The good nature of Ben and evil nature of Brother Justin seemed clearer to most reviewers , with " many bizarre coincidences that seem to imply a deeper and more sinister connection " between the two main characters . Visions were summarized as disturbing and grotesque , dreams as cryptic and mysterious , and abilities as unexplainable . Henry Scudder was noted to be " connected to everything and everyone " , and it was considered Ben 's job to piece together the mystery of his own past . The events of early Season 2 were said to mark a shift in the story from mystery to journey , with Ben accepting and exploring his powers , while Brother Justin was seen completely embracing his evil nature . Reviewers regarded Sofie 's turn in the final episode as an unexpected new threat in the story . 
 = = = Reception and analysis of themes = = = 
 Carnivàle was often compared to David Lynch 's 1990s mystery TV series Twin Peaks and John Steinbeck 's 1939 novel The Grapes of Wrath . Matt Roush of TV Guide called Carnivàle " the perfect show for those who thought Twin Peaks was too accessible " , whereas the show reminded Salon.com 's Heather Havrilesky of the " disappointment you feel as a kid when you come to the last few pages of The Grapes of Wrath . " She argued that a " surreal Twin Peaks @-@ style <unk> [ ... ] hardly bears repeating , " especially if it " avoid [ s ] the ' hugging and learning ' of mainstream television [ by serving up ] such a steady diet of anguish and dashed hopes that viewers refuse to take the risk of making an emotional connection . " Carnivàle , as The Australian stated , " seems to have been conceived in essentially literary terms " which " can sometimes work on the page but is deadly on the large screen , let alone a small one . It 's almost like a biblical injunction against pretension on television . " A reviewer admitted his temptation to dismiss the first season of Carnivàle as " too artsy and esoteric " because his lack of involvement prevented him from understanding " what the heck was going on , [ which ] can be a problem for a dramatic television series . " TV Zone however considered Carnivàle " a series like no other and [ ... ] the fact that it is so open to interpretation surprisingly proves to be one of its greatest strengths . " Carnivàle was lauded for bringing " the hopelessness of the Great Depression to life " and for being among the first TV shows to show " unmitigated pain and disappointment " , but reviewers were not confident that viewers would find the " slowly unfolding sadness " appealing over long or would have the patience or endurance to find out the meaning of the show . 
 = = = Fate and legacy of the mythological storytelling of Carnivàle = = = 
 Viewership did drop significantly in Season 2 , and Carnivàle was cancelled in 2005 after two of six planned seasons . In a post @-@ cancellation interview , Daniel Knauf was positive that someone would let him finish his story someday , if not as a television series , then possibly as a series of features or graphic novels . Knauf approached Marvel Comics to continue the future Carnivàle storyline that he had kept to himself . They seemed interested , but HBO , who own the show and the characters , would not confer their rights . During the 2007 Writers Guild of America strike , Knauf stated that " an idiosyncratic show like Carnivàle would never be greenlit today , " and claimed that present @-@ day television included a high percentage of " talking heads " with " the vast majority of television writers [ not being ] visual storytellers . " Enjoying his creative freedom as graphic storyteller , he has considered directing his efforts away from television series creation . Meanwhile , the mythology of Carnivàle remains in the public conscience . In 2008 , Alessandra Stanley of the Australian newspaper The Age remembered Carnivàle as a " smart , ambitious series that move [ s ] unusual characters around an unfamiliar setting imaginatively , " while A.V. Club called the show " a fantastically rich series with a frustratingly dense mythology " . 
 = Ministry of Finance ( Soviet Union ) = 
 The Ministry of Finance of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics ( USSR ) ( Russian : Министерство <unk> СССР ) , formed on 15 March 1946 , was one of the most important government offices in the Soviet Union . Until 1946 it was known as the People 's Commissariat for Finance ( Russian : Народный комиссариат <unk> – <unk> komissariat <unk> , or " Narkomfin " ) . Narkomfin , at the all @-@ Union level , was established on 6 July 1923 after the signing of the Treaty on the Creation of the USSR , and was based upon the People 's Commissariat for Finance of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic ( RSFSR ) formed in 1917 . The Ministry was led by the Minister of Finance , prior to 1946 a Commissar , who was nominated by the Chairman of the Council of Ministers and then confirmed by the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet . The minister was a member of the Council of Ministers . 
 During the Russian Civil War , and immediately afterwards , the Commissariat usually confiscated property to support government operations . Following a short period of stability after the civil war the Commissariat introduced several governmental taxes on the population . The commissariat 's structure differed little from its Tsarist predecessor , the only notable difference was that the Soviet ministry was very centralised while the Tsarist 's finance ministry was a very decentralised one . The Commissariat , and later the Ministry , prepared the state budget in a joint process with its republican and local branches . The Ministry 's structure went through few changes due to the Soviet government 's conservative approaches to change . Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev introduced several reforms during his rule which had the unintended consequence of considerably hurting the ministry 's prestige . 
 = = Founding and early history = = 
 The Ministry 's predecessor , the People 's Commissariat for Finance of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic ( RSFSR ) , was established by a decree of the second convocation of the All @-@ Russian Congress of Soviets on 8 November [ O.S. 26 October ] 1917 and was part of the Sovnarkom . The first Commissar was Ivan Skvortsov @-@ Stepanov appointed in 1917 . However , following the introduction of the New Economic Policy , Narkomfin was made responsible for Gosbank , the State Bank of the RSFSR and then the State Bank of the Soviet Union . On 26 November 1921 Lenin issued a note calling for the appointment of Grigory <unk> to the newly established post of People 's Commissar for Finance . <unk> took control of the organisation in 1922 , although his formal position was not ratified until November 1922 . In 1946 the Council of People 's Commissars was renamed the Council of Ministers and the People 's Commissariat for Finance was renamed as the Ministry of Finance . 
 In 1928 the Soviet government launched a building program headed by the OSA group . The OSA group oversaw the construction of a building which should have housed the employees of the People 's Commissariat for Finance . Due to its close connections with the Commissariat for Finance the building was often referred to as " the Narkomfin building " . The building was designed by Moisei Ginzburg and <unk> <unk> and has a reputation for being one of the best examples of still @-@ standing Soviet constructivist architecture . The architects tried to give the building a collective feel to it but , when the building was finished in 1932 , it was denounced as a remnant of " leftist utopianism " by Joseph Stalin 's regime . Unlike many other Soviet constructivist buildings there is an ongoing campaign to save it . 
 When Alexei Kosygin , the Chairman of the Council of Ministers , initiated the 1965 economic reform the Ministry of Finance sabotaged the reform by not fully implementing it which , along with many other reasons , helped the reform to fail . 
 = = Duties and responsibilities = = 
 During the formation of the Soviet state , in the late 1910s and early 1920s , the People 's Commissariat for Finance of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic ( RSFSR ) was created . The commissariat did not differ greatly from that of Imperial Russia 's Ministry of Finance and its system . The Soviet finance ministry was a heavily centralised structure , while its predecessor was not . During its humble beginnings , the main task of the People 's Commissariat of Finance were : confiscation of property , robbery and requisition ; printing and creating money ; and taxation . 
 In the immediate aftermath of the October Revolution , and during the Russian Civil War , the Soviet government forcibly confiscated property to support their government . After the inflation of the 1920s printing of money nearly ceased and confiscation of goods became harder ; after years of confiscating there was simply not enough property left to fund government operations anymore . After the civil war the confiscation of property ceased and several government taxes were introduced . The ministry 's tasks were summed up in the 1971 charter : " The USSR Ministry of Finance prepares the draft of the USSR State Budget and bears responsibility for the fulfilment of the USSR State Budget , both for receipts and for expenditures [ ... ] " . Under the rule of Mikhail Gorbachev the Ministry lost much of its power . An example being that before 1990 all foreign trade investments had to be approved by the Ministry of Finance but in 1990 the ministries of finance of the Union republics approved foreign investment . The ministry was of vital importance and in the 1971 charter the Soviet government gave the ministry broad legislative power . As nearly all organisations had some sort of financial aspects the Ministry of Finance set standards and rules for accounting and bookkeeping . It also had the power to issue regulations for the detailed application of the tax legislation . This is also a common feature in the United States Department of Treasury , although the Soviet 's regulations differ in being of a highly centralised manner that the US one does not . The Ministry of Finance usually exercised its powers jointly with other government agencies . The 1971 charter states that the Ministry of Finance had the right to participate with the State Committee on Prices for price @-@ setting in the USSR , but it also participated in the setting of salaries and the fulfillment of the five @-@ year plans with the State Planning Committee and the State Bank of the USSR ( Gosbank ) . 
 The finance ministry started the budget preparation process by preparing instructions , forms and schedules for the upcoming state budget and prepared a preliminary balance of revenues and expenditures using data estimated by the State Planning Committee ( Gosplan ) . This preliminary budget was then sent , together with instructions , to the all @-@ Union ministries and ministries of finance of the Union 's republics . The Union branches of the Ministry of Finance then prepared a budget estimate with information received from the lower Union ministries and information given to them by the all @-@ Union Ministry of Finance . The state budget was conceived after the Union Ministry negotiated a compromise with its republican and local branches and each Soviet republic was given its own state budget . The Economic Committees of the Supreme Soviet voted on the state budget which , if it received enough support , would become policy . 
 = = Organisation = = 
 Positions 
 The leading office of the ministry was the Minister of Finance ( titled " Commissars " until 1946 ) , the head of the ministry . The offices of First Deputy Minister of Finance were seen as the ministry 's second @-@ in @-@ command . 
 There were several Deputy Ministers of Finance , each of them focusing their responsibility in one specific area , for example the financial regulation of the Soviet automobile industry . 
 Departments 
 There were two departments in the Ministry of Finance , both of which were highly centralised but were sometimes subjected to direct control by the local CPSU Party Control Committees . The two departments had their own distinctive budget . The Head of the Department of Revisory Control was recommended by the Minister of Finance and approved by the Council of Ministers , the Head of the Department of Revisory Control for the Union republics was recommended by the republic 's Minister of Finance and the Council of Ministers . 
 The Department of Revisory Control of the Ministry of Finance enforced financial discipline by the following means : observance of laws , supervising financial discipline , controlling the implementation of the state budget , controlling the activities of financial organs , controlling the national insurance of the workers , examining the activities of the State Bank , controlling the audit functions of the internal financial control and controlling the activities of the chief and his senior accountants . 
 The Department of Revisory Control of the Ministries of Finance of the Union Republics : Controlled the implementation of the national budget of the republican Ministries of Finance and their local counterparts . The department also exercised control over enterprises and institutions directly subordinate to the Soviet government . The Department of Budget was a department which took part in drafting the budget of the Soviet Republics . 
 = = Disintegration = = 
