 After the failed August Coup of 1991 Boris Yeltsin and the Ministry of Finance of the RSFSR claimed authority over the Ministry of Finance of the USSR , the state bank and the Bank of Foreign Economic Activity . This meant that the institutions could not carry out any orders without the consent of the RSFSR government . The Ministry of Finance continued functioning until the RSFSR government issued a decree completing its takeover of the Soviet financial system . It was succeeded by the Ministry of Economics and Finance of the Russian Federation ( 1991 ) and the Ministry of Finance of the Russian Federation ( 1992 ) . The last Soviet Minister of Finance was Vladimir <unk> Orlov , and Vladimir <unk> was acting Minister during the period of transition . 
 = = Commissars and ministers = = 
 The following persons headed the Commissariat / Ministry as commissars ( narkoms ) , ministers , and deputy ministers : 
 = Hurricane Gustav ( 1990 ) = 
 Hurricane Gustav was the only major hurricane to form during the 1990 Atlantic hurricane season . Developing out of a tropical wave on August 24 , Gustav tracked westward across the Atlantic Ocean , steadily intensifying . The storm reached hurricane @-@ status on August 26 and reached its initial peak intensity as a strong Category 2 hurricane the following day . After turning towards the north and weakening due to increased wind shear , the storm encountered more favorable conditions and re @-@ intensified , attaining peak winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) around 0600 UTC on August 31 . Gradual weakening took place in the following days. on September 2 , the former hurricane underwent an extratropical transition and dissipated shortly after completing it . At that time , the system was located roughly 230 miles ( 370 km ) south of Iceland . 
 Hurricane Gustav initially posed a significant threat to the Lesser Antilles which had already suffered severe damages from Hurricane Hugo in 1989 . Several watches and warnings were issued for the islands between August 26 and 27 ; however , due to the northward turn , Gustav did not directly impact the region . Only light rain and large swells were reported . Offshore , a ship encountered the storm and sustained hull damage . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Hurricane Gustav originated out of a tropical wave that moved off the western coast of Africa on August 18 . Shortly after , the system became embedded within the Intertropical Convergence Zone and tracked westward across the Atlantic Ocean . By August 23 , the system began to intensify while convective activity become consolidated around the center of circulation . By 0600 UTC on August 24 , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) estimated that the wave spawned Tropical Depression Eight roughly 965 miles ( 1 @,@ 555 km ) east of Barbados . A weak ridge of high pressure to the north of the depression led to a general westward movement of the system . Gradually strengthening , the depression was upgraded to a tropical storm early on August 25 , at which time it was given the name Gustav . 
 A cold @-@ core low pressure system near Gustav was forecast to have an effect on the development of the system ; however , the tropical storm continued to intensify , attaining hurricane status around 1200 UTC on August 26 . Not long after attaining hurricane @-@ status , the ridge steering Gustav to the west began to break down , causing the hurricane to slowly turn towards the north . By 0600 UTC on August 27 , the storm attained Category 2 intensity , with winds of 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) . Later that day , the storm made its closest approach to the Lesser Antilles , passing 205 miles ( 330 km ) to the east . By this time , hurricane and tropical storm @-@ force winds extended 35 miles ( 55 km ) and 175 miles ( 280 km ) from the center respectively . 
 Tracking towards the north , Hurricane Gustav slightly weakened due to increasing wind shear , with winds decreasing to 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) early on August 29 . A trough located near Bermuda and the ridge located to the east of the hurricane kept Gustav on a northward track . The following day , the hurricane re @-@ intensified and again reached Category 2 status . Early on August 31 , Gustav further developed into a major hurricane , a storm with winds of 111 mph ( 178 km / h ) or higher . Around this time , Gustav began to interact with the nearby Tropical Storm Hortense , located roughly 460 miles ( 740 km ) from Gustav . This initiated a Fujiwhara interaction between the two storms , causing Hortense to track counterclockwise around the more intense Gustav . Around 0600 UTC on August 31 , Hurricane Gustav reached its peak intensity with winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 956 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 23 inHg ) , making it the strongest storm of the season . At this time , the storm was located about 450 miles ( 725 km ) east of Bermuda . 
 Throughout September 1 , the storm weakened and the following day , it began to track towards the north @-@ northeast as the ridge located to the east of it strengthened . Additionally , nearby ship reports of sustained winds indicated that tropical storm @-@ force winds extended 230 miles ( 370 km ) northwest of the center of circulation . The trough located west of Gustav began accelerating late on September 2 , causing the hurricane to track towards the northeast , away from Newfoundland . Around 1800 UTC , Gustav weakened to a tropical storm , as winds decreased to 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . By this time , Gustav had entered the Canadian Hurricane Centres area of responsibility , leading to them initiating advisories on the weakening storm . Early the next day , the former hurricane underwent and completed an extratropical transition . The last notice on the remnants of Gustav were while the system was located roughly 230 miles ( 370 km ) south of Iceland . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 At around 1600 UTC on August 26 , the National Hurricane Center issued hurricane watches for Dominica , Martinique , St. Martin , Anguilla , Guadeloupe , Antigua , Barbuda , Montserrat , and St. Kitts and Nevis . Six hours later , the watch was upgraded to a hurricane warning for Guadeloupe , Antigua , Barbuda , Montserrat , and St. Kitts and Nevis . Local meteorological agencies on the islands also declared small craft advisories . The local government in Montserrat mobilized the 100 member police force and 50 off @-@ duty volunteer army members . Supermarkets , hardware stores , banks , and pharmacies were specially opened for residents to purchase plywood , canned food , bottled water , and other hurricane kit items . Around 1300 UTC on August 27 , the hurricane watch for Dominica and Martinique was discontinued as Gustav no longer posed a direct threat to the islands . Three hours later , all watches and warnings were discontinued except for Antigua and Barbuda where a tropical storm warning and St. Martin where a tropical storm watch were in place . By 1900 UTC , once Hurricane Gustav turned towards the north away from the Lesser Antilles , all watches and warnings were discontinued . 
 Gustav had only effects on the Lesser Antilles . Large swells , light rain , and gusty winds were reported along the outer fringes of the hurricane . On August 30 , the Egyptian <unk> <unk> encountered rough seas in relation to Gustav , and the hull of the ship was damaged . The remnants of Gustav severely impacted a seismic research operation off the coast of the United Kingdom which took place between August 25 and September 12 . The purpose of the operation was to collect seismic reflection profiles of the <unk> Plateau . On September 3 , the members of the team had to quickly retrieve all buoys that were deployed to avoid damage to the sensors . However , some of the research tools were damaged before they were recovered . In all , the storm delayed the project by two days . 
 = Delaware Route 2 = 
 Delaware Route 2 ( DE 2 ) is a 10 @.@ 94 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 17 @.@ 61 km ) east – west highway located in northern New Castle County , Delaware . It runs from DE 72 and DE 273 east of Newark east to DE 52 in Wilmington . DE 2 is known variously as Capitol Trail , Kirkwood Highway , Wilmington Avenue , and Lincoln and Union Streets along its route . Between Newark and Wilmington , the route is a four- to six @-@ lane divided highway that passes through suburban areas . In Wilmington , DE 2 is routed along a one @-@ way pair of city streets . 
 What would become DE 2 was paved by 1924 and became a state highway in 1927 , receiving the DE 2 designation by 1936 . At this time , the western terminus of the road was at the Maryland border southwest of Newark , where it continued into that state as Maryland Route 279 ( MD 279 ) . The road was progressively widened into a divided highway from Wilmington to Newark between 1940 and 1964 , bypassing some portions of the road which are now known as Old Capitol Trail . DE 2 was routed to bypass Newark by 1990 , with DE 2 Business ( DE 2 Bus . ) designated on the former route through Newark . In 2013 , the western terminus of DE 2 was truncated to its current location and DE 2 Bus. was decommissioned . The westernmost portion of the route was designated as DE 279 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 DE 2 begins at an intersection with DE 72 and DE 273 in the eastern part of Newark . From here , DE 2 heads north concurrent with DE 72 on Capitol Trail , a four @-@ lane divided highway . The road turns northeast and passes under CSX 's Philadelphia Subdivision railroad line before it leaves Newark and continues northeast through residential areas , briefly becoming undivided as it crosses White Clay Creek . 
 DE 72 splits from DE 2 by heading northwest on Possum Park Road , with DE 2 continuing northeast through suburban areas consisting of homes and businesses as a four @-@ lane divided highway , with the name changing to Kirkwood Highway . The road passes to the south of Pike Creek and intersects several roads including Polly Drummond Hill Road / Red Mill Road , North Harmony Road , Upper Pike Creek Road , Pike Creek Road , and Milltown Road . In Marshallton , the route widens to six lanes and comes to an intersection with DE 7 . 
 Past this intersection , DE 2 continues past businesses , intersecting Duncan Road . The road comes to a bridge over Red Clay Creek and the Wilmington and Western Railroad before entering Prices Corner and reaching an intersection with Newport Gap Pike , which heads northwest as DE 41 and southeast as DE 62 . At this point , DE 2 passes to the north of Prices Corner Shopping Center . The road comes to a bridge over Centerville Road before reaching a partial cloverleaf interchange with the DE 141 freeway . 
 Following this interchange , DE 2 narrows to four lanes and continues east through a mix of homes and businesses , crossing Little Mill Creek and passing to the south of a V.A. Hospital . At this point , the route enters Elsmere and briefly turns southeast before curving back to the east and reaching an intersection with DE 100 . Past this intersection , the road comes to a bridge over a junction between CSX 's Philadelphia Subdivision and an East Penn Railroad line before running past homes as Union Street . 
 DE 2 crosses into Wilmington to the north of Canby Park and splits into the one @-@ way pair of South Lincoln Street eastbound and South Union Street westbound , heading northeast . The one @-@ way pair , which carries two lanes in each direction , passes urban homes and businesses and reaches an intersection with DE 48 ( Lancaster Avenue ) in the Union Park Gardens neighborhood . At this point , DE 2 becomes North Lincoln Street eastbound and North Union Street westbound , with the westbound direction forming a concurrency with westbound DE 48 between West 2nd Street and Lancaster Avenue . The highway enters the Little Italy neighborhood , where it intersects the northern terminus of DE 9 . The route continues north to its eastern terminus at DE 52 . 
 DE 2 has an annual average daily traffic count ranging from a high of 49 @,@ 378 vehicles at the DE 141 interchange to a low of 20 @,@ 486 vehicles between DE 48 and DE 52 . The entire length of DE 2 is part of the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 What would become DE 2 was originally an unimproved county road between Newark and Wilmington by 1920 . By 1924 , the road was paved . In 1925 , suggestions were made for the state to take over maintenance of the highway connecting the Maryland border to Newark and Wilmington , which was known as the Lincoln Highway , the Wilmington @-@ Newark highway , or the Capitol Trail . The same year , recommendations were made to remove a grade crossing with a junction between the Reading Railroad ( now the East Penn Railroad ) and the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad ( now CSX 's Philadelphia Subdivision ) in Elsmere . In 1927 , the state took over maintenance of the highway between the Maryland border and Wilmington via Newark . In November 1931 , the Marshallton Cutoff was opened , bypassing the narrow and winding route through the community of Marshallton . This section included a through plate girder bridge over the Red Clay Creek . 
 By 1936 , DE 2 was designated to run from the Maryland border southwest of Newark , where it connected to MD 279 , to DE 52 in Wilmington , following Elkton Road , Main Street , Capitol Trail , New Road , and Union Street . In 1938 , construction began on widening DE 2 into a divided highway between Prices Corner and Elsmere , with plans to extend the divided highway westward to bypass the two @-@ lane section through Marshallton to the north along a new alignment . In 1939 , the divided highway alignment of DE 2 was completed between DE 7 and Elsmere , with the exception of the bridge over the Red Clay Creek in Cranston Heights . This bridge was finished in 1940 , completing the improvement of DE 2 into a divided highway between DE 7 and Elsmere . 
 In 1940 , plans were made to eliminate the grade crossing with the railroad junction in Elsmere by replacing it with a bridge over the tracks along with a new alignment for DE 2 between the end of the divided highway in Elsmere and Union and Lincoln streets in Wilmington . Due to World War II and steel shortages , construction of the bridge would be delayed until after the war . In December 1949 , the bridge carrying the route over the Reading Railroad and the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad in Elsmere was opened to traffic , with final work on the bridge finished in 1950 . 
 In 1956 , DE 2 and DE 273 were routed onto the one @-@ way pair of Delaware Avenue eastbound and Main Street westbound in downtown Newark following an eastward extension of Delaware Avenue to the intersection between DE 2 and DE 273 east of the city . In 1957 , work began to widen DE 2 into a four @-@ lane divided highway between the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad ( now CSX 's Philadelphia Subdivision ) bridge in Newark and DE 7 . The divided highway was extended west to Red Mill Road by 1959 . Also by this time , the route was split into a one @-@ way pair in Wilmington on Union Street and Lincoln Street . The road between Newark and Red Mill Road became a divided highway by 1964 . The portion of DE 2 along Elkton Road between the Maryland border and Newark was widened into a divided highway in 1972 . 
 The Christiana Parkway around the southern edge of Newark was completed in September 1983 . By 1990 , DE 2 was realigned to bypass Newark along Christiana Parkway , which carried portions of DE 4 and DE 896 , Chestnut Hill Road , which also carried DE 4 , and South Chapel Street and Library Avenue , which was also DE 72 . With this realignment , the former route through Newark became DE 2 Bus . In 2013 , DelDOT proposed the renumbering of routes in and around Newark . The plan called for DE 2 to start at DE 273 ( Main Street ) east of Newark instead of at the Maryland state line as well as the removal of the DE 2 Bus. designation through Newark . In addition , the portion of Elkton Road between the Maryland border and the Christiana Parkway would be designated as DE 279 . The goal of the project was to " simplify the route designations in Newark , reduce sign clutter , and reduce sign maintenance costs . " The changes were completed in summer 2013 . In 2015 , the concurrency with DE 41 in Prices Corner was removed . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in New Castle County . 
 = = Bannered routes = = 
 Delaware Route 2 Business ( DE 2 Bus . ) was a 2 @.@ 91 @-@ mile ( 4 @.@ 68 km ) long business route of DE 2 that ran through Newark . DE 2 Bus. continued northeast from an intersection with DE 2 / DE 4 / DE 896 southwest of downtown Newark along four @-@ lane divided Elkton Road , concurrent with DE 896 . From this point , DE 2 Bus . / DE 896 headed into residential areas . The road changed names to South Main Street and became undivided as it passed businesses before reaching downtown Newark . Here , DE 2 Bus . / DE 896 intersected DE 273 , with the road splitting into a one @-@ way pair . Eastbound DE 2 Bus . / northbound DE 896 ran concurrent with eastbound DE 273 on West Delaware Avenue , heading to the east , while westbound DE 2 Bus . / southbound DE 896 remained along South Main Street , also concurrent with eastbound DE 273 . The one @-@ way pair carried two lanes in each direction . Westbound DE 2 Bus. entered South Main Street from West Main Street , which also carried the westbound direction of DE 273 and the northbound direction of DE 896 . At the intersection with South College Avenue , the concurrency in both directions with northbound DE 896 ended . DE 2 Bus . / DE 273 passed through the University of Delaware campus and continued through the commercial downtown as East Delaware Avenue eastbound and East Main Street westbound . Farther east , East Delaware Avenue shifted farther to the south of East Main Street , with the one @-@ way streets passing between a residential neighborhood and East Delaware Avenue passing to the north of Newark High School . Past here , the route came to an intersection with DE 2 / DE 72 . At this point , DE 2 Bus. ended and eastbound DE 273 headed north with DE 2 / DE 72 to rejoin westbound DE 273 . 
 The route was created by 1990 when DE 2 was routed to bypass Newark . In 2012 , the Newark city council voted in favor of renaming the portion of Elkton Road carrying DE 2 Bus . / DE 896 between West Park Place and West Main Street to South Main Street in order to promote businesses along this stretch of road . The change went into effect January 1 , 2013 . DE 2 Bus. was decommissioned in 2013 as part of changes that also truncated the western terminus of DE 2 to the intersection with DE 72 and DE 273 in the eastern part of Newark . 
 Major intersections 
 The entire route was in Newark , New Castle County . 
 = George Rogers Clark National Historical Park = 
 George Rogers Clark National Historical Park , located in Vincennes , Indiana , on the banks of the Wabash River at what is believed to be the site of Fort Sackville , is a United States National Historical Park . President Calvin Coolidge authorized a classical memorial and President Franklin D. Roosevelt dedicated the completed structure in 1936 . 
 In a celebrated campaign , Lieutenant Colonel George Rogers Clark , older brother of William Clark , and his frontiersmen captured Fort Sackville and British Lt. Governor Henry Hamilton on February 25 , 1779 . The heroic march of Clark 's men from Kaskaskia on the Mississippi River in mid @-@ winter and the subsequent victory over the British remains one of the great feats of the American Revolution . 
 In 1966 , Indiana transferred the site to the National Park Service . Adjacent to the memorial is a visitor center which presents interpretive programs and displays . The center is located on South 2nd Street in Vincennes . It is located in the Vincennes Historic District . 
 = = History = = 
 The memorial is placed at the believed site of Fort Sackville ; no archeological evidence has shown the exact location , but it is undoubtedly within the park 's boundaries . The episode being commemorated marked the finest moment in General George Rogers Clark 's life . He was sent by the state of Virginia to protect its interest in the Old Northwest . His 1778 @-@ 1779 campaign included the founding of Louisville , Kentucky and the capture of British forts in the lower Ohio and Mississippi valleys . Forces under Clark 's command had captured Fort Sackville months before , but when notified that British forces under Henry Hamilton had retaken the fort , Clark led a desperate march to retake the fort again for the American cause , succeeding on February 25 , 1779 . This led to the newly formed United States claiming control of what would become the states of Ohio , Illinois , Indiana , Michigan , and Wisconsin in the 1783 Treaty of Paris . 
 As Vincennes grew in the 1800s , it overran the site of Fort Sackville and its boundaries were lost . In 1905 , the Daughters of the American Revolution placed a stone marker on what they believed was the location of the fort . In 1929 , local residents made a major effort to commemorate the 150th anniversary of Clark 's campaign . The state of Indiana chose to build a memorial to General Clark 's triumph in the 1930s , with the assistance of the United States government ; the various funds amounted to $ 2 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 . The memorial was designed by New York architect Frederic Charles <unk> and dedicated June 14 , 1936 , by President Franklin Roosevelt . Though the National Park Service in 1976 called the finished memorial the " last major Classical style memorial " constructed in the United States , the New York State Memorial to Theodore Roosevelt at the American Museum of Natural History by John Russell Pope was also completed in 1936 , and Pope 's Jefferson Memorial in Washington , D.C. was completed 1939 @-@ 1943 , are of the same era . 
 = = Structures = = 
 The memorial building is a circular granite structure surrounded by sixteen granite fluted Greek Doric columns in a <unk> colonnade , capped with a saucer dome of glass panels and resting on a stylobate . The north and east corners have restrooms and various maintenance rooms . Except for the maintenance rooms , these feature plastered walls and ceilings , marble wainscoting , and terrazzo flooring . Visitors enter the memorial by climbing thirty granite steps in the northwest corner . The basement is unfinished , with fluorescent lighting revealing a ceiling and walls of exposed concrete , and a dirt floor . 
 Other prominent features in the park include Johns Angel 's granite statue of Francis Vigo , a 4 @-@ by @-@ 9 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 2 by 2 @.@ 7 m ) monument overlooking the Wabash River erected in 1934 that honors the Italian @-@ American merchant who assisted General Clark . The adjacent grounds of the Basilica of St. Francis Xavier hold a 1934 bronze statue by Albin Polasek honoring Father Pierre <unk> , another figure in the Revolutionary War . Raoul <unk> designed the Lincoln Memorial Bridge across the Wabash River to compliment the memorial aesthetically . It includes relief carvings designed by a monument by Nellie Walker on the Illinois side of the bridge and celebrates the migration of Abraham Lincoln . A concrete floodwall that protects the memorial and Vincennes from Wabash flooding is also designed in a complimentary Classical style . The grounds also hold a memorial to the soldiers from Knox County who served in World War I , a marker denoting where Clark 's headquarters probably stood during his siege of Fort Sackville , and the original Daughters of the American Revolution memorial , which has moved several times due to construction of the main memorial . 
 = = Murals = = 
 <unk> Ezra Winter executed a series of eleven murals for the building . 
 = = Purpose and significance = = 
 The park was authorized by the Act of July 23 , 1966 ( PL 89 @-@ 517 ) . This law ( Appendix A ) contains three provisions . The first authorized the Secretary of the Interior to accept from the State of Indiana , the donation of the Clark Memorial and surrounding grounds for a national park . This was accomplished within one year of the law ’ s enactment . The second provision permits the Secretary to enter into cooperative agreements with the owners of other historic properties in Vincennes which are associated with George Rogers Clark and the Northwest Territory . Such properties would become part of the park , and the Secretary could assist in their preservation , renewal and interpretation . The third provision requires the Secretary to administer , protect , develop and maintain the park in accordance with the provisions of the act of August 25 , 1916 , which established the National Park Service . 
 George Rogers Clark NHP was established to commemorate the accomplishments of George Rogers Clark and the expansion of the United States into the Northwest Territory ; to commemorate this story and its significance to the American people ; and to cooperate in the preservation , renewal and interpretation of the sites and structures in Vincennes associated with this story . The park also commemorates the actions of Father Pierre <unk> and Francis Vigo who sided with Clark against the British . 
 The park is located on the site of Fort Sackville which Clark captured from the British during the American Revolution on February 25 , 1779 . The victory extended American land claims in the Ohio Valley and contributed to the United States acquisition of the Northwest Territory in the 1783 Treaty of Paris . No structures dating from the Revolution exist in the park today . 
 The historical theme represented by George Rogers Clark NHP is the “ Revolution , War in the Frontier , ” according to 1987 History and Prehistory in the National Park System and the National Historic Landmarks Program . 
 = = Restoration = = 
 August 9 , 2008 , George Rogers Clark National Historical Park closed for 13 @-@ months to complete a three @-@ million @-@ dollar renovation by Frontier <unk> , Inc out of Denton , Texas . Park Superintendent Dale Phillips said , " This is a once @-@ in @-@ a @-@ lifetime restoration project , and is critically needed for the long @-@ term preservation of the Clark Memorial " . The main goal was to fix the drainage of the terrace , which has leaked since the 1930s , and renovate the access steps . The monument reopened September 24 , 2009 , and was rededicated on October 3 , 2009 . The 2009 Spirit of Vincennes Rendezvous was not impacted by the renovation . 
 Work during the renovation included demolition and installation of new parapets and <unk> ; repair of wall cracks ; removal , temporary storage , and numbering of approximately 1 @,@ 000 large granite paving stones ; installation of new waterproofing on the existing concrete structural deck of the plaza and the monuments stylobate ; cleaning and repair of the granite stone , steps , and veneer ; installation of a new exposed aggregate concrete walking surface around the Monument plaza ; and replacing the existing sprinkler system and landscaping elements . This repaired problems first identified in a 1939 structural inspection . 
 George Rogers Clark National Historical Park will be honored on an America the Beautiful Quarter representing Indiana in 2017 . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = 12 Songs of Christmas ( Etta James album ) = 
 12 Songs of Christmas is a holiday album by American singer Etta James , released in October 1998 through the record label Private Music . The album , produced by John Snyder , features standards arranged mostly by pianist Cedar Walton and solos by Walton , George Bohanon on trombone and Red Holloway on tenor saxophone . Critical reception of the album was positive overall . Following its release , 12 Songs reached a peak position of number five on Billboard 's Top Blues Albums chart . 
 = = Composition = = 
 12 Songs of Christmas consists of twelve standard holiday songs with arrangements mostly by pianist Cedar Walton and solos by Walton , George Bohanon on trombone and Red Holloway on tenor saxophone . The album combines James ' blues style with a jazz sound . 12 Songs , recorded during May and June 1998 , was produced by John Snyder with Lupe DeLeon serving as executive producer . 
 The album opens with " Winter Wonderland " , originally by Felix Bernard and Richard B. Smith , followed by James Pierpont 's " Jingle Bells " . A " bluesy " rendition of Lou Baxter and Johnny Moore 's " Merry Christmas , Baby " trails " This Time of Year " ( Hollis , Owens ) . Other holiday standards appearing on the album include : " Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas " ( Ralph Blane , Hugh Martin ) , John Frederick Coots and Haven Gillespie 's " Santa Claus Is Coming to Town " , and " White Christmas " , originally by Irving Berlin . " The Christmas Song ( Chestnuts Roasting on an Open Fire ) " , originally by Mel Tormé and Robert Wells , " The Little Drummer Boy ( Carol of the Drum ) " ( Katherine Kennicott Davis , Henry Onorati , Harry Simeone ) , Franz Xaver Gruber and Joseph Mohr 's " Silent Night " , and " Joy to the World " ( George Frideric Handel , Lowell Mason , Isaac Watts ) follow . The album closes with a rendition of Adolphe Adam and John Sullivan Dwight 's " O Holy Night " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critical reception of the album was positive overall . Jon Pareles of The New York Times wrote a positive review of the album , claiming that James turned standards into " suave after @-@ hours jazz arrangements " that seemed " cozy and intimate " . He wrote that James was " surprisingly reverent " and sounded " downright devout " on " Joy to the World " . Entertainment Weekly 's Matt Diehl felt that James ' performances brought both " sass and class " and " ooze [ d ] passionately with old @-@ school soul " . David Hinckley of New York City 's Daily News awarded 12 Songs " two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half bells " out of four . Rolling Stone called 12 Songs a " tour de force of interpretive rethinking " with " scintillating , bluesy spins on Yuletide evergreens " . The Spartanburg Herald @-@ Journal 's Dan DeLuca also complimented the set . 
 The album received some negative criticism . Larry Nager of The Cincinnati Enquirer awarded the album two out of four stars and wrote that James had the ability to make " the ultimate blue Christmas disc " but failed to do so . Nager complimented " Merry Christmas , Baby " but considered the performance to be a " rare bit of juke joint " among " supper club sounds " that left him " wanting more " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 " Winter Wonderland " ( Felix Bernard , Richard B. Smith ) – 4 : 26 
 " Jingle Bells " ( James Pierpont , traditional ) – 5 : 26 
 " This Time of Year " ( Jesse Hollis , Cliff Owens ) – 5 : 47 
 " Merry Christmas , Baby " ( Lou Baxter , Johnny Moore ) – 6 : 10 
 " Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas " ( Ralph Blane , Hugh Martin ) – 4 : 45 
 " Santa Claus Is Coming to Town " ( John Frederick Coots , Haven Gillespie ) – 6 : 22 
 " White Christmas " ( Irving Berlin ) – 5 : 52 
 " The Christmas Song ( Chestnuts Roasting on an Open Fire ) " ( Mel Tormé , Robert Wells ) – 4 : 23 
 " The Little Drummer Boy ( Carol of the Drum ) " ( Katherine Kennicott Davis , Henry Onorati , Harry Simeone ) – 4 : 59 
 " Silent Night " ( Franz Xaver Gruber , Joseph Mohr , traditional ) – 4 : 49 
 " Joy to the World " ( George Frideric Handel , Lowell Mason , traditional , Isaac Watts ) – 5 : 30 
 " O Holy Night " ( Adolphe Adam , John Sullivan Dwight ) – 4 : 50 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from Allmusic . 
 = = Charts = = 
 Following its release , 12 Songs of Christmas reached a peak position of number five on Billboard 's Top Blues Albums chart . In 1999 , James had five albums chart in the United States : Life , Love & the Blues , 12 Songs of Christmas , Heart of a Woman ( 1999 ) , as well as two compilation albums Best of Etta James and Her Best ( 1997 ) . 
 = History of the horse in Britain = 
 The known history of the horse in Britain starts with horse remains found in Pakefield , Suffolk , dating from 700 @,@ 000 BC , and in Boxgrove , West Sussex , dating from 500 @,@ 000 BC . Early humans were active hunters of horses , and finds from the Ice Age have been recovered from many sites . At that time , land which now forms the British Isles was part of a peninsula attached to continental Europe by a low @-@ lying area now known as " Doggerland , " and land animals could migrate freely between what is now island Britain and continental Europe . The domestication of horses , and their use to pull vehicles , had begun in Britain by 2500 BC ; by the time of the Roman conquest of Britain , British tribes could assemble armies which included thousands of chariots . 
 Horse improvement as a goal , and horse breeding as an enterprise , date to medieval times ; King John imported a hundred Flemish stallions , Edward III imported fifty Spanish stallions , and various priories and abbeys owned stud farms . Laws were passed restricting and prohibiting horse exports and for the culling of horses considered undesirable in type . By the 17th century , specific horse breeds were being recorded as suitable for specific purposes , and new horse @-@ drawn agricultural machinery was being designed . Fast coaches pulled by teams of horses with Thoroughbred blood could make use of improved roads , and coaching inn proprietors owned hundreds of horses to support the trade . Steam power took over the role of horses in agriculture from the mid @-@ 19th century , but horses continued to be used in warfare for almost another 100 years , as their speed and agility over rough terrain remained unequalled . Working horses had all but disappeared from Britain by the 1980s , and today horses in Britain are kept almost wholly for recreational purposes . 
 = = Pleistocene epoch = = 
 The earliest horse remains found in the area now covered by Britain and Ireland date to the Middle Pleistocene . Two species of horse have been identified from remains at Pakefield , East Anglia , dating back to 700 @,@ 000 BC . Spear damage on a horse shoulder bone discovered at Eartham Pit , Boxgrove , dated 500 @,@ 000 BC , showed that early hominids were hunting horses in the area at that time . The land which now comprises the British Isles was periodically joined to continental Europe by a land bridge , extending from approximately the current coast of North Yorkshire to the English Channel , most recently until about 9 @,@ 000 years ago . Dependent on the rise and fall of sea levels associated with advancing and retreating Ice ages , this allowed humans and fauna to migrate between these areas ; as the climate fluctuated , hunters could follow their prey , including equids . 
 Although much of Britain from this time is now beneath the sea , remains have been discovered on land that show horses were present , and being hunted , in this period . Significant finds include a horse tooth dating from between 55 @,@ 000 and 47 @,@ 000 BC and horse bones dating from between 50 @,@ 000 and 45 @,@ 000 BC , recovered from Pin Hole Cave , in the Creswell Crags ravine in the North Midlands ; further horse remains from the same era have been recovered from Kent 's Cavern . In Robin Hood Cave , also in Creswell Crags , a horse tooth was recovered dating from between 32 @,@ 000 and 24 @,@ 000 BC ; this cave has also preserved one of the earliest examples of prehistoric artwork in Britain – an engraving of a horse , on a piece of horse bone . A goddess figurine carved from horse bone and dating from around 23 @,@ 000 BC has been recovered from Paviland Cave in South Wales . 
 Horse remains dating to the later part of this period – roughly coinciding with the end of the last glacial period – have been found at Farndon Fields , Nottinghamshire , dating from around 12 @,@ 000 BC . Mother Grundy 's Parlour , also in Creswell Crags , contains horse remains showing cut marks indicating that hunting of horses occurred there around 10 @,@ 000 BC . A study of Victoria Cave in North Yorkshire produced a horse bone showing cut marks dating from about the same time . 
 = = Holocene period = = 
 The Holocene period began around 11 @,@ 700 years ago and continues to the present . Identified with the current warm period , known as " Marine Isotope Stage 1 " , or MIS 1 , the Holocene is considered an interglacial period in the current Ice Age . Horse remains dating from the Mesolithic period , or Middle Stone Age , early in the Holocene , have been found in Britain , though much of Mesolithic Britain now lies under the North Sea , the Irish Sea and the English Channel , and material which may include archaeological evidence for the presence of the horse in Britain continues to be washed into the sea , by rivers and coastal erosion . 
 During the Devensian glaciation , the northernmost part of the peninsula from which Britain was formed was covered with glacial ice , and the sea level was about 120 metres ( 390 ft ) lower than it is today . This glacial ice advanced and retreated several times during this period , and much of what is now the North Sea and the English Channel was an expanse of low @-@ lying tundra , which , around 12 @,@ 000 BC , extended northwards to a point roughly parallel with Aberdeenshire , in eastern Scotland . In 1998 , archaeologist B.J. Coles named this low @-@ lying area " Doggerland " , in which the River Thames flowed somewhat to the north of its current route , joining the Rhine to flow west to the Atlantic Ocean along the line of what is now the English Channel . Human hunters roamed this land , which , by about 8000 BC , had a varied coastline of lagoons , salt marshes , mudflats , beaches , inland streams , rivers , marshes , and included lakes . It may have been the richest hunting , fowling and fishing ground available to the people of Mesolithic Europe . 
 Horse remains dating from 10 @,@ 500 – 8 @,@ 000 BC have been recovered from Sewell 's Cave , Flixton , Seamer Carr , Uxbridge and Thatcham . Remains dating from around 7 @,@ 000 BC have been found in Gough 's Cave in Cheddar . 
 Although there is an apparent absence of horse remains between 7000 BC and 3500 BC , there is evidence that wild horses remained in Britain after it became an island separate from Europe by about 5 @,@ 500 BC . Pre @-@ domestication wild horse bones have been found in Neolithic tombs of the Severn @-@ Cotswold type , dating from around 3500 BC . 
 = = Domestication in pre @-@ Roman times = = 
 Domesticated horses were present in Bronze Age Britain from around 2000 BC . Bronze Age horse trappings including snaffle bits have been found which were used in harnessing horses to vehicles ; Bronze Age cart wheels have been found at Flag Fen and Blair Drummond , the latter dating from around 1255 – 815 BC , though these may have belonged to vehicles pulled by oxen . Early Bronze Age evidence for horses being ridden is lacking , though bareback riding may have involved materials which have not survived or have not been found ; but horses were ridden in battle in Britain by the late Bronze Age . Domesticated ponies were on Dartmoor by around 1500 BC . 
 Excavations of Iron Age sites have recovered horse bones from ritual pits at a temple site near Cambridge , and around twenty Iron Age chariot burials have been found , including one of a woman discovered at <unk> Slack . The majority of Iron Age chariot burials in Britain are associated with the Arras culture , and in most cases the chariots were dismantled before burial . Exceptions are the Ferrybridge and Newbridge chariots , which are the only ones found to have been buried intact . The Newbridge burial has been radiocarbon dated to 520 – 370 BC , and the Ferrybridge burial is likely to be of similar date . 
 Towards the end of the Iron Age , there is much evidence for the use of horses in transport and battle , and for extensive trade between the inhabitants of Britain and other cultures . A collection of Iron Age artefacts from Polden Hill in Somerset includes a very large hoard of horse gear , and a rare , cast copper alloy cheekpiece dating from the late , pre @-@ Roman Iron Age was found in St Ewe , Cornwall . The horse was an important figure in Bronze Age and Iron Age Celtic religion and myth , and is symbolised in the hill figure of the Uffington White Horse , near the Iron Age hill fort of Uffington Castle in Oxfordshire . 
 = = Roman Britain to the Norman Conquest = = 
 By the time of Julius Caesar 's attempted invasion of Britain in 55 BC , the inhabitants of Britain included proficient horsemen . Caesar 's forces were met by British horsemen and war chariots , the chariots <unk> the Gaulish horsemen who had accompanied him . Caesar later faced organised resistance led by Cassivellaunus , with over 4 @,@ 000 war chariots . To the east of the Pennines , the Romans also encountered the <unk> , or " horse @-@ riding warriors . " The spread and development of horse trappings recovered from this period , such as bits , strap junctions and <unk> , have been used to indicate the withdrawal of ruling groups of Britons during the Roman conquest of Britain . 
 A large amount of horse dung has been found in a well at a Roman fort in Lancaster , Lancashire , which was a base for cavalry units in the 1st and 2nd centuries . The bones of 28 horses have been found in a Roman well at Dunstable , Bedfordshire , which was a Roman posting @-@ station on Watling Street , where horses would have been kept . These horses had been butchered for horsemeat ; but a revival of the cult of the Celtic goddess Epona , protector of horses , donkeys and mules , may account for horse carcasses buried whole at Dunstable , with " special care " . Buried with humans in a 4th – 5th century cemetery , these horses represent a belief that Epona protected the dead . 
 One of the earliest records of British horses being recognised for their quality and exported dates from the Roman era ; many British horses were taken to Italy to improve native stock . Some of the earliest evidence of horses used for sport in Britain also dates from Roman times , a chariot @-@ racing arena having been discovered at Colchester , in Essex . 
 From the 5th century , the role of the horse in Anglo @-@ Saxon culture is partly illustrated by the number of words for " horse " in Old English . These distinguish between cart horses ( two words ) , pack horses ( two words ) , riding horses ( three words ) , horses for breeding ( three words , male and female ) , horses suitable for royalty and aristocracy ( five words , of which three were mainly used in poetry ) , and warhorses ( one word ) . There was no word for " plough horse , " and no evidence that horses were used for ploughing in Anglo @-@ Saxon times , when this was still done by ox teams ; but Domesday Book records a horse used for harrowing , in 1086 . Horses were used predominantly for transporting goods and people ; numerous English place @-@ names , such as <unk> , <unk> and <unk> , refer to the keeping of " studs " , in this case " herds " , of horses ; and Anglo @-@ Saxon stirrups and spurs have been found by archaeologists . Horses were also raced for sport , and a " race @-@ course " in Kent is mentioned in a charter of King Eadred , dated 949 . 
 There is some evidence that horses were occasionally eaten , perhaps in a hard winter , or ridden until five years of age and then slaughtered for meat ; but there are many references in medieval sources indicating that the Anglo @-@ Saxons placed a high value on horses . They were often included in the price paid for land and in bequests and other gifts , and kings ' servants included horse @-@ thegns , or marshals . Numerous horses and horse @-@ breeding establishments were recorded in Domesday Book , though many more horses were probably omitted , given the need for horses for riding and pulling carts . Only 71 smiths are recorded in Domesday Book , but others " must be concealed under the heading of other classes . " Six smiths in Hereford were obliged to supply 120 horseshoes each year for the maintenance of horses belonging to warriors . 
 Horses held religious significance in Anglo @-@ Saxon paganism . The 8th century historian Bede , of Jarrow , in Northumbria , wrote that the first Anglo @-@ Saxon chieftains , in the 5th century , were Hengist and Horsa – Old English words for " stallion " and " horse " , respectively . Modern scholars regard Hengist and Horsa as horse deities venerated by pagan Anglo @-@ Saxons , <unk> into ancestors of Anglo @-@ Saxon royalty , and stemming from the divine twins of Proto @-@ Indo @-@ European religion , with cognates in various other Indo @-@ European cultures . 
 Horses appear frequently in accounts concerning miraculous events in the context of Anglo @-@ Saxon Christianity . In the 7th century , a horse is reported to have revealed warm bread and some meat when St Cuthbert was hungry , by pulling straw from the roof of a hut ; and , when Cuthbert was suffering from a diseased knee , he was visited by an angel on horseback , who helped him to heal his knee . In the 8th century , the Anglo @-@ Saxon Bishop Willibald of Eichstätt wrote that , when a source of fresh water was needed for a monastery on the site where St Boniface had died , in the kingdom of Frisia , the ground gave way under the forelegs of a horse , and , when the horse was pulled free , a fountain of spring water came out of the ground and formed a brook . In the 10th century , King Edmund I is reported to have been saved from death while chasing a deer on horseback when he prayed for forgiveness for his maltreatment of St Dunstan , and thereafter made him abbot of Glastonbury : the horse stopped at the edge of a cliff , over which the deer and hunting dogs had already fallen . On a later occasion , a horse fell dead under Dunstan when he heard a voice from heaven telling him that King Eadred had died . 
 Although there is reference to Viking horsemen fighting in the 10th century Battle of <unk> , in Ireland , their primary use for horses in Britain – some of which they captured or seized , and some of which they brought with them – was to facilitate rapid travel . This is a central purpose for which horses were used in Anglo @-@ Saxon England , particularly in warfare , since conflict between the various Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdoms was carried out over long distances . In the 7th century , King Penda of Mercia , in central England , took his armies north to Bamburgh , nearly 50 miles ( 80 km ) north of Hadrian 's Wall ; and Oswald of Northumbria was killed fighting the Mercians in Shropshire . These armies probably rode horses to war , and the maintenance of horses was required of many , or perhaps all , who held land under Anglo @-@ Saxon kings . In the 7th century , an Anglo @-@ Saxon warrior was buried with his horse at Sutton Hoo ; carvings on Anglo @-@ Saxon stone crosses feature warriors on horseback ; and 62 " warhorses " are recorded in Domesday Book . In the 11th century , Anglo @-@ Saxon warriors on horseback fought successfully against Viking , Welsh and Scottish armies , the latter including Norman allies . 
 Duke William of Normandy shipped horses across the English Channel when he invaded England in 1066 , and the outcome of the subsequent Battle of Hastings has been described as " the inevitable victory of <unk> cavalry over helpless infantry " . The Battle of Hastings took place in King Harold of England 's former earldom , at the centre of his property and connections ; but it came less than three weeks after he had taken an army north and defeated Norwegian invaders , under King Harald Hardrada , at the Battle of Stamford Bridge , near York . Harold of England had then been " strong in cavalry " . However , that battle had seriously depleted the English king 's resources in the south , and , although he re @-@ <unk> his army in London on his way to meet the Norman invaders , the force which he brought to the Battle of Hastings was smaller than that which fought at the Battle of Stamford Bridge . No English cavalry was deployed : 
 [ This ] was a tactical decision ... The [ English ] troops withstood four Norman cavalry charges before they finally broke and this may well have been due to the deaths of commanders rather than the superiority of the invaders ' mounted troops . 
 Although these mounted troops have been described as cavalry , their weapons and armour were similar to those of foot soldiers , and they did not fight as an organised group in the way that cavalries are normally understood to have done . 
 = = Medieval period to the Industrial Age = = 
 The improvement of horses for various purposes began in earnest during the Middle Ages . King Alexander I of Scotland ( c . 1078 – 1124 ) imported two horses of Eastern origin into Britain , in the first documented import of oriental horses . King John of England ( 1199 – 1216 ) imported 100 Flemish stallions to continue the improvement of the " great horse " for tournament and breeding . At the coronation of Edward I of England and his queen Eleanor of Castile in 1274 , royal and aristocratic guests gave away hundreds of their own horses , to whoever could catch them . 
 [ When King Edward ] was sat at his meat king [ Alexander III ] of Scotland came to do him service ... and a hundred knights with him , horsed and arrayed . And when they were light off their horses , they let their horses go whither they would , and they that could catch them had them to their own behoof . ... [ The Earl of Pembroke and the Earl of Warenne each ] led a horse by their hand , and a hundred of their knights did the same . And when they were alight off their horses they let them go wherever they would , and they that could take them had them still at their liking . 
 King Edward III of England ( 1312 – 1377 ) imported 50 Spanish stallions , and three " great horses " from France . He was a passionate supporter of hunting , the tournament , and horse racing , in which Spanish horses known as " running horses " were then primarily involved . 
 Horse ownership was widespread by the 12th century . Both tenant farmers and landlords were involved in the harrowing of land for arable crops in the relatively new open field system , and employed horses for this work . Horses and carts were increasingly used for transporting farm goods and implements ; peasants were obliged to transport such items in their own carts , though the poorest may have had to rely on one horse for all their farm work . The necessity for carting produce revolutionised communication between villages . Horse @-@ breeding as an enterprise continued ; in the 14th century , Hexham Priory had 80 broodmares , the Prior of Durham owned two stud farms , Rievaulx Abbey owned one , Gilbert d <unk> , Earl of Angus , in Scotland , had significant grazing lands for mares , and horse @-@ breeding was being carried out both east and west of the Pennines . 
 The introduction of the horse @-@ drawn , four @-@ wheeled wagon in Britain , by the early 15th century at the latest , meant that much heavier loads could be hauled , but brought with it the necessity for horse teams capable of hauling those heavier loads over the poor roads of the time . Where loads were suitable , and the ground was exceptionally poor , pack horses had an advantage over wagons as they needed fewer handlers , were faster , and could travel over much rougher ground . By that time , post @-@ horses were available for general hire in post @-@ stage towns on principal routes in England . These were used by royal messengers with warrants from the Privy Council to hire horses at half price , but they would be delayed if all available horses were already engaged . In 1482 , while in Scotland , King Edward IV established a temporary relay of riders between London and Berwick @-@ upon @-@ Tweed , which allowed messages to be transmitted within two days , and appears to have imitated a system used by Louis XI of France . London merchants established a private post @-@ horse system for correspondence with Calais , France , in 1496 . Henry VIII appointed the first British Master of the Post in 1512 : he established local postmasters , whose post @-@ boys would carry royal mail from one stage to the next on horseback , in a system which " combined elements of several European models " . 
 By the early 16th century , horse teams were beginning to replace ox teams in ploughing work in Britain because of their greater speed , strength and agility , particularly on lighter soils ; in heavier soils ox teams retained an advantage , both because they pulled more steadily , albeit more slowly , and because they could work despite being fed by grazing alone . While the horse collar , which allows a horse greater freedom to pull heavy loads , had been used in western Europe by the 10th century , and may be shown in the Bayeux Tapestry of the 11th or 12th century , the use of horse teams in Britain was made possible in part because of an increase in the farming of oats , a staple food for hard @-@ working horses . 
 During the Hundred Years War of the 14th – 15th centuries , the English government banned the export of horses in times of crisis ; in the 16th century , Henry VII passed a number of laws relating to the breeding and export of horses in an attempt to improve the British stock , under which it was forbidden to allow <unk> male horses to be turned out in fields or on common land ; they had to be " kept within bounds and tied in stalls . " This ruling caused inconvenience , and the practice of gelding horses became widespread . In 1535 , Henry VIII passed the Breed of Horses Act aimed at improving the height and strength of horses ; no stallion under 15 hands ( 60 inches , 152 cm ) and no mare under 13 hands ( 52 inches , 132 cm ) was permitted to run out on common land , or to run wild , and no two @-@ year @-@ old colt under 11 @.@ 2 hands ( 46 inches , 117 cm ) was allowed to run out in any area with mares . Annual round @-@ ups on common land were enforced , and any stallion under the height limit was ordered to be destroyed , along with " all unlikely [ small horses ] whether mares or foals . " Henry VIII also established a stud for breeding imported horses such as the Spanish Jennet , Neapolitan coursers , Irish Hobbies , Flemish " <unk> " , or draught horses , and Scottish " nags " , or riding horses . However , it was reported in 1577 that this had " little effect " ; soon after , in the reign of Queen Elizabeth I , Nicholas Arnold was said to have bred " the best horses in England " . 
 During the successive reigns of queens Mary I and Elizabeth I , laws were introduced with the aim of reducing horse theft , requiring all sale transactions of horses to be recorded . Laws calling for <unk> culls of " under @-@ height " horses were partially repealed by Elizabeth I in 1566 . Areas of poor quality land could not support the weight of horses desired by Henry VIII , and were exempted because of " their rottenness ... [ They ] are not able to breed <unk> and bring forth such great breeds of [ stallions ] as by the statute of 32 Henry VIII is expressed , without peril of miring and perishing of them " . This allowed many of Britain 's mountain and moorland pony breeds to escape slaughter . Human population expansion in Britain during the reign of Elizabeth , and the resulting necessity for improvements in transport , increased the demand for good horses . Horse transport was so extensive at the time that on one morning alone 2 @,@ 200 horses were counted on the road between Shoreditch , just north of the city of London , and Enfield , about 14 @.@ 6 miles ( 23 km ) further north . 
 During the Tudor and Stuart periods , horse ownership was more widespread in Britain than in continental Europe , but it suffered a decline in the harsh economic environment of the late 16th and early 17th centuries . With economic recovery , the number of horse owners increased again . Travel became more popular , along with the hiring of horses , although a common practice at the time was for a traveller to buy a horse for a journey , and then sell it on arrival at his destination . Horses had been raced in Britain for hundreds of years by the time of King James VI of Scotland ( 1567 – 1625 ) , but he brought the sport as it is known today into England from Scotland while he was king of both countries ( 1603 – 1625 ) ; he organised public races in a number of places , and continued to import quality animals aimed at the development of a new , lighter , faster type of horse . 
 When Gervase Markham published his <unk> , or the English Horseman in 1617 , farmers were not only using pack horses , farm horses and cart horses , but were also breeding horses for saddling and driving . Markham recommended crossing native horses with other breeds for particular purposes , for example suggesting Turks or Irish Hobbies as an outcross to produce riding animals , Friesland and Flanders horses to produce light driving animals , and German heavy draught horses to produce heavy haulage animals . Horse fairs were numerous , and some of the earliest mentions of specific breeds , such as Cleveland horses and Suffolk Punch horses , date from this time . Large Dutch horses were imported by King William III ( 1650 – 1702 ) when he discovered that existing cart horses did not have the strength for the task of draining the Fens . These horses became known as Lincolnshire Blacks , and the English heavy draught horses of today are their descendants . By the middle of the 17th century , the reputation of the British horse throughout Europe had become so good that , according to Sir Jonas Moore in 1703 , " since the peace treaty with France , farmers had been offered by Frenchmen three times the accustomed price for their horses " . 
 During the reign of Charles I ( 1625 – 1649 ) , passion for racing and racehorses , and for swift horses for the hunting field , became the focus of horse breeding to the point that there was a dearth of the heavier horses used in tournament and for warfare . This led to complaints , as there was still a need for stronger , more powerful types of horse . The English Civil War , from 1642 to 1651 , disrupted horse racing ; Oliver Cromwell banned horse racing and ordered that all race horses and spectators at such an event should be seized . He concentrated on the breeding of animals suited as cavalry horses , by encouraging crossbreeding of lightweight racing horses with the heavier working horses , and effectively produced a new type of horse altogether in the warmblood . The export of any horse other than geldings was prohibited , and the ending of the war resulted in hardship for horse breeders , as demand for their horses was significantly reduced ; but an illicit trade in horses flourished with wealthier Europeans , who wanted to buy from the vastly @-@ improved British stock . It was not until 1656 that legislation removed the restrictions on horses for export . With the Restoration of the monarchy in 1660 , the breeding of quality horses was begun again " from scratch " . 
 Horse @-@ powered agricultural implements were improved during this period . By 1600 , a lighter plough which could be drawn by two horses , the " Dutch plough " , was used in eastern England ; this was followed in 1730 by the lightweight Rotherham plough , an <unk> , or " swing " plough . It was advertised as reducing ploughing times by a third , or using a third less horsepower for the same ploughing time . The improved seed drill and horse @-@ hoe were invented by Jethro Tull in 1731 ; but it took more than 100 years for these designs to come into common use . The earliest horse @-@ powered threshing machines , which were installed permanently in barns , were developed towards the end of the 18th century . 
 The use of fast horse @-@ drawn coaches , known as ' Flying Coaches ' , began in 1669 . Travelling between London and Oxford by coach had involved an overnight stay at Beaconsfield , but Oxford University organised a project to allow completion of the journey between sunrise and sunset . The project succeeded , and was quickly copied by Cambridge University ; by the end of Charles II 's reign , in 1685 , Flying Coaches ran three times a week from London to all major towns , in good conditions covering a distance of around fifty miles in a day . The Thoroughbred horse was developed from about this time , with native mares being crossbred to Arab , Turk and Barb horses to produce excellent racehorses ; the General Stud Book , giving clear and detailed pedigrees , was first published in the 1790s , and the lineage of today 's Thoroughbred horses can be traced with great accuracy to 1791 . Horses running in races sponsored by the monarchy then carried weights of around 12 stone ( 76 kg ) , more than the usual weight of 8 – 10 stone ( 51 – 64 kg ) , indicating that horse racing , hunting and chasing partly originated in a need for military training . 
 The Mail coach service began towards the end of the 18th century , adding to the existing use of fast coaches . The horses required for fast coaches were mainly produced by outcrossing heavy farm mares to the lighter racing type of horse , as a combination of speed , agility , endurance and strength was required . While the aristocracy and gentry paid high prices for matched teams of quality horses , farmers sold the best of their animals at a good profit , keeping lower @-@ quality animals for themselves , or for sale as saddle horses . The coaching trade grew from the trade in carriage of goods ; some public transport was provided by farmers , who could keep large numbers of horses on their own farms more cheaply than those who had to buy in food and forage . However , proprietors of coaching inns accounted for most of the trade . In many cases a proprietor would work his horse teams only in his local district , but some owned many coaching establishments , and could provide transport over much greater distances . An advantage to proprietors of a string of coaching inns was that passengers on their coaches also used and paid for the services offered by their inns , often including overnight accommodation . Some inn proprietors owned hundreds of horses . 
 = = 19th and 20th centuries = = 
 Horses remained the primary source of power for agriculture , mining , transport and warfare , until the arrival of the steam engine . The Middleton Railway had been established for industrial use by an Act of Parliament in 1785 ; Parliament also allowed the construction of the Surrey Iron Railway , intended to carry goods , in 1801 , and the <unk> Railway , later known as the Swansea and Mumbles Railway , in 1804 . These initially used horse @-@ drawn vehicles , but developments in steam engines made them cheaper to run than horses , and more useful as a source of locomotive power on railways . The Swansea and Mumbles Railway was the first to carry paying passengers , from 1807 , and was soon followed by many others , with Parliament passing around one new railway Act per year until 1821 . By 1840 , numerous railway lines had been laid , forming networks such as that created by George Hudson ; the number of rail miles expanded from 1 @,@ 497 in 1840 to 6 @,@ 084 by 1850 , and horse @-@ drawn passenger coaches became virtually obsolete over long distances . 
 Use of the steam engine also began to make the horse redundant in farm work . In a letter to The Farmer 's Magazine in 1849 , Alderman Kell of Ross @-@ on @-@ Wye , Herefordshire , commented that " [ enough ] ... has been said , although perhaps not mathematically correct , to show that horses are kept at vast expense in comparison with a steam engine that eats only when it works . " With the invention of the portable steam engine in the 1840s , which was promoted by the Royal Agricultural Society , steam @-@ powered machines could be used on small farms . One man could invest in a portable machine , and recoup the cost by hiring it out for <unk> and harvest ; the only use for horses here was to move the machine from one place to another . There were about 3 @.@ 3 million horses in late Victorian Britain . In 1900 about a million of these were working horses , but by 1914 this number had dropped to between 20 @,@ 000 and 25 @,@ 000 . 
 Horses and ponies began to be used in Britain 's mining pits in the 18th century , to haul " tubs " of coal and ore from the working face to the lifts , in deep mines , or to the surface in shallower mines . Many of these ponies were Shetlands , as their small size was combined with great strength . A stud farm for the sole purpose of breeding ponies for the pits was established in 1870 by colliery owner Frederick Stewart , 4th Marquess of Londonderry , and the Shetland Pony Stud Book Society was formed in 1890 to stop the use of the best stallions in the pits . By 1984 , only 55 pit ponies were being used by the National Coal Board in Britain , chiefly at the modern pit in Ellington , Northumberland . A horse called " Robbie " , probably the last to work underground in a British coal mine , was retired from a mine at Pant y <unk> , near Pontypool , in May 1999 . 
 In the First World War , horses were used in combat for cavalry charges , and they remained the best means for moving scouts , messengers , supply wagons , ambulances , and artillery quickly on the battlefield ; the horse could refuel itself to some extent by grazing , and could cope with terrain which was beyond machines of the time . However , this war had a devastating effect on the British horse population . As thousands of animals were drafted for the war effort , some breeds were so reduced in number that they were in danger of disappearing . Many breeds were saved by the dedicated efforts of a few breeders who formed breed societies , tracking down remaining animals and registering them . 
 = = 21st century = = 
 Working horses all but disappeared from Britain 's streets by the 21st century ; among few exceptions are heavy horses pulling brewers ' wagons , or drays . However , when Young 's Brewery ceased brewing in Wandsworth , London , in 2006 , it ended more than 300 years ' use of dray horses by the brewery : its team of Shire horses was retired from delivery work and given a new career with the head <unk> , offering heavy horse team driving as a recreational event , although they continue to appear at opening ceremonies for new Young 's pubs and other publicity events . There are still working brewery horses in other areas , such as <unk> Brewery 's Shire horses in Devizes , Wiltshire , but working teams are becoming increasingly rare . In some areas , such as the New Forest , local farmers and commoners use horses to round up thousands of semi @-@ feral ponies grazing on the open Forest during the drift season , and Britain 's mounted police use horses in crowd control , but other than such niche areas , the horse in Britain today is kept almost entirely for recreational purposes . They compete in all equestrian disciplines , carry riders from novice to advanced on trekking and trail @-@ riding holidays , work in riding schools , provide therapy for the disabled , and are much @-@ loved companions and hacks . The horses and riders of Great Britain have won numerous medals for eventing in equestrian sports at the Summer Olympic Games . 
 = Arizona Robbins = 
 Arizona Robbins , M.D. is a fictional character on the ABC television series Grey 's Anatomy , portrayed by Jessica Capshaw . She was introduced in the show 's fifth season as an attending surgeon and the new chief of pediatric surgery . Originally contracted to appear in three episodes , Capshaw 's contract was extended to the remainder of the fifth season , with her becoming a series regular in the sixth season . 
 Robbins has been characterized as " quirky " and " perky " , and is well known for wearing roller skates and a Holly Hobbie pink scrub cap , designed to appeal to her younger patients . She was established as a love @-@ interest for orthopedic resident Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ) after the Torres ' storyline with Erica Hahn ( Brooke Smith ) was cut short due to what series creator Shonda Rhimes called " a lack of chemistry " . Shonda Rhimes was in contrast pleased with the chemistry between Robbins and Torres , citing the addition of Capshaw to the cast as an element of the season of which she was most proud . Initial media reaction to the character was positive . Matt Mitovich of TV Guide described her as a " fan favorite " , and Chris Monfette for IGN praised the addition of " fresh , new characters " , such as Robbins over the course of the season . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Following the death of Dr. Jordan Kenley ( John Sloman ) , Chief Webber ( James Pickens , Jr . ) replaces his head of pediatric surgery with Dr. Arizona Robbins , a graduate of the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine . Robbins has a romantic interest in orthopedic 5 resident Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ) , and kisses her . The two embark on a relationship , but when Torres ' father , Carlos ( Héctor Elizondo ) , learns of the relationship , he threatens to cut her off financially unless she returns home with him . When Torres ' father returns to Seattle and continues to reject his daughter 's sexuality , Robbins is able to convince him to reconsider . She tells Mr. Torres that her father was able to accept her own sexuality , as she promised him she was still the " good man in a storm " he raised her to be , and that Torres is still the same person he raised . Torres is dismayed to learn that Robbins doesn 't want children , and the two come to a conclusion that they cannot continue their relationship , since they both want different things . However , after a shooter enters Seattle Grace with a vendetta for Derek Shepherd ( Patrick Dempsey ) , Lexie Grey ( Chyler Leigh ) , and Richard Webber ( James Pickens , Jr . ) , they are in lockdown together , and the two reconcile . 
 Robbins receives word that she has been given a grant to go to Malawi , and become a doctor there . In the end , Torres is shown to have accepted this as well and has decided to leave with Robbins . However , a fight at the airport results in Robbins leaving for Malawi without Torres , ending their relationship . She returns , hoping to rekindle her relationship with Torres , but is initially rejected . Eventually , Torres reveals that she is pregnant with Mark Sloan ( Eric Dane ) ' s baby . Robbins accepts the situation , and she and Torres restart their relationship . Torres gifts Robbins with a weekend getaway , and Robbins proposes to Torres . After proposing , the two get in a car crash leaving Torres in critical condition . A series of surgeries follows , including the delivery of her premature baby , along with emotional breakdowns of both Sloan and Robbins . Upon the awakening of Torres , she accepts her marriage proposal , and the two are married by Miranda Bailey ( Chandra Wilson ) . As the fifth year residents are coming close to the end of their residency , Robbins urges Alex Karev ( Justin Chambers ) to work under her . At the end of the eighth season , Robbins is hurt badly in a plane crash , resulting in her left leg being amputated . In the aftermath of the plane accident , in which Sloan and Lexie Grey were killed , the hospital is sued and eventually found guilty of negligence . Each victim including Shepherd , Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ) , Cristina Yang ( Sandra Oh ) , and Robbins herself must receive $ 15 million of compensation , which leads the hospital to a near bankruptcy as the insurances refuse to pay . Those doctors and Callie buy the hospital with the help of the Harper @-@ Avery Foundation to prevent it from closing , and each become members of the new directing board . Robbins is initially cold towards Callie because she was the one who decided for an amputation . She also struggles with body image issues , but they slowly reconcile as Robbins tries to adapt to her new life . When Dr. Lauren Boswell ( Hilarie Burton ) arrives at the hospital to reconstruct the face of a baby and flirts with Robbins , she is flattered that a stranger still finds her attractive despite knowing about her injury and the two have a one @-@ night stand . 
 After finding out that Arizona cheated on her with Lauren , Callie kicks Arizona out of their apartment . They also let out their true feelings about the accident and more is revealed about how they actually have felt . Callie initially agrees to couples therapy , but she shows up at the office only to tell Arizona that she isn 't going in . Arizona gets drunk with April for a laugh while Callie , who is at the fundraiser , tells people that Arizona died in the plane crash . Arizona is led to believe that she and Leah slept together , however all they did was dance and make grilled cheese sandwiches after watching Derek perform surgery on film . Arizona pursues a sexual relationship with Leah but cuts ties with her when Callie asks her to come back home . It is revealed that Arizona became pregnant via a sperm donor prior to sleeping with Lauren . They decided to try again for a second child , but after agreeing that Callie would carry it , Callie went to see an OB / GYN and discovered that she had developed adhesions in her uterus since Sofia 's birth , meaning she can 't carry any more children . When she told Arizona , Arizona offered to carry the baby , but Callie decided that since they 're still on unsteady footing that if something goes wrong , they won 't make it and she doesn 't want to put them in that position . They agree to postpone their plans to have another baby . However , in the season finale of Season 10 it is implied that Callie and Arizona 's dream of having other child may come by means of a surrogate . At the beginning of Season 11 , Callie and Arizona decide to have a baby by surrogate and Arizona applies for a fetal surgery fellowship with Dr. Herman . Arizona , with a heavy workload because of the fellowship , and Callie have an argument in the waiting room , and they choose to go to therapy together , resulting in a 30 @-@ day break . Arizona believes that the break strengthened their relationship and made her realize that she needs Callie - Callie on the other hand declares that the break gave her a taste of the freedom that she has been missing . Callie walks away and the two get a divorce later . 
 Callie wants to take Sofia and move to New York with Penny but Arizona does not want to be separated from her daughter so she hires a lawyer and they go to court for a custody battle . After a long case , Arizona wins sole custody of <unk> but in the end she ends up sharing Sofia with Callie because she thinks that ; ' both of Sofia 's moms deserve to be happy ' . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Casting and creation = = = 
 It was first reported in December 2008 that Capshaw would be joining the cast of Grey 's Anatomy as pediatric surgeon Arizona Robbins , for a multi @-@ episode arc . Initially scheduled to appear in three episodes of the show 's fifth season , series creator Shonda Rhimes later extended Capshaw 's contract to appear in all of the season 's remaining episodes , becoming a series regular in the sixth season . Speaking of the new addition , Rhimes said : 
 I love Jessica Capshaw , and when I say love I mean love . She couldn 't be a more wonderful person , and I feel like the chemistry Arizona and Callie have feels like the Meredith and Derek chemistry to me . I find them delightful to watch . 
 This promotion saw Robbins become the only lesbian series regular on primetime TV . Robbins is described as " quirky [ and ] perky " by TV Guide 's Matt Mitovich , and " a clear and rational surgeon who is not ruled by her emotions " by Kris De Leon of BuddyTV . William Harper , writer of the episode " Beat Your Heart Out " in which Robbins and Torres kiss for the first time , has deemed Robbins : " genuinely , positively interested in people , in the most selfless way . " Commenting on Robbins ' confidence , Capshaw commented : " she never thinks she 's wrong and you don 't hate her for it . There 's no ego though , she just always thinks she 's right and she is . " She is portrayed as having " wacky tendencies " , including wearing roller shoes to work . 
 = = = Characterization = = = 
 The American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) characterized Robbins as " confident " , " ambitious " , and " cheerful " . Shortly after her arrival in the show , Robbins became a love @-@ interest for Torres ( Ramirez ) . The relationship between the two is referred to by fans by the portmanteau " <unk> " . Torres ' previous girlfriend Erica Hahn ( Brooke Smith ) was written out of Grey 's Anatomy in 2008 , due to a lack of chemistry between the characters . Rhimes praised the chemistry between Robbins and Torres in contrast , comparing it to that between the show 's primary couple Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ) and Shepherd ( Dempsey ) , and stating : " They have that little thing that makes you want to watch them . " Rhimes named the addition of Capshaw to the cast as one of the elements of the season she was most proud of , commenting that she wished she could have found Callie a love interest that " sparkled " sooner , but was pleased with eventually having found one in Robbins . 
 When Robbins turned Torres down in the episode " An Honest Mistake " due to her inexperience with women , series writer Peter Nowalk offered the insight : 
 I totally understand why Arizona wouldn 't want to date a newborn . It 's like getting a Freshman as your Physics lab partner even though you 're a Senior who not only knows the Laws of Motion but has mastered them in ways that would rock that Freshman 's world . Which is not to say the Freshman won 't grow to be really good at Physics , or that Callie won 't catch up to Arizona on the lesbian front , it 's simply that Arizona might not have the patience to wait that long . 
 Although the characters go on to begin a relationship , the show 's one @-@ hundredth episode " What a Difference a Day Makes " sees them experience difficulties as a result of Torres ' father rejecting her for her sexuality . Rhimes commented on their ultimate reconciliation : " I love [ Callie ] with Arizona . [ ... ] I like that they make me feel hopeful about love . " Rhimes has said of their relationship in the sixth season : " I would like to see Callie happily in a long @-@ term relationship . We have so much to explore with them , because we barely know anything about [ Arizona ] . " Capshaw has characterized the relationship as " incredibly understanding and compassionate and sensitive " . She described the sixth season as being about : " cementing a very mature and grounded relationship and taking it forward . This is a drama , of course ; there will be conflict , but for the time being , they 're enjoying being in a relationship that seems stable . " 
 Asked whether Robbins and Torres might marry in the future , Capshaw replied : " There 's probably a lot more stuff that has to happen before that happens . [ ... ] I don 't think they 're going to get married just to get married . As Arizona goes , I think she has incredible discipline and she does , as you said , have a very strict moral compass and marriage would not be something she would jump into without giving it a great amount of thought . " Discussing Robbins ' relationship with Torres ' former lover Sloan , Capshaw divulged : " Whenever there 's been a chance to play that I am intimidated by him or being standoffish , I 've always chosen to make it very playful . It 's much more Arizona 's style to find it very amusing . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Robbins ranked seventh in a top ten list of gay characters on TV compiled by Jane Boursaw of TV Squad . Boursaw wrote : " She 's a mix of ironies - a pediatrician who glides around the hospital on wheelies , impulsively kisses Callie , then tells her she doesn 't have time to teach a newbie how to be gay . Still , she 's more interesting than the other gays on this show , which are dwindling in numbers since Erica left for parts unknown . " Commenting on Hahn 's abrupt departure from the show , Dorothy Snarker , writing for LGBT website AfterEllen.com observed of Robbins and Torres ' relationship : " I [ ... ] can 't help but be wary of how the Grey 's writers will handle this relationship . Jessica has proven lovely and likable in her brief screen time so far . But it 's not how the romance starts , but what happens next that really matters . " AfterEllen.com also included Robbins in their poll of the Top 50 Lesbian and Bisexual Characters , ranking her at No. 3 and in their Top 50 Favorite Female TV Characters , placing her at No. 2 . 
 Matt Mitovich of TV Guide noted that Robbins " quickly established herself as a fan favorite " , describing her as : " a breath of fresh air in the often angsty halls of Seattle Grace . " Chris Monfette for IGN has opinionated that the fifth season of Grey 's Anatomy was an improvement on the previous two seasons , attributing this in part to the introduction of " fresh , new characters " Robbins and Owen Hunt ( Kevin McKidd ) . Monfette wrote that Arizona 's ultimate contribution to the season was " introducing the element of childcare to Seattle Grace " , which in turn gave Miranda Bailey ( Chandra Wilson ) " a great arc " . Jennifer Godwin for E ! Online approved of Arizona 's season six promotion to a series regular , particularly as it meant the continuation of her relationship with Callie . 
 The Los Angeles Times 's Carina MacKenzie wrote of the sixth season episode " Invasion " : " By far the best moment in this episode was Robbins ' scene with Torres ' father , Carlos . Jessica Capshaw has an incredible ability to take even the most melodramatic of " Grey 's " speeches and deliver them with a subtlety and an honesty that makes them come off as sincere instead of overwrought . " I was named for a battleship , " she said , and in the powerful monologue that followed , she calmly and carefully explained that Torres was still the woman Carlos raised . 
 = Cuban macaw = 
 The Cuban macaw or Cuban red macaw ( Ara tricolor ) was a species of macaw native to the main island of Cuba and the nearby Isla de la Juventud that became extinct in the late 19th century . Its relationship with other macaws in the genus Ara is uncertain , but it may have been closely related to the scarlet macaw , which has some similarities in appearance . It may also have been closely related , or identical , to the hypothetical Jamaican red macaw . No modern skeletons are known , but a few subfossil remains have been found on Cuba . 
 At about 45 – 50 centimetres ( 18 – 20 in ) long , the Cuban macaw was one of the smallest macaws . It had a red , orange , yellow , and white head , and a red , orange , green , brown , and blue body . Little is known of its behaviour , but it is reported to have nested in hollow trees , lived in pairs or families , and fed on seeds and fruits . The species ' original distribution on Cuba is unknown , but it may have been restricted to the central and western parts of the island . It was mainly reported from the vast Zapata Swamp , where it inhabited open terrain with scattered trees . 
 The Cuban macaw was traded and hunted by Amerindians , and by Europeans after their arrival in the 15th century . Many individuals were brought to Europe as cagebirds , and 19 museum skins exist today . It had become rare by the mid @-@ 19th century due to pressure from hunting , trade , and habitat destruction . Hurricanes may also have contributed to its demise . The last reliable accounts of the species are from the 1850s on Cuba and 1864 on Isla de la Juventud , but it may have persisted until 1885 . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Early explorers of Cuba , such as Christopher Columbus and Diego Álvarez <unk> , mentioned macaws on Cuba in 14th- and 15th @-@ century writings . Cuban macaws were described and illustrated in several early accounts about the island . In 1811 , Johann Matthäus Bechstein scientifically named the species Psittacus tricolor . Bechstein 's description was based on the bird 's entry in François Le Vaillant 's 1801 book Histoire Naturelle des <unk> . Le Vaillant 's account was itself partially based on the late 1700s work Planches <unk> and a specimen in Paris ; as it is unknown which specimen this was , the species has no holotype . Jacques <unk> 's original watercolour painting which was the basis of the plate in Le Vaillant 's book differs from the final illustration in showing bright red lesser wing covert feathers ( " shoulder " area ) , but the significance of this is unclear . 
 Today , 19 skins of the Cuban macaw exist in 15 collections worldwide ( two each in Natural History Museum at Tring , Muséum national d 'histoire naturelle in Paris , the Swedish Museum of Natural History , and the Smithsonian Museum ) , but many are of unclear provenance . Several were provided by Juan Gundlach , who collected some of the last individuals that regularly fed near the Zapata Swamp in 1849 – 50 . Some of the preserved specimens are known to have lived in captivity in zoos ( such as Jardin des Plantes de Paris , Berlin Zoo , and Amsterdam Zoo ) or as cagebirds . Several more skins are known to have existed , but have been lost . There are no records of its eggs . 
 No modern skeletal remains are known , but three subfossil specimens have been discovered : half a carpometacarpus from a possibly Pleistocene spring deposit in Ciego Montero , identified by extrapolating from the size of Cuban macaw skins and bones of extant macaws ( reported in 1928 ) , a rostrum from a Quaternary cave deposit in Caimito ( reported in 1984 ) , and a worn skull from Sagua La Grande , which was deposited in a <unk> sinkhole possibly during the Quaternary and associated with various extinct birds and ground sloths ( reported in 2008 ) . 
 As many as 13 now @-@ extinct species of macaw have variously been suggested to have lived on the Caribbean islands , but many of these were based on old descriptions or drawings and only represent hypothetical species . Only three endemic Caribbean macaw species are known from physical remains : the Cuban macaw , the Saint Croix macaw ( Ara autochthones ) , which is known only from subfossils , and the Lesser Antillean macaw ( Ara guadeloupensis ) , which is known from subfossils and reports . Macaws are known to have been transported between the Caribbean islands and from mainland South America to the Caribbean both in historic times by Europeans and natives , and in prehistoric times by Paleoamericans . Historical records of macaws on these islands , therefore , may not have represented distinct , endemic species ; it is also possible that they were escaped or feral foreign macaws that had been transported to the islands . All the endemic Caribbean macaws were likely driven to extinction by humans in historic and prehistoric times . The identity of these macaws is only likely to be further resolved through fossil finds and examination of contemporary reports and artwork . 
 The Jamaican red macaw ( Ara <unk> ) was named by Walter Rothschild in 1905 on the basis of a description of a specimen shot in 1765 . It was described as being similar to the Cuban macaw , mainly differing in having a yellow forehead . Some researchers believe the specimen described may have been a feral Cuban macaw . A stylised 1765 painting of a macaw by Lieutenant L. J. Robins , published in a volume called The Natural History of Jamaica , matches the Cuban macaw , and may show a specimen that had been imported there ; however , it has also been claimed that the painting shows the Jamaican red macaw . Rothschild 's 1907 book Extinct Birds included a depiction of a specimen in the Liverpool Museum which was presented as a Cuban macaw . In a 1908 review of the book published in The Auk , the reviewer claimed that the picture looked sufficiently dissimilar from known Cuban macaws that the specimen may actually be of one of the largely unknown species of macaw , such as a species from Haiti . The reviewer 's objection has not been accepted . 
 In 1985 , David Wetherbee suggested that extant specimens of the Cuban macaw had come from both Cuba and Hispaniola , based on his interpretation of an 1888 report . He believed the name Ara tricolor applied to the supposed Hispaniolan species , and therefore coined the new name Ara cubensis for the Cuban species . This hypothesis has not been accepted by other researchers , and there is no clear evidence for a species of macaw on Hispaniola . The trinomial name Ara tricolor <unk> was coined for a supposed Hispaniolan macaw by Dieter Hoppe in 1983 , but is now considered to have been based on erroneous records . 
 Since detailed descriptions of extinct macaws exist only for the species on Cuba , it is impossible to determine the species ' relationships . It has been suggested that the closest mainland relative of the Cuban macaw is the scarlet macaw ( Ara macao ) , due to the similar distribution of red and blue in their plumage , and the presence of a white patch around the eyes , naked except for lines of small red feathers . Furthermore , the range of the scarlet macaw extends to the margins of the Caribbean Sea . The Cuban macaw is distinct due to its lack of a yellow shoulder patch , its all @-@ black beak , and its smaller size . The two also share a species of feather mite , which supports their relationship . James Greenway believed the scarlet macaw and the Cuban macaw formed a superspecies with the other extinct species suggested to have inhabited Jamaica , Hispaniola and Guadeloupe . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Cuban macaw had a red forehead fading to orange and then to yellow at the nape of the neck . It had white unfeathered areas around the eyes , and yellow irises . The face , chin , chest , abdomen and thighs were orange . The legs were brown . The upper back was brownish red with feathers scalloped with green . The rump , undertail feathers , and lower back were blue . The wing feathers were brown , red and purplish blue . The upper surface of the tail was dark red fading to blue at the tip , and the under surface of the tail was brownish red . The beak has variously been described as dark , all @-@ black , and greyish black . The sexes were identical in external appearance , as with other macaws . 
 About 50 centimetres ( 20 in ) long , the Cuban Macaw was a third smaller than its largest relatives . The wing was 275 – 290 millimetres ( 10 @.@ 8 – 11 @.@ 4 in ) long , the tail was 215 – 290 millimetres ( 8 @.@ 5 – 11 @.@ 4 in ) , the culmen 42 – 46 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 7 – 1 @.@ 8 in ) , and the tarsus 27 – 30 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 1 – 1 @.@ 2 in ) . The subfossil cranium shows that the length between the naso @-@ frontal hinge and the occipital condyle was 47 @.@ 0 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 85 in ) , the width across the naso @-@ frontal hinge was about 25 @.@ 0 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) , and the width of the postorbital processes was about 40 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) . Details of the skull were similar to other Ara species . 
 Austin Hobart Clark reported that juvenile Cuban macaws were green , though he did not provide any source for this claim . It is unclear whether green birds spotted on the island were in fact juvenile Cuban macaws or if they were instead feral military macaws ( Ara militaris ) . 
 = = Behaviour and ecology = = 
 Little is known about the behaviour of the Cuban macaw and its extinct Caribbean relatives . Gundlach reported that it vocalised loudly like its Central American relatives and that it lived in pairs or families . Its speech imitation abilities were reportedly inferior to those of other parrots . Nothing is known about its breeding habits or its eggs , but one reported nest was a hollow in a palm . 
 The skull roof of the subfossil cranium was flattened , indicating the Cuban macaw fed on hard seeds , especially from palms . This is consistent with the habits of their large relatives on mainland South America and distinct from those of smaller , mainly frugivorous relatives . In 1876 , Gundlach wrote that the Cuban macaw ate fruits , seeds of the royal palm ( Roystonea regia ) and the <unk> tree ( Melia <unk> ) , as well as other seeds and shoots . Cuba has many species of palms , and those found in swamps were probably most important to the Cuban macaw . The pulp surrounding the seeds of the <unk> tree were probably the part consumed by the Cuban macaw . 
 In 2005 , a new species of chewing louse , <unk> <unk> , was described based on a dead specimen discovered on a museum skin of the Cuban macaw . It is thought to have been unique to this species , and is therefore an example of <unk> . The feather mite species <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> have also been reported from Cuban macaw skins , the latter new to science . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The breadth of the Cuban macaw 's distribution the time of European settlement on the main island of Cuba is unclear , but the species was reportedly becoming rare by the mid @-@ 19th century . It may have been restricted to the central and western part of Cuba . Most accounts from the 19th century are based on Gundlach 's reports from the immense Zapata Swamp , where the species was somewhat common near the northern edge . By the 1870s , it was becoming rarer and had retreated to the interior . The subfossil skull from Sagua La Grande is the northernmost and easternmost record of the Cuban macaw . One subfossil rostrum was found in a cave . Caves are usually not visited by macaws , but the surrounding region is possibly a former swamp . The Cuban macaw had also inhabited Isla de la Juventud ( previously called the Isle of Pines ) off Cuba , but Outram Bangs and W. R. <unk> reported that the last pair was shot near La Vega in 1864 . Early writers also claimed it lived on Haiti and Jamaica , but this is no longer accepted . 
 The habitat of the Cuban macaw was open savanna terrain with scattered trees , typical of the Zapata Swamp area . Cuba was originally widely covered in forest , much of which has since been converted to cropland and pastures . Lomas de <unk> , where the macaw was also reported , had rainforest @-@ like gallery forest . 
 = = Extinction = = 
 Hunting has been proposed as a factor in the extinction of the Cuban macaw . Parrots were hunted , kept as pets , and traded by Amerindians in the Caribbean before the arrival of Europeans . The Cuban macaw was reportedly " stupid " and slow to escape , and therefore was easily caught . It was killed for food ; <unk> <unk> found the meat tasty , but Gundlach considered it tough . Archaeological evidence suggests the Cuban macaw was hunted in Havana in the 16th – 18th centuries . It may also have been persecuted as a crop pest , though it did not live near dwellings . 
 In addition to being kept as pets locally , many Cuban macaws ( perhaps thousands of specimens ) were traded and sent to Europe . This trade has also been suggested as a contributing cause for extinction . Judging by the number of preserved specimens that originated as captives , the species was probably not uncommon in European zoos and other collections . It was popular as a cagebird , despite its reputation for damaging items with its beak . Furthermore , collectors caught young birds by observing adults and felling the trees in which they nested , although sometimes nestlings were accidentally killed . This practice reduced population numbers and selectively destroyed the species ' breeding habitat . This means of collection continues today with the Cuban parakeet ( <unk> <unk> ) and the Cuban amazon ( Amazona leucocephala ) . 
 A hurricane in 1844 is said to have wiped out the population of Cuban macaws from Pinar del Río . Subsequent hurricanes in 1846 and 1856 further destroyed their habitat in western Cuba and scattered the remaining population . In addition , a tropical storm hit the Zapata Swamp in 1851 . With a healthy macaw population , such events could have been beneficial by creating suitable habitat . However , given the species ' precarious position , it may have resulted in fragmented habitat and caused them to seek food in areas where they were more vulnerable to hunting . 
 The extinction date of the Cuban macaw is uncertain . Gundlach 's sightings in the Zapata Swamp in the 1850s and <unk> 's second @-@ hand report of a pair on Isla de la Juventud in 1864 are the last reliable accounts . In 1886 , Gundlach reported that he believed birds persisted in southern Cuba , which led Greenway to suggest that the species survived until 1885 . Parrots are often among the first species to be exterminated from a given locality , especially islands . 
 According to British writer Errol Fuller , aviculturalists are rumoured to have bred birds similar in appearance to the Cuban macaw . These birds , however , are reportedly larger in size than the Cuban macaw , having been bred from larger macaw species . 
 = Nikita Khrushchev = 
 Nikita Sergeyevich Khrushchev ( April 15 [ O.S. April 3 ] 1894 – September 11 , 1971 ) was a politician who led the Soviet Union during part of the Cold War . He served as First Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union from 1953 to 1964 , and as Chairman of the Council of Ministers , or Premier , from 1958 to 1964 . Khrushchev was responsible for the de @-@ Stalinization of the Soviet Union , for backing the progress of the early Soviet space program , and for several relatively liberal reforms in areas of domestic policy . Khrushchev 's party colleagues removed him from power in 1964 , replacing him with Leonid Brezhnev as First Secretary and Alexei Kosygin as Premier . 
 Khrushchev was born in the village of Kalinovka in 1894 , close to the present @-@ day border between Russia and Ukraine . He was employed as a metalworker in his youth , and during the Russian Civil War was a political commissar . With the help of Lazar Kaganovich , he worked his way up the Soviet hierarchy . He supported Joseph Stalin 's purges , and approved thousands of arrests . In 1938 , Stalin sent him to govern Ukraine , and he continued the purges there . During what was known in the Soviet Union as the Great Patriotic War ( Eastern Front of World War II ) , Khrushchev was again a commissar , serving as an intermediary between Stalin and his generals . Khrushchev was present at the bloody defense of Stalingrad , a fact he took great pride in throughout his life . After the war , he returned to Ukraine before being recalled to Moscow as one of Stalin 's close advisers . 
 In the power struggle triggered by Stalin 's death in 1953 , Khrushchev , after several years , emerged victorious . On February 25 , 1956 , at the 20th Party Congress , he delivered the " Secret Speech " , denouncing Stalin 's purges and ushering in a less repressive era in the Soviet Union . His domestic policies , aimed at bettering the lives of ordinary citizens , were often ineffective , especially in agriculture . Hoping eventually to rely on missiles for national defense , Khrushchev ordered major cuts in conventional forces . Despite the cuts , Khrushchev 's rule saw the most tense years of the Cold War , culminating in the Cuban Missile Crisis . 
 Some of Khrushchev 's policies were seen as erratic , particularly by his emerging rivals within the Party , who quietly rose in strength and deposed him in October 1964 . He did not suffer the deadly fate of some previous losers of Soviet power struggles , and was pensioned off with an apartment in Moscow and a dacha in the countryside . His lengthy memoirs were smuggled to the West and published in part in 1970 . Khrushchev died in 1971 of heart disease . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Khrushchev was born on April 15 , 1894 , in Kalinovka , a village in what is now Russia 's Kursk Oblast , near the present Ukrainian border . His parents , Sergei Khrushchev and Ksenia Khrushcheva , were poor peasants of Russian origin , and had a daughter two years Nikita 's junior , Irina . Sergei Khrushchev was employed in a number of positions in the Donbas area of far eastern Ukraine , working as a railwayman , as a miner , and laboring in a brick factory . Wages were much higher in the Donbas than in the Kursk region , and Sergei Khrushchev generally left his family in Kalinovka , returning there when he had enough money . 
 Kalinovka was a peasant village ; Khrushchev 's teacher , Lydia Shevchenko , later stated that she had never seen a village as poor as Kalinovka had been . Nikita worked as a <unk> from an early age . He was schooled for a total of four years , part in the village parochial school and part under Shevchenko 's tutelage in Kalinovka 's state school . According to Khrushchev in his memoirs , Shevchenko was a freethinker who upset the villagers by not attending church , and when her brother visited , he gave the boy books which had been banned by the Imperial Government . She urged Nikita to seek further education , but family finances did not permit this . 
 In 1908 , Sergei Khrushchev moved to the Donbas city of Yuzovka ; fourteen @-@ year @-@ old Nikita followed later that year , while Ksenia Khrushcheva and her daughter came after . Yuzovka , which was renamed Stalino in 1924 and Donetsk in 1961 , was at the heart of one of the most industrialized areas of the Russian Empire . After the boy worked briefly in other fields , Khrushchev 's parents found him a place as a metal fitter 's apprentice . Upon completing that apprenticeship , the teenage Khrushchev was hired by a factory . He lost that job when he collected money for the families of the victims of the Lena Goldfields Massacre , and was hired to mend underground equipment by a mine in nearby Rutchenkovo , where his father was the union organizer , and he helped distribute copies and organize public readings of Pravda . He later stated that he considered emigrating to the United States for better wages , but did not do so . 
 When World War I broke out in 1914 , Khrushchev , as a skilled metal worker , was exempt from conscription . Employed by a workshop which serviced ten mines , Khrushchev was involved in several strikes demanding higher pay , better working conditions , and an end to the war . In 1914 , he married <unk> <unk> , daughter of the elevator operator at the Rutchenkovo mine . In 1915 , they had a daughter , Yulia , and in 1917 , a son , Leonid . 
 After the abdication of Tsar Nicholas II in 1917 , the new Russian Provisional Government in Petrograd had little influence over Ukraine . Khrushchev was elected to the worker 's council ( or soviet ) in Rutchenkovo , and in May he became its chairman . He did not join the Bolsheviks until 1918 , a year in which the Russian Civil War , between the Bolsheviks and a coalition of opponents known as the White Army , began in earnest . His biographer , William Taubman , suggests that Khrushchev 's delay in affiliating himself with the Bolsheviks was because he felt closer to the Mensheviks who prioritized economic progress , whereas the Bolsheviks sought political power . In his memoirs , Khrushchev indicated that he waited because there were many groups , and it was difficult to keep them all straight . 
 In March 1918 , as the Bolshevik government concluded a separate peace with the Central Powers , the Germans occupied the Donbas and Khrushchev fled to Kalinovka . In late 1918 or early 1919 he was mobilized into the Red Army as a political commissar . The post of political commissar had recently been introduced as the Bolsheviks came to rely less on worker activists and more on military recruits ; its functions included indoctrination of recruits in the tenets of Bolshevism , and promoting troop morale and battle readiness . Beginning as commissar to a construction platoon , Khrushchev rose to become commissar to a construction battalion and was sent from the front for a two @-@ month political course . The young commissar came under fire many times , though many of the war stories he would tell in later life dealt more with his ( and his troops ' ) cultural awkwardness , rather than with combat . In 1921 , the civil war ended , and Khrushchev was demobilized and assigned as commissar to a labor brigade in the Donbas , where he and his men lived in poor conditions . 
 The wars had caused widespread devastation and famine , and one of the victims of the hunger and disease was Khrushchev 's wife , <unk> , who died of typhus in Kalinovka while Khrushchev was in the army . The commissar returned for the funeral and , loyal to his Bolshevik principles , refused to allow his wife 's coffin to enter the local church . With the only way into the churchyard through the church , he had the coffin lifted and passed over the fence into the burial ground , shocking the village . 
 = = Party official = = 
 = = = Donbas years = = = 
 Through the intervention of a friend , Khrushchev was assigned in 1921 as assistant director for political affairs for the Rutchenkovo mine in the Donbas region , where he had previously worked . There were as yet few Bolsheviks in the area . At that time , the movement was split by Lenin 's New Economic Policy , which allowed for some measure of private enterprise and was seen as an ideological retreat by some Bolsheviks . While Khrushchev 's responsibility lay in political affairs , he involved himself in the practicalities of resuming full production at the mine after the chaos of the war years . He helped restart the machines ( key parts and papers had been removed by the pre @-@ Soviet mineowners ) and he wore his old mine outfit for inspection tours . 
 Khrushchev was highly successful at the Rutchenkovo mine , and in mid @-@ 1922 he was offered the directorship of the nearby <unk> mine . However , he refused the offer , seeking to be assigned to the newly established technical college ( tekhnikum ) in Yuzovka , though his superiors were reluctant to let him go . As he had only four years of formal schooling , he applied to the training program ( rabfak ) attached to the tekhnikum that was designed to bring undereducated students to high @-@ school level , a prerequisite for entry into the tekhnikum . While enrolled in the rabfak , Khrushchev continued his work at the Rutchenkovo mine . One of his teachers later described him as a poor student . He was more successful in advancing in the Communist Party ; soon after his admission to the rabfak in August 1922 , he was appointed party secretary of the entire tekhnikum , and became a member of the bureau — the governing council — of the party committee for the town of Yuzovka ( renamed Stalino in 1924 ) . He briefly joined supporters of Leon Trotsky against those of Joseph Stalin over the question of party democracy . All of these activities left him with little time for his schoolwork , and while he later claimed to have finished his rabfak studies , it is unclear whether this was true . 
 In 1922 , Khrushchev met and married his second wife , Marusia , whose maiden name is unknown . The two soon separated , though Khrushchev helped Marusia in later years , especially when Marusia 's daughter by a previous relationship suffered a fatal illness . Soon after the abortive marriage , Khrushchev met Nina Petrovna <unk> , a well @-@ educated Party organizer and daughter of well @-@ to @-@ do Ukrainian peasants . The two lived together as husband and wife for the rest of Khrushchev 's life , though they did not register their marriage until 1965 . They had three children together : daughter Rada was born in 1929 , son Sergei in 1935 and daughter Elena in 1937 . 
 In mid @-@ 1925 , Khrushchev was appointed Party secretary of the Petrovo @-@ <unk> <unk> , or district , near Stalino . The <unk> was about 400 square miles ( 1 @,@ 000 km2 ) in area , and Khrushchev was constantly on the move throughout his domain , taking an interest in even minor matters . In late 1925 , Khrushchev was elected a non @-@ voting delegate to the 14th Congress of the USSR Communist Party in Moscow . 
 = = = Kaganovich protégé = = = 
 Khrushchev met Lazar Kaganovich as early as 1917 . In 1925 , Kaganovich became Party head in Ukraine and Khrushchev , falling under his patronage , was rapidly promoted . He was appointed second in command of the Stalino party apparatus in late 1926 . Within nine months his superior , Konstantin <unk> , was ousted , which , according to Taubman , was due to Khrushchev 's instigation . Kaganovich transferred Khrushchev to Kharkov , then the capital of Ukraine , as head of the Organizational Department of the Ukrainian Party 's Central Committee . In 1928 , Khrushchev was transferred to Kiev , where he served as second @-@ in @-@ command of the Party organization there . 
 In 1929 , Khrushchev again sought to further his education , following Kaganovich ( now in the Kremlin as a close associate of Stalin ) to Moscow and enrolling in the Stalin Industrial Academy . Khrushchev never completed his studies there , but his career in the Party flourished . When the school 's Party cell elected a number of rightists to an upcoming district Party conference , the cell was attacked in Pravda . Khrushchev emerged victorious in the ensuing power struggle , becoming Party secretary of the school , arranging for the delegates to be withdrawn , and afterward purging the cell of the rightists . Khrushchev rose rapidly through the Party ranks , first becoming Party leader for the Bauman district , site of the Academy , before taking the same position in the <unk> district , the capital 's largest and most important . By 1932 , Khrushchev had become second in command , behind Kaganovich , of the Moscow city Party organization , and in 1934 , he became Party leader for the city and a member of the Party 's Central Committee . Khrushchev attributed his rapid rise to his acquaintance with fellow Academy student Nadezhda <unk> , Stalin 's wife . In his memoirs , Khrushchev stated that <unk> spoke well of him to her husband . His biographer , William Tompson , downplays the possibility , stating that Khrushchev was too low in the Party hierarchy to enjoy Stalin 's patronage , and that if influence was brought to bear on Khrushchev 's career at this stage , it was by Kaganovich . 
 While head of the Moscow city organization , Khrushchev superintended construction of the Moscow Metro , a highly expensive undertaking , with Kaganovich in overall charge . Faced with an already @-@ announced opening date of November 7 , 1934 , Khrushchev took considerable risks in the construction and spent much of his time down in the tunnels . When the inevitable accidents did occur , they were depicted as heroic sacrifices in a great cause . The Metro did not open until May 1 , 1935 , but Khrushchev received the Order of Lenin for his role in its construction . Later that year , he was selected as First Secretary of the Moscow Regional Committee which was responsible for Moscow oblast , a province with a population of 11 million . 
 = = = Involvement in purges = = = 
 Stalin 's office records show meetings at which Khrushchev was present as early as 1932 . The two increasingly built a good relationship . Khrushchev greatly admired the dictator and treasured informal meetings with him and invitations to Stalin 's dacha , while Stalin felt warm affection for his young subordinate . 
 Beginning in 1934 , Stalin began a campaign of political repression known as the Great Purge , during which millions of people were executed or sent to the Gulag . Central to this campaign were Moscow Trials , a series of show trials of the purged top leaders of the party and the military . In 1936 , as the trials proceeded , Khrushchev expressed his vehement support : 
 Everyone who rejoices in the successes achieved in our country , the victories of our party led by the great Stalin , will find only one word suitable for the mercenary , fascist dogs of the Trotskyite @-@ <unk> gang . That word is execution . 
 Khrushchev assisted in the purge of many friends and colleagues in Moscow oblast . Of 38 top Party officials in Moscow city and province , 35 were killed — the three survivors were transferred to other parts of the USSR . Of the 146 Party secretaries of cities and districts outside Moscow city in the province , only 10 survived the purges . In his memoirs , Khrushchev noted that almost everyone who worked with him was arrested . By Party protocol , Khrushchev was required to approve these arrests , and did little or nothing to save his friends and colleagues . 
 Party leaders were given numerical quotas of " enemies " to be turned in and arrested . In June 1937 , the Politburo set a quota of 35 @,@ 000 enemies to be arrested in Moscow province ; 5 @,@ 000 of these were to be executed . In reply , Khrushchev asked that 2 @,@ 000 wealthy peasants , or kulaks living in Moscow be killed in part fulfillment of the quota . In any event , only two weeks after receiving the Politburo order , Khrushchev was able to report to Stalin that 41 @,@ 305 " criminal and kulak elements " had been arrested . Of the arrestees , according to Khrushchev , 8 @,@ 500 deserved execution . 
 Khrushchev had no reason to think himself immune from the purges , and in 1937 , confessed his own 1923 dalliance with Trotskyism to Kaganovich , who , according to Khrushchev , " blanched " ( for his protégé 's sins could affect his own standing ) and advised him to tell Stalin . The dictator took the confession in his stride , and , after initially advising Khrushchev to keep it quiet , suggested that Khrushchev tell his tale to the Moscow party conference . Khrushchev did so , to applause , and was immediately reelected to his post . Khrushchev related in his memoirs that he was also denounced by an arrested colleague . Stalin told Khrushchev of the accusation personally , looking him in the eye and awaiting his response . Khrushchev speculated in his memoirs that had Stalin doubted his reaction , he would have been categorized as an enemy of the people then and there . Nonetheless , Khrushchev became a candidate member of the Politburo in January 1938 and a full member in March 1939 . 
 In late 1937 , Stalin appointed Khrushchev as head of the Communist Party in Ukraine , and Khrushchev duly left Moscow for Kiev , again the Ukrainian capital , in January 1938 . Ukraine had been the site of extensive purges , with the murdered including professors in Stalino whom Khrushchev greatly respected . The high ranks of the Party were not immune ; the Central Committee of Ukraine was so devastated that it could not convene a quorum . After Khrushchev 's arrival , the pace of arrests accelerated . All but one member of the Ukrainian Politburo Organizational Bureau and Secretariat were arrested . Almost all government officials and Red Army commanders were replaced . During the first few months after Khrushchev 's arrival , almost everyone arrested received the death penalty . 
 Biographer William Taubman suggests that , since Khrushchev was again unsuccessfully denounced while in Kiev , he must have known that some of the denunciations were not true and that innocent people were suffering . In 1939 , Khrushchev addressed the Fourteenth Ukrainian Party Congress , saying " Comrades , we must unmask and relentlessly destroy all enemies of the people . But we must not allow a single honest Bolshevik to be harmed . We must conduct a struggle against <unk> . " 
 = = World War II = = 
 = = = Occupation of Polish territory = = = 
 When Soviet troops , pursuant to the Molotov – Ribbentrop Pact , invaded the eastern portion of Poland on September 17 , 1939 , Khrushchev accompanied the troops at Stalin 's direction . A large number of ethnic Ukrainians lived in the invaded area , much of which today forms the western portion of Ukraine . Many inhabitants therefore initially welcomed the invasion , though they hoped that they would eventually become independent . Khrushchev 's role was to ensure that the occupied areas voted for union with the USSR . Through a combination of propaganda , deception as to what was being voted for , and outright fraud , the Soviets ensured that their new territories would elect assemblies which would unanimously petition for union with the USSR . When the new assemblies did so , their petitions were granted by the USSR Supreme Soviet , and Western Ukraine became a part of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic ( SSR ) on November 1 , 1939 . Clumsy actions by the Soviets , such as staffing Western Ukrainian organizations with Eastern Ukrainians , and giving confiscated land to collective farms ( kolkhozes ) rather than to peasants , soon alienated Western Ukrainians damaging Khrushchev 's efforts to achieve unity . 
 = = = War against Germany = = = 
 When Nazi Germany invaded the USSR , in June 1941 , Khrushchev was still at his post in Kiev . Stalin appointed him a political commissar , and Khrushchev served on a number of fronts as an intermediary between the local military commanders and the political rulers in Moscow . Stalin used Khrushchev to keep commanders on a tight leash , while the commanders sought to have him influence Stalin . As the Germans advanced , Khrushchev worked with the military in an attempt to defend and save Kiev . Handicapped by orders from Stalin that under no circumstances should the city be abandoned , the Red Army was soon encircled by the Germans . While the Germans stated they took 655 @,@ 000 prisoners , according to the Soviets , 150 @,@ 541 men out of 677 @,@ 085 escaped the trap . Primary sources differ on Khrushchev 's involvement at this point . According to Marshal Georgi Zhukov , writing some years after Khrushchev fired and disgraced him in 1957 , Khrushchev persuaded Stalin not to evacuate troops from Kiev . However , Khrushchev noted in his memoirs that he and Marshal Semyon Budyonny proposed redeploying Soviet forces to avoid the encirclement until Marshal Semyon Timoshenko arrived from Moscow with orders for the troops to hold their positions . Early Khrushchev biographer Mark Frankland suggested that Khrushchev 's faith in his leader was first shaken by the Red Army 's setbacks . Khrushchev stated in his memoirs : 
 But let me return to the enemy breakthrough in the Kiev area , the encirclement of our group , and the destruction of the 37th Army . Later , the Fifth Army also perished ... All of this was senseless , and from the military point of view , a display of ignorance , incompetence , and illiteracy . ... There you have the result of not taking a step backward . We were unable to save these troops because we didn 't withdraw them , and as a result we simply lost them . ... And yet it was possible to allow this not to happen . 
 In 1942 , Khrushchev was on the Southwest Front , and he and Timoshenko proposed a massive counteroffensive in the Kharkov area . Stalin approved only part of the plan , but 640 @,@ 000 Red Army soldiers would still become involved in the offensive . The Germans , however , had deduced that the Soviets were likely to attack at Kharkov , and set a trap . Beginning on May 12 , 1942 , the Soviet offensive initially appeared successful , but within five days the Germans had driven deep into the Soviet flanks , and the Red Army troops were in danger of being cut off . Stalin refused to halt the offensive , and the Red Army divisions were soon encircled by the Germans . The USSR lost about 267 @,@ 000 soldiers , including more than 200 @,@ 000 men captured , and Stalin demoted Timoshenko and recalled Khrushchev to Moscow . While Stalin hinted at arresting and executing Khrushchev , he allowed the commissar to return to the front by sending him to Stalingrad . 
 Khrushchev reached the Stalingrad Front in August 1942 , soon after the start of the battle for the city . His role in the Stalingrad defense was not major — General Vasily Chuikov , who led the city 's defense , mentions Khrushchev only briefly in a memoir published while Khrushchev was premier — but to the end of his life , he was proud of his role . Though he visited Stalin in Moscow on occasion , he remained in Stalingrad for much of the battle , and was nearly killed at least once . He proposed a counterattack , only to find that Zhukov and other generals had already planned Operation Uranus , a plan to break out from Soviet positions and encircle and destroy the Germans ; it was being kept secret . Before Uranus was launched , Khrushchev spent much time checking on troop readiness and morale , interrogating Nazi prisoners , and recruiting some for propaganda reasons . 
 Soon after Stalingrad , Khrushchev met with personal tragedy , as his son Leonid , a fighter pilot , was apparently shot down and killed in action on March 11 , 1943 . The circumstances of Leonid 's death remain obscure and controversial , as none of his fellow fliers stated that they witnessed him being shot down , nor was his plane found or body recovered . As a result , Leonid 's fate has been the subject of considerable speculation . One theory has Leonid surviving the crash and collaborating with the Germans , and when he was recaptured by the Soviets , Stalin ordering him shot despite Nikita Khrushchev pleading for his life . This supposed killing is used to explain why Khrushchev later denounced Stalin in the Secret Speech . While there is no supporting evidence for this account in Soviet files , some historians allege that Leonid Khrushchev 's file was tampered with after the war . In later years , Leonid Khrushchev 's <unk> stated that he saw his plane disintegrate , but did not report it . Khrushchev biographer Taubman speculates that this omission was most likely to avoid the possibility of being seen as complicit in the death of the son of a Politburo member . In mid @-@ 1943 , Leonid 's wife , <unk> Khrushcheva , was arrested on accusations of spying and sentenced to five years in a labor camp , and her son ( by another relationship ) , <unk> , was placed in a series of orphanages . Leonid 's daughter , Yulia , was raised by Nikita Khrushchev and his wife . 
 After Uranus forced the Germans into retreat , Khrushchev served in other fronts of the war . He was attached to Soviet troops at the Battle of Kursk , in July 1943 , which turned back the last major German offensive on Soviet soil . Khrushchev related that he interrogated an SS defector , learning that the Germans intended an attack — a claim dismissed by his biographer Taubman as " almost certainly exaggerated " . He accompanied Soviet troops as they took Kiev in November 1943 , entering the shattered city as Soviet forces drove out German troops . As Soviet forces met with greater success , driving the Nazis westwards towards Germany , Nikita Khrushchev became increasingly involved in reconstruction work in Ukraine . He was appointed Premier of the Ukrainian SSR in addition to his earlier party post , one of the rare instances in which the Ukrainian party and civil leader posts were held by one person . 
 According to Khrushchev biographer William Tompson , it is difficult to assess Khrushchev 's war record , since he most often acted as part of a military council , and it is not possible to know the extent to which he influenced decisions , rather than signing off on the orders of military officers . However , Tompson points to the fact that the few mentions of Khrushchev in military memoirs published during the Brezhnev era were generally favorable , at a time when it was " barely possible to mention Khrushchev in print in any context " . Tompson suggests that these favorable mentions indicate that military officers held Khrushchev in high regard . 
 = = Rise to power = = 
 = = = Return to Ukraine = = = 
 Almost all of Ukraine had been occupied by the Germans , and Khrushchev returned to his domain in late 1943 to find devastation . Ukraine 's industry had been destroyed , and agriculture faced critical shortages . Even though millions of Ukrainians had been taken to Germany as workers or prisoners of war , there was insufficient housing for those who remained . One out of every six Ukrainians was killed in World War II . 
 Khrushchev sought to reconstruct Ukraine , but also desired to complete the interrupted work of imposing the Soviet system on it , though he hoped that the purges of the 1930s would not recur . As Ukraine was recovered militarily , conscription was imposed , and 750 @,@ 000 men aged between nineteen and fifty were given minimal military training and sent to join the Red Army . Other Ukrainians joined partisan forces , seeking an independent Ukraine . Khrushchev rushed from district to district through Ukraine , urging the depleted labor force to greater efforts . He made a short visit to his birthplace of Kalinovka , finding a starving population , with only a third of the men who had joined the Red Army having returned . Khrushchev did what he could to assist his hometown . Despite Khrushchev 's efforts , in 1945 , Ukrainian industry was at only a quarter of pre @-@ war levels , and the harvest actually dropped from that of 1944 , when the entire territory of Ukraine had not yet been retaken . 
 In an effort to increase agricultural production , the kolkhozes ( collective farms ) were empowered to expel residents who were not pulling their weight . <unk> leaders used this as an excuse to expel their personal enemies , invalids , and the elderly , and nearly 12 @,@ 000 people were sent to the eastern parts of the Soviet Union . Khrushchev viewed this policy as very effective , and recommended its adoption elsewhere to Stalin . He also worked to impose collectivization on Western Ukraine . While Khrushchev hoped to accomplish this by 1947 , lack of resources and armed resistance by partisans slowed the process . The partisans , many of whom fought as the Ukrainian Insurgent Army ( <unk> ) , were gradually defeated , as Soviet police and military reported killing 110 @,@ 825 " bandits " and capturing a quarter million more between 1944 and 1946 . About 600 @,@ 000 Western Ukrainians were arrested between 1944 and 1952 , with one @-@ third executed and the remainder imprisoned or exiled to the east . 
 The war years of 1944 and 1945 had seen poor harvests , and 1946 saw intense drought strike Ukraine and Western Russia . Despite this , collective and state farms were required to turn over 52 % of the harvest to the government . The Soviet government sought to collect as much grain as possible in order to supply communist allies in Eastern Europe . Khrushchev set the quotas at a high level , leading Stalin to expect an unrealistically large quantity of grain from Ukraine . Food was rationed — but non @-@ agricultural rural workers throughout the USSR were given no ration cards . The inevitable starvation was largely confined to remote rural regions , and was little noticed outside the USSR . Khrushchev , realizing the desperate situation in late 1946 , repeatedly appealed to Stalin for aid , to be met with anger and resistance on the part of the leader . When letters to Stalin had no effect , Khrushchev flew to Moscow and made his case in person . Stalin finally gave Ukraine limited food aid , and money to set up free soup kitchens . However , Khrushchev 's political standing had been damaged , and in February 1947 , Stalin suggested that Lazar Kaganovich be sent to Ukraine to " help " Khrushchev . The following month , the Ukrainian Central Committee removed Khrushchev as party leader in favor of Kaganovich , while retaining him as premier . 
 Soon after Kaganovich arrived in Kiev , Khrushchev fell ill , and was barely seen until September 1947 . In his memoirs , Khrushchev indicates he had pneumonia ; some biographers have theorized that Khrushchev 's illness was entirely political , out of fear that his loss of position was the first step towards downfall and demise . However , Khrushchev 's children remembered their father as having been seriously ill . Once Khrushchev was able to get out of bed , he and his family took their first vacation since before the war , to a beachfront resort in Latvia . Khrushchev , though , soon broke the beach routine with duck @-@ hunting trips , and a visit to newly Soviet Kaliningrad , where he toured factories and quarries . By the end of 1947 , Kaganovich had been recalled to Moscow and the recovered Khrushchev had been restored to the First Secretaryship . He then resigned the Ukrainian premiership in favor of <unk> <unk> , Khrushchev 's protégé . 
 Khrushchev 's final years in Ukraine were generally peaceful , with industry recovering , Soviet forces overcoming the partisans , and 1947 and 1948 seeing better @-@ than @-@ expected harvests . Collectivization advanced in Western Ukraine , and Khrushchev implemented more policies that encouraged collectivization and discouraged private farms . These sometimes backfired , however : a tax on private livestock holdings led to peasants slaughtering their stock . With the idea of eliminating differences in attitude between town and countryside and transforming the peasantry into a " rural proletariat " , Khrushchev conceived the idea of the " agro @-@ town " . Rather than agricultural workers living in villages close to farms , they would live further away in larger towns which would offer municipal services such as utilities and libraries , which were not present in villages . He completed only one such town before his December 1949 return to Moscow ; he dedicated it to Stalin as a 70th birthday present . 
 In his memoirs , Khrushchev spoke highly of Ukraine , where he governed for over a decade : 
 I 'll say that the Ukrainian people treated me well . I recall warmly the years I spent there . This was a period full of responsibilities , but pleasant because it brought satisfaction ... But far be it from me to inflate my significance . The entire Ukrainian people was exerting great efforts ... I attribute Ukraine 's successes to the Ukrainian people as a whole . I won 't elaborate further on this theme , but in principle it 's very easy to demonstrate . I 'm Russian myself , and I don 't want to offend the Russians . 
 = = = Stalin 's final years = = = 
 Khrushchev attributed his recall to Moscow to mental disorder on the part of Stalin , who feared conspiracies in Moscow matching those which the ruler believed to have occurred in the fabricated Leningrad case , in which many of that city 's Party officials had been falsely accused of treason . Khrushchev again served as head of the Party in Moscow city and province . Khrushchev biographer Taubman suggests that Stalin most likely recalled Khrushchev to Moscow to balance the influence of Georgy Malenkov and security chief Lavrentiy Beria , who were widely seen as Stalin 's heirs . 
 At this time , the aging leader rarely called Politburo meetings . Instead , much of the high @-@ level work of government took place at dinners hosted by Stalin . These sessions , which Beria , Malenkov , Khrushchev , Kaganovich , Kliment Voroshilov , Vyacheslav Molotov , and Nikolai Bulganin , who comprised Stalin 's inner circle , attended , began with showings of cowboy movies favored by Stalin . Stolen from the West , they lacked subtitles . The dictator had the meal served at around 1 a.m. , and insisted that his subordinates stay with him and drink until dawn . On one occasion , Stalin had Khrushchev , then aged almost sixty , dance a traditional Ukrainian dance . Khrushchev did so , later stating , " When Stalin says dance , a wise man dances . " Khrushchev attempted to nap at lunch so that he would not fall asleep in Stalin 's presence ; he noted in his memoirs , " Things went badly for those who dozed off at Stalin 's table . " 
 In 1950 , Khrushchev began a large @-@ scale housing program for Moscow . A large part of the housing was in the form of five- or six @-@ story apartment buildings , which became ubiquitous throughout the Soviet Union ; many remain in use today . Khrushchev had prefabricated reinforced concrete used , greatly speeding up construction . These structures were completed at triple the construction rate of Moscow housing from 1946 – 1950 , lacked elevators or balconies , and were nicknamed <unk> by the public , but because of their shoddy workmanship sometimes disparagingly called <unk> , a portmanteau formed from the name Khrushchev and the Russian word <unk> , meaning " slum " . Almost 60 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 residents of the former Soviet republics still live in these buildings . 
 In his new positions , Khrushchev continued his kolkhoz consolidation scheme , decreasing the number of collective farms in Moscow province by about 70 % . This resulted in farms that were too large for one chairman to manage effectively . Khrushchev also sought to implement his agro @-@ town proposal , but when his lengthy speech on the subject was published in Pravda in March 1951 , Stalin disapproved of it . The periodical quickly published a note stating that Khrushchev 's speech was merely a proposal , not policy . In April , the Politburo disavowed the agro @-@ town proposal . Khrushchev feared that Stalin would remove him from office , but the leader mocked Khrushchev , then allowed the episode to pass . 
 On March 1 , 1953 , Stalin suffered a massive stroke , apparently on rising after sleep . Stalin had left orders not to be disturbed , and it was twelve hours until his condition was discovered . Even as terrified doctors attempted treatment , Khrushchev and his colleagues engaged in intense discussion as to the new government . On March 5 , Stalin died . As Khrushchev and other high officials stood weeping by Stalin 's bedside , Beria raced from the room , shouting for his car . 
 Khrushchev reflected on Stalin in his memoirs : 
 Stalin called everyone who didn 't agree with him an " enemy of the people . " He said that they wanted to restore the old order , and for this purpose , " the enemies of the people " had linked up with the forces of reaction internationally . As a result , several hundred thousand honest people perished . Everyone lived in fear in those days . Everyone expected that at any moment there would be a knock on the door in the middle of the night and that knock on the door would prove fatal ... [ P ] eople not to Stalin 's liking were annihilated , honest party members , irreproachable people , loyal and hard workers for our cause who had gone through the school of revolutionary struggle under Lenin 's leadership . This was utter and complete arbitrariness . And now is all this to be forgiven and forgotten ? Never ! 
 = = = Struggle for control = = = 
 On March 6 , 1953 , Stalin 's death was announced , as was the new leadership . Malenkov was the new Chairman of the Council of Ministers , with Beria ( who consolidated his hold over the security agencies ) , Kaganovich , Bulganin , and former Foreign Minister Vyacheslav Molotov as first vice @-@ chairmen . Those members of the Presidium of the Central Committee who had been recently promoted by Stalin were demoted . Khrushchev was relieved of his duties as Party head for Moscow to concentrate on unspecified duties in the Party 's Central Committee . The New York Times listed Malenkov and Beria first and second among the ten @-@ man Presidium — and Khrushchev last . 
 However , on March 14 , Malenkov resigned from the secretariat of the Central Committee . This came due to concerns that he was acquiring too much power . The major beneficiary was Khrushchev . His name appeared atop a revised list of secretaries — indicating that he was now in charge of the party . The Central Committee formally elected him First Secretary in September . 
 Even before Stalin had been laid to rest , Beria launched a lengthy series of reforms which rivalled those of Khrushchev during his period of power and even those of Mikhail Gorbachev a third of a century later . Beria 's proposals were designed to denigrate Stalin and pass the blame for Beria 's own crimes to the late leader . One proposal , which was adopted , was an amnesty which eventually led to the freeing of over a million prisoners . Another , which was not , was to release East Germany into a united , neutral Germany in exchange for compensation from the West — a proposal considered by Khrushchev to be anti @-@ communist . Khrushchev allied with Malenkov to block many of Beria 's proposals , while the two slowly picked up support from other Presidium members . Their campaign against Beria was aided by fears that Beria was planning a military coup , and , according to Khrushchev in his memoirs , by the conviction that " Beria is getting his knives ready for us . " 
 On June 26 , 1953 Beria was arrested at a Presidium meeting , following extensive military preparations by Khrushchev and his allies . Beria was tried in secret , and executed in December 1953 with five of his close associates . The execution of Beria proved to be the last time the loser of a top @-@ level Soviet power struggle paid with his life . 
 The power struggle in the Presidium was not resolved by the elimination of Beria . Malenkov 's power was in the central state apparatus , which he sought to extend through reorganizing the government , giving it additional power at the expense of the Party . He also sought public support by lowering retail prices and lowering the level of bond sales to citizens , which had long been effectively obligatory . Khrushchev , on the other hand , with his power base in the Party , sought to both strengthen the Party and his position within it . While , under the Soviet system , the Party was to be preeminent , it had been greatly drained of power by Stalin , who had given much of that power to himself and to the Politburo ( later , to the Presidium ) . Khrushchev saw that with the Presidium in conflict , the Party and its Central Committee might again become powerful . Khrushchev carefully cultivated high Party officials , and was able to appoint supporters as local Party bosses , who then took seats on the Central Committee . 
 Khrushchev presented himself as a down @-@ to @-@ earth activist prepared to take up any challenge , contrasting with Malenkov who , though sophisticated , came across as colorless . Khrushchev arranged for the Kremlin grounds to be opened to the public , an act with " great public resonance " . While both Malenkov and Khrushchev sought reforms to agriculture , Khrushchev 's proposals were broader , and included the Virgin Lands Campaign , under which hundreds of thousands of young volunteers would settle and farm areas of Western Siberia and Northern Kazakhstan . While the scheme eventually became a tremendous disaster for Soviet agriculture , it was initially successful . In addition , Khrushchev possessed incriminating information on Malenkov , taken from Beria 's secret files . As Soviet prosecutors investigated the atrocities of Stalin 's last years , including the Leningrad case , they came across evidence of Malenkov 's involvement . Beginning in February 1954 , Khrushchev replaced Malenkov in the seat of honor at Presidium meetings ; in June , Malenkov ceased to head the list of Presidium members , which was thereafter organized in alphabetical order . Khrushchev 's influence continued to increase , winning the allegiance of local party heads , and with his nominee heading the KGB . 
 At a Central Committee meeting in January 1955 , Malenkov was accused of involvement in atrocities , and the committee passed a resolution accusing him of involvement in the Leningrad case , and of facilitating Beria 's climb to power . At a meeting of the mostly ceremonial Supreme Soviet the following month , Malenkov was demoted in favor of Bulganin , to the surprise of Western observers . Malenkov remained in the Presidium as Minister of Electric Power Stations . According to Khrushchev biographer William Tompson , " Khrushchev 's position as first among the members of the collective leadership was now beyond any reasonable doubt . " 
 = = Leader ( 1953 – 1964 ) = = 
 = = = Domestic policies = = = 
 = = = = Consolidation of power ; Secret Speech = = = = 
 After the demotion of Malenkov , Khrushchev and Molotov initially worked together well , and the longtime foreign minister even proposed that Khrushchev , not Bulganin , replace Malenkov as premier . However , Khrushchev and Molotov increasingly differed on policy . Molotov opposed the Virgin Lands policy , instead proposing heavy investment to increase yields in developed agricultural areas , which Khrushchev felt was not feasible due to a lack of resources and a lack of a sophisticated farm labor force . The two differed on foreign policy as well ; soon after Khrushchev took power , he sought a peace treaty with Austria , which would allow Soviet troops then in occupation of part of the country to leave . Molotov was resistant , but Khrushchev arranged for an Austrian delegation to come to Moscow and negotiate the treaty . Although Khrushchev and other Presidium members attacked Molotov at a Central Committee meeting in mid @-@ 1955 , accusing him of conducting a foreign policy which turned the world against the USSR , Molotov remained in his position . 
 By the end of 1955 , thousands of political prisoners had returned home , and told their experiences of the gulag labor camps . Continuing investigation into the abuses brought home the full breadth of Stalin 's crimes to his successors . Khrushchev believed that once the stain of Stalinism was removed , the Party would inspire loyalty among the people . Beginning in October 1955 , Khrushchev fought to tell the delegates to the upcoming 20th Party Congress about Stalin 's crimes . Some of his colleagues , including Molotov and Malenkov , opposed the disclosure , and managed to persuade him to make his remarks in a closed session . 
 The 20th Party Congress opened on February 14 , 1956 . In his opening words in his initial address , Khrushchev denigrated Stalin by asking delegates to rise in honor of the communist leaders who had died since the last congress , whom he named , equating Stalin with Klement Gottwald and the little @-@ known <unk> <unk> . In the early morning hours of February 25 , Khrushchev delivered what became known as the " Secret Speech " to a closed session of the Congress limited to Soviet delegates . In four hours , he demolished Stalin 's reputation . Khrushchev noted in his memoirs that the " congress listened to me in silence . As the saying goes , you could have heard a pin drop . It was all so sudden and unexpected . " Khrushchev told the delegates : 
 It is here that Stalin showed in a whole series of cases his intolerance , his brutality , and his abuse of power ... he often chose the path of repression and physical annihilation , not only against actual enemies , but also against individuals who had not committed any crimes against the party or the Soviet Government . 
 The Secret Speech , while it did not fundamentally change Soviet society , had wide @-@ ranging effects . The speech was a factor in unrest in Poland and revolution in Hungary later in 1956 , and Stalin defenders led four days of rioting in his native Georgia in June , calling for Khrushchev to resign and Molotov to take over . In meetings where the Secret Speech was read , communists would make even more severe condemnations of Stalin ( and of Khrushchev ) , and even call for multi @-@ party elections . However , Stalin was not publicly denounced , and his portrait remained widespread through the USSR , from airports to Khrushchev 's Kremlin office . Mikhail Gorbachev , then a Komsomol official , recalled that though young and well @-@ educated Soviets in his district were excited by the speech , many others decried it , either defending Stalin or seeing little point in digging up the past . Forty years later , after the fall of the Soviet Union , Gorbachev applauded Khrushchev for his courage in taking a huge political risk and showing himself to be " a moral man after all " . 
 The term " Secret Speech " proved to be an utter misnomer . While the attendees at the Speech were all Soviet , Eastern European delegates were allowed to hear it the following night , read slowly to allow them to take notes . By March 5 , copies were being mailed throughout the Soviet Union , marked " not for the press " rather than " top secret " . An official translation appeared within a month in Poland ; the Poles printed 12 @,@ 000 extra copies , one of which soon reached the West . Khrushchev 's son , Sergei , later wrote , " [ C ] <unk> , Father tried to ensure it would reach as many ears as possible . It was soon read at Komsomol meetings ; that meant another eighteen million listeners . If you include their relatives , friends , and acquaintances , you could say that the entire country became familiar with the speech ... Spring had barely begun when the speech began circulating around the world . " 
 The anti @-@ Khrushchev minority in the Presidium was augmented by those opposed to Khrushchev 's proposals to decentralize authority over industry , which struck at the heart of Malenkov 's power base . During the first half of 1957 , Malenkov , Molotov , and Kaganovich worked to quietly build support to dismiss Khrushchev . At a June 18 Presidium meeting at which two Khrushchev supporters were absent , the plotters moved that Bulganin , who had joined the scheme , take the chair , and proposed other moves which would effectively demote Khrushchev and put themselves in control . Khrushchev objected on the grounds that not all Presidium members had been notified , an objection which would have been quickly dismissed had Khrushchev not held firm control over the military , through Minister of Defense Marshal Zhukov , and the security departments . Lengthy Presidium meetings took place , continuing over several days . As word leaked of the power struggle , members of the Central Committee , which Khrushchev controlled , streamed to Moscow , many flown there aboard military planes , and demanded to be admitted to the meeting . While they were not admitted , there were soon enough Central Committee members in Moscow to call an emergency Party Congress , which effectively forced the leadership to allow a session of the Central Committee . At that meeting , the three main conspirators were dubbed the Anti @-@ Party Group , accused of factionalism and complicity in Stalin 's crimes . The three were expelled from the Central Committee and Presidium , as was former Foreign Minister and Khrushchev client Dmitri <unk> who joined them in the plot . Molotov was sent as Ambassador to Mongolia ; the others were sent to head industrial facilities and institutes far from Moscow . 
 Marshal Zhukov was rewarded for his support with full membership in the Presidium , but Khrushchev feared his popularity and power . In October , the defense minister was sent on a tour of the Balkans , as Khrushchev arranged a Presidium meeting to dismiss him . Zhukov learned what was happening , and hurried back to Moscow , only to be formally notified of his dismissal . At a Central Committee meeting several weeks later , not a word was said in Zhukov 's defense . Khrushchev completed the consolidation of power by arranging for Bulganin 's dismissal as premier in favor of himself ( Bulganin was appointed to head the Gosbank ) and by establishing a USSR Defense Council , led by himself , effectively making him commander in chief . Though Khrushchev was now preeminent , he did not enjoy Stalin 's absolute power . 
 = = = = <unk> and the arts = = = = 
 After assuming power , Khrushchev allowed a modest amount of freedom in the arts . Vladimir <unk> 's Not by Bread Alone , about an idealistic engineer opposed by rigid bureaucrats , was allowed to be published in 1956 , though Khrushchev called the novel " false at its base " . In 1958 , however , Khrushchev ordered a fierce attack on Boris Pasternak after his novel Doctor Zhivago was published abroad ( he was denied permission to publish it in the Soviet Union ) . Pravda described the novel as " low @-@ grade reactionary hackwork " , and the author was expelled from the Writer 's Union . To make things worse ( from Khrushchev 's perspective ) , Pasternak was awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature , which , under heavy pressure , he declined . Once he did so , Khrushchev ordered a halt to the attacks on Pasternak . In his memoirs , Khrushchev stated that he agonized over the novel , very nearly allowed it to be published , and later regretted not doing so . After his fall from power , Khrushchev obtained a copy of the novel and read it ( he had earlier read only excerpts ) and stated , " We shouldn 't have banned it . I should have read it myself . There 's nothing anti @-@ Soviet in it . " 
 Khrushchev believed that the USSR could match the West 's living standards , and was not afraid to allow Soviet citizens to see Western achievements . Stalin had permitted few tourists to the Soviet Union , and had allowed few Soviets to travel . Khrushchev let Soviets travel ( over 700 @,@ 000 Soviet citizens travelled abroad in 1957 ) and allowed foreigners to visit the Soviet Union , where tourists became subjects of immense curiosity . In 1957 , Khrushchev authorized the 6th World Festival of Youth and Students to be held in Moscow that summer . He instructed Komsomol officials to " smother foreign guests in our embrace " . The resulting " socialist carnival " involved over three million <unk> , who joined with 30 @,@ 000 young foreign visitors in events that ranged from discussion groups throughout the city to events at the Kremlin itself . According to historian Vladislav <unk> , the festival " shattered propagandist clichés " about Westerners by allowing <unk> to see them for themselves . 
 In 1962 , Khrushchev , impressed by Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn 's One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich , persuaded the Presidium to allow publication . That renewed thaw ended on December 1 , 1962 , when Khrushchev was taken to the <unk> Gallery to view an exhibit which included a number of avant @-@ garde works . On seeing them , Khrushchev exploded with anger , describing the artwork as " dog shit " , and proclaiming that " a donkey could smear better art with its tail " . A week later , Pravda issued a call for artistic purity . When writers and filmmakers defended the painters , Khrushchev extended his anger to them . However , despite the premier 's rage , none of the artists were arrested or exiled . The <unk> Gallery exhibit remained open for some time after Khrushchev 's visit , and experienced a considerable rise in attendance after the article in Pravda . 
 = = = = Political reform = = = = 
 Under Khrushchev , the special tribunals operated by security agencies were abolished . These tribunals ( known as <unk> ) , had often ignored laws and procedures . Under the reforms , no prosecution for a political crime could be brought even in the regular courts unless approved by the local Party committee . This rarely happened ; there were no major political trials under Khrushchev , and at most several hundred political prosecutions overall . Instead , other sanctions were imposed on dissidents , including loss of job or university place , or expulsion from the Party . During Khrushchev 's rule , forced hospitalization for the " socially dangerous " was introduced . According to author Roy Medvedev , who wrote an early analysis of Khrushchev 's years in power , " political terror as an everyday method of government was replaced under Khrushchev by administrative means of repression " . 
 In 1958 , Khrushchev opened a Central Committee meeting to hundreds of Soviet officials ; some were even allowed to address the meeting . For the first time , the proceedings of the Committee were made public in book form , a practice which was continued at subsequent meetings . This openness , however , actually allowed Khrushchev greater control over the Committee , since any dissenters would have to make their case in front of a large , disapproving crowd . 
 In 1962 , Khrushchev divided oblast ( province ) level Party committees into two parallel structures , one for industry and one for agriculture . This was unpopular among Party apparatchiks , and led to confusions in the chain of command , as neither committee secretary had precedence over the other . As there were limited numbers of Central Committee seats from each oblast , the division set up the possibility of rivalry for office between factions , and , according to Medvedev , had the potential for beginning a two @-@ party system . Khrushchev also ordered that one @-@ third of the membership of each committee , from low @-@ level councils to the Central Committee itself , be replaced at each election . This decree created tension between Khrushchev and the Central Committee and upset the party leaders upon whose support Khrushchev had risen to power . 
 = = = = Agricultural policy = = = = 
 Since the 1940s , Khrushchev had advocated the cultivation of corn ( maize ) in the Soviet Union . He established a corn institute in Ukraine and ordered thousands of acres to be planted with corn in the Virgin Lands . In February 1955 , Khrushchev gave a speech in which he advocated an Iowa @-@ style corn belt in the Soviet Union , and a Soviet delegation visited the U.S. state that summer . While their intent was to visit only small farms , the delegation chief was approached by farmer and corn salesman Roswell Garst , who persuaded him to insist on visiting Garst 's large farm . The Iowan visited the Soviet Union in September , where he became great friends with Khrushchev , and Garst sold the USSR 5 @,@ 000 short tons ( 4 @,@ 500 t ) of seed corn . Garst warned the Soviets to grow the corn in the southern part of the country , and to ensure there were sufficient stocks of fertilizer , insecticides , and herbicides . This , however , was not done , as Khrushchev sought to plant corn even in Siberia , and without the necessary chemicals . While Khrushchev warned against those who " would have us plant the whole planet with corn " , he displayed a great passion for corn , so much so that when he visited a Latvian kolkhoz , he stated that some in his audience were probably wondering , " Will Khrushchev say something about corn or won 't he ? " He did , rebuking the farmers for not planting more corn . The corn experiment was not a great success , and he later wrote that overenthusiastic officials , wanting to please him , had <unk> without laying the proper groundwork , and " as a result corn was discredited as a silage crop — and so was I " . 
 Khrushchev sought to abolish the Machine @-@ Tractor Stations ( MTS ) which not only owned most large agricultural machines such as combines and tractors , but also provided services such as plowing , and transfer their equipment and functions to the kolkhozes and <unk> ( state farms ) . After a successful test involving MTS which served one large kolkhoz each , Khrushchev ordered a gradual transition — but then ordered that the change take place with great speed . Within three months , over half of the MTS facilities had been closed , and kolkhozes were being required to buy the equipment , with no discount given for older or dilapidated machines . MTS employees , unwilling to bind themselves to kolkhozes and lose their state employee benefits and the right to change their jobs , fled to the cities , creating a shortage of skilled operators . The costs of the machinery , plus the costs of building storage sheds and fuel tanks for the equipment , impoverished many kolkhozes . Inadequate provisions were made for repair stations . Without the MTS , the market for Soviet agricultural equipment fell apart , as the kolkhozes now had neither the money nor skilled buyers to purchase new equipment . 
 One adviser to Khrushchev was Trofim Lysenko , who promised greatly increased production with minimal investment . Such schemes were attractive to Khrushchev , who ordered them implemented . Lysenko managed to maintain his influence under Khrushchev despite repeated failures ; as each proposal failed , he advocated another . Lysenko 's influence greatly retarded the development of genetic science in the Soviet Union . In 1959 , Khrushchev announced a goal of overtaking the United States in production of milk , meat , and butter . Local officials , with Khrushchev 's encouragement , made unrealistic pledges of production . These goals were met by forcing farmers to slaughter their breeding herds and by purchasing meat at state stores , then reselling it back to the government , artificially increasing recorded production . 
 In June 1962 , food prices were raised , particularly on meat and butter ( by 25 – 30 % ) . This caused public discontent . In the southern Russian city of <unk> ( Rostov Region ) this discontent escalated to a strike and a revolt against the authorities . The revolt was put down by the military . According to Soviet official accounts , 22 people were killed and 87 wounded . In addition , 116 demonstrators were convicted of involvement and seven of them executed . Information about the revolt was completely suppressed in the USSR , but spread through <unk> and damaged Khrushchev 's reputation in the West . 
 Drought struck the Soviet Union in 1963 ; the harvest of 107 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 short tons ( 97 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 t ) of grain was down from a peak of 134 @,@ 700 @,@ 000 short tons ( 122 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 t ) in 1958 . The shortages resulted in bread lines , a fact at first kept from Khrushchev . Reluctant to purchase food in the West , but faced with the alternative of widespread hunger , Khrushchev exhausted the nation 's hard currency reserves and expended part of its gold stockpile in the purchase of grain and other foodstuffs . 
 = = = = Education = = = = 
 While visiting the United States in 1959 , Khrushchev was greatly impressed by the agricultural education program at Iowa State University , and sought to imitate it in the Soviet Union . At the time , the main agricultural college in the USSR was in Moscow , and students did not do the manual labor of farming . Khrushchev proposed to move the programs to rural areas . He was unsuccessful , due to resistance from professors and students , who never actually disagreed with the premier , but who did not carry out his proposals . Khrushchev recalled in his memoirs , " It 's nice to live in Moscow and work at the <unk> Agricultural Academy . It 's a venerable old institution , a large economic unit , with skilled instructors , but it 's in the city ! Its students aren 't yearning to work on the collective farms because to do that they 'd have to go out in the provinces and live in the sticks . " 
 Khrushchev founded several academic towns , such as <unk> . The premier believed that Western science flourished because many scientists lived in university towns such as Oxford , isolated from big city distractions , and had pleasant living conditions and good pay . He sought to duplicate those conditions in the Soviet Union . Khrushchev 's attempt was generally successful , though his new towns and scientific centers tended to attract younger scientists , with older ones unwilling to leave Moscow or Leningrad . 
 Khrushchev also proposed to restructure Soviet high schools . While the high schools provided a college preparatory curriculum , in fact few Soviet youths went on to university . Khrushchev wanted to shift the focus of secondary schools to vocational training : students would spend much of their time at factory jobs or in apprenticeships and only a small part at the schools . In practice , what occurred is that schools developed links with nearby enterprises , and students went to work for only one or two days a week ; the factories and other works disliked having to teach , while students and their families complained that they had little choice in what trade to learn . 
 While the vocational proposal would not survive Khrushchev 's downfall , a longer @-@ lasting change was a related establishment of specialized high schools for gifted students or those wishing to study a specific subject . These schools were modeled after the foreign @-@ language schools that had been established in Moscow and Leningrad beginning in 1949 . In 1962 , a special summer school was established in Novosibirsk to prepare students for a Siberian math and science Olympiad . The following year , the Novosibirsk Maths and Science Boarding @-@ School became the first permanent residential school specializing in math and science . Other such schools were soon established in Moscow , Leningrad , and Kiev . By the early 1970s , over 100 specialized schools had been established , in mathematics , the sciences , art , music , and sport . Preschool education was increased as part of Khrushchev 's reforms , and by the time he left office , about 22 % of Soviet children attended preschool — about half of urban children , but only about 12 % of rural children . 
 = = = Foreign and defense policies = = = 
 When Khrushchev took control , the outside world still knew little of him , and initially was not impressed by him . Short , heavyset , and wearing ill @-@ fitting suits , he " radiated energy but not intellect " , and was dismissed by many as a buffoon who would not last long . British Foreign Secretary Harold Macmillan wondered , " How can this fat , vulgar man with his pig eyes and ceaseless flow of talk be the head — the aspirant Tsar for all those millions of people ? " 
 Khrushchev biographer Tompson described the mercurial leader : 
 He could be charming or vulgar , ebullient or sullen , he was given to public displays of rage ( often contrived ) and to soaring hyperbole in his rhetoric . But whatever he was , however he came across , he was more human than his predecessor or even than most of his foreign counterparts , and for much of the world that was enough to make the USSR seem less mysterious or menacing . 
 = = = = United States and allies = = = = 
 = = = = = Early relations and U.S. visit ( 1957 – 60 ) = = = = = 
 Khrushchev sought to find a lasting solution to the problem of a divided Germany and of the enclave of West Berlin deep within East German territory . In November 1958 , calling West Berlin a " malignant tumor " , he gave the United States , United Kingdom and France six months to conclude a peace treaty with both German states and the Soviet Union . If one was not signed , Khrushchev stated , the Soviet Union would conclude a peace treaty with East Germany . This would leave East Germany , which was not a party to treaties giving the Western Powers access to Berlin , in control of the routes to the city . This ultimatum caused dissent among the Western Allies , who were reluctant to go to war over the issue . Khrushchev , however , repeatedly extended the deadline . 
 Khrushchev sought to eliminate many conventional weapons , and defend the Soviet Union with missiles . He believed that unless this occurred , the huge Soviet military would continue to eat up resources , making Khrushchev 's goals of improving Soviet life difficult to achieve . In 1955 , Khrushchev abandoned Stalin 's plans for a large navy , believing that the new ships would be too vulnerable to either conventional or nuclear attack . In January 1960 , Khrushchev took advantage of improved relations with the U.S. to order a reduction of one @-@ third in the size of Soviet armed forces , alleging that advanced weapons would make up for the lost troops . While conscription of Soviet youth remained in force , exemptions from military service became more and more common , especially for students . 
 The Soviets had few operable ICBMs ; in spite of this Khrushchev publicly boasted of the Soviets ' missile programs , stating that Soviet weapons were varied and numerous . The First Secretary hoped that public perception that the Soviets were ahead would result in psychological pressure on the West and political concessions . The Soviet space program , which Khrushchev firmly supported , appeared to confirm his claims when the Soviets launched Sputnik 1 into orbit , a launch many westerners , including United States Vice President Richard Nixon were convinced was a hoax . When it became clear that the launch was real , and Sputnik 1 was in orbit , Western governments concluded that the Soviet ICBM program was further along than it actually was . Khrushchev added to this misapprehension by stating in an October 1957 interview that the USSR had all the rockets , of whatever capacity , that it needed . For years , Khrushchev would make a point of preceding a major foreign trip with a rocket launch , to the discomfiture of his hosts . The United States learned of the primitive state of the Soviet missile program from overflights in the late 1950s , but only high U.S. officials knew of the deception . In January 1960 , Khrushchev told the Presidium that Soviet ICBMs made an agreement with the U.S. possible because " main @-@ street Americans have begun to shake from fear for the first times in their lives " . The perceived " missile gap " led to a considerable defense buildup on the part of the United States . 
 In 1959 , during Nixon 's visit to the Soviet Union , Khrushchev took part in what later became known as the Kitchen Debate , as Nixon and Khrushchev had an impassioned argument in a model kitchen at the American National Exhibition in Moscow , with each defending the economic system of his country . Khrushchev was invited to visit the United States , and did so that September , spending thirteen days . Khrushchev arrived in Washington , DC on his first visit to the United States on September 15 , 1959 . The first visit by a Soviet premier to the United States resulted in an extended media circus . Khrushchev brought his wife , Nina Petrovna , and adult children with him , though it was not usual for Soviet officials to travel with their families . The peripatetic premier visited New York City , Los Angeles , San Francisco ( visiting a supermarket ) , Coon Rapids , Iowa ( visiting Roswell Garst 's farm ) , Pittsburgh , and Washington , concluding with a meeting with U.S. President Eisenhower at Camp David . Khrushchev was supposed to visit Disneyland , but the visit was canceled for security reasons , much to his disgruntlement . He did , however , visit Eleanor Roosevelt at her home in Hyde Park , New York . While visiting an IBM facility in California , Khrushchev expressed little interest in the computers , but greatly admired the self @-@ service cafeteria , and , on his return , introduced self @-@ service in the Soviet Union . 
 Khrushchev 's U.S. visit resulted in an informal agreement with U.S. president Dwight Eisenhower that there would be no firm deadline over Berlin , but that there would be a four @-@ power summit to try to resolve the issue , and the premier left the U.S. to general good feelings . Khrushchev returned from the U.S. convinced that he had achieved a strong personal relationship with Eisenhower ( who in fact was unimpressed by the Soviet leader ) and that he could achieve détente with the Americans . He pushed for an immediate summit , but was frustrated by French President Charles de Gaulle , who postponed it until 1960 , a year in which Eisenhower was scheduled to pay a return visit to the Soviet Union . 
 = = = = = U @-@ 2 and Berlin crisis ( 1960 – 61 ) = = = = = 
 A constant irritant in Soviet – U.S. relations was the overflight of the Soviet Union by American U @-@ 2 spy aircraft . On April 9 , 1960 , the U.S. resumed such flights after a lengthy break . The Soviets had protested the flights in the past , but had been ignored by Washington . Content in what he thought was a strong personal relationship with Eisenhower , Khrushchev was confused and angered by the flights ' resumption , and concluded that they had been ordered by CIA Director Allen Dulles without the U.S. President 's knowledge . On May 1 , a U @-@ 2 was shot down , its pilot , Francis Gary Powers , captured alive . Believing Powers to have been killed , the U.S. announced that a weather plane had been lost near the Turkish @-@ Soviet border . Khrushchev risked destroying the summit , due to start on May 16 in Paris , if he announced the shootdown , but would look weak in the eyes of his military and security forces if he did nothing . Finally , on May 5 , Khrushchev announced the shootdown and Powers ' capture , blaming the overflight on " imperialist circles and militarists , whose stronghold is the Pentagon " , and suggesting the plane had been sent without Eisenhower 's knowledge . Eisenhower could not have it thought that there were rogue elements in the Pentagon operating without his knowledge , and admitted that he had ordered the flights , calling them " a distasteful necessity " . The admission stunned Khrushchev , and turned the U @-@ 2 affair from a possible triumph to a disaster for him , and he even appealed to U.S. Ambassador Llewellyn Thompson for help . 
 Khrushchev was undecided what to do at the summit even as he boarded his flight to Paris . He finally decided , in consultation with his advisers on the plane and Presidium members in Moscow , to demand an apology from Eisenhower and a promise that there would be no further U @-@ 2 flights in Soviet airspace . Neither Eisenhower nor Khrushchev communicated with the other in the days before the summit , and at the summit , Khrushchev made his demands and stated that there was no purpose in the summit , which should be postponed for six to eight months , that is until after the 1960 United States presidential election . The U.S. President offered no apology , but stated that the flights had been suspended and would not resume , and renewed his Open Skies proposal for mutual overflight rights . This was not enough for Khrushchev , who left the summit . Eisenhower accused Khrushchev " of sabotaging this meeting , on which so much of the hopes of the world have rested " . Eisenhower 's visit to the Soviet Union , for which the premier had even built a golf course so the U.S. President could enjoy his favorite sport , was canceled by Khrushchev . 
 Khrushchev made his second and final visit to the United States in September 1960 . He had no invitation , but had appointed himself as head of the USSR 's UN delegation . He spent much of his time wooing the new Third World states which had recently become independent . The U.S. restricted him to the island of Manhattan , with visits to an estate owned by the USSR on Long Island . The notorious shoe @-@ banging incident occurred during a debate on October 12 over a Soviet resolution decrying colonialism . Infuriated by a statement of the Filipino delegate Lorenzo Sumulong which charged the Soviets with employing a double standard by decrying colonialism while dominating Eastern Europe , Khrushchev demanded the right to reply immediately , and accused Sumulong of being " a fawning lackey of the American imperialists " . Sumulong resumed his speech , and accused the Soviets of hypocrisy . Khrushchev yanked off his shoe and began banging it on his desk . This behavior by Khrushchev scandalized his delegation . 
 Khrushchev considered U.S. Vice President Nixon a hardliner , and was delighted by his defeat in the 1960 presidential election . He considered the victor , Massachusetts Senator John F. Kennedy , as a far more likely partner for détente , but was taken aback by the newly inaugurated U.S. President 's tough talk and actions in the early days of his administration . Khrushchev achieved a propaganda victory in April 1961 with the first manned spaceflight and Kennedy a defeat with the failure of the Bay of Pigs invasion . While Khrushchev had threatened to defend Cuba with Soviet missiles , the premier contented himself with after @-@ the @-@ fact aggressive remarks . The failure in Cuba led to Kennedy 's determination to make no concessions at the Vienna summit scheduled for June 3 , 1961 . Both Kennedy and Khrushchev took a hard line , with Khrushchev demanding a treaty that would recognize the two German states and refusing to yield on the remaining issues obstructing a test @-@ ban treaty . Kennedy on the other hand had been led to believe that the test @-@ ban treaty could be concluded at the summit , and felt that a deal on Berlin had to await easing of East – West tensions . Kennedy described negotiating with Khrushchev to his brother Robert as " like dealing with Dad . All give and no take . " 
 An indefinite postponement of action over Berlin was unacceptable to Khrushchev if for no other reason than that East Germany was suffering a continuous " brain drain " as highly educated East Germans fled west through Berlin . While the boundary between the two German states had elsewhere been fortified , Berlin , administered by the four Allied powers , remained open . Emboldened by statements from former U.S. Ambassador to Moscow Charles E. Bohlen and United States Senate Committee on Foreign Relations Chairman J. William Fulbright that East Germany had every right to close its borders , which were not disavowed by the Kennedy Administration , Khrushchev authorized East German leader Walter Ulbricht to begin construction of what became known as the Berlin Wall , which would surround West Berlin . Construction preparations were made in great secrecy , and the border was sealed off in the early hours of Sunday , August 13 , 1961 , when most East German workers who earned hard currency by working in West Berlin would be at their homes . The wall was a propaganda disaster , and marked the end of Khrushchev 's attempts to conclude a peace treaty among the Four Powers and the two German states . That treaty would not be signed until September 1990 , as an immediate prelude to German reunification . 
 = = = = = Establishing relations with Cuba = = = = = 
 Diplomatic relations between the Soviet Union and Cuba were officially restored in May 1960 . Alexandr Alexeyev was named Soviet Ambassador to Cuba two years later , in May 1962 . 
 = = = = = Cuban Missile Crisis and the test ban treaty ( 1962 – 1964 ) = = = = = 
 Superpower tensions culminated in the Cuban Missile Crisis ( in the USSR , the " Caribbean crisis " ) of October 1962 , as the Soviet Union sought to install medium range nuclear missiles in Cuba , about 90 miles ( 140 km ) from the U.S. coast . Cuban Prime Minister Fidel Castro was reluctant to accept the missiles , and , once he was persuaded , warned Khrushchev against transporting the missiles in secret . Castro stated , thirty years later , " We had a sovereign right to accept the missiles . We were not violating international law . Why do it secretly — as if we had no right to do it ? I warned Nikita that secrecy would give the imperialists the advantage . " 
 On October 16 , Kennedy was informed that U @-@ 2 flights over Cuba had discovered what were most likely medium @-@ range missile sites , and though he and his advisors considered approaching Khrushchev through diplomatic channels , could come up with no way of doing this that would not appear weak . On October 22 , Kennedy addressed his nation by television , revealing the missiles ' presence and announcing a blockade of Cuba . Informed in advance of the speech but not ( until one hour before ) the content , Khrushchev and his advisors feared an invasion of Cuba . Even before Kennedy 's speech , they ordered Soviet commanders in Cuba that they could use all weapons against an attack — except atomic weapons . 
 As the crisis unfolded , tensions were high in the U.S. ; less so in the Soviet Union , where Khrushchev made several public appearances , and went to the Bolshoi Theatre to hear American opera singer Jerome Hines , who was then performing in Moscow . By October 25 , with the Soviets unclear about Kennedy 's full intentions , Khrushchev decided that the missiles would have to be withdrawn from Cuba . Two days later , he offered Kennedy terms for the withdrawal . Khrushchev agreed to withdraw the missiles in exchange for a U.S. promise not to invade Cuba and a secret promise that the U.S. would withdraw missiles from Turkey , near the Soviet heartland . As the last term was not publicly announced at the request of the U.S. , and was not known until just before Khrushchev 's death in 1971 , the resolution was seen as a great defeat for the Soviets , and contributed to Khrushchev 's fall less than two years later . Castro had urged Khrushchev to launch a pre @-@ emptive nuclear attack on the U.S. in the event of any invasion of Cuba , and was angered by the outcome , referring to Khrushchev in profane terms ; 
 On October 28 , 1962 , he told his son Sergei Khrushchev that the Lockheed U2 shot down over Cuba and killing Major Rudolf Anderson was by the " Cuban military at the direction of Raul Castro " . Khrushchev invited Castro to Moscow later , and was able to restore good relations . 
 After the crisis , superpower relations improved , as Kennedy gave a conciliatory speech at American University on June 10 , 1963 , recognizing the Soviet people 's suffering during World War II , and paying tribute to their achievements . Khrushchev called the speech the best by a U.S. president since Franklin Roosevelt , and , in July , negotiated a test ban treaty with U.S. negotiator Averell Harriman and with Lord Hailsham of the United Kingdom . Plans for a second Khrushchev @-@ Kennedy summit were dashed by the U.S. President 's assassination in November 1963 . The new U.S. President , Lyndon Johnson , hoped for continued improved relations but was distracted by other issues and had little opportunity to develop a relationship with Khrushchev before the premier was ousted . 
 = = = = Eastern Europe = = = = 
 The Secret Speech , combined with the death of Polish communist leader Boleslaw Bierut , who suffered a heart attack while reading the Speech , sparked considerable liberalization in Poland and Hungary . In Poland , a worker 's strike in Poznań developed into disturbances which left more than 50 dead in October 1956 . When Moscow blamed the disturbances on Western agitators , Polish leaders ignored the claim , and instead made concessions to the workers . With anti @-@ Soviet displays becoming more common in Poland , and crucial Polish leadership elections upcoming , Khrushchev and other Presidium members flew to Warsaw . While the Soviets were refused entry to the Polish Central Committee plenum where the election was taking place , they met with the Polish Presidium . The Soviets agreed to allow the new Polish leadership to take office , on the assurance there would be no change to the Soviet @-@ Polish relationship . 
 The Polish settlement emboldened the Hungarians , who decided that Moscow could be defied . A mass demonstration in Budapest on October 23 turned into a popular uprising . In response to the uprising , Hungarian Party leaders installed reformist Premier Imre Nagy . Soviet forces in the city clashed with Hungarians and even fired on demonstrators , with hundreds of both Hungarians and Soviets killed . Nagy called for a cease @-@ fire and a withdrawal of Soviet troops , which a Khrushchev @-@ led majority in the Presidium decided to obey , choosing to give the new Hungarian government a chance . Khrushchev assumed that if Moscow announced liberalization in how it dealt with its allies , Nagy would adhere to the alliance with the Soviet Union . However , on October 30 Nagy announced multiparty elections , and the next morning that Hungary would leave the Warsaw Pact . On November 3 , two members of the Nagy government appeared in Ukraine as the self @-@ proclaimed heads of a provisional government and demanded Soviet intervention , which was forthcoming . The next day , Soviet troops crushed the Hungarian uprising , with a death toll of 4 @,@ 000 Hungarians and several hundred Soviet troops . Nagy was arrested , and was later executed . Despite the international outrage over the intervention , Khrushchev defended his actions for the rest of his life . Damage to Soviet foreign relations was severe , and would have been greater were it not for the fortuitous timing of the Suez crisis , which distracted world attention . 
 In the aftermath of these crises , Khrushchev made the statement for which he became well @-@ remembered , " We will bury you " ( in Russian , " <unk> <unk> <unk> ! " ( My vas <unk> ! ) ) . While many in the West took this statement as a literal threat , Khrushchev made the statement in a speech on peaceful coexistence with the West . When questioned about the statement during his 1959 U.S. visit , Khrushchev stated that he was not referring to a literal burial , but that , through inexorable historical development , communism would replace capitalism and " bury " it . 
 Khrushchev greatly improved relations with Yugoslavia , which had been entirely sundered in 1948 when Stalin realized he could not control Yugoslav leader Josip Tito . Khrushchev led a Soviet delegation to Belgrade in 1955 . Though a hostile Tito did everything he could to make the Soviets look foolish ( including getting them drunk in public ) , Khrushchev was successful in warming relations , ending the <unk> period in Soviet @-@ Yugoslav relations . During the Hungarian crisis , Tito initially supported Nagy , but Khrushchev persuaded him of the need for intervention . Still , the intervention in Hungary damaged Moscow 's relationship with Belgrade , which Khrushchev spent several years trying to repair . He was hampered by the fact that China disapproved of Yugoslavia 's liberal version of communism , and attempts to conciliate Belgrade resulted in an angry Beijing . 
 = = = = China = = = = 
 After completing his takeover of mainland China in 1949 , Mao Zedong sought material assistance from the USSR , and also called for the return to China of territories taken from it under the Tsars . As Khrushchev took control of the USSR , he increased aid to China , even sending a small corps of experts to help develop the newly communist country . This assistance was described by historian William Kirby as " the greatest transfer of technology in world history " . The Soviet Union spent 7 % of its national income between 1954 and 1959 on aid to China . On his 1954 visit to China , Khrushchev agreed to return Port Arthur and Dalian to China , though Khrushchev was annoyed by Mao 's insistence that the Soviets leave their artillery as they departed . 
 Mao bitterly opposed Khrushchev 's attempts to reach a rapprochement with more liberal Eastern European states such as Yugoslavia . Khrushchev 's government , on the other hand , was reluctant to endorse Mao 's desires for an assertive worldwide revolutionary movement , preferring to conquer capitalism through raising the standard of living in communist @-@ bloc countries . 
 Relations between the two nations began to cool in 1956 , with Mao angered both by the Secret Speech and by the fact that the Chinese had not been consulted in advance about it . Mao believed that de @-@ Stalinization was a mistake , and a possible threat to his own authority . When Khrushchev visited Beijing in 1958 , Mao refused proposals for military cooperation . Hoping to torpedo Khrushchev 's efforts at détente with the U.S. , Mao soon thereafter provoked the Second Taiwan Strait Crisis , describing the Taiwanese islands shelled in the crisis as " batons that keep Eisenhower and Khrushchev dancing , scurrying this way and that . Don 't you see how wonderful they are ? " 
 The Soviets had planned to provide China with an atomic bomb complete with full documentation , but in 1959 , amid cooler relations , the Soviets destroyed the device and papers instead . When Khrushchev paid a visit to China in September , shortly after his successful U.S. visit , he met a chilly reception , and Khrushchev left the country on the third day of a planned seven @-@ day visit . Relations continued to deteriorate in 1960 , as both the USSR and China used a Romanian Communist Party congress as an opportunity to attack the other . After Khrushchev attacked China in his speech to the congress , Chinese leader Peng Zhen mocked Khrushchev , stating that the premier 's foreign policy was to blow hot and cold towards the West . Khrushchev responded by pulling Soviet experts out of China . 
 = = Removal = = 
 Beginning in March 1964 , Supreme Soviet presidium chairman and nominal head of state Leonid Brezhnev began discussing Khrushchev 's removal with his colleagues . While Brezhnev considered having Khrushchev arrested as he returned from a trip to Scandinavia in June , he instead spent time persuading members of the Central Committee to support the ousting of Khrushchev , remembering how crucial the Committee 's support had been to Khrushchev in defeating the Anti @-@ Party Group plot . Brezhnev was given ample time for his conspiracy ; Khrushchev was absent from Moscow for a total of five months between January and September 1964 . 
 The conspirators , led by Brezhnev , First Deputy Premier Alexander Shelepin , and KGB Chairman Vladimir Semichastny , struck in October 1964 , while Khrushchev was on vacation at <unk> , Abkhaz ASSR . On October 12 , Brezhnev called Khrushchev to notify him of a special Presidium meeting to be held the following day , ostensibly on the subject of agriculture . Even though Khrushchev suspected the real reason for the meeting , he flew to Moscow , accompanied by the head of the Georgian KGB , General <unk> <unk> , but otherwise taking no precautions . 
 Khrushchev arrived at the VIP hall of Vnukovo Airport ; KGB Chairman Semichastny waited for him there , flanked by KGB security guards . Semichastny informed Khrushchev of his ouster and told him not to resist . Khrushchev did not resist , and the hardliners ' coup went off smoothly ; Khrushchev felt betrayed by Semichastny , as he considered him a friend and ally until that very moment , not suspecting that he had joined his enemies within the Party . Khrushchev was then taken to the Kremlin , to be verbally attacked by Brezhnev , Suslov and Shelepin . He had no stomach for a fight , and put up little resistance . Semichastny was careful not to create the appearance of a coup ; 
 I didn 't even close the Kremlin to visitors . People were strolling around outside , while in the room the Presidium was meeting . I deployed my men around the Kremlin . Everything that was necessary was done . Brezhnev and Shelepin were nervous . I told them : Let 's not do anything that isn 't necessary . Let 's not create the appearance of a coup . 
 That night , after his ouster , Khrushchev called his friend and Presidium colleague Anastas Mikoyan , and told him : 
 I 'm old and tired . Let them cope by themselves . I 've done the main thing . Could anyone have dreamed of telling Stalin that he didn 't suit us anymore and suggesting he retire ? Not even a wet spot would have remained where we had been standing . Now everything is different . The fear is gone , and we can talk as equals . That 's my contribution . I won 't put up a fight . 
 On October 14 , 1964 , the Presidium and the Central Committee each voted to accept Khrushchev 's " voluntary " request to retire from his offices for reasons of " advanced age and ill health . " Brezhnev was elected First Secretary ( later General Secretary ) , while Alexei Kosygin succeeded Khrushchev as premier . 
 = = Life in retirement = = 
 Khrushchev was granted a pension of 500 rubles per month , and was assured that his house and dacha were his for life . Following his removal from power , Khrushchev fell into deep depression . He received few visitors , especially since Khrushchev 's security guards kept track of all guests and reported their comings and goings . In the fall of 1965 , he and his wife were ordered to leave their house and dacha to move to an apartment and to a smaller dacha . His pension was reduced to 400 rubles per month , though his retirement remained comfortable by Soviet standards . The depression continued . His doctor prescribed sleeping pills and tranquilizers , but even so , when one of his grandsons was asked what the ex @-@ premier was doing in retirement , the boy replied , " Grandfather cries . " He was made a <unk> to such an extent that the thirty @-@ volume Soviet Encyclopedia omitted his name from the list of prominent political commissars during the Great Patriotic War . 
 As the new rulers made their conservatism in artistic matters known , Khrushchev came to be more favorably viewed by artists and writers , some of whom visited him . One visitor whom Khrushchev regretted not seeing was former U.S. Vice President Nixon , then in his " wilderness years " before his election to the presidency , who came to Khrushchev 's Moscow apartment while the former premier was at his dacha . 
 Beginning in 1966 , Khrushchev began his memoirs . He dictated them into a tape recorder , and , after attempts to record outdoors failed due to background noise , recorded indoors , knowing that every word would be heard by the KGB . However , the security agency made no attempt to interfere until 1968 , when Khrushchev was ordered to turn over his tapes , which he refused to do . However , while Khrushchev was hospitalized with heart ailments his son , Sergei , was approached by the KGB and told that there was a plot afoot by foreign agents to steal the memoirs . Since copies had been made , some of which had been transmitted to a Western publisher , and since the KGB could steal the originals anyway , Sergei Khrushchev turned over the materials to the KGB , but also instructed that the smuggled memoirs be published , which they were in 1970 under the title Khrushchev Remembers . Under some pressure , Nikita Khrushchev signed a statement that he had not given the materials to any publisher , and his son was transferred to a less desirable job . Upon publication of the memoirs in the West , Izvestia denounced them as a fraud . When Soviet state radio carried the announcement of Khrushchev 's statement , it was the first time in six years he had been mentioned in that medium . 
 In his final days , Khrushchev visited his son @-@ in @-@ law and former aide , Alexei <unk> , and told him , " [ n ] ever regret that you lived in stormy times and worked with me in the Central Committee . We will yet be remembered ! " 
 = = Death = = 
 Khrushchev died of a heart attack in a hospital near his home in Moscow on September 11 , 1971 , and is buried in the Novodevichy Cemetery in Moscow , having been denied a state funeral , and interment in the Kremlin Wall . Fearing demonstrations , the authorities did not announce Khrushchev 's death until the hour of his wake , and surrounded the cemetery with troops . Even so , some artists and writers joined the family at the graveside for the interment . 
 Pravda ran a one @-@ sentence announcement of the former premier 's death ; Western newspapers contained considerable coverage . Veteran New York Times Moscow correspondent Harry Schwartz wrote of Khrushchev , " Mr. Khrushchev opened the doors and windows of a petrified structure . He let in fresh air and fresh ideas , producing changes which time already has shown are irreversible and fundamental . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Many of Khrushchev 's innovations were reversed after his fall . The requirement that one @-@ third of officials be replaced at each election was overturned , as was the division in the Party structure between industrial and agricultural sectors . His vocational education program for high school students was also dropped , and his plan for sending existing agricultural institutions out to the land was ended . However , new agricultural or vocational institutions thereafter were located outside major cities . When new housing was built , much of it was in the form of high rises rather than Khrushchev 's low @-@ rise structures , which lacked elevators or balconies . 
 Some of Khrushchev 's agricultural projects were also easily overturned . Corn became so unpopular in 1965 that its planting fell to the lowest level in the postwar period , as even kolkhozes which had been successful with it in Ukraine and other southern portions of the USSR refused to plant it . Lysenko was stripped of his policy @-@ making positions . However , the MTS stations remained closed , and the basic agricultural problems , which Khrushchev had tried to address , remained . While the Soviet standard of living increased greatly in the ten years after Khrushchev 's fall , much of the increase was due to industrial progress ; agriculture continued to lag far behind , resulting in regular agricultural crises , especially in 1972 and 1975 . Brezhnev and his successors continued Khrushchev 's precedent of buying grain from the West rather than suffer shortfalls and starvation . Neither Brezhnev nor his colleagues were personally popular , and the new government relied on authoritarian power to assure its continuation . The KGB and Red Army were given increasing powers . The government 's conservative tendencies would lead to the crushing of the " Prague Spring " of 1968 . 
 Though Khrushchev 's strategy failed to achieve the major goals he sought , Aleksandr <unk> , who wrote a book analyzing Khrushchev 's foreign and military policies , argued that the strategy did coerce the West in a limited manner . The agreement that the United States would not invade Cuba has been adhered to . The refusal of the western world to acknowledge East Germany was gradually eroded , and , in 1975 , the United States and other NATO members signed the Helsinki Agreement with the USSR and Warsaw Pact nations , including East Germany , setting human rights standards in Europe . 
 The Russian public 's view of Khrushchev remains mixed . According to a major Russian pollster , the only eras of the 20th century that Russians evaluate positively are those under Nicholas II , and under Khrushchev . A poll of young Russians found that they felt Nicholas II had done more good than harm , and all other 20th @-@ century Russian leaders more harm than good — except Khrushchev , about whom they were evenly divided . Subsequent polls , however , have found Brezhnev and Lenin the most popular Russian leaders of the century . Khrushchev biographer William Tompson related the former premier 's reforms to those which occurred later : 
 Throughout the Brezhnev years and the lengthy interregnum that followed , the generation which had come of age during the ' first Russian spring ' of the 1950s awaited its turn in power . As Brezhnev and his colleagues died or were pensioned off , they were replaced by men and women for whom the Secret Speech and the first wave of de @-@ Stalinization had been a formative experience , and these ' Children of Twentieth Congress ' took up the reins of power under the leadership of Mikhail Gorbachev and his colleagues . The Khrushchev era provided this second generation of reformers with both an inspiration and a cautionary tale . 
 = Pacers – Pistons brawl = 
 The Pacers – Pistons brawl ( colloquially known as the Malice at the Palace ) was an altercation that occurred in a National Basketball Association ( NBA ) game between the Indiana Pacers and the Detroit Pistons on November 19 , 2004 , at The Palace of Auburn Hills in Auburn Hills , Michigan . The Associated Press ( AP ) called it " the most infamous brawl in NBA history " . 
 With less than a minute left in the game , a fight broke out on the court between several players . After the fight was broken up , a fan threw a drink from the stands at Pacers player Ron Artest while he was lying on the scorer 's table . Artest then entered the crowd and sparked a massive brawl between players and fans that stretched onto the court . 
 After the game , the NBA suspended nine players for a total of 146 games , which led to $ 11 million in salary being lost by the players . Five players were also charged with assault , and eventually sentenced to a year of probation and community service . Five fans also faced criminal charges and were banned from attending Pistons home games for life . The fight also led the NBA to increase security between players and fans , and to limit the sale of alcohol in games . 
 = = Before the brawl = = 
 The meeting was the first between the two teams since the previous season 's Eastern Conference Finals , which the Pistons won in six games en route to their first NBA title since the " Bad Boys " era of the late 1980s and early 1990s . This caused the game to receive much hype from the media and fans . Having won two games in a row , the Pacers came into the game with a 6 – 2 record , while the Pistons , the defending champions , began their season 4 – 3 . The game was televised nationally on ESPN , as well as on the Pacers ' and Pistons ' local broadcast affiliates , Fox Sports Midwest and WDIV ( Detroit 's NBC affiliate ) , respectively . 
 The game , like many previous meetings between the two teams , was dominated by defense . The Pacers got off to a quick start , opening up a 20 @-@ point lead with seven minutes to go before halftime . The Pistons managed to cut into the lead , trailing by 16 points by halftime . The Pistons opened the third quarter with a 9 – 2 run , but the Pacers ended it with a buzzer @-@ beating three @-@ pointer and a layup from Jamaal Tinsley heading into the fourth quarter . Richard Hamilton and Lindsey Hunter started the last quarter with consecutive three @-@ point field goals , as the Pistons cut into the lead again . But Stephen Jackson 's back @-@ to @-@ back field goals pushed the lead back to 93 – 79 with 3 : 52 remaining , essentially putting the Pistons away . Despite the lopsided score near the end of the game , most key players on both teams remained in the game . 
 The Pacers were led by the 24 @-@ point effort of Ron Artest , who scored 17 in the first quarter . Jermaine O 'Neal notched a double @-@ double with 20 points and 13 rebounds . Tinsley had 13 points , eight assists and a career @-@ high eight steals . Hamilton led the Pistons with 20 points . Rasheed Wallace and Ben Wallace both recorded a double @-@ double . Despite being outrebounded by the Pistons , the Pacers managed to shoot 41 % from the field . 
 = = Altercation = = 
 The brawl began with 45 @.@ 9 seconds remaining in the game , when Indiana led 97 – 82 . The Pistons ' Ben Wallace was fouled hard from behind by the Pacers ' Ron Artest ( now known as Metta World Peace ) , who slapped him across the back of the head during a layup attempt . Wallace later said that Artest had warned him he would be hit . Wallace responded by shoving Artest in the face with both hands , causing players from both teams to quickly get in between them as they attempted to keep Wallace and Artest separated . 
 Pistons coach Larry Brown was not yet very concerned , because fights in the NBA rarely lasted for more than a few seconds . During the altercation , Artest lay down on the scorer 's table to relax while putting on a headset to speak with Pacers radio broadcaster Mark Boyle . The microphone was not live . Boyle recalled that the broadcasting team knew Artest 's personality and " there was no way we were going to put an open mic in front of [ him ] in that situation " . Pacers president Donnie Walsh later stated that Artest was following advice he had received on how to calm down and avoid trouble in a volatile situation . After unsuccessfully attempting to break up the confrontation , referees prepared to eject various players before the game resumed . Sportscaster Mike Breen , calling the game for ESPN , believed Wallace would be ejected , while Bill Walton was of the opinion that Stephen Jackson should be ejected as well , for shouting at the Pistons players and aggravating the situation . However , Breen expressed concern that , if ejected , Wallace would have to walk past the Pacers bench , which could trigger another incident . 
 Ninety seconds after Wallace shoved Artest , most of both teams ' players and coaches were huddled at midcourt , attempting to calm down Wallace ( Tayshaun Prince was the only player on either team to not leave the bench during the entire incident ; others became automatically eligible for one @-@ game suspensions ) . While Artest was lying on the table , Wallace threw a towel at him , causing Artest to briefly stand up before being held back by coaches . A spectator , John Green , then threw a plastic cup of Diet Coke at Artest , hitting him in the chest . Artest jumped off the table , ran into the stands , and grabbed a man , Michael Ryan , who he mistakenly believed was responsible . Boyle stood up to try and hold back Artest and was trampled in the effort , suffering five fractured vertebrae and a gouge on his head . Jackson followed Artest into the stands and punched a fan , William Paulson , in the face in retaliation for the man throwing another drink in Artest 's face while he was being restrained by other spectators . Pacers players Eddie Gill , David Harrison , Reggie Miller , Fred Jones , and Jamaal Tinsley , the Pistons ' Rasheed Wallace , and numerous personnel ( including Pistons radio analyst and former player Rick Mahorn ) also quickly entered the stands to retrieve Artest and Jackson , and to break up the fighting . Green punched Artest twice in the head from behind , as did Ben Wallace 's brother , David , to Jones . More fans then began throwing drinks and other objects , while a number of fans spilled out onto the court . 
 As Artest walked out of the stands , he was confronted by two more fans , Alvin " A.J. " Shackleford and Charlie Haddad , who ran onto the court . Artest punched Shackleford in the face , causing Haddad to intervene by pushing away Artest , before both fans fell over . While Haddad was on the ground , Anthony Johnson struck him in the back of the head . As Haddad stood up , Jermaine O 'Neal punched him in the jaw after a running start , while slipping in liquid and falling backwards , causing witnesses Scot Pollard , ESPN sideline reporter Jim Gray , and a Pistons executive , Tom Wilson , to briefly fear that O 'Neal would kill Haddad . O 'Neal later claimed that Haddad had been asked to leave the arena earlier that night , and was well @-@ known to security because of claims that he wanted to fight an NBA player in order to receive compensation . William Wesley , Austin <unk> , and Miller pulled Artest away from the fans , but the scene became chaotic as outnumbered arena security struggled to reestablish order . Although Auburn Hills police had plans to handle many disorders , and had three officers in the arena , they were unprepared for players entering the stands . 
 Pacers coach Rick Carlisle said after the game , " I felt like I was fighting for my life out there . " One reporter who attempted to stop Tinsley from entering the stands recalled that the player " went through me like I was butter " , and former NBA Commissioner David Stern , watching the game on TV , recalled that he said , " Holy [ mouths a swear word ] . " ( O 'Neal later said , " As bad as it looked on TV , it was at least 20 times worse in person . " ) Pacers assistant coach Chuck Person compared the situation to being " trapped in a gladiator @-@ type scene where the fans were the lions and we were just trying to escape with our lives . That 's how it felt . That there was no exit . That you had to fight your way out . " Players ' children and others in the audience cried from fear and shock . Derrick Coleman stood near Brown and Brown 's ball boy son to protect them . The remaining seconds of the game were called off and the Pacers were awarded the 97 – 82 win . Fans booed the Indiana players as they were escorted from the court by officials and security , and continued to throw beverages and other objects ( including a folding chair that nearly hit O 'Neal ) at them as they walked under the tunnel to the locker room . No players from either team spoke to the media before leaving the arena . Eventually , police officers were able to swarm the arena , threatening to handcuff those who wouldn 't leave . Nine spectators were injured , and two were taken to the hospital . 
 In the Pacers ' locker room , O 'Neal and Carlisle nearly got into a fight over the coaches trying to restrain the players when they were defending themselves . Artest asked Jackson whether he thought the players would get in trouble . Jackson responded , " We 'll be lucky if we have a freaking job . " The conversation convinced an amazed Jackson and Pollard that Artest " wasn 't in his right mind , to ask that question " . Auburn Hills police entered the locker room to make arrests , but the team rushed Artest onto the bus and refused to take him off . The police decided to protect the Pacers as they left the arena and to later contact the team after reviewing game film . Outside of the arena , there were dozens of police cruisers lining the roads out of the parking lots . 
 = = Charges = = 
 = = = Suspensions = = = 
 On November 20 , 2004 , the NBA suspended Artest , Jackson , O 'Neal , and Wallace indefinitely , saying that their actions were " shocking , repulsive , and inexcusable " . The following day , the NBA announced that nine players would be suspended for a total of what eventually became 146 games – 137 games for Pacers players and nine games for Pistons players . David Harrison was also seen fighting with fans , but the NBA stated that he wouldn 't be suspended because " the incident occurred as the players were attempting to leave the floor " . 
 Artest was given the longest suspension ; he was suspended for the remainder of the 2004 – 05 NBA season , a suspension that eventually totaled 86 games ( 73 regular season and 13 subsequent playoff games ) , the longest suspension for an on @-@ court incident in NBA history . The players suspended also lost in excess of $ 11 million in salary due to the suspensions , with Artest alone losing almost $ 5 million . 
 In the week following the announcement of the suspensions , the players ' union appealed the suspensions of Artest , Jackson , and O 'Neal , saying they thought that commissioner Stern had " exceeded his authority " . ( Jackson felt that despite losing millions the players were fortunate , however , as Stern could have expelled them from the league . ) A federal arbitrator upheld the full length of all suspensions , except that of O 'Neal , which was reduced to 15 games . However , the NBA appealed the decision of the arbitrator to reduce O 'Neal 's suspension in federal court , and on December 24 , a judge issued a temporary injunction allowing O 'Neal to play , until a full hearing was held on the NBA 's appeal . 
 O 'Neal played in two more games before the NBA 's case was brought before the U.S. District Court in Brooklyn , New York on December 30 . The NBA argued that under the terms of the Collective Bargaining Agreement ( CBA ) , Stern had absolute authority to hand out suspensions and hear appeals for all on @-@ court incidents . But the judge ruled that because O 'Neal 's behavior was an off @-@ court incident , arbitration was allowed under the CBA , and thus the arbitrator was within his rights to reduce the suspension . Despite O 'Neal 's successful appeal , no further appeals were made to reduce Artest 's and Jackson 's suspensions . 
 = = = Legal charges = = = 
 Green was identified by county prosecutor John <unk> , who had been his neighbor . On November 30 , Palace Sports and Entertainment , the owner of the Pistons , banned Green and Haddad from attending any events at Palace properties ( including the Palace of Auburn Hills and the DTE Energy Music Theatre ) , revoked their season tickets and issued them refunds . Green had several previous criminal convictions , including counterfeiting , carrying a concealed weapon , felony assault , and three drunken driving convictions , and he was on court @-@ ordered probation from a DUI conviction at the time of the brawl . 
 On December 8 , 2004 , five Indiana players and five fans ( John Ackerman , John Green , Bryant Jackson , William Paulson , and David Wallace , Ben Wallace 's brother ) were charged for assault and battery . Player O 'Neal ( who also threw usher Melvin <unk> onto the scorer 's table when attempting to enter the stands ) and spectator Green , who <unk> said " single @-@ handedly incited " the brawl by throwing a cup of liquid at Artest , were charged with two counts , and Artest , Harrison , Jackson , and Anthony Johnson were charged with one count each . Three fans , including David Wallace , received one count of the same charge ; two fans ( Haddad and Shackleford ) who entered the court during the fight were charged with trespassing , and Bryant Jackson , who had prior criminal convictions , was charged with felony assault for throwing a chair . All of the fans involved were banned from attending Pistons games . 
 On March 29 , 2005 , Bryant Jackson pleaded no contest to a felony assault charge for throwing the chair , and on May 3 , 2005 , he was sentenced to two years probation and ordered to pay $ 6 @,@ 000 in restitution . David Wallace was also convicted , and sentenced to one year of probation and community service for punching Pacers guard Fred Jones from behind . 
 All five players who were charged pleaded no contest to the charges . On September 23 , 2005 , Artest , Jackson , and O 'Neal were all sentenced to one year on probation , 60 hours of community service , a $ 250 fine , and anger management counseling . A week later , Harrison received the same sentence , and on October 7 , 2005 , Johnson , the last player to be charged , received a similar sentence ( he was ordered to serve 100 hours of community service ) . 
 On March 27 , 2006 , a jury found Green guilty on one count of assault and battery for punching Artest in the stands , but acquitted him of an assault charge for throwing the cup . On May 1 , 2006 , Green was sentenced to 30 days in jail and two years ' probation . On November 7 , 2006 , the Pistons issued a letter to Green informing him that he was banned for life from attending any Pistons home games under orders from the NBA ( although the ban does not extend to other events at the Palace of Auburn Hills ) . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Public reaction = = = 
 Several NBA players and coaches said the brawl was the worst fight they had ever seen . Pacers fans began to refer to the team as " the Thugs " . Pistons CEO Tom Wilson later stated that Artest 's action took away physical barriers , such as tables and benches , that normally separate fans and players , and Indianapolis Star reporter Mark <unk> claimed that " in a way , [ Artest ] provoked [ the forthcoming assault ] passively by lying down " . In the post @-@ game commentary on ESPN 's NBA <unk> , ESPN 's studio analysts laid the blame on the Pistons ' fans instead of on the players . John Saunders of ESPN referred to the fans as " a bunch of punks " . Tim Legler said that " the fans crossed the line " . Stephen A. Smith stated that " some of them ( the fans ) should be arrested as far as I 'm concerned " . Their commentary prompted ESPN vice president Mark Shapiro to place calls to host Saunders , as well as analysts Legler , Smith , and Greg Anthony . Shapiro felt their commentary was biased . The following Tuesday , Shapiro stated , " I wish the studio hadn 't laid the blame solely on the backs of the fans Friday night . " 
 Although a significant portion of media criticism was directed at the Pistons fans , 46 % of the voters in the ESPN SportsNation poll believed that the fans were to blame for the incident . Other commentators said that Artest and the other players involved were to blame . 
 = = = Events after the brawl = = = 
 The Pacers and Pistons played for the first time after the brawl on December 25 at the Conseco Fieldhouse in Indianapolis . The Pistons won 98 – 93 without any incidents . Neither Artest nor Jackson played due to their suspensions ; O 'Neal played in his first game back after the arbitrator reduced his suspension to 15 games . Three months later , on February 17 , 2005 , the NBA imposed new security guidelines for all NBA arenas . The new policies included a size limit of 24 US fl oz ( 710 ml ) for alcohol purchases and a hard cap of two alcoholic beverage purchases for any individual person , as well as a ban of alcohol sales after the end of the third quarter . They also later ordered that each team put at least three security guards between the players and the fans . 
 On March 25 , 2005 , the Pacers played at The Palace for the first time since the brawl . The game was delayed 90 minutes after a series of bomb threats were aimed at the Pacers locker room , but the game eventually started after no explosives were found . Two of the key figures in the original incident missed the game , as Artest was still suspended and O 'Neal had an injured shoulder . In the game , the Pacers stopped the Pistons ' twelve @-@ game winning streak with a 94 – 81 win . 
 In the playoffs , Detroit entered as the second seed of the Eastern Conference , and Indiana as the sixth . After the Pistons defeated the Philadelphia 76ers in five games , and the Pacers upset the third seed Boston Celtics in seven games , the two teams met in the second round . Although the Pacers went ahead two games to one , the Pistons clinched the series in six games with three straight wins . After eliminating Indiana , Detroit defeated the Miami Heat in the Eastern Conference Finals in seven games , then advanced to the NBA Finals , where they lost to the San Antonio Spurs in seven games . 
 After serving his suspension of the rest of the 2004 – 05 season , Ron Artest returned to the Pacers at the beginning of the 2005 – 06 season . After playing 16 games he demanded to be traded , and the Pacers put him on the injured list . The Pacers ' Walsh said that Artest 's demands were " the last straw " , and many Pacers players who had fought in the brawl to help their teammate felt betrayed . Jackson later said , " I put my career on the line for him , going into the stands and fighting ... I lost $ 3 million [ but ] there was no ' thank you ' or nothing . " After more than a month of inactivity , Indiana traded Artest to the Sacramento Kings for Peja Stojaković . Artest faced Ben Wallace for the first time after the fight in November 2006 , and finally made his return to Detroit in January 2007 . During the Kings ' 91 – 74 loss to the Pistons , Artest was booed constantly , but there were no unusual incidents . After a year 's stop with the Houston Rockets in the 2008 – 09 season , Artest signed with the Los Angeles Lakers . After winning his first NBA championship in 2010 , Artest apologized to Jackson and other Pacers for being " so young and egotistical " , stating " sometimes I feel like a coward when I see those guys . I 'm on the Lakers , but I had a chance to win with you guys . I feel almost like a coward . " On September 16 , 2011 , Artest legally changed his name to Metta World Peace . 
 During the 2011 – 12 season , only one of the nine players that were suspended after the brawl was still with his original team : Ben Wallace , who signed with the Chicago Bulls as a free agent in 2006 , later traded to the Cleveland Cavaliers , and rejoined the Pistons on August 7 , 2009 . Most of the players involved were traded to other teams , and since then all the players , minus Artest , have retired . The Pistons advanced to four straight Eastern Conference Finals after the brawl , and six straight overall , making them the first team since the Los Angeles Lakers in the 1980s to advance to six straight conference finals though they only won the championship once in that streak . However , after losing to the Pistons in the 2005 playoffs , the Pacers failed to finish above .500 until the 2011 – 12 season and missed the playoffs for five straight seasons from 2006 through 2010 . Many Pacers from the 2004 – 05 season believe that the brawl and its consequences ruined a potential championship team , with Artest as the cause . The Pacers have attempted to rebuild by obtaining " character guys " as players . 
 On November 19 , 2009 , John Green , one of the fans who helped begin the brawl , appeared on ESPN First Take , where he talked about the incident and the changes he had made since then . Green recounted that he had an alcohol problem at the time and had since made an effort to deal with that . He also said that Ron Artest had apologized to him several months earlier , and wished to work together in some type of community service in Detroit . 
 = York Museum Gardens = 
 The York Museum Gardens are botanic gardens in the centre of York , England , beside the River Ouse . They cover an area of 10 acres ( 4 @.@ 0 ha ) of the former grounds of St Mary 's Abbey , and were created in the 1830s by the Yorkshire Philosophical Society along with the Yorkshire Museum which they contain . 
 The gardens are held in trust by the City of York Council and are managed by the York Museums Trust . They were designed in a gardenesque style by landscape architect Sir John Murray <unk> , and contain a variety of species of plants , trees and birds . Admission is free . A variety of events take place in the gardens , such as open @-@ air theatre performances and festival activities . 
 There are several historic buildings in the gardens . They contain the remains of the west corner of the Roman fort of Eboracum , including the Multangular Tower and parts of the Roman walls . In the same area there is also the Anglian Tower , which was probably built into the remains of a late Roman period fortress . During the Middle Ages , the tower was expanded and the Roman walls were incorporated into York 's city walls . Most of the other buildings dating from the Middle Ages are associated with St Mary 's Abbey , including the ruins of the abbey church , the Hospitium , the lodge and part of the surviving precinct wall . The remains of St. Leonard 's Hospital chapel and undercroft are on the east side of the gardens . The Yorkshire Philosophical Society constructed several buildings in the gardens during the 19th and early 20th century , including the Yorkshire Museum and its octagonal observatory . The museum houses four permanent collections , covering biology , geology , archaeology and astronomy . 
 = = History = = 
 The gardens , which were given to the Yorkshire Philosophical Society by the British Royal Family in 1828 , occupy part of the former grounds of St. Mary ’ s Abbey . The society acquired the land to build a museum to house its collections ; the Yorkshire Museum was completed in 1830 . The land was granted to the Yorkshire Philosophical Society under the condition that botanical gardens would be established on the site . These were created during the 1830s in a gardenesque style design by landscape architect Sir John Murray <unk> . They originally contained a conservatory , a pond and a menagerie , which was destroyed when a bear escaped from it and had brief control of the area . The then Princess Victoria visited the gardens in 1835 , the year that they were first open to the public . In 1854 the gardens were described as " one of the principal attractions of York " . At this time entrance as free to members and for non @-@ members entrance cost one shilling except on Saturday when it cost six pence . 
 In 1960 , the gardens and the Yorkshire Museum were given in trust to the City of York Council and they became a public park . Since 2002 , they have been managed by the York Museums Trust , along with York Castle Museum and York Art Gallery . The gardens are maintained by the <unk> Bryan College of Agriculture . 
 = = Description = = 
 York Museum Gardens cover an area of 10 acres ( 4 @.@ 0 ha ) on the north bank of the River Ouse , just outside the city walls in the centre of York . There are four entrances to the gardens : on Marygate ( off Bootham ) by St Olave 's Church , on Museum Street by Lendal Bridge , via a path at the side of King 's Manor , and from the riverside walk next to the River Ouse . The site slopes gently down towards the river and is made up of historical buildings and undulating lawns interspersed with plants and trees . The gardens are open to the public during daylight hours , so the opening and closing times vary throughout the year . Normally admission is free but there are charges for some events . In 2010 it was estimated that the gardens attract 1 @.@ 3 million visitors a year . Drinking alcohol , cycling and ball games are not allowed in the gardens . 
 The gardens are home to a population of semi @-@ tame grey squirrels and many species of birds . Until 2006 a family of peacocks had been in residence for at least 70 years . There are approximately 4 @,@ 500 plants and trees in the collection , some of the varieties native to England and some from other parts of the world . Planting consists of large beds containing predominantly shrubs and trees , and lawns interspersed with individual trees . Species of tree include a monkey puzzle tree along with oak and chestnut trees ; three of the trees in the gardens are classed as United Kingdom champion trees . There is a rockery next to the Marygate entrance , by the ruins of the abbey church , and in front of the entrance to the Yorkshire Museum there is a terrace bordered with beds of white roses , the symbol of Yorkshire . 
 There is also a geological oddity close to the main gates , consisting of a large boulder of pink granite that was discovered during construction of the city 's railway station . Since this type of stone is not local it was determined as having been transported there from Shap in Cumbria by glacial action during the last ice age . 
 = = Activities = = 
 As well as being a popular recreational space for both residents and visitors , the gardens are the venue for special events such as open @-@ air theatre and music performances . In 1970 , bands including Roxy Music , Hawkwind and Pink Fairies staged concerts , and in 2007 The Lord Chamberlain 's Men presented a production of Romeo & Juliet . During the 20th @-@ century revival of the York Mystery Plays , performances were held on a fixed stage in the gardens among the ruins of St. Mary 's Abbey . In the 1950s , York actress Dame Judi Dench acted in the plays performed in the gardens , and played the Virgin Mary in 1957 . 2012 sees the York Mystery Plays return to the gardens between 2 – 27 August and will involve over one thousand local volunteers . Several of York 's festivals use the gardens as a venue for events ; in 2006 , between 800 and 1 @,@ 000 people celebrated the Chinese New Year with displays that included lion dancers , and in 2007 during the Jorvik Viking festival there were demonstrations of Viking craft skills and battle training . The gardens are the location of York ’ s Saluting Station , one of only 12 in the United Kingdom , with 21 @-@ gun salutes being fired at noon to celebrate occasions related to the British Royal Family throughout the year . At these times a military band marches to the gardens before the salute is fired . 
 = = Buildings = = 
 = = = Roman = = = 
 In the northeast of Museum Gardens there are remains of the west corner of the fortifications that surrounded the Roman fort of Eboracum . The original defences , consisting of turf ramparts on a green wood foundation , were built by the Ninth Legion between 71 and 74 AD . Later those were replaced by a clay mound with a turf front on a new oak foundation , and eventually wooden battlements were added , which were then replaced by limestone walls and towers . These stone defences are some of the few Roman remains that are visible above ground in York . 
 The Multangular Tower is the western corner tower of the Roman fortress , and consists of both Roman and medieval architecture . The tower has 10 sides , from which it derives its modern name " <unk> " , and is 19 feet ( 5 @.@ 8 m ) high . It was built in its late Roman form during the early 4th century , when it was constructed with three floors to house a catapult . Five Roman stone coffins are in the Multangular Tower , which were brought from graveyards in other areas of York . 
 A 76 foot ( 23 m ) section of 4th @-@ century wall connects the Multangular Tower to a small interval tower . The side of the wall and towers facing into Museum Gardens is carefully faced in stone , as during the Roman period it was on display . The other side is rougher because it was originally covered by an earth bank . The wall and towers were still in use after the end of the Roman period in Britain , and were subsequently incorporated into the medieval city walls . As late as the English Civil War they were being used to defend the city , and there is a hole in the wall along from the Multangular Tower that was made by a cannonball during this period . The Roman parts of the wall and towers are constructed of regular rectangular limestone blocks with a band of red tile running through them . The later medieval additions can be identified by the use of much larger blocks of limestone that cut through the red tiles in places and by the cross shaped arrow slits on the Multangular Tower . 
 To the north of the Multangular Tower there is a stretch of the medieval city wall with the remains of the original Roman wall running parallel to it on the city side . Built into this part of the wall is the stone Anglian Tower , which was once thought to have been built during the reign of Edwin of Northumbria , but now is generally thought to be of the very late Roman period . Behind the Anglian Tower are a series of banks showing the level of the defences during the Roman , early Middle Ages , Norman , and late medieval periods . 
 = = = Medieval = = = 
 Main article for St. Mary 's Abbey : St. Mary 's Abbey , York 
 The gardens contain several buildings dating back to the medieval period , most of them relating to St Mary 's Abbey . The Benedictine Abbey 's origins date back to 1086 when Alan Count of Brittany granted St Olave 's Church and the adjoining land to the monk Stephen of Whitby , who became the first abbot of St. Mary 's . When St Olave 's Church became too small , a larger church in a Romanesque style was built nearby , the foundation stone of which was laid in 1089 by William II . This was replaced between 1270 and 1279 by a church in a Gothic style . The abbey became the wealthiest monastery in the North of England , worth over £ 2 @,@ 085 a year before it was dissolved by Henry VIII on 25 November 1539 . Over the next 200 years the abbey fell into disrepair and the abbey church was largely dismantled for its stone . 
 Stones from the abbey church can be seen lining paths throughout the gardens , but the major ruins of the church are on the western side . The church was aligned on a northeast axis because of the shape and size of the site , instead of pointing to the east , the normal alignment for churches in England . Part of the north and west walls that formed the nave and crossing , designed in Gothic style by architect Simon of <unk> in the 13th century , remain standing . The ruins include dummy lancet windows , tracery windows and " tracery remains to show that the patterns alternated between a single large circle over two lights and three small circles over three lights " . The column capitals are decorated with foliage in a stiff @-@ leaf style as well as in a naturalistic style , although this stonework is <unk> and so this decoration is hard to distinguish . Sections of the foundations of the church and its Norman predecessor are exposed , and a plan of their layouts can be seen in the grass . Finds excavated from the site , including life @-@ sized statues of Christian saints , can be seen in the Yorkshire Museum . 
 St Mary 's Lodge was built around 1470 as an addition to the late 12th @-@ century buildings that formed the gatehouse at the main entrance to the abbey , – now the Marygate entrance to the gardens . Some remains of the 12th @-@ century gatehouse can still be seen , in particular the archway attached to the side of the lodge . The lodge is built of stone , and does not contain timber framing like the nearby Hospitium . The lodge , along with the attached railings , gates and gate piers are all Grade I listed buildings , which means that they are of outstanding interest . Originally , the lodge may have been used as a guesthouse for the abbey , and was the point where the poor could claim alms from the abbey . After the abbey 's dissolution , the lodge became a courthouse until 1722 , when part of the building became the Brown Cow pub . In 1840 John Philips , the Yorkshire Museum 's curator , restored and converted it to use as his home while retaining its external appearance . The lodge subsequently became used as offices , and during the early 21st century became the headquarters of the York Museums Trust . 
 Along with the lodge , some of the abbey 's precinct walls are still standing . A section of the remaining walls runs along the north @-@ west part of the gardens and extends further along Marygate to Bootham . The walls were constructed in 1266 and increased in height and crenellated in 1318 under a royal licence from Edward III . Originally there was a defensive ditch along the outside of the walls . The walls include several towers , not all of them dating from the medieval period ; the semicircular tower near the gatehouse is a 19th @-@ century reconstruction . The walls and towers were used for the abbey 's defence , e.g. in disputes with the City of York over land ownership and taxes , and played a role in the defence of the city during the Siege of York . 
 The Hospitium is located between the ruins of St. Mary 's Abbey Church and the River Ouse and is thought to have originally been a guest house for visitors to the abbey of low social rank , or possibly a barn . It was originally part of a group of buildings in the abbey grounds that included a brew @-@ house , stables , mill and , near the main gate , a boarding school with 50 pupils . The oldest parts of the ground floor were built around 1300 , but the upper storey has been extensively restored in modern times . The ruined gateway at the side dates back to the 15th century , and was probably the entrance to a passage that ran towards the water @-@ gate by the river . 
 The remains of St. Leonard 's Hospital chapel and undercroft are on the east side of the gardens , by the Museum Street entrance . The hospital was the largest in England during the Middle Ages , and was run by a community of men and women of the Augustinian order . During the 14th century , the hospital could have contained as many as 240 patients , 18 clergy and 30 choristers . St. Leonard 's Hospital was closed during the dissolution of the monasteries , when it was surrendered to Henry VIII by Thomas Magnus . The undercroft and chapel were part of the infirmary built between 1225 and 1250 . The interior of the undercroft , accessible from the gardens , has a rib vaulted ceiling and houses a collection of Roman and medieval stonework . In 1999 , the hospital and surrounding area in Museum Gardens was one of three sites in York to feature in an edition of the British Channel 4 television show Time Team . 
 Between the Museum Street entrance to the gardens and the River Ouse is a short stretch of York 's city walls , which ends at the medieval Lendal Tower . 
 = = = 19th and 20th century = = = 
 William Hincks was instrumental in establishing the gardens . Henry John Wilkinson reports as follows : " Mr. Hincks was lecturer on botany at the York School of Medicine , and the services he rendered to the Yorkshire Philosophical Society for over ten years deserve our grateful thanks . He devoted his leisure time to convert the " waste land " into a botanical and ornamental * garden , and in this work he was ably assisted by the late sub @-@ curator , Henry Baines . " 
 The Yorkshire Philosophical Society constructed several buildings in the gardens during the 19th and early 20th centuries , including the Yorkshire Museum , one of the first purpose @-@ built museums in Britain . The Yorkshire Museum was designed by architect William Wilkins in a Greek Revival style and was officially opened in February 1830 . On 26 September 1831 the inaugural meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science was held at the Yorkshire Museum . Three of the museum 's permanent collections are housed in the Yorkshire Museum building all of which have English designated collection status , which means they are " pre @-@ eminent collections of national and international importance " . The biology collection contains 200 @,@ 000 specimens , including both fauna and flora , with most of the collection made up of insects . There are two stuffed specimens of the extinct great auk , an almost complete skeleton of an extinct moa and a large collection of specimens from the Yorkshire region including the remains of elephants , cave bears and hyena from Kirkdale Cave dated to the Quaternary period , around 125 @,@ 000 years ago . The geological collection contains over 112 @,@ 500 specimens of rocks , minerals and fossils . Fossils make up most of the collection numbering over 100 @,@ 000 samples , and include important specimens from the Carboniferous , Mesozoic and Tertiary periods . The archaeology collection has close to a million objects that date from around 500 @,@ 000 BC to the 20th century , including the <unk> Helmet discovered in York in 1982 , and the <unk> Bowl , an intricate example of an Anglian silversmith . 
 Most of the museum 's astronomy collection is housed in the octagonal observatory in the centre of the gardens , built during 1832 and 1833 . The design of its rotating roof is credited to John Smeaton designer of the Eddystone Lighthouse . A 4 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 11 cm ) telescope built in 1850 by the instrument maker Thomas Cooke of York was installed during the observatory 's 1981 restoration . It is Yorkshire 's oldest working observatory and as of August 2007 was opened to the public by a team of volunteers . The building is currently opened every Thursday and Saturday 11 @.@ 30 until 2 @.@ 30 . The clock in the observatory was made by Barraud of London in 1811 , and during the 19th century it was used to set the time for other clocks in York . 
 At the eastern , Museum Street , entrance to the gardens is Museum Gardens ' Lodge built in 1874 to a design by George Fowler Jones in a Victorian Gothic revival style . The lodge now houses the Yorkshire Philosophical Society 's offices and reading room . 
 The curator 's house , built in 1844 and originally called the keeper 's house , is located by King 's Manor . It was designed by J B Atkinson and was built using reclaimed limestone from St. Mary 's Abbey . 
 = = = = Tempest Anderson Hall = = = = 
 The Tempest Anderson Hall is a 300 @-@ seat auditorium @-@ style lecture theatre built in 1912 as an annexe to the Yorkshire Museum . Dr Tempest Anderson , a York surgeon and <unk> , presented the hall to the Yorkshire Philosophical Society to replace its existing lecture theatre . Designed by E Ridsdale Tate , it is an early example of the use of reinforced concrete and is a Grade I listed building . In the late 20th century it housed a cinema , but it is now used as a conference venue and lecture theatre . 
 = Montel Vontavious Porter = 
 Hassan <unk> Assad ( born Alvin Burke Jr . ; October 28 , 1973 ) is an American professional wrestler and rapper , better known by his ring name Montel Vontavious Porter ( abbreviated as MVP ) . He is perhaps most known for his tenure with World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) , and has also worked for New Japan Pro Wrestling ( NJPW ) and Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) . 
 Assad was trained by former professional wrestlers <unk> Alex G and Norman Smiley . Following the completion of his training , Assad began wrestling for numerous independent promotions , including a stint in TNA . During his time in these promotions , he won various championships in singles competition . Assad signed with WWE in 2005 and was assigned to Deep South Wrestling ( DSW ) , one of the company 's developmental territories . 
 After being promoted to the SmackDown ! brand , Assad made his WWE wrestling debut in October 2006 . In May 2007 , he won the United States Championship , giving him his first title reign with the company . That same year , he captured the WWE Tag Team Championship alongside Matt Hardy . Assad won the United States Championship for a second time on March 17 , 2009 . Following his tenure in WWE , Assad joined NJPW in February 2011 . He would spend the next two years with the promotion , becoming the inaugural IWGP Intercontinental Champion in May 2011 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Assad was born in Liberty City , Miami , but grew up in Opa @-@ locka , Florida . His father was a police officer . He joined a gang when he was 12 , describing it as " a graffiti gang " , which later turned into a street gang . He spent six months in a juvenile detention center after a robbery . He later completed 9 ½ years of an 18 ½ year prison sentence for armed robbery and kidnapping which he started at the age of sixteen . While in prison , he converted to Islam and changed his name from Alvin Burke Jr. to Hassan <unk> Assad . Due to his past criminal record , Assad 's visits to other countries on international tours are subject to permits and background checks for recent behavior . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 = = = Early career ( 2002 – 2005 ) = = = 
 Assad entered the professional wrestling business through the help of a corrections officer in his prison who also worked as a wrestler in the independent circuit . After being trained by former professional wrestlers <unk> Alex G and Norman Smiley , Assad made his wrestling debut in 2002 . He worked for many different companies on the independent circuit using the name Antonio Banks , including appearances with Full Impact Pro ( FIP ) and Future of Wrestling ( <unk> ) , where he won the latter 's Tag Team Championship with Punisher . During his time in FIP , he wrestled Homicide for the World Heavyweight Championship at the Ring of Honor show Do or Die IV on February 19 , 2005 , but did not win the title . He also made sporadic appearances for Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) , and wrestled on the April 20 , 2003 , episode of TNA Xplosion . He appeared again for TNA on the August 6 , 2004 , episode of Impact ! , with Sal Rinauro as his tag team partner , losing to America 's Most Wanted . He also wrestled for Coastal Championship Wrestling ( CCW ) and Elite Wrestling Entertainment in 2005 , competing against wrestlers like Jerry Lynn and D 'Lo Brown . In CCW , he won the Heavyweight Championship on August 20 , 2005 , by defeating <unk> and Bruno Sassi in a three @-@ way match . 
 = = = World Wrestling Entertainment = = = 
 = = = = Deep South Wrestling ( 2005 – 2006 ) = = = = 
 In 2005 , after a number of live events and dark matches , Assad signed a developmental contract with World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) and was assigned to their developmental territory Deep South Wrestling . He originally wrestled under his " Antonio Banks " ring name , but then developed the Montel Vontavious Porter ( MVP ) in @-@ ring persona : an arrogant , self @-@ obsessed athlete partially inspired by the fictional NFL wide receiver Rod Tidwell ( Cuba Gooding , Jr . ) from the 1996 film Jerry Maguire and the real @-@ life wide receiver Terrell Owens . 
 = = = = Feud with Kane ( 2006 – 2007 ) = = = = 
 As MVP , he made his first appearance on WWE television on the August 4 , 2006 episode of SmackDown ! , during which announcers described him as a coveted free agent . The initial angle involved MVP appearing backstage and in arena crowds , often flanked by women and / or a bodyguard , and talking to SmackDown ! General Manager Theodore Long about the contract his ( unseen ) agent was supposedly aggressively negotiating . Throughout his segments , commentators described MVP as arrogant , noting that he would stop conversations in the middle to answer his mobile phone or admire his own jewelry while people were speaking to him . Finally , on September 26 , 2006 , video of a press conference announcing the signing of MVP to " the largest contract in SmackDown ! history " was uploaded to <unk> 
 MVP made his in @-@ ring debut at No Mercy as a villain with a ring entrance featuring an NFL @-@ like inflatable tunnel , before defeating Marty Garner . During the match , commentators Michael Cole and John " Bradshaw " Layfield ( JBL ) decried the choice of opponent , since it had been implied that it would be someone " more competent " , and joined in with fans mocking his athletic suit styled ring gear , calling him " pathetic " while the fans chanted Power Ranger . On the following week 's SmackDown ! , MVP made a demand for a tougher opponent to prove his mettle , which was answered by Kane making his SmackDown ! debut . The two feuded for the next two months , with MVP narrowly scoring wins over Kane in a Street Fight and a Steel Cage match before losing to Kane in an Inferno match at Armageddon , from which he suffered storyline 1st degree burns . Because of the burns he was " out of action " for a short time , during which color commentator JBL expressed rage with the fans for cheering a match where the only way of achieving victory is to set an opponent on fire . 
 = = = = United States and Tag Team Champion ( 2007 – 2009 ) = = = = 
 When the Kane feud died down , MVP began a feud with the WWE United States Champion Chris Benoit over Benoit 's title . During the buildup for a title match with Benoit , MVP appeared on SmackDown ! introducing various supposed champions from around the world , defeating them in squash matches . MVP lost to Benoit at WrestleMania 23 and at Backlash , but finally defeated Benoit in a Two out of three falls match at Judgment Day , with MVP taking the United States Championship , his first WWE title , in two straight falls . MVP credits his time working with Benoit for improving his in @-@ ring skill . 
 His first major feud as the champion was against Matt Hardy , whom he started claiming to be better than at everything , after defeating him at the Great American Bash . When MVP was legitimately diagnosed with the heart condition Wolff @-@ Parkinson @-@ White syndrome , it was written into the storyline , with MVP blaming the condition for his losing an arm wrestling match against Hardy . When MVP was given an interview segment during SmackDown ! , the VIP Lounge , it was used to bow out of a scheduled boxing match at Saturday Night 's Main Event – with Evander Holyfield replacing him , and eventually punching out MVP during the bout . On the August 24 , 2007 episode of SmackDown ! , MVP bragged to General Manager Theodore Long that he was so good , he could win the WWE Tag Team Championship with anybody , prompting Long to grant him a Championship match alongside the next person who entered the room , who turned out to be Matt Hardy . The following week , MVP and Hardy took the championship from Deuce ' n Domino , making MVP a double champion . MVP and Hardy 's contentious relationship had them competing with each other in various ways while MVP proclaimed himself " Captain " of the team and refused to defend his United States Championship . In the months coming , MVP started getting along better with Hardy and helped him defeat Finlay on SmackDown ! . 
 Their reign together came to an end on the November 16 , 2007 episode of SmackDown after Hardy demanded a shot at the United States Championship , but MVP declined , and announced they had a Tag Team Championship defense against John Morrison and The Miz instead . They lost the match , and immediately afterwards , MVP invoked the rematch clause , but they lost that match as well . MVP then attacked Hardy , targeting his knee , which in storyline had been injured during the matches , and put him " out of action " . Hardy suffered a legitimate ruptured appendix while he was off television , putting their feud on hold . While Hardy recovered , MVP engaged in short feuds with Rey Mysterio and Ric Flair . He participated in the Money in the Bank ladder match at WrestleMania XXIV , and during the match , Hardy made an unannounced return and knocked MVP from the ladder with his signature Twist of Fate maneuver , reigniting their feud . At Backlash in 2008 , MVP dropped the title to Hardy , ending his record reign at 343 days , which was at the time the longest reign of the WWE era , and the third longest in the entire history of the championship ( the record has since broken by Dean Ambrose in 2014 ) . 
 Beginning on the August 29 , 2008 episode of SmackDown , MVP developed a losing streak that lasted over five months , losing in both singles and tag team matches . At Unforgiven , he challenged for the WWE Championship in the Championship Scramble match , but was unsuccessful . The losing streak meant that , in storyline , MVP did not receive " his contract incentive bonus " , and also was no longer allowed his usual entrance with the NFL @-@ like inflatable tunnel . During this losing streak he had a short feud with The Great Khali . On the January 16 , 2009 episode of SmackDown , MVP finally broke the losing streak by defeating Big Show in a Last Man Standing match with help from Triple H , as he was fighting to ensure that Triple H would be allowed to compete in the Royal Rumble match , in the process turning him into a fan favorite . At the SmackDown taping on March 17 , he won the United States Championship for the second time by defeating Shelton Benjamin . At WrestleMania XXV , MVP competed in the Money in the Bank ladder match for the second year in a row , but failed to win . 
 = = = = Brand switches and Departure ( 2009 – 2010 ) = = = = 
 On April 13 , 2009 , MVP was drafted as the first overall pick to the Raw brand as a part of the 2009 WWE Draft . As a result of being the reigning WWE United States Champion , he transferred the title to Raw for the first time in history . He lost the title to Kofi Kingston on the June 1 episode of Raw . He then formed a tag team with Mark Henry , and they challenged Jeri @-@ Show ( Chris Jericho and The Big Show ) for the Unified WWE Tag Team Championship at the Breaking Point pay @-@ per @-@ view , but they failed to win the championship . 
 After beginning a feud with The Miz , MVP faced him for the WWE United States Championship at Royal Rumble on January 31 , 2010 , but was unable to win . After this preliminary title retention , both also participated in the Rumble itself . MVP entered 14th and was surprise @-@ attacked by Miz ( who was not yet an official entrant ) who hit him with the United States title belt . MVP later recovered and entered the match ( having not been eliminated ) to double @-@ eliminate both himself and Miz . MVP challenged The Miz for the title a second time at the February 21 Elimination Chamber pay @-@ per @-@ view but was once again unable to win . He also competed in the Money in the Bank ladder match at WrestleMania XXVI , but was unable to win . 
 As part of the 2010 WWE Supplemental Draft , MVP was drafted back to the SmackDown brand . He made his SmackDown return on the April 30 episode , interrupting CM Punk 's promo , and later teaming up with Rey Mysterio to defeat Punk and Luke Gallows . On June 1 , MVP was announced as the mentor of Percy Watson for the second season of WWE NXT ; Watson was eliminated from the competition on August 17 , finishing fifth overall . On the November 5 episode of SmackDown , MVP fought in a Triple Threat Match for the number one contendership of Dolph Ziggler 's Intercontinental Championship against Cody Rhodes and Drew McIntyre . The match was won by MVP , and the championship match was set for the following week 's SmackDown , but MVP was unsuccessful in winning the title . MVP was announced as part of Team Mysterio , teaming with Rey Mysterio , The Big Show , Chris Masters and Kofi Kingston to take on Team Del Rio ( Alberto Del Rio , Tyler Reks , Jack Swagger , Drew McIntyre and Cody Rhodes ) at Survivor Series . At the pay @-@ per @-@ view , MVP was the first man eliminated in the match by McIntyre , who was aided by Del Rio holding MVP 's foot down so he couldn 't kick out . MVP 's last match with the WWE aired on December 3 , teaming with Kaval in a losing effort against Drew McIntyre and Dolph Ziggler ; afterward , he and Kaval were attacked by Kane . Later then , MVP has had his release from WWE contract . 
 = = = New Japan Pro Wrestling ( 2011 – 2013 ) = = = 
 In 2011 , Assad signed a one @-@ year contract with New Japan Pro Wrestling , pursuing his noted passion for puroresu . TMZ reported that Assad 's prior convictions had made it difficult for him to acquire a visa but that he would be debuting in February . As WWE owned the rights to the name Montel Vontavious Porter , but not MVP , Assad was able to continue working under the abbreviated ring name . In storyline MVP was brought in to the promotion by NOSAWA Rongai , who wanted him to join the villainous Kojima @-@ gun , led by Satoshi Kojima . In his debut match for the promotion on February 20 at The New Beginning , MVP teamed with fellow Kojima @-@ gun member Taichi to defeat Togi Makabe and Tomoaki Honma in a tag team match by making Honma submit to his Take it to the Bank crucifix neck crank . On March 6 , MVP entered the 2011 New Japan Cup , used to determine the new number one contender to the IWGP Heavyweight Championship , defeating Karl Anderson in his first round match . On March 19 , MVP suffered his first loss in New Japan , when he was defeated by Togi Makabe in the second round of the New Japan Cup . The following day , MVP achieved a major victory when he tapped IWGP Heavyweight Champion Hiroshi Tanahashi out with the TTB in a tag team match , where he teamed with Satoshi Kojima and Tanahashi with Hirooki Goto . On May 3 , the returning Minoru Suzuki took over as the new leader of Kojima @-@ gun , after its members Taichi and Taka Michinoku had turned on Satoshi Kojima . 
 In May 2011 , MVP took part in the Invasion Tour 2011 , New Japan 's first tour of the United States . On May 13 in Rahway , New Jersey , he entered the tournament to determine the first ever IWGP Intercontinental Champion , defeating Kazuchika Okada in his first round match . The following day in New York City , MVP defeated Tetsuya Naito to advance to the finals of the tournament . On the third and final day of the tour in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , MVP defeated Toru Yano in the finals to become the first IWGP Intercontinental Champion . Earlier in the event , MVP showed his allegiance to Satoshi Kojima by saving him from the debuting Lance Archer , thus breaking away from the newly renamed Suzuki @-@ gun . On June 18 at Dominion 6 @.@ 18 , MVP made his first successful defense of the IWGP Intercontinental Championship by defeating Toru Yano . After the match , Yano attacked him and cut his hair . The two would face each other in a third title match on July 18 , where MVP was once again victorious . After the match MVP was attacked and challenged by Yano 's Chaos stablemate Masato Tanaka . In August , MVP took part in the 2011 G1 Climax , where he managed to win six out of his nine matches , but a loss to Karl Anderson on the final day of the tournament caused him to narrowly miss advancing to the finals . On October 10 at Destruction ' 11 , MVP lost the IWGP Intercontinental Championship to Masato Tanaka , ending his reign at 148 days . MVP received a rematch for the title on December 4 , but was again defeated by Tanaka , following interference from his stablemate Yujiro Takahashi . 
 On January 4 , 2012 , at Wrestle Kingdom VI in Tokyo Dome , MVP teamed with Shelton Benjamin , making a special one @-@ time appearance , to defeat Tanaka and Takahashi in a tag team match . MVP reunited with Benjamin on June 16 at Dominion 6 @.@ 16 , where they defeated Karl Anderson and Tama Tonga in a tag team match . In August , MVP took part in his second G1 Climax tournament , where he won four out of his eight matches and failed to advance to the finals . In November , MVP took part in the 2012 World Tag League , where he teamed with Shelton Benjamin under the tag team name " Black Dynamite " . MVP and Benjamin finished their tournament on December 1 with a record of three wins , one over the reigning IWGP Tag Team Champions K.E.S. ( Davey Boy Smith , Jr. and Lance Archer ) , and three losses , failing to advance from their block . 
 On January 4 , 2013 , at Wrestle Kingdom 7 in Tokyo Dome , MVP teamed with Akebono , Manabu Nakanishi and Strong Man in an eight @-@ man tag team match , where they defeated Bob Sapp , Takashi Iizuka , Toru Yano and Yujiro Takahashi . On February 26 , Assad announced that he had parted ways with New Japan and would be next focusing on a television project with Lionsgate Television . He later explained his reasons behind leaving the promotion , saying that he wanted to stay closer to his home in addition to just " recharging the batteries " . 
 = = = Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( 2014 – 2015 ) = = = 
 At the January 30 , 2014 , tapings of Impact Wrestling , Assad returned to TNA using the MVP name , revealing himself to be the storyline " investor " responsible for signing The Wolves and counteracting Dixie Carter 's agenda in recent weeks , establishing himself as a face . On the February 13 episode of Impact Wrestling , MVP made his in @-@ ring debut , defeating Rockstar Spud . The following week it was announced that MVP would captain a team to face opposition representing Dixie Carter and captained by Bobby Roode in a Lethal Lockdown match at Lockdown , to determine whether MVP or Dixie would gain complete control over wrestling operations at TNA . On March 9 , 2014 , at Lockdown , MVP 's team defeated Dixie 's team with an assist from special referee Bully Ray , earning MVP total control of wrestling operations . 
 On the edition of May 8 of Impact Wrestling , after telling Eric Young how " proud " he was of Young 's TNA World Heavyweight Championship victory , MVP attacked Young and announced himself as the number one contender to the title at Slammiversary XII , turning heel again in the process . However , TNA announced on the Friday before the event that due a torn meniscus , MVP was deemed medically unfit to compete and thus removed from the match . According to <unk> , the original plans were to crown MVP as champion . On the June 19 episode of Impact Wrestling , MVP and Kenny King helped Lashley win the TNA World Heavyweight Championship from Eric Young , but firing Earl Hebner in the process . On the following week 's episode on June 26 , MVP attempted to fire Bobby Roode only to be told by Board of Directors representative Earl Sullivan Armstrong that he was officially relieved of his duties as Director of Wrestling Operations and that his replacement was Kurt Angle . From there , MVP acted as Lashley and King 's manager ( and occasional partner after his knee 's condition improved ) , while feuding with Angle in promos , until Lashley lost the World Heavyweight Championship to Roode on September 18 , 2014 , at the tapings for the edition of October 28 of Impact <unk> on the November 5 episode of Impact Wrestling , MVP faced Bobby Roode for the World Heavyweight Championship but lost the match . On January 7 , 2015 , MVP and King along with new members Samoa Joe , Low Ki , and Roode 's friend Eric Young all helped Lashley regain the championship from Roode . On the following night 's tapings of the January 16 , 2015 episode of Impact Wrestling , MVP presented the group as his " family " and officially christened them Beat Down Clan . Later that night , Low Ki defeated Austin Aries to win back the TNA X Division Championship , which he had lost to Aries the previous night , following which MVP attempted to present Lashley as the centerpiece of the Clan as well as a " founding member " ( officially establishing the MVP @-@ Lashley @-@ King trio as the foundation of the BDC as a faction ) . However , Lashley refused to become a part of this new group and decided to leave , but was attacked by the other members with MVP saying that the title belongs to the BDC . On February 6 , 2015 at Lockdown , Team Angle ( Kurt Angle , Austin Aries , Gunner , and Lashley ) defeated The BDC ( MVP , Samoa Joe , Low Ki , and Kenny King ) in a Lethal Lockdown <unk> on the February 13 episode of Impact Wrestling , The BDC ( MVP and Samoa Joe ) defeated Lashley and Kurt Angle . MVP would win the number one contendership for Lashley 's TNA World Heavyweight Championship on the February 20 broadcast of Impact Wrestling by last eliminating Kurt Angle in an over @-@ the @-@ top rope gauntlet match , but would lose to Lashley by pinfall in the ensuing title match the following week . 
 On the April 10 episode of Impact Wrestling , MVP , Kenny King and Low Ki faced the newly formed Rising a losing effort . On the May 8 episode of Impact Wrestling , MVP faced Galloway in a losing effort . On the May 15 episode of Impact Wrestling , The Beat Down Clan ( MVP , Low Ki and Kenny King ) , Bram and Eric Young defeated Galloway , Micah , Chris Melendez , Lashley , and Kurt Angle in a Hardcore War . On the June 3 episode of Impact Wrestling , The Beat Down Clan ( MVP , Kenny King and Low Ki ) faced The Rising ( Drew Galloway , Eli Drake and Micah ) in a losing effort . On the June 24 , 2015 ( aired July 1 ) episode of Impact Wrestling , The Beat Down Clan defeated The Rising in a 4 @-@ on @-@ 3 Handicap match , forcing The Rising to dissolve . On the July 15 episode of Impact Wrestling , MVP competed in a 20 @-@ man battle royal for the # 1 World Title <unk> , where he was in the final three , the match was won by Drew Galloway . 
 On July 17 , 2015 , MVP left TNA . He was reportedly released in the fallout of a contract dispute between TNA and Lucha Underground . MVP had pushed for TNA to sign Hernandez , even though he was at the time still under contract to Lucha Underground . When Lucha Underground contacted TNA , they released Hernandez and were forced to re @-@ edit all segments he had been involved in at the past tapings . 
 = = = Lucha Underground ( 2016 ) = = = 
 MVP announced on March 31 , 2016 , that he would be joining Lucha Underground . However , on April 8 , he announced his release from the company due to inadvertently violating terms of his contract by interviewing members of the roster for his podcast . 
 = = Other media = = 
 Assad made a cameo appearance in the film <unk> , alongside fellow WWE Superstars Chris Jericho , The Great Khali , Big Show , Kane , and Mark Henry . 
 MVP released his first hip hop song titled " Holla to the World " featuring Dwane <unk> in June 2011 . A music video for the song , featuring cameos from Carlito and Hernandez , was released the following October . The song was released as a single through iTunes on April 5 , 2012 . On March 18 , 2013 , he released his second song entitled " Tokyo " . On January 30 , 2014 , MVP released his third single , titled " Return of the Ronin " . The song also became MVP 's entrance theme in TNA . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In August 2007 , Assad was diagnosed with Wolff – Parkinson – White syndrome , a rare condition that causes the heart to beat faster than normal . The condition was discovered during his tenure with WWE , when he had undergone a routine check @-@ up in accordance with WWE 's Talent Wellness Policy , which otherwise would have gone undetected until it was too late . 
 Assad has acquired numerous tattoos through his life , including ; a portrait of Malcolm X on the upper left portion of his chest , the sarcophagus of King Tut and pyramids on his left upper biceps , the legend " Monte Cristo " along with the phrase " The best revenge is living well " in script on his right forearm ( both references to the book The Count of Monte Cristo ) , and an Eye of Horus on the back of his left arm . He also has a star on his right shoulder . He also has a number of homemade gang related tattoos that he had done when he was a teenager . 
 Assad has stated that he was a video game fan growing up , and that the finishing maneuver he used on the independent circuit , the Malicious Intent , was inspired by a similar move performed by a character in the Tekken series . He has been a fan of Manchester United F.C. since he was 13 , and his favorite player is Eric Cantona . Despite his earlier conversion to Islam , Assad has since described himself as a <unk> and an atheist . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 As Montel Vontavious Porter / MVP 
 305 / Play of the Day ( Leaping reverse STO ) – 2010 – present 
 Drive @-@ By Kick ( Running big boot to the face of a kneeling opponent while using their knee for leverage ) – 2008 – present 
 Irreversible Crisis ( Crossface / <unk> armbar combination ) – 2011 – 2014 
 <unk> ( Jumping single underhook DDT followed by a <unk> ) – 2011 – 2012 
 Playmaker ( Overdrive ) – 2007 – 2009 
 TTB – Take it to The Bank ( Crucifix neck crank ) – 2011 
 As Antonio Banks 
 Malicious Intent ( Reverse roundhouse kick ) – 2002 – 2005 
 TTB – Take it to The Bank ( Arm trap crossface ) – 2004 – 2006 
 Signature moves 
 Ballin ' Elbow ( Running delayed elbow drop , with theatrics ) 
 Facebreaker knee smash 
 Flapjack 
 Kesa @-@ gatame – 2015 – present 
 Multiple suplex variations 
 Exploder 
 Release / Rolling German 
 Snap overhead belly @-@ to @-@ belly 
 Running big boot to a standing or cornered opponent 
 Single leg Boston crab 
 With Shelton Benjamin 
 Double team finishing moves 
 Fade to Black ( Aided <unk> ) 
 Managers 
 Quentin Michaels 
 Nicknames 
 " The Franchise Playa " 
 " BDC Leader " 
 " The Ballin ' Superstar " 
 " Mr BDC " 
 " Black Godzilla " 
 " The International <unk> " 
 " The Master Manipulator " 
 " Half Man , Half Amazing " 
 Entrance themes 
 " Get Back " by Ludacris ( Independent circuit ) 
 " Move Bitch " by Ludacris featuring Mystikal and I @-@ 20 ( Independent circuit ) 
 " I 'm Comin ' " by <unk> the Shocker ( WWE ) ( 2006 – 2010 ) 
 " Ballin " by Unknown ( WWE ) ( December 3rd , 2010 ) 
 " Most <unk> Person " by Yonosuke Kitamura ( NJPW ) 
 " Return of the Ronin " by MVP ( TNA ; January 30 , 2014 – July 18 , 2015 ) 
 " The Anthem " by Jess <unk> and MVP ( TNA ; used as a part of The Beat Down Clan ) 
 Wrestlers trained 
 Jonny Vandal 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Coastal Championship Wrestling 
 CCW Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Future of Wrestling 
 <unk> Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Punisher 
 New Japan Pro Wrestling 
 IWGP Intercontinental Championship ( 1 time ) 
 IWGP Intercontinental Championship Tournament ( 2011 ) 
 Pro Wrestling Illustrated 
 PWI ranked him 23 of the best 500 singles wrestlers in the PWI 500 in 2008 
 World Wrestling Entertainment 
 WWE United States Championship ( 2 times ) 
 WWE Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Matt Hardy 
 Wrestling Observer Newsletter 
 Most Improved ( 2007 ) 
 Most Underrated ( 2008 ) 
 = Kumbakonam = 
 Kumbakonam , also spelt as <unk> in the records of British India , is a town and a special grade municipality in the Thanjavur district in the southeast Indian state of Tamil Nadu . It is located 40 km ( 25 mi ) from Thanjavur and 273 km ( 170 mi ) from Chennai and is the headquarters of the Kumbakonam taluk of Thanjavur district . The town is bounded by two rivers , the Kaveri River to the north and <unk> River to the south . According to the 2011 census , Kumbakonam has a population of 140 @,@ 156 and has a strong Hindu majority ; but it also has sizeable Muslim and Christian populations . Kumbakonam is known as a " temple town " due to the prevalence of a number of temples here and is noted for its Mahamaham festival which attracts people from all over the globe . 
 Kumbakonam dates back to the Sangam period and was ruled by the Early Cholas , Pallavas , Medieval Cholas , Later Cholas , Pandyas , the Vijayanagar Empire , Madurai Nayaks , Thanjavur Nayaks and the Thanjavur Marathas . It rose to be a prominent city between the 7th and 9th centuries AD , when it served as a capital of the Medieval Cholas . The town reached the zenith of its prosperity during the British Raj when it was a prominent centre of European education and Hindu culture ; and it acquired the cultural name , the " Cambridge of South India " . In 1866 , Kumbakonam was officially constituted as a municipality , which today comprises 45 wards , making it the second largest municipality in Thanjavur district . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The name " Kumbakonam " , roughly translated in English as the " Pot 's Corner " , is believed to be an allusion to the mythical pot ( <unk> ) of the Hindu god Brahma that contained the seed of all living beings on earth . The <unk> is believed to have been displaced by a pralaya ( dissolution of the universe ) and ultimately came to rest at the spot where the town of Kumbakonam now stands . This event is now commemorated in the Mahamaham festival held every 12 years . Kumbakonam is also known as <unk> and <unk> from time immemorial and as <unk> in ancient times . Kumbakonam is also spelt as <unk> in the records of British India . Kumbakonam was also formerly known by the Tamil name of <unk> . Kumbakonam is also identified with the Sangam age settlement of <unk> . 
 = = History = = 
 The region around Kumbakonam was inhabited as early as the Sangam Age ( 3rd century BC to 3rd century AD ) . The present @-@ day Kumbakonam is believed to be the site of the ancient town of <unk> where the Early Chola king Karikala held his court . Some scholars identify Kumbakonam as the site of the fabled prison of <unk> @-@ <unk> where the Chera king <unk> Irumporai was imprisoned by the Early Chola king <unk> . Kumbakonam is identified with the town of <unk> which had served as the Chola capital as early as the 7th century and with the town of <unk> which had also served as a Chola capital . According to the <unk> plates , Kumbakonam was the site of a battle between the Pallava king Sri Vallabha and the then Pandya king in 859 and between the Pandya king <unk> Pandya and a confederacy of the Cholas and Gangas . 
 Kumbakonam came into limelight during the rule of the Medieval Cholas who ruled from the 9th century to the 12th century . The town of <unk> , 8 km ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) from Kumbakonam was the capital of the Chola Empire in the 9th century . 
 Following the decline of the Chola kingdom , Kumbakonam was conquered by the Pandyas in 1290 . Following the demise of the Pandya kingdom in the 14th century , Kumbakonam was conquered by the Vijayanagar Empire . Krishnadevaraya ( 1509 – 29 ) , the emperor of Vijayanagara visited the town in 1524 and is believed to have bathed in the famous Mahamaham tank during the Mahamaham festival . Kumbakonam was ruled by the Madurai Nayaks and the Thanjavur Nayaks from 1535 to 1673 when it fell to the Marathas . Each of these foreign dynasties had a considerable impact on the demographics and culture of the region . When the Vijayanagar Empire fell in 1565 , there was a mass influx of poets , musicians and cultural artists from the kingdom . 
 According to the chronicles of the Hindu monastic institution , the Kanchi matha , the matha was temporarily transferred to Kumbakonam in the 1780s following an invasion of Kanchipuram by Hyder Ali of Mysore . When Tipu Sultan invaded the east coast of South India in 1784 , Kumbakonam bore the brunt of his invasion . The produce fell sharply and the economy collapsed . Kumbakonam did not recover from the calamity till the beginning of the 19th century . 
 Kumbakonam was eventually ceded to the British East India Company in 1799 by the Thanjavur Maratha ruler Serfoji II ( 1777 <unk> ) and reached the zenith of its prosperity in the late 19th and early 20th century when it emerged as an important center of Brahminism , Hindu religion and European education in the Madras Presidency . The opening of the Suez Canal in 1869 fostered trade contacts with the United Kingdom . In 1877 , railway lines were completed linking Kumbakonam with the ports of Madras , Tuticorin and Nagapattinam . The Tanjore district court was established in Kumbakonam in 1806 and functioned from 1806 to 1863 . 
 Kumbakonam continued to grow even after India 's independence though it fell behind the nearby town of Thanjavur in terms of population and administrative importance . The population growth rate began to fall sharply after 1981 . This decline has been attributed to limited land area and lack of industrial potential . During the Mahamaham festival of 1992 , there was a major stampede in which 48 people were killed and 74 were injured . On July 16 , 2004 , a devastating fire accident in the Sri Krishna school killed 94 children . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Kumbakonam is located at 10 @.@ 97 ° N 79 @.@ 42 ° E ﻿ / 10 @.@ 97 ; 79 @.@ 42 . It is situated 273 km ( 170 mi ) south of Chennai , 96 km ( 60 mi ) east of Tiruchirappalli , and about 40 km ( 25 mi ) north @-@ east of Thanjavur . It lies in the region called the " Old delta " which comprises the north @-@ western taluks of Thanjavur district that have been naturally irrigated by the waters of the Cauvery and its tributaries for centuries in contrast to the " New Delta " comprising the southern taluks that were brought under irrigation by the construction of the Grand <unk> canal and the Vadavar canal in 1934 . It has an average elevation of 26 metres ( 85 ft ) . The town is bounded by two rivers , the Cauvery River on the north and <unk> River on the south . 
 Although the Cauvery delta is usually hot , the climate of Kumbakonam and other surrounding towns is generally healthy and moderate . Kumbakonam is cooler than Chennai , the capital of Tamil Nadu . The maximum temperature in summer is about 40 ° C ( 104 ° F ) while the minimum temperature is about 20 ° C ( 68 ° F ) . Kumbakonam receives an annual rainfall of 114 @.@ 78 cm ( 45 @.@ 19 in ) every year . The region is covered with mainly alluvial or black soil which is conducive for rice cultivation . Other crops grown in Kumbakonam include mulberry , cereals and sugarcane . 
 The town of Kumbakonam is surrounded by extensive paddy fields . Methods of irrigation were considerably improved following the opening of the Mettur Dam in 1934 . The fauna of the Cauvery Delta is limited to cattle and goats . The town is situated at the western flank of the Kumbakonam @-@ Shiyali ridge which runs along the Kollidam river basin separating the Ariyalur @-@ Puducherry depression from the Nagapattinam depression . This granular ridge projects further eastwards penetrating the Puducherry depression and forms a hard layer of cretaceous rock underneath the sedimentary top soil . 
 = = Temples = = 
 Kumbakonam is known for its temples and mathas ( monasteries ) . There are around 188 Hindu temples within the municipal limits of Kumbakonam . Apart from these , there several thousand temples around the town thereby giving the town the sobriquets " Temple Town " and " City of temples " . 
 Adi <unk> Temple is considered to be the oldest Shaiva ( the sect of the god Shiva ) shrine in the town , believed to be constructed by the Cholas in the 7th century . The <unk> Temple has a separate shrine for the Sun god Surya who is believed to have worshipped Shiva at this place . Adi <unk> temple , <unk> temple and Kasi <unk> temple are Shiva temples in the town revered in the Tevaram , a Tamil Shaiva canonical work of the 7th – 8th century . Kumbakonam has one of the few temples dedicated to the god Brahma . 
 <unk> temple is the largest Vaishnava ( the sect of the god Vishnu ) shrine present in Kumbakonam . The present structure of the temple having a twelve storey high tower was constructed by Nayak kings in the 15th century . It is one of the " Divya Desams " , the 108 temples of Vishnu revered by the 12 Alvar saint @-@ poets . The Ramaswamy temple , which has scenes from the Hindu epic Ramayana depicted on its walls , was constructed by Govinda Dikshitar , the minister of successive Nayak rulers , <unk> Nayak ( 1560 – 1614 ) and Raghunatha Nayak ( 1600 – 34 ) . He added a commercial corridor between the temple and the older Chakrapani temple , which in modern times is called Chinna Kadai <unk> , a commercial street in the town . 
 Pilgrims from all parts of India take a holy dip once every 12 years during the Mahamaham festival in the Mahamaham tank . An estimated 2 million pilgrims participated in the festival during the 2004 event . Govinda Dikshitar constructed the sixteen <unk> ( shrines ) and stone steps around this tank . 
 Kumbakonam also has a number of mathas . The Sri Sankara matha of Kanchipuram was moved to Kumbakonam during the reign of Pratap Singh ( 1739 – 63 ) and remained in Kumbakonam until the 1960s . There are also two Vellalar mathas in the nearby towns of <unk> and <unk> and a Raghavendra matha in Kumbakonam . There is also a branch of the Vaishnava <unk> mutt in Kumbakonam . 
 The <unk> Temple at <unk> , the <unk> Kovil , the <unk> Murugan temple and the <unk> temple at Darasuram are located in the vicinity of Kumbakonam . The Airavatesvara Temple built by Rajaraja Chola II ( 1146 – 73 ) during 12th century is a UNESCO World Heritage Site , along with the <unk> Temple at Thanjavur , the <unk> Temple at Gangaikonda Cholapuram that are referred as the Great Living Chola Temples . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 According to 2011 census , Kumbakonam had a population of 140 @,@ 156 with a sex @-@ ratio of 1 @,@ 021 females for every 1 @,@ 000 males , much above the national average of 929 . A total of 12 @,@ 791 were under the age of six , constituting 6 @,@ 495 males and 6 @,@ 296 <unk> average literacy of the city was 83 @.@ 21 % , compared to the national average of 72 @.@ 99 % . There were a total of 9 @,@ 519 workers , comprising 32 cultivators , 83 main agricultural labourers , 1 @,@ 206 in house hold industries , 7 @,@ 169 other workers , 1 @,@ 029 marginal workers , 24 marginal cultivators , 45 marginal agricultural labourers , 212 marginal workers in household industries and 0 other marginal workers . 
 Kumbakonam has a strong Hindu majority ; but it also has sizeable Muslim and Christian populations . Among Hindus , <unk> , <unk> <unk> , Brahmins and Dalits are the numerically dominant Tamil @-@ speaking groups . Brahmins are more numerous and affluent in Kumbakonam than in other parts of Tamil Nadu . There are also large populations of <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and Nadars . Amongst Muslims , the Sunnis are dominant . However , there is also a significant Shia minority . Most of the Muslims are <unk> or <unk> . The majority of Muslims in Kumbakonam are involved in commerce or maritime trade . Kumbakonam also has a large population of Protestant Christians largely due to the efforts of the German missionary Christian Friedrich Schwarz . The Catholics in Kumbakonam are mainly affiliated to the Roman Catholic Diocese of Kumbakonam which was separated from the Archdiocese of Pondicherry in 1899 . 
 The population of Kumbakonam is predominantly Tamil @-@ speaking . The commonly used dialects is the Central Tamil dialect . There are significant minorities speaking Thanjavur Marathi , Telugu , Kannada and Saurashtrian as their mother tongue . 
 Residential areas make up 32 @.@ 09 % of the town 's total area while commercial enterprises and industrial units make up 2 @.@ 75 % and 1 @.@ 21 % respectively . The non @-@ urban portion of the town constitutes about 44 @.@ 72 % of the total area . Kumbakonam has a total of 45 slums with a population of 49 @,@ 117 . 
 As per the religious census of 2011 , Kumbakonam had 86 @.@ 07 % Hindus , 9 @.@ 57 % Muslims , 3 @.@ 99 % Christians , 0 . % Sikhs , 0 . % Buddhists , 0 @.@ 23 % Jains , 0 @.@ 13 % following other religions and 0 . % following no religion or did not indicate any religious preference . 
 = = Municipal administration and politics = = 
 The Kumbakonam municipality was officially constituted in the year 1866 . Initially , the municipality exercised its jurisdiction over an area of 7 @.@ 68 km2 ( 2 @.@ 97 sq mi ) and its affairs were administered by a town @-@ level committee or municipal committee . Later it was constituted special @-@ grade municipality and currently , exercises its authority over an area of 12 @.@ 58 km2 ( 4 @.@ 86 sq mi ) out of the town 's total area of 64 @.@ 02 km2 ( 24 @.@ 72 sq mi ) . It comprises 45 wards and is the second biggest municipality in Thanjavur district . 
 The functions of the municipality are devolved into six departments : General , Engineering , Revenue , Public Health , Town planning and the Computer Wing . All these departments are under the control of a Municipal Commissioner who is the supreme executive head . The legislative powers are vested in a body of 45 members , one each from each of the 45 wards . The legislative body is headed by an elected Chairperson who is assisted by a Deputy Chairperson . 
 Kumbakonam is a part of the Kumbakonam Legislative Assembly constituency and elects a member to the Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly once every five years . Despite being a hub of militant Communism in the 1950s , Kumbakonam voted for the Indian National Congress in the first five state elections held between 1952 and 1977 . The Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam won the elections in 1977 and between 1977 and 1989 , the seat was alternatively held by the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam , All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam or the Indian National Congress . Since 1989 , barring an interregnum of five years between 1991 and 1996 , the seat has been held by Ko . Si . Mani of the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam . Kumbakonam was a part of the Kumbakonam Lok Sabha constituency from 1952 till 1977 , when the constituency was disbanded . The assembly segments in the erstwhile Kumbakonam Lok Sabha constituency were included in the Mayiladuthurai Lok Sabha constituency and have remained so ever since . 
 Law and order in Kumbakonam in maintained by the Thanjavur sub division of the Tamil Nadu Police headed by a Deputy Superintendent of Police ( DSP ) . There are four police stations in the town , one of them being an all @-@ women police station . There are special units like prohibition enforcement , district crime , social justice and human rights , district crime records and special branch that operate at the district level police division headed by a Superintendent of Police ( SP ) . 
 = = Economy = = 
 The important products of Kumbakonam include brass , bronze , copper and pewter vessels , silk and cotton cloths , sugar , indigo and pottery . Kumbakonam is considered to be the chief commercial centre for the Thanjavur region . In 1991 , around 30 % of the population was engaged in economic activity . Rice production is an important activity in Kumbakonam . Of 194 industrial units in Kumbakonam , 57 are rice and flour mills . Kumbakonam is also a leading producer of betel leaves and nuts ; the betel leaves produced in Kumbakonam are ranked amongst the best in the world in terms of quality . The A. R. R. Agencies , a leading manufacturer of <unk> slices has its factory in Kumbakonam . The main administrative offices of T. S. R. & Co . , a cosmetic company , are also based in Kumbakonam . Kumbakonam is also famous for its metal works . The Tamil Nadu Handicraft Development Corporation had been established in the nearby town of <unk> in order to train bronze artisans . Kumbakonam is an important silk @-@ weaving centre and more than 5 @,@ 000 families were employed either directly or indirectly in silk weaving . Silk weaved in Kumbakonam is regarded as one of the finest in the subcontinent . They are largely used in the manufacture of <unk> silk sarees . Kumbakonam was also an important salt @-@ manufacturing area during British rule . The town lends its name to the Kumbakonam Degree Coffee , a blend of coffee prepared using undiluted pure milk . In recent times , Kumbakonam has emerged as an important manufacturer of fertilizers . 
 Apart from its manufactures , tourism is also a major source of income for the town . The Hindu temples and colonial @-@ era buildings have been recognised for their tourism potential . The 12th @-@ century Airavatesvara Temple in the town of Darasuram near Kumbakonam is an UNESCO World Heritage Site . Kumbakonam is also frequented by art collectors interested in handloom cloth and other curios . Banks such as the Axis Bank , Bank of Baroda , State Bank of India , <unk> Mercantile Bank , Canara Bank , Indian Bank , Indian Overseas Bank , Bank of India , Union Bank of India , Corporation Bank , Lakshmi Vilas Bank , ICICI Bank , ING Vysya Bank , Karur Vysya Bank , Punjab National Bank , Syndicate Bank and Vijaya Bank have their branches in Kumbakonam . The City Union Bank was founded in Kumbakonam in 1904 as the Kumbakonam Bank Limited and it is headquartered in the town . 
 = = Transport and utility services = = 
 Kumbakonam is well @-@ connected by road and rail with the rest of India . The nearest international airport is at Tiruchirapalli , which is 91 km ( 57 mi ) from Kumbakonam . The nearest seaport is located at Nagapattinam which is about 50 km ( 31 mi ) away . The town has around 141 km ( 88 mi ) of roads , 544 municipal roads making up 122 @.@ 29 km ( 75 @.@ 99 mi ) . There are also around 18 @.@ 71 km ( 11 @.@ 63 mi ) of state highways running through Kumbakonam . Over 87 % of the municipal roads are paved . There are regular government and private bus services to Chennai , Thanjavur , Mannargudi , Tiruchirapalli , Chidambaram , Mayiladuthurai , Nagapattinam , Coimbatore , Palani , Tiruppur , Thoothukudi , Madurai , Puducherry , and Tirunelveli . The Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation ( KSRTC ) operates daily services from Bengaluru and <unk> to Kumbakonam . On March 1 , 1972 , the Cholan Roadways Corporation was established by the Government of Tamil Nadu with its headquarters in Kumbakonam in order to improve transportation facilities in the districts of central Tamil Nadu . The organisation acquired the fleets of buses earlier owned by private operators – Sri <unk> Service , Raman and Raman Limited and Sathi Vilas . On July 1 , 1997 , the organization was renamed Tamil Nadu State Transport Corporation , Kumbakonam and presently forms division no . 1 of the Tamil Nadu State Transport Corporation . The corporation runs a reconditioning unit and a tyre re @-@ threading unit in Kumbakonam . Kumbakonam is connected by rail with most important towns and cities in South India . The <unk> Mayiladuthurai Express connects Kumbakonam with Mysuru and Bengaluru . There are regular express trains that connect Kumbakonam with major cities in the state like Chennai , Coimbatore , Madurai and Tiruchirapalli . There are passenger trains that connect Kumbakonam with Thanjavur , Tiruchirapalli , Chidambaram and Mayiladuthurai . 
 The traditional modes of transportation are bullock carts . It is recorded that as late as the 1950s , landlords and rich farmers travelled mostly by bullock carts with the exception of rare long journeys which they undertook by buses or motor vehicles . Kumbakonam has an efficient local bus transportation system . The <unk> bus stand is located in the south @-@ east of Kumbakonam and is situated just opposite to the <unk> Anna Bus Stand where the long @-@ distance buses are stationed . There are occasional ferries that transport people and goods across the Cauvery . Till the beginning of the 20th century , students of the Government Arts College used to cross the Cauvery on coracle ferries in order to attend college . Since the construction of a bridge in 1944 , the practice of transporting men and goods by coracles has greatly diminished . 
 Electricity supply to Kumbakonam is regulated and distributed by the Kumbakonam circle of Tamil Nadu Electricity Board ( TNEB ) . Water supply is provided by the Kumbakonam municipality from Cauvery river and <unk> river ; the distribution is managed through head works located at <unk> and <unk> , supplying 3 @,@ 265 kl ( 863 @,@ 000 US gal ) of water to the town . About 18 t ( 40 @,@ 000 lb ) of solid waste is collected from the town everyday ; 53 % domestic wastes and 32 % commercial wastes . The collected wastes are dumped in yards outside the town and segregated to produce organic manure . Kumbakonam municipality has partial underground drainage connectivity and the municipality is implementing the underground drainage to the uncovered areas . The major sewerage system for disposal of sullage is through septic tanks and public conveniences . Roadside drains carry untreated sewage out of the town to let out raw into the sea or accumulates in low @-@ lying area . 
 Kumbakonam comes under the Cauvery River Delta Area ( CRDA ) of the Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited ( BSNL ) , India 's state @-@ owned telecom and internet services provider . Apart from telecom , BSNL also provides broadband internet service . There are two government hospitals , 34 private hospitals & clinics and numerous medical shops catering to the healthcare need of the town . 
 = = Education = = 
 The Raja Veda <unk> , established by Govinda Dikshitar during 1542 in Kumbakonam , teaches Sanskrit vedic scriptures in specialised fields of Rig Veda , Yajur Veda , Sama Veda , Agamas and <unk> . Kumbakonam emerged as an important centre of education in the late 19th century and was known as the " Cambridge of South India " . The Government Arts College , established in Kumbakonam in 1867 , is one of the oldest educational institutions in the Madras Presidency . It began as a provincial school on October 19 , 1854 , before being upgraded to a government college in 1867 . It was affiliated to the Madras University in 1877 . One of the early principals of the college was William Archer Porter , a Cambridge Wrangler , who , along with T. Gopala Rao , was instrumental in its elevation to a government college . He is also credited with framing the college 's acclaimed educational policy . In 1881 , it became a full @-@ fledged college and high school courses ceased to be taught . Notable faculty members included U. V. <unk> Iyer ( 1855 – 1942 ) while the Indian mathematician Srinivasa Ramanujan ( 1887 – 1920 ) who studied from 1904 until 1906 when he dropped out and V. S. Srinivasa Sastri ( 1869 – 1946 ) , an Indian politician and administrator , are its notable alumni . The Government Arts College for Women was started in 1963 and had a total strength of 2 @,@ 597 pupils in February 2006 . The college offers various undergraduate courses and one post @-@ graduate course and is affiliated to the Bharathidasan University . Other colleges in Kumbakonam include <unk> Colleges of Arts and Sciences , Annai College of Arts and Sciences , Government College Of Fine Arts and Arasu Engineering College . The <unk> Arts , Science , Technology & Research Academy has a satellite campus based in Kumbakonam where all disciplines of Engineering , arts and sciences are taught . 
 The Native High School , founded in 1876 , and the Town Higher Secondary School , one of whose students was Srinivasa Ramanujan , were some of the oldest schools in the Madras Presidency . At present , there a total of 36 government and private schools in Kumbakonam . 
 = Theatre Royal , Drury Lane = 
 The Theatre Royal , Drury Lane , commonly known as Drury Lane , a West End theatre , is a Grade I listed building in Covent Garden , London . The building faces Catherine Street ( earlier named Bridges or Brydges Street ) and backs onto Drury Lane . The building is the most recent in a line of four theatres which were built at the same location , the earliest of which dated back to 1663 , making it the oldest theatre site in London still in use . According to the author Peter Thomson , for its first two centuries , Drury Lane could " reasonably have claimed to be London 's leading theatre " . For most of that time , it was one of a handful of patent theatres , granted monopoly rights to the production of " legitimate " ( meaning spoken plays , rather than opera , dance , concerts , or plays with music ) drama in London . 
 The first theatre on the site was built at the behest of Thomas Killigrew in the early 1660s , when theatres were allowed to reopen during the English Restoration . Initially known as " Theatre Royal in Bridges Street " , the theatre 's proprietors hired a number of prominent actors who performed at the theatre on a regular basis , including Nell Gwyn and Charles Hart . In 1672 the theatre caught fire and Killigrew built a larger theatre on the same plot , renamed the " Theatre Royal in Drury Lane " ; it opened in 1674 . This building lasted nearly 120 years , under the leaderships of Colley Cibber , David Garrick and Richard Brinsley Sheridan , the last of whom employed Joseph Grimaldi as the theatre 's resident Clown . 
 In 1791 , under Sheridan 's management , the building was demolished to make way for a larger theatre which opened in 1794 . This new Drury Lane survived for 15 years before burning down in 1809 . The building that stands today opened in 1812 . It has been the residency of a number of well known actors including ; Edmund Kean , comedian Dan Leno , and the musical composer and performer Ivor Novello . From the Second World War , the theatre has primarily hosted long runs of musicals , including Oklahoma ! ( 1947 – 1953 ) , My Fair Lady ( 1958 – 1963 ) , 42nd Street ( 1984 – 1989 ) and Miss Saigon ( 1989 – 1999 ) , the theatre 's longest @-@ running show . The theatre is owned by the composer Andrew Lloyd Webber . 
 = = First theatre : Theatre Royal , Bridges Street ( 1663 ) = = 
 After the eleven @-@ year @-@ long Puritan Interregnum , which had seen the banning of pastimes regarded as frivolous , such as theatre , the English monarchy was restored to the throne with the return of Charles II in 1660 . Soon after , Charles issued Letters Patent to two parties licensing the formation of new acting companies . One of these went to Thomas Killigrew , whose company became known as the King 's Company , and who built a new theatre in Drury Lane . The Letters Patent also granted the two companies a shared monopoly on the public performance of legitimate drama in London ; this monopoly was challenged in the 18th century by new venues and by a certain <unk> in the definition of " legitimate drama , " but remained legally in place until 1843 . The new playhouse , architect unknown , opened on 7 May 1663 and was known from the placement of the entrance as the " Theatre Royal in Bridges Street . " It went by other names as well , including the " King 's Playhouse . " The building was a three @-@ tiered wooden structure , 112 feet ( 34 m ) long and 59 feet ( 18 m ) wide ; it could hold an audience of 700 . Set well back from the broader streets , the theatre was accessed by narrow passages between surrounding buildings . 
 The King himself frequently attended the theatre 's productions , as did Samuel Pepys , whose private diaries provide much of what we know of London theatre @-@ going in the 1660s . The day after the Theatre Royal opened , Pepys attended a performance of Francis Beaumont and John Fletcher 's The Humorous Lieutenant . He has this to say in his diary : 
 The house is made with extraordinary good contrivance , and yet hath some faults , as the narrowness of the passages in and out of the Pitt , and the distance from the stage to the boxes , which I am confident cannot hear ; but for all other things it is well , only , above all , the musique being below , and most of it sounding under the very stage , there is no hearing of the bases at all , nor very well of the trebles , which sure must be mended . 
 Performances usually began at 3 pm to take advantage of the daylight : the main floor for the audience , the pit , had no roof in order to let in the light . A glazed dome was built over the opening , but according to one of Pepys ' diary entries , the dome was not entirely effective at keeping out the elements : he and his wife were forced to leave the theatre to take refuge from a hail storm . Green baize cloth covered the benches in the pit and served to decorate the boxes , additionally ornamented with gold @-@ tooled leather , and even the stage itself . The backless green benches in the pit were in a semicircular arrangement facing the stage , according to a May 1663 letter from one Monsieur de <unk> : " All benches of the pit , where people of rank also sit , are shaped in a semi @-@ circle , each row higher than the next . " The three galleries formed a semicircle around the floor seats ; both the first and second galleries were divided up into boxes . 
 The King 's Company was forced with some reluctance to commission the technically advanced and expensive Theatre Royal playhouse by the success of the rival Duke 's Company , which was drawing fascinated crowds with their " moveable " or " changeable " scenery and visually gorgeous productions at the former Lisle 's Tennis Court at Lincoln 's Inn Fields . Imitating the innovations at Lincoln 's Inn Fields , the Theatre Royal also featured moveable scenery with wings or shutters that could be smoothly changed between or even within acts . When not in use , the shutters rested out of sight behind the sides of the proscenium arch , which also served as a visual frame for the on @-@ stage happenings . The picture @-@ frame @-@ like separation between audience and performance was a new phenomenon in English theatre , though it had been found on the Continent earlier . However , theatre design in London remained ambivalent about the merits of the " picture @-@ box " stage , and for many decades to come , London theatres including Drury Lane had large <unk> protruding beyond the arch , often including the thrust stages found in the Elizabethan theatres . The players could still step forward and bridge the distance between performer and audience , and in addition , it was not unusual for audience members to mount the stage themselves . 
 Killigrew 's investment in the new playhouse put the two companies on a level as far as technical resources were concerned , but the offerings at the Theatre Royal nevertheless continued to be dominated by actor @-@ driven " talk " drama , contrasting with William Davenant 's baroque spectacles and operas at Lincoln 's Inn Fields . Internal power structures were the main reason for this difference : while Davenant skilfully commanded a docile young troupe , Killigrew 's authority over his veteran actors was far from absolute . Experienced actors Michael Mohun ( who Pepys called " the best actor in the world " ) and Charles Hart held out for shares and good contracts in the King 's Company . Such a division of power between the patentee , Killigrew , and his chief actors led to frequent conflicts that hampered the Theatre Royal as a business venture . Nevertheless , it was mostly at the struggling Theatre Royal , rather than at the efficiently run Lincoln 's Inn Fields , that the plays were acted that are classics today . This applies especially to the new form Restoration comedy , dominated in the 1660s by William Wycherley and the Theatre Royal 's house dramatist John Dryden . Actors such as Hart and Charles II 's mistress Nell Gwyn developed and refined the famous scenes of repartee , banter and flirtation in Dryden 's and Wycherley 's comedies . With the appearance of actresses for the first time at Drury Lane and Lincoln 's Inn Fields in the 1660s , British playwrights wrote parts for outspoken female characters , daring love scenes and provocative breeches roles . In any case , the competition between the King 's Company and the Duke 's was good for the rebirth and development of English drama . 
 The Great Plague of London struck in the summer of 1665 , and the Theatre Royal , along with all other public entertainment , was shut down by order of the Crown on 5 June . It remained closed for 18 months until the autumn of 1666 , during which time it received at least a little interior renovation , including widening of the stage . Located well to the west of the City boundary , the theatre was unaffected by the Great Fire of London , which raged through the City in September 1666 , but it burned down six years later on 25 January 1672 . 
 = = Second theatre : Theatre Royal , Drury Lane ( 1674 ) = = 
 During the 20th century , one illustration was repeatedly – and wrongly – published as " Christopher Wren , design for the Theatre Royal Drury Lane , 1674 " . Since 1964 , this presumption has been disputed by scholars . Careful inspection of the drawing at All Soul 's Library shows that it has one pencil inscription : " Play house " [ sic ] , which may have been added by a librarian or by anyone else . No sign of a signature ( by Wren or anyone else ) or a date appears anywhere on the drawing . Robert D. Hume of Penn State University explained that use of the drawing " rests almost entirely on the supposition that the so @-@ called " Wren section " at All Souls represents this theatre . It could just as easily be a discarded sketch unconnected to Drury Lane in any way . " 
 Comparative evidence for Drury Lane 's 1674 design can be found in the Theatre Royal , Bristol , built in 1766 , whose design was modelled , in part , on Drury Lane 's . The site measured 112 ft ( 34 m ) east @-@ west and 59 ft ( 18 m ) north @-@ south . The building was smaller than this , however , as reliable surveys and maps of the period show three passageways measuring between 5 and 10 ft ( 1 @.@ 5 and 3 @.@ 0 m ) wide surrounding the Theatre Royal on three sides . The building therefore probably measured between 40 and 50 ft ( 12 and 15 m ) wide ( the average width of all " Restoration " Theatres ) and between 90 and 100 ft ( 27 and 30 m ) long . Architect Robert Adam designed Drury Lane 's 1674 interior . The theatre was managed , from 1747 to Adam 's retirement in the 1770s , by David Garrick . 
 The King 's Company never recovered financially from the loss of the old Theatre Royal Bridges Street . The cost of constructing the new theatre , replacing their costumes and scenery lost in the fire and competitive pressure from the rival Duke 's Company contributed to its decline . Eventually , in 1682 , the King 's Company merged with the Duke 's . The 1674 Theatre Royal building contained a warren of rooms , including storage space and dressing rooms used by the management and performers , nearly seventy people in total , as well as some fifty technical staff members . Additionally three rooms were provided for scripts , including a library for their storage , a separate room for copying actors ' parts and a special library for the theatre 's account books , ledger books and music scores . This jumble of rooms often made communication among various departments difficult , a problem that Garrick corrected during his tenure as manager . The entire complex occupied 13 @,@ 134 square feet ( 1 @,@ 220 m2 ) bounded by Drury Lane ( east ) , Brydges Street ( west ) , Great Russell Street ( north ) and Little Russell Street ( south ) . 
 From 1674 , theatregoers accessed the Drury Lane via a long ten foot wide passageway from Bridges Street . The passageway opened onto a yard ( previously a " Riding Yard " ) in which the theatre stood . It 's likely that the yard remained open to the sky at this date , on three sides of the Theatre Royal walls . Henri Misson , a visitor from France , offers a description of the theatre in 1698 : his use of the word " amphitheatre " supports the view that Drury Lane had a circular line of boxes surrounding its pit : 
 The Pit is an Amphitheatre , fill 'd with Benches without <unk> , and adorn 'd and cover 'd with green Cloth . Men of Quality , particularly the younger Sort , some Ladies of Reputation and Virtue , and abundance of Damsels that haunt for Prey , sit all together in this Place , <unk> @-@ <unk> , chatter , toy , play , hear , hear not . Farther up , against the Wall , under the first Gallery and just opposite to the Stage , rises another Amphitheatre , which is taken by persons of the best Quality , among whom are generally very few Men . The Galleries , whereof there are only two Rows , are fill 'd with none but ordinary People , particularly the Upper one . 
 As Misson points out , the seating was divided by class , and tickets were priced accordingly . Box seats , used by the nobility and wealthy gentry , cost 5 shillings ; the benches in the pit where some gentry sat , but also critics and scholars , cost 3 shillings ; tradesmen and professionals occupied the first gallery with seats costing 2 shillings , while servants and other " ordinary people " , as Misson refers to them , occupied the 1 shilling seats of the upper gallery . Seats were not numbered and were offered on a " first come , first served " basis , leading many members of the gentry to send servants to reserve seats well ahead of performances . The stage was 45 feet ( 14 m ) wide and 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) deep with a raked floor from the footlights to the backdrop . The angle of the rake rose one inch for every 24 inches ( 610 mm ) of horizontal stage . The stage floor included grooves for wings and flats in addition to trap doors in the floor . The proscenium arch covered the stage equipment above the stage that included a pair of <unk> – large wheels holding many candles used to counteract the light from the footlights . Towards the latter part of the 18th century , doors were placed on either side of the stage , and a series of small spikes traced the edge of the stage apron to prevent audiences from climbing onto the stage . At the very back of the stage , a wide door opened to reveal Drury Lane . 
 An added difficulty for Killigrew and his sons Thomas and Charles was the political unrest of 1678 – 1684 with the Popish Plot and the Exclusion Bill crisis distracting potential audiences from things theatrical . This affected both the King 's and the Duke 's companies , but most of all the King 's which had no profit margin to carry them through the lean years . In 1682 the companies merged , or rather , the King 's was absorbed by the Duke 's . Led at the time by Thomas Betterton , the United Company , as it was now called , chose Drury Lane as their production house , leaving the Duke 's Company 's theatre in Dorset Garden closed for a time . In 1688 Betterton was removed from managerial control by Alexander Davenant , son of William Davenant , the original patent holder for the Duke 's Company . Davenant 's management ( with Charles Killigrew ) proved brief and disastrous , and by 1693 he was fleeing to the Canary Islands in the wake of embezzlement charges . The Theatre Royal found itself in the hands of lawyer Christopher Rich for the next 16 years . 
 Neither Davenant 's nor Killigrew 's sons were much better than crooks , and Rich attempted to recoup their depredations of the company 's resources by cost @-@ cutting tyranny , pitting actor against actor and slashing salaries . By 1695 the actors , including day @-@ to @-@ day manager and acting legend Thomas Betterton , were alienated and humiliated enough to walk out and set up a cooperative company of their own . Nine men and six women departed , all of them established professional performers , including such draws as tragedian Elizabeth Barry and comedian Anne Bracegirdle , leaving the United Company – henceforth known as the " Patent Company " – in " a very despicable condition , " according to an anonymous contemporary pamphlet : 
 The disproportion was so great at parting , that it was almost impossible , in Drury Lane , to muster up a sufficient number to take in all the parts of any play ; and of them so few were tolerable , that a play must of necessity be damned , that had not extraordinary favour from the audience . No fewer than sixteen ( most of the old standing ) went away ; and with them the very beauty and vigour of the stage ; they who were left being for the most part learners , boys and girls , a very unequal match for them that revolted . 
 A private letter from 19 November 1696 reported that Drury Lane " has no company at all , and unless a new play comes out on Saturday revives their reputation , they must break . " The new play is assumed to have been John Vanbrugh 's The Relapse , and it turned out the success the company needed . Christopher Rich continued as its head until 1709 , when the patent in question was actually revoked amid a complex tangle of political machinations . A lawyer named William Collier was briefly given the right to mount productions in Drury Lane , but by 1710 the troupe was in the hands of the actors Colley Cibber , Robert Wilks , and Thomas Doggett – a triumvirate that eventually found themselves sharply satirised in Alexander Pope 's Dunciad . In 1713 Barton Booth replaced Doggett . 
 Cibber was the de facto leader of the triumvirate , and he led the theatre through a controversial but generally successful period until 1733 , when he sold his controlling interest to John Highmore . It is likely that the sale was at a vastly inflated price and that Colley 's goal was simply to get out of debts and make a profit ( see Robert Lowe in his edition of Cibber 's Apology ) . Members of the troupe at the time were most displeased ; an actor 's revolt was organised and executed ; Charles Fleetwood came to control the theatre . Fleetwood 's tenure was tumultuous ; his abolition of the practice of allowing footmen free access to the upper gallery led to riots in 1737 , and Fleetwood 's gambling problems entangled the theatre in his own financial difficulties . It was during this period that actor Charles Macklin ( a native of Inishowen in County Donegal in Ulster ) rose to fame , propelled by a singular performance as Shylock in an early 1741 production of The Merchant of Venice , in which he introduced a realistic , naturalistic style of acting , abandoning the artificial bombast typical to dramatic roles prior . 
 In 1747 Fleetwood 's playhouse patent expired . The theatre and a patent renewal were purchased by actor David Garrick ( who had trained under Macklin earlier ) and partner James Lacy . Garrick served as manager and lead actor of the theatre until roughly 1766 , and continued on in the management role for another ten years after that . He is remembered as one of the great stage actors and is especially associated with advancing the Shakespearean tradition in English theatre – during his time at Drury Lane , the company mounted at least 24 of Shakespeare 's plays . Some of Shakespeare 's surge in popularity during this period can be traced to the Licensing Act of 1737 , which mandated governmental approval of any play before it could be performed and thereby created something of a vacuum of new material to perform . Garrick shared the stage with company including Peg <unk> , Susannah Cibber , Hannah Pritchard , Kitty Clive , Spranger Barry , Richard Yates and Ned Shuter . It was under Garrick 's management that spectators were for the first time barred from the stage itself . 
 Garrick commissioned Robert Adam and his brother James to renovate the theatre 's interior , which they did in 1775 . Their additions included an ornate ceiling and a stucco facade facing Bridges Street . This facade was the first time any structure that might be considered part of the theatre proper actually abutted the street : the building , like the 1663 original , had been built in the centre of the block , hemmed in by other structures . The narrow passage from Bridges street to the theatre now became an interior hallway ; some theatre office space also went up behind the new facade . 
 With a series of farewell performances , Garrick left the stage in 1776 and sold his shares in the theatre to the Irish playwright Richard Brinsley Sheridan . Sheridan and his partners , Thomas Linley the elder and Doctor James Ford ( court physician to King George III ) , completed their purchase of Drury Lane two years later , and Sheridan owned it until 1809 . Sheridan premiered his own comedy of manners The School for Scandal in 1777 . Active management of the theatre was carried out by a number of parties during Sheridan 's ownership , including himself , his father Thomas , and , from 1788 to 1796 and 1800 to 1802 , the popular actor John Philip Kemble . Linley took up the post of Musical Director at the theatre , receiving a retainer of £ 500 per annum . 
 Sheridan employed dozens of children as extras at Drury Lane including Joseph Grimaldi who made his stage debut at the theatre in 1780 . Grimaldi became best known for his development of the modern day white @-@ face clown and popularised the role of Clown in many <unk> and <unk> . Towards the end of the 1790s , Grimaldi starred in Robinson Crusoe , which confirmed him as a key Christmas pantomime performer . Many pantomimes followed , but his career at Drury Lane became turbulent , and he left the theatre for good in 1806 . 
 = = Third theatre : 1794 = = 
 The theatre was in need of updating by the end of the 18th century and was demolished in 1791 , with the company moving temporarily to the new King 's Theatre , in the Haymarket . A third theatre was designed by Henry Holland and opened on 12 March 1794 . In the design of the theatre boxes , Henry Holland asked John Linnell for assistance . The designs by Linnell survive in the V & A Print Room – there are also designs by Henry Holland and Charles Heathcote Tatham who were involved in the design process . This was a cavernous theatre , accommodating more than 3 @,@ 600 spectators . The motivation behind building on such a large scale ? In the words of one owner : 
 I was aware of the very popular notion that our theatres ought to be very small ; but it appeared to me that if that very popular notion should be suffered to proceed too far it would in every way deteriorate our dramatic performances depriving the proprietors of that revenue which is indispensable to defray the heavy expenses of such a concern . 
 New technology facilitated the expansion : iron columns replaced bulky wood , supporting five tiers of galleries . The stage was large , too : 83 feet ( 25 m ) wide and 92 feet ( 28 m ) deep . Holland , the architect , said it was " on a larger scale than any other theatre in Europe . " Except for churches , it was the tallest building in London . 
 The " very popular notion that our theatres ought to be very small " proved hard to overcome , however . Various accounts from the period bemoan the mammoth size of the new theatre , longing for the " warm close observant seats of Old Drury , " as one May 1794 theatre @-@ goer put it . Actress Sarah Siddons , then part of the Drury Lane company , called it " a wilderness of a place " ( and left Drury Lane along with her brother John Philip Kemble in 1803 ) . Not only was any sense of intimacy and connection to the company on stage lost , but the very size of the theatre put a great deal of the audience at such a distance from the stage so as to make hearing a player 's voice quite difficult . To compensate , the productions mounted in the new theatre tended more toward spectacle than the spoken word . An example of such a spectacle is a 1794 production that featured real water flowing down a rocky stream into a lake large enough on which to row a boat . This water issued from tanks in the attics above the house , which were installed – along with a much @-@ touted iron safety curtain – as proof against fire . 
 Richard Sheridan continued as theatre owner during the entire lifetime of this third building . He had grown in stature as a statesman during this time , but troubled finances were to be his undoing . The 1794 rebuilding had cost double the original estimate of £ 80 @,@ 000 , and Sheridan bore the entirety of the debt . Productions were more expensive to mount in the larger structure , and increased audience revenues failed to make up the difference . 
 An assassination attempt against King George III took place at the theatre on 15 May 1800 . James Hadfield fired two pistol shots from the pit toward the King , sitting in the royal box . The shots missed by inches , Hadfield having been jostled by a Mr <unk> . Hadfield was quickly subdued , and George , apparently unruffled , ordered the performance to continue . 
 The comedy actor John Bannister became acting @-@ manager in 1802 . With Sheridan 's son Tom , and in the circle of Richard Wroughton ( stage @-@ manager ) , William <unk> , Michael Kelly , Tom Dibdin and their likes , he helped to see the Theatre Royal through its next catastrophe . On 24 February 1809 , despite the previously mentioned fire safety precautions , the theatre burned down . On being encountered drinking a glass of wine in the street while watching the fire , R.B. Sheridan was famously reported to have said : " A man may surely be allowed to take a glass of wine by his own fireside . " Already on the <unk> financial ground , Sheridan was ruined entirely by the loss of the building . He turned to brewer Samuel Whitbread , an old friend , for help . As well as investing strongly in the project , Whitbread agreed to head a committee that would manage the company and oversee the rebuilding of the theatre , but asked Sheridan to withdraw from management himself , which he did entirely by 1811 . 
 = = Modern theatre : 1812 = = 
 The present Theatre Royal in Drury Lane , designed by Benjamin Dean Wyatt on behalf of the committee led by Whitbread , opened on 10 October 1812 with a production of Hamlet featuring Robert Elliston in the title role . The new theatre made some concessions toward intimacy , seating 3 @,@ 060 people , about 550 fewer than the earlier building ( though this size is still considered an extremely large theatre ) . On 6 September 1817 , gas lighting was extended from the audience area to the stage , making it the first British theatre to be <unk> throughout . In 1820 the portico that still stands at the theatre 's front entrance on Catherine Street was added , and in 1822 the interior underwent a significant remodelling . The colonnade running down the Russell Street side of the building was added in 1831 . 
 Productions relying more on scenery and effects than on dialogue and acting remained commonplace in the new facility . The 1823 production of Cataract of the Ganges had a finale featuring a horseback escape up a flowing cataract " with fire raging all around . " Effects for an 1829 production were produced by hydraulic apparatus that reportedly could discharge 39 tons of water . 
 There were those concerned that the theatre was failing in its role as one of the very few permitted to show legitimate drama . Management of the theatre after it reopened in 1813 fell to Samuel James Arnold , overseen by an amateur board of directors and a subcommittee focusing on the theatre as a centre for national culture . ( Lord Byron was briefly on this subcommittee , from June 1815 until leaving England in April 1816 . ) Actor Edmund Kean was the on @-@ stage highlight ; like Macklin before him , he made his reputation as Shylock , premiering in the role in 1814 . Kean remained until 1820 through praise and notorious disputes with local playwrights such as Charles <unk> . 
 Elliston leased the theatre from 1819 until he went bankrupt in 1826 . An American , Stephen Price , followed ( 1826 – 1830 ) ; then through most of the remainder of the 19th century , Drury Lane passed quickly from one proprietor to another . A colonnade was added to the Russell Street frontage , in 1831 , by architect Samuel Beazley . In 1833 , Alfred Bunn gained control of both Drury Lane and Covent Garden , managing the former from 1833 to 1839 , and again from 1843 to 1850 . Following the lead of the Lyceum Theatre , London , Bunn championed English opera , rather than the Italian operas that had played earlier at the theatre . These included Fair Rosamond and <unk> by John Barnett ; a series of twelve operas by Michael Balfe including The Maid of Artois and The Bohemian Girl ; Maritana and others by William Vincent Wallace and several by Julius Benedict . In 1837 , actor @-@ manager Samuel Phelps ( 1804 – 1878 ) joined the company at Drury Lane , appearing with William Charles Macready , the gifted actor @-@ manager in a number of Shakespeare plays . He also created the role of Captain Channel in Douglas Jerrold 's melodrama , The Prisoner of War ( 1842 ) , and of Lord Tresham in Robert Browning 's A Blot in the ' <unk> ( 1843 ) . Macready was briefly manager in 1841 – 1843 , putting significant reforms in place . Nevertheless , most productions there were financial disasters . 
 The theatrical monopoly first bestowed by Royal Letters Patent 183 years earlier was abolished by the Theatres Act 1843 , but the patent had been largely toothless for decades and this had little immediate effect . On the other hand , other theatres , used to presenting musical entertainments , continued to do so , and Drury Lane continued as one of the most accepted venues for legitimate theatre . The 19th @-@ century run of financial and artistic failures at Drury Lane was interrupted by four plays produced over a twenty @-@ five @-@ year period by the actor @-@ playwright Dion Boucicault : The Queen of Spades ( 1851 ) , Eugenie ( 1855 ) , Formosa ( 1869 ) , and The <unk> ( 1875 ) . But this period of general decline culminated with F. B. Chatterton 's 1878 resignation ; in his words , " Shakespeare spells ruin , and Byron bankruptcy . " During the 19th century , Drury Lane staged ballet as well , with performers including Italy 's Carlotta Grisi . 
 One famous musical director of Drury Lane was the eccentric French conductor and composer of light music Louis @-@ Antoine Jullien ( 1812 – 1860 ) , who successfully invited Berlioz to visit London and give concerts in the Theatre . 
 The house 's fortunes rose again under the management of Augustus Harris from 1879 . In the 1880s and 1890s , the theatre hosted many of the productions of the Carl Rosa Opera Company . Harris focused increased resources on the theatre 's annual pantomime , beginning at Christmas 1888 , adding a well @-@ known comedian , Dan Leno . These spectacular Christmas shows were a major success , often playing into March . They were choreographed by the theatre 's dance master , John D 'Auban . Many of the designs under Harris were created by the imaginative designer C. Wilhelm , including the spectacular drama , Armada ( 1888 ) , and many of the pantomimes . Productions relying on spectacle became the norm at Drury Lane under the managements first of Harris , from 1879 to 1896 , and then of Arthur Collins from 1896 to 1923 . Examples include the 1909 play , The Whip , which featured not only a train crash , but also twelve horses recreating the 2 @,@ 000 Guineas Stakes on an on @-@ stage treadmill . 
 The last major interior renovation was in 1922 under the ownership of managing director Sir Alfred Butt at a cost of ₤ 150 @,@ 000 , leaving a four @-@ tiered theatre able to seat just over 2 @,@ 000 people . It was decorated with one of the most notable interiors produced by the specialist ornamental plasterwork company of Clark and Fenn . Composer and performer Ivor Novello , immensely popular in his time though little @-@ remembered today , presented his musicals in Drury Lane from 1931 until the theatre was closed in 1939 because of the outbreak of the Second World War . During the war the theatre served as the headquarters for the Entertainments National Service Association ; it sustained some minor bomb damage as well . The theatre reopened with Noël Coward 's Pacific 1860 in 1946 . 
 In the post @-@ war years , four of the Rodgers and Hammerstein musicals made their London debuts in Drury Lane , holding the stage almost continuously for nearly a decade , including Oklahoma ! ( 1947 – 1950 ) , Carousel ( musical ) ( 1950 – 1951 ) , South Pacific ( 1951 – 1953 ) and The King and I ( 1953 – 1956 ) . American imports also included Lerner and Loewe 's My Fair Lady , which began a five @-@ year run in 1958 . Productions in the 1960s included Camelot ( 1964 – 1965 ) , Hello , Dolly ! ( 1965 – 1967 ) and The Great Waltz ( 1970 – 1972 ) . In 1974 , Monty Python recorded an album at the theatre , Live at Drury Lane . 
 The theatre became part of the West End theatre scene and still stages popular musical productions . Later long runs at the theatre include productions of A Chorus Line ( 1976 – 1979 ) , 42nd Street ( 1984 – 1989 ) , Miss Saigon ( 1989 – 1999 , the theatre 's longest @-@ running show ) , The Producers ( 2004 – 2007 ) , an original musical , The Lord of the Rings ( 2007 – 2008 ) , Oliver ! ( 2009 – 2011 ) and Shrek the Musical ( 2011 – 2013 ) . Charlie and the Chocolate Factory the Musical has been playing since 2013 and is booking through January 2017 . The Drury Lane is owned and managed by Really Useful Theatres , owned by Andrew Lloyd Webber . The seating plan for the theatre remains the same and the auditorium is still one of the largest in London 's West End . The building was Grade I listed in February 1958 . It is one of the 40 theatres featured in the 2012 DVD documentary series Great West End Theatres , presented by Donald Sinden . 
 = = 350th anniversary = = 
 On 15 May 2013 , Lloyd Webber revealed a £ 4 million restoration of the theatre to mark its 350th anniversary . Using a team of specialist heritage tradesmen , the detailed restoration has returned the public areas of the Rotunda , Royal Staircases and Grand Saloon , all of which were part of the 1810 theatre , to their original Regency style . 
 = = Hauntings = = 
 The author Tom Ogden calls the Theatre Royal one of the world 's most haunted theatres . The appearance of almost any one of the handful of ghosts that are said to frequent the theatre signals good luck for an actor or production . The most famous ghost is the " Man in Grey " , who appears dressed as a nobleman of the late 18th century : powdered hair beneath a tricorne hat , a dress jacket and cloak or cape , riding boots and a sword . Legend says that the Man in Grey is the ghost of a knife @-@ stabbed man whose skeletal remains were found within a walled @-@ up side passage in 1848 . Various people have reported seeing the ghost , including W. J. MacQueen @-@ Pope , who described its usual path as starting at the end of the fourth row in the upper circle and then proceeding via the rear gangway to the wall near the royal box , where the remains were found . 
 The ghosts of actor Charles Macklin and clown Joseph Grimaldi are also supposed to haunt the theatre . Macklin appears backstage , wandering the corridor which now stands in the spot where , in 1735 , he killed fellow actor Thomas Hallam in an argument over a wig ( " Goddamn you for a blackguard , scrub , rascal ! " he shouted , thrusting a cane into Hallam 's face and piercing his left eye ) . Grimaldi is reported to be a helpful apparition , purportedly guiding nervous actors skilfully about the stage on more than one occasion . The comedian Stanley Lupino claimed to have seen the ghost of Dan Leno in a dressing room . 
 = Darius I = 
 Darius I ( Old Persian : Dārayava ( h ) uš , c . 550 – 486 BCE ) was the third king of the Persian Achaemenid Empire . Also called Darius the Great , he ruled the empire at its peak , when it included much of West Asia , the Caucasus , parts of the Balkans ( Thrace @-@ Macedonia and Paeonia ) , most of the Black Sea coastal regions , parts of the North Caucasus , Central Asia , as far as the Indus Valley in the far east , and portions of north and northeast Africa including Egypt ( <unk> ) , eastern Libya and coastal Sudan . 
 Darius ascended the throne by overthrowing Gaumata , the alleged magus usurper of Bardiya with the assistance of six other Persian noble families ; Darius was crowned the following morning . The new king met with rebellions throughout his kingdom and quelled them each time . A major event in Darius 's life was his expedition to punish Athens and Eretria for their aid in the Ionian Revolt , and subjugate Greece . Although ultimately ending in failure at the Battle of Marathon , Darius succeeded in the re @-@ subjugation of Thrace , expansion of the empire through the conquest of Macedon , the Cyclades , and the island of Naxos , and the sacking of the city of Eretria . 
 Darius organized the empire by dividing it into provinces and placing satraps to govern it . He organized a new uniform monetary system , along with making Aramaic the official language of the empire . He also put the empire in better standing by building roads and introducing standard weights and measure . Through these changes the empire was centralized and unified . Darius also worked on construction projects throughout the empire , focusing on Susa , Pasargadae , Persepolis , Babylon and Egypt . He had the cliff @-@ face Behistun Inscription carved to record his conquests , an important testimony of the Old Persian language . 
 Darius is mentioned in the Biblical books of <unk> , Zechariah , Daniel , and Ezra – Nehemiah . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 <unk> and <unk> are the Latin form of the Greek <unk> ( <unk> ) , itself from Old Persian Dārayava ( h ) uš ( <unk> ; in Aramaic <unk> ) , which is a shortened form of Dārayava ( h ) uš ( <unk> ) . The longer form is also seen to have been reflected in the Elamite Da @-@ <unk> ( y ) a @-@ ma @-@ u @-@ <unk> , Babylonian <unk> ( a- ) ri @-@ <unk> ( a- ) <unk> , Aramaic <unk> , and possibly the longer Greek form <unk> ( <unk> ) . The name is a nominative form meaning " he who holds firm the good ( ness ) " , which can be seen by the first part <unk> , meaning " holder " , and the adverb <unk> , meaning " goodness " . Sanskrit " <unk> " or " <unk> , which means " to hold " has the same roots . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Darius was the eldest of five sons to Hystaspes and <unk> in 550 BCE . Hystaspes was a leading figure of authority in Persia , which was the homeland of the Persians . Darius 's inscription states that his father was satrap of Bactria in 522 BCE . According to Herodotus , Hystaspes was the satrap of Persis , although most historians state that this is an error . Also according to Herodotus ( <unk> ) , Darius , prior to seizing power and " of no consequence at the time " , had served as a spearman ( <unk> ) in the Egyptian campaign ( 528 – 525 BCE ) of Cambyses II , then the Persian Great King . Hystaspes was an officer in Cyrus 's army and a noble of his court . 
 Before Cyrus and his army crossed the Aras River to battle with the Armenians , he installed his son Cambyses II as king in case he should not return from battle . However , once Cyrus had crossed the Aras River , he had a vision in which Darius had wings atop his shoulders and stood upon the confines of Europe and Asia ( the known world ) . When Cyrus awoke from the dream , he inferred it as a great danger to the future security of the empire , as it meant that Darius would one day rule the whole world . However , his son Cambyses was the heir to the throne , not Darius , causing Cyrus to wonder if Darius was forming treasonable and ambitious designs . This led Cyrus to order Hystaspes to go back to Persis and watch over his son strictly , until Cyrus himself returned . Darius did not seem to have any treasonous thoughts as Cambyses II ascended the throne peacefully ; and , through promotion , Darius was eventually elevated to be Cambyses 's personal lancer . 
 = = Accession = = 
 The rise of Darius to the throne contains two variations , an account from Darius and another from Greek historians . Some modern historians have inferred that Darius 's rise to power might have been illegitimate . To them , it seems likely that Gaumata ( a pretender to the throne ) was in fact Bardiya ( the legitimate heir ) , and that under cover of revolts , Darius killed the heir to the throne and took it himself . 
 Darius 's account , written at the Behistun Inscription states that Cambyses II killed his own brother Bardiya , but that this murder was not known among the Iranian people . A would @-@ be usurper named Gaumata came and lied to the people , stating he was Bardiya . The Iranians had grown rebellious against Cambyses 's rule and on 11 March 522 BCE a revolt against Cambyses broke out in his absence . On 1 July , the Iranian people chose to be under the leadership of Gaumata , as " Bardiya " . No member of the Achaemenid family would rise against Gaumata for the safety of their own life . Darius , who had served Cambyses as his lance @-@ bearer until the deposed ruler 's death , prayed for aid and in September 522 BCE , along with Otanes , <unk> , <unk> , Hydarnes , Megabyzus and <unk> , killed Gaumata in the fortress of <unk> . 
 Herodotus provides a dubious account of Darius 's ascension : Several days after Gaumata had been assassinated , Darius and the other six nobles discussed the fate of the empire . At first , the seven discussed the form of government ; a democratic republic was strongly pushed by Otanes , an oligarchy was pushed by Megabyzus , while Darius pushed for a monarchy . After stating that a republic would lead to corruption and internal fighting , while a monarchy would be led with a single @-@ mindedness not possible in other governments , Darius was able to convince the other nobles that a monarchy was the correct form of government . To decide who would become the monarch , the six nobles ( Otanes stated that he had no interest in becoming king ) decided on a test . All six nobles would gather outside mounted on their horses at sunrise , and the nobles ' horse which neighed first would become Great King . According to Herodotus , Darius had a slave , Oebares who helped Darius win this contest . Before the contest , Oebares rubbed his hand over the genitals of a mare that Darius 's horse had a fondness for . When the six nobles gathered outside , Oebares placed his hands beside the nostrils of Darius 's horse , who became excited at the smell and neighed . Immediately after , lightning and thunder occurred leading the other six noblemen to believe to be an act of God , causing them to dismount and kneel before Darius . Darius did not believe that he had achieved the throne through fraud but through brilliant sagacity , even erecting a statue of himself mounted on his neighing horse stating " Darius , son of Hystaspes , obtained the sovereignty of Persia by the sagacity of his horse and the ingenious contrivance of <unk> , his groom . " 
 According to the accounts of Greek historians , Cambyses II had left Patizeithes in charge of the kingdom when he headed for Egypt . He later sent <unk> to murder Bardiya . After the killing , Patizeithes put his brother Gaumata , a Magian who resembled Bardiya , on the throne and declared him the Great King . Otanes discovered that Gaumata was an impostor , and along with six other Iranian nobles including Darius , created a plan to oust the pseudo @-@ Bardiya . After killing the impostor along with his brother Patizeithes and other Magians , Darius was crowned king the following morning . 
 = = Early reign = = 
 Following his coronation at Pasargadae , Darius moved to Ecbatana . He soon learned that support for Bardiya was strong , and revolts in Elam and Babylonia had broken out . Darius ended the Elamite revolt when the revolutionary leader <unk> was captured and executed in Susa . After three months the revolt in Babylonia had ended . While in Babylonia , Darius learned a revolution had broken out in Bactria , a satrapy which had always been in favour of Darius , and had initially volunteered an army of soldiers to quell revolts . Following this , revolts broke out in Persis , the homeland of the Persians and Darius and then in Elam and Babylonia , followed by in Media , Parthia , Assyria , and Egypt . By 522 BCE , there were revolts against Darius in most parts of the Achaemenid Empire leaving the empire in turmoil . Even though Darius did not seem to have the support of the populace , Darius had a loyal army , led by close confidants and nobles ( including the six nobles who had helped him remove Gaumata ) . With their support , Darius was able to suppress and quell all revolts within a year . In Darius 's words , he had killed a total of eight " lying kings " through the quelling of revolutions . Darius left a detailed account of these revolutions in the Behistun Inscription . 
 One of the significant events of Darius 's early reign was the slaying of Intaphernes , one of the seven noblemen who had deposed the previous ruler and installed Darius as the new monarch . The seven had made an agreement that they could all visit the new king whenever they pleased , except when he was with his wife . One evening , Intaphernes went to the palace to meet Darius , but was stopped by two officers who stated that Darius had retired for the night . Becoming enraged and insulted , Intaphernes drew his sword and cut off the ears and noses of the two officers . While leaving the palace , he took the bridle from his horse , and tied the two officers together . The officers went to the king and showed him what Intaphernes had done to them . Darius began to fear for his own safety ; he thought that all seven noblemen had banded together to rebel against him and that the attack against his officers was the first sign of revolt . He sent a messenger to each of the noblemen , asking them if they approved of Intaphernes 's actions . They denied and disavowed any connection with Intaphernes 's actions , stating that they stood by their decision to appoint Darius as King of Kings . 
 Taking precautions against further resistance , Darius sent soldiers to seize Intaphernes , along with his son , family members , relatives and any friends who were capable of arming themselves . Darius believed that Intaphernes was planning a rebellion , but when he was brought to the court , there was no proof of any such plan . Nonetheless , Darius killed Intaphernes 's entire family , excluding his wife 's brother and son . She was asked to choose between her brother and son . She chose her brother to live . Her reasoning for doing so was that she could have another husband and another son , but she would always have but one brother . Darius was impressed by her response and spared both her brother 's and her son 's life . 
 = = Military campaigns = = 
 After securing his authority over the entire empire , Darius embarked on a campaign to Egypt where he defeated the armies of the Pharaoh and secured the lands that Cambyses had conquered while incorporating a large portion of Egypt into the Achaemenid Empire . 
 Through another series of campaigns , Darius I would eventually reign over the territorial apex of the empire , when it stretched from parts of the Balkans ( Thrace @-@ Macedonia , Bulgaria @-@ Paeonia ) in the west , to the Indus Valley in the east . 
 = = = Invasion of Indus Valley = = = 
 In 516 BCE , Darius embarked on a campaign to Central Asia , Aria and Bactria and then marched into Afghanistan to Taxila in modern @-@ day Pakistan . Darius spent the winter of 516 @-@ 515 BCE in Gandhara , preparing to conquer the Indus Valley . Darius conquered the lands surrounding the Indus River in 515 BCE . Darius I controlled the Indus Valley from Gandhara to modern Karachi and appointed the Greek Scylax of <unk> to explore the Indian Ocean from the mouth of the Indus to Suez . Darius then marched through the Bolan Pass and returned through <unk> and <unk> back to Persia . 
 = = = Babylonian revolt = = = 
 After Bardiya was murdered , widespread revolts occurred throughout the empire , especially on the eastern side . Darius asserted his position as king by force , taking his armies throughout the empire , suppressing each revolt individually . The most notable of all these revolts was the Babylonian revolt which was led by Nebuchadnezzar III . This revolt occurred when Otanes withdrew much of the army from Babylon to aid Darius in suppressing other revolts . Darius felt that the Babylonian people had taken advantage of him and deceived him , which resulted in Darius gathering a large army and marching to Babylon . At Babylon , Darius was met with closed gates and a series of defences to keep him and his armies out . Darius encountered mockery and taunting from the rebels , including the famous saying " Oh yes , you will capture our city , when mules shall have foals . " For a year and a half , Darius and his armies were unable to retake the city , though he attempted many tricks and strategies — even copying that which Cyrus the Great had employed when he captured Babylon . However , the situation changed in Darius 's favour when , according to the story , a mule owned by Zopyrus , a high @-@ ranking soldier , foaled . Following this , a plan was hatched for Zopyrus to pretend to be a deserter , enter the Babylonian camp , and gain the trust of the Babylonians . The plan was successful and Darius 's army eventually surrounded the city and overcame the rebels . 
 During this revolt , Scythian nomads took advantage of the disorder and chaos and invaded Persia . Darius first finished defeating the rebels in Elam , Assyria , and Babylon and then attacked the Scythian invaders . He pursued the invaders , who led him to a marsh ; there he found no known enemies but an enigmatic Scythian tribe . 
 = = = European Scythian campaign = = = 
 The Scythians were a group of north Iranian nomadic tribes , speaking an Iranian language ( Scythian languages ) who had invaded Media , killed Cyrus in battle , revolted against Darius and threatened to disrupt trade between Central Asia and the shores of the Black Sea as they lived between the Danube River , River Don and the Black Sea . 
 Darius crossed the Black Sea at the Bosphorus Straits using a bridge of boats . Darius conquered large portions of Eastern Europe , even crossing the Danube to wage war on the Scythians . Darius invaded European Scythia in 513 BC , where the Scythians evaded Darius 's army , using feints and retreating eastwards while laying waste to the countryside , by blocking wells , intercepting convoys , destroying pastures and continuous skirmishes against Darius 's army . Seeking to fight with the Scythians , Darius 's army chased the Scythian army deep into Scythian lands , where there were no cities to conquer and no supplies to forage . In frustration Darius sent a letter to the Scythian ruler <unk> to fight or surrender . The ruler replied that he would not stand and fight with Darius until they found the graves of their fathers and tried to destroy them . Until then , they would continue their strategy as they had no cities or cultivated lands to lose . Despite the evading tactics of the Scythians , Darius ' campaign was so far relatively successful . As presented by Herodotus , the tactics used by the Scythians resulted in the loss of their best lands and of damage to their loyal allies . This gave Darius the initiative . As he moved eastwards in the cultivated lands of the Scythians in Eastern Europe proper , he remained resupplied by his fleet and lived to an extent off the land . While moving eastwards in the European Scythian lands , he captured the large fortified city of the <unk> , one of the allies of the Scythians , and burnt it . 
 Darius eventually ordered a halt at the banks of <unk> , where he built " eight great forts , some eight miles distant from each other " , no doubt as a frontier defence . In his Histories , Herodotus states that the ruins of the forts were still standing in his day . After chasing the Scythians for a month , Darius 's army was suffering losses due to fatigue , privation and sickness . Concerned about losing more of his troops , Darius halted the march at the banks of the Volga River and headed towards Thrace . He had conquered enough Scythian territory to force the Scythians to respect the Persian forces . 
 = = = Persian invasion of Greece = = = 
 Darius 's European expedition was a major event in his reign , which began with the invasion of Thrace . Darius also conquered many cities of the northern Aegean , Paeonia , while Macedonia submitted voluntarily , after the demand of earth and water , becoming a vassal kingdom . He then left Megabyzus to conquer Thrace , returning to Sardis to spend the winter . The Greeks living in Asia Minor and some of the Greek islands had submitted to Persian rule already by 510 BCE . Nonetheless , there were certain Greeks who were pro @-@ Persian , although these were largely based in Athens . To improve Greek @-@ Persian relations , Darius opened his court and treasuries to those Greeks who wanted to serve him . These Greeks served as soldiers , artisans , statesmen and mariners for Darius . However , the increasing concerns amongst the Greeks over the strength of Darius 's kingdom along with the constant interference by the Greeks in Ionia and Lydia were stepping stones towards the conflict that was yet to come between Persia and certain of the leading Greek city states . 
 When Aristagoras organized the Ionian Revolt , Eretria and Athens supported him by sending ships and troops to Ionia and by burning Sardis . Persian military and naval operations to quell the revolt ended in the Persian reoccupation of Ionian and Greek islands , as well as the re @-@ subjugation of Thrace and the conquering of Macedonia in 492 BC under Mardonius . Macedon had been a vassal kingdom of the Persians since the late 6th century BC , but remained having autonomy . Mardonius ' 492 campaign made it a fully subordinate part of the Persian kingdom . These military actions as a direct response to the revolt in Ionia as well commenced the beginning of the First Persian invasion of ( mainland ) Greece . At the same time , anti @-@ Persian parties gained more power in Athens , and pro @-@ Persian aristocrats were exiled from Athens and Sparta . Darius responded by sending troops led by his son @-@ in @-@ law across the Hellespont . However , a violent storm and harassment by the Thracians forced the troops to return to Persia . Seeking revenge on Athens and Eretria , Darius assembled another army of 20 @,@ 000 men under his Admiral , Datis , and his nephew Artaphernes , who met success when they captured Eretria and advanced to Marathon . In 490 BCE , at the Battle of Marathon , the Persian army was defeated by a heavily armed Athenian army , with 9 @,@ 000 men who were supported by 600 Plataeans , 1 @,@ 000 soldiers from each of eleven Greek city @-@ states ( 11 @,@ 000 men in total ) and 10 @,@ 000 lightly armed soldiers led by Miltiades . 
 The defeat at Marathon marked the end of the first Persian invasion of Greece . Darius began preparations for a second force which he would command , instead of his generals ; however , before the preparations were complete , Darius died , thus leaving the task to his son Xerxes . 
 = = Family = = 
 Darius was the son of Hystaspes and the grandson of Arsames . Both men belonged to the Achaemenid tribe and were still alive when Darius ascended the throne . Darius justifies his ascension to the throne with his lineage . He claimed he could trace his ancestors back to Achaemenes , even though he was only distantly related . With this in mind , Darius married Atossa , daughter of Cyrus , with whom he had four sons : Xerxes , <unk> , <unk> and Hystaspes . He also married <unk> , another daughter of Cyrus , with whom he had two sons , Arsames and <unk> . Darius married <unk> , the daughter of Bardiya , with whom he had a son , <unk> . Furthermore , Darius married <unk> , with whom he had two sons , <unk> and <unk> . He also married another woman of the nobility , <unk> , the daughter of Otanes . It is unknown if he had any children with her . Before these royal marriages , Darius had married an unknown daughter of his good friend and lace carrier <unk> from an early marriage , with whom he had three sons , <unk> , Ariabignes and <unk> . Any daughters he had with her are not known . Although <unk> was Darius 's first @-@ born , Xerxes became heir and the next king through the influence of Atossa ; she had great authority in the kingdom as Darius loved her most of all his wives . 
 = = Death = = 
 After becoming aware of the Persian defeat at the Battle of Marathon , Darius began planning another expedition against the Greek @-@ city states ; this time , he , not Datis , would command the imperial armies . Darius had spent three years preparing men and ships for war when a revolt broke out in Egypt . This revolt in Egypt worsened his failing health and prevented the possibility of his leading another army . Soon after , Darius died . In October 486 BCE , the body of Darius was embalmed and entombed in the rock @-@ cut sepulchre that had been prepared for him several years earlier . 
 Xerxes , the eldest son of Darius and Atossa , succeeded to the throne as Xerxes I ; however , prior to Xerxes 's accession , he contested the succession with his elder half @-@ brother <unk> , Darius 's eldest son who was born to his commoner first wife before Darius rose to power . 
 In 1923 German archaeologist Ernst Herzfeld made casts of the cuneiform inscriptions on Darius 's tomb . They are currently housed in the archives of the Freer Gallery of Art and Arthur M. Sackler Museum , Smithsonian Institution , Washington , DC . 
 = = Government = = 
 = = = Organization = = = 
 Early in his reign , Darius wanted to reorganise the structure of the empire and reform the system of taxation he inherited from Cyrus and Cambyses . To do this , Darius created twenty provinces called satrapies ( or <unk> ) which were each assigned to a satrap ( archon ) and specified fixed tributes that the satrapies were required to pay . A complete list is preserved in the catalogue of Herodotus , beginning with Ionia and listing the other satrapies from west to east excluding Persis which was the land of the Persians and the only province which was not a conquered land . Tributes were paid in both silver and gold talents . 
 Tributes in silver from each satrap were measured with the Babylonian talent . Those paid in gold were measured with the <unk> talent . The total tribute from the satraps came to an amount less than 15 @,@ 000 silver talents . 
 The majority of the satraps were of Persian origin and were members of the royal house or the six great noble families . These satraps were personally picked by Darius to monitor these provinces . Each of these provinces were divided into sub @-@ provinces with their own governors which were chosen either by the royal court or by the satrap . To assess tributes , a commission evaluated the expenses and revenues of each satrap . To ensure that one person did not gain too much power , each satrap had a secretary who observed the affairs of the state and communicated with Darius , a treasurer who safeguarded provincial revenues and a garrison commander who was responsible for the troops . Additionally , royal inspectors who were the " eyes and ears " of Darius completed further checks on each satrap . 
 The imperial administration was coordinated by the chancery with headquarters at Persepolis , Susa , and Babylon with Bactria , Ecbatana , Sardis , <unk> and Memphis having branches . Darius chose Aramaic as a common language , which soon spread throughout the empire . However , Darius gathered a group of scholars to create a separate language system only used for Persis and the Persians , which was called Aryan script which was only used for official inscriptions . 
 = = = Economy = = = 
 Darius introduced a new universal currency , the daric , sometime before 500 BCE . Darius used the coinage system as a transnational currency to regulate trade and commerce throughout his empire . The daric was also recognized beyond the borders of the empire , in places such as Celtic Central Europe and Eastern Europe . There were two types of darics , a gold daric and a silver daric . Only the king could mint gold darics . Important generals and satraps minted silver darics , the latter usually to recruit Greek mercenaries in Anatolia . The daric was a major boost to international trade . Trade goods such as textiles , carpets , tools and metal objects began to travel throughout Asia , Europe and Africa . To further improve trade , Darius built the Royal Road , a postal system and Phoenician @-@ based commercial shipping . 
 The daric also improved government revenues as the introduction of the daric made it easier to collect new taxes on land , livestock and marketplaces . This led to the registration of land which was measured and then taxed . The increased government revenues helped maintain and improve existing infrastructure and helped fund irrigation projects in dry lands . This new tax system also led to the formation of state banking and the creation of banking firms . One of the most famous banking firms was <unk> Sons , based in the Babylonian city of Nippur . These banking firms provided loans and credit to clients . 
 The daric was called <unk> within the empire and was most likely named after Darius . In an effort to further improve trade , Darius built canals , underground waterways and a powerful navy . He further improved and expanded the network of roads and way stations throughout the empire , so that there was a system of travel authorization for the King , satraps and other high officials , which entitled the traveller to draw provisions at daily stopping places . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 While there is no absolute consensus about the adherence of the kings before Darius , such as Cyrus and Cambyses , it is well established that Darius was an adherent of Zoroastrianism or at least a firm believer in Ahura Mazda . As can be seen at the Behistun Inscription , Darius believed that Ahura Mazda had appointed him to rule the Achaemenid Empire . Darius had dualistic convictions and believed that each rebellion in his kingdom was the work of <unk> , the enemy of Asha . Darius believed that because he lived righteously by Asha , Ahura Mazda supported him . In many cuneiform inscriptions denoting his achievements , he presents himself as a devout believer , perhaps even convinced that he had a divine right to rule over the world . 
 In the lands that were conquered by his empire , Darius followed the same Achaemenid tolerance that Cyrus had shown and later Achaemenid kings would show . He supported faiths and religions that were " alien " as long as the adherents were submissive and peaceable , sometimes giving them grants from his treasury for their purposes . He had funded the restoration of the Israelite temple which had originally been decreed by Cyrus , was supportive towards Greek cults which can be seen in his letter to <unk> , and supported Elamite priests . He had also observed Egyptian religious rites related to kingship and had built the temple for the Egyptian god , Amun . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 During Darius 's Greek expedition , he had begun construction projects in Susa , Egypt and Persepolis . He had linked the Red Sea to the river Nile by building a canal which ran from modern <unk> to modern Suez . To open this canal , he travelled to Egypt in 497 BCE , where the inauguration was carried out with great fanfare and celebration . Darius also built a canal to connect the Red Sea and Mediterranean . On this visit to Egypt he erected monuments and executed <unk> on the charge of treason . When Darius returned to Persis , he found that the codification of Egyptian law had been finished . 
 Additionally , Darius sponsored large construction projects in Susa , Babylon , Egypt , and Persepolis . In Susa , Darius built a new palace complex in the north of the city . An inscription states that the palace was destroyed during the reign of Artaxerxes I , but was rebuilt . Today only glazed bricks of the palace remain , the majority of them in the Louvre . In Pasargadae Darius finished all incomplete construction projects from the reign of Cyrus the Great . A palace was also built during the reign of Darius , with an inscription in the name of Cyrus the Great . It was previously believed that Cyrus had constructed this building , however due to the cuneiform script being used , the palace is believed to have been constructed by Darius . 
 In Egypt Darius built many temples and restored those that had previously been destroyed . Even though Darius was a Zoroastrian , he built temples dedicated to the Gods of the Ancient Egyptian religion . Several temples found were dedicated to Ptah and Nekhbet . Darius also created several roads and routes in Egypt . The monuments that Darius built were often inscribed in the official languages of the Persian Empire , Old Persian , Elamite and Babylonian and Egyptian hieroglyphs . To construct these monuments Darius employed a large number of workers and artisans of diverse nationalities . Several of these workers were deportees who had been employed specifically for these projects . These deportees enhanced the empire 's economy and improved inter @-@ cultural relations . At the time of Darius 's death construction projects were still under way . Xerxes completed these works and in some cases expanded his father 's projects by erecting new buildings of his own . 
 = Russian ironclad Petropavlovsk = 
 The Russian ironclad Petropavlovsk ( Russian : Петропавловск ) was ordered as a 58 @-@ gun wooden frigate by the Imperial Russian Navy in the early 1860s , but was converted while under construction into a 22 @-@ gun armored frigate . She served as the flagship of the Baltic Fleet during the 1860s and 1870s . The ship was decommissioned in 1885 , but was not sold for scrap until 1892 . 
 = = Description = = 
 Petropavlovsk was 300 feet ( 91 @.@ 4 m ) long between perpendiculars , with a beam of 50 feet 4 inches ( 15 @.@ 3 m ) and a draft of 22 feet 2 inches ( 6 @.@ 8 m ) ( forward ) and 24 feet ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) ( aft ) . She displaced 6 @,@ 040 long tons ( 6 @,@ 140 t ) and was fitted with a blunt iron ram at her bow . Petropavlovsk was considered to be seaworthy ; her total crew numbered 680 officers and enlisted men . 
 The ship was fitted with a horizontal return @-@ connecting @-@ rod steam engine built by the Baird Works of Saint Petersburg . It drove a single four @-@ bladed propeller using steam that was provided by an unknown number of rectangular boilers . During the ship 's sea trials , the engine produced a total of 2 @,@ 805 indicated horsepower ( 2 @,@ 092 kW ) and gave the ship a maximum speed of 11 @.@ 8 knots ( 21 @.@ 9 km / h ; 13 @.@ 6 mph ) . The ship carried a maximum of 375 long tons ( 381 t ) of coal , but her endurance is unknown . She was ship rigged with three masts . 
 As a heavy frigate , Petropavlovsk was intended to be armed with 54 of the most powerful guns available to the Russians , the 7 @.@ 72 @-@ inch ( 196 mm ) 60 @-@ pounder smoothbore gun , and four long 36 @-@ pounder smoothbores . Her armament was revised when she was converted to an ironclad and she was completed with an armament of twenty 8 @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) rifled guns and two 60 @-@ pounder guns ; all of the 8 @-@ inch guns were located on the lower deck and the 60 @-@ pounders were mounted on the upper deck as chase guns . Later another pair of 60 @-@ pounder guns were added on the upper deck . In 1877 , the armament on her upper deck was changed and consisted of one 8 @-@ inch , one 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) and ten 3 @.@ 4 @-@ inch ( 86 mm ) rifled guns . 
 The entire ship 's side was protected with wrought @-@ iron armor that extended 5 feet 2 inches ( 1 @.@ 6 m ) below the waterline . It was 4 @.@ 5 inches ( 114 mm ) thick amidships , backed by 10 inches ( 254 mm ) of teak , that reduced to 3 inches ( 76 mm ) , backed by six inches of teak , in steps beginning 50 feet ( 15 @.@ 2 m ) from the ship 's ends . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 Petropavlovsk , named for the Siege of Petropavlovsk during the Crimean War , was laid down on 12 January 1861 as a 58 @-@ gun heavy frigate at the New Admiralty Shipyard in Saint Petersburg . She was reordered as ( converted into ) a 22 @-@ gun armored frigate on 29 October 1861 while still under construction . The ship was launched on 15 August 1865 and commissioned on 1 August 1867 . During the 1860s and 1870s , Petropavlovsk served as the flagship of the Baltic Fleet . She was decommissioned on 15 June 1885 , stricken from the Navy List on 4 January 1892 and subsequently sold for scrap . 
 = A. J. Foyt IV = 
 Anthony Joseph " A. J. " Foyt IV ( born May 25 , 1984 ) is an American race car driver and also is a scouting assistant for the Indianapolis Colts . He competed in the IndyCar Series and briefly in the NASCAR Nationwide Series , then called the Busch Series . He is the grandson of A. J. Foyt . 
 He began his career racing karts . He moved up through the open wheel racing ranks , winning the 2002 Infiniti Pro Series . When Foyt made his first Indianapolis 500 race in 2003 , he became the youngest driver to start in the event . He continued in IndyCar for two more years until his back was injured at the 2005 Indianapolis 500 . Later that season he made several NASCAR Busch Series starts . He was scheduled to continue in the Busch Series in 2006 , but the team was bought out and his contract didn 't allow him to race in a non @-@ Dodge car . He returned to IndyCar late that season . He has not raced since 2009 , although he drove for his grandfather 's A. J. Foyt Enterprises team in trials for the 2010 Indianapolis 500 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
