 = = = Consolidation = = = 
 After the take @-@ over in 1905 , KSS was operating seven routes : Homansbyen – Oslo , Homansbyen – Sannergata , Munkedamsveien – Sannergata – Grefsen , Munkedamsveien – Vålerenga , Sagene – St. Hanshaugen – Kampen , St. Hanshaugen – Rodeløkka and Stortorvet – Vippetangen . KSS extended the Vippetangen Line on 8 November 1905 , and opened an extension from Homansbyen to <unk> on 24 September 1909 . KSS and KES agreed to link their two networks , and a connecting line opened on 1 May 1912 between Homansbyen and Rosenborg station on KES 's Line 1 . An extension of the Vestbanen Line to Skillebekk was finished on 2 November 1911 . 
 This expansion caused the need for more rolling stock , and KSS took delivery of 42 trams from Falkenried and Skabo between 1912 and 1914 . At 10 @.@ 5 metres ( 34 ft ) long they were somewhat longer than the other trams . The new lines allowed the two companies to operate on each other 's lines , and they introduced a common numbering scheme for the services . Several of the lines were serviced by two numbered routes , a system that remains in use today . From 1912 , a number of additional connections were built between the KES and KSS networks , and the two companies started cooperating on certain lines . From 1921 to 1923 , KSS bought an additional 22 trams from <unk> Waggonfabrik , Brill and Busch , commonly referred to as the HaWa Class . KSS had an annual ridership of almost 60 million in 1922 . 
 = = Light rail = = 
 = = = Holmenkolbanen = = = 
 Holmenkolbanen ( " The Holmenkollen Line " ) opened the city 's first suburban light rail line , the Holmenkollen Line , in 1898 . It ran 6 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 0 mi ) from Majorstuen station northwestwards via 12 stations to Besserud station . Like all the later light rail lines , these were electric trams with a grade @-@ separated right @-@ of @-@ way and proper stations instead of tram stops . Unlike the other suburban tram lines that were built later , the Holmenkollen Line was not extended into the city using on @-@ street tracks . Instead , passengers had to change at Majorstuen station to KES streetcars . In 1909 , the Holmenkollen Line started using 3 @.@ 1 @-@ metre ( 10 ft ) wide suburban stock , when it replaced its original 1898 Class trams with 1909 Class stock . The 2 @.@ 1 @-@ kilometre ( 1 @.@ 3 mi ) long Smestad Line opened in 1912 as a two station branch line from Majorstuen to Smestad station south of the Holmenkollen Line . In 1916 , the Holmenkollen Line was extended 5 @.@ 2 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 2 mi ) from Besserud northwards to Tryvann with six new stations . The last part , from Frognerseteren station to Tryvann , which was single track and used for freight was demolished in 1939 . 
 In 1912 , Holmenkolbanen started construction of a 2 @.@ 0 @-@ kilometre ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) long tunnel from Majorstuen station to Nationaltheatret station , with an intermediate Valkyrie Plass station . This was the first part of the Common Tunnel and was blasted through the rock beneath the city . The extension was planned to give the two suburban lines access to the central business district of Oslo , but high construction costs and difficult geological conditions prevented the extension from opening until 1928 . The tunneling caused the company financial difficulties , resulting in the Smestad Line being sold to Akersbanerne , owned by Aker Municipality . In 1922 , Holmenkolbanen started building the Sognsvann Line , although it took twelve years to complete it . The 6 @.@ 0 @-@ kilometre ( 3 @.@ 7 mi ) long line ran north from Majorstuen station to Sognsvann station with 11 new stations . The Smestad Line was extended 2 @.@ 8 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 7 mi ) to Røa station in 1935 with six new stations and was renamed Røa Line . 
 = = = Ekeberg Line = = = 
 The Ekebergbanen ( " The Ekeberg Line " ) was incorporated in 1913 , and the following year construction started on the single tracked Ekeberg Line . It opened on 11 June 1917 , running 6 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 1 mi ) southwards from Oslo Hospital station via six other stations to Sæter station . The company had made an agreement with KSS to use the Gamlebyen Line to Stortorvet , but chose to electrify the Ekeberg Line using 1 @,@ 200 volts . In 1924 , Ekebergbanen started operating adjacent bus lines , the first in Oslo . On 30 September 1931 , the 1 @.@ 3 @-@ kilometre ( 0 @.@ 81 mi ) long Simensbråten Line was opened with three stations as a branch from Jomfrubråten station to Simensbråten station . It was operated as a shuttle service outside rush hour ; during peak hours a direct service was provided to Stortorvet . Part of the main line was double @-@ tracked from Sjømannskolen station to Kastellet station in 1931 , to Bråten station in 1940 and to Sæter station in 1946 . The line was extended from Sæter to Ljabru station on 17 September 1941 , but the extension remained single track until 1967 . 
 = = = Lilleaker Line = = = 
 The success of the light rail lines tempted KES to extend the Skøyen Line west from Skøyen as a suburban line . The Lilleaker Line opened to Lilleaker station on 9 May 1919 , to Avløs station in 1924 and to Kolsås station in 1930 . The section west of Jar station is located in the municipality of Bærum in Akershus . A new branch section from Jar station to Sørbyhaugen station opened in 1942 , connecting the Jar — Kolsås Line to Nationaltheatret station . The Jar — Kolsås Line was upgraded and the stock was replaced with wider suburban trams . Kolsås station is 16 @.@ 7 kilometres ( 10 @.@ 4 mi ) from Nationaltheatret station . 
 = = = Akersbanerne = = = 
 Before its 1948 merger with the city of Oslo , Aker was a municipality which surrounded Oslo on all sides . Akersbanerne ( " The Aker Lines " ) was founded on 7 June 1917 by Aker Municipality to coordinate the construction of a new light rail line from Kristiania to new suburbs in Aker . The company planned to build several lines from the ends of the street tramways and extend them on grade @-@ separated rights @-@ of @-@ way . Construction of the Østensjø Line started in 1922 and opened from Vålerenga eastwards to Bryn on 18 December 1923 , and to <unk> on 10 January 1926 . For the first three years , street trams operated by KSS , and later Oslo Sporveier , ran the 1 @.@ 5 @-@ kilometre ( 0 @.@ 93 mi ) route to Bryn . After the full line opened , spanning another 3 @.@ 2 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 0 mi ) , Akersbanerne could not reach agreement with Oslo Sporveier , owned by Oslo Municipality . It was not until 1937 that direct services to the city centre were provided via the Vålerenga Line . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 The tramways of Oslo experienced a higher ridership and several sabotage actions during the Second World War . During the " April Days of 1940 " , rumour had it that Oslo was going to be bombed , and the tram service was therefore stopped for half an hour that day . Later , on 19 December 1943 , an explosion at the ammunition supply at Filipstad caused a total stop of tramway service from 14 : 30 a.m. A small explosion accident also took place at Vålerenga Depot in December 1944 . On 31 December 1944 , a tram was hit by an <unk> at <unk> ( now Henrik Ibsens gate ) next to the Palace Park , where all passengers but the conductor were killed . 
 Due to a low supply of petrol , bus traffic was replaced by electric tramways during the war . The trams experienced therefore an increase in ridership , from 64 million passengers per year in 1939 to 151 million in 1944 . The three lines of Holmenkolbanen had together a ridership of 9 @.@ 5 billion in 1939 , 10 @.@ 9 billions in 1940 , 21 billions in 1943 and at the peak 22 @.@ 6 billion passengers in 1945 . In addition to the regular tram passenger services , Oslo Sporveier started to transport goods across the city in tram wagons . 
 The leadership of the tramway was transferred to the German occupiers , who printed tickets and signs with Nazi emblems on them . If a passenger " demonstrated " by changing his seat when seated next to a German officer , he was expelled at the next stop . 
 Except from damage to the rail tracks at Frøen caused by a bomb , the Oslo Metro experienced no sabotage actions . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 The city had granted concessions to the two private tram companies until 1924 , after which the city could expropriate the companies . Both companies were well run and highly profitable , and on 1 May 1924 , KSS and KES were merged and taken over by the city council , which gave the new company the name Kristiania Sporveier ( " Kristiania Tramways " ) . The municipality owned 51 per cent . On 1 January 1925 , the city changed its name to Oslo , with the company 's name also changing . The light rail lines operated by Holmenkolbanen and Ekebergbanen were not taken over , nor was the Lilleaker Line operated by KES ; the city council did not want to take over tram lines in Aker . The Lilleaker Line operations of KES were transferred to the private company Bærumsbanen ( " The Bærum Line " ) . 
 After the take @-@ over , Oslo Sporveier immediately started expanding the tram network . On 4 May 1924 , the Korsvoll Line was opened as a branch of the Grünerløkka – Torshov Line from Torshov northwestwards to <unk> . On 1 August 1925 , the Ullevål Hageby Line was extended from <unk> further north to Ullevål Hageby . The Kjelsås Line opened on 25 September 1934 and ran from Storo on the Grünerløkka – Torshov Line northwards to Kjelsås station . By 1934 , the municipality had gained full ownership of Oslo Sporveier . The new company also decided to increase the permitted car width to 2 @.@ 5 metres ( 8 @.@ 2 ft ) , allowing wider suburban trams to run in the city streets . During the 1930s , Oslo Sporveier decided it needed more rolling stock , and cooperated with Strømmens Værksted to create the Gullfisk ( " Goldfish " ) class . Forty @-@ six units were delivered from 1937 to 1940 . Built with an aluminium chassis , they were quick and light , with a distinct streamlined shape , making their back ends look like a goldfish tail . On 1939 , the Sinsen Line was extended from Carl Berners plass northwards to Sinsen . At this point the city had its most extensive tram network . 
 Holmenkolbanen had built @-@ up large debts in building the underground section to Nationaltheatret , including large amounts of compensation to house @-@ owners who had their buildings damaged during construction . To finance their debt , the Akersbanerne @-@ owned Smestad Line was transferred to Holmenkolbanen on 16 November 1933 , with <unk> taking over the majority of shares in Holmenkolbanen . The latter remained listed on the Oslo Stock Exchange . From 4 January 1937 , Bærumsbanen took over the operation of trams on the Østensjø Line , though the ownership of the line remained with Akersbanerne . Oslo Sporveier started operating trolleybus lines from 1939 . On 1 October 1944 , Oslo Sporveier bought Bærumsbanen and took over the operation of the <unk> and Østensjø Lines . On 1 January 1948 , the municipalities of Oslo and Aker merged , and on 31 May 1949 , the two municipally @-@ owned companies , Oslo Sporveier and Akersbanerne , merged , taking the name of Oslo Sporveier . The following year , Oslo Sporveier took over Ekebergbanen . In 1975 , Oslo Sporveier bought all but a few of the shares in Holmenkolbanen , and at the same time took over operation of all the suburban lines . 
 = = = Partial closing = = = 
 The Oslo Tramway had a ridership of 108 million passengers in 1948 . On 17 January 1949 , the Korsvoll Line became the first tram line to be closed. followed by the Rodeløkka Line on 6 February . The latter reopened following a new route on 2 January 1955 . In 1960 , with the deregulation of the sale of cars , cheap diesel and the decision to build the metro , the city council decided to close the tram and the trolleybus networks . Tracks would be kept and trams would run until they would be naturally retired . However , no major investments would be made in the lines or rolling stock . Within a year , the Kampen , Rodeløkka , Vippetangen , Simensbråten and Vestbanen Lines were closed , as were trolleybus lines 18 and 24 . The remaining two trolleybus routes were closed in 1968 . On 24 June 1968 , Vålerenga Line was closed . 
 However , no further tram lines were closed . In 1969 , the site of the turning loop at Sinsen needed to be moved to allow the construction of the Sinsen Interchange . Instead of closing the line , Oslo Sporveier chose to build a new loop at <unk> at Sinsen . The Ekeberg Line was scheduled to close in 1972 , because a new line needed to be built to allow passage during the construction of Oslo Central Station , which would replace the Østbanen . After heavy protests from Ekeberg residents , Oslo Sporveier chose to build a loop in Vognmannsgata in the city centre . 
 = = Metro = = 
 The city established the Metro Office on 15 September 1949 , with the first plans launched in 1951 . In 1954 , the city council decided to build the metro network with four branches in eastern Oslo ; two would run on each side of the Grorud Valley , while two would run southwards through Nordstrand . These areas had all been chosen as new suburbs for Oslo , and needed a good public transport system to be put in place quickly . The system was to feature improvements over the light rail lines : a third rail power supply , cab signaling with automatic train protection , stations long enough for six @-@ car trains and level crossings replaced by bridges and underpasses — specifications christened " metro standard " by Oslo Sporveier . 
 The Østensjø Line would be converted to metro standard , and three new lines would be built . The Lambertseter Line opened as a light rail line from Brynseng station , where it connected to the Vålerenga Line , to Bergkrystallen station on 28 April 1957 . Originally it had overhead wires , low platforms and was served using trams . The Ekeberg Line would remain a tramway . The Lambertseter Line served the area located between the Ekeberg and Østensjø Lines . The Østensjø Line was extended to <unk> station in 1958 . 
 The Metro took delivery of T1000 trains from Strømmens Verksted . From 1964 to 1978 , 162 cars were delivered for the eastern network . The metro opened on 22 May 1966 , when the Common Tunnel opened from Brynseng station to Jernbanetorget station in the city centre , located beside the Østbanen . The same day , the Lambertseter Line was reopened after it had been upgraded to metro standard . On 16 October 1966 , the then 9 @.@ 2 @-@ kilometre ( 5 @.@ 7 mi ) and twelve station long Grorud Line , which ran northeast on the northern hillside of the Grorud Valley , opened to Grorud station . The Lambertseter Line was connected to the system in 1967 , when the line was extended to Skullerud station . 
 The Furuset Line runs on the southern hillside of the Grorud Valley . It opened to Haugerud station in 1970 , and was extended to <unk> station in 1974 . The same year , the Grorud Line was extended to Vestli station , which is 14 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 1 mi ) from Jernbanetorget . By 1981 , the Furuset Line had reached Ellingsrudåsen station , which is 11 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 7 @.@ 1 mi ) from Jernbanetorget . The western light rail lines took delivery of 33 T1300 train cars from 1978 to 1981 , with an additional 16 converted from the existing T1000 cars . The T1300 cars differed in that they could run on both third rail and overhead wires . Although not connected to the metro , the western lines were gradually becoming more like the metro , although they retained overhead wires , a different signaling system and shorter platforms . 
 = = = Common Tunnel = = = 
 The western lines terminated at an underground station on the west side of the city centre , while the metro terminated at an underground station at the east side of the city centre . The two termini were located 1 @.@ 2 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 75 mi ) apart . Sentrum station , located in the heart of the city centre , 0 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 31 mi ) east of Jernbanetorget , opened along with the extension of the metro tunnel in 1977 . Water leaks exceeding the drainage capacity forced the station to be closed between 1983 and 1987 . When it reopened , the western light rail tunnel had been extended to it , and the station was renamed Stortinget . Because of incompatible signalling and power equipment , it was not possible for trains to run through the whole tunnel . In 1993 , the western part of the Common Tunnel and the Sognsvann Line were upgraded to metro standard , followed by the Røa Line two years later . Trains on the Holmenkollen and Kolsås Line needed both pantographs and third rail shoes to operate , using the former on the outer parts of the line and the latter in the tunnel . They switched to overhead wire at Frøen station and Montebello station , respectively . In 1994 , six two @-@ car T2000 trains were delivered for the Holmenkollen Line to meet the need for more rolling stock . Additional orders of the class were originally planned to replace the older stock , but the T2000 trains proved unreliable and no further order was made . 
 In 2003 , the section of the Kolsås Line in Bærum closed due to disagreements between the two counties of Oslo and Akershus on how much Akershus should pay to purchase services from Oslo Sporveier . After a year of replacement buses , the line was reopened , only to be closed again in 2006 for an upgrade to metro standard . Disagreements between the two counties means the upgrade will be done separately on the two sides of the municipal boundary , with the Oslo side opening first . By 2010 , the upgraded part had reached <unk> station in Oslo . In 2003 , the Ring Line opened from Ullevål Stadion station on the Sognsvann Line to Storo station . The line will create a loop , which will connect to neighbourhoods such as Nydalen and <unk> north of the city centre . In July 2004 , construction caused a tunnel to collapse on the Grorud Line — the system 's busiest — forcing a shutdown of this line until December and creating havoc on the overloaded replacement buses . The ring was completed onwards to Carl Berners plass on the Grorud Line via Sinsen in 2006 . In 2007 , the system started taking delivery of the new MX3000 trains , which replaced all the old stock . By 2010 , all T1000 , T1300 and T2000 trains had been retired . In 2010 , the Holmenkollen Line reopened with metro standard , after it had been closed for renovation for a year . 
 = = Revival of the tramway = = 
 In 1977 , the city council changed their decision to close down the tramway . The main reason was the 1973 oil crisis , which had made it cheaper to run hydroelectric @-@ powered trams than diesel @-@ powered buses . After no investment on the tramway for seventeen years , new stock had to be bought , and Oslo Sporveier opted to buy seven used M @-@ 23 units from the Gothenburg Tramway in Sweden . In addition , twenty @-@ five SL79 articulated trams were delivered in 1982 and 1983 , followed by a further fifteen in 1989 and 1990 . Oslo Sporveier merged with Holmenkolbanen in 1991 , and with Ekebergbanen in 1993 . 
 During the 1990s , a number of expansions were made to the tram network . The disused line from Storo via the depot at Grefsen to Sinsen opened for revenue traffic in 1993 . In 1995 , the Vika Line was constructed to access Aker Brygge , a new waterfront neighbourhood is the southwestern part of the city centre , and in 1999 , the Ullevål Hageby Line was extended to the new Rikshospitalet . For these new lines , 32 SL95 low @-@ floor trams were delivered from 1996 to 2004 , replacing all but the SL79 units . The voltage was increased from 600 to 750 volts on 4 June 2000 , once all non @-@ articulated trams had been retired . 
 In 2002 , Oslo Sporveier announced that it would close the Ekeberg , Sinsen , Briskeby and Kjelsås Lines to reduce costs . Only the Kjelsås Line was actually closed and replaced by buses , which occurred 21 November 2002 . After local protests , and a compromise in the city council , the Kjelsås Line was reopened on 22 November 2004 . 
 On 1 July 2003 , Oslo Sporveier was reorganized with the operation of the trams transferred to Oslo Sporvognsdrift ( " Oslo Tram Operations " ) and the operation of the Metro to Oslo T @-@ banedrift ( " Oslo Metro Operations " ) . Another reorganization was made on 1 July 2006 , when Oslo Sporveier was demerged into two companies . The Oslo Public Transport Administration , which kept the Oslo Sporveier brand name , was made responsible for purchasing and the marketing of the public transport system . The ownership and maintenance of the tracks and stations was transferred to Kollektivtransportproduksjon ( " Public Transport Production " ) . The latter also became the parent of the operating companies , who retained the actual running of the trams and metro trains . The brand name Oslo Sporveier was discontinued on 1 January 2008 , when Ruter was created as a merger between the Oslo Public Transport Administration and Stor @-@ Oslo Lokaltrafikk ( " Greater Oslo Local Traffic " ) — which had been responsible for public transport in Akershus . 
 = = Preservation = = 
 In 1966 , the Oslo Tramway Museum was founded to preserve the tramway and trolleybus vehicles . The museum is run by a 450 @-@ member non @-@ profit organization <unk> Forening ( <unk> , " Local Traffic History Association " ) . It was founded as a reaction to the aftermath of the closing of the Bergen Tramway , where only a single tram was preserved , and where volunteers realized that a similar lack of preservation could happen in Oslo . As of 2004 , the museum had 56 rail vehicles , 31 buses and seven other vehicles , including four trolleybuses . It has a museum with 25 trams and 10 buses on display at Majorstuen , as well as a full heritage tramway , including <unk> station , which is under construction at <unk> . 
 = = Future plans = = 
 Oslo Package 3 is a political agreement between all the major projects on what to spend public funding for transport in Oslo and Akershus on . The agreement was made in 2007 , and consists of 53 billion Norwegian krone ( NOK ) , which will be shared between investments in road infrastructure , public transport infrastructure , and operating subsidies for Ruter . Financing comes from the state , the counties and from toll roads . The agreement states the major investments which are planned during a 20 @-@ year period . In addition , the previous agreement , Oslo Package 2 , still has funding for some smaller projects . 
 An upgrade of the Kolsås Line to metro standard started in 2006 , and is estimated to finish by 2014 . In the Common Tunnel , a new Homansbyen Station is planned between Majorstuen and Nationaltheatret . The Grorud Line is planned be connected to the Ring Line via the Løren Line , allowing trains to run directly from Grorud to the Ring via a station at Løren . An extension has been proposed for the Furuset Line to Lørenskog , which would give stations at <unk> , Lørenskog Centre and a new terminus at Akershus University Hospital ( <unk> ) . The travel time from <unk> to Jernbanetorget would be 27 minutes . 
 The Fjord City urban redevelopment project that is converting the Bjørvika and Vippetangen areas in the centre of Oslo , will include a gradual building of tramways through them . The Ekeberg Line will be moved to run on the south side of the Central Station through Bjørvika . A new line may also be built from Aker Brygge around Vippetangen to Bjørvika . A similar redevelopment project at Fornebu in Bærum involves plans for building the Fornebu Line as an extension of the Lilleaker Line from <unk> via Lysaker Station to Fornebu . The line was previously planned as a people mover , but the solution was unsuccessful , and planning now focuses on building a tramway instead . An extension of the Sinsen Line to <unk> is planned . 
 = My Name Is My Name = 
 My Name Is My Name is the debut studio album by American hip hop recording artist Pusha T ( who is one half of the hip hop duo Clipse ) . It was released on October 7 , 2013 , by GOOD Music and Def Jam Recordings . While leading up to the album 's announcement , Pusha T released the mixtape Fear of God and the EP Fear of God II : Let Us Pray during 2011 , along with collaborating on the GOOD Music 's compilation album Cruel Summer ( released in 2012 ) . In 2013 , he also released another mixtape Wrath of Caine . The album 's production was handled primarily by Kanye West , along with several producers , including Pharrell Williams , The @-@ Dream , Hudson Mohawke , Sebastian Sartor , Don Cannon , Swizz Beatz , Rico Beats , Mano and Nottz , It also features guest appearances from Rick Ross , Young Jeezy , 2 Chainz , Big Sean , Future , Pharrell Williams , Chris Brown and Kendrick Lamar , among others . 
 The album was met with universal acclaim from music critics and was positioned highly on many " Best Albums of 2013 " lists by major publications . The album also fared well commercially debuting at number 4 on the US Billboard 200 , selling 74 @,@ 000 copies in its first week of release . As of November 20 , 2013 , the album has sold 122 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . The album was promoted by five singles ; " Pain " featuring Future , " Numbers on the Boards " , " Sweet Serenade " featuring Chris Brown , " Let Me Love You " featuring Kelly Rowland , and " Nosetalgia " featuring Kendrick Lamar , along with the promotional single " Who I Am " featuring 2 Chainz and Big Sean . 
 = = Background = = 
 After establishing his solo career , while signing a deal to GOOD Music in September 2010 , Pusha T released his first solo project , a mixtape , titled Fear of God ( 2011 ) . Following the release of his mixtape , he released his first extended play , a sequel to the mixtape , titled Fear of God II : Let Us Pray ( 2011 ) . After the release of his EP , Pusha T started working on his debut album , and at the time it have included the production from Kanye West , The Neptunes , Bangladesh , Ryan Leslie and Alex da Kid . After continued to working on his first full @-@ length album , which was originally set to be released in 2012 , it was pushed back due to his participation in GOOD Music 's first compilation album Cruel Summer ( 2012 ) . 
 In July 2012 , Pusha T told MTV that while he was putting together his solo album , he was heavily influenced by Keanu Reeves and Al Pacino 's 1997 film The Devil 's Advocate . " This album was based off the movie ' Devil 's Advocate ' . Not theme @-@ wise at all , but just in the feel of the album . ' Devil 's Advocate ' is a very dark movie , but at the same time , visually , it 's beautiful . The album is based off of that because I speak about the harsh realities of street life but there 's a lot of glitz and glamour that comes along with that . If you just look at it at face value , you might think , ' It sounds a bit like he 's glorifying [ street life ] ' , but when you get tuned into the record , you realize that you get both sides of it . " 
 In 2012 , in an interview , Pusha T spoke on the inspiration behind the album title . " Basically , I tried to pick a title that embodied who I am as an artist . I wanted people to understand like Pusha is everything that I really , really am . Actually , there is a line in ' Pain ' where I say " My name is my name , " that line comes from Marlo Stanfield from the series The Wire . It was one of the more prominent catch phrases that he said at the end of that series . He was basically saying , I am who I am , I stand on my name I live this . I really felt that embodied my presence in the rap game . " Pusha T announced the new title of his album in November 2012 , along with Spin reporting that his album had been pushed back until 2013 . On March 19 , 2013 Pusha T said that the album would include 13 songs and that he had already finished 11 of those songs . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 On April 13 , 2013 , during at the 2013 's Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival , Pusha T announced that he would be going to Paris later this week , just to put on some final touches on the album , afterwards he would announce a release date . In June 2013 , Pusha T had been set to turn in the album to Def Jam for mastering , however , Kanye West was shortly given by him with three new beats , in which resulted him to go back to the studio to continued recording . In early stages in the recording process , he began working on the album with Kanye West , Symbolyc One , The Neptunes , Bangladesh , and Ryan Leslie . Since then , he has confirmed that he was working with The @-@ Dream , Just Blaze , No I.D. , Nottz , Don Cannon , <unk> Myrick , Carlos Brody ( of The Hitmen ) , DJ Mano , Swizz Beatz , Rico Beats , <unk> $ Scott , Hudson Mohawke , Young Chop , and Sham , amongst others on the album 's production . On August 4 , 2013 he announced that the song he wants to be the album 's intro is produced by Joaquin Phoenix . On August 22 , 2013 , Pusha T appeared on MTV 's RapFix and told Sway Calloway that the bulk of the album 's production would be handled by Kanye West , while confirming production by Pharrell , Swizz Beatz , The @-@ Dream , Nottz , and Don Cannon to be featured on the album . 
 Pusha T has announced leading up to the album that the guest appearances are included from Rick Ross , Kanye West , The @-@ Dream , Future , Young Jeezy , 2 Chainz , Big Sean , Chris Brown , Kendrick Lamar , and The Re @-@ Up Gang . He also said he was looking to get a couple more cleared up . In early January , Pusha stated that fellow Clipse member No Malice could appear on the album , however , in July , he confirmed that Malice would not be featured on the album . He also said his dream collaboration for the album would be with Jay @-@ Z. In an August 22 , 2013 , appearance on MTV 's RapFix he confirmed that additional guest appearances , that had yet to be revealed would come from Ab @-@ Liva , Kelly Rowland , and Pharrell . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 While performing in Vancouver , Canada , it was reported that Pusha T announced that he would be releasing , for promotional purposes , a mixtape , titled Wrath of Caine by the end of 2012 . However , it would have to be pushed back to 2013 . Pusha T described the tape as street @-@ oriented music intended for his longtime fans . 
 " Wrath of Caine is basically just me catering to my core . It 's all about just street Hip Hop , street music " he said . " It 's just something that I like to do . It 's something that I feel like has no boundaries , no parameters . I can do what I really , really want to do … [ my approach to the mixtape is ] not about more of a creative [ decision ] , I just think it 's about more of what I want to hear for myself and what my fans want to hear . They want to hear lyrics , they want to hear street [ music ] … it 's just the whole street life perspective . " 
 On December 5 , 2012 , the first song released from the mixtape , " <unk> " , which features guest vocals by <unk> and GOOD Music 's <unk> $ Scott . The reggae @-@ inspired track was produced by Young Chop . The music video was released on December 10 , 2012 . The second song was , " Millions " , which features guest vocals from a fellow rapper Rick Ross . The mixtape cover was revealed on January 15 , 2013 . The mixtape was released for free download on January 28 , 2013 . The mixtape also features guest appearances from French Montana , Wale , Kevin Gates , Troy Ave and Andrea Martin , also it included the production from Kanye West , Young Chop , Harry Fraud , The Neptunes , Jake One , ! <unk> and B ! nk , among others . 
 The album was included on multiple " Most Anticipated Albums of 2013 " lists including eighth by Complex Magazine and ninth by XXL Magazine . In January 2013 , Pusha T announced that his album will be releasing at the end of quarter one of 2013 . During the red carpet for the 55th Grammy Awards , Pusha T announced that his album would have to be pushed back till May 2013 . On April 29 , Pusha T announced through his Twitter page that the album would be released on July 16 , 2013 . In July 2013 , he confirmed that the album would be pushed back , and then on August 22 , he confirmed that the album would be released on October 8 , 2013 . 
 On August 30 , 2013 , Kanye West unveiled the simplistic standard and deluxe edition album covers via his Twitter account . On September 21 , 2013 , Pusha T released snippets for the standard edition tracks . On September 27 , 2013 , Pusha T released the music video for the intro track " King Push " . On October 2 , 2013 , after a few days of being credited as a co @-@ producer of " King Push " , Joaquin Phoenix denied having assist in producing the song . He said , " While it was widely reported that Pusha T used my beat and that I produced his song , I can 't take any credit . A friend 's son played me his music , and all I did was make an introduction to Kanye 's camp . " On October 3 , 2013 , during an interview with Rap @-@ Up , Pusha T revealed that it was actually the son of Metallica drummer Lars Ulrich who produced the song , saying " Joaquin Phoenix gave the beat to ' Ye , so when I got the beat from ' Ye , it was , Yo , Joaquin gave me this beat . So me , I 'm just like , OK , I know Joaquin 's into music and you know the whole thing , so I 'm like , Oh , damn . I believe it is the son of Lars Ulrich from Metallica . I hope I 'm not wrong this time . It was mistaken because it came from Joaquin . " On October 1 , 2013 , the album was released for free streaming via MySpace . 
 Starting April 24 , 2013 , Pusha T and fellow Def Jam rapper Fabolous begun the Life is So Exciting Tour in Providence , Rhode Island . The tour features 28 shows and ended on June 1 , 2013 . The tour was in promotion of My Name Is My Name and Fabolous ' sixth studio album Loso 's Way 2 : Rise to Power . On December 9 , 2013 , it was revealed that Pusha T would be co @-@ headlining the 2 Good 2 Be <unk> Tour with 2 Chainz , a North American tour to begin on February 4 , 2014 , in Boston , Massachusetts and end on March 24 , 2014 , in Washington DC . The tour will also feature August Alsina and <unk> as opening acts . 
 = = Singles = = 
 On October 9 , 2012 , Pusha T released " Pain " featuring Future , as the first single from the album . On October 10 , 2013 , the music video was released for " Pain " featuring Future . The first promotional single released from the album would be " Millions " which features Rick Ross . The song originally appeared on his mixtape Wrath of Caine , however Pusha also released the song for retail sale on January 29 , 2013 . The music video for " Millions " was released on February 10 , 2013 . At the 55th Grammy Awards he announced the song would be featured on his album . On March 8 , 2013 , in an interview with DJ Semtex , Pusha T said that " Millions " would not be featured on the album after all . Moreover , Pusha T confirmed a further collaboration with Rick Ross . 
 On April 29 , 2013 Rolling Stone gave his following single " Numbers on the Boards " 4 out of 5 stars , stating " The star is Kanye West 's beat , a <unk> bass blur with percussion that 's like bamboo sticks on a busted radiator . The result is near @-@ perfect no @-@ bullshit hip @-@ hop . " On May 9 , 2013 , the music video was released for " Numbers on the Boards " which featured cameo appearances from Kanye West and Chief Keef . The video was shot in Paris . The Kanye West and Don Cannon @-@ produced song was then released as the album 's second single the following day . 
 In March 2013 , during an interview Hot 107 @.@ 9 , he announced that his next single is " Who I Am " featuring Kanye West . On June 11 , Pusha T announced that " Who I Am " would be released in two days on June 13 , 2013 . The final version of the single featured 2 Chainz and Big Sean , however Kanye West still provided the production of the track . However , the song did not end up receiving an official retail release , instead becoming the album 's second promotional single . 
 On August 30 , 2013 , Pusha T premiered the audio to the album 's third single , " Sweet Serenade " featuring Chris Brown . After during a Twitter Q & A , he would reveal the song was produced by Swizz Beatz . It would then be released for retail digital download on September 4 , 2013 . The music video was released for " Sweet Serenade " on October 7 , 2013 . 
 On September 16 , 2013 , Def Jam released the single artwork , and announced that " Nosetalgia " featuring Kendrick Lamar would be released soon . Later that same day the song would be premiered via Def Jam 's website . The song produced by Nottz , features both artists rapping about their experiences and effects of cocaine on their childhoods . On the following day , it has been released to the DJs , as the album 's third promotional single , and then be released for pre @-@ order with the album on iTunes . On October 3 , 2013 , the music video was released for " Nosetalgia " featuring Kendrick Lamar . " Nosetalgia " was officially released as a single in the United Kingdom on February 3 , 2014 , serving as the fifth overall single from the album . 
 " Let Me Love You " features guest vocals by Kelly Rowland , impacted urban contemporary radio on November 12 , 2013 , as the album 's fourth single . 
 = = = Other songs = = = 
 On the following day , the music video for the Rick Ross featuring " Hold On " was released . On January 17 , 2014 , the music video was released for " Suicide " featuring Ab @-@ Liva . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 My Name Is My Name debuted at number 4 on the US Billboard 200 , selling 74 @,@ 000 copies in its first week of release . In its second week the album dropped to number 14 on the US Billboard 200 , selling 20 @,@ 000 more copies . In its third week , the album dropped to twelve more places , selling 10 @,@ 000 more copies in the United States . As of November 2015 , the album has sold 182 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . 
 Internationally , the album peaked at number 56 on the UK Albums Chart , number 36 in the Netherlands , and number 98 in Switzerland . It also charted in other countries such as France and Belgium . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 My Name Is My Name was met with universal acclaim from music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 81 , based on 27 reviews . Mike Powell of Rolling Stone stated , " He 's still a witty , quietly vicious rapper , capable of tearing apart spare street tracks like " Nosetalgia " and " Numbers on the Board " while barely raising his voice . But set in the more commercial contexts of Kelly Rowland features and the @-@ Dream 's fluorescent R & B , he can sound like a fish out of some pretty expensive water . Who Pusha was is gone , but who he is still sometimes unclear . " David Jeffries of AllMusic said , " With Pusha 's pen at full force and his performance a proper combination of cold and tense , the album is as if Clipse 's Hell Hath No Fury were atom @-@ smashed into something more artful and unstable . My Name Is My Name is a remarkable and vital solo debut . " Jesse Cataldo , writing for Slant Magazine , said , " Yet despite its pedigree , the album puts too much overall emphasis on guest spots and not enough on establishing a distinctive identity for the rapper . Full of retrograde lyrical conceits , seemingly at odds with its futuristic backdrops , My Name Is My Name is a reminder that Pusha T hasn 't changed , and his stubborn reliance on maintaining his brand is probably not the wisest strategy in today 's shifting hip @-@ hop climate . " Jon Hadusek of Consequence of Sound stated , " A few poor production choices and uneven sequencing do slow the album , but it shows flashes of real brilliance . The best tracks here are produced by Kanye and Pharrell , and they 're concentrated at the beginning and end . The smattering in the middle of the tracklist is handled by host of collaborators , not all of them effectively complimenting Pusha 's rawness . While not the defining statement it could ’ ve been , My Name Is My Name shows different sides of Pusha T as he becomes a more multidimensional rapper . " 
 <unk> Weekes of Exclaim ! said , " A majority of My Name Is My Name 's sounds are wrapped in minimalistic <unk> wrap that allows Pusha T 's cold delivery to flourish , with more abstract drug references than a paranoid dealer over a tapped phone line . " Reed Jackson , writing for XXL , stated , " Certain songs , like the trap house anthem " No Regrets " or the early @-@ 2000s @-@ sounding " Let Me Love You , " are entertaining , but don ’ t have the inventiveness or excitement of the album ’ s other tracks . With <unk> standing at a lean 12 songs , these missteps are hard to gloss over . Regardless , Pusha T accomplishes a lot here , crafting a record that is big in concept but is still rooted in the longstanding hip @-@ hop tradition that lyricism is king . " Brandon Soderberg of Spin said , " Don 't tell King Push , but My Name Is My Name bears a weird resemblance to Drake 's Nothing Was the Same : Here is another deeply considered collection of top @-@ shelf beats and uncompromising @-@ though @-@ still @-@ pop @-@ enough raps that justifies the fairly awful personalities driving it , which , depending on your tolerance for wounded narcissism and a complete lack of insight , is either fascinating or frustrating . " 
 Randall Roberts of the Los Angeles Times stated , " The album ’ s haunting highlight -- and one of the best hip @-@ hop tracks of the year — is the last one . Called " <unk> , " it thrives on understated tension as Pusha and guest vocalist Pharrell recount an interaction with an old friend who had decided to become a police informant . It 's the perfect conclusion to a consistently surprising hip @-@ hop album . " Lauren Martin of Fact gave the album three and a half stars out of five , saying " In short , on My Name Is My Name , Pusha doesn ’ t really give much away about his past , present or future , and it 's a disconcerting thought for an album posited as a vanguard for a more " real " presentation of rap . " Russ Bengtson of Complex said , " it 's a never @-@ hit @-@ skip album made by a 36 @-@ year @-@ old rapper with more hunger than most 15 years his junior . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Closing out the year , My Name Is My Name was named to multiple " Best Albums of the Year " lists . It was ranked at number 33 on Rolling Stone 's list of the 50 best albums of 2013 . They commented saying , " The cockier half of the Clipse didn 't choose to go solo — he had to after his brother found God . Pusha , in turn , found Kanye West , whose stark and twisted production helped make My Name Is My Name feel like a more lyrically focused companion piece to his own Yeezus . It 's the year 's sharpest hit of street philosophy . " Complex named it the third best album of 2013 . They elaborated saying , " everything clicks because of the way it was calculated . The songs benefit from their respective placement beside each other , each track a background for the next . In that way , it brings the Pusha T fan up to speed with what he 's evolved into , without leaving them in unfamiliar territory . If you were the reluctant " we want that old Pusha T " fan , then it fed you the teaspoon of updated classic with the medicine of his reinvention — and by the end , you appreciated both sides . " Nick Catucci of Entertainment Weekly named it the eighth best album of 2013 saying , " With these beats — private @-@ stash stuff from the likes of his label boss Kanye West and Pharrell Williams — he could sell fire in hell . In fact , Pusha <unk> his emotional depths , breaking down his parents ' divorce after 35 years of marriage and his conflicted feelings about his brother . " Exclaim ! named it the second best hip hop album of 2013 . XXL named it the fourth best album of 2013 . They commented saying , " Song for song , it 's tough to put any album in the same category as Pusha 's proper solo debut . In the space of a trim 46 minutes , Push coaxed the best verse of Rick Ross ' year on " Hold On , " made Kendrick Lamar get dark and grim on " Nosetalgia " and even rapped over a beat that seemed impossible to make into a hip @-@ hop track on " King Push , " all while keeping his lyricism at the absolute highest level . The worst song on this album could find its way onto a top ten list . If this is what a post @-@ Yeezus world sounds like , sign us up immediately . " 
 Spin positioned it at number 46 on their list of the best 50 albums of 2013 . They said , " Push is in fighting form , incorporating a mature point of view on his drug @-@ dealer past while rapping with the confidence of a man who knows the game is his to lose . " NME positioned it at number 48 on their list of the 50 best albums of year . They said , My Name Is My Name was the moment Clipse member Pusha T finally hit the home run he promised for so long . The beats snapped hard , the guests including Kendrick Lamar , Rick Ross and 2 Chainz glittered and the overall vibe was dirty but triumphant . " Paste ranked it number 34 on their list of the 50 best albums of 2013 saying , " each bar has the ferociousness of a lion smelling the scent of fresh blood . Among his contemporaries , Pusha T is the sharp @-@ witted wordsmith who makes you feel like you ’ re listening to a master at work , devilishly cooking up something as pure and addictive as he possibly can . " It was named the third best hip hop album of 2013 by PopMatters . They commented saying , " My Name Is My Name is easily one of the most impressive displays of lyricism of the year and contains some of 2013 's best verses , as Pusha shows off his versatility ..... The production is minimalistic and intelligently doesn 't overshadow Pusha 's performance . The beats are big and full of bass , giving life to the album and forming a unique theme , with a reunion with Pharrell triggering a nice blast of nostalgia ..... My Name Is My Name has substance , style , and passion , and no doubt is an album that will still be appreciated a decade from now . " Consequence of Sound positioned it at number 44 on their list of the 50 best albums of the year . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Notes 
 Track listing and credits from album booklet . 
 ^ a signifies a co @-@ producer 
 ^ b signifies an additional producer 
 " Hold On " features uncredited vocals from Kanye West . 
 Sample credits 
 " Numbers on the Boards " contains samples of " Shake Your Booty " , written and performed by Bunny Sigler ; samples of " Intro : A Million and One Questions / Rhyme No More " , written by Jay @-@ Z and Chris Martin performed by the former ; and samples of " Pots and Pans " , written and performed by Anthony King and John Matthews , as included on the Luke Vibert compilation Nuggets . 
 " Hold On " contains samples of " <unk> @-@ To @-@ Funk " , written by W. Norman performed by <unk> . 
 " Let Me Love You " contains samples of " Audition " , written by Jeppe <unk> and Nick Johnsen performed by The <unk> . 
 " Who I Am " contains samples of " <unk> " , written by R. <unk> performed by ESG ; and samples of " <unk> " , written and performed by <unk> . 
 " Nosetalgia " contains samples of " The Bridge Is Over " , written by Scott La Rock and Lawrence Parker performed by Boogie Down Productions ; samples of " ( If Loving You Is Wrong ) I Don 't Want to Be Right " , written by Homer Banks , Carl Hampton and Raymond Jackson performed by Bobby Bland ; and samples of " Do You Like Scratchin ' " , written by Trevor Horn and Malcolm McLaren performed by Malcolm McLaren . 
 " Pain " contains samples of " My Name Is Anthony Gonsalves " , written by Laxmikant – <unk> and Anand Bakshi performed by Kishore Kumar . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from AllMusic . 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = New York State Route 175 = 
 New York State Route 175 ( NY 175 ) is a west – east state highway located in Onondaga County , New York , in the United States . The 15 @.@ 46 @-@ mile ( 24 @.@ 88 km ) route begins at an intersection with U.S. Route 20 ( US 20 ) east of the village of Skaneateles and passes through the village of Marcellus before ending at a junction with US 11 in Syracuse . The highway was designated in the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . 
 The section of NY 175 from the town of Marcellus to the end of the NY 173 concurrency is part of the Seneca Turnpike , which was established in 1800 and dissolved in 1852 . This portion of the Seneca Turnpike was instrumental in the development of the villages of Skaneateles and Marcellus . When designated in 1930 , NY 175 was on a rural stretch of highway connecting Marcellus to Onondaga , and brought about an increase in population and development along its route . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Skaneateles to Marcellus = = = 
 In the west , NY 175 begins at an intersection with US 20 in the town of Skaneateles . The highway heads towards the northeast as Lee Mulroy Road , passing by farmlands and fields as well as several residences . As NY 175 heads to the northeast into the town of Marcellus , it intersects with three county roads . This section of the route is parallel to two other unsigned county roads , located to the northwest and to the southeast . 
 As the highway heads towards the village of Marcellus , it begins edging closer to NY 174 . The area becomes slightly more residential as the roads merge and become concurrent . The southern terminus of unsigned County Route 73 ( CR 73 , named South Street Road ) is also at the intersection with NY 174 . About 0 @.@ 6 miles ( 1 @.@ 0 km ) southwest of this junction , NY 175 crosses over West Nine Mile Creek on a bridge inventoried by the New York State Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) as NY <unk> . The bridge was built in 1962 and is maintained by Onondaga County , as is the rest of NY 175 west of NY 174 . 
 NY 174 and NY 175 begin to curve to the northeast as they become parallel with another unsigned county road ( CR 150 ) , passing Marcellus County Park along the way . The roads remain as such until an intersection where the county road ends and the two state routes split . In downtown Marcellus , the terrain is flat , with residential homes and commercial businesses surrounding the road . At the split , NY 174 heads to the west through the main street of the village , while NY 175 heads eastward towards Syracuse . 
 = = = Marcellus to Onondaga = = = 
 NY 175 heads eastward out of Marcellus along the West Seneca Turnpike . At the intersection with Frank Gay Road ( CR 243 ) , NY 175 passes a golf course and country club . The highway continues eastward into the hamlet of Wellington Corner , before heading towards Onondaga . There is a suburban area here , where NY 175 intersects with a county road . The highway then leaves Wellington Corner after the intersection . 
 After exiting Wellington Corner , NY 175 enters another hamlet called Cards Corners . There are a few businesses in this hamlet , with NY 175 and nearby <unk> Road being the major roads . The highway then enters a large forested area , at times surrounded by trees . NY 175 continues northeast , passing by several more businesses and soon crosses into the town of Onondaga . In Onondaga , the route passes by the Gen. Orrin Hutchinson House and the Onondaga Community College , intersecting with two consecutive county roads along the way before joining with NY 173 . The two roads are concurrent for about 0 @.@ 2 miles ( 0 @.@ 32 km ) , after which NY 173 heads east towards Manlius while NY 175 heads northeast towards the city of Syracuse . 
 = = = Onondaga to Syracuse = = = 
 After leaving NY 173 and the Seneca Turnpike , the highway heads to the northeast through the town of Onondaga as South Avenue . NY 175 passes the Community General Hospital of Greater Syracuse and intersects with a county road before entering the Syracuse city limits . At this point , maintenance of the route shifts from NYSDOT to the city of Syracuse . In Syracuse , NY 175 runs along the western edge of Saint Agnes Cemetery to an intersection with NY 80 at the cemetery 's north end . Much of the next area is both residential and commercial in nature , leaving the fields and forests that the route had previously followed behind . 
 It intersects a number of city streets as it heads to the northeast , traversing several mixed @-@ use blocks before crossing over Onondaga Creek , a north – south waterway that passes through most of Syracuse . On the northeast bank of the creek , NY 175 turns east onto West Kennedy Street , a short connector between the creek and US 11 . The route continues for three more blocks along the mostly residential street to US 11 , where the east end of West Kennedy Street also marks the east end of NY 175 . 
 = = History = = 
 The section of NY 175 from downtown Marcellus to NY 173 in Onondaga was built along the historical Seneca Turnpike . The turnpike was originally the Genesee Road which began in the city of Utica and ended in the city of Canandaigua . Genesee Road was approved by the state legislature in 1794 , and construction began in sections from Utica to Canandaigua . In 1800 , the road was renamed to " Seneca Turnpike " when a law was passed to establish a maintenance company . At 157 miles ( 253 km ) , the turnpike was the longest in the state at the time . 
 Soon after settlement of the village of Skaneateles began , the Seneca Turnpike route which originally bypassed the village to the north was relocated southward to go through the growing settlement . The Seneca Turnpike Company closed its doors in 1852 . Modern NY 175 does not follow either the original alignment or the relocated alignment , but rather the length of a former trolley line that went from Skaneateles to Syracuse via Marcellus and Onondaga . This trolley line parallels the relocated alignment . 
 When the NY 175 designation was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , it began at an intersection with US 20 in the village of Skaneateles and utilized the relocated Seneca Turnpike alignment ( New Seneca Turnpike ) between Skaneateles and Marcellus . This road is now designated but not signed as CR 41 by Onondaga County . A 31 @-@ mile ( 50 km ) alternate route of US 20 between Skaneateles and Cazenovia by way of Marcellus was designated as NY 20N c . 1938 . The new route utilized pre @-@ existing numbered highways , including NY 175 from NY 174 in Marcellus to NY 173 in Onondaga . The NY 20N designation was removed c . 1962 , as was the nearby NY 20SY , another alternate route of US 20 that served downtown Syracuse . 
 In the 1930s , the western terminus of NY 175 was relocated eastward to NY 174 in downtown Marcellus . The configuration of NY 175 remained unchanged until the early 1960s when the route was re @-@ extended westward over the New Seneca Turnpike to its original terminus in Skaneateles . The section of NY 175 west of Marcellus was realigned in the early 1980s to follow Lee Mulroy Road and NY 174 between US 20 and Marcellus . Ownership and maintenance of the former alignment of NY 175 on the New Seneca Turnpike was eventually transferred to Onondaga County , which designated the highway as CR 41 . Additionally , the modern alignment of NY 175 on Lee Mulroy Road is maintained by Onondaga County and co @-@ designated as CR 73 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Onondaga County . 
 = Adrian Cole ( RAAF officer ) = 
 Air Vice Marshal Adrian Lindley Trevor Cole , CBE , DSO , MC , DFC ( 19 June 1895 – 14 February 1966 ) was a senior commander in the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) . Joining the army at the outbreak of World War I , he transferred to the Australian Flying Corps in 1916 and flew with No. 1 Squadron in the Middle East and No. 2 Squadron on the Western Front . He became an ace , credited with victories over ten enemy aircraft , and earned the Military Cross and the Distinguished Flying Cross . In 1921 , he was a founding member of the RAAF . 
 " King " Cole rose to the position of Air Member for Supply in 1933 and gained promotion to group captain in 1935 . The following year he was appointed the first commanding officer of Headquarters RAAF Station Richmond . During World War II , he led North @-@ Western Area Command in Darwin , Northern Territory , and held a series of overseas posts in North Africa , England , Northern Ireland , and Ceylon . As Forward Air Controller during the Dieppe Raid in 1942 , he was wounded in action and awarded the Distinguished Service Order . Cole served on corporate boards of directors following his retirement from the RAAF in 1946 . He died in 1966 at the age of seventy . 
 = = Early life and World War I = = 
 Adrian Cole was born in Glen Iris , a suburb of Melbourne , to barrister and doctor Robert Cole and his wife Helen ( née <unk> ) . He was educated at Geelong Grammar School and Melbourne Grammar School , where he was a member of the cadet corps . When World War I broke out in August 1914 , Cole gained a commission in the Australian Military Forces , serving with the 55th ( Collingwood ) Infantry Regiment . He resigned his commission to join the Australian Imperial Force on 28 January 1916 , intending to become a pilot in the Australian Flying Corps . 
 = = = Middle East = = = 
 Posted to No. 1 Squadron ( also known until 1918 as No. 67 Squadron , Royal Flying Corps ) , Cole departed Melbourne aboard HMAT A67 Orsova on 16 March 1916 , bound for Egypt . He was commissioned a second lieutenant in June and began his pilot training in August . By the beginning of 1917 , he was flying reconnaissance and scouting missions in Sinai and Palestine . He took part in an early example of Allied air @-@ sea cooperation on 25 February , directing French naval fire against the coastal town of Jaffa by radio from his B.E.2 biplane . On 20 April , Cole and fellow squadron member Lieutenant Roy Maxwell Drummond attacked six enemy aircraft that were threatening to bomb Allied cavalry , scattering their formation and chasing them back to their own lines . Both airmen were awarded the Military Cross for their actions ; Cole 's citation was published in a supplement to the London Gazette on 16 August 1917 : 
 For conspicuous gallantry and devotion to duty . With another officer he attacked and disorganised six enemy machines that were about to attack our cavalry with bombs . The engagement was continued until all six machines were forced to return to their lines . His skill and courage on all occasions have been worthy of the greatest praise . 
 The day after the action that earned him the Military Cross , Cole was flying a Martinsyde G.100 " Elephant " over Tel el Sheria when he was hit by ground fire and forced to crash land behind enemy lines ; after setting his aircraft alight he was picked up and rescued by Captain Richard Williams . On 26 June , following an eight @-@ plane raid on Turkish Fourth Army headquarters in Jerusalem , Cole and another pilot suffered engine seizures while undertaking a similar rescue of a downed comrade ; all three airmen were forced to walk through no man 's land before being picked up by an Australian Light Horse patrol . 
 = = = Western Front = = = 
 Promoted to captain in August 1917 , Cole was posted to France as a flight commander with No. 2 Squadron AFC ( also known until 1918 as No. 68 Squadron RFC ) . Flying S.E.5 fighters on the Western Front , he was credited with destroying or sending out of control ten enemy aircraft between July and October 1918 , making him an ace . In a single sortie over the Lys Valley on 19 August , Cole shot down two German fighters and narrowly avoided being shot down himself immediately afterwards , when he was attacked by five Fokker Triplanes that were being pursued by Allied Bristol Fighters . On 24 September , he led into battle a patrol of fifteen S.E.5s that destroyed or damaged eight German fighters over Haubourdin and <unk> , claiming one Pfalz D.III for himself . 
 Cole was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross for his actions on 7 October 1918 , when he led No. 2 Squadron through " a tornado of anti @-@ aircraft fire " in a major assault on transport infrastructure in Lille . During the raid he successfully bombed a goods engine and a troop train , and put several anti @-@ aircraft batteries out of action , before leading his formation back to base at low level . The announcement and accompanying citation for his decoration was gazetted on 8 February 1919 : 
 On 7th October this officer carried out a most successful flying raid on enemy railway lines and stations . The success of the attack was largely owing to his cool and determined leadership , and our freedom from casualties was mainly due to the methodical manner in which he collected and reorganised the machines after the raid . He himself displayed marked initiative and courage in attacking troops and other objectives . Since May Capt. Cole has destroyed four hostile machines . 
 = = Between the wars = = 
 Returning to Australia in February 1919 , Cole briefly spent time as a civilian before accepting a commission in the Australian Air Corps , the short @-@ lived successor to the Australian Flying Corps , in January 1920 . On 17 June , accompanied by Captain Hippolyte De La Rue , he flew a DH.9 to a height of 27 @,@ 000 feet ( 8 @,@ 200 m ) , setting an Australian altitude record that stood for more than ten years . He transferred to the Royal Australian Air Force as a flight lieutenant in March 1921 , becoming one of its original twenty @-@ one officers . On 30 November , he married his cousin Katherine Cole in St Peter 's Chapel at Melbourne Grammar School ; the couple would have two sons and two daughters . Squadron Leader Cole was posted to England in 1923 – 24 to attend RAF Staff College , Andover , returning to Australia in 1925 to become Director of Personnel and Training . Promoted to wing commander , he was in charge of No. 1 Flying Training School ( No. 1 FTS ) at RAAF Station Point Cook , Victoria , from 1926 to 1929 . The first Citizens Air Force ( reserve ) pilots ' course took place during Cole 's tenure at No. 1 FTS ; although twenty @-@ four accidents occurred , injuries were minor , leading him to remark at the graduation ceremony that the students were either made of India rubber or had learned how to crash " moderately safely " . 
 Cole held command of RAAF Station Laverton from 1929 until his appointment as Air Member for Supply ( AMS ) in January 1933 . The AMS occupied a seat on the Air Board , which was chaired by the Chief of the Air Staff and was collectively responsible for control and administration of the RAAF . In March 1932 , Cole accepted an invitation from the Lord Mayor of Melbourne to serve as Deputy Chairman of the 1934 <unk> Air Race from England to Australia , to celebrate Melbourne 's Centenary . Provision of the RAAF 's radio facilities and technicians was considered a boon for contestants , though Cole later recorded that his role involved " twenty months ' hard work , without pay ... with loads of scurrilous and other criticism " . Promoted to group captain in January 1935 , he became the inaugural commanding officer ( CO ) of Headquarters RAAF Station Richmond , New South Wales , on 20 April 1936 . The new headquarters , which had been formed from elements of two of the base 's lodger units , No. 3 Squadron and No. 2 Aircraft Depot , supplanted an earlier arrangement where the CO of No. 3 Squadron had doubled as the station commander . Cole was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire in the Coronation Honours of 11 May 1937 , and attended the Imperial Defence College in London the following year . He returned to RAAF Station Laverton as CO in February 1939 , taking over from Group Captain Henry Wrigley . 
 = = World War II = = 
 As part of the RAAF 's reorganisation following the outbreak of World War II in September 1939 , No. 2 Group was formed in Sydney on 20 November , with Cole in command . The group controlled Air Force units in New South Wales . Cole was raised to temporary air commodore in December , and took charge of Central Area Command , which supplanted No. 2 Group , when it was established in the new year . In September 1941 , he was sent to North Africa as Officer Commanding No. 235 Wing RAF of the Desert Air Force , where he helped establish a new anti @-@ submarine warfare unit , No. 459 Squadron RAAF . Posted to England with Headquarters No. 11 Group in May 1942 , he served as Forward Air Controller of the Dieppe Raid on 19 August , responsible for co @-@ ordinating Allied air cover off the French coast aboard HMS Calpe . In doing so , he was seriously wounded in the jaw and upper body when German fighters strafed the ship ; he required plastic surgery and spent several weeks recuperating . His gallantry during the action earned him the Distinguished Service Order , the announcement being published in a supplement to the London Gazette on 2 October 1942 . The same month , he was made Air Officer Commanding ( AOC ) RAF Northern Ireland , with the acting rank of air vice marshal , though the command was described in the official history of Australia in the war as a " backwater " . 
 In May 1943 , Cole returned to Australia , taking over as AOC North @-@ Western Area Command from Air Commodore Frank Bladin in July . Based in Darwin , Northern Territory , he was responsible for regional air defence , reconnaissance , protection of Allied shipping and , later , offensive operations in the New Guinea campaign . Cole found the command in " good shape " but considered its air defence capability inadequate , recommending augmentation by long @-@ range fighters such as the P @-@ 38 Lightning . He nevertheless had to make do with the three squadrons of Spitfires already on his strength , and the possibility of calling on the USAAF 's Fifth Air Force for reinforcements as necessary . During August and September , he reduced regular reconnaissance missions to " increase bombing activity to the limit " , following a request from General Douglas MacArthur to provide all available support for Allied assaults on Lae – Nadzab . North @-@ Western Area B @-@ 24 Liberators , Hudsons , Beaufighters and Catalinas carried out raids to destroy Japanese bases and aircraft , and divert enemy forces from Allied columns . Through March and April 1944 , Cole had thirteen squadrons under his control , and was supporting amphibious operations against Hollandia and Aitape . In May , he directed bombing from North @-@ Western Area on Surabaya as part of Operation Transom . 
 Cole handed over North @-@ Western Area to Air Commodore Alan Charlesworth in September 1944 . He took up an appointment as Air Member for Personnel ( AMP ) in October , but was removed soon afterwards following an incident at RAAF Headquarters , Melbourne . The Chief of the Air Staff , Air Vice Marshal George Jones , received an anonymous letter alleging that Cole had become drunk and lost control at a mess meeting on 8 November . Investigating the matter , Jones was unable to establish whether or not Cole had been drunk but was satisfied that he had not behaved appropriately , and issued him a warning without charging or otherwise disciplining him . Under pressure from the Federal government , Jones dismissed Cole from the position of AMP and posted him to Ceylon in January 1945 as RAAF Liaison Officer to South East Asia Command . Cole served in this role until the end of the war , taking part in negotiations for the Japanese capitulation and acting as Australia 's senior representative at the formal surrender ceremony in Singapore on 12 September 1945 . 
 = = Retirement and legacy = = 
 Cole was summarily retired from the RAAF in 1946 , along with several other senior commanders and veterans of World War I , primarily to make way for the advancement of younger and equally capable officers . In an earlier minute to the Minister for Air , Arthur Drakeford , regarding post @-@ war command prospects , Air Vice Marshal Jones had assessed Cole as having failed to display " certain of those qualities expected to be possessed by senior officers of such rank " . In any case , his role overseas was redundant . Cole , for his part , later wrote to the Melbourne Herald that he considered the RAAF 's administration during World War II to be " weak " , and that as a consequence he felt " a lot happier to serve most of the War with the Royal Air Force " . 
 Ranked substantive air commodore and honorary air vice marshal , Cole was officially discharged from the RAAF on 17 April 1946 . He resented being forcibly retired , and stood for election as the Liberal Party candidate for Drakeford 's seat , the Victorian Division of Maribyrnong , in the federal election that year . Cole stated that his candidacy was " an endeavour to bring some sense and stability to Government administration " but was unsuccessful , and Drakeford retained the seat . Cole subsequently served as a director with Pacific Insurance and Guinea Airways . He died in Melbourne of chronic respiratory disease on 14 February 1966 . Survived by his wife and four children , he was buried in Camperdown Cemetery , Victoria , following a funeral at RAAF Base Laverton . 
 Cole Street and the Cole Street Conservation Precinct at Point Cook Base , RAAF Williams , are named for Adrian Cole . His decorations were held by the Naval and Military Club , Melbourne , where he had been a long @-@ standing member . In July 2009 , following the club 's dissolution , the medals were to be auctioned along with other memorabilia . This action was challenged by Cole 's family , who argued that his decorations were only on loan to the club , and should be donated to the Australian War Memorial ( AWM ) . As the Supreme Court of Victoria deliberated on the case , the parties involved negotiated a settlement whereby Cole 's medals would be transferred to the AWM . 
 = Shemanski Fountain = 
 Shemanski Fountain , also known as Rebecca at the Well , is an outdoor fountain with a bronze sculpture , located in the South Park Blocks of downtown Portland , Oregon , in the United States . The sandstone fountain was designed in 1925 , completed in 1926 , and named after Joseph Shemanski , a Polish immigrant and businessman who gave it to the city . Carl L. Linde designed the trefoil , which features a statue designed by Oliver Laurence Barrett . The sculpture , which was added to the fountain in 1928 , depicts the biblical personage Rebecca . Shemanski Fountain includes two drinking platforms with three basins each , with one platform intended for use by dogs . 
 The fountain underwent major renovations between 1987 and 1988 and in 2004 . It has been vandalized on several occasions and has been used as a reference point for gatherings . It has also has been included in public art guides and walking tours of Portland . According to " <unk> " , the statue Rebecca at the Well is part of the City of Portland and Multnomah County Public Art Collection courtesy of the Regional Arts & Culture Council — the agency that maintains the sculpture . The fountain surrounding the statue , often considered part of the artwork , is maintained by the Portland Water Bureau with assistance from the Regional Arts & Culture Council . 
 = = Description = = 
 Shemanski Fountain was designed by Carl L. Linde in 1925 , and is located behind the Arlene Schnitzer Concert Hall between Main Street and Salmon Street in Shemanski Park , part of the South Park Blocks of downtown Portland , Oregon . It was gifted to Portland by Joseph Shemanski ( 1869 – 1951 ) , a Polish immigrant who became a successful businessman after founding Eastern Outfitting Co . , to " express in small measure gratitude " for what the city offered to him . The fountain is triangular and cast from Oregon sandstone . The <unk> trefoil supports two drinking platforms with three basins each , with one platform intended for use by dogs . Inara <unk> of The Oregonian described the fountain 's lower water basins as " cute little bowl @-@ sized pools at the base " for the purpose of serving pets " who did not have a place to cool off " . <unk> Logan , a designer who worked for Linde , said that Shemanski " wanted something for the little animals " . Logan also said that the fountain 's original design called for granite , but it was constructed of cast stone because of that material 's popularity at the time . According to the Regional Arts & Culture Council , the fountain is 144 inches ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) high and has a diameter of 224 inches ( 5 @.@ 7 m ) . An inscription around the top of the fountain reads : " To the People of / The City of Portland / By Joseph Shemanski " . Other inscriptions include " O. Barrett SC ' 27 Cal . Br . Foundry , L.A " and a signed Founder 's mark . The bottom of the fountain is decorated with busts of females . It is maintained by the Portland Water Bureau with assistance from the Regional Arts & Culture Council . 
 The fountain 's original design included a large planter , but following its construction Shemanski hired Oliver Laurence Barrett to create a bronze statue to replace the vase . Barrett , an arts professor at the University of Oregon , designed Rebecca at the Well , though his reasons for depicting the Biblical personage Rebecca fetching water are unknown . According to Portland Parks & Recreation , which operates the South Park Blocks , he chose Rebecca for " her hospitality to strangers and kindness to animals " . The bureau has also said that Rebecca was chosen because of her offers to draw water for Abraham . The statue , which depicts Rebecca holding a jug on her right shoulder , was added to the fountain in 1928 . Rebecca at the Well measures 42 inches ( 110 cm ) x 18 inches ( 46 cm ) × 14 inches ( 36 cm ) and is maintained by the Regional Arts & Culture Council . 
 = = History = = 
 Shemanski petitioned the City Council to let him gift the fountain , which began operating on September 3 , 1926 . In 1987 , the fountain 's plumbing was repaired and a new base was poured as part of a renovation of the South Park Blocks . That same year , Logan and two other men — David L. Lipman and Jeff <unk> , grandson and great @-@ grandson of Shemanski , respectively — approached the Portland Bureau of Parks and Recreation , advocating for the fountain 's restoration . During the renovation process , the fountain was thoroughly cleaned , had missing pieces such as finials and urns replaced and chipped corners repaired , and was coated with a sealant to protect it from the elements and graffiti . In July 1988 , the fountain re @-@ opened following nearly a year of reconditioning . A dedication ceremony to mark the restoration was held on the afternoon of July 18 . One park designer with the Park Bureau said , " the water will be turned on for the first time that anybody can remember . " Lipman , Logan and <unk> attended the ceremony . Logan , aged 88 , was the only surviving person who participated in the fountain 's design and construction . The men offered funds for part of the renovation and the purchase of a bronze plaque that includes the original rendering done by Logan and describes the fountain 's history and recent work . Costs for the plaque and renovation totaled $ 14 @,@ 000 . 
 The fountain and sculpture were surveyed by the Smithsonian 's Save Outdoor Sculpture ! program in 1993 . Lee Lacey advocated for a 2004 restoration of the fountain ; his lobbying efforts , among other accomplishments , earned him the Downtown Neighborhood Association 's inaugural First Neighbor Award in 2005 . The restoration was completed by conservator Marie <unk> @-@ Craft and Pioneer <unk> . In 2008 , The Oregonian reported that the fountain was " completely dry " . 
 According to The Oregonian , the fountain and statue " commemorates kindness " ; however it has been vandalized on several occasions . In 1988 , three brass bowls were removed from the recently renovated fountain . In 2007 , the statue of Rebecca was pushed off its base , resulting in nearly $ 10 @,@ 000 in damage . In 2008 , one of the fountain 's three brass nozzles was stolen . In December 2011 , when Occupy Portland protesters were camping at Shemanski Park , a cup of coffee was drawn on the statue using a marker or paint . 
 The fountain has been used as a reference point for gatherings . In 2001 , following the September 11 attacks , a peace shrine consisting of flowers , " scrawled words " and candles was erected at the fountain . In 2003 , People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals displayed photographs of slaughterhouses next to those of Nazi extermination camps by the fountain . In 2006 , a PDX AIDS Day Promise Vigil was held in conjunction with World AIDS Day at the site . In 2010 , 600 Catholic women and their supporters gathered at the site for the first " One Spirit – One Call " event , which brought focus to their role within the Church . Shemanski Fountain was chosen at the gathering site for its depiction of Rebecca . 
 = = Reception = = 
 AOL Travel said that Rebecca is depicted " with motion and grace " . Shemanski Fountain has been included in public art guides and walking tours of fountains in downtown Portland . In 1988 , The Oregonian 's Suzanne Richards referred to Shemanski Fountain as " one of the city 's favorite fountains " . In 2006 , Bonnie <unk> of The Oregonian included the fountain in her walking tour of Portland landmarks , and said it is " worth getting wet for " . 
 = 2008 Orange Bowl = 
 The 2008 FedEx Orange Bowl was a post @-@ season college football bowl game between the Virginia Tech Hokies and the Kansas Jayhawks on January 3 , 2008 , at Dolphin Stadium in Miami Gardens , Florida . Spread bettors favored Virginia Tech by three points , but in a game dominated by defensive and special teams play , Kansas defeated Virginia Tech 24 – 21 . The game was part of the 2007 – 2008 Bowl Championship Series ( BCS ) of the 2007 NCAA Division I FBS football season and was the concluding game of the season for both teams . This 74th edition of the Orange Bowl was televised in the United States on FOX and was watched by more than eight million viewers . 
 The game between the fifth @-@ ranked ACC champion Virginia Tech Hokies and the eighth @-@ ranked Kansas Jayhawks from the Big 12 Conference ( Big 12 ) was played at neutral @-@ site Dolphins Stadium . Tech served as the home team in the contest . Virginia Tech automatically qualified for the Orange Bowl by virtue of the ACC 's tie @-@ in with the bowl , while Orange Bowl selected Kansas over West Virginia — which had been upset by then 4 – 7 Pittsburgh — and conference rival Missouri . Two weeks after Kansas 's selection , controversy erupted when a deal was revealed to put 4th @-@ ranked Oklahoma against Virginia Tech . The deal was vetoed by BCS commissioners , and the selection of Kansas was upheld . 
 The game marked the first time the Jayhawks had been to the Orange Bowl since the 1969 Orange Bowl and was their first bowl game since the 2005 Fort Worth Bowl , when they defeated Houston 41 – 13 . Virginia Tech last played in the Orange Bowl game in December 1996 , losing to Nebraska 21 – 41 . The 2008 Orange Bowl was Virginia Tech 's 15th consecutive season with a bowl game , a streak dating to the 1993 Independence Bowl . 
 Kansas quarterback Todd Reesing completed 20 of his 37 passes for 227 yards , one touchdown , and one interception . On the opposite side of the ball , Virginia Tech quarterback Sean Glennon finished the game 13 for 28 passing , earning 160 yards , one touchdown and two interceptions . Kansas cornerback Aqib Talib , whose 60 @-@ yard interception return for a touchdown gave Kansas its first lead of the game , won the game 's Most Valuable Player award . After the game , Talib was one of several players from both teams to announce an intention to enter the 2008 NFL Draft . 
 = = Team selection = = 
 As champions of the Atlantic Coast Conference , Virginia Tech was awarded an automatic bid to the Orange Bowl game . The automatic ACC bid was the result of an off @-@ season deal following the inaugural ACC Championship Game which granted the winner of the ACC Championship Game an automatic bid to the Orange Bowl unless it was ranked high enough in the Bowl Championship Series standings to play in the National Championship Game . 
 = = = Virginia Tech = = = 
 The Virginia Tech Hokies began their 2007 football season with emotion and remembrance . As Virginia Tech recovered from the worst school shooting in American history , football served as a way to help the university community emotionally heal . The opening game of the season , on September 1 , 2007 , was against East Carolina University and featured numerous remembrance ceremonies and commemorations . Buoyed by the emotion of the day , the Hokies earned a 17 – 7 victory . Their next game would not be as easy . One week later , Virginia Tech traveled to Baton Rouge , Louisiana to face the No. 2 Louisiana State University Tigers . The Tigers were widely regarded in pre @-@ season polls as favorites to play in the National Championship Game and overwhelmed the Hokies in front of a home crowd , 48 – 7 . 
 In the wake of the Hokies 's defeat , Virginia Tech chose to start a new quarterback and a new offensive plan . Behind freshman Tyrod Taylor , the Hokies rolled to five straight victories , including a win over No. 22 Clemson by 18 points . During the winning streak , Sean Glennon , who had started at quarterback for the Hokies during the first two games of the season , returned to alternate possessions with Taylor in an unusual two @-@ quarterback system . On October 25 , the Hokies had a chance to make up for their early @-@ season loss to LSU when they faced No. 2 Boston College on a Thursday night in Blacksburg , Virginia . Though the Hokies dominated for most of the game , Boston College quarterback Matt Ryan managed a late @-@ game comeback to win the game 14 – 10 with 11 seconds remaining . 
 With four consecutive victories after the loss , including a win over then @-@ No. 16 Virginia , the Hokies won the Coastal division and secured a bid to the 2007 ACC Championship Game in Jacksonville , Florida . There , they faced a rematch with Boston College , champions of the Atlantic Division . As in the previous matchup , defense dominated , but unlike in the earlier matchup , Matt Ryan was unable to seize the victory . Two fourth @-@ quarter interceptions by Virginia Tech sealed the Hokie win and an automatic bid to the Orange Bowl game . 
 = = = Kansas = = = 
 Kansas began its 2007 football season <unk> and without much consideration from the national media . In the opening Associated Press football poll of the 2007 season , Kansas did not receive a single vote . From their opening game of the year , however , the Jayhawks began to impress voters with their offensive efficiency . Against Mid @-@ American Conference Champion Central Michigan University , Kansas scored 52 points while only allowing a single touchdown . 
 Over the next three games , Kansas outscored its opponents 162 – 16 . As Kansas 's Big 12 schedule began , the Jayhawks ' winning ways continued , as they proved themselves against legitimate competition . On October 6 , Kansas traveled to Manhattan , Kansas , home of then @-@ ranked No. 24 Kansas State University for the opening game of its Big 12 schedule . In front of 50 @,@ 924 hostile fans , Kansas quarterback Todd Reesing struggled for the first time in the season . Late in the fourth quarter , Reesing threw a ball that bounced off the facemask of wide receiver Dexton Fields before being intercepted . The interception set up a Kansas State touchdown that put Kansas into a 24 – 21 hole with seven and a half minutes remaining . Reesing and the Jayhawks struck back quickly , however , and scored a 30 @-@ yard touchdown to take the lead for good . 
 With the win , Kansas broke into the rankings of the top 25 college football teams in the country for the first time since 1996 , entering the AP Poll at No. 20 . Over the next six weeks , Kansas continued to find ways to win . Traditional Jayhawk rivals such as Nebraska , Oklahoma State , and Texas A & M were defeated during the course of the season , and Kansas climbed the national rankings . By the 13th week of the season , the stage had been set for an epic game against Kansas 's traditional rival , Missouri . 
 Due to prior agreement , the 2007 edition of the Border War was held in Kansas City , Missouri , at Arrowhead Stadium , home of the National Football League 's Kansas City Chiefs . In front of over 80 @,@ 000 fans , No. 4 Missouri defeated No. 2 Kansas 36 – 28 to hand the Jayhawks their first loss of the season . Missouri , with the win , earned a trip to the Big 12 Championship Game . In that game , Oklahoma defeated Missouri 38 – 17 to earn an automatic bid to the 2008 Fiesta Bowl . Because the loss gave Missouri its second of the year , Kansas , which lost to the Tigers , was selected as an at @-@ large pick by the BCS and earned a trip to the Orange Bowl . 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 Although Virginia Tech 's selection via automatic bid was relatively quiet , Kansas ' selection caused a great deal of controversy . Kansas had lost to Big 12 runner @-@ up Missouri and had a lower Bowl Championship Poll ranking than the Tigers . Some believed that Missouri should have been selected ahead of Kansas because they had defeated Kansas and because they had played in the Big 12 Championship Game . According to BCS officials , however , Missouri 's two losses were more of a detriment than Kansas 's one loss and subsequent championship game absence . 
 Pundits and fans who opposed Kansas ' selection pointed to the Jayhawks ' strength of schedule , which at one point during the season was as low as 109th out of 119 Division I teams . By the time of the BCS selection , however , Kansas 's strength of schedule had climbed by a small amount , reaching 88th in the Sagarin rankings and 74th in the CBS rankings . The final rankings rated Kansas ' schedule as more difficult than Hawaii , which was also selected to play in the BCS . <unk> the situation was the fact that Kansas and Missouri had one of the most intense rivalries in college football . Known as the Border War , the roots of the rivalry dated to the years before the American Civil War . 
 Two weeks after the selection of Kansas , yet another controversy arose when it was revealed that Big 12 and ACC officials had worked out an agreement to feature an Oklahoma / Virginia Tech matchup in the Orange Bowl in the hours leading up to the final selection . Oklahoma , which initiated the proposal , requested that it face the highest @-@ ranked BCS opponent then available , which would have been Virginia Tech ( ranked 3rd in the BCS ) . Normally , Oklahoma , the 2007 Big 12 Champion , would have played in the Fiesta Bowl , which holds the automatic rights to the Big 12 Champion 's BCS bid . A little @-@ known clause in the Bowl Championship Series contract , however , allows for the commissioners of the BCS to override that bid if the automatically selected team had played in the game the previous year , or to create a more interesting matchup . Oklahoma had played in the 2007 Fiesta Bowl and seemed a perfect candidate for execution of the clause . Representatives from the Orange and Fiesta bowls reportedly worked out a deal to swap Oklahoma and Kansas and Dan Beebe , the commissioner from the Big 12 , presented the plan to the BCS committee . The remaining BCS commissioners rejected the request ( with only the Big 12 , ACC and Big East commissioners in favor ) and honored the original selection of Kansas for the Orange Bowl and forced Oklahoma to accept its automatic Fiesta Bowl Bid . The release of this plan upset many fans at both schools and across the country , who perceived that an ( 4 ) <unk> ( 3 ) Virginia Tech matchup would have been superior to a ( 8 ) <unk> ( 3 ) Virginia Tech game . Ironically , while Oklahoma @-@ Virginia Tech was perceived as a better match @-@ up due to their high rankings , both teams went on to be upset by the lower ranked team with Oklahoma losing 48 @-@ 28 to ( 9 ) West Virginia . 
 = = Pregame buildup = = 
 Most pre @-@ game media and popular coverage of the 2008 Orange Bowl focused on the matchup between Kansas 's No. 2 scoring offense and Virginia Tech 's No. 2 scoring defense . Outside factors , such as coaching , previous experience , and fan support were also considered in pre @-@ game analysis of the matchup . Outside story lines included Virginia Tech 's recovery from the Virginia Tech Massacre , recovery from late @-@ season losses suffered by each team ( against Missouri for Kansas and against Boston College for Virginia Tech ) . 
 = = = Offensive matchups = = = 
 = = = = Kansas = = = = 
 Heading into the Orange Bowl , Kansas was ranked second in the nation in scoring ( 44 @.@ 3 ) and sixth in yards per game ( 491 ) . Kansas scored 40 or more points eight times during the 2007 season and scored 50 points five times . Kansas 's ground game was led by running back Brandon McAnderson , who averaged 87 @.@ 5 yards per game during the 2007 season and earned 1 @,@ 050 yards and 16 touchdowns in the season leading to the Orange Bowl . Through the air , Kansas quarterback Todd Reesing earned the 11th @-@ highest passer rating in the country , averaging a 152 @.@ 41 quarterback rating in 2007 . Reesing completed 62 @.@ 6 % of his passes during the 2007 season , earning 3 @,@ 259 yards , 32 touchdowns , and just six interceptions . Reesing 's favorite receiver was Marcus Henry , who was ranked No. 29 in the country for passing yardage , averaging over 82 receiving yards per game . During 2007 , Henry earned 994 yards and nine touchdowns . On the offensive line , the Jayhawks were led by All @-@ American left tackle Anthony Collins , who finished as a finalist for the Outland Trophy , awarded to college football 's best offensive lineman . Because of the Jayhawks ' effectiveness on offense , they punted the ball just 46 times during the 2007 season , the seventh @-@ lowest total in Division I. 
 = = = = Virginia Tech = = = = 
 Virginia Tech featured an unusual two @-@ quarterback system on offense , as quarterbacks Sean Glennon and Tyrod Taylor shared time behind center . Though unusual , the system was successful in leading the Hokies to their second ACC Championship in four years . During the 2007 regular season , Glennon threw for 1 @,@ 636 yards and 11 touchdowns , completing 63 percent of his passes . Taylor , meanwhile , passed for 916 yards and five touchdowns while also rushing for 431 yards . Some pundits predicted that Kansas might have difficulty with Taylor 's mobility , as his style of play was similar to that of Missouri 's Chase Daniel , who gave Kansas its sole loss of the 2007 season . On the other end of the Virginia Tech aerial offense was a corps of capable receivers , led by senior wide receivers Eddie Royal and Josh Morgan . Morgan was the fifth @-@ ranked receiver in Virginia Tech history , having earned 1 @,@ 787 receiving yards . Royal was sixth , having earned 1 @,@ 767 yards . Two of Tech 's other receivers , Josh Hyman and Justin Harper , recorded 1 @,@ 138 and 1 @,@ 274 receiving yards each , marking the first time in Virginia Tech history that the Hokies had four different thousand @-@ yard career receivers on the same team . On the ground , the Hokies were led by running back Branden Ore , who rushed for 876 yards and eight touchdowns during the regular season . One week before the Orange Bowl , Tech coaches revealed that Ore would be suspended for the first quarter of the game against Kansas as punishment for showing up late to the Hokies ' final pre @-@ bowl practice . Ore was replaced by sophomore rusher Kenny Lewis Jr . 
 = = = Defensive matchups = = = 
 = = = = Virginia Tech = = = = 
 Virginia Tech finished the season ranked second nationally in points allowed per game ( 15 @.@ 5 ) and fourth nationally in yardage allowed ( 293 ) . The Hokies didn 't allow a fourth @-@ quarter point in the five games after giving up 14 fourth @-@ quarter points to Boston College in Blacksburg . One key player in the Virginia Tech defense was linebacker Xavier Adibi , who had scored his third career defensive touchdown in the ACC Championship Game against Boston College . Adibi , together with fellow linebacker Vince Hall , made up " the best LB duo in the country , " according to ESPN commentator Chris Spielman . Hall 's effectiveness had , however , been limited in the 2007 season by a broken wrist suffered against Clemson . Hall missed four games with the injury , but returned to play the final three contests of the season for Virginia Tech and promised to be featured heavily in the 2008 Orange Bowl . Backing up the Virginia Tech linebackers was a strong backfield , which had produced 12 NFL draft picks in the nine years preceding the 2007 season . Primary among the backfield players were cornerbacks Victor Harris and Brandon Flowers , who Sports <unk> called " maybe the best cornerback duo in the country " . 
 = = = = Kansas = = = = 
 Kansas , meanwhile , was less @-@ highly regarded on defense and came into the 2008 Orange Bowl ranked 57th nationally in pass defense . On the ground , however , Kansas was ranked far higher — sixth in the nation . In addition , Kansas only allowed an average of 16 points per game , good enough for to be ranked fourth nationally . A key portion of that run defense was defensive tackle James McClinton , who was named the Big 12 's Defensive Lineman of the Year and earned second @-@ team All @-@ America honors . McClinton finished the 2007 regular season with 10 @.@ 5 tackles for loss and promised more of the same for the Orange Bowl . The team captain of the Jayhawk defense , meanwhile , was All @-@ American cornerback Aqib Talib . Talib was also a threat on offense , catching eight passes , including four touchdowns , during the regular season . 
 = = Game summary = = 
 The 2008 Orange Bowl kicked off at 8 : 30 p.m. EST at Dolphin Stadium in Miami Gardens , Florida . The official attendance for the game was listed as 74 @,@ 111 ( the eighth consecutive Orange Bowl sellout ) , but actual attendance was lower , and several upper @-@ deck sections of the stadium were sparsely filled . Approximately 15 million viewers watched the game , earning the broadcast a Nielsen rating of 7 @.@ 4 . The broadcast of the 2008 Orange Bowl was the only BCS bowl game to show a rise in television viewers over the previous season 's broadcast , as the 2007 Orange Bowl had only earned a Nielsen rating of 7 @.@ 0 . The pre @-@ game show featured several high school marching bands , and the national anthem was sung by American Idol runner @-@ up Katharine McPhee . 
 The coin toss featured former Virginia Tech star Bruce Smith , while Kansas was represented by Gale Sayers . Kansas won the toss and elected to defer its choice until the second half . Virginia Tech chose to receive the ball to start the game . Kansas would receive the ball to begin the second half . At kickoff , the air temperature was unseasonably cold for Miami at 57 ° F ( 14 ° C ) , and the skies were cloudy with intermittent rain . 
 = = = First quarter = = = 
 Virginia Tech 's Eddie Royal fielded the opening kickoff from Kansas kicker Scott Webb , returning it 59 yards to the 41 @-@ yard line of Kansas . The return gave the Virginia Tech offense excellent field position to begin the game . Tech quarterback Sean Glennon connected on an 11 @-@ yard pass to Justin Harper for a first down on the opening play of the game , but Kansas ' defense stiffened on subsequent plays . After Virginia Tech 's Tyrod Taylor entered the game at quarterback , Kansas sacked Taylor twice , pushing Virginia Tech 19 yards backward , out of field goal range . Because of the sacks , Virginia Tech was forced to punt the ball away without scoring any points . 
 The punt was downed in the end zone for a touchback , and Kansas began its first offensive possession of the game at its 20 @-@ yard line . Kansas quarterback Todd Reesing proved remarkably effective , completing six of his eight passes during the drive and rushing for five yards on a quarterback scramble . Reesing drove Kansas ' offense into Virginia Tech territory , but after Tech 's Orion Martin sacked Reesing , Kansas was unable to gain another first down and kicker Scott Webb was sent into the game to attempt a 44 @-@ yard field goal . Webb 's kick sailed wide of the uprights , however , and the game remained scoreless with 6 : 44 remaining in the first quarter . 
 After the missed field goal , Virginia Tech took over on offense at its own 27 @-@ yard line . Running back Kenny Lewis , Jr . , replacing the suspended Branden Ore , ran for a first down , and Tyrod Taylor connected on an 11 @-@ yard pass to Eddie Royal for another first down . Now inside Kansas territory , Taylor attempted another pass . Kansas All @-@ American cornerback Aqib Talib jumped between Taylor 's throw and the receiver , intercepting the ball . Talib returned the interception 60 yards to the end zone for a Kansas touchdown — the first points of the game . An extra point kick by Scott Webb made the score 7 – 0 Kansas with 5 : 15 remaining in the quarter . 
 High @-@ stepping into the endzone , Aqib Talib committed a 15 @-@ yard unsportsmanlike conduct penalty , which was enforced on the post @-@ score kickoff . The penalty , coupled with a good kick return by Virginia Tech , gave the Hokies excellent field position for their third possession of the game . Quarterback Sean Glennon capitalized on that field position , connecting on a 24 @-@ yard pass to wide receiver Justin Harper . The catch pushed Virginia Tech inside Kansas territory and seemingly set up the Hokie offense for their first score of the game . After two plays for no gain and a five @-@ yard loss when Glennon was sacked by James Holt , Virginia Tech was forced to attempt a 49 @-@ yard field goal . Jud Dunlevy 's kick fell short , however , and Virginia Tech was denied a score . Kansas recovered the short kick , which landed in the end zone , and returned the ball 39 yards . Despite the momentum earned by the missed kick , Kansas went three plays without gaining a first down and was forced to punt the ball away . Virginia Tech recovered the ball at its 15 @-@ yard line and ran two plays before time ran out in the first quarter . 
 At the end of the first quarter , Kansas had kept Virginia Tech scoreless while capitalizing on a 60 @-@ yard interception return by Aqib Talib for the game 's only points , a 7 – 0 lead . 
 = = = Second quarter = = = 
 Virginia Tech began the second quarter in possession of the ball and facing a third @-@ and @-@ five from its own 20 @-@ yard line . On the first play of the quarter , quarterback Sean Glennon threw for the first down , but was intercepted at the 37 @-@ yard line by Kansas ' Chris Harris . After the interception , Kansas had the ball at the Virginia Tech 31 @-@ yard line . Todd Reesing connected on a first @-@ down pass to Derek Fine , and running back Brandon McAnderson contributed several short rushes . The Kansas offense failed to gain a second first down after the interception , however , and kicker Scott Webb was again called upon to attempt a field goal , this time from 32 yards away . Unlike his first kick , the second sailed through the uprights for three points . With 12 minutes remaining in the second quarter , Kansas extended its lead to 10 – 0 . 
 Virginia Tech recovered the post @-@ field goal kickoff at its own 31 @-@ yard line , and Branden Ore , having entered the game after his one @-@ quarter suspension , advanced the ball three yards . Quarterback Tyrod Taylor also advanced the ball five yards on a scramble , but failed to gain a first down . The Hokies were forced to punt the ball away , and Kansas recovered the kick at its 41 @-@ yard line . With good field position and momentum granted by the interception and field goal , Kansas moved the ball quickly . Todd Reesing was sacked by <unk> Brown and Xavier Adibi , but connected to Jake Sharp for 20 yards on two passes , advancing the ball deep into Virginia Tech territory . Passes to Marcus Henry and <unk> Briscoe advanced Kansas 21 more yards into Hokie territory , and Brandon McAnderson rushed for five yards on the ground . Capping the Kansas drive was a 13 @-@ yard toss by Reesing to Henry for a touchdown . The score , which came with 7 : 03 remaining in the first half , gave Kansas a 17 – 0 lead , its largest of the game . 
 Virginia Tech recovered the post @-@ touchdown kickoff desperately needing to score before halftime . Kansas had played strongly on defense throughout the first half , and the game 's momentum was firmly behind the Jayhawks , who had capitalized on two Virginia Tech turnovers . Sean Glennon completed a three @-@ yard pass to Josh Morgan to begin the drive , but it was running back Branden Ore who did the vast majority of the work during the Hokies ' final offensive drive of the first half . After Glennon 's pass , Ore rushed the ball on six straight plays , picking up 33 yards and two first downs on the way . After that , Glennon contributed a five @-@ yard run of his own , which was aided by a 15 @-@ yard facemask penalty against Kansas . Branden Ore received the ball again , rushing on five consecutive plays , culminating in a one @-@ yard run for a touchdown . The score came with just 1 : 03 left in the half , giving Virginia Tech its first points of the game and narrowing Kansas ' lead to 17 – 7 . 
 Kansas received Virginia Tech 's kickoff , and the Hokies attempted to give themselves another chance at offense by calling timeouts after Kansas rushed the ball . The timeouts stopped the clock , but Kansas managed to earn a first down and run out the clock after Tech used its allotted three timeouts . Heading into halftime , Kansas still had the lead and the momentum , but a Virginia Tech touchdown had cut the Jayhawks ' lead to just 10 points , 17 – 7 . 
 = = = Halftime show = = = 
 The halftime show of the 2008 Orange Bowl was headlined by American blues rock band ZZ Top , who played their song Sharp Dressed Man . The band was a favorite of Kansas quarterback Todd Reesing , who expressed regrets prior to the game that he would not be able to listen to the performance . The Master of Ceremonies for the show was local disc jockey DJ Irie , who orchestrated a cheering contest between fans of Virginia Tech and Kansas . Irie became the first DJ to perform in the halftime show of a bowl game in 2005 when he played during halftime at the 2005 Orange Bowl . Also featured during the halftime show were a group of high school marching bands , who played Stevie Ray Vaughan 's Crossfire while ZZ Top 's stage was disassembled . Following the halftime show , the FOX truck broadcasting the game experienced a power outage . As Fox crews worked to get the power restored , the second half was delayed by three minutes . 
 = = = Third quarter = = = 
 Kansas , which had won the pre @-@ game coin toss , received the ball to open the second half . Todd Reesing initially began where he had left off in the first half , completing a pass to Dexton Fields for 12 yards and a first down . On subsequent plays , however , Virginia Tech showed some of the defensive prowess that had been promoted heavily heading into the game . Aqib Talib was tackled for a loss of six yards after catching a pass . Reesing was sacked under heavy pressure from the Tech defense . On third down , a Reesing pass was nearly intercepted by Cody Grimm , who knocked it down to force a Kansas punt . On the subsequent return , Virginia Tech earned its first big play of the game . Eddie Royal , who had returned every one of Virginia Tech 's first @-@ half kicks , received the ball and lateraled it to Justin Harper , who returned it 84 yards for a touchdown . The score cut Kansas ' lead to just three points with 11 : 35 remaining in the third quarter . 
 With the game 's momentum now firmly in their favor , the Virginia Tech defense stopped Kansas ' offense on three straight plays , forcing another Kansas punt . The kick traveled 62 yards and was recovered at the Virginia Tech 18 @-@ yard line . Virginia Tech 's offense , despite the poor field position , moved quickly , partly due to a 15 @-@ yard pass interference penalty against Kansas . Sean Glennon completed a controversial 37 @-@ yard pass to tight end Greg Boone to drive the Hokies deep into Kansas territory . Initially , the pass appeared to have been intercepted by a Kansas defender , but subsequent replays revealed that Boone had wrested possession of the ball away from the defender . Three rushes deep inside the Kansas red zone netted the Hokies just nine more yards , setting up a fourth @-@ and @-@ one scenario for the Virginia Tech offense . Rather than risk a failed fourth @-@ down conversion , Virginia Tech head coach Frank Beamer sent in kicker Jud Dunlevy to attempt a 25 @-@ yard field goal . During the kick , however , Kansas defender Joe Mortensen rushed through the Virginia Tech line and blocked the kick , denying the Hokies three points and preserving a 17 – 14 Kansas lead with 6 : 31 remaining in the quarter . 
 The block neutralized all the Virginia Tech momentum that had been gained with the punt @-@ return touchdown and kept Kansas in the lead . After the block , however , Kansas failed to gain a first down on offense . Though forced to punt the ball away , punter Kyle Tucker 's 42 @-@ yard kick was helped by a 10 @-@ yard illegal blocking penalty against Virginia Tech that pinned the Hokies at their own 25 @-@ yard line . Branden Ore picked up a first down with two rushes , but the Tech offense failed to gain another first down and the Hokies were forced to punt the ball again . 
 Kansas took over at its own 12 @-@ yard line after the punt . On the first play of the drive , Reesing completed a 37 @-@ yard pass to Dexton Fields , putting the ball near midfield . Three straight incomplete passes later , Kansas faced a fourth @-@ and @-@ ten and a punt . Instead of punting the ball away , however , Kansas elected to try a risky fake punt @-@ pass . Instead of snapping the ball to the punter , the ball was snapped to running back Brandon McAnderson , who threw the ball 22 yards downfield to Micah Brown for a first down . On the very next play , Reesing , having returned to the field , connected on a 28 @-@ yard pass to Dexton Fields , who was pushed out of bounds just short of the goal line . With a first @-@ and @-@ goal from inside the one @-@ yard line , a Kansas touchdown seemed inevitable . On the first play inside the red zone , however , Kansas fumbled the ball . Though the ball was recovered by a Kansas player , the play lost four yards . On the next play , Kansas committed a 15 @-@ yard personal foul penalty . The personal foul was followed by a 10 @-@ yard holding penalty , and Kansas was pushed entirely outside the Virginia Tech red zone . In an effort to push back , Reesing threw a pass deep downfield . Instead of being completed , however , the ball was intercepted by Virginia Tech 's D.J. Parker . With 39 seconds left in the quarter , Virginia Tech had stopped Kansas from gaining a point despite the Jayhawks penetrating inside the Virginia Tech one @-@ yard line . 
 As the quarter came to an end , the Hokies gained two quick first downs and advanced the ball 26 yards , seemingly having regained the momentum lost with the blocked kick . With one quarter remaining in the game , however , Kansas still had a three @-@ point lead , 17 – 14 . 
 = = = Fourth quarter = = = 
 The first few plays of the fourth quarter failed to live up to the promise that had been shown in the third for the Hokies . Two incomplete passes and one that gained just two yards forced Virginia Tech to punt the ball away with 13 : 49 remaining in the quarter . After taking over at its 33 @-@ yard line , Kansas had no more success on offense than did Virginia Tech . After three straight plays with no gain , Kansas was forced to punt the ball away as well . A 58 @-@ yard kick by Kyle Tucker pinned Virginia Tech inside its 10 @-@ yard line , and the Hokies were unable to advance the ball much beyond the ten @-@ yard line . An incomplete pass and a two @-@ yard run by Branden Ore were all the offense managed before Sean Glennon threw a 20 @-@ yard interception to the Jayhawks ' Justin Thornton . Thornton returned the ball 30 yards to the Virginia Tech two @-@ yard line , and on Kansas ' first play after the interception , Todd Reesing ran two yards for the touchdown . The score gave the Jayhawks a 24 – 14 lead with just 10 : 57 remaining . 
 After the Kansas kickoff , Virginia Tech took over at its 33 @-@ yard line . Needing a score , the Hokies committed a five @-@ yard false start penalty before quarterback Sean Glennon was sacked by Kansas ' Mike Rivera . The two plays pushed the Virginia Tech offense back , preventing them from gaining a first down . Forced to punt the ball away , Virginia Tech had to play defense as Kansas took over at its 28 @-@ yard line . Secure in their lead , Kansas elected to run the ball in an effort to keep the clock moving and bring the game to an end more quickly . Brandon McAnderson broke free for 28 yards on the first play of the drive , and Jake Sharp contributed another first down on the ground before the Hokie defense stopped Kansas on an attempt to earn a first down on a fourth @-@ and @-@ two deep inside Virginia Tech territory . 
 Having stopped Kansas on fourth down , Virginia Tech took over on offense at its 22 @-@ yard line . With just 5 : 51 remaining in the game , the Hokies badly needed to score quickly and get a defensive stop in order to have a chance to win . The Hokies advanced on the first aspect of that requirement as Sean Glennon converted several first downs through the air . Kansas allowed no play over nine yards until late in the drive , forcing Virginia Tech to use up valuable time . On the last play of the drive , Sean Glennon connected on a 20 @-@ yard strike to Justin Harper for a touchdown . The score cut Kansas ' lead to just three points , but with just three minutes remaining in the game , Virginia Tech 's comeback would only be complete if the Hokies could recover a difficult onside kick . 
 Jud Dunlevy kicked the ball , which traveled the regulation 10 yards , but was recovered by Kansas . The Hokies , despite failing to recover the onside kick , still had a chance for another offensive possession if they stopped Kansas ' offense short of a first down . Because the Hokies had two timeouts remaining , they could stop the clock after two Kansas plays , thus preserving time for a Virginia Tech offensive drive . An 11 @-@ yard pass by Todd Reesing netted Kansas a first down , however , and subsequent runs by the Jayhawks allowed Kansas to run out the clock despite the Virginia Tech timeouts . Kansas preserved its lead by kneeling on the ball inside the Virginia Tech 5 @-@ yard line on the final plays of the game , and the 24 – 21 victory was celebrated as time ran out . 
 = = Final statistics = = 
 Kansas ' Aqib Talib was named the game 's Most Valuable Player . Talib 's 60 @-@ yard interception return for a touchdown was the Orange Bowl 's first since the 1968 Orange Bowl , when Oklahoma 's Bob Stephenson performed the same feat . When he appeared on stage on the field after the game to receive his award , Talib exclaimed , " I felt like Deion ! " , a reference to former NFL star Deion Sanders . 
 The two teams finished with extremely similar statistical totals , as befitting a close game . The two teams were within 38 total yards of each other ; Kansas had 344 yards and Virginia Tech had 306 . That relative closeness was reflected in the teams ' first @-@ down totals as well . Virginia Tech earned 20 first downs : 10 rushing , eight passing , and two via penalty . Kansas , meanwhile , earned 19 first downs : five rushing , 13 passing , and one via penalty . 
 Over two @-@ thirds of Kansas ' offense came through the air as the Jayhawks racked up 249 net passing yards . The Hokies , meanwhile , earned almost half their offense on the ground . The end result of the varying offensive strategies was much the same , however . Kansas successfully converted six of its 17 third @-@ down attempts , while Virginia Tech converted seven of its 17 attempts . The time of possession was one key stat in favor of Kansas , as Kansas controlled the ball for 33 : 47 , over 7 minutes more than Virginia Tech 's possession time of 26 : 13 . 
 The difference in the game came from special teams and turnovers . Virginia Tech turned the ball over three times , while Kansas turned the ball over just once . Kansas converted its three takeaways into 17 points , giving the Jayhawks an enormous advantage on the scoreboard . Virginia Tech failed to convert its sole turnover recovery into any points . 
 = = = Virginia Tech statistical recap = = = 
 On offense , the Hokies largely kept up with the Jayhawks , despite a losing effort . The two @-@ quarterback system that had been heavily promoted heading into the game was largely abandoned in the first quarter after freshman Tyrod Taylor was sacked on his first two plays and threw an interception that was returned for a touchdown during his second time on the field . After those two abortive first @-@ quarter appearances , and a single play at the beginning of the second quarter , Taylor did not re @-@ enter the game until a single play halfway through the fourth quarter . With Taylor largely removed from the game , junior Sean Glennon was left to fill the gaps . Glennon had a solid , if unspectacular , game , completing 13 of his 28 passes for 160 yards and a touchdown . Glennon did struggle at times against the Jayhawks ' defense , however , throwing two interceptions that resulted in 10 Kansas points . 
 With Glennon behind center , the Virginia Tech offense utilized several different wide receivers in the passing game . Eight different players caught at least one pass , and the leading receiver , Justin Harper , hauled in four catches for 64 yards and a touchdown . Receiver Josh Morgan , meanwhile , caught three passes , bringing him to 122 receptions for his career , passing Antonio Freeman for second place all @-@ time at Virginia Tech . Ernest Wilford remains first in the Virginia Tech record book , with 126 receptions . 
 The Hokies were slightly more effective rushing the ball . In the ground game , seven different players carried the ball at least once , netting 135 rushing yards . Branden Ore finished the game with 116 yards , leading all rushers on both teams . That total put him just eight yards short of his second @-@ straight 1 @,@ 000 @-@ yard season . Ore 's total is even more impressive when one considers that he had been suspended for the entire first quarter of the game , his place taken by backup rusher Kenny Lewis , Jr . Lewis finished the game with four carries for 22 yards , and did not see much action after Ore entered the game at the beginning of the second quarter . 
 On special teams , the Hokies had several highs and lows . Justin Harper 's 84 @-@ yard punt @-@ return touchdown sparked a Virginia Tech rally that brought the Hokies within striking distance , but failures on special teams also ended the rally and turned the momentum of the game against Virginia Tech . Kicker Jud Dunlevy had been the third @-@ most accurate kicker in the nation heading into the Orange Bowl , having hit 21 of his 24 field goal attempts during the season . He only needed two field goals to break Tech 's record for most field goals in the season , set at 22 by Shayne Graham in 1998 . Though Dunlevy had two chances for field goals , one fell short and the other was blocked . 
 On defense , the Hokies were led by linebacker Vince Hall , who recorded seven solo tackles , one assisted tackle , and one pass break @-@ up . Hokies ' defender Orion Martin also had a big game , recording six solo tackles , one assisted tackle , and two sacks of Kansas quarterback Todd Reesing . Two other defensive players recorded one sack apiece , and D.J. Parker recorded the Hokies ' sole interception on defense . 
 = = = Kansas statistical recap = = = 
 On offense , the Jayhawks recorded a total of 344 yards , 249 of which came through the air . Quarterback Todd Reesing was the key contributor to the Kansas aerial attack , completing 20 of his 37 passes for 227 yards and just one interception . The only other Kansas player to record passing yards was running back Brandon McAnderson , who threw a 22 @-@ yard first @-@ down pass during a fake punt . Though under pressure for much of the game — Reesing was sacked four times — Kansas continued to maintain an effective pass attack throughout the game . 
 Eight different receivers caught at least one pass , with Dexton Fields leading all receivers in the game with seven catches for 101 yards . Both totals were the highest marks recorded in the game by either team . Fields was also the recipient of a play that tied for the longest pass play of the game , a 37 @-@ yard toss from Reesing halfway through the third quarter . Cornerback and game MVP Aqib Talib came into the game as a receiver several times , but because his appearance in the game was such an unusual occurrence , the Virginia Tech defense was able to zero in on him and prevent him from catching the ball . 
 The Jayhawks ' ground game was less effective than their pass offense , but still had success against a tough Virginia Tech defense . Running back Brandon McAnderson , Kansas ' leading rusher , finished the game with 15 carries for 75 yards . Backup running back Jake Sharp rushed nine times for 33 yards , including several key first @-@ down runs . 
 As successful as Kansas ' offense was , it was the Jayhawks ' special teams ( beating Virginia Tech coach Frank Beamer at his own game ) that earned them the victory . Kansas blocked one Virginia Tech field goal , and caused Tech kicker Jud Dunlevy to miss another short . Kansas punter Kyle Tucker did an excellent job pinning Virginia Tech deep in its own end of the field , kicking the ball five times for a total of 250 yards , averaging 50 yards a punt . His longest punt , a 62 @-@ yard kick , was one of three punts that were downed inside Tech 's 20 @-@ yard line . 
 The Kansas defense , which had been ill @-@ regarded heading into the game , performed well , as MVP Aqib Talib finished the game with five tackles in addition to the interception that he returned for a touchdown . The Jayhawks ' leading tackler was Mike Rivera , who earned 12 tackles , including one sack of quarterback Sean Glennon . Altogether , the Jayhawks sacked Virginia Tech 's quarterbacks five times , including two sacks on the opening drive of the game . 
 = = Postgame effects = = 
 Kansas ' victory in the 2008 Orange Bowl had far @-@ reaching effects for both Virginia Tech and Kansas as well as college football teams around the country . The victory allowed Kansas to finish its 2007 season with a final record of 12 – 1 , while the loss brought Virginia Tech to a final record of 11 – 3 . The game itself provided tens of millions of dollars of economic impact for the South Florida region , which attracted tens of thousands of visitors from both Virginia and Kansas . In Kansas , bars and liquor stores benefited from the game , as Jayhawks ' fans stocked up on food and alcohol for the game . 
 A bet on the game between the governors of Kansas and Virginia was resolved when Virginia Governor Tim Kaine sent a Virginia smoked ham to the Kansas state capitol . Had Virginia Tech won , Kansas Governor Kathleen Sebelius would have sent Kaine an assortment of Kansas beef . 
 = = = Virginia Tech = = = 
 The Hokies ' loss to Kansas lowered its bowl winning percentage since 1993 to 40 percent . In the 15 bowl games played between the 1993 Independence Bowl and the 2008 Orange Bowl , the Hokies amassed a record of six wins and nine losses . Despite the loss to the Jayhawks and the loss of several graduating players , Virginia Tech was a popular pick to repeat as ACC champions heading into the off @-@ season . The seniors who graduated following the Orange Bowl game were the winningest team in Virginia Tech history , becoming one of just three teams in Division I to win at least 10 games each of the previous four years . Junior Sean Glennon 's second consecutive failure to win a bowl game , however , re @-@ opened the question of whether he or Tyrod Taylor would be the Hokies ' starter at quarterback in 2008 . 
 = = = Kansas = = = 
 Kansas ' victory over Virginia Tech was the Jayhawks ' fifth bowl victory and was the 11th bowl game in the history of the Kansas Jayhawks football team . Because of the unexpected nature of the Jayhawks ' success , some pundits proclaimed the 2008 Orange Bowl as ranking among the greatest Kansas sports victories of all time . The game paid $ 17 million to Kansas and the Big 12 Conference and helped to boost the Kansas football team 's national profile among potential recruits . In addition , the bowl appearance assisted the Kansas Athletic Department 's fundraising efforts . 
 = = = 2008 NFL Draft = = = 
 The 2008 Orange Bowl provided an excellent national platform for players from both Kansas and Virginia Tech to impress National Football League scouts prior to the 2008 NFL Draft , held April 26 and April 27 , 2008 . Virginia Tech cornerback Brandon Flowers was one of the first Orange Bowl participants to announce his intent to enter the draft following the game . Flowers , a redshirt junior , finished the season with five interceptions . 
 Two Kansas players announced that they would leave early for the NFL . Aqib Talib , the game 's MVP , and All @-@ American Anthony Collins announced they would enter the 2008 draft , capitalizing on their successful season . 
 In total , eight Virginia Tech players would be drafted that year , along with four Kansas players . 
 = Keith Ballard = 
 Keith Galen Ballard ( born November 26 , 1982 ) is an American former professional ice hockey defenseman who previously played in the National Hockey League with the Phoenix Coyotes , Florida Panthers , Vancouver Canucks and the Minnesota Wild . He played college hockey for the Minnesota Golden Gophers of the Western Collegiate Hockey Association ( WCHA ) for three seasons . After his freshman year , he was selected 11th overall by the Buffalo Sabres in the 2002 NHL Entry Draft . Before he made his NHL debut , he was traded twice – initially to the Colorado Avalanche , then to the Phoenix Coyotes . He played his professional rookie season in 2004 – 05 with the Coyotes ' American Hockey League ( AHL ) affiliate , the Utah Grizzlies , then debuted with Phoenix the following season . After three years , he was traded to the Florida Panthers , where he spent two seasons before being dealt to Vancouver at the 2010 NHL Entry Draft . Internationally , Ballard has represented the United States in four World Championships , winning bronze in 2004 . He has also played in two junior tournaments – the 2000 IIHF World U18 Championships and 2002 World Junior Championships . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Junior and college ( 1999 – 2004 ) = = = 
 Ballard played two seasons at the junior level in the United States Hockey League ( USHL ) , initially with the United States National Development Team in 1999 – 00 , then the Omaha Lancers the following season . He recorded 51 points over 56 games in 2000 – 01 . With a league @-@ leading 22 goals among defensemen , he earned First Team All @-@ Star honors and a selection to the 2001 USHL All @-@ Star Game . In the post @-@ season , he helped the Lancers win the Clark Cup as league champions , scoring seven points in 10 playoff games . 
 In 2001 – 02 , he began a three @-@ year tenure of college hockey with the Minnesota Golden Gophers of the WCHA , a conference within the National Collegiate Athletics Association ( NCAA ) . He joined a defensive corps in Minnesota that included future NHL players Jordan Leopold and Paul Martin . Ballard was a much @-@ anticipated freshman and was named the WCHA 's pre @-@ season rookie of the year . Making his collegiate debut on October 5 , 2001 , he notched two assists against the North Dakota Fighting Sioux . Ballard started his rookie campaign on a six @-@ game point streak that included two goals and four assists . Recording 10 goals and 23 points over 41 games total as a freshman , he earned WCHA All @-@ Rookie Team honors . In the first round of the subsequent WCHA playoffs , he scored the series @-@ clinching goal in overtime to eliminate North Dakota . The Golden Gophers advanced to the 2002 NCAA Championships , where they captured their first of back @-@ to @-@ back national titles . Ballard scored the first goal of the NCAA final against the Maine Black Bears , helping Minnesota to a 4 – 3 win in overtime . 
 The following year , Ballard recorded a college career @-@ high 41 points over 45 games , fourth among NCAA defensemen and third in team scoring . He was named a WCHA All @-@ Academic and University of Minnesota Scholar Athlete for combined performance with the Golden Gophers and in classes . He helped the Golden Gophers to the Broadmoor Trophy as WCHA playoff champions and earned WCHA Final Five All @-@ Tournament Team honors after recording two assists and a + 4 rating in the final two games of the post @-@ season . The Gophers then defeated the New Hampshire Wildcats in the 2003 NCAA Final by a 5 – 1 score to repeat as national champions . Ballard received NCAA West Regional All @-@ Star honors for his efforts during the tournament . 
 Ballard was named an alternate captain in his third year and produced 11 goals and 36 points over 37 games . His 0 @.@ 97 points @-@ per @-@ game average ranked second among NCAA defensemen , while his five game winning goals were second among all WCHA players and fifth in the NCAA . Ballard served as captain in place of Grant Potulny when the latter was sidelined with injury . Ballard was also sidelined for seven games during the campaign himself with a knee injury . He was voted by his teammates as Minnesota 's most valuable player and received WCHA First All @-@ Star Team , WCHA All @-@ Tournament Team and NCAA West First All @-@ Star Team honors . Ballard was also one of 10 finalists for the Hobey Baker Award , given to the NCAA 's top men 's ice hockey player ( it was awarded to Junior Lessard of the Minnesota @-@ Duluth Bulldogs ) . The Golden Gophers failed to defend their national championship , however , losing their regional final to Minnesota @-@ Duluth . 
 Ballard left the Golden Gophers seventh all @-@ time among team defensemen with 33 goals . He was also the 74th player in team history to notch 100 points , which also ranked him 11th among defensemen . 
 = = = Phoenix Coyotes ( 2004 – 08 ) = = = 
 Ballard was selected in the first round , 11th overall , by the Buffalo Sabres in the 2002 NHL Entry Draft . The choice was seen as a surprise by draft observers , as he was projected to be a late first @-@ round to second @-@ round pick . Ballard himself professed the early selection to be unexpected , saying he was ready to be drafted between the 20th and 40th positions . Scouting reports listed him as a puck @-@ rushing offensive defenceman with comparisons to Phil Housley . Before making his NHL debut , he was traded twice . He was initially dealt by Buffalo to the Colorado Avalanche on July 3 , 2003 , for Steven Reinprecht . The following year , he was traded again to the Phoenix Coyotes , along with defenseman Derek Morris , for forward Chris Gratton , defenseman Ossi <unk> and a second @-@ round selection in the 2005 draft . 
 Ballard signed with Phoenix a year later to an entry @-@ level contract worth an annual $ 1 @.@ 2 million over three years , including bonuses . With his NHL contract , he decided to forgo his senior year of college hockey . The decision was spurred by his performance at the 2004 World Championships with Team USA , competing with NHL veterans . Ballard indicated that he would only leave the University of Minnesota if he was offered the maximum allowable contract for a rookie , as designated by the collective bargaining agreement of the time , which he received . 
 Due to the NHL lockout , he made his professional debut in the AHL with the Coyotes ' minor league affiliate , the Utah Grizzlies in 2004 – 05 . He notched two goals and 20 points over 60 games in his professional rookie campaign . As NHL resumed play the following season , Ballard played his first game with the Coyotes on October 5 , 2005 , against the Vancouver Canucks . He scored his first NHL goal in his debut , beating goaltender Dan Cloutier . Ballard finished with 8 goals and 39 points as a rookie ; both remain career highs . He led all NHL defensemen in shorthanded goals with three . Ballard was sidelined for 13 games in his second NHL season due to a bone fracture in his hand , suffered while blocking a shot during a game on October 9 , 2006 . He went on to record 27 points in 69 games . In the off @-@ season , he was re @-@ signed on August 29 , 2007 , to a two @-@ year contract . In 2007 – 08 , Ballard recorded a career @-@ low 21 points . 
 = = = Florida Panthers ( 2008 – 10 ) = = = 
 During the 2008 NHL Entry Draft , he was dealt , along with defenseman Nick Boynton and a second @-@ round pick in the draft , to the Florida Panthers in exchange for forward Olli Jokinen . Upon trading for Ballard , Florida head coach Jacques Martin heralded him as the club 's number @-@ two defenseman , behind Jay Bouwmeester . Prior to the 2008 – 09 season , Ballard signed a six @-@ year , $ 25 @.@ 2 million contract extension with the Panthers . The deal came with a season remaining on his existing contract , previously signed with the Coyotes . 
 Ballard went on to tally 34 points during his first campaign with Florida in 2008 – 09 . The following season , on November 30 , 2009 , Ballard was involved in an on @-@ ice incident that injured his own teammate , goaltender Tomáš Vokoun . After being on the ice for a goal during a game against the Atlanta Thrashers , Ballard aimed to smash his stick against the post and mistakenly hit Vokoun in the mask . Vokoun was taken from the ice on a stretcher and suffered a cut on his ear that required stitches ; he missed two games before returning to the lineup . Ballard , who apologized to Vokoun following the game , was not disciplined by the Panthers or NHL . He went on to match his career @-@ high eight goals and added 20 assists for 28 points in his second season with the Panthers . He also ranked third in the league in blocked shots with 201 . Ballard had played parts of the season with a hip injury . After completing the campaign , he underwent the second hip surgery of his career in May 2010 to repair a stress fracture and remove a cyst . 
 = = = Vancouver Canucks ( 2010 – 13 ) = = = 
 On June 25 , 2010 , during the 2010 NHL Entry Draft , Ballard was traded to the Vancouver Canucks along with Victor <unk> , for Michael Grabner , Steve Bernier , and Vancouver 's first round pick , the 25th overall selection , used to select Quinton Howden . After spending two months of the off @-@ season on crutches while recovering from surgery , he reported to the Canucks ' training camp , but struggled in the pre @-@ season . Four games into the regular season , he suffered a concussion after being hit into the boards by Los Angeles Kings forward Brad Richardson on October 16 , 2010 . He was subsequently sidelined for five games . Upon returning to the lineup , however , his play continued to struggle . Averaging 13 minutes of ice time a game , he was eventually taken out of the lineup for four games in November by Canucks head coach Alain Vigneault . It marked the first time in his career he was a healthy scratch . After being re @-@ <unk> into the lineup , he scored his first goal as a Canuck in a 6 – 1 win against the San Jose Sharks on November 26 . Several months later , Ballard suffered a sprained medial collateral ligament ( MCL ) in his right knee during a game against the Ottawa Senators on February 7 , 2011 . The injury resulted from opposing forward Milan Michalek tripping him from behind , which Canucks general manager Mike Gillis pointed out did not occur anywhere near the puck , alluding to the play as illegal and <unk> . Ballard finished his first regular season with career lows in games played ( 65 ) , goals ( 2 ) , assists ( 5 ) , points ( 7 ) and average ice time per game ( 15 minutes and 14 seconds ) . His individual struggles came amidst a franchise record season for the Canucks , who won the Presidents ' Trophy as the NHL 's regular season champion for the first time in team history . Entering the playoffs as the first seed in the West , the Canucks advanced past the Chicago Blackhawks , Nashville Predators and San Jose Sharks to qualify for the 2011 Stanley Cup Finals . Facing the Boston Bruins , Vancouver lost the Stanley Cup in Game 7 . Over the team 's 25 playoff games , Ballard dressed for 10 . Playing only one game of the final two rounds , he dropped in the depth chart behind Aaron Rome and rookie Chris Tanev . 
 Ballard continued to be used as a third @-@ pairing defenceman in his second season with Vancouver . He missed five contests in November and December 2011 due to a back injury , before sustaining a season @-@ ending concussion on February 5 , 2012 . Initially undetected , the injury was caused by two separate hits during a game against the Colorado Avalanche . He remained in the lineup for the following contest before being diagnosed with the injury . His season ended with 1 goal and 7 points over 47 games . His third season with the Canucks was shortened by the 2012 – 13 NHL lockout . When the season started Ballard was again on the Canucks third pairing with Tanev . Early in the season the two were the Canucks ' most consistent pairing . An injury to Kevin Bieksa allowed Andrew Alberts to get into the line @-@ up and split the Ballard @-@ Tanev paring . After Bieksa 's return it was Ballard who was removed from the line @-@ up becoming a healthy scratch . In late March Vancouver suffered several injuries up front to help fill the void Ballard returned to the line @-@ up as a forward . He played three games before suffering a broken foot . Though he was healthy by the playoffs Vancouver opted to play Alberts and rookie Frank Corrado in the first round lost to San Jose . He finished the year playing in 36 games and recording two assists . 
 = = = Minnesota Wild ( 2013 – 15 ) = = = 
 With the salary cap decreasing in the off @-@ season Vancouver needed to unload salary . Ballard had two years remaining on his contract with an annual value $ 4 @.@ 2 million . The Canucks tried to trade Ballard in an attempt to avoid using a compliance buyout on him . When that failed the team placed him on waivers . He cleared waivers before Vancouver ultimately bought him out . Two days after becoming a free agent he signed a two @-@ year $ 3 million contract with the Minnesota Wild . 
 In his second season with the Wild Ballard was hit by the New York Islanders ' Matt Martin after making a pass . The hit was delivered as Ballard turned away from Martin . Ballard 's head struck a glass partition and as he fell his head bounced off the ice . He lay on the ice for a few minutes before being able to leave the ice on his own . Ballard suffered a concussion and multiple facial fractures as a result . He was taken to Regions Hospital for evaluation and observation and released the next day . There was no penalty or suspension in result of the hit . 
 As a free agent in the off @-@ season , Ballard was still suffering from post @-@ concussion syndrome and opted to end his professional career to pursue studies in sport science at the University of Minnesota . 
 = = International play = = 
 Ballard made his international debut with Team USA at the 2000 IIHF World U18 Championships in Switzerland . He was named to the squad while playing in the National Under @-@ 18 Development Program for the 1999 – 2000 season . He contributed a goal and an assist in six games , as the United States finished in eighth place . Two years later , Ballard was named to the under @-@ 20 squad for the 2001 World Junior Championships in the Czech Republic . He played in seven games , recording a goal and an assist . The United States lost in the quarterfinal to Russia and went on to place in fifth after defeating Sweden 3 – 2 in a consolation match . 
 Following his third year with the Minnesota Golden Gophers , Ballard debuted with the United States men 's team for the 2004 World Championships in the Czech Republic . He was named to the squad after forward Scott Gomez withdrew himself due to personal reasons . As the lone NCAA player on the national squad , he helped the United States to a bronze medal finish . His lone goal of the tournament and first career goal in men 's international competition came during a 7 – 1 round @-@ robin win against Ukraine . 
 Three years later , Ballard began a three @-@ year stretch of consecutive appearances at the World Championships . He recorded an international career @-@ high three assists at the 2007 tournament in Russia , as the United States were eliminated in a 5 – 4 shootout loss to Finland in the quarterfinal . Competing in Quebec City and Halifax , Canada , the following year , Ballard recorded two assists in five games while ranking seventh among team defensemen in average ice time per game . The United States finished in sixth place , losing in the quarterfinal to Finland . Ballard made his second bronze medal game appearance with the United States at the 2009 IIHF World Championship in Switzerland , but lost to Sweden by a 4 – 2 score . He contributed a goal and two assists in nine games while ranking second on the squad in plus @-@ minus with a + 3 rating and sixth among team defensemen in average ice time per game . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Ballard is a two @-@ way defenseman , capable of contributing both offensively and defensively . Known for his hard hitting , specifically with hip checks , he led his club in hits during his first five years in the NHL . He is also proficient in shot @-@ blocking . Offensively , Ballard is noted as a quick and smooth skater , making him able to start plays from the defensive zone . At the 2012 Canucks SuperSkills Competition , he won the fastest skater segment by circling the rink in 13 @.@ 440 seconds . He has a reputation as a player with intensity and a competitive edge . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Ballard was born in <unk> , Minnesota , to parents Steve and Joanne . He has a sister , Jessie . His family runs a fishing resort at Lake of the Woods in Minnesota , founded by Ballard 's grandparents in 1961 . 
 Ballard left home following his sophomore year of high school to pursue his hockey career with the U.S. National Development Team in Ann Arbor , Michigan . During his time with the Omaha Lancers , he graduated from Millard North High School in Omaha , Nebraska . He was a multi @-@ sport athlete during high school , having earned an All @-@ Conference selection as a fullback and linebacker playing football and finishing as Conference championship runner @-@ up as a golfer . 
 Ballard and his wife have a daughter who was born in May 2010 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 = Matt Smith ( actor ) = 
 Matthew Robert " Matt " Smith ( born 28 October 1982 ) is an English actor . He is best known for his role as the Eleventh Doctor in the BBC science fiction series Doctor Who , for which he received a BAFTA Award nomination in 2011 . 
 Smith initially aspired to be a professional footballer , but <unk> forced him out of the sport . After joining the National Youth Theatre and studying Drama and Creative Writing at the University of East Anglia , he became an actor in 2003 , performing in plays like Murder in the Cathedral , Fresh Kills , The History Boys , and On the Shore of the Wide World in London theatres . Extending his repertoire into West End theatre , he has since performed in the stage adaptation of Swimming with Sharks with Christian Slater , followed a year later by a critically acclaimed performance as Henry in That Face . 
 Before his role in Doctor Who , Smith 's first television role came in 2006 as Jim Taylor in the BBC adaptations of Philip Pullman 's The Ruby in the Smoke and The Shadow in the North , while his first major role in television came as Danny in the 2007 BBC series Party Animals . Smith , who was announced as the eleventh incarnation of the Doctor in January 2009 , is the youngest person to play the character in the British television series . He left the series at the end of the 2013 Christmas Day special , " The Time of the Doctor " . He portrayed both the physical embodiment and a holographic version of Skynet in the Terminator Genisys ( 2015 ) and is expected to return if sequels are made . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Smith was born and raised in Northampton , the son of David and Lynne Smith . He attended Northampton School for Boys . He had planned to be a professional football player , having played for the youth teams of Northampton Town , Nottingham Forest , and Leicester City . After a serious back injury ruined this career , his drama teacher introduced him to acting by signing him up as the tenth juror in an adaptation of Twelve Angry Men without his consent . Although he took part in the play , he refused to attend a drama festival for which his teacher had also signed him up , as he saw himself as a football player and did not view acting as socially acceptable . His drama teacher persisted , and eventually persuaded him to join the National Youth Theatre in London . 
 After leaving school , Smith studied drama and creative writing at the University of East Anglia , graduating in 2005 . His first theatre roles as part of the National Youth Theatre were Thomas Becket in Murder in the Cathedral and Bassoon in The Master and Margarita . His role in the latter earned him an agent and his first professional jobs , Fresh Kills and On the Shore of the Wide World . His new professional roles led him to seek an agreement with his university so that he could graduate without attending lectures in his final year . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 Smith 's first television role was as Jim Taylor in the BBC adaptations of the Sally Lockhart quartet books The Ruby in the Smoke and The Shadow in the North . His first major television role came in the television series Party Animals , a BBC television drama series about fictional parliamentary advisors and researchers in Westminster . In Party Animals , Smith portrays Danny Foster , a parliamentary researcher to Jo Porter ( Raquel Cassidy ) , a Labour politician and junior Home Office minister . At 26 years old , Danny is described as an intelligent but timid " politics geek " who should have moved on from researching at his age . Within the series ' narrative , he attempts to balance his affections for Kirsty MacKenzie ( Andrea Riseborough ) , his intern , while trying to prevent Porter 's imminent decline . 
 In an interview in 2007 , Smith discussed his character 's motivations . He summarised Danny as having a romantic outlook of the political world while being cynical elsewhere . The character was drawn into politics by his father and his own political drive . He defended his character 's age by characterising him as being loyal to Porter , instead of being incompetent . He talked about his character 's emotional and intellectual maturity : emotionally , he lacks confidence around women — most notably seen with his unrequited love towards Kirsty — but Smith portrays Danny as a caring and sensitive but " wry , sarcastic , [ and ] witty " romantic ; and intellectually , Danny is portrayed as attentive and possessing a strong work ethic . 
 = = = = Doctor Who = = = = 
 Smith was revealed as the Eleventh Doctor in the British science @-@ fiction television series Doctor Who in January 2009 to replace David Tennant , who announced his departure in October 2008 . Smith was a relatively unknown actor compared to the actors then speculated about possibly taking on the role , who included Paterson Joseph , David Morrissey , Sean Pertwee , James Nesbitt , Russell Tovey , Catherine Zeta @-@ Jones , Chiwetel Ejiofor , Robert Carlyle , and Billie Piper . Smith was first named as a possible successor less than a day before he was announced as the Eleventh Doctor , on edition of 3 January 2009 of BBC Breakfast , among the names speculated about . His obscurity prompted the news headline " Doctor Who ? " , a riff on the show 's title . 
 Smith was one of the earliest actors to audition for the role , performing on the first day . The production team , consisting of the incoming producer , Steven Moffat , and BBC Wales Head of Drama and executive producer , Piers Wenger , immediately singled him out based on his performance . Smith additionally auditioned for the role of John Watson in the Moffat @-@ created Sherlock , undergoing auditions at the same time ; he was unsuccessful , as Moffat believed his eccentric acting style was closer to Holmes , whose role had already been given to Benedict Cumberbatch . At 26 years old , Smith was three years younger than Peter Davison was at the time of his casting as the Doctor in 1981 , and younger than any other actor suggested for the role . After three weeks of auditions , Moffat and Wenger agreed that it had " always been Matt " and approached him to accept the role . The BBC were cautious about casting him because they felt that a 26 @-@ year @-@ old could not play the Doctor adequately ; Wenger shared the same sentiment but thought Smith had proven his acting quality in Party Animals , which Wenger thought highlighted Smith 's " mercurial qualities " . Some fans of the show believed that Smith was inexperienced and too young for the role , while others supported him by citing his demonstrated acting ability . For his performance in his first series he was nominated in the Outstanding Drama Performance Category of the National Television Awards . Smith is the first Doctor to be nominated for a BAFTA for Best Actor . 
 Smith has said of his character : " The Doctor is excited and fascinated by the tiniest of things . By everything . By every single thing . That 's what 's wonderful about him as a character . It 's why children like him , I think . Because he doesn 't dismiss anything . He 's not cynical . He 's open to every single facet of the universe . " In June 2010 , Smith appeared on stage with Orbital , and performed with them a version of the Doctor Who theme , at the Glastonbury Festival . Smith hosted the Doctor Who Prom at the Royal Albert Hall on 24 – 25 July 2010 . On the morning of 26 May 2012 , Smith carried the Olympic torch in Cardiff , an activity which was noted by Doctor Who fans for its resemblance to a 2006 episode of the show in which the Doctor carried the torch . On 1 June 2013 , the BBC announced that Smith would be leaving Doctor Who at the end of the 2013 Christmas special . 
 = = = Film = = = 
 Smith appeared in a deleted scene of the 2007 film In Bruges , playing a younger version of Ralph Fiennes ' character . He starred in the 2009 short film Together and the 2010 film Womb . In February 2013 , it was reported that Smith had signed up to appear in Ryan Gosling 's directorial debut Lost River . Smith 's directorial debut , the short film <unk> , was aired on Sky Arts in May 2013 . Smith had a supporting role , as the embodiment of Skynet , in Terminator Genisys ( 2015 ) ; he is set to have more screen time in the sixth and seventh films in the series . On 20 November 2014 , it was announced that Smith will star in the action @-@ thriller film Patient Zero .. 
 = = = Theatre = = = 
 During Smith 's tenure in On the Shore of the Wide World , the play transferred to the Royal National Theatre in London . After finishing the play , he took on the role of Lockwood , a pupil in the Alan Bennett play The History Boys . After The History Boys , he would act in the teen play Burn / <unk> / Citizenship and Swimming with Sharks ; the latter being his West End début , with Christian Slater . In 2007 , Smith appeared as Henry in the critically acclaimed Polly <unk> play That Face at the Royal Court Theatre Upstairs in Chelsea . The play transferred to the Duke of York 's Theatre in the West End in 2008 and became Smith 's second role there . That Face focuses primarily upon alcohol and drug addiction in an upper @-@ middle @-@ class family after the paternal figure in the family leaves . As Henry , Smith portrayed an aspiring artist who left school to take care of his mother . To prepare for the role , the cast interviewed alcoholics and their families . Smith discussed his character 's relationship with his mother in an interview with the Evening Standard . 
 The thing I find tricky to get my head round is why doesn 't he just leave ? An awful lot of it is codependency . [ ... ] With Henry there 's a real belief — or denial maybe — that he can change his mother . When she is finally pulled away from him to go to rehab , his identity collapses . His sacrifice has been for nothing . 
 The entire cast of the play was nominated for the 2008 Laurence Olivier Award for Outstanding Achievement in an Affiliate Theatre , and Smith won the Evening Standard 's award for " best newcomer " for his role . Upon its transfer to the West End , Smith 's performance as Henry was highlighted as one of the positive aspects of the play by critics for the Evening Standard , Daily Express , The Guardian , and The Times . 
 On 7 October 2013 , it was announced Smith would portray Patrick Bateman in the musical adaption of American Psycho at London 's Almeida Theatre . The show began its run in December 2013 . 
 = = = Public image = = = 
 In 2015 , Smith was named one of GQ 's 50 Best @-@ Dressed British Men . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Smith is an atheist , and an avid supporter of Blackburn Rovers . He has cited his favourite band , Radiohead , as an inspiration . His sister , Laura Jayne , was one of the dancers featured in the music video for the 2004 Eric Prydz song " Call on Me " . 
 Smith dated model Daisy Lowe for 18 months . They broke up in November 2011 . In 2015 , it was confirmed that he is dating actress Lily James . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 = = Stage = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = The Playwright 's Love = 
 The Playwright 's Love is a 1910 American silent short drama produced by the Thanhouser Company . The film focuses on a poor playwright named John Russell who is approached by a poor dying woman . Upon her death , John takes guardianship of her daughter named Grace . A decade passes and Grace becomes a young woman as John struggles with his love for her . Then , a suitor approaches Grace and is denied because she loves John . When John learns of this , he proposes to her and is accepted . Released on July 19 , 1910 , the film received positive reception by film critics . One reviewer noted the similarity to other productions and another reviewer said the film recalled The Prince Chap . The film is presumed lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Though the film is presumed lost , a synopsis survives in The Moving Picture World from July 23 , 1910 . It states : " John Russell , an unsuccessful playwright , is in straitened circumstances , but is generous despite his poverty . When a poor woman falls exhausted at his doorway he takes her in , and after her death he cares for her child . This kind of action seems to bring him luck , for a play that he had been unable to dispose of is sold for a good sum and he starts on the high road to prosperity . Ten years later when the girl is grown to womanhood , John finds that he is deeply in love with his ward , but does not betray his passion , believing that it is hopeless . His eyes are opened , however , by Will , who is in love with Grace , and is told by her when she refuses him that she loves John . When John hears this he promptly proposes and is as promptly accepted by the girl . " 
 = = Production = = 
 The writer of the scenario is unknown , but it was most likely Lloyd Lonergan . He was an experienced newspaperman employed by The New York Evening World while writing scripts for the Thanhouser productions . The New York Dramatic Mirror points out the plot of the film resembles a popular stage production The Prince Chap from several years ago . The plot of the play bear striking familiarities to the Thanhouser production . The play focuses on William Peyton , a sculptor , who takes in a young girl , Claudia , at the request of her dying mother . Claudia grows into a young woman , rejects her suitor , and concludes with Claudia and Peyton deciding to marry . Another mention of this film in The Morning Telegraph stated , " This story has been told many times in pictures , excepting in this film the character is a playwright . " The film director and the cameraman are unknown , but the " Thanhouser Kid " Marie Eline is the only known credit in the cast . Eline plays the role of the young orphan Grace . Other members cast may have included the other leading players of the Thanhouser productions , Anna Rosemond , Frank H. Crane and Violet Heming . A surviving film still shows the playwright in the process of trimming his cuffs with scissors before an interview , leaving hope that another credit may be attributed to the lost film . 
 Despite the lack of production details , the quality of the Thanhouser films in general stood out amongst the Independent producers . An editorial by " The Spectator " in The New York Dramatic Mirror contained specific praise for Thanhouser productions by stating , " ... practically all other Independent American companies , excepting Thanhouser , show haste and lack of thought in their production . Crude stories are crudely handled , giving the impression that they are rushed through in a hurry - anything to get a thousand feet of negative ready for the market . Such pictures , of course , do not cost much to produce , but they are not of a class to make reputation . The Thanhouser company , alone of the Independents , shows a consistent effort to do things worthwhile ... " The editorial warned that American audiences were not subject to be entertained by the novelty of moving images and cautioned the Independents that there was distinct danger in quantity over quality . The editorial was written by Frank E. Woods of the American Biograph Company , a Licensed company , and like the publication itself had a considerable slant to the Licensed companies . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The one reel drama , approximately 950 feet long , was released on July 22 , 1910 . The film had known showings in Indiana , and Maryland . The film was advertised , possibly in error , as simply Playwright 's Love and A Playwright 's Love . The film received numerous reviews in the trade publications and most were positive . The Moving Picture News review was positive and stated , " Love knows neither creed nor class , and when the unsuccessful playwright falls in love with the daughter of a woman whom he had taken a charitable interest in at the time of her death , the fact is not to be wondered at . He plays a noble part and is rewarded as the film reaches it [ s ] final scene . The story is rich in feeling and sympathy , the settings are touching and appropriate and the photography is pretty good . " Another review in the publication agreed that the film was another high @-@ quality Thanhouser release . The Moving Picture World spared only a brief summary of the film with a simple approval for the romantic story . The New York Dramatic Mirror found another reason that the film was worth seeing - the absence of a villain . 
 = Time Gal = 
 Time Gal ( Japanese : <unk> , Hepburn : <unk> <unk> ) is an interactive movie video game developed and published by Taito , and originally released in Japan for the arcades in 1985 . It is an action game which uses full motion video ( FMV ) to display the on @-@ screen action . The player must correctly choose the on @-@ screen character 's actions to progress the story . The pre @-@ recorded animation for the game was produced by Toei Animation . 
 The game is set in a fictional future where time travel is possible . The protagonist , Reika , travels to different time periods in search of a criminal , Luda , from her time . After successfully tracking down Luda , Reika prevents his plans to alter the past . 
 Time Gal was inspired by the success of earlier laserdisc video games , most notably the 1983 title Dragon 's Lair , which also used pre @-@ recorded animation . The game was later ported to the Sega / Mega @-@ CD for a worldwide release , and also to the LaserActive in Japan . The home console versions received a mixed reception . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Time Gal is a FMV @-@ based game which uses pre @-@ recorded animation rather than sprites to display the on @-@ screen action . Gameplay is divided into levels , referred to as time periods . The game begins in 4001 AD with the theft of a time travel device . The thief , Luda , steals the device to take over the world by changing history . Reika , the protagonist also known as Time Gal , uses her own time travel device to pursue him ; she travels to different time periods , such as 70 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 BC , 44 BC , 1588 AD , and 2010 AD , in search of Luda . Each time period is a scenario which presents a series of threats that must be avoided or confronted . Successfully navigating the sequences allows the player to progress to another period . 
 The player uses a joystick and button to input commands , though home versions use a game controller with a directional pad . As the game progresses , visual cues — highlighted portions of the background or foreground — will appear on the screen to help survive the dangers that occur throughout the stage ; more difficult settings omit the visual cues . Depending on the location of the cue , the player will input one of four directions ( up , down , left and right ) or an attack ( shoot the target with a laser gun ) . <unk> the correct command will either avoid or neutralize the threats and progress the game , while incorrect choices result in the character 's death . Reika dying too many times results in a game over . Specific moments in the game involve Reika stopping time . During these moments , players are presented with a list of three options and have seven seconds to choose the one which will save the character . 
 = = Development = = 
 The game uses LaserDisc technology to stream pre @-@ recorded animation , which was produced by Japanese studio Toei Animation . The game features raster graphics on a CRT monitor and amplified monaural sound . The protagonist 's appearance was derived from the main character , Lum , from the Japanese manga and anime series <unk> <unk> . Several factors prevented an overseas release : a decline in the popularity of laserdisc arcade games in the mid @-@ 80s , the expensive price of laserdisc technology , and difficulty to translate . Reika was voiced by Yuriko Yamamoto . 
 = = Release = = 
 Since its release original release to the arcades in Japan in 1985 , Time Gal has been ported to different home formats . It was first released exclusively in Japan by Nippon Victor on the Video High Density format ; it could be played on Microsoft 's MSX via a Sony laserdisc player . The release of Sega 's Mega @-@ CD console in 1991 spawned numerous games that took advantage of the CD technology to introduce interactive FMVs . Among the new titles , Time Gal was one of several older laserdisc @-@ based games that were ported to the system . Renovation Products acquired the rights to publish Time Gal on the Mega @-@ CD , with Wolf Team handling development . They released it , along with similar games , as part of their " Action @-@ Reaction " series . It was first released in Japan in November 1992 , and in North America and Europe the next year . 
 American press coverage of the Japanese release prompted video game enthusiasts to contact Renovations about a Western release . The number of requests persuaded Renovation 's president , Hide Irie , to announce a release in the USA . In addition to being dubbed in English , a few death scenes in the US version were censored . The Mega @-@ CD version uses a smaller color palette than the original , includes a video gallery which requires passwords to view each level 's animation sequences , and features a new opening and ending theme by Shinji Tamura and Motoi Sakuraba respectively . Time Gal was ported to the PlayStation in 1996 as a compilation with Ninja Hayate , another laserdisc arcade game developed by Taito . This release lacks the Mega @-@ CD version 's additional content , but features a more accurate reproduction of the animation . The compilation was also released on the Sega Saturn the following year . The game can also be played on the Pioneer LaserActive via the Sega Mega @-@ LD module . The LaserActive version is the rarest home release of Time Gal , as well as one of the most expensive on the system among collectors . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 GamePro magazine noted that " Japanese players ate it up " when it first released in Japanese arcades . However , GameSetWatch 's Todd Ciolek believed it was released too late in the life of LaserDisc games , and that players " were getting tired " of the genre 's gameplay . He further commented that , despite its gameplay , it was unique and charming . GamePro 's reviewer referred to the arcade game as a " lost , laserdisc treasure " , and was enthusiastic about its Mega @-@ CD release . He called the death sequences " hilarious " and felt they reduced the tediousness of dying . MEGA magazine rated the Mega @-@ CD version the number five CD game , commenting that though it lacked difficulty , it was a good showcase of the system . Prior to its Mega @-@ CD release , Electronic Gaming Monthly praised the use of CD technology and felt it would be followed by titles with similar gameplay . 
 Critics praised Time Gal 's visuals . GameFan magazine , in praising Wolfteam 's port of the game , complimented the Mega @-@ CD version 's graphics and short load times . GamePro said the animation is " great , with bright , vivid colors , and fast @-@ paced , exciting movement " and praised the " funny gameplay " and " nonstop action " . Shawn Sackenheim of AllGame complimented the animation , calling it " high quality " , but criticized the Mega @-@ CD graphics , calling them " downgraded " . He commented that , though Time Gal offered a good thrill , it lacked replay value . Author Andy Slaven commented that , though the animation is nice , it can 't really be enjoyed while playing . Ciolek echoed similar statements , saying it is more enjoyable to watch than to play . He further commented that the game is frustrating and rigid when compared to more contemporary standards . Electronic Gaming Monthly 's group of reviewers praised the Mega @-@ CD version 's graphics quality . Three of the four reviewers lauded the gameplay , specifically the challenge and format . The other reviewer stated he didn 't care for this type of game , referring to the gameplay as " nothing more than memorizing " . 
 Author Masaru Takeuchi attributes the origin of the quick time event game mechanic to laserdisc games like Dragon 's Lair and Time Gal . IGN 's Levi Buchanan listed FMV games like Time Gal as one of the reasons behind the Mega @-@ CD 's commercial failure , citing them as a waste of the system 's capabilities . Ciolek referred to the protagonist as one of the first human heroines in the industry . He further added that Reika was an appealing lead character that Taito could have easily turned into a mascot and featured in other games and media . The character was later included in Alfa System 's shooting game Castle of <unk> III — Taito published the arcade version in Japan . In the game , Reika features similar attacks and personality but the character 's visual design was updated . Reika 's most recent appearance was in the Elevator Action remake Elevator Action Deluxe as one of the few free Taito DLCs . 
 = Four Quartets = 
 Four Quartets is a set of four poems written by T. S. Eliot that were published individually over a six @-@ year period . The first poem , Burnt Norton , was written and published with a collection of his early works following the production of Eliot 's play Murder in the Cathedral . After a few years , Eliot composed the other three poems , East Coker , The Dry Salvages , and Little Gidding , which were written during World War II and the air @-@ raids on Great Britain . The poems were not collected until Eliot 's New York publisher printed them together in 1943 . They were first published as a series in Great Britain in 1941 to 1942 towards the end of Eliot 's poetic career . 
 Four Quartets are four interlinked meditations with the common theme being man 's relationship with time , the universe , and the divine . In describing his understanding of the divine within the poems , Eliot blends his Anglo @-@ Catholicism with mystical , philosophical and poetic works from both Eastern and Western religious and cultural traditions , with references to the Bhagavad @-@ Gita and the Pre @-@ Socratics as well as St. John of the Cross and Julian of Norwich . 
 Although many critics find the Four Quartets to be Eliot 's great last work , some of Eliot 's contemporary critics , including George Orwell , were dissatisfied with Eliot 's overt religiosity . Later critics disagreed with Orwell 's claims about the poems and argued instead that the religious themes made the poem stronger . Overall , reviews of the poem within Great Britain were favourable while reviews in the United States were split between those who liked Eliot 's later style and others who felt he had abandoned positive aspects of his earlier poetry . 
 = = Background = = 
 While working on his play Murder in the Cathedral , Eliot came up with the idea for a poem that was structured similarly to The Waste Land . The resulting poem , Burnt Norton , named after a manor house , was published in Eliot 's 1936 edition of Collected Poems 1909 – 1935 . Eliot decided to create another poem similar to Burnt Norton but with a different location in mind . This second poem , East Coker , was finished and published by Easter 1940 . ( Eliot visited East Coker in 1937 and his ashes now repose there at St. Michael 's Church . ) 
 As Eliot was finishing his second poem , World War II began to disrupt his life and he spent more time lecturing across Great Britain and helping out during the war when he could . It was during this time that Eliot began working on The Dry Salvages , the third poem , which was put together near the end of 1940 . This poem was published in February 1941 and Eliot immediately began to plot out his fourth poem , Little Gidding . Eliot 's health declined and he stayed in Shamley Green to recuperate . His illness and the war disrupted his ability to write and he became dissatisfied with each draft . He believed that the problem with the poem was with himself and that he had started the poem too soon and written it too quickly . By September 1941 , he stopped writing and focused on his lecturing . It was not until September 1942 that Eliot finished the last poem and it was finally published . 
 While writing East Coker Eliot thought of creating a " quartet " of poems that would reflect the idea of the four elements and , loosely , the four seasons . As the first four parts of The Waste Land has been associated with one of the four classical elements so has each of the constituent poems of Four Quartets : air ( BN , ) earth ( EC , ) water ( DS , ) and fire ( LG . ) However , there is little support for the poems matching with individual seasons . Eliot described what he meant by " quartet " in a 3 September 1942 letter to John Hayward : 
 ... these poems are all in a particular set form which I have elaborated , and the word " quartet " does seem to me to start people on the right track for understanding them ( " sonata " in any case is too musical ) . It suggests to me the notion of making a poem by weaving in together three or four superficially unrelated themes : the " poem " being the degree of success in making a new whole out of them . 
 The Four Quartets was first published as a series in New York in 1943 and London in 1944 . The original title was supposed to be the Kensington Quartets after his time in Kensington . The poems were kept as a separate entity in the United States until they were collected in 1952 as Eliot 's Complete Poems and Plays , and in the United Kingdom until 1963 as part of Eliot 's Complete Poems 1909 – 62 . The delay in collecting the Four Quartets with the rest of Eliot 's poetry separated them from his other work , even though they were the result of a development from his earlier poems . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 The outbreak of World War II , in 1939 , pushed Eliot further into the belief that there was something worth defending in society and that Germany had to be stopped . There is little mention of the war in Eliot 's writing except in a few pieces , like " Defence of the Islands " . The war became central to Little Gidding as Eliot adds in aspects of his own experience while serving as a watchman at the Faber building during the London blitz . The Four Quartets were favoured as giving hope during the war and also for a later religious revival movement . By Little Gidding , WWII is not just the present time but connected also to the English Civil War . 
 = = Poems = = 
 Each poem has five sections . The later poems connect to the earlier sections with Little Gidding synthesising the themes of the earlier poems within its sections . Within Eliot 's own poetry , the five sections connect to The Waste Land . This allowed Eliot to structure his larger poems , which he had difficulty with . 
 According to C.K. Stead , the structure is based on : 
 The movement of time , in which brief moments of eternity are caught . 
 <unk> experience , leading on to dissatisfaction . 
 <unk> in the world , divesting the soul of the love of created things . 
 A lyric prayer for , or affirmation of the need of , intercession . 
 The problems of attaining artistic wholeness which becomes analogue for , and merge into , the problems of achieving spiritual health . 
 These points can be applied to the structure of The Waste Land , though there is not necessarily a fulfilment of these but merely a longing or discussion of them . 
 = = = Burnt Norton = = = 
 The poem begins with two epigraphs taken from the fragments of Heraclitus : 
 τοῦ <unk> δὲ <unk> <unk> <unk> οἱ <unk> 
 ὡς <unk> <unk> <unk> 
 I. p . 77 . Fr . 2 . 
 <unk> ἄνω <unk> <unk> καὶ <unk> 
 I. p . 89 Fr . 60 . 
 The first may be translated , " Though wisdom is common , the many live as if they have wisdom of their own " ; the second , " the way upward and the way downward is one and the same . " 
 The concept and origin of Burnt Norton is connected to Eliot 's play Murder in the Cathedral . The poem discusses the idea of time and the concept that only the present moment really matters because the past cannot be changed and the future is unknown . 
 In Part I , this meditative poem begins with the narrator trying to focus on the present moment while walking through a garden , focusing on images and sounds like the bird , the roses , clouds , and an empty pool . In Part II , the narrator 's meditation leads him / her to reach " the still point " in which he doesn 't try to get anywhere or to experience place and / or time , instead experiencing " a grace of sense . " In Part III , the meditation experience becomes darker as night comes on , and by Part IV , it is night and " Time and the bell have buried the day . " In Part V , the narrator reaches a contemplative end to his / her meditation , initially contemplating the arts ( " Words " and " music " ) as they relate to time . The narrator focuses particularly on the poet 's art of manipulating " Words [ which ] strain , / Crack and sometimes break , under the burden [ of time ] , under the tension , slip , slide , perish , decay with imprecision , [ and ] will not stay in place , / Will not stay still . " By comparison , the narrator concludes that " Love is itself unmoving , / Only the cause and end of movement , / Timeless , and <unk> . " For this reason , this spiritual experience of " Love " is the form of consciousness that most interests the narrator ( presumably more than the creative act of writing poetry ) . 
 = = = East Coker = = = 
 Eliot started writing East Coker in 1939 , and modelled the poem after Burnt Norton as a way to focus his thoughts . The poem served as a sort of opposite to the popular idea that The Waste Land served as an expression of disillusionment after World War I , though Eliot never accepted this interpretation . The poem focuses on life , death , and continuity between the two . Humans are seen as disorderly and science is viewed as unable to save mankind from its flaws . Instead , science and reason lead mankind to warfare , and humanity needs to become humble in order to escape the cycle of destruction . To be saved , people must recognize Christ as their savior as well as their need for redemption . 
 = = = The Dry Salvages = = = 
 Eliot began writing The Dry Salvages at the end of 1940 during air @-@ raids on London , and managed to finish the poem quickly . The poem included many personal images connecting to Eliot 's childhood , and emphasised the image of water and sailing as a metaphor for humanity . According to the poem , there is a connection to all of mankind within each man . If we just accept drifting upon the sea , then we will end up broken upon rocks . We are restrained by time , but the Annunciation gave mankind hope that it will be able to escape . This hope is not part of the present . What we must do is understand the patterns found within the past in order to see that there is meaning to be found . This meaning allows one to experience eternity through moments of revelation . 
 = = = Little Gidding = = = 
 Little Gidding was started after The Dry Salvages but was delayed because of Eliot 's declining health and his dissatisfaction with early drafts of the poem . Eliot was unable to finish the poem until September 1942 . Like the three previous poems of the Four Quartets , the central theme is time and humanity 's place within it . Each generation is seemingly united and the poem describes a unification within Western civilisation . When discussing World War II , the poem states that humanity is given a choice between the bombing of London or the Holy Spirit . God 's love allows mankind to redeem themselves and escape the living hell through purgation by fire ; he drew the affirmative coda " All shall be well " from medieval mystic Julian of Norwich . The end of the poem describes how Eliot has attempted to help the world as a poet , and he parallels his work in language with working on the soul or working on society . 
 = = Motifs = = 
 Eliot believed that even if a poem can mean different things to each reader , the " absolute " meaning of the poem needs to be discovered . The central meaning of the Four Quartets is to connect to European literary tradition in addition to its Christian themes . It also seeks to unite with European literature to form a unity , especially in Eliot 's creation of a " familiar compound ghost " who is supposed to connect to those like Stéphane Mallarmé , Edgar Allan Poe , Jonathan Swift , and William Butler Yeats . 
 = = = Time = = = 
 Time is viewed as unredeemable and problematic , whereas eternity is beautiful and true . Living under time 's influence is a problem . Within Burnt Norton section 3 , people trapped in time are similar to those stuck in between life and death in Inferno Canto Three . When Eliot deals with the past in The Dry Salvages , he emphasises its importance to combat the influence of evolution as encouraging people to forget the past and care only about the present and the future . The present is capable of always reminding one of the past . These moments also rely on the idea of Krishna in the Bhagavad @-@ Gita that death can come at any moment , and that the divine will is more important than considering the future . 
 The Jesuit critic William F. Lynch , who believed that salvation happens within time and not outside of it , explained what Eliot was attempting to do in the Four Quartets when he wrote : " it is hard to say no to the impression , if I may use a mixture of my own symbols and his , that the Christian imagination is finally limited to the element of fire , to the day of Pentecost , to the descent of the Holy Ghost upon the disciples . The revelation of eternity and time is of an intersection ... It seems not unseemly to suppose that Eliot 's imagination ( and is this not a theology ? ) is alive with points of intersection and of descent . " He continued with a focus on how time operated within the poem : " He seems to place our faith , our hope , and our love , not in the flux of time but in the points of time . I am sure his mind is interested in the line and time of Christ , whose Spirit is his total flux . But I am not so sure about his imagination . Is it or is it not an imagination which is saved from time 's nausea or terror by points of intersection ? ... There seems little doubt that Eliot is attracted above all by the image and the goal of immobility , and that in everything he seeks for approximations to this goal in the human order . " Lynch went on to point out that this understanding of time includes Asian influences . 
 Throughout the poems , the end becomes the beginning and things constantly repeat . This use of circular time is similar to the way Dante uses time in his Divine Comedy – Little Gidding ends with a rose garden image that is the same as the garden beginning Burnt Norton . The repetition of time affects memory and how one can travel through their own past to find permanency and the divine . Memory within the poem is similar to how St. Augustine discussed it , in that memory allows one to understand words and life . The only way to discover eternity is through memory , understanding the past , and transcending beyond time . Likewise , in the Augustinian view that Eliot shares , timeless words are connected to Christ as the Logos and how Christ calls upon mankind to join him in salvation . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The title Four Quartets connects to music , which appears also in Eliot 's poems " Preludes " , " Rhapsody on a Windy Night " , and " A Song for Simeon " along with a 1942 lecture called " The Music of Poetry " . Some critics have suggested that there were various classical works that Eliot focused on while writing the pieces . In particular , within literary criticism there is an emphasis on Beethoven serving as a model , although these claims rarely have much substance . The purpose of the quartet was to have multiple themes that intertwined with each other . Each section , as in the musical image , would be distinct even though they share the same performance . East Coker and The Dry Salvages are written in such a way as to make the poems continuous and create a " double @-@ quartet " . 
 Eliot focused on sounds or " auditory imagination " , as he called it . He doesn 't always keep to this device , especially when he is more concerned with thematic development . He did fix many of these passages in revision . 
 = = = Dante and Christianity = = = 
 Critics have compared Eliot to Yeats . Yeats believed that we live in a cyclical type of world , saying , " If it be true that God is a circle whose centre is everywhere , the saint goes to the centre , the poet and the artist to the ring where everything comes round again . " Eliot believed that such a system is stuck within time . Eliot was influenced by Yeats 's reading of Dante . This appears in Eliot 's Ash @-@ Wednesday by changing Yeats 's " desire for absolution " away from a humanistic approach . When Eliot wrote about personal topics , he tended to use Dante as a reference point . He also relied on Dante 's imagery : the idea of the " refining fire " in the Four Quartets and in The Waste Land comes from Purgatorio and the celestial rose and fire imagery of Paradiso makes its way into the series . 
 If The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock , Gerontion , The Waste Land , and The Hollow Men are Eliot 's Inferno , Ash @-@ Wednesday seems to be Purgatorio , and the Four Quartets seems to be Paradiso . The Four Quartets abandons time , as per Dante 's conception of the Empyrean , and allows for opposites to co @-@ exist together . As such , people are able to experience God directly as long as they know that they cannot fully understand or comprehend him . Eliot tries to create a new system , according to Denis Donoghue , in which he is able to describe a Christianity that is not restricted by previous views that have fallen out of favour in modern society or contradicted by science . Eliot reasoned that he is not supposed to preach a theological system as a poet , but expose the reader to the ideas of religion . As Eliot stated in 1947 : " if we learn to read poetry properly , the poet never persuades us to believe anything " and " What we learn from Dante , or the Bhagavad @-@ Gita , or any other religious poetry is what it feels like to believe that religion . " 
 According to Russell Kirk , " Nor is it possible to appreciate Eliot — whether or not one agrees with him — if one comes to Four Quartets with ideological blinders . Ideology , it must be remembered , is the attempt to supplant religious dogmas by political and <unk> dogmas . If one 's first premise is that religion must be a snare and a delusion , for instance , then it follows that Eliot becomes an enemy to be assaulted , rather than a pilgrim whose journal one may admire @-@ even if one does not believe in the goal of that quest . " 
 = = = Krishna = = = 
 Eliot 's poetry is filled with religious images beyond those common to Christianity : the Four Quartets brings in Hindu stories with a particular emphasis on the Bhagavad @-@ Gita of the Mahabharata . Eliot went so far as to mark where he alludes to Hindu stories in his editions of the Mahabharata by including a page added which compared battle scenes with The Dry Salvages . 
 = = Critical responses = = 
 Reviews were favourable for each poem . The completed set received divided reviews in the United States while it was received overall favourably by the British . The American critics liked the poetry but many did not appreciate the religious content of the work or that Eliot abandoned philosophical aspects of his earlier poetry . The British response was connected to Eliot 's nationalistic spirit , and the work was received as a series of poems intended to help the nation during difficult times . <unk> Haldar went so far as to assert that the " Four Quartets has been universally appreciated as the crown of Eliot 's achievement in religious poetry , one that appeals to all including those who do not share Orthodox Christian creed . " 
 George Orwell believed just the opposite . He argued : " It is clear that something has departed , some kind of current has been switched off , the later verse does not contain the earlier , even if it is claimed as an improvement upon it [ ... ] He does not really feel his faith , but merely assents to it for complex reasons . It does not in itself give him any fresh literary impulse . " Years later , Russell Kirk wrote , " I cannot agree with Orwell that Eliot gave no more than a melancholy assent to doctrines now quite unbelievable . Over the past quarter of a century , most serious critics — whether or not they find Christian faith impossible — have found in the Quartets the greatest twentieth @-@ century achievements in the poetry of philosophy and religion . " Like Orwell , Stead also noticed a difference between the Four Quartets and Eliot 's earlier poetry , but he disagreed with Orwell 's conclusion : " Four Quartets is an attempt to bring into a more exact balance the will and the creative imagination ; it attempts to harness the creative imagination which in all Eliot 's earlier poetry ran its own course , edited but not consciously directed . The achievement is of a high order , but the best qualities of Four Quartets are inevitably different from those of The Waste Land . 
 Early American reviewers were divided on discussing the theological aspects of the Four Quartets . F. R. Leavis , in Scrutiny ( Summer 1942 ) , analysed the first three poems and discussed how the verse " makes its explorations into the concrete realities of experience below the conceptual currency " instead of their Christian themes . Muriel <unk> , in Theology ( March 1943 ) , did the opposite of F. R. Leavis and emphasised how Eliot captured Christian experience in general and how it relates to literature . D. W. Harding , in the Spring 1943 issue of Scrutiny discussed the Pentecostal image but would not discuss how it would relate to Eliot 's Christianity . Although he appreciated Eliot 's work , Paul Goodman believed that the despair found within the poem meant that Eliot could not be a Christian poet . John Fletcher felt that Eliot 's understanding of salvation could not help the real world whereas Louis Untermeyer believed that not everyone would understand the poems . 
 Many critics have emphasised the importance of the religious themes in the poem . Vincent <unk> stated that the Four Quartets " presuppose certain values as necessary for their very structure as poems yet devote that structure to questioning their meaning and relevance . The whole work is , in fact , the most authentic example I know in modern poetry of a satisfying religio @-@ poetic meditation . We sense throughout it is not merely a building @-@ up of an intricate poetic form on the foundation of experiences already over and done with , but a constant energy , an ever @-@ present activity , of thinking and feeling . " In his analysis of approaches regarding apocalypse and religious in British poetry , M H Abrams claimed , " Even after a quarter @-@ century , T. S. Eliot 's Four Quartets has not lost its status as a strikingly ' modern ' poem ; its evolving meditations , however , merely play complex variations upon the design and motifs of Romantic representation of the poets educational progress . " 
 Late 20th century and early 21st century critics continued the religious emphasis . Craig Raine pointed out : " Undeniably , Four Quartets has its faults — for instance , the elementary tautology of ' anxious worried women ' in section I of The Dry Salvages . But the passages documenting in undeniable detail ' the moment in and out of time ' are the most successful attempts at the mystical in poetry since Wordsworth 's spots of time in The Prelude — themselves a <unk> of the mystical . " Michael Bell argued for the universality within the poems religious dimension and claimed that the poems " were genuinely of their time in that , while speaking of religious faith , they did not assume it in the reader . " John Cooper , in regard to the poem 's place within the historical context of World War II , described the aspects of the series appeal : " Four Quartets spoke about the spirit in the midst of this new crisis and , not surprisingly , there were many readers who would not only allow the poem to carry them with it , but who also hungered for it . " 
 In a more secular appreciation , one of Eliot 's biographers , the critic Peter Ackroyd , has stated that " the most striking characteristic of The Four Quartets is the way in which these sequences are very carefully structured . They echo and re @-@ echo each other , and one sequence in each poem , as it were , echoes its companion sequence in the next poem . . . The Four Quartets are poems about a nation and about a culture which is very severely under threat , and in a sense , you could describe The Four Quartets as a poem of memory , but not the memory of one individual but the memory of a whole civilization . " 
 = Johann Peter Hebel = 
 Johann Peter Hebel ( 10 May 1760 – 22 September 1826 ) was a German short story writer , dialectal poet , evangelical theologian and pedagogue , most famous for a collection of Alemannic lyric poems ( Allemannische Gedichte ) and one of German tales ( Schatzkästlein des <unk> <unk> – Treasure Chest of the Family Friend from the Rhine ) . 
 Born in Basel , Hebel entered primary school in 1766 and joined a Latin school three years later ; he visited the schools in Basel during summer and in Hausen and <unk> respectively in the nearby Wiesental during winter . After the death of his mother in 1773 , he remained at school , graduating with the help of friends from the Gymnasium <unk> of Karlsruhe in 1778 and going on to study theology . He became a home tutor , an assistant preacher , an assistant teacher , a <unk> and , in 1798 , a professor and court deacon . 
 Hebel was interested in botany , natural history and other subjects . His literary work began with Allemannische Gedichte , which is perhaps the most popular work written in Alemannic . He had success with his calendar stories in the <unk> <unk> , and later with Rheinländischer Hausfreund ( Rhenish family friend ) , but a dispute between Catholics forced him to resign as editor of the calendar . In his last years he devoted himself increasingly to religion , becoming a prelate in 1819 , but his wish to become a parish priest was never fulfilled . His last works were biblical stories for young readers , which served as textbooks until 1855 . Hebel died 1826 in Schwetzingen . Goethe , Tolstoy , Gottfried Keller , Hermann Hesse and other writers have praised his works . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Johann Peter Hebel was born on 10 May 1760 in Basel , where his parents were employed in a patrician household during the summer . He spent half of his childhood in Basel and the other half in the village of Hausen im Wiesental , where his father worked as a weaver during the winters . As he wrote in an autobiographical sketch , " there I learned early on what it meant to be poor and rich ... to have nothing and to have everything , to be happy with the happy people and to be sad with those who cried " . Memories of both places had a deep influence on his literary work . Hebel 's father , who had moved to southern Baden from the Hunsrück area , died of typhus early in 1761 , as did his younger sister , who was only a few weeks old . Hebel went to primary school in Hausen in 1766 , and in 1769 went on to the Latin school in <unk> , where his teacher was the theologian August Gottlieb <unk> . During the summer months he went to a parish school in Basel , and later to the prestigious cathedral school ( Gymnasium am <unk> ) . His mother died when he was thirteen . 
 In 1774 , with financial help from friends , Hebel joined the Gymnasium <unk> in Karlsruhe ( now the Bismarck @-@ Gymnasium ) , where he graduated in 1778 . After studying theology in Erlangen from 1778 to 1780 , he became a home tutor and assistant preacher in <unk> , Bad Bellingen , and was appointed <unk> ( assistant teacher ) in 1783 at the <unk> in Lörrach , now called the Hebel @-@ Gymnasium in his honour . He became friends with the headmaster , Tobias <unk> , and through him met Gustave <unk> , <unk> 's sister @-@ in @-@ law , with whom he had a long @-@ lasting , platonic relationship and to whom he sent numerous letters . Hebel remained unmarried all his life , although in later years he adored the actress Henriette Hendel @-@ Schütz . In 1791 he returned to Karlsruhe to take up a position as a deacon at the Karlsruhe Gymnasium , but was instead only named a " <unk> " . Apart from teaching , Hebel occasionally preached at court , where he enjoyed great popularity . 
 = = Later life = = 
 In 1798 Hebel became a professor and court deacon . He taught several other subjects in the Gymnasium , among them botany and natural history . He took a broad interest in botany ; he maintained a herbarium and rearranged the botanical terms and diagnoses in Flora <unk> <unk> , written by his friend , botanist Karl Christian Gmelin . In his honour , Gmelin named a plant <unk> <unk> , though it was later renamed <unk> <unk> . Hebel became an honorary member of the mineralogical society in Jena in 1799 , and three years later a corresponding member of the " <unk> Gesellschaft der Ärzte und <unk> in Schwaben " . In his youth he enjoyed the works of Klopstock and Jung @-@ <unk> . Later he especially liked Jean Paul and Johann Heinrich <unk> . 
 Hebel lived in Karlsruhe until his death , but made occasional journeys to other regions . His wish to become a parish priest in Wiesental was never fulfilled , though he wrote an inaugural sermon for a rural parish in 1820 . In this sermon he wrote , " to live and die as a pastor in a peaceful country town , among honest people , has always been my sole wish , up to this hour ; it was what I wished for in the happiest and in the darkest moments of my life " . Instead , he was " led higher and higher by an invisible hand , ever further away from my modest goals " . In 1805 he was offered the Lutheran parish of Freiburg im Breisgau , but he declined it at the behest of Charles Frederick , Grand Duke of Baden . He was rewarded in 1808 with his appointment as director of the Gymnasium in Karlsruhe . In 1819 he became a prelate of the Lutheran regional church , a leading position that brought with it a seat in the Upper House of the Parliament ( <unk> ) of Baden . As a member of parliament he devoted himself mainly to education , the church and social policy . He later gave a speech at the consecration of the statehouse in Karlsruhe . Even though the Lutheran and Reformed regional churches of Baden merged in 1821 with strong support from his side , into today 's Evangelische <unk> in Baden , his position as the prelate of the unified Protestant church was not endangered . 
 Hebel 's health deteriorated after 1815 . In 1826 he travelled to Heidelberg and Mannheim to oversee school exams , and he died on 22 September 1826 in nearby Schwetzingen . His grave is there . Johannes <unk> succeeded him as prelate in the regional church of Baden . 
 = = Writings = = 
 = = = Allemannische Gedichte = = = 
 Apart from a few early attempts , Hebel 's began his literary work near the end of the 18th century . After returning to Karlsruhe from a trip to Wiesental in 1799 , he began to write Allemannische Gedichte , inspired by a longing for his home . ( Allemannische is the spelling he used ; normally it has just one " l " . ) The 32 poems " for friends of the rural way of life " were written in Alemannic , the local dialect of Wiesental . Hebel could not find a Basel publisher willing to produce the book in Alemannic , and the collection was only published in 1803 by Philip <unk> in Karlsruhe , after Hebel and his friends managed to collect enough advance subscriptions . The first edition was published anonymously , possibly because Hebel was concerned about getting a rustic image . 
 In Allemannische Gedichte , Hebel depicts the local life and customs of his homeland , with topics ranging from a description of the river Wiese , through praise of the Breisgau area , to his work in the ironworks in Hausen . Perhaps the most famous poem is " Die <unk> " , a poem about death , in which the father ( Alemannic : <unk> ) tells his son ( <unk> ) a story based on <unk> Castle , about how a glorious town like Basel will decline – and likewise the whole world . Hebel also included his experience of his mother 's death : the conversation between <unk> and <unk> takes place in a cart on the street between <unk> and <unk> , where Hebel 's mother had died . 
 Allemannische Gedichte was very successful , and a new edition was published a year later , this time crediting the author . When Hebel read the poems aloud to margrave Charles Frederick , the duke praised them , and Hebel noticed his exact local knowledge : " I am surprised how the margrave knew all the villages , every small place , every shrub and hedge from <unk> to Lörrach , and could always say : this is this , and yes , that 's how it is . " In the following decades , further editions were released in Aarau , Vienna and <unk> . Famous poets such as Jean Paul ( 1803 ) and Goethe ( 1804 ) wrote reviews of the poems . Hebel was elated at this success and wrote in a letter : " In certain moments I feel all proud inside , and as if drunk with happiness , that I could make our otherwise despised and ridiculed language so classical and give it such artistic fame " . 
 = = = Calendar stories = = = 
 Hebel 's second famous work is his calendar stories , which he wrote from 1803 on for the <unk> <unk> and especially from 1807 for its successor , the Rheinländischer Hausfreund . This old Lutheran calendar was selling poorly in the early 19th century , and Hebel was a member of the commission appointed to suggest improvements . After several discussions , Hebel finally became editor of the new calendar , which was first released in 1807 . One of the biggest improvements was to have more text , featuring " instructive news and funny stories " . Hebel wrote about 30 of these stories each year , and they were highly successful . The Schatzkästlein des <unk> <unk> was issued in 1811 as a collection of the most interesting of these stories . Further editions followed in 1816 and 1827 . The calendar stories included news , short stories , anecdotes , comical stories and modified fairy tales . They were intended both to entertain and to provide moral education . The best @-@ known of Hebel 's calendar stories are " <unk> Wiedersehen " ( unexpected reunion ) and " <unk> " ( I cannot understand ) . The philosopher Ernst Bloch called the first " the most beautiful story of the world " . There was a dispute in 1815 , as Hebel 's calendar story " Der <unk> Rat " ( pious advice ) , issued in 1814 , was partially criticised by Catholics as being offensive , leading to its removal from the calendar . There he portrays a Catholic who prays to heaven instead of to the cross @-@ bearing priest ; the change can be viewed as a conversion of the Catholic to Protestantism . Hebel rounded off his story with the words : " The family friend knows to praise and venerate that , although he has never prayed to a rosary , else he would not write to the Lutheran calendar . " Subsequently , Hebel resigned as editor and wrote far fewer calendar stories , except in 1819 , when he wrote more than ever to make that year 's issue of the Rheinländischer Hausfreund possible . 
 = = = Bible stories = = = 
 After the calendar stories , Hebel wrote <unk> Geschichten ( Bible stories ) , a new school book for evangelical religious education . His criteria were that it should be clearly written and tell biblical stories in an exciting narrative style aimed at children from ten to fourteen . It took five years to write and was completed and released in 1824 . It was used as a textbook until 1855 . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Hebel 's admirers include Goethe , Gottfried Keller and Tolstoy . Goethe , who tried to write a poem ( the " <unk> " , Swiss song ) in Alemannic himself , praised the Allemannische Gedichte highly . According to him , Hebel " countrified the universe in the most naive , graceful fashion " . But on the question of whether he would translate Hebel 's works , Goethe said : " Such a great poet should be only read in the original ! One just needs to learn this language ! " The Brothers Grimm also admired Hebel , and he met Jacob Grimm in Karlsruhe in 1814 . 
 Hebel 's work reflects the links between popular culture and deeper ideas . August <unk> , for example , praised Hebel 's " <unk> " ( transience ) , saying that it gives the folk @-@ like foreground a background not found in other poets who wrote folk idylls . <unk> further emphasises Hebel 's description of nature by the river Wiese , the poem " <unk> " , and especially the stories of the Schatzkästlein : " In their mood , their deep and genuine feeling , the liveliness of their imagery , the stories are unsurpassable , and worth a whole cart @-@ load of novels " . Theodor Heuss praised Hebel 's use of the native Alemannic language , not only for parody and vulgarity , but also to make it " a true tool of the poetic craft " , and according to Heuss he created a work that " resonates with the durable , the valid , the eternal , the eternally human " . 
 Later authors appreciated Hebel 's work too . Hermann Hesse once commented , " As far as I know , in no literary history do we yet read that Hebel was the greatest German novelist , as great as Keller and more confident and purer and mightier in effect than Goethe . " Theodor W. Adorno lauded his essay Die Juden as " one of the most beautiful German prose plays in defence of the Jews " . In Die <unk> <unk> , Geschichte einer Jugend , Elias Canetti described the influence that Hebel 's Schatzkästlein had on him : " I never wrote a book , but that I did not secretly aspire to his style , and I began by writing everything in shorthand , the knowledge of which I owe to him alone . " Marcel Reich @-@ <unk> wrote , " Hebel 's stories are among the most beautiful in the German language " , and included the " Schatzkästlein " and " Die Rose " in his Kanon Deutscher Literatur . The first was also listed in the <unk> @-@ Bibliothek der 100 <unk> . 
 The Johann @-@ Peter @-@ Hebel @-@ Preis was endowed in 1936 in honour of Hebel . The 10 @,@ 000 @-@ euro prize is awarded every two years to writers , translators , essayists , media representatives or scientists from the German district of Baden @-@ Württemberg who write in Alemannic or are connected with Hebel . The <unk> ceremony takes place in Hausen im Wiesental , which is also home to the <unk> every 10 May . The community of Hausen also awards the annual Johann @-@ Peter @-@ Hebel @-@ <unk> to personalities from the Upper Rhine . 
 The <unk> <unk> was renamed the Hebel @-@ Gymnasium in 1926 . Several <unk> in Pforzheim and Schwetzingen were named after him . Basic schools , in Essen , Berlin and especially <unk> bear his name , as do numerous German streets . Monuments to Hebel are found in the Karlsruhe Palace , in Basel , Hausen and in the <unk> Lörrach . The <unk> Lörrach , Müllheim and the Basler <unk> are dedicated to his life and work . 
 = Cardiff Arms Park = 
 Cardiff Arms Park ( Welsh : Parc yr <unk> Caerdydd ) , also known as The Arms Park and the BT Sport Cardiff Arms Park for sponsorship reasons from September 2014 , is situated in the centre of Cardiff , Wales . It is primarily known as a rugby union stadium , but it also has a bowling green . The Arms Park was host to the British Empire and Commonwealth Games in 1958 , and hosted four games in the 1991 Rugby World Cup , including the third @-@ place play @-@ off . The Arms Park also hosted the inaugural Heineken Cup final of 1995 – 96 and the following year in 1996 – 97 . 
 The history of the rugby ground begins with the first stands appearing for spectators in the ground in 1881 – 1882 . Originally the Arms Park had a cricket ground to the north and a rugby union stadium to the south . By 1969 , the cricket ground had been demolished to make way for the present day rugby ground to the north and a second rugby stadium to the south , called the National Stadium . The National Stadium , which was used by Wales national rugby union team , was officially opened on 7 April 1984 , however in 1997 it was demolished to make way for the Millennium Stadium in 1999 , which hosted the 1999 Rugby World Cup and became the national stadium of Wales . The rugby ground has remained the home of the semi @-@ professional Cardiff RFC yet the professional Cardiff Blues regional rugby union team moved to the Cardiff City Stadium in 2009 , but returned three years later . 
 The site is owned by Cardiff Athletic Club and has been host to many sports , apart from rugby union and cricket ; they include athletics , association football , greyhound racing , tennis , British baseball and boxing . The site also has a bowling green to the north of the rugby ground , which is used by Cardiff Athletic Bowls Club , which is the bowls section of the Cardiff Athletic Club . The National Stadium also hosted many music concerts including Michael Jackson , David Bowie , Bon Jovi , The Rolling Stones and U2 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history of the site = = = 
 The Cardiff Arms Park site was originally called the Great Park , a swampy meadow behind the Cardiff Arms Hotel . The hotel was built by Sir Thomas Morgan , during the reign of Charles I. Cardiff Arms Park was named after this hotel . From 1803 , the Cardiff Arms Hotel and the Park had become the property of the Bute family . The Arms Park soon became a popular place for sporting events , and by 1848 , Cardiff Cricket Club was using the site for its cricket matches . However , by 1878 , Cardiff Arms Hotel had been demolished . 
 The 3rd Marquess of Bute stipulated that the ground could only be used for " recreational purposes " . At that time Cardiff Arms Park had a cricket ground to the north and a rugby union ground to the south . 1881 – 2 saw the first stands for spectators ; they held 300 spectators and cost £ 50 . The architect was Archibald Leitch , famous for designing Ibrox Stadium and Old Trafford , amongst others . In 1890 , new standing areas were constructed along the entire length of the ground , with additional stands erected in 1896 . 
 = = = 1912 redevelopment = = = 
 By 1912 , the Cardiff Football Ground , as it was then known , had a new south stand and temporary stands on the north , east and west ends of the ground . The south stand was covered , while the north terrace was initially without a roof . The improvements were partly funded by the Welsh Rugby Union ( WRU ) . The opening ceremony took place on 5 October 1912 , with a match between Newport RFC and Cardiff RFC . The new ground was opened by Lord Ninian Crichton @-@ Stuart . This new development increased the ground capacity to 43 @,@ 000 and much improved the facilities at the ground compared to the earlier stands . 
 In 1922 John Crichton @-@ Stuart , 4th Marquess of Bute , had sold the entire site and it was bought by the Cardiff Arms Park Company Limited for £ 30 @,@ 000 , it was then leased to the Cardiff Athletic Club ( cricket and rugby sections ) for 99 years at a cost of £ 200 per annum . 
 = = = North and South Stand redevelopments = = = 
 During 1934 the cricket pavilion had been demolished to make way for the new North Stand , which was built on the rugby union ground , costing around £ 20 @,@ 000 . However , in 1941 the new North Stand and part of the west terracing had been badly damaged in the Blitz by the Luftwaffe during the Second World War . 
 At a general meeting of the WRU in June 1953 , they made a decision , " That until such time as the facilities at Swansea were improved , all international matches be played at Cardiff " . At the same time , plans were made for a new South Stand , which was estimated to cost £ 60 @,@ 000 , however the tender price came out at £ 90 @,@ 000 , a compromise was made , and it was decided to build a new upper South Stand costing £ 64 @,@ 000 instead , with the Cardiff Athletic Club contributing £ 15 @,@ 000 and the remainder coming from the WRU . The new South Stand opened in 1956 , in time for the 1958 British Empire and Commonwealth Games . This brought the overall capacity of the Arms Park up to 60 @,@ 000 , of which 12 @,@ 800 spectators were seated and the remainder standing . 
 The Arms Park hosted the 1958 British Empire and Commonwealth Games , which was used for the athletics events , but this event caused damage to the drainage system , so much so , that other rugby unions ( England , Scotland and Ireland ) complained after the Games about the state of the pitch . On 4 December 1960 , due to torrential rain , the River Taff burst its banks with the Arms Park pitch being left under 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) of water . The Development Committee was set up to resolve these issues on a permanent basis . They looked at various sites in Cardiff , but they all proved to be unsatisfactory . They also could not agree a solution with the Cardiff Athletic Club , so they purchased about 80 acres ( 320 @,@ 000 m2 ) of land at Island Farm in Bridgend , which was previously used as a prisoner @-@ of @-@ war camp . It is best known for being the camp where the biggest escape attempt was made by German prisoners of war in Great Britain during the Second World War . Due to problems including transport issues Glamorgan County Council never gave outline planning permission for the proposals and by June 1964 the scheme was abandoned . At that stage , the cricket ground to the north was still being used by Glamorgan County Cricket Club , and the rugby union ground to the south was used by the national Wales team and Cardiff RFC . 
 By 7 October 1966 , the first floodlit game was held at Cardiff Arms Park , a game in which Cardiff RFC beat the Barbarians by 12 points to 8 . 
 = = = National Stadium redevelopment = = = 
 The National Stadium , which was also known as the Welsh National Rugby Ground , was designed by Osborne V Webb & Partners and built by G A Williamson & Associates of Porthcawl and Andrew Scott & Company of Port Talbot . 
 After agreement from the Cardiff Athletic Club , the freehold of the south ground was transferred solely to the WRU in July 1968 . Work could then begin on the new National Stadium . Glamorgan County Cricket Club would move to Sophia Gardens and the cricket ground to the north would be demolished and a new rugby union stadium built for Cardiff RFC , who would move out of the south ground , allowing the National Stadium to be built , for the sole use of the national rugby union team . 
 On 17 October 1970 , the new North Stand and the Cardiff RFC ground was completed , the North Stand cost just over £ 1 million . The West Stand was opened in 1977 and the new East Terrace was completed by March 1980 . By the time the final South Stand had been completed and the Stadium officially opened on 7 April 1984 , the South Stand had cost £ 4 @.@ 5 million . At the start of the project , the total cost was estimated at £ 2 @.@ 25 million , although by time it was finished in 1984 , it had risen by nearly four times that amount . 
 Both stadia had approximately east @-@ west alignment : the rugby ground to the north ( Castle Street ) end ; the National Stadium to the south ( Wood Street ) end . The original capacity was 65 @,@ 000 but this had to be reduced in later years to 53 @,@ 000 for safety reasons . 11 @,@ 000 of these were on the East Terrace and the conversion to all @-@ seater stadium would have reduced the stadium capacity still further to 47 @,@ 500 . This capacity would have been much less than Twickenham and the other major rugby venues and also less than the demand for tickets to major events . 
 A world record crowd of 56 @,@ 000 for a rugby union club match watched Llanelli RFC beat Neath RFC by 28 points to 13 points in the final of the Schweppes Cup ( WRU Challenge Cup ) on 7 May 1988 . The first evening game to be played under floodlights was held on 4 September 1991 at 8 @.@ 00 pm , between Wales and France . The last international match to be held at the National Stadium was between Wales and England on 15 March 1997 , and the last ever match that was held at the National Stadium was on 26 April 1997 between Cardiff and Swansea , Cardiff won the <unk> Cup ( WRU Challenge Cup ) by 33 points to 26 points . 
 = = = Millennium Stadium = = = 
 In 1997 , just thirteen years after the National Stadium had opened , it was considered too small and did not have the facilities required of the time and it was demolished and a new stadium , the Millennium Stadium , was built in its place ( completed to a north @-@ south alignment and opened in June 1999 ) . This would become the fourth redevelopment of the Cardiff Arms Park site . Although the Millennium Stadium is on roughly two thirds of the National Stadium , Cardiff Arms Park site , it is currently no longer using the Arms Park name . The official website confuses the issue as well , one part states that " The Millennium Stadium is located on Westgate Street in Cardiff ; next to the Cardiff Arms Park " . whereas another section specifically refers to the stadium as " The Millennium Stadium , on the Cardiff Arms Park " 
 = = = Proposed redevelopment = = = 
 An agreement in principle was reached in December 2015 between the landlord of the stadium site ( Cardiff Athletic Club ) and its tenant ( Cardiff Blues ) to give the club a 150 @-@ year lease on the stadium site . This could see the redevelopment of the Arms Park , including a new 15 @,@ 000 seater stadium at 90 degrees to the existing stadium costing between £ 20 million and £ 30 million and surrounded by new offices and apartments . 
 More detailed negotiations will begin with a final approval expected early in 2016 . If the final agreement goes ahead , Cardiff Athletic Club would receive an upfront payment of approximately £ 8 million . As part of the agreement , the bowls section would have to vacate its current site at the Arms Park and move to a new facility . At present Cardiff Blues pay Cardiff Athletic Club rent of around £ 115 @,@ 000 per annum , however this would nearly double to around £ 200 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Rugby ground = = 
 Only the rugby ground and the Cardiff Athletic Bowls Club now use the name Cardiff Arms Park . The rugby ground has two main stands , the North Stand and the South Stand . Both the Stands have terracing below seating . The other stands in the ground are the Westgate Street end ( currently known as the Coastal Cottages Family Stand ) , which has rows of seating below executive boxes , plus the club shop , and the River Taff end ( the Barry <unk> Suite , named after Barry <unk> , the former Cardiff RFC captain ) , which has 26 executive boxes . The rugby ground has two main entrances , the south entrance , and the Gwyn Nicholls Memorial Gates ( Angel Hotel entrance ) , which was unveiled on 26 December 1949 in honour of the Welsh international rugby player Gwyn Nicholls . The Cardiff Athletic Clubhouse is situated in the corner of the ground between the South Stand and the Westgate Street end . 
 The South Stand of the rugby ground formed a complete unit with the North Stand of the National Stadium . Now the same structure of the South Stand of the rugby ground is also physically attached to the North Stand of the Millennium Stadium . This section is known colloquially as Glanmor 's Gap , after Glanmor Griffiths , former chair and President of the WRU . This came about because the WRU were unable to secure enough funding to include the North Stand in the Millennium Stadium , and the National Lottery Commission would not provide any additional funds to be used for the construction of a new ground for Cardiff RFC . The Millennium Stadium was therefore built with the old reinforced concrete structure of the National Stadium ( North Stand ) and the new steel Millennium Stadium structure built around it . 
 There was doubt about the future of the Arms Park after 2010 following the move of the Cardiff Blues to the Cardiff City Stadium . Cardiff RFC Ltd , the company that runs Cardiff Blues and Cardiff RFC , still has a 15 @-@ year lease on the Arms Park , but talks are underway to release the rugby club from the terms of the lease , to enable the Millennium Stadium to be redeveloped with a new North Stand and adjoining convention centre . However , it still has the original requirement on the lease , that the land will only be used for " recreational purposes " , as stipulated by the Bute family . But the Arms Park site is a prime piece of real estate in the centre of Cardiff , which means that it may be difficult to sell the land to property developers . The estimated value of the whole Arms Park site could be at least £ 25 million , although with the " recreational use " requirement , its actual value could be a lot less than that figure . A decision by Cardiff Athletic Club on the future of the Arms Park has yet to be made . In 2011 , the Cardiff Blues regional rugby union team made a £ 6 million bid for the Arms Park , later the WRU made an increased bid of £ 10 million for the site . Both bids were rejected by the trustees of the Cardiff Athletic Club . However , in 2012 Cardiff Blues announced that they would be making a permanent return to Cardiff Arms Park following declining attendances at the Cardiff City Stadium . In the 2013 off @-@ season , the pitch at the Arms Park will be replaced with an artificial FieldTurf surface in time for the start of the 2013 – 14 season . This change is intended to prevent any adverse weather conditions from affecting the rugby . 
 = = Bowling green = = 
 Cardiff Arms Park is best known as a rugby union stadium , but Cardiff Athletic Bowls Club ( <unk> ) was established in 1923 , and ever since then , the club has used the Arms Park as its bowling green . The bowls club is a section of the Cardiff Athletic Club and shares many of the facilities of the Cardiff Arms Park athletics centre . 
 The Les Spence Memorial Gates were erected in memory of the former Cardiff RFU player , who captained the team in 1936 @-@ 37 . He was born in 1907 and became chairman of the Cardiff RFU and president of the WRU between 1973 and 1974 . He was awarded an MBE and died in 1988 . 
 The Club has produced two Welsh international bowlers ; Mr. C Standfast in 1937 and Mr. B Hawkins who represented Wales in the 1982 World Pairs and captained Wales in 1982 and 1984 . 
 = = Usage = = 
 = = = Association football = = = 
 The Riverside Football Club , founded in 1899 , played some matches at the Arms Park until 1910 , when they moved to Ninian Park , and later became Cardiff City Football Club . 
 On 31 May 1989 , Wales played its first international game against West Germany at the National Stadium in a World Cup qualifying match , which ended goalless . It was also the first ever international football match held in Great Britain that was watched by all @-@ seater spectators . 
 The adjoining Cardiff Rugby Club ground has also been used for Association Football . In July 1995 , Ton Pentre played two Intertoto Cup games there , against Heerenveen ( Netherlands ) and <unk> Leiria ( Portugal ) as their own ground was not suitable . The Heerenveen game - the first ever soccer match to be played there - kicked off at 6pm on Saturday 1 July 1995 and resulted in the Dutch side winning 7 @-@ 0 . The Wales U @-@ 21 team have also played a home game there in the late 1990s . 
 = = = Athletics = = = 
 In 1958 , the British Empire and Commonwealth Games were held in Cardiff . The event was ( to date ) the biggest sporting event ever held in Wales ; however , it would not have been possible without the financial support given by the WRU and the Cardiff Athletic Club . Both the opening and closing ceremonies took place at Cardiff Arms Park , plus all the track and field events , on what had been the greyhound track . It would turn out to be the last time that South Africa would participate in the Games until 1994 . South Africa withdrew from the Commonwealth Games in 1961 . 
 = = = Baseball & British baseball = = = 
 Baseball was established early on in Cardiff , and one of the earliest of games to be held at the Arms Park was on 18 May 1918 . It was a charity match in aid of the Prisoner of War Fund between Welsh and American teams of the U.S. Beaufort & U.S. Jupiter . British baseball matches have also regularly taken place at the Arms Park and hosted the annual England versus Wales international game every four years . The games are now usually held at Roath Park . 
 = = = Boxing = = = 
 The first boxing contest held at the Arms Park was on 24 January 1914 , when <unk> Billy Wells beat Gaston Pigot by a knockout in the first round of a 20 round contest . Boxing contests were held later on 14 June 1943 , 12 August 1944 , 4 October 1951 and 10 September 1952 . 
 Around 25 @,@ 000 spectators watched international boxing on 1 October 1993 , at the National Stadium with a World Boxing Council ( WBC ) Heavyweight title bout between Lennox Lewis and Frank Bruno . It was the first time that two British @-@ born boxers had fought for the world heavyweight title . Lewis beat Bruno by a technical knockout in the 7th round , in what was called the " Battle of Britain " . On 30 September 1995 , Steve Robinson the World Boxing Organization ( WBO ) World Featherweight Champion , lost against Prince Naseem Hamed at the rugby ground in 8 rounds . 
 = = = Cricket = = = 
 In 1819 Cardiff Cricket Club was formed , by 1848 they had moved to their new home at the Arms Park . Glamorgan Cricket Club , at the time not a first @-@ class county , played their first match at Cardiff Arms Park in June 1869 , against Monmouthshire Cricket Club . They played their first @-@ ever County Championship match there in 1921 , competing there every season ( except while first @-@ class cricket was suspended during the Second World War ) , their last match being against Somerset County Cricket Club in August 1966 . Cardiff Cricket Club played their final game at the ground against Lydney Cricket Club on 17 September 1966 . Both Cardiff Cricket Club and Glamorgan then moved to a new ground at Sophia Gardens on the opposite bank of the River Taff to the Arms Park , following work on the creation of a national rugby stadium , later named the National Stadium . 
 The first first @-@ class cricket match actually to be held on the ground was between West of England and East of England , on 20 June 1910 . In all more than 240 first @-@ class cricket matches were played at Cardiff Arms Park . 
 Only one List A game was ever played at the ground , and this was only the second match of its type : Glamorgan 's Gillette Cup fixture against Somerset on 22 May 1963 . Except for the aforementioned 1910 game , the only major match not to involve Glamorgan was a Test Trial in July 1932 , which was badly affected by the weather and saw play on only one of the scheduled three days . 
 = = = Greyhound racing = = = 
 To help pay for the upkeep of the site , a greyhound track was built in 1927 . The first meeting was held on 7 April 1928 . The Arms Park ( Cardiff ) Greyhound Racing Company Limited signed a 50 @-@ year lease in 1937 , with Cardiff Athletic Club – the owners of the Arms Park – having no rights to break the agreement or to review the rental until 50 years expired . A neighbouring track , the White City closed in 1939 and the Welsh Greyhound Derby was transferred to the Arms Park from White City , Cardiff in 1945 . This was one of the three races that formed the triple crown along with the English Greyhound Derby and Scottish Greyhound Derby . The track continued to host the race annually . In 1958 the entire surface required relaying after the Commonwealth Games had finished . In 1971 the Welsh Greyhound Derby was given ' classic ' status . In 1977 the Cardiff City Council announced that a revamp of the Arms Park site would not include greyhound racing . The Welsh Rugby Union required the Arms Park track to extend terracing at the National Stadium . The last Welsh Greyhound Derby was on 9 July and the last meeting was held on 30 July . 1 @,@ 128 greyhound fans saw <unk> Queen , owned by Cardiff butcher Malcolm Davies and trained by Freddie Goodman , win the last race . Cardiff City Council had taken less than ten minutes to reject a plan to switch greyhound racing to nearby <unk> Stadium . 
 = = = Rugby union = = = 
 In 1876 , the Cardiff RFC was formed and soon after they also used the park . On 12 April 1884 , the first international match was played at the ground between Wales and Ireland , when 5 @,@ 000 people watched Wales beat Ireland by two tries and a drop goal to nil . 
 The Arms Park rugby ground became the permanent home of the Wales national rugby union team in 1964 . Later , the National Stadium was also home to the WRU Challenge Cup from 1972 until the match held at the Stadium on 26 April 1997 , at a much reduced capacity , between Cardiff RFC and Swansea RFC . Cardiff RFC won the match 33 – 26 . 
 The National Stadium is best known as the venue for what is considered to be " the greatest try ever scored " by Gareth Edwards for the Barbarians against New Zealand in what is also called " the greatest match ever played " on 27 January 1973 . The final result was a win for the Barbarians . The score , 23 – 11 , which translates to 27 – 13 in today 's scoring system . 
 The scorers were : 
 Barbarians : Tries : Gareth Edwards , Fergus Slattery , John Bevan , J P R Williams ; Conversions : Phil Bennett ( 2 ) ; Penalty : Phil Bennett . 
 All Blacks : Tries : Grant Batty ( 2 ) ; Penalty : Joseph Karam . 
 The National Stadium hosted four games in the 1991 Rugby World Cup , including the third @-@ place play @-@ off . The National Stadium was also host to the inaugural Heineken Cup final of 1995 – 96 when Toulouse beat Cardiff RFC by 21 – 18 after extra time , in front of 21 @,@ 800 spectators . The following final in 1996 – 97 was also held at the National Stadium , this time it was between Brive and Leicester Tigers . Brive won the match 28 – 9 , in front of a crowd of 41 @,@ 664 . 
 In 2008 , the rugby ground hosted all the games in Pool A of the 2008 IRB Junior World Championship and also the semi @-@ final on 18 June 2008 , in which England beat South Africa 26 – 18 . 
 Until February 2012 , it had been assumed that the last professional rugby union game to take place at the Arms Park was on 17 May 2009 , when Edinburgh beat the Cardiff Blues 36 – 14 in a Celtic League match during the 2008 – 09 season . 
 However , on Tuesday , 7 February 2012 , it was confirmed that Cardiff Blues would face Connacht at the Arms Park on Friday , 10 February 2012 . The Pro12 League game result was a win for the Cardiff Blues 22 – 15 and attendance of 8 @,@ 000 . The following Tuesday , it was announced that the match against Ulster on Friday , 17 February , would also be at the Arms Park , resulting in a Blues win , 21 – 14 and attendance of 8 @,@ 600 . The agreement signed during 2009 tied Cardiff Blues to a 20 @-@ year contract to play a maximum of 18 games per season for a set fee , rather than per match at Cardiff City Stadium . But on 23 February , it was announced that the two Welsh ' derbies ' against the Scarlets and the Ospreys would be played at Cardiff City Stadium , rather than the Arms Park , because of Cardiff Blues ' anticipation that the attendance figures would far exceed the maximum capacity of 9 @,@ 000 . On 8 May 2012 , it was announced that Cardiff Blues would be returning to the Arms Park on a permanent basis after just three years at the Cardiff City Stadium . 
 On 23 May 2014 , the rugby ground hosted the final of the 2013 – 14 <unk> Challenge Cup in which Northampton Saints beat Bath 30 @-@ 16 . 
 = = = Rugby league = = = 
 South Wales Scorpions played a Rugby League Championship 1 match against London <unk> at Cardiff Arms Park on Sunday , 27 July 2014 and on Sunday 10 May 2015 at Cardiff Arms Park , South Wales Scorpions took on North Wales Crusaders . The 2015 European Cup match between France and Wales was held at Cardiff Arms Park on Friday , 30 October 2015 at 18 : 30 GMT . 
 The highest attendance for a rugby league game at the Arms Park was recorded on 8 June 1996 during the first Super League season when 6 @,@ 708 saw St Helens defeat the Sheffield Eagles 43 @-@ 32 . The St Helens team at the time contained Welsh players Anthony Sullivan , Karle Hammond and <unk> Cunningham . 
 = = = = Rugby league test matches = = = = 
 List of rugby league test matches played at Cardiff Arms Park . 
 = = = Tennis = = = 
 Tennis courts were laid out in the Arms Park for Cardiff Tennis Club until the club moved to Sophia Gardens in 1967 . In 2003 , the club amalgamated with Lisvane Tennis Club to form Lisvane ( CAC ) Tennis Club , which is still a section of Cardiff Athletic Club ( CAC ) . 
 = = Music concerts = = 
 Major music concerts were also held at the National Stadium from 1987 until 1996 , they included Tina Turner , U2 , Michael Jackson , The Rolling Stones , Dire Straits , Bon Jovi and R.E.M. The last music concert was held on 14 July 1996 . Jehovah 's Witnesses held their annual conventions at the National Stadium . 
 = = Singing tradition = = 
 The National Stadium was known primarily as the venue for massed voices singing such hymns as " Cwm Rhondda " , " Calon Lân " , " Men of Harlech " and " Hen Wlad Fy Nhadau " ( " Land of my Fathers " – the national anthem of Wales ) . The legendary atmosphere including singing of the crowd was said to be worth at least a try or a goal to the home nation . This tradition of singing has now passed on to the Millennium Stadium . 
 The Arms Park has its own choir , called the Cardiff Arms Park Male Choir . It was formed in 1966 as the Cardiff Athletic Club Male Voice Choir , and today performs internationally with a schedule of concerts and tours . In 2000 , the choir changed their name to become the Cardiff Arms Park Male Choir . 
 = Italian battleship Impero = 
 Impero was the fourth Littorio @-@ class battleship built for Italy 's Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) during the Second World War . She was the fourth ship of her class and was named after the Italian word for " empire , " in this case referring to the newly ( 1936 ) conquered Italian Empire in East Africa ( Somaliland , Eritrea and Ethiopia territories ) as a result of the Second Italo @-@ Abyssinian War . She was constructed under the order of the 1938 Naval Expansion Program , along with her sister ship Roma . 
 Impero was laid down in May 1938 and launched in November 1939 . The entrance of Italy into World War II forced the Regia Marina to refocus its construction priorities on escort warships , which meant that Impero would not be completed . After Italy surrendered to the Allies on 8 September 1943 , the rest of the Italian Navy steamed to Sardinia to rendezvous with their American contemporaries . Impero was still incomplete in Trieste and was captured by the Germans , who used her for target practice . Sunk by Allied bombers in February 1945 , she was refloated in 1947 and scrapped in Venice from 1948 to 1950 . 
 = = Background = = 
 For additional information , see Littorio @-@ class battleship 
 The Italian leader Benito Mussolini did not authorize any large naval rearmament until 1933 . Once he did , two old battleships of the Conte di Cavour class were sent to be modernized in the same year , and Vittorio Veneto and Littorio were laid down in 1934 . In May 1935 , the Italian Naval Ministry began preparing for a five @-@ year naval building program that would include four battleships , three aircraft carriers , four cruisers , fifty @-@ four submarines , and forty smaller ships . In December 1935 , Admiral Domenico Cavagnari proposed to Mussolini that , among other things , two more battleships of the Littorio class be built to attempt to counter a possible Franco @-@ British alliance — if the two countries combined forces , they would easily outnumber the Italian fleet . Mussolini postponed his decision , but later authorized planning for the two ships in January 1937 for the 1938 Naval Expansion Program . In December , they were approved and money was appropriated for them ; they were named Roma and Impero . 
 = = Description = = 
 Impero was 240 @.@ 68 meters ( 789 @.@ 6 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 32 @.@ 82 m ( 107 @.@ 7 ft ) and a draft of 9 @.@ 6 m ( 31 ft ) . She was designed with a standard displacement of 40 @,@ 992 long tons ( 41 @,@ 650 t ) , a violation of the 35 @,@ 000 @-@ long @-@ ton ( 36 @,@ 000 t ) restriction of the Washington Naval Treaty ; at full combat loading , she displaced 45 @,@ 485 long tons ( 46 @,@ 215 t ) . The ship was to be powered by four Belluzo geared steam turbines rated at 128 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 95 @,@ 000 kW ) . Steam was provided by eight oil @-@ fired Yarrow boilers . The engines provided a top speed of 30 knots ( 56 km / h ; 35 mph ) and a range of 3 @,@ 920 mi ( 6 @,@ 310 km ; 3 @,@ 410 nmi ) at 20 kn ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) . Impero would have had a crew of 1 @,@ 830 to 1 @,@ 950 if she had been completed . 
 Impero 's main armament would have consisted of nine 381 @-@ millimeter ( 15 @.@ 0 in ) 50 @-@ caliber Model 1934 guns in three triple turrets ; two turrets were placed forward in a superfiring arrangement and the third was located aft . Her secondary anti @-@ surface armament would have consisted of twelve 152 mm ( 6 @.@ 0 in ) 55 @-@ caliber Model 1934 / 35 guns in four triple turrets amidships . These were to be supplemented by four 120 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) 40 @-@ caliber Model 1891 / 92 guns in single mounts ; these guns were old weapons and were primarily intended to fire star shells . Impero was intended to be equipped with an anti @-@ aircraft battery that comprised twelve 90 mm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) 50 @-@ caliber Model 1938 guns in single mounts , twenty 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) 54 @-@ caliber guns in eight twin and four single mounts , and sixteen 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) 65 @-@ caliber guns in eight twin mounts . 
 The ship was protected by a main armored belt that was 280 mm ( 11 in ) with a second layer of steel that was 70 mm ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) thick . The main deck was 162 mm ( 6 @.@ 4 in ) thick in the central area of the ship and reduced to 45 mm ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) in less critical areas . The main battery turrets were 350 mm ( 14 in ) thick and the lower turret structure was housed in barbettes that were also 350 mm thick . The secondary turrets had 280 mm thick faces and the conning tower had 260 mm ( 10 in ) thick sides . Impero was to be fitted with a catapult on her stern and equipped with three IMAM Ro.43 reconnaissance float planes or Reggiane Re.2000 fighters . 
 = = History = = 
 Authorized to be built by Ansaldo of Genoa , the new battleship 's keel was laid down on 14 May 1938 and launched on 15 November 1939 . At her launching , she was christened Impero , after Italy 's empire in Africa . With Genoa being in bombing range of France , and war now a definite possibility , Impero was moved to Brindisi on 8 June 1940 due to fears of French attack . Trieste was considered a better location , but Roma was fitting out there and the shipyard could not handle two battleships at one time . While at Brindisi , some of her machinery was installed , along with parts of her smaller caliber weaponry . Despite the intent to move Impero to a safer location , Brindisi was still hit by Allied bombers , though Impero was not damaged . Nevertheless , the Regia Marina decided to shift production priorities to desperately needed escorts for merchant convoys . As a result , construction of Impero was delayed to expedite those ships . The only work done was the fitting of the engines and some gun mountings . 
 Fitted with small @-@ caliber anti @-@ aircraft and anti @-@ surface weaponry , Impero was sailed — using her own propulsion — to Venice on 22 January 1942 . At some later time , she was moved again to Trieste , though no further work was done on the ship . After Italy 's capitulation to the Allies in September 1943 , Impero was seized by the Germans , who intended to break her up for scrap . This was evidently never completed , as the hulk was discovered by Allied forces in Trieste after the war half @-@ sunk . The Germans had instead used her as a target ship and the Allies had damaged her during an air attack on 20 February 1945 . Impero was stricken from the naval register on 27 March 1947 . The hulk was raised sometime that year and towed to Venice and beached , where she was scrapped from 1948 to 1950 . 
 At the time of the capitulation , Impero 's hull was 88 % complete and the engines were 76 % complete , but overall the ship was only 28 % complete ; it would have required about eighteen more months of full work to be finished . Key features such as the armament , electrical wiring and a reworking of the bridge had still not been completed . 
 = Mon Calamari cruiser = 
 Mon Calamari cruisers are starships in the fictional Star Wars universe . These starships were first depicted in Return of the Jedi as part of the Rebel Alliance fleet that attacks the second Death Star . Industrial Light and Magic designed the vessels to visually contrast the Imperial Star Destroyers . Various Mon Calamari cruisers also appear in literature and video games of the Star Wars expanded universe . Replicas , toys and other depictions of the ships have been released by several merchandise companies . 
 = = Origin and design = = 
 Industrial Light and Magic ( ILM ) created two Mon Calamari cruiser designs : the cylindrical Home One command ship and a " winged " model identified in the Expanded Universe as the Liberty , which would have its wings removed and thrusters modified to portray another subtype . The ships were designed to be as aesthetically different from the Imperial Star Destroyers as possible , although the filming crew disliked the " pickle ships " due to the models ' unflattering angles . The ships ' design precluded ILM 's modelmakers from kitbashing other models to create the ships ; the model was largely <unk> . Internal neon lights provided lighting , and detail was painted on by using the second Death Star model 's exposed framework as a makeshift <unk> . 
 = = Depiction = = 
 According to Expanded Universe material , the peaceful Mon Calamari converted their passenger liners into warships to support the rebellion against the Galactic Empire . Expanded Universe texts state that the ships are crewed almost entirely by Mon Calamari due to the ships ' Mon Calamari @-@ oriented controls and interface . The primary opponent of Mon Calamari cruisers are the Imperial Star Destroyers . Although Mon Calamari cruisers are roughly the same size as most Imperial Destroyers , in head @-@ to @-@ head engagements the Mon Calamari cruisers are usually at a disadvantage , due to their thinner armor . Even so , Mon Calamari cruisers are still a formidable threat to the Imperial fleet ; their large numbers of fighter squadrons , modular weapons systems and overlapping shields make them ideal for hit @-@ and @-@ run attacks on Imperial ships , bases , and military outposts . In Return of the Jedi , Admiral Ackbar ( Timothy M. Rose ) leads the Rebels during the Battle of Endor from the Mon Calamari cruiser Home One ; although that ship survives , the Death Star 's <unk> destroys other Mon Calamari cruisers , including the Liberty . The franchise 's books , comics , and video games describe and depict other Mon Calamari cruisers and successor designs , such as the Mediator @-@ class battle cruisers and Viscount @-@ class Star Defenders in R.A. Salvatore 's Vector Prime . 
 = = Merchandise = = 
 A 1994 Micro Machines three @-@ pack included a winged Mon Calamari cruiser toy , and a 1996 three @-@ pack included the other variety . Hasbro in 2003 planned to release a Mon Calamari cruiser as part of its Action Fleet collection but they cancelled the line before producing it . Decipher and Wizards of the Coast published Mon Calamari cruiser cards for the Star Wars Customizable Card Game and Star Wars Trading Card Game , respectively . In 2006 , Wizards of the Coast created a Mon Calamari Star Defender miniature as part of its Star Wars Miniatures Starship Battles game . Mon Calamari cruisers are player @-@ controllable units in LucasArts ' Empire at War real @-@ time strategy . 
 = Rise Against = 
 Rise Against is an American melodic hardcore band from Chicago , Illinois , formed in 1999 . The band 's current line @-@ up comprises vocalist / rhythm guitarist Tim McIlrath , lead guitarist Zach Blair , bassist Joe Principe and drummer Brandon Barnes . Former members are guitarists Dan <unk> , Kevin White , Todd Mohney and Chris Chasse , and drummers Toni <unk> and Dan Lumley . 
 The band spent its first four years signed to the independent record label Fat Wreck Chords , on which it released two studio albums , The Unraveling ( 2001 ) and Revolutions per Minute ( 2003 ) . Both the albums met with considerable underground success , and in 2003 the band signed with the major label Geffen . Their major label debut Siren Song of the Counter Culture ( 2004 ) brought the band mainstream success , producing several successful singles . Their next two albums , The Sufferer & the Witness ( 2006 ) and Appeal to Reason ( 2008 ) , were also successful and peaked at number ten and number three on the Billboard 200 chart , respectively . Appeal to Reason was followed three years later by Endgame ( 2011 ) . All four albums released via Geffen were certified platinum in Canada , while three of these albums were certified gold in the United States . 
 Rise Against is also known for their advocacy of progressivism , supporting organisations such as Amnesty International and the It Gets Better Project . The band actively promotes animal rights and most of the members are straight edge ( excluding Barnes ) , PETA supporters and vegetarians . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early years , The Unraveling and Revolutions Per Minute ( 1999 – 2003 ) = = = 
 Following the disbandment of the Chicago hardcore punk band 88 Fingers Louie in 1999 , bassist Joe Principe and guitarist Dan <unk> began recording demos in the hope of using them in a new band . The two recruited drummer Toni <unk> , and auditioned several vocalists before settling on former Baxter and Arma Angelus member Tim McIlrath , whom Principe had met at a Sick of It All concert . The group called themselves Transistor Revolt , and released a self @-@ titled extended play in 2000 . 
 The band changed its name to Rise Against in 2001 and released their first album , The Unraveling , via Fat Wreck Chords that same year , produced by veteran punk producer Mass <unk> . <unk> left the band in 2001 , and was replaced by former The Killing Tree guitarist Todd Mohney . After touring in support of The Unraveling , the band returned to the studio in December 2002 to work on their second full @-@ length studio album , Revolutions per Minute , which was released in 2003 . The band toured extensively in support of its first two albums , opening for Sick of It All , NOFX , Agnostic Front , No Use for a Name , AFI , and <unk> Out . In addition , Rise Against participated in the 2003 Warped Tour . 
 = = = Siren Song of the Counter Culture and The Sufferer & the Witness ( 2004 – 2007 ) = = = 
 After the release of Revolutions per Minute , Rise Against was approached by several major record labels , and eventually signed with DreamWorks Records in December 2003 . However , DreamWorks Records folded into Geffen Records the following year , forcing the band to switch labels . Rise Against were also to switch guitarists , following Mohney 's departure in 2003 ; he was replaced by former Reach the Sky member Chris Chasse . Under the new lineup , Rise Against made their major record label debut with Siren Song of the Counter Culture in August 2004 . It became the band 's first album to reach the Billboard 200 music chart , where it peaked at 136 , and was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , denoting shipments of 500 @,@ 000 copies . The album received generally positive reviews from critics , but drew criticism for its accessibility and melodious sound compared to previous Rise Against works . In giving the album 3 out of 5 stars , Johnny Loftus of Allmusic commented " Siren Song of the Counter Culture sometimes gets carried away with its own melodic urgency . " However , he also stated that because of the album being the band 's major @-@ label debut , " maybe the fuller sound and occasional forays into acoustic guitars and cello overdubs ... are OK . " Rise Against toured North America , Europe , Australia , and Japan in support of Siren Song of the Counter Culture . Some of the most notable mentions include performances on the first international Taste of Chaos tour in 2005 ( with Funeral for a Friend , Story of the Year , The Used , and Killswitch Engage ) , a worldwide tour to the UK , Germany , Australia , New Zealand , and Japan , the Give It a Name tour in the UK , the Reading Festival and Leeds Festival in the UK , a US tour with Alkaline Trio , and the Warped Tour in North America . 
 In January 2006 , after touring in support of Siren Song of the Counter Culture , Rise Against recorded their fourth studio album at the Blasting Room studio in Fort Collins , Colorado with producers Bill Stevenson and Jason Livermore . Mixed by Chris Lord @-@ Alge at Resonate Sound in Burbank , California , The Sufferer & the Witness was released on July 4 , 2006 . The album peaked at number 10 on the U.S. Billboard 200 chart , selling 48 @,@ 397 copies in its first week of release ; it was eventually certified gold by the RIAA in 2008 . The Age newspaper said that with The Sufferer & the Witness , the band " returns to their punk roots . " In addition to earning Rise Against its best chart and sales numbers at the time , the album was generally well received by critics . Corey Apar of Allmusic , in giving the album 4 out of 5 stars , said of it , " the band 's inner grit is aptly drawn out amid all the pit @-@ ready choruses and fist @-@ in @-@ the @-@ air , stirring lyrics . " and also commented that " Rise Against continue to muscularly confront political and personal grievances to the tune of swirling guitars , assertive rhythms , and Tim McIlrath 's <unk> vocals . " Contrastingly , Christine Leonard of Fast Forward Weekly said of the band , " Returning to their old school form with the ballistic intensity of " Bricks , " they just as quickly lose focus with questionable efforts such as ' Worth Dying For ' and ' Prayer of the Refugee . ' " 
 A DVD titled Generation Lost was released on December 5 , 2006 to promote the band and their new album . It contained a documentary of the careers of the band members , as well as live performance videos and making @-@ of clips . Rise Against toured in support of The Sufferer & the Witness throughout the second half of 2006 and all of 2007 . The band was a headliner in the 2006 Warped Tour . In late 2006 , the band co @-@ headlined a tour with Thursday that included the bands Circa Survive and Billy Talent . In early 2007 , the band supported My Chemical Romance as openers on the first half of their arena tour . On February 23 , 2007 , Rise Against announced the departure of guitarist Chris Chasse , who left on his own accord because the touring schedule was becoming " too much , " on the band 's official website . Chasse was replaced by longtime friend Zach Blair from Only Crime . On June 15 , 2007 , the band began their first official headlining tour in support of The Sufferer & the Witness ; it was a North American tour that lasted throughout the summer months . During this tour , on July 3 , 2007 , Rise Against released an EP in Canada titled This Is Noise , which was subsequently released in the United States on January 15 , 2008 . 
 = = = Appeal to Reason ( 2008 – 2010 ) = = = 
 Rise Against played at the sixteenth annual KROQ Weenie Roast on May 17 in Irvine , California , and at the sixth annual Download Festival on June 13 at Donington Park , England . They also played at Switzerland 's Greenfield Festival as well as Germany 's Hurricane Festival and Southside Festival . Like several previous years , the band participated in the Warped Tour , although they decided only to perform on the tour 's west coast swing from August 6 to August 17 . 
 Rise Against 's fifth studio album Appeal to Reason was released on October 4 in Australia , October 6 across Europe , and October 7 in the United States . The album sold 64 @,@ 700 copies in its first week and peaked at number three on the U.S. Billboard 200 , making it Rise Against 's highest @-@ charting album to date . Appeal to Reason was met with generally positive reviews . However , critics did not rate it as highly as The Sufferer & the Witness , mostly blaming the movement toward the mainstream and away from faster hardcore punk . Giving the album a C + rating , Marc Weingarten of Entertainment Weekly said the album is filled with " protest anthems that lean closer to the burnished angst of such bands as New Found Glory and Fall Out Boy than the genuine outrage of brainy Green Day " and songs that are " peppy but pretty empty , power @-@ chord downers with little bark or bite . " Kyle Anderson of Rolling Stone stated that the songs on Appeal to Reason " are driven by an ever @-@ sharpening pop sensibility . " He also said that " Rise Against may be nervous about leaving the underground behind , but with sharp songs like these , they 're ready for the rest of the world . " 
 Rise Against released a song called " Death Blossoms " for DLC on Guitar Hero : World Tour on March 12 , 2009 . " Ready to Fall " and " Audience of One " were also added for a track pack . Another song called " Sight Unseen " was released on the Internet at about the same time . " Death Blossoms " and " Sight Unseen " were later released on the compilation album Long Forgotten Songs : B @-@ Sides & Covers ( 2000 @-@ 2013 ) as tracks 2 and 10 respectively . Two previously unreleased songs from the Appeal to Reason recording sessions were released on Fat Wreck Chords on May 12 , 2009 , as a self @-@ titled 7 " vinyl . The release included the songs " <unk> " and " Voice of Dissent " and was released on 7 inch vinyl , with 1010 pressings made on coloured vinyl and a further <unk> made on black vinyl . Another split 7 " shared with Anti @-@ Flag was released that same year , originally given away with any merchandise purchase on the 2009 Rise Against / Anti @-@ Flag / Flobots UK tour . 
 Rise Against embarked on a North American tour with bands Rancid , Billy Talent , Killswitch Engage , and Riverboat Gamblers in June and July 2009 . They were also on a short tour of the UK in November , which was supported by the bands Thursday and Poison the Well . The band also played at KROQ 's Almost Acoustic Christmas in December 2009 , playing right before AFI . After completing a European tour from October to November 2009 , an Australian tour in January and February 2010 and a summer European festival tour , Rise Against began recording their next album in the fall of 2010 . In September 2010 , Rise Against took part in A.V. Club Undercover by covering the song " Sliver " by Nirvana . On September 7 , 2010 , it was announced on their official website that Rise Against would be releasing their second live DVD entitled Another Station : Another Mile on October 5 , 2010 . According to the band this DVD will focus more on the band 's live , unreleased footage than a documentary , but will show backstage , on tour , and on the road footage as well . 
 = = = Endgame ( 2010 – 2013 ) = = = 
 On September 14 , 2010 , according to guitarist Zach Blair , Rise Against had begun recording their sixth studio album for a 2011 release , at the Blasting Room in Fort Collins , Colorado . On Rise Against 's latest DVD Another Station : Another Mile , there are samples of possible songs for their upcoming album played throughout the beginning of the DVD . Rise Against has announced two South American shows in Brazil and Argentina and a run of European shows in late February and March 2011 respectively . 
 Rise Against finished recording their sixth studio album , Endgame , in January 2011 , after recording some last @-@ minute guest vocals . The lyrics of the album focus on real world events , such as Hurricane Katrina and the Deepwater Horizon oil spill . According to McIlrath , although the lyrics discuss grim topics , they actually take on a positive view and were written from the perspective of : " What if the place on the other side of this transition is a place we 'd all rather be living in ? " On January 12 , 2011 , Rise Against announced the release date of Endgame as March 15 , 2011 . Although Spin Magazine labeled Endgame as a concept album , on January 7 , 2011 , McIlrath tweeted a clarifying message stating that " the record is not a concept record and , fret not , has absolutely nothing to do with the Dixie Chicks . " The first single from the album , " Help Is on the Way " , debuted on KROQ on January 17 . A second song from the album , " Architects " , was debuted and released digitally on February 15 . As a promotion effort , the band embarked on a short tour of South America in February and then a month @-@ long tour of Europe in March . Upon returning to the United States , the band announced a U.S. spring tour with Bad Religion and Four Year Strong . 
 Endgame is notable for being the first album to establish Rise Against 's stance on homophobia with the third song on the album , " Make It Stop ( September 's Children ) , " which references the September 2010 suicides of teenagers in the LGBT community , specifically mentioning Tyler Clementi , Billy Lucas , Harrison Chase Brown , Cody J. Barker , and Seth Walsh . Upon the album 's release , the band put a message on their website inviting listeners to apply the songs ' messages to current events , in addition to those on which they were originally based . 
 On May 10 , 2011 , the band released a 7 " split vinyl with Face to Face . The 7 " features 2 songs , with each band covering a song by the other band . In August 2011 , Rise Against made appearances at the Reading and Leeds Festivals . The band was the main support act for the Foo Fighters ' fall US tour 2011 . Rise Against supported the Foo Fighters on 9 dates in September , with Mariachi El Bronx as the opening act . After this , the band announced a tour of Canada throughout October 2011 , supported by Flogging Molly and Black Pacific . The tour consisted of nine dates . Rise Against contributed a cover of " Ballad of Hollis Brown " to Chimes of Freedom , a tribute album of Bob Dylan songs produced in February 2012 to commemorate Amnesty International 's 50th anniversary . 
 Rise Against embarked on a two @-@ leg US tour with A Day to Remember and The <unk> in the spring of 2012 . Leg one ended with the band launching another European tour . The band continued back to Europe for the summer months . Doing a slew of festivals along the way . To end 2012 , the band announced the return to the US with a fall tour with Gaslight Anthem and Hot Water Music . The tour will include two stops in Arizona , which the band has not played since 2009 due to the Sound Strike . On January 2 , 2013 , vocalist Tim McIlrath told Rolling Stone that Rise Against was " focusing on recharging [ their ] batteries " after two years of touring in support of Endgame . In March 2013 , Rise Against played their first ever performances on African soil when they performed in South Africa for the Durban , Johannesburg and Cape Town legs of <unk> , where they headlined the festival along with the UK band Bring Me the Horizon . 
 = = = The Black Market ( 2013 – present ) = = = 
 On May 22 , 2013 , Principe told AbsolutePunk.net that Rise Against was going to begin work on their seventh studio album around the end of the year for a 2014 release . On September 10 , 2013 , Rise Against released a compilation of B @-@ sides , sampler contributions and covers titled Long Forgotten Songs : B @-@ Sides & Covers 2000 – 2013 . In an interview with ESPN on the same day singer Tim McIlrath was asked about the next record 's progress and said " ... We are getting together periodically all fall to put some ideas together and then we 'll hit the studio when we are ready . It 's been a good breather , but now I can 't wait turn up some amps and scream . " 
 On April 14 , 2014 , the band posted a short video on their Facebook page teasing a new album with the message " Coming Soon " . On May 5 , 2014 , the band posted another short video indicating that a new album would be released in the summer of 2014 . On May 27 , 2014 , the band released a short video with a teaser of a song from the new album , and clarified the summer release date to be July 2014 . On June 4 , 2014 , a new teaser was released on Facebook revealing the album title The Black Market and release date of July 15 , 2014 . The album 's first single , " I Don 't Want To Be Here Anymore " , was released on June 10 , 2014 . In an interview with Kerrang ! Magazine , Tim McIlrath gave an insight into The Black Market and also confirmed five song titles for the new album : " I Don 't Want To Be Here Anymore " , " The Great Die Off " , " People Live Here " , " Zero Visibility " and " Awake Too Long " . On June 13 , 2014 , the band unveiled the official album artwork for The Black Market on their website . The track listing for the album was released one week later on June 20 , 2014 , on their website and other social media sites . On June 23 , 2014 , " The Eco @-@ Terrorist In Me " was leaked on iTunes and became available for purchase . The Black Market was released on July 15 , 2014 . Following the release of The Black Market , Rise Against obtained its second no . 1 on Billboard 's Top Rock Albums with 53 @,@ 000 hits , according to Nielsen SoundScan . Their first no . 1 was their previous album , Endgame . 
 = = Politics and ethics = = 
 All of the group 's members are vegetarians and active supporters of PETA , an animal rights organization . Their video for the single " Ready to Fall " contains footage of factory farming , rodeos , and sport hunting , as well as deforestation , melting ice caps , and forest fires . The group has called the video the most important video they have ever made . In February 2012 the band released a cover of the Bob Dylan song Ballad of Hollis Brown as part of a benefit for Amnesty International . The Director 's Cut of the video was first made available to a PETA website . In 2009 , the band was voted Best Animal @-@ Friendly Band by PETA . In addition to being vegetarians , all the members of Rise Against , with the exception of Brandon Barnes , are straight edge ; that is , they refrain from consuming alcohol or using drugs . 
 In addition to their support of animal rights , the band has voiced their support for Democratic causes . During the 2004 United States presidential election , the band was part of <unk> , a political activist group , and appeared on the Rock Against Bush , Vol . 1 compilation . The Rock Against Bush project raised over $ 1 million for then presidential candidate John Kerry . During the 2008 presidential election , the band members endorsed Barack Obama . In a news bulletin in early 2009 , the band stated : " Few things are more exciting than watching Bush finally release America as his eight year hostage . " 
 = = = Vans shoes = = = 
 On May 23 , 2007 Rise Against announced their endorsement of a new line of Vans shoes that would be " completely vegan in consideration to [ their ] animal rights efforts " . In response to criticism spawning from rumors of Vans ' use of sweatshops , Rise Against released a statement to address the matter on both their MySpace profile and website saying , 
 = = Musical style and influences = = 
 Rise Against 's musical style throughout the band 's career has been described by most critics as melodic hardcore , punk rock , and hardcore punk . The band has cited numerous punk and hardcore bands as influences to its music . In 2004 , drummer Brandon Barnes stated : " I think we have a lot of different influences from hardcore like old Cave In , to a lot of punk like Face to Face , Screeching Weasel , and Down By Law . " 
 In 2006 , Tim McIlrath stated of the band 's style : " We ’ re emulating Minor Threat and Black Flag . Who knows , maybe if Ian MacKaye was wearing eyeliner then I would be . " Other bands that have influenced Rise Against include Descendents , Dead Kennedys , Refused , Bad Brains , and Bad Religion . 
 = = Band members = = 
 = = = Timeline = = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 The Unraveling ( 2001 ) 
 Revolutions per Minute ( 2003 ) 
 Siren Song of the Counter Culture ( 2004 ) 
 The Sufferer & the Witness ( 2006 ) 
 Appeal to Reason ( 2008 ) 
 Endgame ( 2011 ) 
 The Black Market ( 2014 ) 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = 2015 Chicago Bears season = 
 The 2015 Chicago Bears season was the franchise 's 96th season in the National Football League . After the firing of general manager Phil Emery and head coach Marc Trestman following the 2014 season , the team hired former New Orleans Saints director of player personnel Ryan Pace and Denver Broncos head coach John Fox to fill those positions , respectively . Fox 's hiring marked the Bears ' third head coach in four seasons . 
 The Bears entered the 2015 season with hopes of improving their 5 – 11 record in 2014 . The team started the regular season on a poor note , losing their first three games . In the following eight games , the team went 5 – 3 , including a Thanksgiving win over the rival Green Bay Packers . However , the Bears then lost the first three games in December , and were officially eliminated from playoff contention in week fourteen by the Washington Redskins . In week sixteen against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers , the Bears improved upon their 2014 record with a 26 – 21 win . After losing in the final game of the season to the Detroit Lions , the Bears ended the season 6 – 10 and last in the NFC North . 
 The 2015 Bears were more competitive in games compared to the 2014 team , with six of their ten losses being by less than a touchdown . Additionally , new coordinators Adam Gase and Vic Fangio helped revitalize the offense and defense , respectively ; under Gase , quarterback Jay Cutler threw a career @-@ low eleven interceptions and recorded a 92 @.@ 3 passer rating , the highest in his career . With Fangio , the defense allowed 397 points ; the last two defenses had previously allowed franchise highs in points , including 442 in 2014 . However , the team was marred by injuries during the year , with only four players starting all sixteen games . 
 = = Offseason = = 
 = = = Organizational changes = = = 
 = = = = Front office = = = = 
 After three years , general manager Phil Emery was fired on December 29 , 2014 . Later in the day , former Baltimore Colts , Cleveland Browns , and New York Giants general manager and presidential assistant of Bears ' founder George Halas , Ernie Accorsi , was hired by the organization as a consultant to help the team find a new GM and head coach . 
 On December 29 , NFL Network insider Ian Rapoport reported that the Bears had four candidates for the GM position : Kansas City Chiefs director of player personnel and former Bears ' director of pro scouting Chris Ballard , Giants ' vice president of player evaluation and 2012 finalist for the Bears ' GM job Marc Ross , Tennessee Titans vice president of player personnel Lake Dawson , and Baltimore Ravens director of pro personnel Vince Newsome . Ravens ' assistant general manager Eric DeCosta was also rumored to be a potential candidate by Dan Pompei , while Minnesota Vikings assistant GM George Paton declined an offer . DeCosta later announced his intention to remain with the Ravens . Later in the week , Chicago requested an interview with New Orleans Saints director of player personnel Ryan Pace and Houston Texans director of pro scouting Brian Gaine . 
 On January 6 , the Bears conducted interviews for general manager with Gaine and Dawson . Ballard and Pace were interviewed the next day , and Pace was hired on January 8 . On January 13 , director of pro personnel Kevin Turks was fired . The Bears hired former Saints area scout Josh Lucas as their director of player personnel on January 18 . In the scouting department , three scouts were hired on May 15 . Ravens national scout Joe Douglas became the director of college scouting , Broncos assistant director of pro personnel Anthony Kelly as director of pro scouting and New York Jets area scout Christopher Prescott was hired in the same role . 
 = = = = Coaching = = = = 
 On the same day of Emery 's firing , two @-@ year head coach Marc Trestman was also fired , as was offensive coordinator Aaron Kromer . Quarterbacks coach Matt Cavanaugh 's contract expired on the same day , and was not retained by the team . 
 In the hunt for a new head coach , the Bears requested interviews with Denver Broncos offensive coordinator Adam Gase , Arizona Cardinals defensive coordinator Todd Bowles , Seattle Seahawks defensive coordinator Dan Quinn , and Detroit Lions defensive coordinator Teryl Austin . The team also showed interest in Ravens ' offensive coordinator Gary Kubiak and former Buffalo Bills head coach Doug Marrone . However , Kubiak announced on January 11 that he will stay with Baltimore . 
 The Bears went to Seattle on January 2 to interview Quinn , and the following day , interviewed Gase in Denver . Bowles was interviewed on January 8 , while Austin and Marrone were interviewed five days later . On January 14 , former Broncos ' head coach John Fox , who had been released on January 12 , was interviewed . Two days after his interview , Fox was hired , signing a four @-@ year contract . 
 Looking for an offensive coordinator , the Bears requested an interview with Titans tight ends coach Mike <unk> , but were denied . The Bears also showed interest in San Francisco 49ers quarterback coach <unk> <unk> and former Kansas head coach Charlie Weis for the OC position . Gase was selected for the OC role on January 21 . Defensively , 49ers DC Vic Fangio was hired on January 20 , and brought 49ers defensive backs coach Ed <unk> to serve the same position , replacing Jon Hoke . At the NFL Scouting Combine , the Bears announced that they would be switching to a base 3 – 4 defense in 2015 , a defensive scheme that Fangio had operated in San Francisco . Four of Fox 's assistants with the Broncos were brought to Chicago : Broncos special teams coordinator Jeff Rodgers was hired on January 19 , replacing Joe DeCamillis ; the next day , assistant defensive backs coach Sam Garnes , offensive line coach Dave <unk> and assistant special teams coach <unk> Swinton II were hired for the same positions they had served in Denver . The same day , defensive coordinator Mel Tucker , DeCamillis , tight ends coach Andy Bischoff , linebackers coach Reggie Herring and assistant special teams coach Dwayne <unk> were all officially released . To replace Cavanaugh and Herring , respectively , the Browns ' Dowell <unk> and Atlanta Falcons ' Glenn Pires were hired . Saints ' assistant offensive line coach Frank Smith succeeded Bischoff at the tight ends coach spot after being hired on January 22 . Three days later , defensive line coach Paul <unk> left the Bears to join the Houston Texans , and Broncos DL coach Jay Rodgers was hired . Two days later , Bears assistant DL coach Clint Hurtt was reassigned to outside linebackers . On February 10 , Ohio State running backs coach Stan Drayton joined the Bears to serve the same position . The next day , North Shore Senior High School assistant football coach and former NFL player Ben Wilkerson was hired as assistant OL coach , while incumbent OL coach Pat Meyer was not retained . 
 On January 21 , strength and conditioning coach Mike Clark was fired . The next day , the Broncos ' Jason George was hired to take his place . Broncos offensive quality control coach Bo <unk> was hired as an offensive assistant on January 24 . Three days later , Chicago offensive quality control coaches Carson Walch and Brendan Nugent were fired . On February 4 , Central Michigan director of strength and conditioning Rick Perry was hired as an assistant strength coach . On February 10 , the team announced they would not retain defensive quality control coach Chris Harris . 
 = = = Roster changes = = = 
 The Bears entered the new league year with 23 free agents , three of whom were exclusive rights free agents . The NFL 's deadline to apply the franchise tag to players was on March 2 , though the Bears did not tag any players . Free agency officially began on March 10 . 
 = = = = Acquisitions = = = = 
 The first signing of 2015 was on January 28 , when the Bears signed Toronto Argonauts receiver John Chiles to a reserve / future contract . 
 On the second day of free agency , the Bears signed Ravens linebacker Pernell McPhee to a five @-@ year deal worth $ 38 @.@ 75 million with $ 15 @.@ 5 million guaranteed , and New York Giants safety Antrel Rolle ( $ 11 @.@ 25 million , $ 5 million guaranteed ) , and San Diego Chargers receiver Eddie Royal ( $ 15 million , $ 10 million guaranteed ) to three @-@ year deals . 
 Afterwards , the Bears began signing players to one @-@ year deals . On March 16 , Vikings offensive lineman Vladimir Ducasse agreed to a contract ; two days later , Chiefs long @-@ snapper Thomas Gafford was signed . From March 24 – 27 , the Bears added four defenders : defensive ends Jarvis Jenkins ( Redskins ) and Ray McDonald ( 49ers ) on March 24 , Tampa Bay Buccaneers linebacker Mason Foster on March 25 , and Jacksonville Jaguars cornerback Alan Ball on March 27 . On March 31 , Falcons running back <unk> Rodgers joined the team . The first signing of April occurred on the first day , when Cardinals linebacker Sam Acho was acquired , and the next day , former Broncos center Will Montgomery was signed . Later in the month , on April 23 , Falcons tight end Bear Pascoe was signed . June 's first acquisition was also a one @-@ year signing , when the team signed Tracy Porter on June 8 . 
 On April 30 , Chiefs safety Malcolm Bronson was signed to a two @-@ year deal . On May 11 , the Bears signed quarterback Pat Devlin , linebacker Kyle <unk> and defensive tackle Terry Williams to three @-@ year contracts . The next day , New York Jets tight end Chris <unk> was claimed off waivers . On June 18 , safety Sherrod Martin and running back Daniel Thomas agreed to contracts of one year . Two days before the start of training camp , on July 27 , the team signed Arizona Rattlers receiver / returner A. J. Cruz , while former Cardinals defensive lineman David Carter was acquired the next day . 
 = = = = Departures = = = = 
 On March 6 , the Bears agreed to trade receiver Brandon Marshall to the Jets for a fifth @-@ round draft pick ; the trade did not become official until the start of free agency . 
 Defensive tackle Stephen <unk> was the first of the Bears ' free agents to leave the team , signing with the Redskins on March 10 . Two days later , safety Chris Conte joined the Buccaneers . On April 9 , cornerback Charles Tillman was signed by the Panthers . On May 13 , 14 and 17 , linebacker Darryl Sharpton , cornerback Danny McCray and receiver Josh Morgan departed the Bears to sign with the Cardinals , Cowboys and Saints , respectively . 
 On April 2 , safety Anthony Walters and center Roberto Garza , who had been the team 's longest @-@ tenured player , were released after ten seasons . On May 11 , linebacker Khaseem Greene and defensive lineman Austen Lane were released , and eleven days later , newly acquired defensive tackle Ray McDonald was released after being accused of domestic violence and child endangerment . On June 18 , Pat Devlin and tight end Jacob Maxwell were released , as was Jonathan Brown ten days later . 
 = = = 2015 NFL draft = = = 
 = = = = Pre @-@ draft = = = = 
 On March 26 , NFL.com analyst Lance <unk> wrote that the Bears ' five biggest needs entering the draft were at outside linebacker , nose tackle , offensive line , safety , and wide receiver . The general consensus regarding the Bears ' seventh @-@ overall pick was to select an edge rusher like Vic Beasley ( Clemson ) , Dante Fowler ( Florida ) , Shane Ray ( Missouri ) and Randy Gregory ( Nebraska ) , though WBBM @-@ TV 's Greg Gabriel believed the Bears should trade down from the pick , with players like Arik Armstead ( Oregon ) , Danny Shelton ( Washington ) , Eddie Goldman ( Florida State ) , Jordan Phillips ( Oklahoma ) and Malcom Brown ( Texas ) being fits for the Bears ' new 3 – 4 defense if the Bears were to trade down to a spot between 10th and 20th . Another suggested position to draft with the first @-@ rounder was wide receiver , particularly Alabama 's Amari Cooper , who , despite not being considered " a true need , a talent like his would be tough to pass up here . " A defensive position considered for the pick was nose tackle ; Sports Illustrated writer Andy Staples believed a 3 – 4 defense should focus on NT , and as a result , the Bears should draft Shelton , followed by a linebacker in later rounds , such as Eric Kendricks ( UCLA ) , <unk> McKinney ( Mississippi State ) , <unk> Anthony ( Clemson ) and Paul Dawson ( TCU ) in the second round , and afterwards , draft a running back like Buck Allen ( USC ) or Mike Davis ( South Carolina ) . 
 Prior to the draft , the Bears met with 37 players ; 25 had private visits , 6 met at the NFL Scouting Combine , 4 met at their college 's Pro Days , 3 had meetings at the Senior Bowl and the East – West Shrine Game . Iowa State 's David Irving was the only player to have a workout with the team . The team held a local Pro Day on April 7 , which featured players from the Chicago area , including : Northwestern quarterback Trevor <unk> , safety <unk> Campbell and receiver Kyle Prater , quarterbacks Taylor Graham ( Hawaii ) , Chandler Whitmer ( Connecticut ) and Matt Behrendt ( Wisconsin @-@ Whitewater ) , safety Corey Cooper ( Nebraska ) , offensive lineman Arthur Ray Jr . ( Michigan State ) and tight ends Matt <unk> ( Illinois ) , James O 'Shaughnessy ( Illinois State ) and E.J. <unk> ( Iowa State ) . 
 = = = = Draft class = = = = 
 The Bears attempted to trade quarterback Jay Cutler to the Titans for their # 2 overall pick , but Tennessee was not interested . Eventually , the Bears drafted West Virginia receiver Kevin White with the seventh @-@ overall pick ; considered the top receiver in the 2015 draft class by NFL.com analyst Mike Mayock , White caught 109 passes for 1 @,@ 447 yards and 10 touchdowns in 2014 . In the second round , Florida State defensive lineman Eddie Goldman was selected ; considered a first @-@ round prospect who had fallen due to his toughness , the 2014 Associated Press All @-@ American recorded 35 tackles , four sacks and eight tackles for loss in his final college season . With their third @-@ rounder , Oregon center Hroniss Grasu was drafted ; the 2013 and 2014 Rimington Trophy finalist , the Bears were convinced by guard Kyle Long to draft his former Oregon teammate . With White and Grasu 's selections , this marked the first time since 2008 that the Bears drafted at least two offensive players with their first three picks . In the fourth round , Michigan State running back Jeremy Langford was selected ; during his time with Michigan State , he recorded 2 @,@ 967 rushing yards and 40 touchdowns on 577 carries , while also recording 18 games with 100 + rushing yards , the third @-@ most in school history . He holds the Spartans ' record for the most consecutive Big Ten Conference games with 100 rushing yards with 15 , ending his college career with 16 . The Bears drafted their second defensive player in the fifth round , Penn State safety Adrian Amos ; having started 38 consecutive games for the Nittany Lions , Amos recorded 42 tackles and three interceptions in 2014 , with career totals of 149 tackles , seven interceptions , three sacks and nine tackles for loss . The Bears ' final pick of the draft was in the sixth round , drafting TCU tackle Tayo Fabuluje ; the 2012 Big 12 Conference Newcomer of the Year , he skipped football in 2013 due to family issues before returning in 2014 to help TCU win the Big 12 title . 
 Each of the draft class members agreed to four @-@ year deals with the Bears . Langford , Amos and Fabuluje were the first to sign , doing so on May 5 . The following day , White and Goldman were signed . Grasu was the last player to sign a contract , agreeing to a deal on May 8 . 
 Notes 
 The Bears traded their original 2015 fifth @-@ round selection ( No. 143 overall ) along with their 2014 fifth @-@ round selection to the Denver Broncos in exchange for the Broncos ' 2014 fourth- and seventh @-@ round selections . 
 The Bears traded wide receiver Brandon Marshall and their seventh @-@ round selection ( No. 224 overall ) to the New York Jets in exchange for the Jets ' fifth @-@ round selection ( No. 142 overall ) . 
 = = = = Undrafted free agents = = = = 
 After the draft , on May 3 , the Bears signed 15 undrafted free agents . On offense , six players were signed : ECU quarterback Shane Carden , who completed 63 @.@ 5 percent of his passes for 4 @,@ 736 yards , 30 touchdowns and 10 interceptions in 2014 ; Coastal Carolina guard Chad Hamilton , who was named to first @-@ team All @-@ Big South Conference in 2013 and 2014 ; Arkansas tackle Cameron Jefferson , who was an honorable mention for the All @-@ Mountain West Conference team while playing for UNLV ; Illinois State receiver Cameron Meredith , who led the Redbirds with 66 receptions for 1 @,@ 061 yards and nine touchdowns in 2014 ; Baylor receiver and punt returner Levi Norwood , who holds the school record for the most punt return touchdowns with two in 2013 , while also catching 128 passes for 1 @,@ 626 yards and 11 touchdowns ; and Alabama tight end Brian Vogler , who recorded 17 catches for 125 yards and two touchdowns in four years . 
 Defensively , seven players were signed : TCU linebacker Jonathan Anderson , who recorded 30 tackles and 4 @.@ 5 tackles @-@ for @-@ loss in 2014 ; Rice cornerback Bryce Callahan , who recorded 145 tackles , 13 interceptions ( second @-@ most in school history ) , 14 tackles @-@ for @-@ loss , two sacks , two forced fumbles and a fumble recovery in 47 college games , including a career @-@ best 43 tackles in 2014 ; East Central cornerback <unk> Black , a 2013 first @-@ team All @-@ Great American Conference member during his time at Northeastern Oklahoma A & M College , who had 25 tackles and an interception with East Central in 2014 ; UCF cornerback Jacoby Glenn , who recorded 48 tackles and seven picks in 2014 , and was named second @-@ team All @-@ American ( UCF 's first All @-@ American since 2007 ) and American Athletic Conference Co @-@ Defensive Player of the Year ; UCLA safety Anthony Jefferson , who led the Bruins with eight pass breakups while ranking third with 72 tackles , awarding him a spot on the second @-@ team All @-@ Pac @-@ 12 Conference roster ; Miami defensive end Olsen Pierre , who recorded 96 tackles , nine tackles @-@ for @-@ loss , 2 @.@ 5 sacks , two forced fumbles , a fumble recovery and six pass breakups in 44 college games ; and Washington linebacker John Timu , who recorded 108 tackles , two interceptions , and two touchdowns in 2014 . Chicago also signed two special @-@ teamers : Toledo kicker Jeremiah Detmer , the 2013 Mid @-@ American Conference Special Teams Player of the Year , who had an 84 @.@ 4 conversion percentage during his career ; and Old Dominion long snapper Rick Lovato , who didn 't miss a game in college . However , Detmer was released on June 18 . 
 = = = Offseason activities = = = 
 The Bears held a voluntary offseason program on April 13 , with the players focusing on strength and conditioning . Due to having a new head coach , a voluntary veteran minicamp was held on April 28 – 30 . A rookie minicamp was held on May 8 – 10 , while ten organized team activities were scheduled , three of which were open to the media ( May 27 , June 3 , June 10 ) . Finally , a mandatory full @-@ squad minicamp was held on June 16 – 18 . 
 Players reported to Training Camp in Olivet Nazarene University in Bourbonnais on July 29 , though practice officially began the following day . The camp lasted until August 16 , though no practices were held on August 4 , 9 and 12 – 14 . 
