 At the start of the 2010 – 11 season , Aulie was assigned to the Marlies after training camp with the Maple Leafs . He was later called up to the NHL on November 12 , 2010 , when Dion Phaneuf was injured . Aulie played his first career NHL game the next day against the Vancouver Canucks , playing 12 games total with the Maple Leafs in his call @-@ up before ultimately being returned to the Marlies . Despite the time he spent away from the AHL , Aulie was selected to the Western Conference team for the AHL All @-@ Star Game . During the Skills Competition , Aulie competed in the hardest shot event , finishing third , with a top speed of 95 @.@ 5 mph . After the Maple Leafs traded defenceman François <unk> to the Anaheim Ducks , Aulie was called up to rejoin the team . Maple Leafs General Manager Brian Burke said one of the reasons for the trade was to open up a spot at the NHL level for Aulie : " ... as soon as we get a roster spot , we 're calling up Keith Aulie . We expect him to be here for a while . " Aulie engaged in his first career NHL fight against Scott Hartnell of the Philadelphia Flyers , earning him the nickname " Muhammad Aulie . " He scored his first career NHL goal against the New York Islanders on March 9 , 2011 . 
 Prior to the 2011 – 12 season , Aulie was demoted to the Toronto Marlies . On February 27 , 2012 , he was then traded to the Tampa Bay Lightning in exchange for Carter Ashton . After the trade , Aulie split time between the AHL level with the Norfolk Admirals and Syracuse Crunch and the NHL with the Lightning . 
 On July 1 , 2014 , Aulie signed as a free agent to a one @-@ year contract with the Edmonton Oilers . On December 31 , Aulie was suspended for two games as a result of an illegal check to Calgary Flames center Matt Stajan . 
 As a free agent , Aulie accepted a professional try @-@ out contract to attend the training camp of the Arizona Coyotes on September 9 , 2015 . A month into the 2015 – 16 season , Aulie was signed to a professional try @-@ out contract with the Coyotes AHL affiliate , the Springfield Falcons on November 3 , 2015 . Aulie featured in 7 games for 1 goal over the duration of his try @-@ out before he was released on November 26 , 2015 . On January 3 , 2016 , Aulie signed his first European contract , joining <unk> of the Finnish Liiga for the remainder of the season . 
 = = International play = = 
 Aulie represented Canada internationally for the first time at the 2009 World Junior Championships . He played on a defensive pairing with Tyler Myers and helped Team Canada to a gold medal . Aulie , standing 6 ' 5 " tall , and Myers , at 6 ' 7 " , were nicknamed the " twin towers " by media covering the event . After the tournament , Aulie was honoured by his hometown of Rouleau with a steak dinner , as well as by his then @-@ NHL team , the Calgary Flames , when he attended a game against the St. Louis Blues . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Aulie 's parents are Bill and Karen . He has a younger sister , Krystal . He attended school in Rouleau , Saskatchewan , until Grade 9 , where he helped capture a provincial volleyball championship in addition to multiple provincial track medals . He attended high school at Athol Murray College of Notre Dame in Wilcox , before he began playing with the Brandon Wheat Kings . 
 In December 2006 , Aulie 's father was using a tractor to clear snow off a frozen dugout in anticipation of an outdoor shinny game on New Year 's Day . The ice could not support the weight of the tractor , and he fell through . Aulie was able to pull his father out of the water and get him to safety . The Canadian Red Cross honoured Aulie with their Rescuer Award for his act . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 Junior and professional statistics source 
 = = = International = = = 
 International statistics source 
 = Casual Friday ( The Office ) = 
 " Casual Friday " is the twenty @-@ sixth episode of the fifth season of the television series The Office , and the 98th overall episode of the series . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on April 30 , 2009 . In this episode , Michael , Pam and Ryan return to Dunder Mifflin as salespeople , and other members of the sales staff become upset when they don 't get their old clients back that the Michael Scott Paper Company stole from them . Meanwhile , Jim tries to remain neutral about the situation and plays board games with Creed , and Casual Friday is reinstated in the office , with mixed results . 
 The episode was written by Anthony Q. Farrell and directed by Brent Forrester . The episode received generally positive reviews , with several commentators expressing relief that the series appeared to remain fresh following the six @-@ episode " Michael Scott Paper Company " story arc , which had ended in the previous episode , " Broke " . According to Nielsen ratings , " Casual Friday " was watched by 7 @.@ 3 million viewers during its original broadcast , marking the lowest original episode rating of the fifth season until the May 14 season finale , " Company Picnic " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Michael ( Steve Carell ) has returned to his old job as regional manager of the Dunder Mifflin Scranton branch and announces that Pam ( Jenna Fischer ) and Ryan ( B. J. Novak ) have joined the sales team , retaining their old clients from the Michael Scott Paper Company . Dwight ( Rainn Wilson ) , Andy ( Ed Helms ) , Phyllis ( Phyllis Smith ) and Stanley ( Leslie David Baker ) are upset because most of those clients were ones Michael previously stole from them . They are also upset that Michael treats Pam and Ryan with more respect because they were the only people to follow him to his new company , with Michael believing his company operates within the branch despite the buyout . Dwight calls a secret meeting in the warehouse with the salespeople , minus Pam and Ryan , to think of a way to get their clients back . 
 Jim ( John Krasinski ) , trying to remain impartial , informs Michael of the potential mutiny and heads to the break room to play board games with Creed ( Creed Bratton ) until the conflict is resolved . Things take a turn for the worse when Dwight interrupts a sales call with Ryan , causing him to lose the client . Michael steps in and demands an apology , but Dwight , Andy , Phyllis and Stanley threaten to quit and start their own paper company . When Michael calls their bluff and starts throwing " seed money " at them , Phyllis breaks down and says that they were the real victims of Michael 's company , not corporate , and that they were hurt since Michael had treated them like a family and then turned on them . Michael is taken aback by her words . 
 Meanwhile , it is Casual Friday and most people dress too loosely at the office . Angela ( Angela Kinsey ) complains to Toby ( Paul Lieberstein ) about Oscar ( Oscar Nunez ) wearing sandals to work and having to look at his feet . Meredith ( Kate Flannery ) disgusts the rest of the employees by wearing a very short dress without any panties or a bra , thus exposing herself to the rest of the office as she tries to adjust it to meet Toby 's requests . Toby calls a meeting with everyone regarding Casual Friday . When Dwight tries to take charge of the meeting , Toby is finally stern with him and cancels Casual Friday , much to everyone 's disappointment . 
 Michael calls a meeting with Dwight , Andy , Phyllis and Stanley to give them a formal apology , but they do not accept it since all they want is their clients back . Michael reluctantly agrees to give back their clients . In doing so , however , there are not enough clients to keep both Pam and Ryan on the sales team , leaving Michael to decide which one to keep . He talks it over with Jim , who suggests Pam would be better suited , but Michael argues that Jim is biased since Pam is his fiance . Michael calls a meeting with Pam and tells her she did not get the sales job . Pam is visibly disappointed , but Michael starts laughing and tells her that she did get it , having offered Ryan a temp position again . Pam tells him he should stop with the " fake @-@ firing " joke , but Michael decides to pull the joke on the new receptionist , Erin ( Ellie Kemper ) . This is a callback to the pilot episode in which Michael " fake fires " Pam . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Casual Friday " was written by Anthony Q. Farrell and directed by Brent Forrester . The official website for The Office included two cut scenes from " Casual Friday " within a week of its original release . In the first 50 @-@ second clip , Jim welcomes Pam to her new sales desk with a gift of a model of an island with figures representing Jim , Pam and Dwight , who share the office pod together . Dwight insists he did not have anything to do with the gift and does not welcome Pam to the desk because she " obscures my view of the shredder . " In the second 50 @-@ second clip , Dwight tells Andy , Stanley and Phyllis that they should " put our balls in the guillotine , as they say , " by threatening to quit if Michael does not give their clients back . The others express doubt and wonder if they should keep quiet in order to protect their jobs . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Ryan makes reference to Michael Chiklis in The Shield ; Michael is not familiar with the show , but recognizes the actor from The <unk> . Erin says that Kelly looks like J @-@ Lo in her outfit , a reference to the actress and singer Jennifer Lopez . Kevin is shown to drive a Honda CR @-@ V. 
 " Casual Friday " included several callbacks to previous episodes . The scene in which Michael pretends to fire Pam , and she tells him , " Maybe you shouldn 't fake fire people anymore , " is a reference to the first episode of The Office , in which Michael pretends to fire Pam as a prank and she becomes very upset , which he then does exactly to Erin . Michael compares the difficult choice of choosing between renting the movies The Devil Wears Prada and Sophie 's Choice , both of which star Meryl Streep . The reference to the former film is a callback to the cold open to fourth season episode , " Money " , in which Michael discusses having watched the movie recently and acts rudely toward Pam in the same fashion as Miranda Priestly , the film 's antagonist , who is played by Streep . When Dwight is writing the secret messages , he uses Ryan 's coffee mug , that Kelly gave to him from the " Customer Survey " episode , to hold the urine . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast on April 30 , 2009 , " Casual Friday " was watched by 7 @.@ 3 million viewers , according to Nielsen ratings . It was the lowest original episode rating of the fifth season at the time of its broadcast , although the season finale " Company Picnic " , would later receive a lower rating on May 14 , being watched by 6 @.@ 72 million viewers . " Casual Friday " received a 4 @.@ 2 rating / 12 share among viewers aged between 18 and 34 , and a 3 @.@ 7 rating / 10 share among viewers between 18 and 49 . The episode received generally positive reviews . Most reviewers particularly praised the opening scene with Kevin dropping his pot of chili ; Fickett called it " a great silent comedy moment ( and ) a quintessential Office moment " . 
 Alan Sepinwall of The Star @-@ Ledger praised the episode , saying that it proves the show will still be good following the " Michael Scott Paper Company " arc , which he referred to as one of the best storylines in the show 's history . Sepinwall said he thought all the supporting characters were excellent , and that he particularly liked the new adversarial dynamic between Michael and Dwight . Margaret Lyons of Entertainment Weekly said , " This was the episode I 've been waiting for weeks . " She said she particularly enjoyed many of the subplots involving Kelly 's clothing , Creed 's chess game with Jim and Toby dealing with casual Friday problems . Nathan Rabin of The A.V. Club gave " Casual Friday " a B + grade , and said the episode had good character moments and a bit of dramatic depth in addition to a few good laughs . 
 Travis Fickett in IGN said Creed , Kevin , Meredith and Toby were all in top form in " Casual Friday " , and said he enjoyed the changes that resulted in Michael 's departure from and return to the company . However , Fickett questioned what direction the show would go now that so many questions have been resolved . Jay Black of TV Squad said the conflict between Michael and his co @-@ workers was very good , and he enjoys the way Phyllis revealed how hurt she was by Michael 's departure from the company ; however , Black said he did not like that the episode included a " Casual Friday " even though the office had never had one before . Rick Porter of Zap2it said the supporting characters were all in top form and that the episode demonstrated how Michael , in offering a genuine apology , has grown this season . Porter also praised the scenes with Jim and Creed , and described Kate Flannery as " one of the most fearless actresses on TV " for her scene with the short bathing suit . Josh McAuliffe of The Times @-@ Tribune called the episode " yet another winner in what 's shaping up to be a terrific last third of the season " . 
 " Casual Friday " was voted the sixteenth highest @-@ rated episode out of 26 from the fifth season , according to an episode poll at the fansite OfficeTally ; the episode was rated 7 @.@ 95 out of 10 . 
 = Icelandic Naming Committee = 
 The Icelandic Naming Committee ( Icelandic : <unk> ; pronounced [ <unk> ] ) — also known in English as the Personal Names Committee — maintains an official register of approved Icelandic given names and governs the introduction of new given names into the culture of Iceland . 
 = = Composition and mission = = 
 The Naming Committee was established in 1991 to determine whether new given names not previously used in Iceland are suitable for integration into the country 's language and culture . The committee comprises three appointees who serve for four years , appointed by the Minister of Justice — one to be nominated by the Icelandic Language Committee , one by the Faculty of Philosophy of the University of Iceland , and one by the university 's Faculty of Law . 
 A name not already on the official list of approved names must be submitted to the naming committee for approval . A new name is considered for its compatibility with Icelandic tradition and for the likelihood that it might cause the bearer embarrassment . Under Article 5 of the Personal Names Act , names must be compatible with Icelandic grammar ( in which all nouns , including proper names , have grammatical gender and change their forms in an orderly fashion according to the language 's case system ) . Names must also contain only letters occurring in the Icelandic alphabet , and with only occasional exceptions , a name 's grammatical gender must match the sex of the person bearing the name . 
 As of the end of 2012 , the Personal Names Register ( Icelandic : <unk> ) contained 1 @,@ 712 male names and 1 @,@ 853 female names . 
 = = Controversies = = 
 = = = Jón Gnarr = = = 
 Jón Gnarr , former mayor of Reykjavík , protested the committee 's denial of his request to legally drop " <unk> " from his name despite his desire to disassociate himself from his father . Jón pointed out that if Robert Mugabe moved to Iceland , as a foreigner he would be allowed to keep that non @-@ conforming name , but that native Icelanders were not allowed to have non @-@ conforming names . He was also unable to legally name his daughter " Camilla " after her grandmother ; it was instead spelled " Kamilla " because C is not part of the Icelandic alphabet . Jón was allowed to legally change his name in 2015 . 
 = = = Blær <unk> <unk> = = = 
 The committee refused to allow Blær <unk> <unk> ( born in 1997 ) to be registered under the name given to her as a baby , on the grounds that the masculine noun Blær ( " gentle breeze " in Icelandic ) could be used only as a man 's name . Blær — identified in official records as <unk> ( " girl " in Icelandic ) — and her mother , Björk <unk> , challenged the committee 's decision in court , arguing that Blær had been used by Nobel Prize – winning Icelandic author <unk> <unk> as the name of a female character in his 1957 novel The Fish Can Sing ( <unk> ) . One other woman in Iceland was already registered at the time with the name Blær , and two <unk> ( sets of case forms ) — one masculine and one feminine — exist for the name . 
 On 31 January 2013 , the Reykjavík district court ruled in the family 's favour and overruled the naming committee , finding that Blær could in fact be both a man 's and a woman 's name and that Blær had a constitutional right to her own name , and rejecting government claims that it was necessary to deny her request in order to protect the Icelandic language . After the court 's decision , Iceland 's interior minister confirmed that the government would accept the ruling and would not appeal the case to the country 's Supreme Court . The chair of the naming committee , as well as a spokesman for the Ministry of the Interior , said the ruling in Blær 's case could prompt the government to revisit the current laws on personal names . 
 = = = Duncan and Harriet Cardew = = = 
 The committee refused to accept the names of Duncan and Harriet Cardew — Icelandic @-@ born children of a British father and an Icelandic mother — because their names did not meet the criteria for being added to the registry of approved names . The children had originally used passports with the substitute names <unk> ( boy ) and <unk> ( girl ) ; however , in 2014 , Icelandic authorities refused to renew Harriet 's passport at all without a legally acceptable name . Since the <unk> were about to travel to France , they obtained emergency British passports for Duncan and Harriet ; the parents also announced they would file a formal complaint objecting to the naming committee 's rejection of their children 's names and the passport office 's refusal to renew their Icelandic passports . The <unk> announced in June 2016 that they had won their case and their children 's names would be recognised . As a result of this case , the Icelandic Interior Ministry announced it had begun the legislative process to abolish the Naming Committee . 
 = 5 euro note = 
 The five euro note ( € 5 ) is the lowest value euro banknote and has been used since the introduction of the euro ( in its cash form ) in 2002 . The note is used in the 25 countries which have it as their sole currency ( with 23 legally adopting it ) ; with a population of about 332 million . 
 Measuring 120 x <unk> , it is the smallest of the euro notes , and has a grey colour scheme . The five euro banknotes depict bridges and arches / doorways in Classical architecture ( up to the fifth century ) . 
 The five euro note contains several complex security features such as watermarks , invisible ink , holograms and microprinting that document its authenticity . In November 2014 , there were approximately 1 @,@ 653 @,@ 458 @,@ 000 five euro banknotes in circulation around the eurozone . 
 On 8 November 2012 , the European Central Bank announced the first series of notes will be replaced , starting with the 5 euro note on 2 May 2013 . 
 = = History = = 
 The euro was founded on 1 January 1999 , when it became the currency of over 300 million people in Europe . For the first three years of its existence it was an invisible currency , only used in accountancy . Euro cash was not introduced until 1 January 2002 , when it replaced the national banknotes and coins of the countries in eurozone 12 , such as the Irish pound and the Austrian <unk> . 
 Slovenia joined the Eurozone in 2007 , Cyprus and Malta in 2008 , Slovakia in 2009 , Estonia in 2011 and Latvia on 1 January 2014 . 
 = = = The changeover period = = = 
 The changeover period during which the former currencies ' notes and coins were exchanged for those of the euro lasted about two months , going from 1 January 2002 until 28 February 2002 . The official date on which the national currencies ceased to be legal tender varied from member state to member state . The earliest date was in Germany , where the mark officially ceased to be legal tender on 31 December 2001 , though the exchange period lasted for two months more . Even after the old currencies ceased to be legal tender , they continued to be accepted by national central banks for periods ranging from ten years to forever . 
 = = = Changes = = = 
 Notes printed before November 2003 bear the signature of the first president of the European Central Bank , Wim Duisenberg , who was replaced on 1 November 2003 by Jean @-@ Claude Trichet , whose signature appears on issues from November 2003 to March 2012 . Notes issued after March 2012 bear the signature of the third president of the European Central Bank , incumbent Mario Draghi . 
 Until May 2013 there was only one series of euro notes , however a new series , similar to the first one , is planned to be released . The bank notes are going to be replaced in ascending order . Therefore , the first new note is the 5 euro note which is in circulation since 2 May 2013 . Its new design was made public on 10 January 2013 in the Archaeological Museum of Frankfurt ( Germany ) . While broadly similar to the current notes , minor design changes include an updated map and a hologram of Europa . Moreover , the new notes will reflect the expansion of the European Union ; the current issues do not include the recent members Cyprus and Malta ( Cyprus is off the map to the east and Malta was too small to be depicted ) . It will be the first time when the Bulgarian Cyrillic alphabet is going to be used on the banknotes as a result of Bulgaria joining the European Union in 2007 . Therefore , the new series of Euro banknotes will include " <unk> " , which is the Bulgarian spelling for EURO as well as the abbreviation " <unk> " ( short for <unk> <unk> <unk> in Bulgarian ) . The European Central Bank will , in due time , announce when banknotes from the first series lose legal tender status . 
 = = Design = = 
 The five euro note is the smallest at 120 by 62 millimetres ( 4 @.@ 7 in × 2 @.@ 4 in ) with a grey colour scheme . All bank notes depict bridges , arches or doorways in a different historical European style ; the five euro note shows the Classical era ( up to the fifth century ) . Although Robert Kalina 's original designs were intended to show real monuments , for political reasons the bridge and art are merely hypothetical examples of the architectural era . 
 Like all euro notes , it contains the denomination , the EU flag , the signature of the president of the ECB and the initials of said bank in different EU languages , a depiction of EU territories overseas , the stars from the EU flag and twelve security features as listed below . 
 = = = Security features ( First Series ) = = = 
 As a lower value note , the security features of the five euro note are not as high as the other denominations , however , it is protected by : 
 A hologram , tilt the note and one should see the hologram image change between the value and a window or doorway , but in the background , one should see rainbow @-@ coloured concentric circles of micro @-@ letters moving from the centre to the edges of the patch . 
 A EURion constellation , special printing processes give the euro notes their unique feel . 
 A glossy stripe , tilt the note and a glossy stripe showing the value numeral and the euro symbol will appear . 
 Watermarks , it appears when the banknote is against the light . 
 Raised printing , special methods of printing makes the ink feel raised or thicker in the main image , the lettering and the value numerals on the front of the banknotes . To feel the raised print , run your finger over it or scratch it gently with your fingernail . 
 Ultraviolet ink , Under ultraviolet light , the paper itself should not glow , fibres embedded in the paper should appear , and should be coloured red , blue and green , the European Union flag looks green and has orange stars , the ECB President signature turns green , the large stars and small circles on the front glow and the European map , a bridge and the value numeral on the back appear in yellow . 
 Microprinting , On numerous areas of the banknotes you can see microprinting , for example , inside the " EYPΩ " ( EURO in Greek characters ) on the front . You will need a magnifying glass to see it . The tiny text is sharp , and not blurred . 
 A security thread , The security thread is embedded in the banknote paper . Hold the banknote against the light - the thread will appear as a dark stripe . The word " EURO " and the value can be seen in tiny letters on the stripe . 
 Perforations , Hold the banknote against the light . You should see perforations in the hologram which will form the € symbol . You should also see small numbers showing the value . 
 A matted surface , the note paper is made out of pure cotton , which feels crisp and firm , but not limp or waxy . 
 Barcodes , 
 A serial number . 
 = = = Security Features ( Europa Series ) = = = 
 Watermark : When the note is held under a normal light source , a portrait of Europa and an electrotype denomination appear on either side . 
 Portrait Hologram : When the note is tilted , the silver @-@ coloured holographic stripe reveals the portrait of Europa @-@ the same one as in the watermark . The stripe also reveals a window and the value of the banknote . 
 Emerald Number : When the note is tilted , the number on the note displays an effect of light that moves up and down . The number also changes color from emerald green to deep blue . 
 Raised Printing : On the front of the note , there is a series of short raised lines on the left and right edges . The main edge , the lettering and the large value numeral also feel thicker . 
 Security Thread : When the note is held against the light , the security thread appears as a dark line . The Euro symbol ( € ) and the value of the banknote can be seen in tiny white lettering in the thread . 
 Microprint : Tiny letters which can be read with a magnifying glass . The letters should be sharp , not blurred . 
 Ultraviolet ink : Some parts of the banknote shine when under UV or UV @-@ C light . These are the stars in the flag , the small circles , the large stars and several other areas on the front . On the back , a quarter of a circle in the centre as well as several other areas glow green . The horizontal serial number and a stripe appear in red . 
 Infrared light : Under infrared light , the emerald number , the right side of the main image and the silvery stripe are visible on the obverse of the banknote , while on the reverse , only the denomination and the horizontal serial number are visible . 
 = = Circulation = = 
 As of May 2013 , there are approximately 1 @,@ 584 @,@ 036 @,@ 800 € 5 banknotes in circulation around the Eurozone . That is approximately € 7 @,@ 920 @,@ 184 @,@ 200 worth of € 5 banknotes ( as of May 2013 ) . The European Central Bank is closely monitoring the circulation and stock of the euro coins and banknotes . It is a task of the Eurosystem to ensure an efficient and smooth supply of euro notes and to maintain their integrity throughout the euro area . 
 = = Legal information = = 
 Legally , both the European Central Bank and the central banks of the eurozone countries have the right to issue the 7 different euro banknotes . In practice , only the national central banks of the zone physically issue and withdraw euro banknotes . The European Central Bank does not have a cash office and is not involved in any cash operations . 
 = = Tracking = = 
 There are several communities of people at European level , most of which is EuroBillTracker , that , as a hobby , it keeps track of the euro banknotes that pass through their hands , to keep track and know where they travel or have travelled . The aim is to record as many notes as possible to know details about its spread , like from where and to where they travel in general , follow it up , like where a ticket has been seen in particular , and generate statistics and rankings , for example , in which countries there are more tickets . EuroBillTracker has registered over 155 million notes as of May 2016 , worth more than € 2 @.@ 897 billion . 
 = Joy Division = 
 Joy Division were an English rock band formed in 1976 in Salford , Greater Manchester . Originally named Warsaw , the band consisted of singer Ian Curtis , guitarist and keyboardist Bernard Sumner , bassist Peter Hook , and drummer Stephen Morris . 
 Formed by Sumner and Hook after the two attended a Sex Pistols gig , Joy Division moved beyond their punk roots to develop a sound and style that made them one of the pioneers of the post @-@ punk movement . Their self @-@ released 1978 debut EP , An Ideal for Living , drew the attention of the Manchester television personality Tony Wilson , who signed the group to his independent label , Factory Records . Joy Division 's debut album , Unknown Pleasures , recorded with producer Martin Hannett , was released in 1979 to critical acclaim . As the band 's popularity grew , Curtis , who suffered from personal problems that included severe depression , a failing marriage , and epilepsy , found it increasingly difficult to perform at live concerts , during which he occasionally collapsed into seizures . 
 In May 1980 , on the eve of the band 's first American tour , Curtis , aged 23 , committed suicide . The group 's second and final album , Closer , was released two months later ; the album and preceding single " Love Will Tear Us Apart " became the band 's highest charting release . After Curtis 's death , the remaining members continued as New Order and achieved critical and commercial success . Although their career spanned less than four years , Joy Division have continued to exert a vast influence on a variety of subsequent artists . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation = = = 
 On 20 July 1976 , childhood friends Sumner and Hook separately attended a Sex Pistols show at the Manchester Lesser Free Trade Hall . The following day Hook borrowed £ 35 from his mother to buy his first bass guitar . Sumner later said that he felt that the Pistols " destroyed the myth of being a pop star , of a musician being some kind of god that you had to worship " . Inspired by the performance , Sumner and Hook formed a band with their friend Terry Mason , who had also attended the show . Sumner bought a guitar , and Mason a drum kit . They invited schoolfriend Martin Gresty to join as vocalist , but he turned them down after getting a job at a local factory . An advertisement was placed in the Virgin Records shop in Manchester for a vocalist . Ian Curtis , who knew them from earlier gigs , responded and was hired without audition . Sumner said that he " knew he was all right to get on with and that 's what we based the whole group on . If we liked someone , they were in " . 
 Buzzcocks manager Richard Boon and frontman Pete Shelley have both been credited with suggesting the band name " Stiff Kittens " , but settled on " Warsaw " shortly before their first gig , referencing David Bowie 's song " Warszawa " . Warsaw debuted on 29 May 1977 at the Electric Circus , supporting the Buzzcocks , Penetration and John Cooper Clarke . They received immediate national exposure due to reviews of the gig in the NME by Paul Morley and in Sounds by Ian Wood . Tony Tabac played drums that night after joining the band two days earlier . Mason was soon made the band 's manager and Tabac was replaced on drums in June 1977 by Steve Brotherdale , who also played in the punk band Panik . During his tenure with Warsaw , Brotherdale tried to get Curtis to leave the band and join Panik and even got Curtis to audition for the band . In July 1977 , Warsaw recorded a set of five demo tracks at Pennine Sound Studios , Oldham . Uneasy with Brotherdale 's aggressive personality , the band fired him soon after the demo sessions . Driving home from the studio , they pulled over and asked Brotherdale to check on a flat tyre ; when he got out of the car , they sped off . 
 In August 1977 , the band placed an advertisement in a music shop window seeking a replacement drummer . Stephen Morris , who had attended the same school as Curtis , was the sole respondent . Deborah Curtis , Ian 's wife , stated that Morris " fitted perfectly " with the other men , and that with his addition Warsaw became a " complete ' family ' " . To avoid confusion with the London punk band Warsaw <unk> , the band renamed themselves Joy Division in early 1978 , borrowing their new name from the prostitution wing of a Nazi concentration camp mentioned in the 1955 novel House of Dolls . In December , the group recorded what became their debut EP , An Ideal for Living , at Pennine Sound Studio and played their final gig as Warsaw on New Year 's Eve at The Swinging Apple in Liverpool . Billed as Warsaw to ensure an audience , the band played their first gig as Joy Division on 25 January 1978 at Pip 's Disco in Manchester . 
 = = = Early releases = = = 
 Joy Division were approached by RCA Records to record a cover of Nolan " N.F. " Porter 's " Keep on Keepin ' On " and were afforded recording time at a professional Manchester studio in return . Joy Division spent late March and April 1978 writing and rehearsing material . During the Stiff / Chiswick Challenge concert at Manchester 's Rafters Club on 14 April , the group caught the attention of Tony Wilson and Rob Gretton . Curtis berated Wilson for not putting the group on his Granada Television show So It Goes ; Wilson responded that Joy Division would be the next band he would showcase on TV . Gretton , the venue 's resident DJ , was so impressed by the band 's performance that he convinced them to take him on as their manager . Gretton , whose " dogged determination " would later be credited for much of the band 's public success , contributed the business skills that Joy Division lacked to provide them with a better foundation for creativity . Joy Division spent the first week of May 1978 recording at Manchester 's Arrow Studios . The band were unhappy with the Grapevine Records head John Anderson 's insistence on adding synthesiser into the mix to soften the sound , and asked to be dropped from the contract that they had recently signed with RCA . 
 Joy Division made their recorded debut in June 1978 when the band self @-@ released An Ideal for Living , and two weeks later a track of theirs , " At a Later Date " , was featured on the compilation album Short Circuit : Live at the Electric Circus ( which had been recorded live in October 1977 ) . In the Melody Maker review of the EP , Chris Brazier said that it " has the familiar rough @-@ hewn nature of home @-@ produced records , but they 're no mere drone @-@ vendors — there are a lot of good ideas here , and they could be a very interesting band by now , seven months on " . The packaging of An Ideal for Living — which featured a drawing of a Hitler Youth member on the cover — coupled with the nature of the band 's name , fuelled speculation about their political affiliations . While Hook and Sumner later admitted to being intrigued by fascism at the time , Morris insisted that the group 's obsession with Nazi imagery came from a desire to keep memories of the sacrifices of their parents and grandparents during World War II alive . He argued that accusations of neo @-@ Nazi sympathies merely provoked the band " to keep on doing it , because that 's the kind of people we are " . 
 In September 1978 , Joy Division made their television debut performing " Shadowplay " on So It Goes , with an introduction by Wilson in which he misidentified Sumner , and not Hook , as being from Salford . In October , Joy Division contributed two tracks recorded with producer Martin Hannett to the compilation double @-@ 7 " EP A Factory Sample , the first release by Tony Wilson 's record label , Factory Records . In the NME review of the EP , Paul Morley hailed the band as " the missing link between Elvis Presley and [ Siouxsie and ] the Banshees " . Joy Division joined Factory 's roster , after buying themselves out of the deal with RCA . Rob Gretton was made a partner of the label so as to represent the interests of the band . On 27 December , Ian Curtis had his first recognisable epileptic episode . During the ride home after a show at the Hope and Anchor pub in London , Curtis had a seizure and was taken to a hospital . In spite of his illness , Joy Division 's career progressed . He appeared on the cover of 13 January 1979 issue of the NME following the persistence of music journalist Paul Morley . That month the band recorded their first session for BBC Radio 1 DJ John Peel . According to Deborah Curtis , " Sandwiched in between these two important landmarks was the realization that Ian 's illness was something we would have to learn to accommodate " . 
 = = = Unknown Pleasures = = = 
 The band recorded their debut album , Unknown Pleasures in April 1979 at Strawberry Studios , Stockport . Producer Martin Hannett significantly altered their live sound , a fact that greatly displeased the band at the time . Hook said in 2006 that the album " definitely didn 't turn out sounding the way I wanted it [ ... ] But now I can see that Martin did a good job on it [ ... ] There 's no two ways about it , Martin Hannett created the Joy Division sound " . The album cover was designed by Peter Saville , who would go on to provide artwork for future Joy Division releases . Unknown Pleasures was released in June and sold through its initial pressing of 10 @,@ 000 copies . Tony Wilson said that the relative success of the album turned the indie label into a true business and a " revolutionary force " that operated outside of the major record label system . Reviewing the album for Melody Maker , writer Jon Savage called Unknown Pleasures an " opaque manifesto " and declared " [ leaving ] the twentieth century is difficult ; most people prefer to go back and <unk> . Oh boy . Joy Division at least set a course in the present with contrails for the future — perhaps you can 't ask for much more . Indeed , Unknown Pleasures may very well be one of the best , white , English , debut LPs of the year " . 
 Joy Division performed on Granada TV again in July 1979 , and made their only nationwide TV appearance in September on BBC2 's Something Else . They supported the Buzzcocks in a 24 @-@ venue UK tour that began that October , which allowed the band to quit their regular jobs . The non @-@ album single " Transmission " was released in November . Joy Division 's burgeoning success drew a devoted following who were stereotyped as " intense young men dressed in grey overcoats " . 
 = = = Closer = = = 
 In January 1980 , Joy Division set out on a European tour . While the tour schedule was difficult , Curtis experienced only two grand mal seizures in the tour 's final two months . With Martin Hannett again producing , the band recorded their second album , Closer , that March at London 's Britannia Row Studios . March also saw the release of the Licht und <unk> single ( featuring the songs " Atmosphere " ( A side ) and " Dead Souls " ( B side ) ) on the small French label <unk> Sentimental . 
 Lack of sleep and long hours destabilised Curtis 's epilepsy and his seizures became almost uncontrollable . Curtis would often have seizures during shows , which left him feeling ashamed and depressed . As the band worried about their singer , some audience members thought his behaviour was part of the show . On 7 April , Curtis attempted suicide by overdosing on his anti @-@ seizure medication ; <unk> . The next evening , Joy Division were set to play a gig at the Derby Hall in Bury . With Curtis recovering , it was decided that the band would play a combined set with Alan <unk> of Crispy Ambulance and Simon Topping of A Certain Ratio filling in on vocals for the first few songs . Curtis came onstage to perform for part of the set . When Topping came back out to finish the set for Curtis , some in the audience began throwing bottles at the stage . Gretton leapt into the crowd and a riot ensued . Several April gigs were cancelled due to the continuing ill health of Curtis . The band played what would be their final show at the University of Birmingham 's High Hall on 2 May ; the show included Joy Division 's first and only performance of " Ceremony " , which would later be recorded by New Order and released as their first single . 
 = = = Curtis ' suicide and aftermath = = = 
 Joy Division were due to begin their first American tour in May 1980 . While Curtis had expressed a desire to take time off to visit a few acquaintances , he feigned excitement about the tour around the band because he did not want to disappoint his band mates or Factory Records . At the time , Curtis 's relationship with his wife , Deborah ( the couple married in 1975 as teenagers ) , was strained . Contributing factors were his ill health , his excluding her from band activities , and his affair with a young Belgian woman named <unk> Honoré whom he had met on a European tour . The evening before Joy Division were to fly out for their first American tour , Curtis returned to his home in Macclesfield to talk to his by then estranged wife . He asked her to drop the divorce suit she had filed ; later , he told her to leave him alone in the house until he caught a train to Manchester the following morning . Early on 18 May 1980 , having spent the night watching the Werner Herzog film <unk> , Curtis hanged himself in his kitchen . Deborah discovered his body later that day when she returned to their home . It came as a shock to both band members and their management . Wilson said in 2005 , " I think all of us made the mistake of not thinking his suicide was going to happen [ ... ] We all completely underestimated the danger . We didn 't take it seriously . That 's how stupid we were " . 
 Music critic Simon Reynolds said Curtis 's suicide " made for instant myth " . Jon Savage 's obituary said that " now no one will remember what his work with Joy Division was like when he was alive ; it will be perceived as tragic rather than courageous . " In June 1980 , the posthumous single " Love Will Tear Us Apart " was released , which hit number thirteen on the UK Singles Chart . In July 1980 , Closer finally came out , peaking at number six on the UK Albums Chart . NME reviewer Charles Shaar Murray wrote , " Closer is as magnificent a memorial ( for ' Joy Division ' as much as for Ian Curtis ) as any post @-@ Presley popular musician could have . " 
 Stephen Morris has said that even without his suicide it was unlikely that , because of his depression and illness , Curtis and Joy Division would have endured as they were . The members of Joy Division had made a pact long before Curtis 's death that , should any member leave , the remaining members would change the name of the group . Eventually renaming themselves New Order , the band was reborn as a three @-@ piece with Sumner assuming vocal duties ; the group later recruited Morris 's girlfriend Gillian Gilbert to round out the line @-@ up as keyboardist and second guitarist . Starting as a member of punk group The <unk> , Gilbert had become friends with the band 's members and had played guitar at a Joy Division performance when Curtis had been unable to play . 
 New Order 's first single , 1981 's " Ceremony " , was formed from the last two songs written with Curtis . While the group struggled in its early years to escape the shadow of Joy Division , New Order went on to far greater commercial success than their predecessor band with a very different , more upbeat and dance @-@ orientated sound . 
 A number of outtakes and live material have been released since the band 's demise . Still , featuring live tracks and rare recordings was issued in 1981 . Factory issued the Substance compilation in 1988 , including several out @-@ of @-@ print singles . Permanent was released in 1995 by London Records , which had acquired the Joy Division catalogue after Factory 's 1992 bankruptcy . A comprehensive box set , Heart and Soul , appeared in 1997 . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 = = = Sound = = = 
 Joy Division took time to develop their style . As Warsaw , they played " fairly undistinguished punk @-@ inflected hard @-@ rock " . Critic Simon Reynolds wrote that their originality only " really became apparent as the songs got slower " . Their music took on a " sparse " quality ; according to Reynolds , " Peter Hook 's bass carried the melody , Bernard Sumner 's guitar left gaps rather than filling up the group 's sound with dense riffage and Steve Morris 's drums seemed to circle the rim of a crater . " According to music critic Jon Savage , " Joy Division were not punk but they were directly inspired by its energy " . In 1994 Sumner said the band 's characteristic sound " came out naturally : I 'm more rhythm and chords , and Hooky was melody . He used to play high lead bass because I liked my guitar to sound distorted , and the amplifier I had would only work when it was at full volume . When Hooky played low , he couldn 't hear himself . Steve has his own style which is different to other drummers . To me , a drummer in the band is the clock , but Steve wouldn 't be the clock , because he 's passive : he would follow the rhythm of the band , which gave us our own edge " . By " Closer " , Curtis had adapted a low baritone voice , drawing comparisons to Jim Morrison of the Doors ( one of Curtis 's favourite bands ) . 
 Sumner largely acted as the band 's director , a role he continued in New Order . While Sumner was the group 's primary guitarist , Curtis played the instrument on a few recorded songs and during a few shows . Curtis hated playing guitar , but the band insisted he do so . Sumner said , " He played in quite a bizarre way and that to us was interesting , because no one else would play like Ian " . During the recording sessions for Closer , Sumner began using self @-@ built synthesisers and Hook used a six @-@ string bass for more melody . 
 Producer Martin Hannett " dedicated himself to capturing and intensifying Joy Division 's eerie spatiality " . Hannett believed punk rock was sonically conservative because of its refusal to use studio technology to create sonic space . The producer instead aimed to create a more expansive sound on the group 's records . Hannett said , " [ Joy Division ] were a gift to a producer , because they didn 't have a clue . They didn 't argue " . Hannett demanded clean and clear " sound separation " not only for individual instruments , but even for individual pieces of Morris 's drumkit . Morris recalled , " Typically on tracks he considered to be potential singles , he 'd get me to play each drum on its own to avoid any bleed @-@ through of sound " . Music journalist Richard Cook noted that Hannett 's role was " crucial " . There are " devices of distance " in his production and " the sound is an illusion of physicality " . 
 = = = Lyrics = = = 
 Curtis was the group 's sole lyricist . He wrote frantically when the mood took him , and then listened to the band 's music ( which was often arranged by Sumner ) and chose lyrics most appropriate to the sound . Imagery and words revolving around " coldness , pressure , darkness , crisis , failure , collapse , loss of control " recur in his songs . In 1979 , NME journalist Paul <unk> wrote , " The themes of Joy Division 's music are sorrowful , painful and sometimes deeply sad . " Music journalist Jon Savage wrote that " Curtis 's great lyrical achievement was to capture the underlying reality of a society in turmoil , and to make it both universal and personal , " while noting that " the lyrics reflected , in mood and approach , his interest in romantic and science @-@ fiction literature . " Musicologist Robert Palmer wrote that William S. Burroughs and J. G. Ballard were " obvious influences " to Curtis , and Morris also remembered the singer reading T. S. Eliot . Deborah Curtis also remembered Curtis reading works by writers such as Fyodor Dostoevsky , Friedrich Nietzsche , Jean @-@ Paul Sartre , Franz Kafka , and Herman Hesse . 
 The band refused to explain their lyrics to the press and did not print lyrics sheets . Curtis told the fanzine Printed Noise , " We haven 't got a message really ; the lyrics are open to interpretation . They 're multidimensional . You can read into them what you like . " The other band members later admitted they paid little attention to what Curtis was writing . In a 1987 interview with Option , Morris said that they " just thought the songs were sort of sympathetic and more uplifting than depressing . But everyone 's got their own opinion . " Deborah Curtis recalled that only with the release of Closer did many who were close to the singer realise " [ h ] is intentions and feelings were all there within the lyrics " . The surviving members of the band in retrospect regret not seeing warning signs in Curtis 's lyrics . " This sounds awful but it was only after Ian died that we sat down and listened to the lyrics " , Morris said in 2007 . " You 'd find yourself thinking , ' Oh my God , I missed this one ' . Because I 'd look at Ian 's lyrics and think how clever he was putting himself in the position of someone else . I never believed he was writing about himself . Looking back , how could I have been so <unk> ' stupid ? Of course he was writing about himself . But I didn 't go in and grab him and ask , ' What 's up ? ' I have to live with that " . 
 = = = Live performances = = = 
 In contrast to the sound of their studio recordings , Joy Division typically played loudly and aggressively during live performances . The band were unhappy with Hannett 's mixing of Unknown Pleasures , which reduced the abrasiveness of their sound . According to Sumner , " the music was loud and heavy , and we felt that Martin had toned it down , especially with the guitars " . In concert , the group interacted little with the crowd ; Paul Morley wrote , " [ D ] uring a Joy Division set , outside of the songs , you 'll be lucky to hear more than two or three words . Hello and goodbye . No introductions , no promotion " . While singing , Curtis would often perform what was referred to as his " ' dead fly ' dance " , where the singer 's arms would " start flying in [ a ] semicircular , hypnotic curve " . Simon Reynolds noted that Curtis 's dancing style was reminiscent of an epileptic fit , and that he was dancing in the manner for some months before he was diagnosed with epilepsy . Live performances became problematic for Joy Division , due to Curtis 's condition . Sumner later said , " We didn 't have flashing lights , but sometimes a particular drum beat would do something to him . He 'd go off in a trance for a bit , then he 'd lose it and have a [ n epileptic ] fit . We 'd have to stop the show and carry him off to the dressing @-@ room where he 'd cry his eyes out because this appalling thing had just happened to him " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Despite their short career and cult status , Joy Division have exerted a wide @-@ reaching influence . John Bush of AllMusic argues that Joy Division " became the first band in the post @-@ punk movement by [ ... ] emphasizing not anger and energy but mood and expression , pointing ahead to the rise of melancholy alternative music in the ' 80s . " 
 The band 's dark and gloomy sound , which Martin Hannett described in 1979 as " dancing music with Gothic overtones " , presaged the gothic rock genre . While the term " gothic " originally described a " doomy atmosphere " in music of the late 1970s , the term was soon applied to specific bands like Bauhaus that followed in the wake of Joy Division and Siouxsie and the Banshees . Standard musical fixtures of early gothic rock bands included " high @-@ pitched post @-@ Joy Division basslines usurp [ ing ] the melodic role " and " vocals that were either near operatic and Teutonic or deep , droning alloys of Jim Morrison and Ian Curtis . " Joy Division has influenced bands ranging from contemporaries U2 and the Cure to other artists such as Radiohead , Interpol , Bloc Party and Editors . In 2005 , both New Order and Joy Division were inducted into the UK Music Hall of Fame . The Italian psychedelic progressive rock band Twenty Four Hours , in addition to having been inspired by their name from the famous song of Joy Division , dedicated a song to the singer Ian Curtis . 
 Joy Division have been dramatised in two biopics . 24 Hour Party People ( 2002 ) presented a fictionalised account of the rise and fall of Factory Records , in which the band served as supporting characters . Tony Wilson said of the film , " It 's all true , it 's all not true . It 's not a fucking documentary " , and that he favoured the " myth " over the truth . The 2007 film Control , directed by Anton Corbijn , is a biography of Ian Curtis ( portrayed by Sam Riley ) that uses Deborah Curtis 's biography of her late husband , Touching from a Distance ( 1995 ) , as its basis . Control had its international premiere on the opening night of Director 's Fortnight at the 2007 Cannes Film Festival , where it was critically well received . That year Grant Gee directed the band documentary Joy Division . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 Unknown Pleasures ( 1979 ) 
 Closer ( 1980 ) 
 = Millennium ( 2015 comic book ) = 
 Millennium is a five @-@ issue comic book series published by IDW Publishing from January and August 2015 , based on the television series of the same name . The series was written by Joe Harris with artwork by Colin Lorimer , and featured cover art by <unk> . 
 Millennium focuses on Frank Black , a former offender profiler investigating the Millennium Group , a cult @-@ like organisation which had sought to control the end of the world at the turn of the 3rd millennium . Black learns that the Group is still operating over a decade after their supposed defeat , and have recruited his estranged daughter to combat gathering demonic forces . 
 The first issue , released on January 21 , 2015 , saw sales of over 8000 issues , though sales figures would subsequently drop . However , the series has been reviewed positively by critics , with Lorimer 's artwork frequently singled out for praise . The complete series was collected in a trade paperback after its run was finished . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Set during the events of the season ten comic book series for The X @-@ Files , the events of Millennium see Federal Bureau of Investigation agent Fox Mulder joining the long @-@ standing crusade of offender profiler Frank Black as he combats the Millennium Group , a doomsday cult entrenched in elements of the United States law enforcement . 
 = = = Events = = = 
 Fox Mulder attends a parole hearing for Monte Propps , a serial killer he helped to apprehend in the late 1980s . Propps ' method of killing involved brainwashing his kidnapped victims until they were willing to commit suicide by drowning ; however he is now seen as a model <unk> and is released . Shortly afterwards , Mulder meets with Frank Black , who warns him of the dangers of the offender 's freedom . The two visit the released man 's halfway house , arriving shortly after his parole officer ; inside they find Propps drowned in his bath . In an alley outside , they parole officer is also found dead , with the ouroboros symbol of the Millennium Group tattooed on her neck . A child in the alley momentarily speaks to Black with the voice of a demonic entity he recognises , warning of impending disaster . 
 Black attempts to locate further information about the Millennium Group 's activity , having believed them defeated in 1999 . He finds that his access to their old computer systems still works , and learns that they may know the whereabouts of his daughter Jordan . Spurred on by several momentary encounters with similarly demonic beings , Black returns to his home town of Seattle , Washington . As he visits the grave of his wife Catherine , he is tranquilised and apprehended by Group members . Waking in captivity , he learns that they seek his help against the same demonic forces he has been encountering — and that Jordan is now a willing initiate of the Group . She has now begun to powerfully manifest visions of the future , similar to Black 's ability to see the past through others ' eyes . 
 Mulder follows Black to Seattle , arriving at the abandoned ruins of Black 's old family home , where he is confronted by the powerful demon Lucy Butler . Black arrives to find Mulder struggling against her attempts to control him , and she threatens to kill them both , before Jordan arrives to intervene . Butler , now appearing in her full demonic form , is eventually banished by Jordan 's psychic abilities . Jordan leaves again , knowing that the Group will need this power , as Mulder unsuccessfully tries to persuade Black to rejoin the FBI . Watching this is a black cat , which <unk> into Butler 's human guise , who vows to wait " a millennium " for revenge . 
 = = Publication = = 
 Published by IDW Publishing , Millennium is a five @-@ issue limited series , acting as a spin @-@ off from the seventeenth issue of The X @-@ Files Season 10 , itself another IDW title . It is an adaptation of the 1990s television series Millennium , which featured Lance Henriksen as Frank Black . The comic series was written by Joe Harris with art by Colin <unk> , and saw Chris Carter , the creator of Millennium , serve as executive producer . Both Harris and Lorimer had previously worked on The X @-@ Files Season 10 . Cover art for the series was provided by <unk> . 
 Harris cites the success of the adaptation of The X @-@ Files for providing the impetus for a Millennium comic , noting that IDW editor @-@ in @-@ chief Chris Ryall approached him to write the latter series having seen the reception the former had been receiving . Harris himself had been a fan of the series during its initial broadcast , personally favouring its second season . He also expressed interest in possibly adapting another of Carter 's creations , Harsh Realm . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The first issue was released on January 21 , 2015 , and featured a variant cover by artist Paul Shipper . The issue sold 8 @,@ 505 copies in North America , making it the 197th best @-@ selling comic by units for that month . By the release of the second issue , sales had dropped to 6 @,@ 273 issues , the 263rd highest sales figure for the month . A trade paperback collection comprising all five issues was released on August 12 , 2015 . 
 Critical reaction to the series was positive , with review aggregator website <unk> giving the series a score of 8 @.@ 2 out of 10 , based on 20 critics ' reviews of individual issues . Reviewing the first issue for We The Nerdy , <unk> Jane gave a score of 90 out of 100 , describing it as having " excellent storytelling that will keep you engaged " , and complimenting Lorimer 's artwork . Comic Vine 's Tony Guerrero praised Lorimer 's " creepy " artwork , but felt that the storytelling required too much foreknowledge of the television series to fully understand . He summed the issue up as being " the crossover we 've been waiting for " . Reviewing the third issue for <unk> , Patrick Hayes praised the series ' use of photographic alternate covers for subscribers , and complimented the artwork and colouring throughout . Hayes rated the issue an " A " overall . 
 = Double ( basketball ) = 
 In basketball , a double is the accumulation of a double @-@ digit number total in one of five statistical categories — points , rebounds , assists , steals , and blocked shots — in a game . Multiple players usually score double @-@ digit points in any given basketball game ; the double nomenclature is usually reserved for when a player has double @-@ digit totals in more than one category . A double @-@ double is the accumulation of a double @-@ digit number total in two of the five categories in a game . The most common double @-@ double combination is points @-@ rebounds , followed by points @-@ assists . Since the 1983 – 84 season , Tim Duncan leads the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) in the points @-@ rebounds combination with 840 , and John Stockton leads the points @-@ assists combination with 714 . A triple @-@ double is the accumulation of a double @-@ digit number total in three of the five categories in a game . The most common way to achieve a triple @-@ double is through points , rebounds , and assists . Oscar Robertson leads the all @-@ time NBA list with 181 and is the only player ever to average a triple @-@ double for a season . LeBron James leads the list among active players with 42 . A quadruple @-@ double is the accumulation of a double @-@ digit number total in four of the five categories in a game . This has occurred five times in the NBA . A quintuple @-@ double is the accumulation of a double @-@ digit number total in all five categories in a game . Two quintuple @-@ doubles have been recorded by high school girls , but none have occurred in college or professional games . A similar accomplishment is the five @-@ by @-@ five , which is the accumulation of at least five points , five rebounds , five assists , five steals , and five blocks in a game . In the NBA , only Hakeem Olajuwon and Andrei Kirilenko have accumulated multiple five @-@ by @-@ fives since the 1984 – 85 season . 
 = = Double @-@ double = = 
 A double @-@ double is defined as a performance in which a player accumulates a double @-@ digit number total in two of five statistical categories — points , rebounds , assists , steals , and blocked shots — in a game . The most common double @-@ double combination is points and rebounds , followed by points and assists . Double @-@ doubles are fairly common in the NBA . During the 2008 – 09 season , 69 players who were eligible for leadership in the main statistical categories recorded at least 10 double @-@ doubles during the season . 
 Special double @-@ doubles are rare . One such double @-@ double is called double double @-@ double ( also referred to as 20 – 20 or Double @-@ 20 ) . It occurs when a player accumulates 20 or more in two different statistical categories in a game . Another such double @-@ double is called a triple double @-@ double ( also referred to as 30 – 30 ) . The only player in NBA history to record a 40 @-@ 40 is Wilt Chamberlain , who achieved the feat 5 times in his career . Of the 5 instances , 4 were recorded in his rookie season , and the fifth was achieved the following year where he recorded 78 points and 43 rebounds in a game . 
 = = = NBA = = = 
 = = = = Double @-@ double leaders ( in regular season ) = = = = 
 The following is a list of regular season double @-@ double leaders since the 1983 – 84 season : 
 = = = = Facts = = = = 
 Longest continuous streak of double @-@ doubles : According to the Elias Sports Bureau , Wilt Chamberlain holds the record with 227 consecutive double @-@ doubles from 1964 to 1967 . Chamberlain also holds the second and third longest continuous streaks of double @-@ doubles with 220 and 133 . This record is before the ABA – NBA merger in 1976 . The longest streak of double @-@ doubles since the merger was 53 games , achieved by Kevin Love , then of the Minnesota Timberwolves . 
 = = Triple @-@ double = = 
 A triple @-@ double is defined as a performance in which a player accumulates a double digit number total in three of five statistical categories — points , rebounds , assists , steals , and blocked shots — in a game . The most common way for a player to achieve a triple @-@ double is with points , rebounds , and assists , though on occasion players may record 10 or more steals or blocked shots in a game . The origin of the term " triple @-@ double " is unclear . Some sources claim that it was coined by former Los Angeles Lakers public relations director Bruce <unk> in the 1980s in order to showcase Magic Johnson 's versatility , while others claim that it was coined by then Philadelphia 76ers media relations director Harvey Pollack in 1980 . The triple @-@ double became an officially recorded statistic during the 1979 – 80 season . 
 A triple @-@ double is seen as an indication of an excellent all @-@ around individual performance . However , the converse is not necessarily true ; a player can have an excellent all @-@ around performance while failing to achieve a triple @-@ double . In the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) , they are rare , as the top players usually accumulate fewer than 10 in a season ( out of a possible 82 games in the regular NBA season ) . They are even more rare at the collegiate level ( though double @-@ doubles are much more common ) . There are two primary reasons for the relative infrequency of triple @-@ doubles at the collegiate level : the college basketball shot clock is 30 seconds , as opposed to 24 seconds in the NBA , and college games last only 40 minutes instead of 48 in the NBA . Both timing issues considerably reduce the number of possessions in a game and thus the chances for amassing large numbers in any one statistic , much less all three . 
 There has been occasional controversy surrounding triple @-@ doubles made when a player achieves the feat with a late rebound . Players with nine rebounds in a game have sometimes been accused of deliberately missing a shot late in the game in order to recover the rebound ; a few have even gone so far as shooting off their opponent 's basket trying to score a triple @-@ double . To deter this , NBA rules allow rebounds to be nullified if the shot is determined not to be a legitimate scoring attempt . 
 = = = NBA = = = 
 From the 1990 – 91 to the 2010 – 11 season , the NBA averaged 34 @.@ 5 triple @-@ doubles per season , roughly 1 in every 36 games . 
 = = = = Facts = = = = 
 First triple @-@ double in league history : According to the Harvey J. Pollack NBA Statistical Yearbook , Dolph Schayes ( Syracuse Nationals ) might have logged the league 's first triple @-@ double on February 8 , 1951 , versus the New York Knicks . He had 18 points , 22 rebounds and 13 assists . 
 Averaging a triple @-@ double in a single season : Oscar Robertson is the only player in NBA history to achieve this feat . During the 1961 – 62 season , Robertson averaged 30 @.@ 8 points , 12 @.@ 5 rebounds , and 11 @.@ 4 assists per game . Although Robertson only achieved the feat for a full season once , his cumulative stats over his first 5 seasons gave him an average of 30 @.@ 3 points , 10 @.@ 4 rebounds , and 10 @.@ 6 assists per game . Robertson is also the only player in NBA history ever to record season averages of both 10 assists and 10 rebounds per game at any period of his career . 
 Most triple @-@ doubles in a single season : Oscar Robertson recorded 41 triple @-@ doubles during the 1961 – 62 season . Wilt Chamberlain is in second with 31 triple @-@ doubles in the 1967 – 68 season . 
 Most triple @-@ doubles in NBA playoffs : Magic Johnson recorded 30 triple @-@ doubles over his career ; LeBron James currently is second in this category with 16 . 
 Most triple @-@ doubles in NBA Finals : Magic Johnson leads with 8 , while LeBron James currently is second in this category with 7 . 
 Youngest player : LeBron James ( Cleveland Cavaliers ) , aged 20 years and 20 days , logged a triple @-@ double on January 19 , 2005 , versus the Portland Trail Blazers . He had 27 points , 11 rebounds and 10 assists . 
 Oldest player : Karl Malone ( Los Angeles Lakers ) , aged 40 years and 127 days — the only 40 @-@ year @-@ old player to do so — logged a triple @-@ double on November 28 , 2003 , versus the San Antonio Spurs . He had 10 points , 11 rebounds and 10 assists . 
 Fastest triple @-@ double : Jim Tucker of the Syracuse Nationals , holds the record for the fastest triple double . On February 20 , 1955 , Tucker , in his rookie year , recorded the fastest triple @-@ double in NBA history , achieving the mark in just 17 minutes . He finished the game with 12 points , 10 rebounds and 12 assists in a 104 @-@ 84 win over the New York Knicks . Russell Westbrook has the second fastest triple @-@ double in 17 minutes 35 seconds in a 112 – 79 win on April 11 , 2016 against the Los Angeles Lakers . 
 Double @-@ triple @-@ double ( at least 20 of any 3 statistics ) : Wilt Chamberlain is the only player to have accomplished this ; in a February 2 , 1968 game vs. Detroit Pistons , Chamberlain tallied 22 points , 25 rebounds , and 21 assists . 
 Longest continuous streak of triple @-@ doubles : Wilt Chamberlain holds the record for the most consecutive triple @-@ doubles . In 1968 , from March 8 to March 20 , he recorded a triple @-@ double in nine straight games . The second longest streak is held by Oscar Robertson and Michael Jordan , both of whom recorded a triple @-@ double in seven consecutive games . Robertson 's streak occurred in the 1961 – 62 season , while Jordan 's streak went from March 25 to April 6 of 1989 . 
 Longest continuous streak of triple @-@ doubles versus the same team : Since 1980 , three @-@ game streaks have been accomplished six times by four players . During the 1980s , Magic Johnson ( Los Angeles Lakers ) had triple @-@ double streaks of three games each against Houston , Philadelphia , and Denver . This three @-@ game triple @-@ double streak against the same team has also been accomplished by Chris Webber ( Washington Bullets ) against Golden State during the 1990s , Jason Kidd ( New Jersey Nets ) against the Charlotte Bobcats during the 2000s ( 2008 ) , and most recently by Rajon Rondo ( Boston Celtics ) , against Atlanta during the 2010s . 
 Triple @-@ doubles by teammates in a regular season game : This has been accomplished only twice since 1983 – 84 . It was achieved in a January 3 , 1989 game by Michael Jordan and Scottie Pippen of the Chicago Bulls vs. the Los Angeles Clippers . Jordan had 41 points , 11 assists and 10 rebounds , while Pippen had 15 points , 12 assists and 10 rebounds . It was also achieved in an April 7 , 2007 game by Vince Carter and Jason Kidd of the New Jersey Nets vs. the Washington Wizards . Carter had 46 points , 16 rebounds and 10 assists while Kidd had 10 points , 16 rebounds , and 18 assists . One other known instance occurred on March 14 , 1964 when Donnie Butcher and Ray Scott achieved it for the Detroit Pistons vs. the New York Knicks . Butcher had 19 points , 15 rebounds and 15 assists and Scott had 23 points , 20 rebounds and 11 assists . 
 Triple @-@ doubles by opponents in a regular season game : This has occurred only nine times since 1983 – 84 , four times involving Jason Kidd ( while playing for three different teams ) : Magic Johnson and Jeff Ruland ( Los Angeles at Washington , February 10 , 1984 ) 
 Jason Kidd and Clyde Drexler ( Dallas at Houston , April 11 , 1995 ) 
 Jason Kidd and Clyde Drexler ( Phoenix at Houston , March 22 , 1997 ) 
 Gary Payton and Chris Webber ( Seattle at Sacramento , April 18 , 2000 ) 
 Jason Kidd and Jay Williams ( New Jersey at Chicago , November 9 , 2002 ) 
 Jason Kidd and Tracy McGrady ( New Jersey vs. Orlando , February 23 , 2003 ) 
 Caron Butler and Baron Davis ( Washington vs. Golden State , November 23 , 2007 ) 
 Victor Oladipo and Michael Carter @-@ Williams ( Orlando at Philadelphia , December 3 , 2013 ( 2 OT ) ) Oladipo and Carter @-@ Williams were both rookies when accomplishing the feat , marking the first and only time in NBA history that two rookies have recorded triple @-@ doubles in the same game . These were the first career triple @-@ doubles for both players . The last time that two players had recorded their first career triple @-@ doubles in the same game was when Detroit Pistons Donnie Butcher and Ray Scott did it on March 14 , 1964 ( they were not rookies ) . 
 Russell Westbrook and Giannis <unk> ( Oklahoma City at Milwaukee , March 6 , 2016 ) 
 Triple @-@ doubles on Christmas Day : This has been accomplished eight times : Oscar Robertson ( Cincinnati Royals at Detroit Pistons , 1960 ) 
 Oscar Robertson ( Cincinnati Royals vs. Los Angeles Lakers , 1961 ) 
 Oscar Robertson ( Cincinnati Royals vs. St. Louis Hawks , 1963 ) 
 Oscar Robertson ( Cincinnati Royals vs. Seattle SuperSonics , 1967 ) 
 John Havlicek ( Boston Celtics at New York Knicks , 1967 ) 
 Billy Cunningham ( Philadelphia 76ers vs. Detroit Pistons , 1970 ) 
 LeBron James ( Miami Heat at Los Angeles Lakers , 2010 ) 
 Russell Westbrook ( Oklahoma City Thunder at New York Knicks , 2013 ) 
 = = = NCAA Division I = = = 
 Most triple @-@ doubles in a career : Kyle Collinsworth ( BYU ) with 12 — six in 2014 – 15 and six again as a senior in 2015 – 16 . Prior to the triple @-@ double being tracked as an NCAA statistic , Oscar Robertson ( Cincinnati ) had 10 — five in 1958 @-@ 59 and five in 1959 @-@ 60 . 
 Consecutive triple @-@ doubles in a single season : David Edwards ( Texas A & M ) , Penny Hardaway ( Memphis State ) , Tony Lee ( Robert Morris ) , Gerald Lewis ( SMU ) , Shaquille O ’ Neal ( LSU ) , and Kevin Roberson ( Vermont ) each recorded two consecutive games with a triple @-@ <unk> had back @-@ to @-@ back triple @-@ doubles for Memphis State ( now Memphis ) during the 1992 – 93 season . He recorded 21 points , 15 assists , and 14 rebounds against Georgia State on January 4 , 1993 and then recorded 26 points , 12 rebounds , and 10 assists against Vanderbilt on January 6 , 1993 . 
 Most triple @-@ doubles in a single season : Kyle Collinsworth ( BYU ) , with six - performed twice : in the 2014 @-@ 15 season , and again in 2015 @-@ 16 . 
 Triple @-@ doubles in NCAA tournament history : The NCAA began keeping track of assists in 1984 , then blocks and steals in 1986 , so officially this has occurred eight times . However , many tournaments had included assists , steals and blocks in their official <unk> prior to that time , so unofficially this has occurred sixteen times . Only three pre @-@ 1986 triple @-@ doubles are included below . 
 Others 
 <unk> <unk> of the Memphis Lady Tigers achieved perhaps the most unusual triple @-@ double in history , and she did it without scoring a point or even attempting a shot . On February 3 , 2002 , in a women 's Division I game against Charlotte , she had 12 assists , 10 steals , and 10 rebounds . 
 = = Quadruple @-@ double = = 
 A quadruple @-@ double is defined as a performance in which a player accumulates a double digit number total in four of five statistical categories — points , rebounds , assists , steals , and blocked shots — in a game . This feat is extremely rare : only four players have officially recorded a quadruple @-@ double in National Basketball Association ( NBA ) history . The first American male player above the high school level to officially record a quadruple @-@ double was Nate Thurmond , who achieved this feat in 1974 while playing for the NBA 's Chicago Bulls . The first American female player above the high school level to officially record a quadruple @-@ double was Ann Meyers , who achieved this feat in 1978 while playing for the UCLA Bruins . The first male player in NCAA Division I history to record a quadruple @-@ double was Lester Hudson in 2007 . 
 Note that a quadruple @-@ double ( or a triple @-@ double ) is much harder to accomplish in most leagues other than the NBA because of the greater length of NBA games — 48 minutes ( four 12 @-@ minute quarters ) , as opposed to 40 minutes under NCAA , FIBA , and WNBA rules . NCAA men 's basketball uses 20 @-@ minute halves ; the WNBA , FIBA , and ( since 2015 – 16 ) NCAA women 's basketball use 10 @-@ minute quarters . 
 = = = NBA = = = 
 Quadruple @-@ doubles have only been possible since the 1973 – 74 season , when the NBA started recording both blocked shots and steals . It is often speculated by observers that other all @-@ time greats , namely Oscar Robertson ( all time triple @-@ doubles leader with 181 ) , Wilt Chamberlain , Bill Russell or Jerry West could conceivably have had quadruple @-@ doubles . According to West 's biography at NBA.com , he reportedly recorded a quadruple @-@ double with 44 points , 12 rebounds , 10 assists and 10 blocks . Wilt Chamberlain also reportedly recorded a quadruple @-@ double in Game 1 of the 1967 Eastern Division Finals against the Boston Celtics , when he had 24 points , 32 rebounds , 13 assists and 12 blocks . 
 The reason why [ the quadruple @-@ double ] is such a hard thing to accomplish is because it requires a player to be completely dominant on both ends of the court without being too selfish — so he can get the assists — and without fouling out trying to block every shot or grab every rebound . A lot of guys can get the points , rebounds and assists , but it 's the defensive stuff that messes everybody up . You have to love defense to get a quadruple @-@ double . There 's no way around it . 
 The four players listed below are the only players who have officially recorded a quadruple @-@ double in an NBA game . Except for Thurmond , who retired before the award was established in 1983 , all of them have won NBA Defensive Player of the Year at least once . 
 Several others missed that mark by finishing with triple @-@ doubles and a total of 9 in a fourth statistical category ( statistical categories in which they fell short are in bold ) : 
 Notes 
 a Bird sat out the entire fourth quarter . After three quarters , head coach K. C. Jones informed Bird that he was one steal away from a quadruple @-@ double and asked if he wanted to stay in the game . Bird declined , saying that he " already did enough damage . " 
 b Olajuwon was credited with 9 assists in the original box score . However , after Rockets officials reviewed the game tape and discovered what they believe was an uncredited assist in the first quarter , they revised the box score , crediting Olajuwon with 10 assists and the third quadruple @-@ double in NBA history . NBA 's director of operations , Rod Thorn , requested to review the tape . After reviewing the tape , the league disallowed Olajuwon 's quadruple @-@ double and announced that his original line — with 9 assists — is official . 
 = = = Other men 's basketball = = = 
 Accurate as of December 2014 
 Notes 
 c This is the only quadruple @-@ double in French National League history . 
 d This is the only quadruple @-@ double in National Basketball League history . 
 e This is the only quadruple @-@ double in NCAA Division I men 's basketball history . The opponent , Central Baptist , plays in the NAIA . 
 = = = Women 's basketball = = = 
 Accurate as of September 2011 
 = = = = Other known quadruple @-@ doubles = = = = 
 Accurate as of March 2013 
 During the 2003 – 04 season , Helena <unk> averaged a quadruple @-@ double for <unk> in the Icelandic Women 's Division II . In 16 games she averaged 37 @.@ 6 points , 13 @.@ 3 rebounds , 11 @.@ 6 assists and 10 @.@ 2 steals . 
 = = <unk> @-@ double = = 
 A quintuple @-@ double is defined as a performance in which a player accumulates a double @-@ digit number total in all five statistical categories — points , rebounds , assists , steals , and blocked shots — -in a single game . There are only two known quintuple @-@ doubles , both at the girls ' high @-@ school level . The first was recorded by Tamika Catchings of Duncanville High School ( Duncanville , Texas ) with 25 points , 18 rebounds , 11 assists , 10 steals and 10 blocks in 1997 . The second was by Aimee <unk> of Northern Lehigh High School ( <unk> , Pennsylvania ) , who had 26 points , 20 rebounds , 10 assists , 10 steals , and 11 blocks on January 7 , 2012 . 
 = = Five @-@ by @-@ five = = 
 A five @-@ by @-@ five is defined as a performance in which a player accumulates a total of five in five statistical categories — points , rebounds , assists , steals , and blocks — in a single game . Statistics for steals and blocks were not kept in the NBA until the 1973 – 74 season , so NBA five @-@ by @-@ fives were only possible from that season onward . Hakeem Olajuwon ( six times ) and Andrei Kirilenko ( three times ) are the only players to have recorded multiple five @-@ by @-@ fives ( based on records since the 1984 – 85 season ) . Both are also the only players to record five @-@ by @-@ sixes ( at least six in all five statistical categories ) . Only twice has a five @-@ by @-@ five coincided with a triple @-@ double ( both by Olajuwon ) and only three times has a player recorded a five @-@ by @-@ five without registering at least a double @-@ double ( two by Kirilenko and one by Marcus Camby ) . 
 = = = NBA = = = 
 The following is a list of known five @-@ by @-@ fives . Note the list contains all five @-@ by @-@ fives since the 1984 – 85 season , as well as one before . There may be other five @-@ by @-@ fives in the NBA that occurred before the 1984 – 85 season . 
 = = = Facts = = = 
 All facts based on data since 1985 – 86 : 
 Greatest five @-@ by @-@ fives ( most of each stat ) : Hakeem Olajuwon , on March 10 , 1987 , became the first in NBA history to record a five @-@ by @-@ six ( at least 6 each of all five statistics : points , rebounds , assists , blocks , steals ) . It took nearly twenty years for the second official occurrence in NBA history . Andrei Kirilenko , on January 3 , 2006 , recorded a five @-@ by @-@ six against the Lakers . Though his numbers were not quite as impressive as Olajuwon 's , Kirilenko performed the feat in regulation . No one in the NBA has ever recorded a five @-@ by @-@ seven or higher . But Olajuwon was just 1 assist away in the game just mentioned , whereas Kirilenko was only 1 steal shy in his five @-@ by @-@ six . 
 Most five @-@ by @-@ fives in a career : Hakeem Olajuwon leads all players with 6 career five @-@ by @-@ fives . Andrei Kirilenko , with 3 , is the only other player with more than one career five @-@ by @-@ five . 
 Most five @-@ by @-@ fives in the same season : The record for most five @-@ by @-@ fives in a season is 2 . Olajuwon was the first to do this , in the 1993 – 94 season . Kirilenko was the second to do so in the 2003 – 04 season . 
 Most five @-@ by @-@ fives in the same year : Olajuwon recorded 3 five @-@ by @-@ fives in a one @-@ year span . Beside the two from the 1993 – 94 season , he had another late in the 1992 – 93 season . 
 <unk> pair of five @-@ by @-@ fives : Kirilenko performed a five @-@ by @-@ five on December 3 , 2003 , and completed another just a week later , on December 10 , 2003 . The second quickest five @-@ by @-@ fives were completed by Olajuwon on November 5 , 1993 and another , 55 days later , on December 30 , 1993 . 
 Youngest player : Kirilenko 's first NBA five @-@ by @-@ five came on December 3 , 2003 , making him the youngest to record a five @-@ by @-@ five at age 22 years , 288 days . 
 Oldest player : Olajuwon is the oldest player to record a five @-@ by @-@ five . His last career five @-@ by @-@ five came on December 30 , 1993 , at which time he was 30 years , 343 days old . 
 No player has recorded a five @-@ by @-@ five in the NBA Playoffs . 
 However , there have been a number of five @-@ by @-@ fours ( at least 4 points , 4 rebounds , 4 assists , 4 steals , and 4 blocks ) in the playoffs . 
 Hakeem Olajuwon in a record 8 games 
 Game 1 vs 1986 Nuggets ( 1 assist short of a five @-@ by @-@ five ) 
 Game 1 vs 1987 Blazers ( 1 steal short of a five @-@ by @-@ five ) 
 Game 4 vs 1987 Blazers ( 1 steal short of a five @-@ by @-@ five ) 
 Game 1 vs 1993 Clippers ( 1 steal short of a five @-@ by @-@ five ) 
 Game 2 vs 1994 Blazers 
 Game 3 vs 1994 Jazz 
 Game 5 vs 1994 Jazz ( 1 steal short of a five @-@ by @-@ five ) 
 Game 2 vs 1997 Wolves 
 Ben Wallace 
 Game 4 vs 2004 Bucks 
 Game 1 vs 2005 Sixers 
 Ben Wallace and Hakeem Olajuwon are the only players with multiple playoff five @-@ by @-@ fours . The following players accomplished the feat once each in the playoffs 
 Ralph Sampson , Game 2 vs 1986 Nuggets 
 Horace Grant , Game 7 vs 1992 Knicks ( the only five @-@ by @-@ four in a Game 7 ) 
 Scottie Pippen , Game 6 vs 1992 Cavs 
 Michael Jordan , Game 6 vs 1995 Magic 
 Chris Webber , Game 4 vs 2000 Lakers ( 1 steal short of a five @-@ by @-@ five ) 
 Tim Duncan , Game 3 vs 2001 Lakers 
 Dwight Howard , Game 2 vs 2009 Lakers ( the only five @-@ by @-@ four in NBA Finals history ) 
 Draymond Green , Game 4 vs 2016 Blazers ( 1 steal short of a five @-@ by @-@ five ) 
 = = = Players with at least 5 steals and 5 blocked shots in a game = = = 
 This is a list of players since the 1984 – 85 NBA season who have posted totals of five or more in both steals and blocked shots , but did not record a five @-@ by @-@ five . 
 Ben Wallace ( four games ) 
 Michael Jordan ( three games ) 
 Dwight Howard ( two games ) 
 Scottie Pippen ( playoffs ) 
 Anthony Davis 
 Antonio McDyess 
 <unk> Morris 
 Dikembe Mutombo 
 Shaquille O 'Neal 
 Emeka Okafor 
 Bo Outlaw 
 Clifford Robinson 
 Josh Smith 
 Kawhi Leonard 
 = The Idolmaster Dearly Stars = 
 The Idolmaster Dearly Stars ( <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> <unk> , officially stylized as THE <unk> @ <unk> Dearly Stars ) is a Japanese life simulation video game developed by Microvision and published by Bandai Namco Games . It was released on September 17 , 2009 for the Nintendo DS . The game is a spin @-@ off of The Idolmaster series and its timeline coincides before the events in The Idolmaster 2 . 
 The gameplay in Dearly Stars is similar to previous games in the series , but with new elements and differences to the minigames . The gameplay was adjusted to allow the player the option to quickly play through the game 's story , but head director Toshihiko Kujioka also wanted to add in gameplay elements that would add another layer of challenge . The story is told from the perspective of Ai Hidaka , Eri Mizutani and Ryō Akizuki — three prospective pop idols introduced in Dearly Stars as they enter the talent agency 876 Production , and deals with their training on their way to stardom . The player has access to the three idols ' different scenarios when playing , and each one involves a branching plot line . 
 Development for the game began in 2008 as the first game in the franchise 's next stage called " 2nd Vision " . The development team wanted to introduce a new talent agency separate from 765 Production , the main agency in the series , to better suit the details of the story . When developing the game 's three idols , two of them were decided to be girls , but Kujioka suggested that the third idol Ryō be male instead . The game features 10 songs the idols perform , later released on several music albums . Three manga adaptations were also published by Ichijinsha . Dearly Stars sold 30 @,@ 786 copies in its first week of release in Japan , and ranked as the tenth best @-@ selling video game in Japan that week . Reviewers have praised the game , and it has been described as suitable for beginners to The Idolmaster series . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Dearly Stars is a life simulation game in the which the player assumes the role of one of three pop idols at a time : Ai Hidaka , Eri Mizutani or Ryō Akizuki . An idol 's statistics are divided into three categories : vocal , dance and visual image . As these increase , an idol 's overall image level will also increase . The game is largely divided into two modes : a story mode which encompasses normal gameplay , and a separate stage mode for performing songs outside of the story mode . At the start of every in @-@ game week on Monday , the player is shown current popularity trends in vocal , dance and visual image ranked first , second and third in popularity . This gives the player a guide on how to gain popularity by augmenting an idol 's statistics via the choice of song they will perform and what costumes they wear during an audition . Also on Monday , the player is first given the option to choose which costume and accessories to wear for performances , and to choose one of the available songs . Each costume , accessory and song have either a vocal , dance or visual attribute . The player can also modify the choreography and camera positioning used during performances at this time . 
 The player is given the option to check any available messages at the start of every in @-@ game day . This is followed by deciding on the daily schedule for Monday through Saturday from four choices : taking a lesson , doing promotional work , taking an audition , or taking the day off ; Sunday is always a day off . The lessons are in the form of three minigames which serve to increase or decrease an idol 's statistics in either vocal , dance or visual image . For example , if the vocal lesson is chosen , it will not only increase an idol 's vocal statistics , but also decrease an idol 's dance and visual statistics . Each lesson is divided into six parts , and the player is given ranked with either a letter grade from A to E or simply a " bad " rank for each part depending on how well the lesson is performed . The lessons become harder overtime the better they are performed . The lesson 's overall performance is ranked from bad , to normal , good and finally perfect . 
 The promotional phase of the gameplay mainly deals with the idol conversing with various other characters and doing events , some of which are necessary to progress the game . There are also times when the player is given choices that directly affect the idol . Over the course of a conversation , text progression pauses when the player is given multiple responses to choose from . Depending on which choice is made will effect how well or poorly the communication is received , which results in either bad , normal or good memories . A bad memory will decrease an idol 's enthusiasm , which is displayed at certain points throughout gameplay by a horizontal bar in the top @-@ left of the lower screen . An idol 's enthusiasm ranges from blue to yellow and finally to red as enthusiasm increases . A normal memory will reward the player with a heart point , used later during auditions . A good memory will reward the player with two heart points and increased enthusiasm . If the player chooses to take the day off , an idol 's enthusiasm will automatically increase . Days off also give the idol the chance to either stay at home , or go out into town and meet with other characters . The player can check on days off if there are any presents fans have sent the idols , which contain in @-@ game items . 
 When taking an audition , a judge evaluates the idol over a 30 @-@ second period . The judge 's interest level continuously decreases in 10 % increments , but this can be increased with another minigame . The heart points obtained up to the audition are used in the minigame as the number of times the player is given to successfully appeal to the judge until all the points are exhausted . For instance , three heart points indicates the player will have three chances to increase a judge 's interest level . At the end of the audition , a judge 's interest level determines if the idol passes or not . If an idol passes the audition , he or she is chosen to do a televised performance of the song previously chosen . A performance serves to increase an idol 's number of fans , which in turn can increase an idol 's rank if enough fans have been obtained for a given rank . For example , an idol starts at rank F with below 10 @,@ 000 fans , and the next level up is a rank E with between 10 @,@ 001 and 99 @,@ 999 fans . The ranks continue from D to C , B , A and finally S. 
 Each of the three scenarios follows a branching plot line with multiple endings , and the story 's divergence mainly depends on whether an idol passes or fails an audition , though this is not always the case . Some outcomes , such as failing to pass the first audition , can lead the game to end prematurely and offer an alternate ending to the plot . An audition marks the end of a chapter , after which the story will progress onto the next stage . In the game 's stage mode , the player is able to freely customize a stand @-@ alone performance , including options for the song , costume , accessories , choreography and camera positioning . Up to 16 players can participate via Wi @-@ Fi in the stage mode by offering three types of cheers during one player 's performance . If the game is played on a Nintendo DS with a camera , such as a Nintendo DSi or a later model , the camera may be used to scan QR codes found online or in magazines to obtain in @-@ game items . 
 = = Plot and characters = = 
 Dearly Stars occurs prior to the events in The Idolmaster 2 , and revolves around characters related to the talent agency 876 Production ( 876 Pro ) , a rising studio located in a small office . The three main characters are Ai Hidaka , Eri Mizutani and Ryō Akizuki — three prospective pop idols introduced in Dearly Stars . In Ai 's story , she is an energetic girl who wants to be an idol like her mother Mai had been , but she becomes discouraged after failing to pass several idol auditions . One of the judges at her most recent audition was 765 Production 's ( 765 Pro ) Haruka Amami , who catches up with Ai in a nearby park and decides to introduce her to 876 Pro . The president of 876 Pro , Minori Ishikawa , immediately hires Ai and wants to promote her as Mai 's daughter , but Ai insists on becoming a popular idol on her own . 
 At the beginning of Eri 's story , she is a shy shut @-@ in who has made a name for herself online as an Internet idol under the name " Ellie " . This leads to her being contacted by freelance idol producer Reiko Ozaki , who wants to train her as a real @-@ life idol . After they meet , Eri agrees to start work as an idol . Lastly , in Ryō 's story , he is a soft @-@ spoken boy who wants to be an idol so he can be seen as a " cool " guy . He consults his cousin and 765 Pro idol Ritsuko Akizuki about it , who introduces him to 876 Pro 's manager Manami Okamoto . At 876 Pro , Ryō ends up covering for a female idol , and he does so well that the agency decides to hires him , but only if he debuts as a female idol . Ishikawa assures him that once he proves himself as a female idol , that she will help him make the transition into being a male idol . Manami is the manager for both Ai and Ryō in their respective scenarios . The rest of the story deals with the training Ai , Eri and Ryō go through on their way to stardom . 
 Two other idols are introduced in Dearly Stars as supporting characters . Eri is friends with Ayane Suzuki , a high @-@ ranking Internet idol known as " <unk> " whom she also chats with online . She is against Eri transitioning into being a real @-@ life idol , and seeks to take her back into being an Internet idol . In Ryō 's story appears <unk> Sakurai , a talented idol and rival to Ryō . Throughout the story , other idols from 765 Pro also make appearances . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 Dearly Stars was primarily developed by Microvision in conjunction with Bandai Namco Games . The game was directed by Toshihiko Kujioka of Bandai Namco Games and co @-@ directed by Yoshimasa Koyama of Microvision . In 2008 , while Bandai Namco Games was in the process of developing The Idolmaster SP and downloadable content for The Idolmaster Live For You ! , Kujioka and Bandai Namco Games producer <unk> Tanaka submitted the proposal for Dearly Stars to Yōzō Sakagami , the main producer for The Idolmaster games . It was announced in May 2009 as the first game in the franchise 's next stage called " 2nd Vision " , which was described as The Idolmaster 's next project that would further expand the series ' world . 
 The development team wanted to introduce a new talent agency that would be separate from 765 Pro to better suit the details of the story , such as how the idols at 876 Pro are just starting out while the idols at 765 Pro already have an establish fanbase . Tanaka would go on to say that the scenario in Dearly Stars would not have worked without having a different company president — in this case , the president of 876 Pro , Minori Ishikawa . The gameplay was adjusted to allow the player the option to quickly play through the game 's story . However , Kujioka also wanted to add in gameplay elements that would add another layer of challenge , such as the introduction of the choreography panel to make adjustments to an idol 's dance sequence or the positioning and manipulation of in @-@ game cameras . The staff also altered how the lessons and auditions operate in Dearly Stars compared to previous games in the series , which also modified the game 's degree of difficulty . 
 When developing the game 's three idols , the staff first decided on going with an archetypal " cheerful " girl and " slightly brooding and negative " girl . When thinking about what to do with the last idol , Kujioka suggested having the idol be male instead , and Tanaka thought this would be okay . It was also suggested that one of the 876 Pro idols be related to one of the 765 Pro idols , leading to Ritsuko Akizuki being chosen to be Ryō 's cousin . When developing the idols ' characters , creating one idol 's details resulted in equivalent changes to the other two idols . For instance , this development technique ultimately led to the image color for the idols being decided based on the idols ' surnames . The design of the characters was split between two artists : Toshiyuki Kubooka , who had been the character designer since the original arcade version of The Idolmaster , and Kiyotaka Tamiya , who designed the characters introduced in Dearly Stars . 
 When writing the story , the staff wanted to incorporate Hibiki <unk> and Takane Shijō , who had already been introduced in The Idolmaster SP , but because the two games were being developed simultaneously , Hibiki 's and Takane 's role in the main story of Dearly Stars was kept to a minimum . For the dance sequences during performances , Kujioka chose to employ talent star Fumi Sakura , as opposed to professional dancers who had been used in The Idolmaster games up to that point . Kujioka wanted the dance sequences to be closer to what he calls an " idol 's aura " — a certain emotional charm that is not a part of an idol 's skill at dancing , according to him . Also , because of the idols in Dearly Stars are young and are just starting out , Kujioka told Sakura to purposefully mess up some dance portions to reflect this inexperience . 
 Despite The Idolmaster originally being targeted at a male audience , there were also advertisements and promotions for Dearly Stars geared towards young girls . Despite this , the game has a CERO rating of C ( ages 15 and up ) and an additional icon for " sexual " themes . The game was released in Japan on September 17 , 2009 . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Dearly Stars features 10 songs the idols perform written and composed by a variety of songwriters . The chief music director Kōji Nakagawa told Satoru <unk> , the composer of the game 's theme song " Hello ! ! " , that he wanted it to be " similar to the opening theme of an anime . " It was decided beforehand who the three composers would be for the other three songs introduced in Dearly Stars — " Alive " , " <unk> " ( <unk> ) and " Dazzling World " . When discussing who would compose which song , Go Shiina said he wanted to compose the song for the game 's main idol , so he was given in charge of composing Ai 's song " Alive " . Producer Yōzō Sakagami pointed out that as a ballad , " Alive " does not seem like a typical idol song , but as noted by Nakagawa , the song is meant to reflect the fact that Ai 's mother Mai originally sang the song once she became a prominent idol . When recording Ryō 's song " Dazzling World " sung by <unk> Sanpei , Nakagawa decided on the spot to record the song used in the game in two versions : one with a female voice and the other in a male voice . Of the 10 songs in the game , Kujioka specifically wanted to include " <unk> " ( <unk> ) . 
 The four songs introduced in Dearly Stars were released by Nippon Columbia on a four @-@ part CD series titled The Idolmaster Dream Symphony in 2009 . The first release was the single for " Hello ! ! " on September 9 . This was followed by three compilation albums , one for each of the idols : Eri 's album was released on October 14 , Ryō 's album was released on November 4 , and Ai 's album was released on December 2 . 
 = = Related media = = 
 An Internet radio show to promote Dearly Stars titled Dearly Station ( <unk> ) broadcast four main episodes and one special episode between July 11 and August 31 , 2009 on Niconico 's channel <unk> . A 176 @-@ page guidebook of the game titled The Idolmaster Dearly Stars Delicious Album was released on November 6 , 2009 by Enterbrain . The book contains five chapters that detail the plot and characters , gameplay system , data related to in @-@ game items and game mechanics , and interviews from the cast and development staff . Three manga adaptations were serialized in Ichijinsha 's Comic Rex between the September 2009 and March 2011 issues . They included : The Idolmaster Splash Red for Dearly Stars illustrated by <unk> <unk> which deals with Ai 's story , The Idolmaster Innocent Blue for Dearly Stars illustrated by <unk> which covers Eri 's story , and The Idolmaster Neue Green for Dearly Stars illustrated by Kōsuke <unk> which has to do with Ryō 's story . Each manga was released in three tankōbon volumes between July 9 , 2010 and July 27 , 2011 . A limited edition of each of the third manga volumes contained a different drama CD . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Dearly Stars sold 30 @,@ 786 copies in its first week of release in Japan , and ranked as the tenth best @-@ selling video game in Japan that week . The game received a score of 30 out of 40 from the Japanese video game magazine Famitsu . Critics have described Dearly Stars as suitable for beginners to the Idolmaster series for drawing out the series ' essence and reorganizing it into a simpler and easier @-@ to @-@ understand form . At the same time , Famitsu reviewer Sekai Sandai Miyokawa thinks that fans of the series will feel from Dearly Stars the growth of the 765 Pro idols and the overall growth of the series . Reviewers note that despite the change in the game 's details compared to previous games in the series , such as the change in perspective from the producer to the idol , Dearly Stars still plays like an Idolmaster game . However , another Famitsu reviewer stated that because other aspects of the gameplay in Dearly Stars are similar to previous Idolmaster games such as doing lessons and auditions , the sense of enjoyment is not that different from other games . A reviewer for Famitsu felt it was easier to empathize with an idol when the story was told from their perspective . 
 Despite the technical limitations of the Nintendo DS compared to other games in the series that have been developed for the Xbox 360 and PlayStation Portable , Miyokawa described the movement of the idols during performances as " better than expected , " and welcomed shots of the audience waving glow sticks . While another reviewer for 4Gamer could not deny the lower visual quality of the performances compared to previous Idolmaster games , the unexpectedly high sound quality of the songs in combination with well @-@ done dance sequences , albeit on a small screen , was considered by this reviewer as " thoroughly enjoyable . " Miyokawa also praised the additional gameplay that goes into minutely adjusting an idol 's choreography , but described it as extremely difficult to do well . However , the game 's overall degree of difficulty compared to previous Idolmaster games is described as having decreased . The songs introduced in Dearly Stars such as " Hello ! ! " have been called " wonderful " . 
 The introduction of Ryō as a cross @-@ dressing idol has been praised by one reviewer who called him the cutest out of the three playable idols because of both his appearance and his personality . Miyokawa suggested that Ryō may have been created to lessen any sense of awkwardness that male players would feel from playing as female idols , but upon playing his scenario , Miyokawa noted that the player is naturally able to get into the story , in part due to the comical events surrounding Ryō 's story that deal with him cross @-@ dressing . 
 = Suillus salmonicolor = 
 Suillus salmonicolor , commonly known as the slippery Jill , is a fungus in the family Suillaceae of the order Boletales . First described as a member of the genus Boletus in 1874 , the species acquired several synonyms , including Suillus pinorigidus and Suillus subluteus , before it was assigned its current binomial name in 1983 . It has not been determined with certainty whether S. salmonicolor is distinct from the species S. cothurnatus , described by Rolf Singer in 1945 . S. salmonicolor is a mycorrhizal fungus — meaning it forms a symbiotic association with the roots of plants such that both organisms benefit from the exchange of nutrients . This symbiosis occurs with various species of pine , and the fruit bodies ( or mushrooms ) of the fungus appear scattered or in groups on the ground near the trees . The fungus is found in North America ( including Hawaii ) , Asia , the Caribbean , South Africa , Australia and Central America . It has been introduced to several of those locations via transplanted trees . 
 The mushroom 's dingy yellow to brownish cap is rounded to flattened in shape , slimy when wet , and grows up to 9 @.@ 5 cm ( 3 @.@ 7 in ) wide . The small pores on the underside of the cap are yellow before becoming olive @-@ brown . The stem is up to 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) long and 1 @.@ 6 cm ( 0 @.@ 6 in ) thick and is covered with reddish @-@ brown glandular dots . Young specimens are covered with a grayish , slimy partial veil that later ruptures and leaves a <unk> ring on the stem . Although the mushroom is generally considered edible — especially if the slimy cap cuticle and partial veil are first peeled off — opinions about its palatability vary . Other similar Suillus species include S. <unk> , S. <unk> , and S. intermedius . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 The species was first described scientifically by American mycologist Charles Christopher Frost in 1874 as Boletus salmonicolor , based on specimens he collected in the New England area of the United States . In a 1983 publication , mycologist Roy Halling declared Boletus subluteus ( described by Charles Horton Peck in 1887 ; Ixocomus subluteus is a later combination based on this name ) and Suillus pinorigidus ( described by Wally Snell and Esther A. Dick in 1956 ) to be synonymous . Halling also reexamined Frost 's type specimen of B. salmonicolor , and considered the taxon better placed in Suillus because of its glutinous cap , dotted stem , and ring ; he formally transferred it to that genus , resulting in the combination Suillus salmonicolor . The specific epithet salmonicolor is a Latin color term meaning " pink with a dash of yellow " . The mushroom is commonly known as the " slippery Jill " . 
 In a 1986 publication on Suillus taxonomy and nomenclature , Mary E. Palm and Elwin L. Stewart further discussed the synonymy of S. salmonicolor , S. subluteus , and S. pinorigidus . They noted that fruit bodies of S. subluteus collected in Minnesota did not have the strong salmon colors considered characteristic of S. salmonicolor , as well as collections that had been named S. pinorigidus ; this is a morphological difference that could be sufficient to consider S. subluteus a distinct species . They explained that although the microscopic characteristics of the three taxa do not differ significantly , this is not unusual for Suillus and cannot be used as the sole proof of conspecificity . Palm and Stewart concluded that a study of specimens from various areas of their geographical ranges would be needed to fully resolve the taxonomy of these related species . 
 There is some disagreement in the literature about whether Suillus cothurnatus represents a different species from S. salmonicolor . The online mycological taxonomy database MycoBank lists them as synonyms , contrary to Index Fungorum . In their 2000 monograph of North American boletes , Alan Bessette and colleagues list the two taxa separately , noting that the range of S. cothurnatus is difficult to determine because of confusion with S. salmonicolor . In a molecular analyses of Suillus phylogeny , based on the internal transcribed spacer , S. salmonicolor ( as S. subluteus ) and S. intermedius clustered together very closely , indicating a high degree of genetic similarity . These analyses were based on comparing the sequence differences in a single region of ribosomal DNA ; more recent molecular analyses typically combine the analysis of several genes to increase the validity of inferences drawn . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap of S. salmonicolor is bluntly rounded or convex to nearly flattened , reaching a diameter of 3 – 9 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 3 @.@ 7 in ) . The cap surface is sticky to slimy when moist , but becomes shiny when dry . The cap color is variable , ranging from dingy yellow to yellowish @-@ orange to ochraceous @-@ salmon , cinnamon @-@ brown or olive @-@ brown to yellow @-@ brown . The flesh is pale orange @-@ yellow to orange @-@ buff or orange , and does not stain when exposed to air . The odor and taste are not distinctive . The pore surface on the underside of the cap is yellow to dingy yellow , or yellowish orange to salmon , darkening to brownish with age ; it also does not stain when bruised . The pores are circular to angular , measuring 1 – 2 per mm and 8 – 10 mm ( 0 @.@ 3 – 0 @.@ 4 in ) deep . The stem is 2 @.@ 5 – 10 cm ( 1 @.@ 0 – 3 @.@ 9 in ) long , 6 – 16 mm ( 0 @.@ 2 – 0 @.@ 6 in ) thick , and either equal in width throughout or slightly enlarged in the lower portion . It is whitish to yellowish or pinkish @-@ ochre , and has reddish @-@ brown to dark brown glandular dots and smears on the surface . <unk> dots are made of clumps of pigmented cells , and , unlike reticulation or scabers ( small visible tufts of fibers that occur on the stems of other Suillus species ) , can be rubbed off with handling . The flesh is ochraceous to yellowish , often salmon @-@ orange at the base of the stem . The partial veil that protects the developing gills is initially thick , baggy , and rubbery . It often has a conspicuously thickened cottony roll of tissue at its base , and sometimes flares outward from the stem on the lower portion . It forms a gelatinous ring on the upper to middle part of the stem . The spore print is cinnamon @-@ brown to brown . The surface of the cap , when applied with a drop of dilute potassium hydroxide ( KOH ) or ammonia solution ( chemical reagents commonly used for mushroom identification ) , will first turn a fleeting pink color , then dark red as the flesh collapses . 
 The spores are smooth , roughly ellipsoid in shape , inequilateral when viewed in profile , and measure 7 @.@ 6 – 10 by 3 – 3 @.@ 4 μm . They appear hyaline ( translucent ) to yellowish in a dilute solution of KOH , and cinnamon to pale ochraceous when stained with Melzer 's reagent . The basidia are somewhat collapsed , hyaline , and 5 – 6 μm thick . The cystidia are scattered , sometimes arranged in clusters ( especially on the gill edge ) , usually with an ochraceous @-@ brown content , but occasionally hyaline . They are club @-@ shaped to somewhat cylindric and measure 34 – 60 by 10 – 13 μm . The cuticle of the cap is an ixotrichodermium — a cellular arrangement where the outermost hyphae are gelatinous and emerge roughly parallel , like hairs , perpendicular to the cap surface . These hyphae are hyaline and narrowly cylindric , measuring 1 @.@ 4 – 3 μm in diameter . The stem surface is made of scattered bundles of caulocystidia ( cystidia on the stem ) that are brown or sometimes hyaline in KOH , club @-@ shaped to subcylindrical bundles interspersed among hyaline cells . These bundles are underlain by a layer of gelatinous , hyaline , vertically oriented and parallel hyphae that are shaped like narrow cylinders . Clamp connections are absent from the hyphae . 
 = = = Edibility = = = 
 The mushroom is edible , but removal of the slimy cap cuticle and partial veil is recommended to avoid possible gastrointestinal upset ; similarly , the 1992 field guide Edible Wild Mushrooms of North America recommends the removal of the tube layer before preparation , as it can become slimy during cooking . Opinions about the quality of the mushroom vary . According to the book <unk> of North America , it is " very good " with a " lemony " flavor . A Canadian field guide is more cautious in its assessment , and suggests that one would have to be brave to consume a mushroom with such a sticky veil . Mycologist David Arora , in his Mushrooms Demystified , opines that it is not worth eating . Whatever its palatibility to humans , the mushroom serves as a habitat for larvae of <unk> insects such as the <unk> fly Mydaea <unk> and the scuttle fly Megaselia lutea . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Suillus intermedius , found in northeastern and northern North America , is similar in appearance to S. salmonicolor . It may be distinguished by a lighter @-@ colored cap , cream to yellowish or pale ochraceous flesh , and a ring that is neither as thick nor as wide as S. salmonicolor . It is also larger , with a cap diameter of up to 16 cm ( 6 @.@ 3 in ) , and its pore surface sometimes slowly stains reddish @-@ brown when bruised . Although it has not been definitively established whether S. cothurnatus is a distinct species , several characteristics have been reported to differentiate it from S. salmonicolor : a thinner , less rubbery veil that usually lacks a thickened cottony roll at the base ; glandular dots on the stem that consist of bundles of <unk> hyphae in a parallel arrangement ending in an even row of large , sterile cystidia ( 60 – 140 μm long ) that resemble basidia ; and small hyaline cystidia shaped like swollen bottles with narrowed bases . Other Suillus species with which S. salmonicolor might be confused include S. <unk> and S. <unk> . Both of these species have a less well @-@ developed partial veil , and their flesh is a duller tone lacking yellow @-@ orange tints . 
 = = Ecology , habitat and distribution = = 
 Suillus salmonicolor occurs in a mycorrhizal association with various species of Pinus . This is a mutualistic relationship in which the subterranean fungal mycelia creates a protective sheath around the rootlets of the tree and a network of hyphae ( the Hartig net ) that penetrates between the tree 's epidermal and cortical cells . This association helps the plant absorb water and mineral nutrients ; in exchange , the fungus receives a supply of carbohydrates produced by the plant 's photosynthesis . <unk> , three- , and five @-@ needled pines have all been recorded to associate with S. salmonicolor . In North America , the fungus has been found growing with P. banksiana , P. palustris , P. resinosa , P. rigida , P. strobus and P. taeda . In Kamchatka ( in the Russian Far East ) it has been found in association with P. pumila , in the Philippines with P. <unk> , and in southern India with P. patula . The northern limit of its North American range extends to eastern Canada ( Quebec ) , and the southern limit to Nuevo León and near the village of <unk> in <unk> Municipality , Chihuahua , Mexico . 
 Suillus salmonicolor has been collected from the Dominican Republic in the Caribbean , Japan , Taiwan , and from Mpumalanga , South Africa . Because there are no native Pinus species in South Africa , the fungus is assumed to be an exotic species that has been introduced via pine plantations . It has also been introduced to Australia , where it is known from a single collection made in a plantation of Caribbean pine ( Pinus <unk> ) in Queensland ; the fungus has additionally been found growing with Caribbean pine in Belize . It is found in Hawaii under Slash Pine ( Pinus <unk> ) , including lawns where those trees are used in landscaping . S. salmonicolor is one of several ectomycorrhizal species that have " traveled the thousands of kilometers from a mainland to Hawaii in the roots and soil of introduced seedlings . " 
 = Soundgarden = 
 Soundgarden is an American rock band formed in Seattle , Washington , in 1984 by singer and rhythm guitarist Chris Cornell , lead guitarist Kim Thayil , and bassist Hiro Yamamoto . Matt Cameron became the band 's full @-@ time drummer in 1986 , while bassist Ben Shepherd became a permanent replacement for Yamamoto in 1990 . 
 Soundgarden was one of the seminal bands in the creation of grunge , a style of alternative rock that developed in Seattle , and was one of a number of grunge bands signed to the record label Sub Pop . Soundgarden was the first grunge band to sign to a major label ( A & M Records in 1988 ) , though the band did not achieve commercial success until they popularized the genre in the early 1990s with Seattle contemporaries Pearl Jam , Nirvana , and Alice in Chains . 
 Soundgarden achieved its biggest success with the 1994 album Superunknown , which debuted at number one on the Billboard charts and yielded the Grammy Award @-@ winning singles " Black Hole Sun " and " Spoonman " . In 1997 , the band broke up due to internal strife over its creative direction . After more than a decade of working on projects and other bands , Soundgarden reunited in 2010 and their sixth studio album , King Animal , was released two years later . 
 As of 2012 , Soundgarden had sold more than 10 @.@ 5 million records in the United States , and an estimated 22 @.@ 5 million worldwide . VH1 ranked Soundgarden at number 14 in their special 100 Greatest Artists of Hard Rock . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation and early recordings ( 1984 – 1988 ) = = = 
 Soundgarden 's origins can be found in a band called The <unk> , which performed around Seattle in the early 1980s , and featured bassist Hiro Yamamoto and drummer and singer Chris Cornell . Following Yamamoto 's departure , the band recruited guitarist Kim Thayil as its new bassist . Thayil had moved to Seattle from Park Forest , Illinois , with Yamamoto and Bruce Pavitt , who would later start the independent record label Sub Pop . Cornell and Yamamoto stayed in contact , and after The <unk> broke up Cornell and Yamamoto started jamming together , and were eventually joined by Thayil . 
 Soundgarden was formed in 1984 by Cornell ( drums and vocals ) , Yamamoto ( bass ) , and Thayil ( guitar ) . The band named themselves after a wind @-@ channeling pipe sculpture , " A Sound Garden " , located on National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration property at <unk> Sand Point Way next to Magnuson Park , Seattle . Cornell originally played drums while singing , but in 1985 the band enlisted Scott Sundquist to allow Cornell to concentrate on vocals . The band traveled around playing various concerts with this line @-@ up for about a year . Their first recordings were three songs that appeared on the 1986 compilation album for C / Z Records called Deep Six . It also featured songs by fellow grunge pioneers Green River , Skin Yard , Malfunkshun , The U @-@ Men , and The Melvins . In 1986 , Sundquist left the band to spend time with his family , and was replaced by Matt Cameron , the drummer from Skin Yard . 
 <unk> DJ Jonathan Poneman was impressed after seeing Soundgarden perform one night , later saying , " I saw this band that was everything rock music should be . " Poneman offered to fund a release by the band , so Thayil told him to team up with Bruce Pavitt . Poneman offered to contribute $ 20 @,@ 000 in funding for Sub Pop , effectively turning it into a full @-@ fledged record label . Soundgarden signed to Sub Pop , and the label released " Hunted Down " in 1987 as the band 's first single . The B @-@ side of the " Hunted Down " single , " Nothing to Say " , appeared on the <unk> compilation tape Bands That Will Make Money , which was distributed to record companies , many of whom showed interest in Soundgarden . Through Sub Pop , the band released the Screaming Life EP in 1987 , and the Fopp EP in 1988 . A combination of the two was issued as Screaming Life / Fopp in 1990 . 
 = = = Debut album , major label signing , and rift with audience ( 1988 – 1990 ) = = = 
 Though the band was being courted by major labels , in 1988 it signed to the independent label SST Records for its debut album , Ultramega OK , released on October 31 , 1988 . Cornell said that the band " made a huge mistake with Ultramega OK " since they used a producer suggested by SST who " didn 't know what was happening in Seattle . " On that album , Soundgarden demonstrates , according to Steve Huey of AllMusic , a " Stooges / MC5 @-@ meets @-@ Zeppelin / Sabbath sound . " The band 's first music video , " Flower " , was directed by Mark <unk> , and aired regularly on MTV 's 120 Minutes . Soundgarden supported Ultramega OK with a tour in the United States in the spring of 1989 and a tour in Europe , which began in May 1989 and was the band 's first overseas tour . Ultramega OK earned the band a Grammy Award nomination for Best Metal Performance in 1990 . 
 After touring in support of Ultramega OK the band signed with A & M Records , which caused a rift between Soundgarden and its traditional audience . Thayil said , " In the beginning , our fans came from the punk rock crowd . They abandoned us when they thought we had sold out the punk tenets , getting on a major label and touring with Guns N ' Roses . There were fashion issues and social issues , and people thought we no longer belonged to their scene , to their particular sub @-@ culture . " The band subsequently began work on its first album for a major label , and personnel difficulties caused a shift in the band 's songwriting process , according to Cornell : " At the time Hiro [ Yamamoto ] had excommunicated himself from the band and there wasn 't a free @-@ flowing system as far as music went , so I ended up writing a lot of it . " On September 5 , 1989 , the band released its second album , Louder Than Love , which saw the band take " a step toward the metal mainstream , " according to Steve Huey of Allmusic , describing " a slow , grinding , detuned mountain of Sabbath / Zeppelin riffs and Chris Cornell wailing . " Because of some of the lyrics , most notably on " Hands All Over " and " Big Dumb Sex " , the band faced various retail and distribution problems upon the album 's release . Louder Than Love became the band 's first album to chart on the Billboard 200 , peaking at number 108 on the chart in 1990 . 
 A month before touring for Louder Than Love commenced , bassist Hiro Yamamoto , who was becoming frustrated that he wasn 't contributing much , left to go back to college . He was replaced by Jason Everman , formerly of Nirvana . The band toured North America from December 1989 to March 1990 , opening for Voivod , which was supporting their album Nothingface tour , with Faith No More and The Big F also serving as opening acts at the beginning and end of the tour . The band then went on to tour Europe . Bassist Jason Everman was fired immediately after Soundgarden completed its promotional tour for Louder Than Love in mid @-@ 1990 ; Thayil said that " Jason just didn 't work out . " Louder Than Love spawned the EP Loudest Love and the video compilation Louder Than Live , both released in 1990 . 
 = = = Established lineup , censorship , and rise in popularity ( 1991 – 1993 ) = = = 
 Bassist Ben Shepherd replaced previous bassist Jason Everman and the new line @-@ up recorded Soundgarden 's third album in 1991 . Cornell said that Shepherd brought a " fresh and creative " approach to the recording sessions , and the band as a whole said that his knowledge of music and writing skills redefined the band . The resulting album , Badmotorfinger , was released on October 8 , 1991 . Steve Huey of Allmusic said that the songwriting on Badmotorfinger " takes a quantum leap in focus and consistency . " He added , " It 's surprisingly cerebral and arty music for a band courting mainstream metal audiences . " Thayil suggested that the album 's lyrics are " like reading a novel [ about ] man 's conflict with himself and society , or the government , or his family , or the economy , or anything . " The first single from Badmotorfinger , " Jesus Christ Pose " , garnered attention when MTV decided to ban its corresponding music video in 1991 . Many listeners were outraged by the song and its video , perceiving it as anti @-@ Christian . The band received death threats while on tour in the United Kingdom in support of the album . Cornell explained that the lyrics criticize public figures who use religion ( particularly the image of Jesus Christ ) to portray themselves as being persecuted . Although overshadowed at the time of its release by the sudden popularity of Nirvana 's Nevermind , the focus of attention brought by Nevermind to the Seattle scene helped Soundgarden gain wider attention . The singles " Outshined " and " Rusty Cage " were able to find an audience at alternative rock radio and MTV . Badmotorfinger was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Metal Performance in 1992 . The album was among the 100 top selling albums of 1992 . 
 Following the release of Badmotorfinger , Soundgarden went on a tour in North America that ran from October 1991 to November 1991 . Afterward , the band took a slot opening for Guns N ' Roses in North America on the band 's Use Your Illusion Tour . Soundgarden was personally selected by Guns N ' Roses as its opening band . The band took a slot opening for Skid Row in North America in February 1992 on the band 's Slave to the Grind tour , and then headed to Europe for a month @-@ long headlining theater tour . The band returned for a tour in the United States and subsequently rejoined Guns N ' Roses in the summer of 1992 in Europe as part of the Use Your Illusion Tour along with fellow opening act Faith No More . Regarding the time spent opening for Guns N ' Roses , Cornell said , " It wasn 't a whole lot of fun going out in front of 40 @,@ 000 people for 35 minutes every day . Most of them hadn 't heard our songs and didn 't care about them . It was a bizarre thing . " The band would go on to play the 1992 Lollapalooza tour with the Red Hot Chili Peppers , Pearl Jam , Ministry and the Jim Rose Circus among others . In anticipation of the band 's appearance at Lollapalooza , a limited edition of Badmotorfinger was released in 1992 with a second disc containing the EP <unk> ( a palindrome ) , featuring Soundgarden 's cover of Black Sabbath 's " Into the Void " , titled " Into the Void ( Sealth ) " , which was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Metal Performance in 1993 . The band later released the video compilation <unk> , which was filmed at the Paramount Theatre in 1992 . The band also made an appearance in the movie Singles performing " Birth Ritual " . The song appeared on the soundtrack , as did a Cornell solo song , " Seasons " . 
 In 1993 , the band contributed the track " Show Me " to the AIDS @-@ Benefit Album No Alternative produced by the Red Hot Organization . 
 = = = Breakthrough album and mainstream success ( 1994 – 1995 ) = = = 
 Soundgarden began working on its fourth album after touring in support of Badmotorfinger . Cornell said that while working on the album , the band members allowed each other more freedom than on past records , and Thayil observed that the band spent a lot more time working on the actual recording of the songs than on previous records . Released on March 8 , 1994 , Superunknown became the band 's breakthrough album , driven by the singles " Spoonman " , " The Day I Tried to Live " , " Black Hole Sun " , " My Wave " , and " Fell on Black Days " ; Superunknown debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 album chart . 
 The songs on Superunknown captured the creativity and heaviness of the band 's earlier works , while showcasing the group 's newly evolving style . Lyrically , the album was quite dark and mysterious , and it is often interpreted to be dealing with substance abuse , suicide , and depression . Cornell was inspired by the writings of Sylvia Plath at the time . The album was also more experimental than previous releases , with some songs incorporating Middle @-@ Eastern or Indian music . J. D. Considine of Rolling Stone said Superunknown " demonstrates far greater range than many bands manage in an entire career . " He also stated , " At its best , Superunknown offers a more harrowing depiction of alienation and despair than anything on In Utero . " The music video for " Black Hole Sun " became a hit on MTV and received the award for Best Metal / Hard Rock Video at the 1994 MTV Video Music Awards and in 1995 it received the Clio Award for Alternative Music Video . Soundgarden won two Grammy Awards in 1995 ; " Black Hole Sun " received the award for Best Hard Rock Performance and " Spoonman " received the award for Best Metal Performance . Superunknown was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Rock Album in 1995 . Superunknown has been certified five times platinum in the United States and remains Soundgarden 's most successful album . 
 The band began touring in January 1994 in Oceania and Japan , areas where the record came out early and where the band had never toured before . This round of touring ended in February 1994 , and then in March 1994 the band moved on to Europe . They began a theater tour of the United States on May 27 , 1994 , with the opening acts Tad and Eleven . In late 1994 , after touring in support of Superunknown , doctors discovered that Cornell had severely strained his vocal cords , and Soundgarden canceled several shows to avoid causing any permanent damage . Cornell said , " I think we kinda overdid it ! We were playing five or six nights a week and my voice pretty much took a beating . Towards the end of the American tour I felt like I could still kinda sing , but I wasn 't really giving the band a fair shake . You don 't buy a ticket to see some guy croak for two hours ! That seemed like kind of a rip off . " The band would make up the dates later in 1995 . Superunknown spawned the EP Songs from the Superunknown and the CD @-@ ROM Alive in the Superunknown , both released in 1995 . 
 = = = Down on the Upside , internal conflicts and breakup ( 1996 – 1997 ) = = = 
 Following the worldwide tour in support of Superunknown , the band members began working on what would become their last studio album for over 15 years . The band chose to produce the record themselves . However , tensions within the group reportedly arose during the sessions , with Thayil and Cornell allegedly clashing over Cornell 's desire to shift away from the heavy guitar riffing that had become the band 's trademark . Cornell said , " By the time we were finished , it felt like it had been kind of hard , like it was a long , hard haul . But there was stuff we were discovering . " The band 's fifth album , Down on the Upside , was released on May 21 , 1996 . The album was notably less heavy than the group 's preceding albums , and marked a further departure from the band 's grunge roots ; Soundgarden explained at the time that it wanted to experiment with other sounds , which included acoustic instrumentation : David Browne of Entertainment Weekly said , " Few bands since Led Zeppelin have so crisply mixed instruments both acoustic and electric . " The overall mood of the album 's lyrics is less dark than on previous Soundgarden albums , with Cornell describing some songs as " self @-@ affirming . " The album spawned several singles , including " Pretty Noose " , " Burden in My Hand " , and " Blow Up the Outside World " . " Pretty Noose " was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Hard Rock Performance in 1997 . Despite favorable reviews and modest sales , the album did not match the sales or praise of Superunknown . 
 The band took a slot on the 1996 Lollapalooza tour with Metallica , who had insisted on Soundgarden 's appearance on the tour . After Lollapalooza , the band embarked on a worldwide tour , and already @-@ existing tensions increased during that tour . When asked whether the band hated touring , Cornell replied " We really enjoy it to a point , and then it gets tedious , because it becomes repetitious . You feel like fans have paid their money and they expect you to come out and play them your songs like the first time you ever played them . That 's the point where we hate touring . " At the tour 's final stop in Honolulu , Hawaii on February 9 , 1997 , Shepherd threw his bass into the air in frustration after suffering equipment failure , and subsequently stormed off the stage . The band retreated , with Cornell returning to conclude the show with a solo encore . On April 9 , 1997 , the band announced it was disbanding . Thayil said , " It was pretty obvious from everybody 's general attitude over the course of the previous half year that there was some dissatisfaction . " Cameron later said that Soundgarden was " eaten up by the business . " Soundgarden released a greatest hits collection entitled A @-@ Sides on November 4 , 1997 . The album was composed of 17 songs , including the previously @-@ unreleased " Bleed Together " , which had been recorded during the Down on the Upside recording sessions . 
 = = = Post @-@ breakup activities ( 1998 – 2009 ) = = = 
 Cornell released a solo album in September 1999 , entitled Euphoria Morning , which featured Matt Cameron on the track " Disappearing One " . Later , in 2001 , Cornell formed the platinum @-@ selling supergroup Audioslave with Tom Morello , Tim Commerford and Brad Wilk , then @-@ former members of Rage Against the Machine , which recorded three albums ( US : Triple @-@ Platinum ) Audioslave ( 2002 ) , ( US : Platinum ) Out of Exile ( 2005 ) , and ( US : Gold ) Revelations ( 2006 ) ) . Cornell left Audioslave in early 2007 , resulting in the band 's break @-@ up . His second solo album , Carry On , was released in June 2007 and his third solo album , Scream , produced by Timbaland , was released in March 2009 , both to mixed commercial and critical success . In 2009 Cornell also provided the vocals for " Promise " on Slash 's debut solo album Slash . 
 Thayil joined forces with former Dead Kennedys singer Jello Biafra and former Nirvana bassist Krist Novoselic and drummer Gina <unk> for one show , performing as The No WTO Combo during the WTO ministerial conference in Seattle on December 1 , 1999 . Thayil later contributed guitar tracks to Steve Fisk 's 2001 album , 999 Levels of Undo , as well as Dave Grohl 's 2004 side @-@ project album , <unk> . In 2006 , Thayil played guitar on the album Altar , the collaboration between the bands Sunn O ) ) ) and Boris . 
 Cameron initially turned his efforts to his side @-@ project Wellwater Conspiracy , to which both Shepherd and Thayil have contributed . He then worked briefly with The Smashing Pumpkins on the band 's 1998 album , Adore . In 1998 , he stepped in on drums for Pearl Jam 's Yield Tour following Jack Irons 's health problems , and subsequently joined Pearl Jam as an official member ; he has recorded five albums as the band 's drummer ( Binaural ( 2000 ) , Riot Act ( 2002 ) , Pearl Jam ( 2006 ) , Backspacer ( 2009 ) and Lightning Bolt ( 2013 ) . Cameron also played percussion on Geddy Lee 's album My Favourite Headache . 
 Shepherd was the singer on Wellwater Conspiracy 's 1997 debut studio album , Declaration of Conformity , but left the band in 1998 . He has toured with Mark Lanegan and played bass on two of Lanegan 's albums , I 'll Take Care of You ( 1999 ) and Field Songs ( 2001 ) . Shepherd and Cameron lent a hand with recording Tony Iommi 's album <unk> ( 2000 ) ; they were part of the side @-@ project band Hater while they were members of Soundgarden and in 2005 Shepherd released the band 's long @-@ delayed second album , The 2nd . 
 In a July 2009 interview with Rolling Stone , Cornell shot down rumors of a reunion , saying that conversations between the band members had been limited to discussion about the release of a box set or B @-@ sides album of Soundgarden rarities , and that there had been no discussion of a reunion at all . The band 's interest in new releases emerged from a 2008 reunion regarding their shared properties , both financial and legal , where they realized Soundgarden lacked online presence such as a website or Facebook page . As Thayil summed up , " we kind of had neglected our merchandise over the last decade . " Eventually the musicians decided to create an official site handled by Pearl Jam 's Ten Club , relaunch their catalog , and according to Cameron , seek " a bunch of unreleased stuff we wanted to try to put out . ” On March 2009 , Thayil , Shepherd and Cameron got onstage during a concert by Tad Doyle in Seattle and played some Soundgarden songs . Cornell stated that the moment " sort of sparked the idea : If Matt , Kim , and Ben can get in a room , rehearse a couple songs , and play , maybe we all could do that as Soundgarden . ” 
 On October 6 , 2009 , all the members of Soundgarden attended Night 3 of Pearl Jam 's four @-@ night stand at the Gibson Amphitheatre in Universal City , CA . During an encore , Temple of the Dog reunited for the first time since Pearl Jam 's show at the Santa Barbara Bowl on October 28 , 2003 . Chris Cornell joined the band to sing " Hunger Strike " . It was the first public appearance of Soundgarden together since their breakup in April 1997 . Consequently , rumors of an impending reunion were circulating on the internet . 
 = = = Reunion , Telephantasm and King Animal ( 2010 – 2013 ) = = = 
 On January 1 , 2010 , Cornell alluded to a Soundgarden reunion via his Twitter , writing : " The 12 @-@ year break is over and school is back in session . Sign up now . Knights of the <unk> ride again ! " The message linked to a website that features a picture of the group performing live and a place for fans to enter their e @-@ mail addresses to get updates on the reunion . Entering that information unlocks an archival video for the song " Get on the Snake " , from Soundgarden 's second studio album , 1989 's Louder Than Love . On March 1 , 2010 , Soundgarden announced to the people who signed their e @-@ mail subscribers that they are re @-@ releasing an old single " Hunted Down " with the song " Nothing to Say " on a 7 @-@ inch vinyl released on April 17 only at Record Store Day . Also , they released " Spoonman " live at the Del Mar Fairgrounds in San Diego , California from 1996 . Soundgarden played its first show since 1997 on April 16 at the Showbox at the Market in the band 's hometown of Seattle . The band headlined Lollapalooza on August 8 . 
 Telephantasm : A Retrospective , a new Soundgarden compilation album , was packaged with initial shipments of the Guitar Hero : Warriors of Rock video game and released on September 28 , 2010 , one week before the CD 's availability in stores on October 5 , 2010 . An expanded version of Telephantasm consisting of two CDs and one DVD is currently available for sale . A previously unreleased Soundgarden song — " Black Rain " — debuted on the Guitar Hero video game and appears on the compilation album . The compilation album achieved platinum certification status after its first day of retail availability . " Black Rain " hit rock radio stations on August 10 , 2010 . It became the band 's first single since 1997 . In November 2010 , Soundgarden was the second musical guest on the show Conan , making it their first television appearance in 13 years , and issued a 7 @-@ inch vinyl , " The Telephantasm " , for Black Friday Record Store Day . In March 2011 , Soundgarden released their first live album , Live on I @-@ 5 . 
 In February 2011 it was announced on Soundgarden 's homepage that they had started recording a new album . On March 1 , 2011 , Chris Cornell confirmed that Adam Kasper would produce the new album . Four days later , the band stated it would consist of material that was " 90 percent new " and the rest consisting of updated versions of older ideas . They also noted that they had 12 to 14 songs that were " kind of ready to go " . Although Cameron claimed the album would be released in 2011 , the recording was prolonged as Thayil said that " the more we enjoy it , the more our fans should end up enjoying it . " . Thayil also reported that some songs sound " similar in a sense to Down on the Upside " and that the album would be " picking up where we left off . There are some heavy moments , and there are some fast songs . " The next day , Cornell reported that the new album would not be released until the spring of 2012 . 
 In April 2011 , Soundgarden announced a summer tour consisting of four dates in July , and was also headliner for Voodoo Experience at City Park in New Orleans Halloween weekend 2011 . It was announced in March 2012 via the band 's official Facebook page that they would be including a new song on the soundtrack of the upcoming movie The Avengers , based on the franchise by Marvel Comics . The song was titled " Live to Rise " and marked the first newly recorded song that the band have released since reforming in 2010 . " Live to Rise " was released as a free download on iTunes April 17 . Also in March it was announced that Soundgarden would headline the Friday night of the Hard Rock Calling Festival the following July . In April , Soundgarden announced the release of a box set titled " Classic Album Selection " for Europe , containing all of their studio albums ( except for Ultramega OK ) and live album Live on I @-@ 5 . On May 5 , just before The Offspring began playing their set , the band appeared as a special guest at the 20th annual KROQ Weenie Roast in Irvine , California . Later that month , Soundgarden told Rolling Stone they were eyeing an October release for their new album . That June , the band appeared at Download Festival in Donington , England . The band released " Been Away Too Long " , the first single from their new album King Animal on September 27 . King Animal was released on November 13 , 2012 . The band released a video for " By Crooked Steps " , directed by Dave Grohl , in early 2013 . " Halfway There " was the third single to be released from the album . 
 = = = Echo of Miles ... and upcoming seventh studio album ( 2014 – present ) = = = 
 On November 15 , 2013 , drummer Matt Cameron announced that he would not be touring with Soundgarden in 2014 , due to prior commitments promoting Pearl Jam 's album Lightning Bolt . On March 16 , 2014 , it was announced that Soundgarden and Nine Inch Nails , along with opening act Death Grips , were going to tour together in North America . On March 27 , 2014 , former Pearl Jam drummer Matt Chamberlain replaced Cameron for live shows in South America and Europe . 
 On October 28 , 2014 , Soundgarden announced that they would release the 3CD compilation box set , Echo of Miles : Scattered Tracks Across the Path , on November 24 . The set is a collection of rarities , live tracks , and unreleased material spanning the group 's history . It includes previously released songs , such as " Live to Rise " , " Black Rain " , " Birth Ritual " , and others , as well as a newly recorded rendition of a song from the band 's pre @-@ Matt Cameron 1985 demo , " The Storm " , now simply titled " Storm " , which was produced by Jack Endino . One day prior to the announcement , on October 27 , the band posted a copy of " Storm " to YouTube unannounced . 
 Thayil had mentioned in several interviews that it was highly likely that the band would start working on material for a new album in 2015 . In August 2015 , Cornell stated that they were working on songs for the album . On January 19 , 2016 , it was announced that Soundgarden has returned to the studio to continue working on their new album . 
 = = Musical style and influences = = 
 Soundgarden were pioneers of the grunge music genre , which mixed elements of punk rock and metal into a dirty , aggressive sound . " Soundgarden are quite good ... " remarked Black Sabbath 's Tony Iommi , " It 's very much like the same sort of stuff that we would have done . " Soundgarden 's sound during the early years of the Seattle grunge scene has been described as consisting of " gnarled neo @-@ <unk> . " The influence of Led Zeppelin was evident , with Q magazine noting that Soundgarden were " in thrall to ' 70s rock , but contemptuous of the genre 's overt sexism and machismo . " According to Sub Pop , the band had " a hunky lead singer and fused Led Zeppelin and the Butthole Surfers . " The Butthole Surfers ' mix of punk , heavy metal and noise rock was a major influence on the early work of Soundgarden . 
 The name of the band , according to Thayil , was supposed to include the many roots of their style : that included " a virtual plethora of cutting edge rock that spans Velvet Underground , Meat Puppets and Killing Joke " . They also mentioned " Metallica ; <unk> and sublime poetry . The almost ethereal flavour of the name betrays the brutality of the music but never pins Soundgarden in one corner " . 
 Black Sabbath also had a huge impact on the band 's sound , especially on the guitar riffs and tunings . Joel McIver stated : " Soundgarden are one of the bands I 've heard closest to the original Sabbath sound " . Soundgarden , like other early grunge bands , were also influenced by British post @-@ punk bands such as Gang of Four and Bauhaus which were popular in the early 1980s Seattle scene . Cornell himself said : " When Soundgarden formed we were post @-@ punk – pretty quirky . Then somehow we found this neo @-@ Sabbath psychedelic rock that fitted well with who we were " . Thayil described the band 's sound as a " Sabbath @-@ influenced punk " . 
 Soundgarden broadened its musical range with its later releases . By 1994 's Superunknown , the band began to incorporate more psychedelic influences into its music . As a member of Soundgarden , Cornell became known for his wide vocal range and his dark , existentialist lyrics . 
 Soundgarden often uses alternative tunings in its songs . Many Soundgarden songs are performed in drop D tuning , including " Jesus Christ Pose " , " Outshined " , " Spoonman " , " Black Hole Sun " and " Black Rain " . The E strings of the instruments were at times tuned even lower , such as on " Rusty Cage " , where the lower E is tuned all the way down to B. Some songs use more unorthodox tunings : " Been Away Too Long " , " My Wave " and " The Day I Tried to Live " are all in a E – E – B – B – B – B tuning and " Burden in My Hand " , " Head Down " and " Pretty Noose " in a tuning of C @-@ G @-@ C @-@ G @-@ G @-@ E " . 
 Soundgarden also uses unorthodox time signatures ; while such songs as " Jesus Christ Pose " , " 4th of July " , and " Blow Up the Outside World " are in typical 4 / 4 time , " Outshined " is in 7 / 4 , " My Wave " is in 5 / 4 and 4 / 4 , " He Didn 't " is in 5 / 4 and 6 / 4 , " Black Hole Sun " is in 4 / 4 and 9 / 8 , " The Day I Tried to Live " is in 15 / 8 for its verses and switches to 4 / 4 for the second half of its choruses . " Fell on Black Days " and " Somewhere " are in 6 / 4 , " Never the Machine Forever " and " Black Rain " are in 9 / 8 , " Beyond the Wheel " , " Get on the Snake " and " New Damage " are in 9 / 4 , " Face Pollution " uses 9 / 8 and 6 / 4 , " Rusty Cage " is in 4 / 4 , 7 / 4 , 9 / 8 , and 19 / 8 , " Ugly Truth " is in 4 / 4 and 6 / 8 , " Limo Wreck " alternates between 12 / 8 , 15 / 8 , 9 / 8 , and 6 / 8 , " Half " is in 5 / 8 with a measure of 11 / 16 before a 4 / 4 section , and " Spoonman " alternates between 7 / 4 verses and 4 / 4 choruses with a section in 6 / 4 . 
 Thayil has said that Soundgarden usually did not consider the time signature of a song until after the band had written it , and said that the use of odd meters was " a total accident . " Thayil also used the meters as an example of the band 's anti @-@ commercial stance , saying that if Soundgarden " were in the business of hit singles , we 'd at least write songs in 4 / 4 so you could dance to them . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Soundgarden was one of the early bands of the 1980s Seattle music scene and is regarded as being one of the originators of the genre later known as grunge . The development of the Seattle independent record label Sub Pop is tied closely to Soundgarden , since Sub Pop co @-@ founder Jonathan Poneman funded Soundgarden 's early releases , and the band 's success led to the expansion of Sub Pop as a serious record label . Nirvana frontman Kurt Cobain was a fan of Soundgarden 's early music , and reportedly Soundgarden 's involvement with Sub Pop influenced Cobain to sign Nirvana with the label . Soundgarden was the first grunge band to sign to a major label when the band joined the roster of A & M Records in 1989 . Soundgarden , however , did not achieve initial success , and only with successive album releases did the band meet with increased sales and wider attention . Bassist Ben Shepherd has not been receptive to the grunge label , saying in a 2013 interview " That 's just marketing . It 's called rock and roll , or it 's called punk rock or whatever . We never were Grunge , we were just a band from Seattle . " They were ranked No. 14 on VH1 's 100 Greatest Artists of Hard Rock . 
 Regarding Soundgarden 's legacy , in a 2007 interview Cornell said , 
 I think , and this is now with some distance in listening to the records , but on the outside looking in with all earnestness I think Soundgarden made the best records out of that scene . I think we were the most daring and experimental and genre pushing really and I 'm really proud of it . And I guess that 's why I have trepidation about the idea of reforming . I don 't know what it would mean . I guess I just have this image of who we were and I had probably a lot of anxiety during the period of being Soundgarden , as we all did , that it was a responsibility and it was an important band of music and we didn 't want to mess it up and we managed to not , which I felt is a great achievement . 
 Soundgarden has been praised for its technical musical ability and the expansion of its sound as the band 's career progressed . " Heavy yet ethereal , powerful yet always @-@ in @-@ control , Soundgarden 's music was a study in contrasts , " said Henry Wilson of Hit Parader . Wilson proclaimed the band 's music as " a brilliant display of technical proficiency tempered by heart @-@ felt emotion . " Soundgarden is one of the bands credited with the development of the genre of alternative metal , with Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic stating that " Soundgarden made a place for heavy metal in alternative rock . " Ben Ratliff of Rolling Stone defined Soundgarden as the " standard @-@ bearers of stoner rock " during the 1990s . The band inspired and influenced a number of bands , such as metalcore bands like Between the Buried and Me and The Dillinger Escape Plan . 
 = = Band members = = 
 = = = Timeline = = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 Ultramega OK ( 1988 ) 
 Louder Than Love ( 1989 ) 
 Badmotorfinger ( 1991 ) 
 Superunknown ( 1994 ) 
 Down on the Upside ( 1996 ) 
 King Animal ( 2012 ) 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 Grammy Awards 
 = First @-@ person shooter = 
 First @-@ person shooter ( FPS ) is a video game genre centered on gun and projectile weapon @-@ based combat through a first @-@ person perspective ; that is , the player experiences the action through the eyes of the protagonist . The first @-@ person shooter shares common traits with other shooter games , which in turn fall under the heading action game . From the genre 's inception , advanced 3D or pseudo @-@ 3D graphics have challenged hardware development , and multiplayer gaming has been integral . 
 The first @-@ person shooter has since been traced as far back as Maze War , development of which began in 1973 , and 1974 's Spasim . After early , more playful titles like MIDI Maze in 1987 , the genre coalesced into a more wantonly violent form with 1992 's Wolfenstein 3D , which has been credited with creating the genre proper and the basic archetype upon which subsequent titles were based . One such title , and the progenitor of the genre 's wider mainstream acceptance and popularity was Doom , perhaps one of the most influential games in this genre ; for many years , the term Doom clone was used to designate this genre due to Doom 's influence . 1998 's Half @-@ Life — along with its 2004 sequel Half @-@ Life 2 — enhanced the narrative and puzzle elements . In 1999 , Half @-@ Life 's mod Counter @-@ Strike was released , and together with Doom is perhaps the most influential first @-@ person shooters . GoldenEye 007 ( 1997 ) was a landmark first @-@ person shooter for home consoles , while the Halo series heightened the console 's commercial and critical appeal as a platform for first @-@ person shooter titles . In the 21st century , the first @-@ person shooter is the most commercially viable video game genre , and has more market share of any other genre in the gaming industry . Several first @-@ person shooters have been popular games for eSports and competitive gaming competitions as well . 
 = = Definition = = 
 First @-@ person shooters are a type of three @-@ dimensional shooter game , featuring a first @-@ person point of view with which the player sees the action through the eyes of the player character . They are unlike third @-@ person shooters , in which the player can see ( usually from behind ) the character they are controlling . The primary design element is combat , mainly involving firearms . 
 First person @-@ shooter games are also often categorized as being distinct from light gun shooters , a similar genre with a first @-@ person perspective which use light gun peripherals , in contrast to first @-@ person shooters which use conventional input devices for movement . A more important key difference is that first @-@ person light @-@ gun shooters like Virtua Cop often feature " on @-@ rails " movement , whereas first @-@ person shooters like Doom give the player more freedom to roam . 
 The first @-@ person shooter may be considered a distinct genre in itself , or a type of shooter game , in turn a subgenre of the wider action game genre . Following the release of Doom in 1993 , games in this style were commonly termed " Doom clones " ; in time this term has largely been replaced by " first @-@ person shooter " . Wolfenstein 3D , released in 1992 , the year before Doom , has been credited with inventing the genre , but critics have since identified similar though less advanced games developed as far back as 1973 . There are occasional disagreements regarding the specific design elements which constitute a first @-@ person shooter . For example , Deus Ex or BioShock may be considered as first @-@ person shooters , but may also be considered role @-@ playing video games as they borrow from this genre extensively . Some commentators extend the definition to include combat flight simulators where the cockpit or vehicle takes place of the hands and weapons . 
 = = Game design = = 
 Like most shooter games , first @-@ person shooters involve an avatar , one or more ranged weapons , and a varying number of enemies . Because they take place in a 3D environment , these games tend to be somewhat more realistic than 2D shooter games , and have more accurate representations of gravity , lighting , sound and collisions . First @-@ person shooters played on personal computers are most often controlled with a combination of a keyboard and mouse . This system has been claimed as superior to that found in console games , which frequently use two analog sticks : one used for running and sidestepping , the other for looking and aiming . It is common to display the character 's hands and weaponry in the main view , with a head @-@ up display showing health , ammunition and location details . Often , it is possible to overlay a map of the surrounding area . 
 = = = Combat and power @-@ ups = = = 
 First @-@ person shooters often focus on action gameplay , with fast @-@ paced and bloody firefights , though some place a greater emphasis on narrative , problem @-@ solving and logic puzzles . In addition to shooting , melee combat may also be used extensively . In some games , melee weapons are especially powerful , a reward for the risk the player must take in maneuvering his character into close proximity to the enemy . In other situations , a melee weapon may be less effective , but necessary as a last resort . " Tactical shooters " are more realistic , and require teamwork and strategy to succeed ; the player often commands a squad of characters , which may be controlled by the game or by human teammates . 
 First @-@ person shooters typically give players a choice of weapons , which have a large impact on how the player will play the game . Some game designs have realistic models of actual existing or historical weapons , incorporating their rate of fire , magazine size , ammunition amount , recoil and accuracy . Other first @-@ person shooter games may incorporate imaginative variations of weapons , including future prototypes , " alien technology " scenario defined weaponry , and / or utilizing a wide array of projectiles , from industrial labor tools to laser , energy , plasma , rocket and grenade launchers or crossbows . These many variations may also be applied to the tossing animations of grenades , rocks , spears and the such . Also more unconventional modes of destruction may be employed from the viewable users hands such as flames , electricity , telekinesis or other supernatural constructions . However , designers often allow characters to carry varying multiples of weapons with little to no reduction in speed or mobility , or perhaps more realistically , a pistol or smaller device and a long rifle or even limiting the player to only one weapon at a time . There are often options to trade up , upgrade or swap out in most games . Thus , the standards of realism varies between design elements . The protagonist can generally be healed and re @-@ armed by means of items such as first aid kits , simply by walking over them . Some games allow players to accumulate experience points similar to those found in role @-@ playing games , which can unlock new weapons and abilities . 
 = = = Level design = = = 
 First @-@ person shooters may be structurally composed of levels , or use the technique of a continuous narrative in which the game never leaves the first @-@ person perspective . Others feature large sandbox environments , which are not divided into levels and can be explored freely . In first @-@ person shooters , protagonists interact with the environment to varying degrees , from basics such as using doors , to problem solving puzzles based on a variety of interactive objects . In some games , the player can damage the environment , also to varying degrees : one common device is the use of barrels containing explosive material which the player can shoot , destroying them and harming nearby enemies . Other games feature environments which are extensively destructible , allowing for additional visual effects . The game world will often make use of science fiction , historic ( particularly World War II ) or modern military themes , with such antagonists as aliens , monsters , terrorists and soldiers of various types . Games feature multiple difficulty settings ; in harder modes , enemies are tougher , more aggressive and do more damage , and power @-@ ups are limited . In easier modes , the player can succeed through reaction times alone ; on more difficult settings , it is often necessary to memorize the levels through trial and error . 
 = = = Multiplayer = = = 
 First @-@ person shooters may feature a multiplayer mode , taking place on specialized levels . Some games are designed specifically for multiplayer gaming , and have very limited single player modes in which the player competes against game @-@ controlled characters termed " bots " . Massively multiplayer online first @-@ person shooters allow thousands of players to compete at once in a persistent world . Large scale multiplayer games allow multiple squads , with leaders issuing commands and a commander controlling the team 's overall strategy . Multiplayer games have a variety of different styles of match . 
 The classic types are the deathmatch ( and its team @-@ based variant ) in which players score points by killing other players ' characters ; and capture the flag , in which teams attempt to penetrate the opposing base , capture a flag and return it to their own base whilst preventing the other team from doing the same . Other game modes may involve attempting to capture enemy bases or areas of the map , attempting to take hold of an object for as long as possible while evading other players , or deathmatch variations involving limited lives or in which players fight over a particularly potent power @-@ up . These match types may also be customizable , allowing the players to vary weapons , health and power @-@ ups found on the map , as well as victory criteria . Games may allow players to choose between various classes , each with its own strengths , weaknesses , equipment and roles within a team . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins : 1970s to late 1980s = = = 
 The earliest two documented first @-@ person shooter video games are Maze War and Spasim . Maze War features on @-@ foot gameplay that evokes modern first @-@ person shooter games . Development of the game began in 1973 and its exact date of completion is unknown . Spasim had a documented debut at the University of Illinois in 1974 . The game was a rudimentary space flight simulator , which featured a first @-@ person perspective . They were distinct from modern first @-@ person shooters , involving simple tile @-@ based movement where the player could only move from square to square and turn in 90 @-@ degree increments . Spasim led to more detailed combat flight simulators and eventually to a tank simulator , developed for the U.S. Army , in the later 1970s . These games were not available to consumers , however , and it was not until 1980 that a tank video game , Battlezone , was released in arcades . A version of the game was released in 1983 for home computers and became the first successful mass @-@ market game featuring a first @-@ person viewpoint and wireframe 3D graphics , presented using a vector graphics display . 
 = = = Early first @-@ person shooters : 1987 – 1992 = = = 
 MIDI Maze , an early first @-@ person shooter released in 1987 for the Atari ST , featured maze @-@ based gameplay and character designs similar to Pac @-@ Man , but displayed in a first @-@ person perspective . Later ported to various systems - including the Game Boy and Super NES - under the title <unk> 2000 , it featured the first network multiplayer deathmatches , using a MIDI interface . It was a relatively minor game , but despite the inconvenience of connecting numerous machines together , its multiplayer mode gained a cult following : 1UP.com called it the " first multi @-@ player 3D shooter on a mainstream system " and the first " major LAN action game " . 
 Id Software 's <unk> 3D pioneered ray casting technology in May 1991 to enable faster gameplay than 1980s vehicle simulators ; and six months later Catacomb 3 @-@ D introduced another advance , texture mapping , in November 1991 . The second game to use texture mapping was Ultima Underworld : The Stygian Abyss , a March 1992 action role @-@ playing game by Looking Glass Technologies that featured a first @-@ person viewpoint and an advanced graphics engine . In October 1990 , id developer John Romero learned about texture mapping from a phone call to Paul Neurath . Romero described the texture mapping technique to id programmer John Carmack , who remarked , " I can do that . " , and would feel motivated by Looking Glass 's example to do the same in Catacomb 3 @-@ D. Catacomb 3 @-@ D also introduced the display of the protagonist 's hand and weapon ( in this case , magical spells ) on the screen , whereas previously aspects of the player 's avatar were not visible . The experience of developing Ultima Underworld would make it possible for Looking Glass to create the Thief and System Shock series years later . 
 = = = Rise in popularity : 1992 – 1995 = = = 
 Wolfenstein 3D ( created by id Software and released in 1992 ) was an instant success , fueled largely by its shareware release , and has been credited with inventing the first @-@ person shooter genre . It was built on the ray casting technology pioneered in earlier games to create a revolutionary template for shooter game design , which first @-@ person shooters are still based upon today . Despite its violent themes , Wolfenstein largely escaped the controversy generated by the later Doom , although it was banned in Germany due to the use of Nazi iconography ; and the Super NES version replaced the enemy attack dogs with giant rats . Apogee Software , the publisher of Wolfenstein 3D , followed up its success with Blake Stone : Aliens of Gold in 1993 . The game was initially well @-@ received but sales rapidly declined in the wake of the success of id 's Doom , released a week later . 
 Doom , released as shareware in 1993 , refined Wolfenstein 3D 's template by adding improved textures , variations in height ( e.g. , stairs the player 's character could climb ) and effects such as flickering lights and patches of total darkness , creating a more believable 3D environment than Wolfenstein 3D 's more monotonous and simplistic levels . Doom allowed competitive matches between multiple players , termed " deathmatches , " and the game was responsible for the word 's subsequent entry into the video gaming lexicon . The game became so popular that its multiplayer features began to cause problems for companies whose networks were used to play the game . 
 Doom has been considered the most important first @-@ person shooter ever made . It was highly influential not only on subsequent shooter games but on video gaming in general , and has been available on almost every video gaming system since . Multiplayer gaming , which is now integral to the first @-@ person shooter genre , was first achieved successfully on a large scale with Doom . While its combination of gory violence , dark humor and hellish imagery garnered acclaim from critics , these attributes also generated criticism from religious groups , with other commentators labelling the game a " murder simulator . " There was further controversy when it emerged that the perpetrators of the Columbine High School massacre were fans of the game ; the families of several victims later unsuccessfully attempted to sue numerous video game companies - among them id Software - which the families claimed inspired the massacre . 
 In 1994 , Raven Software released Heretic , which used a modified version of the Doom engine that allowed for vertical aiming , an inventory system to store and select items , and <unk> . On the Macintosh , Bungie 's release , in the same year , of Marathon , and its subsequent sequels , set the standard for first @-@ person shooters on that platform . Marathon pioneered or was an early adopter of several new features such as <unk> , dual @-@ wielded and dual @-@ function weapons , versatile multiplayer modes ( such as King of the Hill , Kill the Man with the Ball , and cooperative play ) , friendly NPCs , and a strong emphasis on storytelling in addition to the action . Star Wars : Dark Forces was released in 1995 after LucasArts decided Star Wars would make appropriate material for a game in the style of Doom . However , Star Wars : Dark Forces added several technical features that Doom lacked , such as the ability to crouch or look up and down , Apogee 's Duke Nukem 3D , released in 1996 , was " the last of the great , sprite @-@ based shooters " winning acclaim for its humor based around stylised machismo as well as its gameplay . However , some found the game 's ( and later the whole series ' ) treatment of women to be derogatory and tasteless . 
 = = = Advances in 3D graphics : 1995 – 1999 = = = 
 In 1994 , Exact released Geograph Seal for the Japanese Sharp X68000 home computer . An obscure import title as far as the Western market was concerned , it was nonetheless " a fully 3D polygonal first @-@ person shooter " with innovative platform game mechanics and " free @-@ roaming " outdoor environments . The following year , Exact released its successor for the PlayStation console , Jumping Flash ! , which placed more emphasis on its platform elements . Descent ( released by Parallax Software in 1995 ) , a game in which the player pilots a spacecraft around caves and factory ducts , was a truly three @-@ dimensional first @-@ person shooter . It abandoned sprites and ray casting in favour of polygons and six degrees of freedom . 
 Shortly after the release of Duke Nukem 3D in 1996 , id Software released the much anticipated Quake . Like Doom , Quake was influential and genre @-@ defining , featuring fast @-@ paced , gory gameplay , but used 3D polygons instead of sprites . It was centered on online gaming and featured multiple match types still found in first @-@ person shooter games today . It was the first FPS game to have a following of player clans ( although the concept had existed previously in MechWarrior 2 ( <unk> ) with its <unk> lore as well as amongst MUD players ) , and would inspire popular LAN parties such as QuakeCon . The game 's popularity and use of 3D polygonal graphics also helped to expand the growing market for video card hardware ; and the additional support and encouragement for game modifications attracted players who wanted to tinker with the game and create their own modules . 
 Based on the James Bond film , Rare 's GoldenEye 007 was released in 1997 , and as of 2004 it was the best @-@ selling Nintendo 64 game in the United States . It was the first landmark console first @-@ person shooter and was highly acclaimed for its atmospheric single @-@ player levels and well designed multiplayer maps . It featured a sniper rifle , the ability to perform head @-@ shots , and the incorporation of stealth elements ; as well as Virtua Cop @-@ inspired features such as reloading , position @-@ dependent hit reaction animations , penalties for killing innocents , and an aiming system allowing players to aim at a precise spot on the screen . 
 Though not the first of its kind , Tom Clancy 's Rainbow Six started a popular trend of tactical first @-@ person shooters in 1998 . It featured a team @-@ based , realistic design and themes based around counter @-@ terrorism , requiring missions to be planned before execution and in it , a single hit was sometimes enough to kill a character . Medal of Honor , released in 1999 , started a long running proliferation of first @-@ person shooters set during World War II . 
 Valve 's Half @-@ Life was released in 1998 , based upon Quake 's graphics technology . Initially met with only mild anticipation , it went on to become an unprecedented commercial success . While previous first @-@ person shooters had focused on visceral gameplay with comparatively weak plots , Half @-@ Life had a strong narrative ; the game featured no cut scenes but remained in the first @-@ person perspective at all times . It featured innovations such as non @-@ enemy characters ( featured somewhat earlier in titles such as Strife ) but did not employ power @-@ ups in the traditional sense . Half @-@ Life was praised for its artificial intelligence , selection of weapons and attention to detail and " has since been recognized as one of the greatest games of all time " according to GameSpot . Its sequel Half @-@ Life 2 ( released in 2004 ) , was less influential though " arguably a more impressive game " . 
 <unk> : Tribes , also released in 1998 , was a multiplayer online shooter allowing more than 32 players in a single match . It featured team @-@ based gameplay with a variety of specialized roles , and an unusual jet pack feature . The game was highly popular and later imitated by games such as the Battlefield series . Id 's Quake III Arena and Epic 's Unreal Tournament , both released in 1999 , were popular for their frenetic and accessible online multiplayer modes ; both featured very limited single player gameplay . Counter @-@ Strike was also released in 1999 , a Half @-@ Life modification with a counter @-@ terrorism theme . The game and later version Counter @-@ Strike : Source ( 2004 ) went on to become by far the most popular multiplayer first @-@ person shooter and computer game modification ever , with over 90 @,@ 000 players competing online at any one time during its peak . 
 = = = Online wars and return of the console : 2000 – 2006 = = = 
 At the E3 game show in 1999 , Bungie unveiled a real @-@ time strategy game called Halo ; at the following E3 , an overhauled third @-@ person shooter version was displayed . In 2000 , Bungie was bought by Microsoft . Halo was then revamped and released as a first @-@ person shooter ; it was one of the launch titles for the Xbox console . It was a runaway critical and commercial success , and is considered a premier console first @-@ person shooter . It featured narrative and storyline reminiscent of Bungie 's earlier Marathon series but now told largely through in @-@ game dialog and cut scenes . It also received acclaim for its characters , both the protagonist , Master Chief and its alien antagonists . The sequel , Halo 2 ( 2004 ) , brought the popularity of online @-@ gaming to the console market through the medium of Xbox Live , on which it was the most played game for almost two years . 
 Deus Ex , released by Ion Storm in 2000 , featured a levelling system similar to that found in role @-@ playing games ; it also had multiple narratives depending on how the player completed missions and won acclaim for its serious , artistic style . The Resident Evil games Survivor in 2000 and Dead Aim in 2003 attempted to combine the light gun and first @-@ person shooter genres along with survival horror elements . Metroid Prime , released in 2002 for the Nintendo GameCube , a highly praised console first @-@ person shooter , incorporated action adventure elements such as jumping puzzles and built on the Metroid series of 2D side @-@ scrolling platform @-@ adventures . Taking a " massive stride forward for first @-@ person games " , the game emphasised its adventure elements rather than shooting and was credited by journalist Chris Kohler with " breaking the genre free from the clutches of Doom " . 
 World War II Online , released in 2001 , featured a persistent and " massively multiplayer environment " , although IGN said that " the full realization of that environment is probably still a few years away . " Battlefield 1942 , another World War II shooter released in 2002 , featured large scale battles incorporating aircraft , naval vessels , land vehicles and infantry combat . In 2003 , <unk> allowed hundreds of players at once to compete in a persistent world , and was also promoted as the " world 's first massively multiplayer online first person shooter . " Doom 3 , released in 2004 , placed a greater emphasis on horror and frightening the player than previous games in the series and was a critically acclaimed best seller , though some commentators felt it lacked gameplay substance and innovation , putting too much emphasis on impressive graphics . In 2005 , a film based on Doom featured a sequence that emulated the viewpoint and action of the first @-@ person shooter , but was critically derided as deliberately unintelligent and gratuitously violent . 
 In 2005 , F.E.A.R. was acclaimed for successfully combining first @-@ person shooter gameplay with a Japanese horror atmosphere . Later in 2007 , Irrational Games ' BioShock would be acclaimed by some commentators as the best game of that year for its innovation in artistry , narrative and design , with some calling it the " spiritual successor " to Irrational 's earlier System Shock 2 . 
 Finally , the Crytek games Far Cry ( 2004 ) and Crysis ( 2007 ) as well as Ubisoft 's Far Cry 2 ( 2008 ) would break new ground in terms of graphics and large , open @-@ ended level design , whereas Call of Duty 4 : Modern Warfare ( 2007 ) , Resistance : Fall of Man ( 2006 ) and its sequel Resistance 2 ( 2008 ) presented increasingly refined linear levels and narratives , with the fast pace and linearity of the Call of Duty games bearing a resemblance to rail shooters . In 2006 , GamaSutra reported the first @-@ person shooter as one of the biggest and fastest growing video game genres in terms of revenue for publishers . 
 = = = 2007 – present = = = 
 In 2010 , researchers at Leiden University showed that playing first @-@ person shooter video games is associated with superior mental flexibility . Compared to non @-@ players , players of such games were found to require a significantly shorter reaction time while switching between complex tasks , possibly because they are required to develop a more responsive mindset to rapidly react to fast @-@ moving visual and auditory stimuli , and to shift back and forth between different sub @-@ duties . The use of motion detecting game controllers – particularly the Wii 's – " promised to make FPS controls more approachable and precise with an interface as simple as literally pointing to aim " and thus " dramatically reshape the first @-@ person shooter . " However , technical difficulties pertinent to functions other than aiming – such as maneuvering or reloading – prevented their widespread use among first @-@ person shooters . The <unk> user interface combines a motion @-@ sensitive gamepad , head tracker and sliding foot pedals to increase the precision and level of control over one 's avatar in military first @-@ person shooter games . 
 = Delaware Route 10 = 
 Delaware Route 10 ( DE 10 ) is a state highway in Kent County , Delaware . It runs from Maryland Route 287 ( MD 287 ) at the Maryland border in Sandtown east to an interchange with DE 1 at the north gate of Dover Air Force Base . The route passes through the towns of Camden and Wyoming along the way . From the Maryland border to Camden , it is a two @-@ lane undivided road that passes through rural areas . DE 10 is a four @-@ lane divided highway called Lebanon Road between U.S. Route 13 ( US 13 ) in Camden and DE 1 . DE 10 has one alternate route , DE 10 Alternate ( DE 10 Alt . ) , which provides an alternate alignment between Willow Grove and Lebanon , passing through Woodside and Rising Sun . 
 What is now DE 10 between the Maryland border and Camden was constructed as a state highway in stages in the 1920s and early 1930s . The route was first designated by 1936 to follow its current alignment between the Maryland border and Camden and current Rising Sun Road to US 113 Alt. in Rising Sun . By 1969 , DE 10 was rerouted to follow Lebanon Road , a road completed by 1966 , to US 113 ( now DE 1 ) at Dover Air Force Base . Lebanon Road was improved into a divided highway by 1981 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 DE 10 begins at the Maryland border west of Sandtown , where it continues west into that state as MD 287 . From the state line the route heads east on two @-@ lane undivided Willow Grove Road through a mix of farmland and woodland with some homes , passing through Sandtown . The road curves northeast and runs through Petersburg before coming to an intersection with the western terminus of DE 10 Alt . DE 10 passes the community of Willow Grove and continues northeast . The route heads through rural areas with increasing residential development and intersects DE 15 before crossing Norfolk Southern 's Delmarva Secondary railroad line . 
 The road continues north into Camden and passes homes along with some businesses , becoming South Caesar Rodney Avenue at the South Street intersection . DE 10 forms the border between Wyoming to the west and Camden to the east before turning east onto East Camden Wyoming Avenue and fully entering Camden . The route continues through residential areas , intersecting US 13 Alt. in the center of Camden . On the eastern edge of Camden , the road comes to an intersection with US 13 . 
 Past the intersection with US 13 , DE 10 becomes Lebanon Road , a four @-@ lane divided highway . The road heads east @-@ northeast and passes through areas of suburban residential development to the south of Dover . The route comes to an intersection with South State Street , where DE 10 Alt. returns to the route . DE 10 runs east through a mix of residential and commercial development , curving to the northeast . The road crosses the St. Jones River and reaches an interchange with access to and from the southbound direction the DE 1 freeway . DE 10 comes to its eastern terminus within this interchange at an intersection with Bay Road at the north gate of Dover Air Force Base . Bay Road runs north to provide access to and from the northbound direction of DE 1 . 
 The portion of the route between the Maryland border and US 13 Alt. in Camden and between DE 10 Alt. and Gateway South Boulevard near Lebanon is part of the Harriet Tubman Underground Railroad Byway , a Delaware Byway . DE 10 has an annual average daily traffic count ranging from a high of 22 @,@ 770 vehicles at the eastern terminus at Bay Road to a low of 2 @,@ 262 vehicles at the Sandtown Road intersection . None of DE 10 is part of the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 By 1920 what is now DE 10 existed as an unimproved county road . The portion of the current route through Camden , as well as the road between Camden and Rising Sun , was upgraded to a state highway by 1924 . By 1925 the road was completed as a state highway between Willow Grove and Camden , while the portion between the Maryland border near Sandtown and Willow Grove was under proposal as a state highway . The portion of road west of Willow Grove became a state highway by 1931 . DE 10 was assigned to run from the Maryland border near Sandtown to US 113 Alt . ( South State Street ) in Rising Sun by 1936 , following its current alignment between the Maryland border and Camden and Rising Sun Road between Camden and Rising Sun . By 1964 , the route was realigned to bypass Willow Grove to the southeast , with the former alignment now Willow Tree Circle . The Lebanon Road portion of DE 10 was constructed by 1966 , connecting the route east of Camden to US 113 ( Bay Road ) at Dover Air Force Base . DE 10 was rerouted to follow Lebanon Road to US 113 by 1969 . 
 The Lebanon Road portion of the route between US 13 and US 113 was completely widened into a divided highway by 1981 . In 1993 , the DE 1 freeway was completed in the area of the eastern terminus , with an interchange to that road built that incorporated ramps to both DE 10 and the existing US 113 , which merged with DE 1 at this point . The US 113 designation was removed from the area in 2004 , leaving DE 10 terminating only with DE 1 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Kent County . 
 = = Bannered routes = = 
 Delaware Route 10 Alternate ( DE 10 Alt . ) is an alternate route of DE 10 between Willow Grove and Lebanon . The route heads east from DE 10 on two @-@ lane undivided Henry Cowgill Road , passing through a mix of farmland and woodland with some homes . DE 10 Alt. reaches Woodside and intersects DE 15 , with that route becoming concurrent with DE 10 Alt on Main Street . The road crosses Norfolk Southern 's Delmarva Secondary railroad line and becomes lined with homes . At an intersection with US 13 Alt . , DE 15 splits from DE 10 Alt. by heading south of US 13 Alt . DE 10 Alt. leaves Woodside and becomes Walnut Shade Road , coming to an intersection with US 13 . Past this intersection the route passes to the south of <unk> High School and enters a mix of farms , woods , and residential development , curving to the northeast . DE 10 Alt. reaches the community of Rising Sun , becoming Sorghum Mill Road at the Rising Sun Road intersection before turning north onto South State Street . The route passes through woods and runs through residential development before ending at another intersection with DE 10 , with South State Street continuing north toward Dover . 
 The road was constructed as a state highway between Woodside and Rising Sun in 1931 and between Willow Grove and Woodside the following year . DE 10 Alt. was designated by 1988 onto its current alignment . Prior to 2004 the South State Street portion of DE 10 Alt. was concurrent with US 113 Alt . , which was decommissioned when US 113 was truncated from Dover to Milford . 
 Major intersections 
 The entire route is in Kent County . 
 = Thillana Mohanambal = 
 Thillana Mohanambal ( English : The Dance Queen Mohanambal ) is a 1968 Indian Tamil @-@ language musical drama film written , directed , distributed and produced by A. P. Nagarajan . The film stars Sivaji Ganesan , Padmini and T. S. Balaiah in the lead roles , with A. V. M. Rajan , Nagesh and Manorama in supporting roles . It tells the story of about Shanmugasundaram , a Nadaswaram player who falls in love with Mohanambal , a Bharatanatyam dancer who reciprocates his feelings , but unfortunate circumstances and their egoistic nature prevents them from confessing their love for one another . How they overcome their self @-@ created obstacles and those created by the people around them forms the rest of the story . 
 The film was adapted from Kothamangalam Subbu 's novel of the same name , which was published as a series of weekly chapters in the Tamil magazine Ananda Vikatan in 1956 . The film was mostly shot in Thanjavur , Thiruvarur and Madurai . Its original soundtrack was composed by K. V. Mahadevan , and songs like " Nalandhana " , " Maraindhirundhu " and " Pandian <unk> " became immensely popular among the Tamil diaspora . 
 Thillana Mohanambal was released on 27 July 1968 . Critically acclaimed for subtly portraying the socio @-@ cultural environment and the Thanjavur culture of dance and music prevailing at that time , it was also a commercial success , running for over 100 days in theatres . The film won two National Film Awards — Best Feature Film in Tamil ( President 's Silver Medal ) and Best Cinematography — and five Tamil Nadu State Film Awards . Thillana Mohanambal has since acquired cult status in Tamil cinema , and inspired several later films with similar themes of music and dance . It was dubbed and released in Telugu as Raja <unk> . 
 = = Plot = = 
 " Sikkal " Shanmugasundaram ( Sundaram ) ( Sivaji Ganesan ) is a devoted Nadaswaram player , but is short @-@ tempered and sensitive . He meets Mohanambal ( Mohana ) ( Padmini ) , a Bharatnatyam dancer , and they fall in love with each other . Sundaram 's ego prevents him from developing his relationship with Mohanambal , who asks him to play a Thillana on his Nadaswaram while she dances . Mohanambal 's mother <unk> ( C. K. Saraswathi ) , an influential and mercenary woman , wants her daughter to marry a wealthy man so that she can settle down in life properly . Blinded by love , she disobeys her mother , creating a rift between them . Unaware of her feelings , Sundaram decides to leave the country along with Karuppayi ( Manorama ) , a folk dancer whom he considers to be his sister . Mohana calls him a coward and challenges him to stay , which he readily accepts . In a temple , Sundaram plays the Thillana and Mohana dances . Sundaram , impressed with Mohana 's performance , crowns her the title " Thillana Mohanambal " . Suddenly <unk> ( E. R. Sahadevan ) , a landlord who wanted to marry Mohana , turns up to stab Sundaram with a poisoned knife out of jealousy . He came to the temple to kill Mohana . 
 Sundaram is admitted to hospital but recovers from the incident . Later , he and Mohana meet in a concert programme where they perform , against Mohana 's mother 's wishes . For his personal gains , " <unk> " Vaithi ( Nagesh ) , a cunning man , befriends the Maharaja of Madhanpur ( M. N. Nambiar ) , who is the programme 's chief guest . Vaithi promises to make Mohana the Maharaja 's mistress . Vaithi traps Mohana by telling her that the Maharaja has invited <unk> and Bharatanatyam performers to perform in his palace , and that Sundaram has also decided to attend . Mohana immediately accepts the offer and the two visit Madhanpur . Vaithi treats Sundaram 's group badly and Sundaram decides to leave . He sees Mohana visiting the Maharaja 's room . The Maharaja asks Mohana to be his <unk> but she rejects his advances and is rescued by the Maharaja 's wife , the Maharani . Sundaram decides that Mohana does not love him , despite her repeated denial of the Maharaja 's offer . Depressed , Mohana runs away . The Maharaja reveals the truth to Sundaram that Mohana had refused his offer and she only loves Sundaram . Sundaram realises his mistake , and rushes to apologise to Mohana , but sees her trying to hang herself from the ceiling of a room in which she had locked herself . He screams to her to stop and promises he will never doubt her love again . Sundaram breaks the door and saves Mohana . They then get married with the approval of her mother . Vaithi is arrested for his crimes . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Lead actors 
 Sivaji Ganesan as " Sikkal " Shanmugasundaram ( Sundaram ) , a Nadaswaram player 
 Padmini as Mohanambal ( Mohana ) , a Bharatnatyam dancer 
 T. S. Balaiah as Muthurakku , a Thavil player in Sundaram 's troupe 
 Male supporting actors 
 A. V. M. Rajan as <unk> , the brother of Sundaram and Nadaswaram player in his troupe 
 K. A. Thangavelu as <unk> <unk> Swamy 
 M. N. Nambiar as the Maharaja of Madhanpur 
 Chittor V. <unk> as Sundaram 's Nadaswaram teacher 
 K. Sarangkapani as Sakthivel , another Thavil player in Sundaram 's troupe 
 A. <unk> as an <unk> player in Sundaram 's troupe 
 K. Balaji as " <unk> Minor " <unk> , a landlord and womaniser 
 Nagesh as " <unk> " Vaithi , a cunning man who plans to ruin Sundaram and Mohana 
 T. R. Ramachandran as <unk> , a Mridangam player in Mohana 's troupe 
 S. V. Sahasranamam as a Saint living in Thiruvarur 
 E. R. Sahadevan as <unk> , a landlord 
 P. D. Sambandam as <unk> player in Sundaram 's troupe 
 Female supporting actors 
 Manorama as Karuppayi / " Jil Jil " Ramamani / Roja Rani 
 C. K. Saraswathi as <unk> , Mohana 's mother 
 <unk> as Veena player in Mohana 's troupe 
 M. Saroja as <unk> Petti , Mohana 's mother 's maid 
 M. L. Bhanumathi as a nurse 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Thillana Mohanambal is based on the novel of the same name , written by Kothamangalam Subbu under the pseudonym of " Kalaimani " . It was published as a series of weekly chapters in the Tamil magazine Ananda Vikatan . The story portrayed the relationship between Mohanambal ( Mohana ) , a celebrated dancer , and Shanmugasundaram , a Nadaswaram musician . The novel was popular in 1956 when it was publicised . The illustrations for the novel were done by sketch artist and cartoonist , <unk> . 
 S. S. Vasan , who held the rights to the book , initially refused to allow director Nagarajan to make the film because Vasan wanted to make a film adaptation himself . When Nagarajan approached him later , Vasan gave him the rights without any consideration . Nagarajan paid Vasan ₹ 25 @,@ 000 ( about US $ 3 @,@ 300 in 1968 ) , but also went to visit Subbu with an additional ₹ 10 @,@ 000 ( about US $ 1 @,@ 300 in 1968 ) . Subbu declined the money , saying that Vasan had forwarded him the money that Nagarajan had paid earlier . 
 Nagarajan produced the film under his production company , Sri Vijayalakshmi Pictures . K. S. Prasad was in charge of the film 's cinematography , M. N. Rajan and T. R. Natarajan jointly handled the editing , and Ganga was the film 's art director . R. <unk> was Sivaji Ganesan 's make @-@ up artist . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Because the protagonist of the film is a dancer , Nagarajan wanted Padmini to play the role . Padmini had retired from films and had settled in the United States with her husband Ramachandran at that time . Nagarajan included her in the film after seeking Ramachandran 's permission . A younger artist was suggested instead of Padmini for the film , but Nagarajan refused the suggestion . Padmini 's character , Mohanambal , competed with Ganesan 's character professionally . Ganesan 's character is a Nadaswaram player named Shanmugasundaram , who earned the suffix " Sikkal " due to his place of birth being in Sikkal and also because of his tendency to get into trouble . Ganesan attended Carnatic music concerts , and consulted Carnatic musicians in preparation for his role . T. S. Balaiah portrayed Muthurakku , the Thavil player . <unk> Venkatesan played the instrument Thavil off @-@ screen for Balaiah . Balaiah had additional training for playing the instrument . Madurai T. Srinivasan played the Mridangam off @-@ screen for the song " <unk> <unk> " . 
 A. V. M. Rajan portrayed Shanmugasundaram 's brother <unk> . According to playwright Crazy Mohan , <unk> 's caricature of the character Vaithi in Subbu 's novel was similar to Nagesh , who portrayed Vaithi in the film . Manorama played the wildly expressive , loud @-@ talking but tender @-@ hearted folk dancer Karuppayi , who has to contend with living under the shadows of landlords ; she changes her identity every now and then to escape from them . In an interview with Maalai Malar , Manorama stated that she was initially nervous acting in front of Ganesan and Balaiah , but Nagarajan assured her that whenever her character appeared she would be the centre of attention , which gave her the confidence to play her role . Serial and theatre artist M. L. Bhanumathi played the nurse who treats Shanmugasundaram . Other supporting actors included K. Sarangkapani , S. Ramarao , M. K. Murthy , <unk> , T. N. <unk> , S. R. <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> Natarajan , <unk> <unk> , <unk> , S. V. <unk> , A. M. <unk> , <unk> , Ambika and <unk> . 
 The Nadaswaram played by Ganesan and Rajan was played off @-@ screen by the brothers , M. P. N. <unk> and M. P. N. Ponnusamy . Nagarajan had seen the duo performing at a wedding reception in Karaikudi and asked them to come to Chennai . Their rehearsals took place over 15 days in Mahadevan 's recording studio in Chennai . Nagarajan then listened to a radio recital by the duo , and was impressed with their rendition of Thyagaraja 's Keerthana , " <unk> <unk> " . The Keerthana was later selected as one of the soundtrack instrumentals in the film . After Thillana Mohanambal 's release , a Russian delegation met Ganesan in person . They were surprised to hear that he was only acting and not actually playing the Nadaswaram . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Thillana Mohanambal , shot in Eastmancolor , was filmed in Thanjavur , Thiruvarur and Madurai , in the Cauvery delta . Many of the film 's aesthetics were borrowed from Indian theatre , of which Nagarajan was an artist . The competition sequence between Ganesan and Padmini took about nine takes to be filmed . The film presented a mise @-@ en @-@ scène feel , mostly using frontal shots . The actors were lined up to face the camera and deliver their dialogue . Nagarajan , a former employee of the T. K. S. drama company , paid tribute to <unk> Swamigal — from whom the company had its ancestral roots — by naming a drama company in the film after the company 's name . Snippets of the film 's behind @-@ the @-@ scenes production were filmed by French film director Louis Malle as a part of his 378 @-@ minute , seven @-@ part documentary series , L <unk> <unk> : <unk> sur un voyage ( 1969 ) , when he visited Madras . 
 The film shows the traditions exhibited by courtesans , zamindars in coaches drawn by horses , and palaces that resembled 19th century architecture . The contemporary areas of Madurai and Thanjavur , especially their railway junctions , gave the film a sense of ambiguity that was then very common in Tamil cinema . The film recreated the manner in which the Devadasis were portrayed in the early 20th century , and also depicts the social conditions and the upper class milieu in Thanjavur . Real locations were mixed with the fictional town of Madhanpur , which was ruled by a king portrayed by Nambiar . The song " Pandian <unk> " was inspired from a stage play named <unk> . The film also had undertones of the Chithirai festival . 
 = = Music = = 
 The film 's soundtrack and score were composed by K. V. Mahadevan , while the lyrics were written by Kannadasan . Ganesan did not have a playback singer for any of the songs in the film . The instrumental pieces " English Notes " and " Nadaswaram Bit " were originally composed by Muthiah Bhagavathar . After performing them at Ganesan 's 42nd birthday celebrations , Ponnusamy and Seetharaman were asked to play them in the film . " Maraindhirundhu " was based on <unk> raga . " Nalandhana " was based on <unk> raga , which closely resembles <unk> raga . The first line of " Nalandhana " was later used in the film <unk> ( 2008 ) . Under Mahadevan 's supervision , <unk> set the <unk> for the film 's soundtrack and score . The soundtrack was released by the record label Saregama . 
 The soundtrack received positive reviews from critics . Singer Charulatha Mani wrote for the The Hindu on " Nalandhana " that , " ... one can feel the proximity in musicality . The Thavil beats , <unk> refrains and the honeyed voice all blend into an inviting melody composed by K.V. Mahadevan . " For " Maraindhirundhu " she said , " The nadaswaram and thavil back @-@ ups for this song and the <unk> @-@ s give it its typical classical flavour . ' <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> vaa ' – these lines represent the ideal confluence of raga , bhava and lyric , a perfect foil to each other . " G. Dhananjayan said in his book The Best of Tamil Cinema that the songs contributed to the film 's success , and the songs " Maraindhirundhu " , " Nalandhana " and " <unk> <unk> ( Pandian <unk> ) " remain popular till date . Ashish Rajadhyaksha and Paul Willemen in their Encyclopedia of Indian Cinema , referred to " Nalandhana " as " [ a ] major song hit " . According to film critic Randor Guy , " Nalandhana " became " one of the memorable song sequences with Sivaji Ganesan and AVM Rajan , playing the [ Nadaswaram ] on screen " . P. K. Ajith Kumar of The Hindu stated , " Just as [ Susheela ] does not need to know the language to sing a song perfectly , we need not know Tamil to enjoy her songs like ... <unk> ... ( Thillana Mohanambal ) " . 
 = = = Track listing = = = 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Thillana Mohanambal was released on 27 July 1968 . It was released with English subtitles in overseas countries . The film 's release prints were 4 @,@ 825 m ( 15 @,@ 830 ft ) long and were contained on 19 reels . The film was also dubbed in Telugu as Raja <unk> . The film was shown for six weeks at theatres in Pondicherry , and ran for 100 days in Ganesan 's family @-@ owned Shanthi theatre in Chennai . It also completed 100 @-@ day runs in theatres in Kovai , Madurai and Trichy , and was eventually shown for 25 weeks . 
 Thillana Mohanambal was screened in Chennai on 21 April 2010 at the South Indian Film Chamber Theatre for the Dignity Film Festival . In November 2011 , it was shown at the International Tamil Film Festival held in <unk> , Russia , alongside Chandramukhi ( 2005 ) , Sivaji ( 2007 ) , Angadi Theru ( 2010 ) , Boss Engira Bhaskaran ( 2010 ) , <unk> <unk> ( 2010 ) and Ko ( 2011 ) . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The film received critical acclaim in India and abroad for its song and dance sequences , humour and portrayal of the prevailing socio @-@ cultural milieu at that time . The performances of the actors were praised . The Tamil magazine Ananda Vikatan carried an 11 @-@ page review of Thillana Mohanambal with a discussion among several prominent people , which included IAS officers , professors and actors who unanimously appreciated the film and the people associated with it . The review 's conclusion was , " The director should be given a prize for making such a film " . G. Dhananjayan , in his book The Best of Tamil Cinema , said , " Dance and music were beautifully used as an integral part of the story and not as add @-@ ons . " He cited Padmini 's Bharatanatyam dances as one of the film 's major highlights . 
 In its original review , The Hindu said , " Thillana Mohanambal <unk> [ sic ] all the traditional wealth of the culture of [ Tamil Nadu ] . " Subha J. Rao and K. Jeshi of The Hindu , in their article " Laughter lines " , praised the train scene and the performances of Balaiah and Manorama . The Hindu in its Cinema Plus feature called the film " a perfect combination of music , dance and humour , " while also stating that the film can be enjoyed even today . Randor Guy praised Balaiah 's acting in the film , saying , " In one song , the famous Tyagaraja <unk> in <unk> , ‘ <unk> <unk> ’ , Balaiah played the thavil in excellent sync with the background song that was recorded earlier in the studio , revealing how adept he really was with the instrument " . C. V. Aravind of The News Minute was also positive towards Balaiah 's performance , in addition to those of Thangavelu , T. R. Ramachandran and Sarangkapani . On Manorama 's performance , N. Kesavan of The Hindu wrote , " One can never forget her role as ' Jil Jil Ramamani ' in " Thillana Mohanambal . " She was on a par with Sivaji Ganesan and Padmini in the film with her acting . " 
 The magazine Screen called the film " a brilliantly made entertainer " . Dina Thanthi wrote " Not one would not have been mesmerized by the " Thillana " dance sequence " . The British newspaper Daily Mail said Thillana Mohanambal is " a feast to the eyes and ears " . <unk> Pathmanathan of Daily News Sri Lanka praised the film 's dance and music sequences . D. B. S Jeyaraj of Daily FT called Sivaji 's " ... duel over artistic superiority with Padmini , particularly during the ' <unk> ? ' song sequence " is a scene that " remains etched in [ his ] memory " . 
 In 2011 , film historian S. Theodore Baskaran criticised Thillana Mohanambal for its historical inaccuracies , saying that in the film , a Tamil king was seen wearing a Marathi costume , " The film @-@ makers completely neglect the aspects of dress , jewels and weapons that are depicted in our sculptures . They do not even do basic research . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Thillana Mohanambal won two National Film Awards and five Tamil Nadu State Film Awards . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Thillana Mohanambal became a cult film for bringing the traditional arts of South India into prominence and achieving more popularity than the novel . It became a landmark film for Sivaji Ganesan . Padmini 's titular role become so iconic that the film was identified as her pièce de résistance . She considered Thillana Mohanambal to be the best film of her career . The film is notable for catapulting Manorama to stardom . A dialogue , " Enakku <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ( I know a paan shop owner there ) " , which was spoken by Balaiah , became popular . According to the 2010 book Anna : The Life and Times of C.N. Annadurai by R. Kannan , C. N. Annadurai sister 's granddaughter , Kanmani , would enquire about his well @-@ being during his last days by singing the song , " <unk> " . 
 The film became a trendsetter and inspired several later films with similar themes of music and dance – including Karagattakaran ( 1989 ) , Sangamam ( 1999 ) , and <unk> <unk> ( 2014 ) . In July 2007 , S. R. Ashok Kumar of The Hindu asked eight Tamil film directors to list their all @-@ time favourite Tamil films ; four of them – C. V. Sridhar , K. Balachander , J. Mahendran and K. Bhagyaraj – named Thillana Mohanambal . In May 2014 , C. V. Raghavan , writing for The Hindu , listed Thillana Mohanambal among his top five films . Actress <unk> Nair , who made her debut with <unk> <unk> ( 2011 ) , changed her screen name to Mohana because she liked the character . Actor Jayaprakash referred to the film as " beautifully made " , considering it to be a period film . Tamil comedy actor and writer Crazy Mohan stated that the film made his top ten list , and that there was " excellence in all aspects — screenplay , dialogue , comedy , casting , music and direction . A winning combination , indeed . This gives Thillana Mohanambal its timeless appeal " . Scriptwriter @-@ Director Viji of Velli Thirai ( 2008 ) fame noted how the film showcased the culture of Thanjavur and that the acting performances and film formed a " complete package " . In September 2014 , Vijay Sethupathi , in an interview with Sudhir Srinivasan of The Hindu , listed Thillana Mohanambal among his favourite films alongside Ratha Kanneer ( 1954 ) , Puthiya Paravai ( 1964 ) and <unk> <unk> ( 1973 ) . 
 The prints of the film in 16 mm format were acquired by the American Cultural Association for their archives to represent quintessential old @-@ world Thanjavur culture , and by universities in the United States for the study of Bharatanatyam and Nadaswaram arts in particular . Thillana Mohanambal is included with other Sivaji Ganesan @-@ starrers in 8th Ulaga Adhisayam Sivaji , a compilation DVD featuring Ganesan 's " iconic performances in the form of scenes , songs and stunts " which was released in May 2012 . Although film distributor Shanthi <unk> stated in February 2012 that Thillana Mohanambal 's remaining prints were " totally damaged " , Pradeep Sebastian of Deccan Herald stated in April 2015 that he " recently " saw the film through a restored print . In its obituary for Manorama , The Hindu noted Jil Jil Ramamani " probably bore the closest resemblance to Manorama " in terms of being able to perform <unk> and <unk> Kuthirai . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Thillana Mohanambal has been parodied and referenced many times . In a comedy scene from Karagattakaran , Senthil dances with Kovai Sarala and an onlooker compares them to Ganesan and Padmini 's characters from the film , resulting in Goundamani becoming irked by the comment . The Times of India compared Karagattakaran to Thillana Mohanambal because in both films , the male and female lead characters are in love with each other , despite being professional rivals . In the film Villu <unk> ( 1992 ) , Goundamani asks Senthil to play " Nalandhana " on his thavil , resulting in a comical argument between the two . In Muthu ( 1995 ) , <unk> ( Rajinikanth ) , in a conversation with <unk> ( Sarath Babu ) , says that <unk> 's ( Radha Ravi ) daughter , Padmini ( <unk> ) looks like actress Padmini 's character , Mohana , in the film . 
 When Vadivelu 's character <unk> is injured in Middle Class Madhavan ( 2001 ) , Revathi Sankaran , who plays his in @-@ law in the film , sings " Nalandhana " while enquiring about his health . In <unk> ( 2004 ) , when hunchback Chinna ( Suriya ) talks about improving his looks , <unk> ( Vivek ) jokes that if Chinna was given a party horn to play with , he would look like ' Sikkal ' Shanmugasundaram . Scenes from Thillana Mohanambal were parodied in Thamizh Padam ( 2010 ) . The film 's poster depicts lead actor Shiva as Ganesan 's character , Shanmugasundaram and M. S. Bhaskar as Balaiah 's character , Muthurakku . 
 = = Explanatory notes = = 
 = Chrysler 180 = 
 The Chrysler 180 was the base name for a series of large saloon cars produced by Chrysler Europe . Resulting from joining development efforts of Rootes Group and Simca , the car was produced from 1970 to 1975 in Poissy , France , and later in Chrysler 's subsidiary Barreiros ' factory in Spain . The Chrysler 180 was also the base for the medium @-@ sized model built by Chrysler Australia , the Chrysler Centura . 
 Depending on engine employed , the cars were marketed as Chrysler 160 / 180 / 2 litre , and since 1977 in France and rest of continental Europe as Chrysler @-@ Simca 1609 / 1610 / 2 litres . After the takeover of Chrysler Europe by PSA Peugeot Citroën , the continental Europe models were renamed Talbot 1610 / 2 litres for 1979 and 1980 model years , after which the model was discontinued in Europe save for Spain , where a diesel model was sold until 1982 . 
 The large Chrysler fared quite poorly in the principal European markets . The replacement for the car was developed by Chrysler Europe under the codename C9 and was finally launched by PSA as the even more ill @-@ fated Talbot Tagora . 
 = = Development = = 
 Although Chrysler gradually took financial control of both Simca and Rootes Group during the 1960s , there was little effort to coordinate the operations of both automakers . Therefore , the first " common " European Chrysler car was actually a result of two separate development programmes . 
 = = = Rootes Group C Car = = = 
 In 1966 , under the direction of Roy Axe , the Head of Design , Rootes Group team started working on what was internally named the " C Car " ( in reference to the smaller " B car " , which became the Hillman Avenger ) , a new large car for Rootes to replace the Humber Hawk ( and the imported Australian Chrysler Valiant , which served as a placeholder in Rootes ' lineup after the Hawk 's demise in 1967 , without much success ) . In typical Rootes fashion , the plan was to market the car under three brands - the base version as Hillman , a 2 @.@ 0 @-@ litre one as Sunbeam 2000 , and atop the range a Humber Hawk with a 2 @.@ 5 @-@ litre engine . A further development of the C Car with a stretched platform was planned , a " D Car " , which was to replace the Humber Super Snipe . 
 The Rootes development programme also comprised the development of a brand @-@ new V6 engine , with a 60 ° vee angle , with two versions of the abovementioned displacements of 2 @.@ 0 and 2 @.@ 5 litres . There were four ( Series IV , presumably ) Humber <unk> and some Hillman Avenger @-@ bodied prototypes built to test the new engine . Some other design propositions included the use of De Dion tubes for rear suspension ( like in the competing Rover <unk> ) , as well as a five @-@ speed gearbox ( which would still be a rather daring proposition at that time ) . 
 One of the engineers who worked on the design of the C Car was Tony Wheeler , who was later the founder of the Lonely Planet travel guides . 
 = = = Simca Projet 929 = = = 
 At the same time , in France , Simca was working on Projet 929 , which would be Simca 's first large car since the Vedette was cancelled in 1961 , and also partially replace the Simca 1501 in its role of the range @-@ topping Simca . The car would not use a V6 engine , as the displacement @-@ based puissance fiscale tax system in France would make the costs prohibitive , but rather four @-@ cylinder units of more modest specifications . There were three styling propositions prepared for the new car . The 929 XA was styled by Simca 's design team , featuring angular design and rather top @-@ heavy proportions . <unk> designed the 929 XB , which was much more rounded and somewhat reminiscent of contemporary BMWs . Finally , the 929 XC was sent straight from Chrysler 's Detroit design studios , and was very American in style , resembling a smaller version of what then became the Australian VE Series Chrysler Valiant . 
 = = = The decision = = = 
 In early 1969 , Chrysler realized that there were actually two potentially competing cars being developed and called for both the British and the French proposition to be presented before the general management of Chrysler Europe . The decision was taken to go ahead with the British C Car programme , but to develop two versions for both the UK and the French part of the concern . Chrysler funded a new plant along with a development centre for the Rootes Group at the Whitley plant , Coventry , where the development was continued . Roy Axe employed former Chrysler USA designer Curt Gwinn as project designer , and the C Car took a shape very similar to an enlarged version of Hillman Avenger . Initial designs were inspired by contemporary American <unk> , with twin headlamps and a light bar in the rear . 
 In 1970 , however , Chrysler reviewed the programme once again and decided to trim it down to just one version , to be built in Simca 's Poissy factory in France , for all markets . The responsibility for the programme was then passed in turn to Simca ( where it became known internally as " Simca 1800 " ) , who gave the car a different front end with rectangular single front lamps , as well as stripped the interior of some features proposed by the Rootes Group team , such as genuine wood and leather and air conditioning . Much to the shock of the British engineers , the entire V6 engine programme was scrapped , even despite allegedly £ 31 million of the £ 38 million of the programme budget was already spent , and the tooling for the new engine was already being installed in the Rootes ' Humber Road factory . The car also ended up with more conventional coil sprung rear live axle and MacPherson struts in the front and a four @-@ speed manual transmission ( with an option of a three @-@ speed automatic ) . 
 = = Marketing = = 
 = = = Launch = = = 
 Following the renaming of Simca as " Chrysler France " and Rootes Group as " Chrysler UK " ( which combined formed Chrysler Europe ) , the new large car was the first one to spearhead the concept of unifying the offerings from both sides of the Channel under the common brand . Thus , the vehicle was launched as Chrysler 160 , 160 GT and 180 . In a fashion similar to Simca models , the designations referred to the displacement of the engines employed by the given version . The 160 employed the 1632 cc unit , while the 180 came with the 1812 cc one . A bit confusingly , the 160 GT came equipped with the larger engine . The 160 has 80 PS ( 59 kW ) while the 160 GT and 180 have 97 PS ( 71 kW ) . 
 The three models were introduced to the public at the 1970 Salon International d 'Automobile under the slogan " An American from Paris " . The British launch took place in 1971 , with only the 180 on offer . The 2 @.@ 0 @-@ litre model ( marketed simply as " Chrysler 2 litre " ) joined the lineup for 1973 , unveiled at the Amsterdam Auto Show in 1972 for the first time . The 1981 cc unit was available solely with Chrysler 's <unk> automatic transmission ( which was an option on the 180 model ) , and the model came with a host of features that distinguished it from the lesser versions , including a full @-@ length vinyl roof ( which became an option for the 160 and 180 ) , bumper @-@ mounted auxiliary driving lights and a small " 2L " badge adorning the C @-@ pillar . The 160 and 180 also gained some chrome and metal trim on the outside in 1972 , and since the advent of the 2 @.@ 0 @-@ litre , all models featured 14 @-@ inch ( rather than previous 13 @-@ inch ) wheels and new hubcaps . The 160 GT was cancelled at the same time . 
 = = = Press reaction = = = 
 A Chrysler 180 saloon tested by the British Motor magazine in April 1971 , a few months after the model 's UK launch , had a top speed of 101 @.@ 0 mph ( 162 @.@ 5 km / h ) and could accelerate from 0 @-@ 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) in 12 @.@ 4 seconds . An overall fuel consumption of 21 @.@ 7 miles per imperial gallon ( 13 @.@ 0 L / 100 km ; 18 @.@ 1 mpg @-@ US ) was recorded . The test car was offered at £ 1498 including taxes . For all three of these measurements , the car was ranked third out of five UK market competitor vehicles : competitors identified by the journal , included the Ford Cortina Mk III 2000 <unk> and the Vauxhall VX 4 / 90 . The overall tone of the road test , written at a time when new models were generally greeted with uncritical enthusiasm by UK motoring journalists , is summed up in its description of the Chrysler 180 as a " very pleasing car that only just falls short of being a luxury sporting saloon " . 
 = = = Barreiros = = = 
 When it became apparent that the model was far less than a market hit , Chrysler decided to move the assembly lines from the Poissy factory to the <unk> plant of its Spanish subsidiary , Barreiros . Barreiros had been assembling many Simca and Chrysler models previously for the protected Spanish market , but for the first time it would become the sole supplier of the entire model line for all markets . The vehicle became reasonably popular in its new home market , and local <unk> even created estate and stretched versions of the car . The lineup remained for the most part unchanged in most markets , although the 160 was not offered in Spain , which in turn received a new diesel model , powered by the Barreiros 2 @.@ 0 @-@ litre diesel engine ( not offered in other European markets ) . 
 = = = = Chrysler 180 Diesel = = = = 
 The engine was a traditional four cylinders diesel with indirect injection . It was mated to the four @-@ speed manual transmission and delivered 48 kilowatts ( 65 hp ) . The diesel model was fitted with the most basic 160 dashboard . An important change to the Spanish lineup was forced by the November 1977 change of the Spanish taxation system , similar to France 's puissance fiscale - a new 13 CV tax band was introduced , which attracted the very high rate of 35 % , and encompassed both the petroleum and diesel 2 @.@ 0 @-@ litre models . While the petroleum 2 @.@ 0 Litre model was simply replaced by a 180 automatic , the diesel engine had to be modified for 1978 to avoid increased taxation . The displacement was decreased from 2007 cc to 1917 cc ( without a drop in actual maximum power or speed ) , just below the border of the 13 CV tax band , which stood at 1920 cc . 
 = = = Later model life = = = 
 In 1977 , the car was for the first time officially badged as Chrysler @-@ Simca in continental Europe ( the Simca badge appeared on the <unk> , while the stylized Chrysler plate continued to adorn the front end ) . The individual models were renamed to be in line with the newly launched Simca 1307 / 1308 series . While the first two digits in this model naming system stood for the base engine 's displacement ( 1 @.@ 6 in case of the Chrysler 160 ) , the latter two represented the French fiscal class in which the car slotted . Thus , the 1 @.@ 6 @-@ powered model became the Chrysler @-@ Simca 1609 , as it fitted in the French 9 CV tax band ( even though this model actually was cancelled from the French market lineup ) , and the 1 @.@ 8 , slotting one class higher , became the Chrysler @-@ Simca 1610 , and was fitted with the vinyl roof and extra driving lamps from the 2 @.@ 0 @-@ litre model . However , in the UK , where only the 180 was on offer , it retained its name . To add to the confusion , the 2 @.@ 0 @-@ litre retained its name in all markets . 
 = = = = PSA takeover = = = = 
 In 1979 , the large Chrysler saw the sale of its parent company , Chrysler Europe , to the French PSA concern , due to Chrysler 's financial difficulties . Some minor reshuffles in the range were made . The 1 @.@ 8 @-@ litre engine was cancelled — in France , the 1610 got the 2 @.@ 0 @-@ litre engine ( which made it technically a " 11 CV " car , but the name was not changed ) , while in Britain the 180 model was simply dropped , with the 2 @.@ 0 @-@ litre now being offered with either the manual or automatic transmission to mirror the continental lineup . A minor rehash of the exterior decals also occurred . From 1 August 1979 , PSA decided to rename all previous Chrysler Europe cars as Talbots ( and Talbot @-@ <unk> in case of the French models , to capitalize on the established brand ) , and hence the Chrysler @-@ Simca 1609 and 1610 became the Talbot Simca 1609 and 1610 , and in Britain , the car became the Talbot 2 litre . The range was sold for only one year with the new names , as for 1981 PSA presented a replacement , the brand @-@ new Talbot Tagora . Peugeot had originally intended to replace it with the <unk> , the saloon version of the Alpine , which was launched in April 1980 . 
 The production of petrol @-@ engine Talbot 1610 stopped at the <unk> plant , but diesel versions continued under the Talbot badge until 1982 for the Spanish market . 
 = = Lack of market success = = 
 The Chrysler 180 / 2 @-@ litre probably found its best market in Spain , albeit only after production had been transferred there in the later 1970s : Spain was effectively closed off to any competitor product not assembled in Spain . The only significant locally assembled competitor here was the Seat 132 . 
 The car was not received too well either in France or in the UK . Its mixed pedigree and exotic brand did not fit in well with the expectations of more nationalistic buyers and reviewers , and there was little that would make the car stand out among the crowd of similar cars , many of which already had an established position in the class . By 1976 , with the number of cars sold in the UK not yet up to 10 @,@ 000 , British sales had settled down at the annual rate of about 2 @,@ 000 which was seen to be below the company 's expectations , but UK sales were more impressive than those in France . In France , the sales of the Chrysler were so disappointing that the old Simca 1501 was offered again for 1974 ( it remained in production sometime after the Chrysler 's launch for export markets mostly , in order to use up the remaining parts ) . 
 The German Auto Katalog remarked that the car bore resemblance to the Opel Rekord ( which can perhaps be said not only of its styling , but also of almost identical dimensions and similar engine selection ) , yet it also pointed out that the Rekord in question was a four @-@ year @-@ old car at that time ( and was subsequently replaced by a new model in 1971 ) . In the British market the car 's chances against rivals , such as the successful Rover SD1 , were also hampered by the lack of engines larger than the 2 @.@ 0 @-@ litre , as the competitors offered six- or even eight @-@ cylinder units , being unhampered by the French tax regulations . 
 Moreover , Chrysler seemed not to support the model after the launch . Advertising was scanty and updates scarce and rather limited in scope . Chrysler did not bother to fit the supposedly upmarket model with such features as power windows , central locking , ( though a then @-@ unusual fitment was a low fuel warning lamp which would come on when a couple of gallons of fuel was left in the tank ) , even though they were all available in the smaller Simca 1307 , launched around the time when the 180 was in mid @-@ life . 
 = = Chrysler Centura = = 
 A variant of the Chrysler 180 was produced in Australia from 1975 to 1978 by Chrysler Australia as the Chrysler Centura . The Centura was offered with a choice of 4 @-@ cylinder and 6 @-@ cylinder engines mated to a manual or automatic transmission and was fitted with a modified front radiator grille to allow more airflow to the radiator , and four round headlamps to complete the makeover . The Centura had limited market success in Australia . 
 = Helicoverpa zea = 
 Helicoverpa zea , commonly known as the corn earworm , is a species ( formerly in the genus Heliothis ) in the family Noctuidae . The larva of the moth Helicoverpa zea is a major agricultural pest . Since it is polyphagous ( feeds on many different plants ) during the larval stage , the species has been given many different common names , including the cotton <unk> and the tomato <unk> . It also consumes a wide variety of other crops . 
 The species is widely distributed across the Americas with the exception of northern Canada and Alaska . It has become resistant to many pesticides , but can be controlled with integrated pest management techniques including deep ploughing , trap crops , chemical control using mineral oil , and biological controls . 
 The species migrates seasonally , at night , and can be carried downwind up to 400 km . Pupae can make use of diapause to wait out adverse environmental conditions , especially at high latitudes and in drought . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 The corn earworm is found in temperate and tropical regions of North America , with the exception of northern Canada and Alaska as it cannot overwinter in these areas . Helicoverpa zea found in the eastern United States also do not overwinter successfully . They live in Kansas , Ohio , Virginia , and southern New Jersey , but survival rate is mainly affected by the severity of the winter . Corn earworm moths regularly migrate from southern regions to northern regions depending on winter conditions . They are also found in Hawaii , the Caribbean islands , and most of South America , including Peru , Argentina , and Brazil . 
 Cotton <unk> have also been reported from China in 2002 . 
 = = Life cycle and Description = = 
 = = = Eggs = = = 
 Eggs are individually deposited on leaf hairs and corn silks ( not in reference given ) . The eggs are initially pale green in color , but over time they turn yellowish and then grey . Eggs are 0 @.@ 5 mm in height and average about 0 @.@ 55 mm in diameter . They hatch after 66 to 72 hours of development . Once larvae have breached the chorion , they spend up to 85 % of their time emerging from their shell . In this eclosion process , the larvae work to make the exit hole larger than their head . Larvae spend the rest of the time making a silk meshwork around the exit hole ; this both helps them escape the shell and helps them find the shell afterwards so they can feed on it . After feeding on their shell , larvae rest for approximately 3 minutes before they begin feeding on the plant material around them . 
 = = = Larvae = = = 
 Following hatching , larvae feed on the reproductive structures of the plant and usually develop through four to six instars . Initially , the young larva feed together , and this stage is their most destructive stage . Through maturation , older larvae become aggressive and cannibalistic , leaving one or two larvae per feeding site ( See <unk> Predation ) . They usually have orange heads , black thorax plates , and a body color that is primarily black . Their bodies can also be brown , pink , green , and yellow with many thorny <unk> . Mature larvae migrate to the soil , where they pupate for 12 to 16 days . 
 = = = Pupae = = = 
 Larvae pupate 5 to 10 cm below the soil surface . Pupae are brown in color ; they measure 5 @.@ 5 mm wide and 17 to 22 mm long . The biggest environmental factor that affects the pupal developmental rate is temperature , primarily soil temperature . This is because proper insulation facilitates development , and soil temperatures below 0 degrees Celsius correlate to higher pupal mortality . Another factor that influences pupal development is soil moisture . <unk> mortality is high in wet soil , where the moisture level is between 18 and 25 percent . Dehydration can also lead to high death rates among pupae , if soil moisture is as low as 1 to 2 percent . 
 = = = Adults = = = 
 Adults have forewings that are yellowish brown in color and have a dark spot located in the center of their body . The moths have a wingspan ranging from 32 to 45mm , and live over thirty days in optimal conditions . However , the life span ranges from five to fifteen days on average . They are nocturnal and hide in vegetation during the day . Adult moths collect nectar or other plant exudates from a large number of plants , and live for 12 to 16 days . Females can lay up to 2 @,@ 500 eggs in their lifetime . 
 = = Economic impact = = 
 = = = Damage = = = 
 The corn earworm is a major agricultural pest , with a large host range encompassing corn and many other crop plants . Helicoverpa zea is the second most important economic pest species in North America , next to the codling moth . The estimated annual cost of the damage is more than 100 million US dollars , even though expenditure on insecticide application has reached up to 250 million dollars . The moth ’ s high fecundity , ability to lay between 500 to 3 @,@ 000 eggs , polyphagous larval feeding habits , high mobility during migration , and a facultative pupal diapause have led to the success of this pest . 
 = = = Control = = = 
 Two kinds of control measures have been advocated since the 19th century . One aims at total pest population reduction , while the other is aimed at protection of the particular crop . As of 2013 integrated pest management ( IPM ) , an array of techniques and approaches to control pests , was recommended . Practices such as deep ploughing , mechanical destruction , and trap crops are also used to kill different instars . Chemical control is widely successful , and includes the use of applying mineral oil inside the tip of each corn ear , which suffocates the young larvae . Pesticides are one method by which corn earworm populations are controlled ; however , since they have been widely used , the insects have become resistant to many pesticides . The use of biological controls , such as the bacterium Bacillus thuringiensis and various forms of nematodes , is also common , although not without its own problems . Corn earworm moths are not always vulnerable to the bacterium , and they are only afflicted by nematodes once the larvae have <unk> and dropped to the ground . 
 = = Survival = = 
 = = = Natural Enemies = = = 
 More than one hundred insect species prey on Helicoverpa zea , usually feeding on eggs and larvae . The insidious flower bug ( <unk> <unk> ) , a pirate bug , feeds on the eggs of H. zea , thus acting as a biological control agent . Some plants emit a blend of chemicals in response to damage from H. zea , which attract parasitic insects . <unk> nigriceps , a solitary <unk> wasp , makes use of these volatile plant compounds to identify the presence of H. zea . When the wasp finds a damaged host plant , they hover around and then search for the host with their antennae . When the females find their prey , they use their antennae to position themselves and deposits eggs into the host . The <unk> wasp <unk> <unk> , which deposits its eggs inside a living caterpillar , is also an important parasitoid of both H. zea and the related species Heliothis virescens . When larval densities are high , a fungal pathogen , <unk> <unk> , can cause an outbreak of disease . However , pupal mortality is high not because of predators , but because of harsh weather conditions , collapsing pupal chambers , and disease . 
 = = = Larval predation = = = 
 As the larvae mature , they become increasingly aggressive . Although they have host plants surrounding them , Helicoverpa zea attack and eat other insects . When presented with a second instar larva of Urbanus proteus , the corn earworm larvae grasps the insect , rolls onto its side to form a semicircle , and begins feeding on the insect 's posterior end . If the U. proteus begins to bite out of defense , Helicoverpa zea rotates the larva 180 degrees and uses its mandibles to puncture the head capsule , killing the insect . Then , the H. zea larva rotates the U. proteus back to its original position and continues feeding until the insect is entirely consumed . Even when presented with up to 5 U. proteus larvae , the Helicoverpa zea engages in the unique behavior , as the larvae have a higher affinity for Lepidopterous prey over plant material . Helicoverpa zea raised in a low moisture environment have lower pupal weight and a longer developmental time than those raised in environments of high moisture , so there is a nutritional benefit to such aggressive feeding behavior under such conditions . 
 = = Movement = = 
 = = = Migration = = = 
 Helicoverpa zea is a seasonal , nocturnal migrant , and adults disperse , weather permitting , when there are poor reproductive conditions . In short @-@ range dispersal , the moths move within the crop and low over the foliage . This type of dispersal is mostly independent of wind currents . Long @-@ range dispersal involves adults flying up to 10 meters above the ground and moving downwind from crop to crop . Migratory flights occur up to 1 – 2 km above the ground and can last for hours . Migration of 400 km is 
 common for such flights as moths are carried downwind . Helicoverpa zea caterpillars are usually intercepted on produce transported by air @-@ freight transportation . Most activity is restricted to the night @-@ time . Some moths display vertical take @-@ off flight , which carries them above the flight boundary layer and allows them to undertake migratory movement in upper wind systems . During mating , males engage in high @-@ speed directed flight in search of pheromone plumes ( See Pheromone Production ) . 
 = = = Diapause = = = 
 Pupae have the ability to enter facultative diapause , the state of arrested development and growth in response to a change in the environment . By preparing themselves for a major change in environmental conditions , they can increase reproductive success . Diapause increases with increasing latitude . In tropical conditions , populations breed continuously , and only 2 @-@ 4 % of pupae diapause . In subtropical and temperate regions , most individuals diapause . Individuals who don 't enter diapause in these areas emerge in late fall and die without reproducing . Drought @-@ responsive diapause has also been observed in the summer . 
 = = Feeding = = 
 = = = Host plants = = = 
 Helicoverpa zea has a wide host range , attacking vegetables that include corn , tomato , artichoke , asparagus , cabbage , cantaloupe , <unk> , <unk> , cucumber , eggplant , lettuce , lima bean , melon , okra , pea , pepper , potato , pumpkin , snap bean , spinach , squash , sweet potato , and watermelon . However , not all of these are good hosts . While corn and lettuce are shown to be great hosts , tomatoes are less beneficial , and broccoli and cantaloupe are poor hosts . Corn and sorghum are most favored by corn <unk> . Various signs reveal the presence of these moths . Young maize crops have holes in their leaves , following whorl @-@ feeding on the apical leaf . Eggs can be found on silks on larger plants , and silks display grazing evidence . The soft , milky grains in the top few centimeters of corn cobs are eaten as the corn ears develop . One larva per cob can be observed . Bore holes are observed in cabbage and lettuce hearts , flower heads , cotton <unk> , and tomato fruits . Sorghum heads are grazed , and legume pod seeds are eaten . 
 = = = Corn = = = 
 Helicoverpa zea earns its nickname the corn earworm for its widely known destruction of cornfields . The corn earworm feeds on every part of corn , including the kernels . Severe feeding at the tip of kernels allows entry for diseases and mold growth . Larvae begin feeding on the kernels once they have reached third instar . Larvae penetrate 9 to 15 cm into the ear , with deeper penetration occurring as the kernels harden . Larvae do not eat the hard kernels , but take bites out of many kernels , lowering the quality of the corn for processing . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Helicoverpa zea is the most common and destructive pest of soybean growth in Virginia . About one @-@ third of Virginia acreage is treated annually with pounds of insecticide , costing farmers around 2 million dollars . The degree of damage varies on the size of the pest infestation , the timing , and the stage of the plant . However , soybean plants are capable of withstanding a large amount of damage without substantial yield loss depending on soil moisture , planting date , and weather . If the damage is early in the plants life , then damage will mostly be to the leaves . Plants compensate for the damage by processes such as increasing seed size in remaining pods . Most damage happens in August , when the plants are flowering . Attacks that happen after August do much less damage because many pods have developed tougher walls that H. zea can 't penetrate . <unk> that affect pod formation and seed filling have the potential to reduce yields , and because this happens in the later stages of plants , they have less time to compensate . 
 Female moths are attracted to flowering soybean fields . The most severe infestations occur between flowering and when pods become fully developed . Large @-@ scale outbreak is associated with time of peak flowering , when most pods are developed , and peak moth flight , for giant . Moths are also attracted to drought stressed soybeans or fields with poor growth . Dry weather leads to quick drying of corn plants , compelling moths to leave and seek other hosts . Heavy rainfall also decreases corn earworm populations because it drowns pupae in their soil chambers , limits moth flight , washes eggs from leaves , and creates favorable conditions for fungal diseases that kill caterpillars . 
 = = Mating = = 
 = = = Pheromone production = = = 
 A hormone produced in the brain of the female moths controls sex pheromones . The hormone is released into the hemolymph to stimulate pheromone production . Pheromone biosynthesis @-@ activating neuropeptide ( <unk> ) is a peptide that regulates pheromone production in moths . It acts on the pheromone gland cells using calcium and cyclic AMP . Although the photoperiod regulates the release of <unk> to some extent , the chemical signals from the host plant supersede the effect from the time of day . Female Helicoverpa zea in corn fields do not produce pheromones during the night until they encounter corn . Several natural corn silk volatiles like the plant hormone ethylene induce H. zea pheromone production . The presence of the silk from an ear of corn is enough to cause pheromone production , and physical contact between females and corn is unnecessary . This evolutionary mechanism enables the moths to coordinate their reproductive behavior with the availability of food . Female moths often become depleted of sex pheromone after mating within 2 hours of separation from the male . The <unk> peptide ( PSP ) , a protein 57 amino acids long found in the male accessory gland , is what causes depletion of the female ’ s sex pheromone . This capability in males has been selected for because it increases the reproductive fitness of those that carry it , since other males will not be attracted to a female without a sex pheromone ; thus , the female will bear only the first male 's offspring . The transfer of a spermatophore without accessory gland products does not stop female pheromone production , but does stop the female 's calling behavior . Intense selection acting on males to manipulate female reproductive physiology promotes rapid evolution of specific molecules , and male @-@ derived pheromone suppressing factors exhibit positive selection . 
 = = = Mortality = = = 
 Sperm competition and chemicals introduced to females through mating have a negative effect on females and their lifespan . In males , production of the spermatophore , sperm , and secondary chemicals reduces their lifespan . As the number of copulations increase , the rate of mortality also increases in both sexes . 
 = = = Flight behavior = = = 
 Males must first wait to sense a female ’ s pheromones before they can locate her . Before males engage in flight to find a female , they warm @-@ up by shivering the major flight muscles to reach thoracic temperature optimal to sustain flight , around 26 degrees Celsius . The thermoregulatory shivering activities of males were measured as they were exposed to different sex @-@ related olfactory cues . Males are found to heat up more quickly in the presence of a female pheromone and take @-@ off at a lower thoracic temperature than males who are exposed to other chemical scents . Since heating up to the right temperature leads to better flight performance than flying immediately , there is a trade @-@ off between sub @-@ optimal flight performance and rapid onset of directed flight . Helicoverpa zea males exposed to an attractive pheromone blend thus spend less time shivering and increase their heating rate . <unk> behavior of unrestrained moths is associated with competition for access to females , showing the ecological trade @-@ off . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = = Literature = = 
 Capinera , J.P. [ 1 ] . Corn Earworm , Helicoverpa ( = Heliothis ) zea ( Boddie ) ( Lepidoptera : Noctuidae ) , 2008 . 
 Cooke , K.A. , <unk> , R. [ 2 ] IPM : Field Crops : Corn Earworm ( Heliothis Zea ) , 2004 . 
 <unk> , V.C. ( 1984 ) Eastern Moths . Peterson Field Guides . <unk> . 
 Hagerman , P. [ 3 ] , Corn Earworm Factsheet , 2008 . 
 Hill , D.S. [ 4 ] , Heliothis zea ( Boddie ) , 1983 . 
 = Felipe Camiroaga = 
 Felipe Humberto Camiroaga Fernández ( 8 October 1966 – 2 September 2011 ) was a Chilean television presenter , one of the most popular in his country . 
 Camiroaga hosted many shows for Chilean television station TVN , including the morning talk show Buenos Días a Todos and a late @-@ night talk show Animal Nocturno . He also acted in several TV series , such as Jaque Mate and Rojo y Miel , and in two films . Camiroaga twice hosted the Viña del Mar International Song Festival in 2009 and 2010 . He was nicknamed " Halcón de Chicureo " ( " Falcon of Chicureo " ) because he bred falcons in his residence in Chicureo , a rural area north of Santiago . 
 Camiroaga died on 2 September 2011 after the military plane which was taking him and twenty others to Juan Fernández Archipelago crashed in the sea . Camiroaga 's death was officially announced seven days later , and after a funeral oration at TVN 's headquarters , he was buried in Santiago . He has been posthumously awarded several prizes , including the " Social Communicator Special Award " by the National Council of Television in 2011 . 
 = = Early life and studies = = 
 Camiroaga was born in Santiago , Chile . His parents were Jorge Camiroaga Puch and María de la Luz Fernández <unk> ; he was the second of three brothers . Camiroaga and Fernández separated when Felipe was four years old . His mother moved to the Canary Islands in Spain , leaving her children with their father . In the Canaries , Fernández married Fernando Bontempi , with whom she had three children , including Spanish actress Paola Bontempi . Camiroaga was of Basque , German , and Peruvian descent . His paternal grandfather was Carabineros de Chile colonel Humberto Camiroaga , Director of the Escuela de Carabineros de Chile . 
 During his childhood , Camiroaga regularly visited rural places such as Villa Alegre , where his aunt Lavinia " <unk> " Camiroaga lived , and Robinson Crusoe Island , marking his love for animals and the countryside . In 1981 , while spending his vacations at the Juan Fernández Archipelago , Camiroaga offered to work as a camera assistant for a TV crew from Televisión Nacional de Chile that was in the location , his first ever interaction with TV . Camiroaga was named an " Illustrious Son " of Villa Alegre in May 2011 . 
 Camiroaga completed his primary studies at Colegio San Ignacio de El Bosque , and his secondary studies at Colegio Marshall . In 1987 he completed studies of TV Production and Direction at Instituto <unk> . He also studied journalism at Las <unk> University , but did not complete the course , and theater at Academia de <unk> Fernando González <unk> . 
 = = Career in television = = 
 Felipe Camiroaga started working as a camera assistant at the press department of television channel Red de Televisión Universidad de Chile ( RTU , now <unk> ) in 1988 , and later as a production assistant at the channel 's production department . But he quickly went from off to on @-@ camera ; his first job was as a host in a music video programme called <unk> , that was previously hosted by Pablo Aguilera and Justus Liebig . Later , he presented Extra <unk> , RTU 's teenage @-@ oriented show , which he co @-@ hosted with Katherine Salosny . His chemistry with Salosny proved successful and he became her co @-@ host a few months later . In 1991 he declined an offer to become a news anchor and continued at Extra <unk> , now co @-@ presenting with Claudia <unk> . 
 Camiroaga was hired by Televisión Nacional de Chile ( TVN ) in 1992 to co @-@ host Buenos Días a Todos with Tati Penna , a breakfast programme first transmitted that year ; however , the couple were later replaced by Margot Kahl and Jorge <unk> . Later , he had a brief television acting career , debuting in Jaque Mate , and later he portrayed an antagonistic character in Rojo y Miel . Despite being advised by actress Ana Reeves , Camiroaga did not receive good reviews for his acting performances . 
 At the same time , he hosted some unsuccessful programmes , such as La Gran Apuesta and El <unk> , and others with mixed results , such as <unk> a Bordo and Contigo en Verano . However , at the end of the 1990s , he achieved success with prime time programme La Noche del Mundial , which was broadcast during the 1998 FIFA World Cup , and Pase lo que Pase , a miscellaneous evening programme which he co @-@ hosted with Karen Doggenweiler . 
 Camiroaga also hosted prime time programmes during the 2000s such as Con Mucho <unk> and Ciudad <unk> , both of which did not complete a full season for their " controversial contents " , and the first two seasons of the reality show <unk> . In 2004 he co @-@ hosted <unk> with Bárbara <unk> , but he left the programme later that year and was replaced by Martín <unk> . He returned to Buenos Días a Todos in 2005 , sharing duties with Tonka <unk> , then with Katherine Salosny , and finally Carolina de Moras . The replacement of Salosny by de Moras was not well received and the local entertainment media blamed Camiroaga for it , which later resulted in a mass booing while Camiroaga was being awarded a Premio <unk> de Oro for " Best TV presenter " at the Teatro <unk> in Santiago , in 2010 . In 2006 , he began hosting his own talk show , Animal Nocturno . In February 2009 he co @-@ presented the Viña del Mar International Song Festival with Soledad <unk> , and also co @-@ presented the 2010 edition . 
 In 2010 , Camiroaga co @-@ hosted Halcón y <unk> with comedian Stefan Kramer . That same year , he received an offer from US television network <unk> to present a breakfast programme . Camiroaga rejected this offer and renewed his contract with TVN for three years . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Camiroaga proved to be versatile in his TV programmes , where he created characters such as El Washington , a poor man who lives on the street and survives on leftover food , distinguished by his humble origin . El Washington was created in Buenos Días a Todos , and subsequently developed in Pase lo que Pase , where it became popular in sketch comedies with Karen Doggenweiler , the Señorita Andrea . Camiroaga hosted a radio programme called El <unk> del Washington in Corazón FM , dedicated to the trading of articles . 
 One of Camiroaga 's most recognized characters is Luciano Bello , a TV presenter native to Maracaibo , Venezuela . He is characterized by his large teeth and is coquettish with women . His typical phrase was : " You 're rich and intelligent . " ( " Eres <unk> e <unk> . " ) His name parodies Chilean @-@ Venezuelan humanist Andrés Bello , and some of his moves parody those of the singer of same nationality José Luis Rodríguez . Luciano Bello appeared for the first time in La Noche del Mundial in 1998 . The character was strongly criticized by deputy Enrique Krauss , who called him vulgar . ( " <unk> . " ) 
 = = Other projects = = 
 As well as acting in TV series , Camiroaga was active in theatre and cinema . In 2000 , he participated in the theatrical work <unk> , directed by Boris Quercia , starring Gabriela Medina , Carmen Barros , <unk> Lobos and <unk> Contador ; Camiroaga was the only male actor . In 2006 he had a secondary role in the film <unk> , directed by Claudio <unk> and starred by Uruguayan @-@ Mexican actress Bárbara Mori . The night before his death , on 1 September 2011 , Camiroaga participated in the recording of the comedy film Stefan vs. Kramer with comedian Stefan Kramer and TV presenter Martín <unk> . At first it was not known whether Camiroaga 's scenes would appear in the film , whose release was scheduled for 2012 . In late October 2011 , Kramer said he would include the scenes in the film , as Camiroaga " wanted to be in it . " 
 In 2001 , the programme Pase lo que Pase released the album La Banda del Pase lo que Pase , in which Camiroaga debuted as a singer . The album was produced by Warner Music , and reached gold album status in Chile . 
 Camiroaga also worked in advertising for <unk> and Ripley . At the time of his death , he still had an active contract with Ripley , who decided to remove all advertising in which Camiroaga appeared . 
 = = Death = = 
 Camiroaga was travelling with a team from Buenos Días a Todos , personnel from Desafío <unk> Chile and the National Council of Culture and the Arts to Robinson Crusoe Island in the Juan Fernández Archipelago , when the Chilean Air Force ( <unk> ) CASA C @-@ 212 <unk> plane which was carrying them crashed into the sea and disintegrated while it was trying to land at the Robinson Crusoe Aerodrome , on 2 September 2011 . The aircraft tried to touch down twice unsuccessfully before it disappeared . It was piloted by Lieutenant Carolina Fernández , one of the first female pilots in <unk> 's history , and Lieutenant Juan Pablo <unk> . Journalist Roberto Bruce — also part of Buenos Días a Todos — and businessman Felipe Cubillos , were also aboard the plane . 
 On 3 September 2011 , Defense Minister Andrés Allamand said it was unlikely anyone survived the accident ; they may have died instantly on impact . President Sebastián Piñera decreed national mourning for the days of 5 and 6 September 2011 . Seven days after the crash , Secretary General of Government Andrés Chadwick announced that body remains rescued from the sea were identified by DNA tests as Camiroaga , Felipe Cubillos and three other passengers . 
 Camiroaga 's remains were cremated in a private ceremony on 12 September 2011 , and the next day a funeral oration was conducted at the Televisión Nacional de Chile 's headquarters , which was broadcast live by the station . It was attended by five hundred people invited by his family and the TV channel . After the service , the amphora containing the presenter 's ashes was moved in a hearse under a police escort , which was followed by his relatives . A crowd of around five thousand people accompanied the hearse from Barrio <unk> to the <unk> de las Flores , in Recoleta . After this , his remains were taken to the Parque del <unk> cemetery , where a private ceremony was conducted , attended by relatives and Camiroaga 's closest friends . On 16 November 2011 , Camiroaga 's ashes were taken to the Lugar de Los Hombres <unk> of Villa Alegre 's churchyard . 
 = = Posthumous homages and reactions = = 
 After the announcement of Camiroaga 's death in the crash , thousands of people went to the façade of the Televisión Nacional de Chile ( TVN ) headquarters , in the commune of Providencia , to express their love and affection for Camiroaga , the rest of the team from Buenos Días a Todos and the other plane passengers . Such expressions of support were repeated in regional headquarters of the TV channel , where they placed some condolence books for the public . 
 On 5 September 2011 , Julián <unk> , Carolina de Moras , Jorge <unk> , Karen Doggenweiler and emblematic staff of Buenos Días a Todos , friends , TVN personalities and from other channels — including competitors of the programme — joined to pay tribute to Camiroaga in his program . In that episode of Buenos Días a Todos , the first since Camiroaga 's death , his friend and TV director Daniel <unk> commented that Felipe once told him that he wanted Silvio Rodríguez 's song " Ángel para un Final " to be played in his funeral . As soon as Rodríguez was informed of this , he commented on his blog it would be a " high honour " for him that his song was played at Camiroaga 's funeral . Other international personalities , such as Lucero , Yuri , Ricardo Montaner , Alejandro Sanz , Ricky Martin , Luis Fonsi , amid others , expressed their sadness and consternation at Camiroaga 's death , through the social networks Facebook , Twitter and YouTube . 
 The plane crash was extensively covered by the press , nationally and internationally , emphasizing the figure of the TV presenter , including BBC News from the United Kingdom . Qatari news channel Al Jazeera covered the news on the plane crash immediately after it occurred and also emphasized the deaths of Camiroaga and Felipe Cubillos . In Argentina , various media outlets referred to Camiroaga as " the Chilean Tinelli " , in reference to Argentinean presenter Marcelo Tinelli . An Argentinean TV programme called Duro de Domar mocked the Juan Fernández tragedy , focusing on Camiroaga and his relationships with Rocío Marengo and Cecilia <unk> , provoking harsh attacks from Chileans in social networks . 
 Chilean newspaper Las Últimas Noticias caused controversy on 2 September 2011 ; its digital edition cover was headlined " The last flight of the Falcon " ( " El último <unk> del <unk> " ) , which generated outrage from Internet users , as Camiroaga 's whereabouts were unknown at the time . The cover was replaced and the next day the newspaper said the public had misinterpreted the intention of the headline . 
