 Televisión Nacional de Chile decided to name the studio from which Buenos Días a Todos is transmitted " Felipe Camiroaga Fernández " , and kept free the TV presenter 's parking space to remember him . The municipality of Colina , where Camiroaga lived in Chicureo , announced they would name him posthumously " Illustrious Son " of the <unk> and the Lo <unk> Avenue would be renamed after him . Additionally , the Chilean Telethon ( Teletón ) paid homage to Camiroaga and the twenty other passengers of the aircraft in its opening and at the Julio Martínez National Stadium in the fundraising 's 2011 edition . 
 On 26 September 2011 , the National Council of Television ( Consejo Nacional de Televisión ; <unk> ) awarded posthumously Camiroaga with the " Special Award in Communications . " The Sala Felipe Camiroaga ( Felipe Camiroaga Room ) in the Museum of Villa Alegre was inaugurated on 3 May 2012 ; personal belongings , public and private photographs and a bust of Camiroaga made by <unk> Ponce are exhibited . His father , siblings , his partner Fernanda Hansen , close friends and followers were present at the ceremony . 
 In 2013 , and as part of the student movement which started in 2011 demanding higher quality and free education in Chile — movement which Camiroaga supported — , students of the Law School of the University of Valparaíso created the Juventud Rebelde Felipe Camiroaga ( Felipe Camiroaga Rebel Youth ) political group , which describes itself as " [ a group of ] left @-@ wing students with no defined party , who believe that organization and participation are the necessary tools to make the changes we want , " specifying also that " revolution is made by parts " , satirizing Camiroaga 's death . The group , according to <unk> Chile , is " partly satire , partly real facts " , and is not supposed to use Camiroaga 's image as a " martyr " , but as " a person who puts them into a crucial <unk> frame . " The Juventud Rebelde Felipe Camiroaga group has been replicated in other universities , including the University of Chile and the Metropolitan University of Educational Sciences . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Although Camiroaga had several romantic relationships within the media industry , Camiroaga never married , and was considered " one of the most coveted bachelors " by the Chilean tabloid press . 
 Camiroaga was linked romantically with several Chilean TV personalities , such as Katherine Salosny , Angélica Castro , Karen Doggenweiler , Bárbara <unk> , Paz <unk> and Fernanda Hansen , with whom he was in a relationship at the time of his death . He was also linked to Rocío Marengo , <unk> Amaral , Krishna Navas , amid others . In 1992 , he had a short @-@ lived relationship with Mexican singer and actress Lucero while they were <unk> at the 1992 edition of the Viña del Mar International Song Festival ; the relationship later developed into friendship . 
 Camiroaga lived in a land lot near Chicureo . He lives as a <unk> @-@ style farm owner dedicated to the breeding of horses , dogs and birds . In February 2011 , his house was totally destroyed by a fire . Although it was first reported the fire was caused by an electrical failure , the possibility that it arson was later considered . Felipe Camiroaga practiced polo ; he also was an aviation enthusiast and completed his pilot training in 1996 . 
 = = Political views = = 
 In his later years , Camiroaga openly demonstrated his political preferences , something uncommon in Chilean television presenters . 
 It 's hard to break the patterns in my workspace , where the TV presenters need to be direct , and neutral in some topics . It surprises me when [ people ] say we are opinion leaders , but actually [ we ] the opinion leaders can 't say anything but <unk> , unrelated to deeper issues which interest the country . I have not rebelled , I just think that [ as a presenter ] I have to change my mind . 
 Although he grew up in a right @-@ wing family , supportive of the Pinochet military regime , Camiroaga supported the <unk> coalition of left @-@ wing parties since Chile became a democracy ; in 2008 he said he was a " <unk> " ( " <unk> " ) — supporter of President of Chile Michelle Bachelet — in the Caras magazine , and in 2009 he said Chile was admired for the governments of such a coalition . In 2010 he joined the runoff campaign of Eduardo Frei Ruiz @-@ Tagle , the <unk> candidate for the Chilean presidential election . Frei said Camiroaga was a " very brave man " for publicly expressing his political views . 
 Camiroaga also participated in campaigns by Greenpeace ; he openly asked Chile 's Interior Minister Rodrigo <unk> on Buenos Días a Todos for the government , led by Sebastián Piñera , to halt the installation of a thermoelectric plant in Caleta Punta <unk> — which was later reversed — and supported the 2011 student movement in Chile . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 As a television presenter 
 As an actor in movies 
 As an actor in TV series 
 As an actor ( other appearances ) 
 = = Discography = = 
 2003 : La Banda del Pase lo que Pase ( with Karen Doggenweiler ; gold in Chile ) 
 = = Awards and recognitions = = 
 2006 : Great <unk> of the <unk> ; <unk> King . 
 2006 – 2011 ( posthumously ) : <unk> de Oro Award to " Best TV Presenter " . 
 2009 : 
 <unk> Award to " Best TV presenter " . 
 ( and 2011 , posthumously ) TV Grama Award to " Best TV Presenter " . 
 2011 : Social Communicator Special Award , given by the National Council of Television . 
 = Bahrain health worker trials = 
 The Bahrain health worker trials were a series of legal cases in which forty @-@ eight doctors , nurses , and dentists faced charges for their actions during the 2011 @-@ 2012 Bahraini uprising . In September 2011 , twenty of the health workers were convicted by a military court of felonies including " stockpiling weapons " and " plotting to overthrow the government " . The remaining twenty @-@ eight were charged with misdemeanors and tried separately . The following month , the felony sentences were overturned , and it was announced that the defendants would be retried by a civilian court . <unk> began in March 2012 , but were postponed until June 14 . Convictions against nine of the defendants were quashed and reduced against another nine . The Court of Cassation upheld the sentences against the remaining nine on 1 October . 
 The case drew international attention and criticism , with organizations including the United Nations , the World Medical Association , Médecins Sans Frontières , the International Council of Nurses , Amnesty International , and Human Rights Watch expressing their concern over the health workers ' military trials and sentences . An independent commission organized by the King of Bahrain concluded in November 2011 that many of the detained health workers had been subject to torture and abuse while in police detention . 
 = = Role of health workers in the Bahrain uprising = = 
 Beginning in February 2011 , Bahrain saw sustained pro @-@ democracy protests , centered at Pearl Roundabout in the capital of Manama , as part of the wider Arab Spring . Authorities responded with a night raid on 17 February ( later referred to by protesters as Bloody Thursday ) , which left four protesters dead and more than 300 injured . 
 Health workers played an important role in documenting the injuries , which were at the time downplayed or denied by the government of Bahrain . <unk> Fatima Haji , for example , appeared on Al Jazeera television news in a " hysterical " state , describing Isa Abdul Hasan , a man in his 60s who died in her hospital of a head wound he had received from police : " I just started shouting : ' What the hell did this guy do , he was an old man . What did he do to deserve this ? ' " She later stated that following her arrest , her interrogations were centered on this television appearance . 
 At Salmaniya Medical Complex , doctors joined the protests themselves , speaking to protesters and media from the hospital stairs , after authorities blocked ambulances from bringing injured protesters there for care . The military responded by naming the hospital an opposition stronghold , taking it over on March 16 . 
 = = Arrests and charges = = 
 In March and April 2011 , twenty health workers were arrested on a variety of felony charges for their actions during the protests , while an additional twenty @-@ eight were arrested for misdemeanors . The total number of arrested health workers exceeded seventy . Dr. Ali Al @-@ Ekri was arrested while performing surgery at Salmaniya Medical Complex . 
 Charges against the doctors included " occupying a hospital , stockpiling weapons , spreading lies and false news , inciting hatred of Bahrain 's rulers and calling for their overthrow , and withholding treatment of Sunnis " . The government additionally alleged that blood from hospital blood banks had been used to exaggerate wounds , that health workers had transported weapons to the protesters by ambulance , and that AK @-@ 47s had been confiscated inside the hospital on a police raid . State media described the defendants as having " a terrorist aim " . 
 According to the prosecutor 's case , al @-@ Ekri acted as the group 's ringleader , organizing staff at Salmaniya to oppose the Bahraini government . Al @-@ Ekri was well known in Bahrain previous to the uprising for a January 2009 trip to the Gaza Strip to provide aid to Palestinians during the Gaza War . On his return , he received a number of awards , including one from the king . After his arrest , Al @-@ Ekri stated that he was being persecuted for his comments to the media about police violence : " They know we witnessed all the crimes of the regime and we stood strong by injured people and we talked to the media ... Anywhere , like in Gaza and in Yemen now , doctors speak about what they see . " 
 The defendants denied all charges and maintained that the accusations were politically motivated . In a joint statement , they held that " our only crime was that during the unrest earlier this year , we were outspoken witnesses to the bloodshed and the brutal treatment by the security forces . " Bahraini MP Jamal <unk> responded that Bahrain jails only " people who prefer to play politics rather than be doctors " , not " doctors who treat people " . A spokesman for Bahrain 's Information Affairs Authority stated that the health workers were fabricating their stories and that they were " collaborating with the hard liners " in " an attempted coup d 'etat " . 
 British journalist Robert Fisk , who had been present at the protests , accused the Bahraini government of dishonesty : " Doctors I saw , drenched in their patients ' blood , desperately trying to staunch the bullet wounds of pro @-@ democracy demonstrators shot in cold blood by Bahraini soldiers and police , are now on trial ... How could these fine medical men and women have been trying to " topple " the monarchy ? The idea that these 48 defendants are guilty of such a vicious charge is not just preposterous . It is insane , a total perversion – no , the total opposite – of the truth . " In response , Bahrain 's Information Affairs Authority threatened him with libel action . 
 The BICI supported the government account that medics occupied the first floor of Salmaniya hospital . However , it rejected the claim that medics had supplied protesters with weapons and stated that evidence supporting allegations that medics denied health care to patients was " hardly conclusive , " as paraphrased by Al Jazeera English . 
 = = Trials = = 
 = = = Felony trials = = = 
 The twenty health workers facing felony charges were found guilty and sentenced on 29 September 2011 by the military National Safety Court of First Instance . According to the International Federation for Human Rights , the trial lasted only a few minutes . Thirteen of the twenty received sentences of fifteen years ' imprisonment , while five were sentenced to five years and two were sentenced to ten years . The sentences were a blow to the hopes of human rights groups lobbying on the health workers ' behalf , which had predicted authorities would ease their stance after releasing some defendants on bail . 
 The defendants were scheduled to be retried by civilian courts after widespread international criticism . The prosecutor 's office stated that the defendants ' confessions , which had allegedly been given under torture , would not be used as evidence . 
 On 10 March 2012 , Bahrain 's Information Affairs Authority announced that the criminal charges against fifteen of the twenty would be dropped , and referred to a review board . Their decision was reversed without explanation the following week . The trials were postponed to 14 June . 
 On 14 June the court acquitted nine medics and downgraded sentences against nine others . Ali Al @-@ Ekri was sentenced to five years imprisonment , another doctor to three years and seven were given from one month to one year . Two other doctors did not appeal their sentences of 15 years ' imprisonment , instead fleeing the country . On 1 October , the Court of Cassation , the country 's highest court , closed the first case involving twenty medics by upholding jail sentences on the remaining nine . Although the verdict is final , activist Mohamed al @-@ Maskati said that they could still be pardoned by the king . 
 = = = <unk> trials = = = 
 Of the 28 health workers charged with misdemeanors , 23 were convicted and five acquitted on 21 November 2012 . Those convicted were sentenced to either serve three months in prison or pay 200 dinars ( US $ 530 ) . On 28 March 2013 , 21 of the 23 convictions were overturned by an appeals court . The remaining two health workers had chosen not to appeal their sentences . 
 = = Torture of health workers = = 
 Many of the detained health workers stated that they were ill @-@ treated or tortured while in custody , leading Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International to call for independent investigations . Authorities reportedly forced detainees to stand for long periods , beat them with boards and rubber hoses , and deprived them of sleep in an effort to force confessions . In one case , a prisoner alleged that he had been forced to sign papers while blindfolded . Dr. Fatima Haji alleged that she was blindfolded and beaten in an effort to make her confess to faking the injuries to protesters during her Al Jazeera interview ; she later identified her interrogator as a distant relative of the king . Ibrahim al @-@ <unk> , head of the Bahrain Nurse 's Society , alleged that he was deliberately kicked and kneed by guards in his back at a spot where he had told them he had a prolapsed disc ; he was then denied medical care until he happened to meet a police officer to whom he had once taught first aid . 
 In an investigation by Human Rights Watch , Dr. Rula al @-@ Saffar stated that she had been given electric shocks in the hands and face , and threatened with rape . Al @-@ Ekri described being " constantly beaten by cables , hoses , and fists " , as well as being forced to stand for a full day . Dr. Ghassan <unk> stated that he remained handcuffed and blindfolded for 21 days , and " was beaten every hour " . Dr. <unk> <unk> alleged that he was beaten in front of his children at his home at the time of his arrest , and eventually signed a false confession while in custody after authorities threatened to harm his family . Dr. Nader <unk> , a pediatrician , stated that he was forced to stand for seven days while being beaten by a female officer , and that other officers had tried to force a bottle into his anus . 
 The BICI verified that " many detainees were subjected to torture and other forms of physical and psychological abuse " . The report stated that medics were among the tortured . 
 = = Reactions = = 
 = = = Domestic = = = 
 Many Sunnis supporting the government of Bahrain stood against the doctors , accusing them of " deliberately worsening patient injuries for cameras " as well as " causing the deaths of protesters in order to discredit security personnel " . The BICI report said that some of the Shia health workers refused to treat Sunni patients and instead used their positions to support activists by promoting their causes . 
 = = = International = = = 
 The trials drew sustained international attention , with governments , medical professional organizations , and human rights organizations issuing statements on behalf of the health workers . 
 = = = = Governments = = = = 
 The U.S. State Department stated that it was " deeply disturbed " by the sentences and urged the Bahraini government " to abide by its commitment to transparent judicial proceedings , including a fair trial , access to attorneys , and verdicts based on credible evidence " . Following the conviction of nine medics on the retrials , the department said it was " deeply disappointed " that not all medics were acquitted and that " convictions appear to be based , at least in part , on the defendants ' criticisms of government actions and policies " . United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki @-@ moon also expressed concern at the legality of the military trials , calling on the Bahraini government " to ensure the application of due process and respect for international human rights norms " . A spokesman for the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights noted the office 's " severe concerns " over " serious due process irregularities " in the trials . 
 = = = = Health worker organizations = = = = 
 In a letter published in The Guardian , the British Medical Association expressed its " deep concern " over the twenty felony convictions , stating that " all the independent evidence points to a politically motivated trial which has demonstrated a disregard for proper judicial process and fundamental principles of medical neutrality . " The Australian Medical Association condemned the prosecutions , describing the defendants as " simply doing their jobs in places of conflict " . Doctors Without Borders criticized doctors at Salmaniya Hospital for joining the protests , but described the military response as " exponentially more damaging " to medical neutrality . In May 2011 , the group issued a statement on behalf of the health workers , urging that " doctors and nurses must be allowed to provide healthcare in line with medical ethics , without the fear of reprisal . " The World Health Organization expressed similar concerns , stating that " health @-@ care workers must be able to carry out their duty to treat injured people , regardless of their political affiliation , and even in times of conflict . " 
 The International Council of Nurses and World Medical Association issued a joint statement objecting to the closed military trial and stated its belief that " Doctors and nurses have an ethical duty to care for patients irrespective of their race , colour , creed and political affiliation . No health professional should be put on trial for looking after injured and dying people . " The U.K.-based Royal College of Nursing wrote to the Bahraini government on the health workers ' behalf , as well as sending them a direct video message of support in which General Secretary Peter Carter said , " All you were doing was your job . You were trying to care for people . " Despite “ past and ongoing ” human rights violations by the regime , the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland programme in Bahrain has been accredited by the Irish Medical Council , led by CEO Dr Caroline Spillane . 
 = = = = Human rights organizations = = = = 
 International human rights groups said the accusations against doctors were " reprisals for treating injured protesters " . Amnesty International described the charges as " ludicrous " and a " travesty of justice " . The organization called for a letter @-@ writing campaign on behalf of the convicted health workers , stating its belief " that the charges were politically motivated , that the proceedings did not meet international fair trial standards and that [ the health workers ] may be prisoners of conscience " . Following the conviction of nine medics in the retrials , Amnesty said it was a " dark day for justice " and named them prisoners of conscience . 
 Freedom House called the trials part of " a pattern of repression that belies any promises of reform and honest political discourse by the government or the ruling family " . Front Line Defenders also described the arrests as part of a " widespread pattern of repression " . Human Rights Watch protested the alleged torture of the medics , condemned what it called the " fundamental unfairness " of the trials , and urged the appeals court to overturn the " flawed convictions " . The Gulf Centre for Human Rights called on Bahrain 's king to " intervene personally and immediately " to have the charges against the health workers dropped . The U.S.-based Physicians for Human Rights also called for the health workers ' immediate release . 
 = U Smile = 
 " U Smile " is a song performed by Canadian recording artist Justin Bieber . It was written by Jerry Duplessis , Arden Altino , and Dan August Rigo , and produced by Duplessis and Altino . According to Bieber , the song is dedicated to his special fans . The song was released as the second digital @-@ only single from the latter half of Bieber 's debut album on March 16 , 2010 . It was released to mainstream radio in Canada on August 9 , 2010 , followed by a mainstream and rhythmic release on August 24 , 2010 , in the United States as the album 's third single there . 
 The song , a piano and instrument driven blue @-@ eyed soul ballad , garnered acclaim from critics as a standout track from the album . The song charted at seventeen and twenty @-@ seven respectively in the United States and Canada , and later charted in the United Kingdom . Bieber performed the song as an intro to " Baby " on the ninth season of American Idol and on Saturday Night Live . 
 = = Background = = 
 In an interview with MTV News , Bieber said , " ' U Smile ' is one of the best songs I have ever recorded , " he wrote , " It really is a throwback to the great records I listened to growing up . ... I wrote it for all my fans who got me here . " Bieber explained on his Twitter that his fans " took him from a small town in Canada " to the " amazing opportunity " he is living now , and feels " grateful for everything " and " blessed " for the support . Bieber confirmed he co @-@ wrote the track with August Rigo . He also told his fans to enjoy it as they are the ones who give him his strength in this . 
 In August 2010 , Nick Pittsinger , a Florida @-@ based sound artist , slowed down Bieber 's song 800 % to produce a 35 minute long track . It was compared to ambient music , including the works of Sigur Rós . The track became an internet meme in mid to late 2010 . 
 = = Composition and critical reception = = 
 " U Smile " is a blue @-@ eyed soul ballad , driven by piano and other instruments . Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly said the song is " the best by far " of My World 2 @.@ 0 , calling it " a shimmery slice of Hall & Oates @-@ style blue @-@ eyed soul " . The song has a " bluesy " feel , and makes use of metaphors such as " You are my ends and my means / With you there ’ s no in between . " The song composed in the key E ♭ Mixolydian and it set in time signature of compound time with twelve eighth note in a bar , with the tempo of 75 beats per minute . Bieber 's vocal range span two music from the lowest note A ♭ 3 and the highest note E ♭ 5 . It follows the chord progression E ♭ -D ♭ -A ♭ . 
 Bill Lamb of About.com noted the song as a track on My World 2 @.@ 0 and said it " lets Justin Bieber sway and croon . It is guaranteed to generate warm and fuzzy emotions in millions of young fans " and that it " should not disappoint adults either " . Monica Herrera of Billboard commended the song and said that it " should appeal to some older listeners . " For Billboard ' s cover story on Bieber , Herrera said , " Bieber croons , his voice straining as much from puberty as emotion . It 's the closest he 's come to fulfilling Braun 's wish , by sounding like a certain young Motown star . " This is as unconditional as it 'll ever get / You ain 't seen nothing yet " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Originally released as a digital @-@ only single , the song debuted at number twenty @-@ seven on the Billboard Hot 100 , selling 83 @,@ 000 downloads in its first week . It also debuted on the Canadian Hot 100 at seventeen . " U Smile " was the highest debut on the week on both charts . The song initially stayed on both charts for a weeks ' length . Following an official release to mainstream and rhythmic radio , the song re @-@ entered the US Hot 100 at ninety @-@ five on the week ending October 2 , 2010 . Due to digital sales , the song also reached ninety @-@ eight in the United Kingdom . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background and reception = = = 
 On September 30 , 2010 , the music video for " U Smile " premiered online , it was directed by Colin Tilley , with a cameo appearance by Sandra Bullock . Bieber had stated that the video for " U Smile " was about " letting fans experience the ultimate fantasy for any hard @-@ core <unk> : being Justin 's girlfriend " , further explaining in a tweet , " I took the opportunity 2 make a video 4 the fans , about a fan , and how we could fall IN LOVE . " Mawuse Ziegbe from MTV met the video with a positive review . Ziegbe felt that the video suggested " a more mature Bieber , who appears to relish the quiet moments with his gal pal away from the nonstop fan hysteria . " Ziegbe also felt that the video " displayed [ Bieber 's ] skills as an instrumentalist , as he belts out the lyrics from behind a grand piano throughout much of the vid . " 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 Starting out in a black and white frame ( and later incorporating scenes of color ) , a group of girls are seen standing outside on the street while Bieber is seen exiting a building while trying to walk away without getting noticed . This however , is unsuccessful as the girls run up to Bieber ; he then takes pictures and signs autographs with the girls . While this is happening Bieber takes an interest with one particular girl asking her to meet him later on , to which she agrees . As the song starts playing Bieber is seen sitting in an empty auditorium playing the piano and singing . When Bieber 's date shows up they sneak into an empty theater where they are seen ; holding hands , <unk> around on the theater 's seats , and sliding down banisters . At the ending of the video they are seen engaging in a playful back @-@ alley water fight and eventually collapse into each other 's arms while Bieber is playing the piano back inside the theater . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Bieber performed the song along with " Baby " on the eighteenth episode of season thirty five of Saturday Night Live . He also performed the song in American Idol along with " Baby " on May 19 , <unk> was also released as a single video of the live performance , along with " Baby " . Bieber performed the song at the 2010 Teen Choice Awards on August 9 , 2010 . The performance was pre @-@ recorded because Bieber could not attend the event . The performance was filmed in Los Angeles on his My World Tour . 
 = = Slowed Version = = 
 In August 2010 , music producer Nick Pittsinger used the sound processing software <unk> to create an 800 % slower version of the album track , lasting around 35 minutes , which he made available via SoundCloud . The modified track resembled a minimalist , ambient composition . By September 2 it had been discussed in multiple news articles , linked to from Bieber 's website , and downloaded more than one million times . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Songwriting - Jerry Duplessis , Arden Altino , Dan August Rigo 
 Production - Jerry Duplessis , Arden Altino 
 Vocal recording - Andy Grassi , Serge Tsai , Dave <unk> , Warren Babson , assisted by William <unk> 
 Vocal production and recording - Kuk Harrell , assisted by Travis Harrington 
 Piano and keyboards - Arden Altino , additional by Paul J. Falcone 
 Guitar - Bruno Beatz , Ben <unk> 
 Harmonica - Frédéric <unk> 
 Mixing - Glen Marchese 
 Engineering - Pat Thrall 
 Source 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Vengeance : Night of Champions = 
 Vengeance : Night of Champions was the seventh annual professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view event produced by World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) within its Vengeance / Night of Champions chronology . It featured talent from the Raw , SmackDown , and ECW brands . The event was sponsored by RAW Attitude Energy Drink and took place on June 24 , 2007 , at the Toyota Center in Houston , Texas . Every match on the card was contested for a championship ; two were won and seven were retained . This event was notable for being on the weekend of the Chris Benoit double @-@ murder and suicide case . Benoit , who was originally booked to face CM Punk for the vacant ECW World Championship , legitimately no @-@ showed . 
 The main event featured the Raw brand . It saw John Cena defend the WWE Championship against Mick Foley , Bobby Lashley , Randy Orton , and King Booker . Cena won the match and retained the WWE Championship after pinning Foley following an FU . The featured match from the SmackDown brand was a " Last Chance match " for the World Heavyweight Championship between Edge and Batista , which Edge won by countout . The primary match from the ECW brand was CM Punk versus Johnny Nitro for the vacant ECW World Championship , which Nitro won by pinfall after performing a corkscrew neckbreaker from the middle rope . The event was supposed to use the Vengeance name but on the June 11th edition of Raw , it was announced that the event would now change its name to Vengeance : Night of Champions where every active WWE titles will be defended . 
 = = Background = = 
 The main feud on the Raw brand heading into the event was between John Cena , Bobby Lashley , King Booker , Mick Foley , and Randy Orton over the WWE Championship . The feud began when Lashley was drafted to the Raw brand and stripped of the ECW World Championship . After being stripped of the title , Lashley began to pursue the WWE Championship . On the June 18 episode of Raw , Foley , Orton , Booker , and Lashley all cut promos on why they deserve to be the number @-@ one contender to the WWE Championship . Cena also cut a promo on who he believed deserved to be the number one contender to the championship . Following this , Interim General Manager Jonathan Coachman announced that all five men would compete for the title in a match billed as the " WWE Championship Challenge " at Vengeance . 
 The main feud heading into Vengeance on the SmackDown brand was between Edge and Batista over the World Heavyweight Championship . Their match stemmed from their Steel cage match at One Night Stand , the pay @-@ per @-@ view three weeks before Vengeance , where Edge won by escaping the cage . On the June 8 episode of SmackDown , WWE Chairman Vince McMahon announced that Edge would be defending the World Heavyweight Championship against Batista in a " Last Chance " match at Vengeance . On the June 22 episode of SmackDown ! , Batista and Ric Flair defeated Edge and Montel Vontavious Porter ( MVP ) . Midway through the match , Flair and MVP brawled outside the ring , leaving Edge on his own against Batista . Batista gained the pinfall after executing a Batista Bomb on Edge . 
 The feud between The Hardys ( Matt and Jeff ) and Lance Cade and Trevor Murdoch began at Backlash . At the event , The Hardys defeated Cade and Murdoch to retain the World Tag Team Championship . At the following event , Judgment Day , Matt and Jeff defeated Cade and Murdoch once again to retain the title . 
 = = Event = = 
 = = = Preliminary matches = = = 
 Before the event aired live on pay @-@ per @-@ view , Super Crazy defeated Carlito in a dark match . 
 The event began with a video package of the event and its theme , " Night of Champions , " followed by opening pyrotechnics . The first match was between Lance Cade and Trevor Murdoch and The Hardys ( Matt and Jeff ) for the World Tag Team Championship . Cade and Matt started the match , with Matt in control . The two teams tagged in and out until Cade and Murdoch attempted to walk out of the match , but the Hardys went after them , and brought them back into the ring . Jeff attempted a Swanton Bomb onto Cade , but Murdoch interfered on Cade 's behalf . Matt tried to interfere on Jeff 's behalf , but was stopped by the referee . Murdoch used this as an advantage , and pushed Jeff off the turnbuckle , leading to Cade performing a powerbomb . Cade gained the pinfall on Jeff to win the match and retain the titles . 
 The second match was between Chavo Guerrero and Jimmy Wang Yang for the WWE Cruiserweight Championship . The match began with Yang and Guerrero locking up , followed by Yang in control through most of the match . After Yang missed a moonsault , Guerrero executed a Gory Bomb . Shortly after , Guerrero performed a Frog Splash on Yang . Afterwards , Guerrero pinned Yang to win the match and retain the Cruiserweight Championship . 
 The third match was between CM Punk and Johnny Nitro , who subbed in for the absent Chris Benoit ( unknown of killing his family at the time ) , for the ECW World Championship . The match started off with Punk attempting a crossbody on Nitro . Nitro countered , however , and executed an enzuigiri . Nitro delivered a corkscrew neckbreaker and pinned Punk to win the match to become the new ECW World Champion . 
 The fourth match was between Santino Marella and Umaga for the WWE Intercontinental Championship . The match began with Umaga in control , squashing Marella . Two minutes into the match , Umaga was punching Marella uncontrollably . The referee disqualified Umaga when he refused to stop after giving a five count , and Marella retained the title . Umaga , following the disqualification , delivered a splash and a Samoan Spike to <unk> . 
 The fifth match was between Montel Vontavious Porter ( MVP ) and Ric Flair for the WWE United States Championship . The match started with Flair executing a series of backhand chops to MVP . Flair kept the advantage and applied the figure four leglock . MVP countered , by executing a low blow . MVP then performed the Playmaker and pinned Flair to retain the United States Championship . 
 The sixth match was an open challenge by Deuce ' n Domino to any tag team for the WWE Tag Team Championship , which was accepted by Jimmy Snuka and Sgt. Slaughter . Snuka and Slaughter controlled most of the match ; however , Deuce ' n Domino got the win after Deuce pinned Snuka . After the match , Deuce ' n Domino attacked Snuka and Slaughter until Tony Garea and Rick Martel came into the ring to assist Snuka and Slaughter . 
 = = = Main event matches = = = 
 The seventh match was between Edge and Batista for the World Heavyweight Championship . This was a " Last Chance match " , meaning if Batista lost , he could not get another shot at the World Heavyweight Championship as long as Edge was champion . Batista originally won the match by disqualification after Edge executed a low blow ; however , SmackDown General Manager Theodore Long restarted the match with the stipulation that Edge could lose the title by countout or disqualification . Edge won the match after Batista was counted out , thus retaining the title , and with the match stipulation , Batista would be unable to challenge for the World Heavyweight Championship so as long as Edge was the champion . After the match , in complete frustration , Batista attacked Edge and performed a Batista Bomb on him outside of the ring onto the ground before leaving him with the title . 
 The eighth match was between Melina and Candice Michelle for the WWE Women 's Championship . After a back and forth match , Michelle executed a spinning heel kick on Melina to gain the victory and win the Women 's Championship . 
 The main event , billed as the " WWE Championship Challenge , " saw John Cena defending the WWE Championship against King Booker , Bobby Lashley , Mick Foley and Randy Orton . Throughout the match , all five men gained an advantage over one @-@ another at one or more spots . One spot in the match saw Lashley dive over the top rope onto the other four competitors . Towards the end of the match , Cena executed an FU on Lashley through an announce table . Cena won the match and retained the title after pinning Foley following an FU . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Chavo Guerrero went on to defend the WWE Cruiserweight Championship in a Cruiserweight Open at The Great American Bash against Jimmy Wang Yang , Jamie Noble , Funaki , and Shannon Moore . Hornswoggle also entered the match at the bell , but immediately escaped the ring and hid under it . With all of the cruiserweights down , with the exception of Noble , Hornswoggle came out from under the ring and delivered a Tadpole Splash to Noble . He pinned him afterwards to win the match and the Cruiserweight Championship . Candice Michelle and Melina continued to feud over the WWE Women 's Championship . The two had a rematch at The Great American Bash for the title . Michelle pinned Melina after delivering a Candy Wrapper to retain the title . 
 On the July 2 episode of Raw , Umaga defeated Santino Marella in a rematch to capture the WWE Intercontinental Championship . Two weeks later , Jeff Hardy defeated William Regal , Shelton Benjamin , and Santino Marella in a Fatal Four @-@ Way Elimination match to become the number one contender to the Intercontinental Championship . At The Great American Bash , Umaga defeated Hardy to retain the title after the Samoan Spike . That same night , Bobby Lashley won a " Beat the Clock " tournament to become the number @-@ one contender to the WWE Championship . At The Great American Bash , Lashley faced John Cena for the WWE Championship in the main event . Cena retained the title after an FU from the top rope . 
 On the June 26 episode of ECW on Sci Fi , CM Punk defeated Elijah Burke in a two out of three falls match to become the number one contender to the ECW Championship . At The Great American Bash , Punk faced John Morrison ( formerly known as Johnny Nitro ) for the ECW Championship . Morrison retained the title after hitting Punk with both of his knees . 
 On the July 6 episode of SmackDown , Kane was named the number one contender to the World Heavyweight Championship after he appeared as the special guest on Edge 's Cutting Edge segment . Edge held a celebration for himself on the July 13 episode of SmackDown , and was attacked by Kane , who in the process legitimately injured Edge . On the July 20 episode of SmackDown , Edge was forced to vacate the World Heavyweight Championship as a result of his injury . The Great Khali went on to win a 20 @-@ man battle royal to become the new World Heavyweight Champion . At The Great American Bash , Khali defended the title successfully against Kane and Batista in a Triple Threat match . 
 = = Results = = 
 = Lola Versus Powerman and the Moneygoround , Part One = 
 Lola Versus Powerman and the Moneygoround , Part One , commonly abbreviated to Lola Versus Powerman , or just Lola , is the eighth studio album by British rock band the Kinks , recorded and released in 1970 . A concept album , it is a satirical appraisal of the music industry , including song publishers , unions , the press , accountants , business managers , and life on the road . Musically Lola Versus Powerman is varied , described by Stephen Thomas Erlewine as " a wildly unfocused but nonetheless dazzling tour de force " , containing some of Ray Davies ' strongest songs . 
 Although it appeared during a transitional period for the Kinks , Lola Versus Powerman was a success both critically and commercially for the group , charting in the Top 40 in America and helping restore them in the public eye , making it a " comeback " album . It contained two hit singles : " Lola " , which reached the top 10 in the US and UK , and " Apeman " , which peaked at number five in the UK . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 The Kinks ban by the American Federation of Musicians on performing in America , which had been in force since 1965 , was lifted in 1969 , so the group 's management arranged a North American tour . However , members of the band fell ill , and the tour was shuffled , resulting in the band playing only a few dates in America and Canada . A follow @-@ up tour in 1970 met with similar results , with the group performing at only a select number of venues , with many dates cancelled . The down time between the tours allowed Ray Davies , lead singer and songwriter of the group , to develop the band 's next single , " Lola " . 
 The Kinks returned to England to start work on their new LP in spring 1970 . The group used Morgan Studios , an independent studio in Willesden , London , which was a change for them . They would continue recording their albums there until Preservation , when they switched to their newly purchased studio , Konk . Recording began in late April / early May . Some of the first songs recorded were " Lola " , the outtake " The Good Life " , " Powerman " and " Got to Be Free " . The sessions for " Lola " were especially long , and the recording continued into late May . Davies would recall later how he achieved the signature <unk> sound at the beginning of the track : 
 The National Steel would play an integral part in many Kinks projects after that . In the 1972 song " Supersonic Rocket Ship " , Ray Davies would use the guitar to create a Caribbean feel for the record . Davies would play it on numerous Top of The Pops appearances , and it would be featured in several music videos the Kinks made in the future , including " Scattered " in 1992 . 
 Keyboardist John Gosling was added to the Kinks ' lineup in May . He auditioned on the final backing master track for " Lola " , and was hired soon after . He was initially taken on solely for their upcoming US tour , but his post evolved into a more permanent position soon after . Gosling would remain with the band until 1977 , departing after the release of Sleepwalker . Dubbing for " Lola " was finished in June . Recording for the LP was completed by October , and it was mixed throughout the remainder of the month . Lola Versus Powerman and the Moneygoround , Part One was released on 27 November 1970 . 
 For " Lola " , Ray Davies <unk> the trademarked word " Coca @-@ Cola " with the generic " cherry @-@ cola " for the mono single release , as product placement rules meant the BBC ( being a public service broadcaster ) would not have played it . The lyrics in the gatefold sleeve of the original LP use the " cherry @-@ cola " line , though the album track contains the original stereo " Coca @-@ Cola " version . A similar situation was encountered with the song " Apeman " , concerning the line " the air pollution is a @-@ <unk> ' up my eyes " . " <unk> " was mistaken for " fucking " , and consequently Ray Davies had to re @-@ record this line prior to its single release . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Lola Versus Powerman was well @-@ received throughout the British music press . A review in New Musical Express called " [ Ray ] Davies ... one of the finest writers in contemporary rock , " and praised the record 's British styles and originality . Melody Maker 's interpretation of Lola Versus Powerman was Davies " taking a cheeky nibble " at the pop music business ; they continued that " The music 's pure Kinks simplicity — but it works . " 
 The album received generally positive reviews in the US . Rolling Stone magazine commented that it was " the best Kinks album yet " . Writing in his " Consumer Guide " column of The Village Voice , Robert Christgau commented that " Lola " had been an " astounding single , " but gave Lola Versus Powerman a mixed review , saying that " the melodies are still there , but in this context they sound corny rather than plaintive . " The single " Lola " received positive reviews , and , due to its success , an interview with Ray Davies by Jonathan Cott was featured as a cover story for Rolling Stone in November 1970 . 
 = = = = Current opinion = = = = 
 Modern critical opinion towards Lola Versus Powerman is generally positive but often mixed . Initially given a positive review by the magazine in 1971 , Rolling Stone rated it 31 / 2 out of 5 stars in its 1992 printing — however , the fourth edition ( published in 2004 ) ranked it at only 2 stars . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic gave the album a positive review , writing that " Davies never really delivers a cohesive story , but the record holds together because it 's one of his strongest sets of songs . " 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 Lola Versus Powerman and the Moneygoround , Part One went virtually unnoticed by the record @-@ buying public in the UK and failed to chart , despite the success of its lead single , " Lola " , which topped the New Musical Express charts in the UK , and reached # 2 on Melody Maker . " Lola " became the Kinks ' biggest success since " Sunny Afternoon " in 1966 ; the group would never again have another single reach this position in the UK . " Lola " was also successful in the US market , charting at # 9 on the Billboard Hot 100 singles chart , staying on the charts for 14 weeks . It also peaked at # 7 on the Record World charts . Lola Versus Powerman and the Moneygoround , Part One reached # 35 on Billboard , and on the Record World charts it peaked at # 22 , making it their most successful album since the mid @-@ 60s . 
 = = Aftermath and legacy = = 
 The success of the singles and album allowed the Kinks to negotiate a new contract with RCA Records , construct their own London Studio , which they named Konk , and assume more creative and managerial control . The record also proved influential : Tom Petty told Rolling Stone that he " especially liked " it , and cited the album as an influence on The Last DJ , another album critical of the music industry . 
 Tracks from Lola Versus Powerman have been featured in multiple films across several languages . One of the most notable uses of songs from the album was when " This Time Tomorrow " , " Strangers " , and " Powerman " were featured in the 2007 Wes Anderson film The Darjeeling Limited ; these tracks were later included on the accompanying soundtrack album . In France , " This Time Tomorrow " appeared in the 2005 Philippe <unk> film Les <unk> <unk> . " Apeman " has been featured in multiple films , including <unk> ( 2004 ) and Harold Ramis ' Club Paradise ( 1986 ) . 
 = = Themes = = 
 The album is a satirical look at the various facets of the music industry , including song publishers ( " Denmark Street " ) , unions ( " Get Back in Line " ) , the press and the hit @-@ making machine ( " Top of the Pops " ) , accountants and business managers ( " The Moneygoround " ) and the road ( " This Time Tomorrow " ) . Musically , Lola Versus Powerman is varied , contrasting gentle ballads like " Get Back in Line " and " A Long Way From Home " against hard rock songs like " Rats " and " Powerman " , with " Denmark Street " and " The Moneygoround " paying homage to the English music hall tradition . 
 = = Part Two = = 
 Before the release of Lola Versus Powerman and the Moneygoround , Part One the band discussed the possibility of it being released as a double album . According to Doug Hinman 's book , The Kinks : All Day and All of the Night , a sequel album was planned for release sometime in 1971 , but was ultimately scrapped and the band opted to record Muswell Hillbillies instead . Due to the fact that an official title to the follow @-@ up album was never revealed , Hinman refers to the album as " Lola Versus Powerman and the Moneygoround , Part Two " and suggests that preliminary sessions may have occurred in late 1970 / early 1971 . It is unclear what songs would have appeared on this album , and it is unknown if any songs were even recorded , with the possible exception of some unreleased backing tracks . Almost certainly no songs were completed or mastered . 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = = = Album = = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 All positions sourced to except where noted . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All tracks written by Ray Davies except where noted . 
 The 2014 Deluxe edition included the Kinks ' following album Percy as a second disc , also with bonus tracks . The 2 @-@ disc set is titled Lola versus Powerman and The Moneygoround and Percy . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Ray Davies – lead vocals , guitar , harmonica , keyboards , resonator guitar 
 Dave Davies – lead guitar , banjo , backing vocals , lead vocals on " Strangers " and " Rats " , co @-@ lead vocal on " Powerman " 
 Mick Avory – drums , percussion 
 John Dalton – bass guitar , backing vocals 
 John Gosling – keyboards , piano , organ 
 = Georgia Institute of Technology = 
 The Georgia Institute of Technology ( commonly referred to as Georgia Tech , Tech , or GT ) is a public research university in Atlanta , Georgia , in the United States . It is a part of the University System of Georgia and has satellite campuses in Savannah , Georgia ; Metz , France ; Athlone , Ireland ; Shanghai , China ; and Singapore . 
 The educational institution was founded in 1885 as the Georgia School of Technology as part of Reconstruction plans to build an industrial economy in the post @-@ Civil War Southern United States . Initially , it offered only a degree in mechanical engineering . By 1901 , its curriculum had expanded to include electrical , civil , and chemical engineering . In 1948 , the school changed its name to reflect its evolution from a trade school to a larger and more capable technical institute and research university . 
 Today , Georgia Tech is organized into six colleges and contains about 31 departments / units , with emphasis on science and technology . It is well recognized for its degree programs in engineering , computing , business administration , the sciences , design , and liberal arts . Georgia Tech is ranked 7th among all public national universities in the United States and 36th among all colleges and universities U.S. News & World Report rankings , and Georgia Tech is also highly regarded internationally for its engineering and business programs . 
 Georgia Tech 's main campus occupies part of Midtown Atlanta , bordered by 10th Street to the north and by North Avenue to the south , placing it well in sight of the Atlanta skyline . The campus was the site of the athletes ' village and a venue for a number of athletic events for the 1996 Summer Olympics . The construction of the Olympic village , along with subsequent gentrification of the surrounding areas , enhanced the campus . 
 Student athletics , both organized and intramural , are a part of student and alumni life . The school 's intercollegiate competitive sports teams , the four @-@ time football national champion Yellow Jackets , and the nationally recognized fight song " Ramblin ' Wreck from Georgia Tech " , have helped keep Georgia Tech in the national spotlight . Georgia Tech fields eight men 's and seven women 's teams that compete in the NCAA Division I athletics and the Football Bowl Subdivision . Georgia Tech is a member of the Coastal Division in the Atlantic Coast Conference . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Establishment = = = 
 The idea of a technology school in Georgia was introduced in 1865 during the Reconstruction period . Two former Confederate officers , Major John Fletcher Hanson ( an industrialist ) and Nathaniel Edwin Harris ( a politician and eventually Governor of Georgia ) , who had become prominent citizens in the town of Macon , Georgia after the Civil War , strongly believed that the South needed to improve its technology to compete with the industrial revolution that was occurring throughout the North . However , because the American South of that era was mainly populated by agricultural workers and few technical developments were occurring , a technology school was needed . 
 In 1882 , the Georgia State Legislature authorized a committee , led by Harris , to visit the Northeast to see firsthand how technology schools worked . They were impressed by the polytechnic educational models developed at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the Worcester County Free Institute of Industrial Science ( now Worcester Polytechnic Institute ) . The committee recommended adapting the Worcester model , which stressed a combination of " theory and practice " , the " practice " component including student employment and production of consumer items to generate revenue for the school . 
 On October 13 , 1885 , Georgia Governor Henry D. McDaniel signed the bill to create and fund the new school . In 1887 , Atlanta pioneer Richard Peters donated to the state 4 acres ( 1 @.@ 6 ha ) of the site of a failed garden suburb called Peters Park . The site was bounded on the south by North Avenue , and on the west by Cherry Street . He then sold five adjoining acres of land to the state for US $ 10 @,@ 000 , ( equivalent to $ 260 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) . This land was located near the northern city limits of Atlanta at the time of its founding , although the city has now expanded several miles beyond it . A historical marker on the large hill in Central Campus notes that the site occupied by the school 's first buildings once held fortifications built to protect Atlanta during the Atlanta Campaign of the American Civil War . The surrender of the city took place on the southwestern boundary of the modern Georgia Tech campus in 1864 . 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 The Georgia School of Technology opened its doors in the fall of 1888 with two buildings . One building ( now Tech Tower , an administrative headquarters ) had classrooms to teach students ; The second building featured a shop and had a foundry , forge , boiler room , and engine room . It was designed specifically for students to work and produce goods to sell and fund the school . The two buildings were equal in size to show the importance of teaching both the mind and the hands , though , at the time , there was some disagreement to whether the machine shop should have been used to turn a profit . 
 On October 20 , 1905 , U.S. President Theodore Roosevelt visited the Georgia Tech campus . On the steps of Tech Tower , Roosevelt delivered a speech about the importance of technological education . He then shook hands with every student . 
 Georgia Tech 's Evening School of Commerce began holding classes in 1912 . The evening school admitted its first female student in 1917 , although the state legislature did not officially authorize attendance by women until 1920 . Annie T. Wise became the first female graduate in 1919 and went on to become Georgia Tech 's first female faculty member the following year . Rena Faye Smith , appointed as a research assistant in the School of Physics in 1969 by Dr. Ray Young , in X @-@ Ray Diffraction , became the first female faculty member ( research ) in the School of Physics . She went on to earn a Ph.D. at Georgia State University and taught physics and instructional technology at Black Hills State University - 1997 @-@ 2005 as Rena Faye Norby . She served as a Fulbright Scholar in Russia 2004 @-@ 2005 . In 1931 , the Board of Regents transferred control of the Evening School of Commerce to the University of Georgia ( UGA ) and moved the civil and electrical engineering courses at UGA to Tech . Tech replaced the commerce school with what later became the College of Business . The commerce school would later split from UGA and eventually become Georgia State University . In 1934 , the Engineering Experiment Station ( later known as the Georgia Tech Research Institute ) was founded by W. Harry Vaughan with an initial budget of $ 5 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to $ 88 @,@ 445 in 2015 ) and 13 part @-@ time faculty . 
 = = = Modern history = = = 
 Founded as the Georgia School of Technology , Georgia Tech assumed its present name in 1948 to reflect a growing focus on advanced technological and scientific research . Unlike most similarly named universities ( such as the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the California Institute of Technology ) , the Georgia Institute of Technology is a public institution . 
 Tech first admitted female students to regular classes in 1952 , although women could not enroll in all programs at Tech until 1968 . Industrial Management was the last program to open to women . The first women 's dorm , Fulmer Hall , opened in 1969 . Women constituted 30 @.@ 3 % of the undergraduates and 25 @.@ 3 % of the graduate students enrolled in Spring 2009 . 
 In 1959 , a meeting of 2 @,@ 741 students voted by an overwhelming majority to endorse integration of qualified applicants , regardless of race . Three years after the meeting , and one year after the University of Georgia 's violent integration , Georgia Tech became the first university in the Deep South to desegregate without a court order . There was little reaction to this by Tech students ; like the city of Atlanta described by former Mayor William Hartsfield , they seemed " too busy to hate " . 
 In 1965 the university bought the former <unk> Restaurant , a site of confrontation in the Civil Rights movement , which it first used as a placement center . Later , it was known as the Ajax Building . The building was razed in 2009 . 
 Similarly , there was little student reaction at Georgia Tech to the Vietnam War and United States involvement in the Cambodian Civil War . The student council defeated a resolution supporting the Vietnam Moratorium , and the extent of the Tech community 's response to the Kent State shooting was limited to a student @-@ organized memorial service , though the Institute was ordered closed for two days , along with all other University System of Georgia schools . 
 In 1988 , President John Patrick Crecine pushed through a restructuring of the university . The Institute at that point had three colleges : the College of Engineering , the College of Management , and the catch @-@ all <unk> , the College of Sciences and Liberal Arts . Crecine reorganized the latter two into the College of Computing , the College of Sciences , and the Ivan Allen College of Management , Policy , and International Affairs . Crecine never asked for input regarding the changes and , consequently , many faculty members disliked his top @-@ down management style ; despite this , the changes passed by a slim margin . Crecine was also instrumental in securing the 1996 Summer Olympics for Atlanta . A large amount of construction occurred , creating most of what is now considered " West Campus " for Tech to serve as the Olympic Village , and significantly gentrifying Midtown Atlanta . The Undergraduate Living Center , Fourth Street Apartments , Sixth Street Apartments , Eighth Street Apartments , Hemphill Apartments , and Center Street Apartments housed athletes and journalists . The Georgia Tech Aquatic Center was built for swimming events , and the Alexander Memorial Coliseum was renovated . The Institute also erected the Kessler Campanile and fountain to serve as a landmark and symbol of the Institute on television broadcasts . 
 In 1994 , G. Wayne Clough became the first Tech alumnus to serve as the president of the Institute ; he was in office during the 1996 Summer Olympics . In 1998 , he separated the Ivan Allen College of Management , Policy , and International Affairs into the Ivan Allen College of Liberal Arts and returned the College of Management to " College " status ( Crecine , the previous president , had demoted Management from " College " to " School " status as part of a controversial 1990 reorganization plan ) . His tenure focused on a dramatic expansion of the Institute , a revamped Undergraduate Research Opportunities Program , and the creation of an International Plan . On March 15 , 2008 , he was appointed secretary of the Smithsonian Institution , effective July 1 , 2008 . Dr. Gary Schuster , Tech 's provost and executive vice president for Academic Affairs , was named interim president , effective July 1 , 2008 . 
 On April 1 , 2009 , G. P. " Bud " Peterson , previously the chancellor of the University of Colorado at Boulder , became the 11th president of Georgia Tech . On April 20 , 2010 , Georgia Tech was invited to join the Association of American Universities , the first new member institution in nine years . In 2014 , Georgia Tech launched the first " massive online open degree " in computer science by partnering with <unk> and AT & T ; a complete degree through that program costs students $ 7 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Campuses = = 
 The Georgia Tech campus is located in Midtown , an area north of downtown Atlanta . Although a number of skyscrapers — most visibly the headquarters of AT & T , The Coca @-@ Cola Company , and Bank of America — are visible from all points on campus , the campus itself has few buildings over four stories and has a great deal of greenery . This gives it a distinctly suburban atmosphere quite different from other Atlanta campuses such as that of Georgia State University . 
 The campus is organized into four main parts : West Campus , East Campus , Central Campus , and Technology Square . West Campus and East Campus are both occupied primarily by student living complexes , while Central Campus is reserved primarily for teaching and research buildings . 
 = = = West Campus = = = 
 West Campus is occupied primarily by apartments and coed undergraduate dormitories . Apartments include Crecine , Center Street , 6th Street , <unk> , Undergraduate Living Center ( <unk> ) , and Eighth Street Apartments , while dorms include Freeman , Montag , <unk> , Folk , Caldwell , Armstrong , Hefner , Fulmer , and Woodruff Suites . The Campus Recreation Center ( formerly the Student Athletic Complex ) ; a volleyball court ; a large , low natural green area known as the Burger Bowl ; and a flat artificial green area known as the CRC ( formerly SAC ) Fields are all located on the western side of the campus . 
 West Campus was formerly home to Under the Couch , which relocated to the Student Center in the fall of 2010 . Also within walking distance of West Campus are several late @-@ night eateries and Engineer 's Bookstore , an economical alternative to Georgia Tech 's official bookstore . West campus is home to a convenience store , West Side Market . Due to limited space , all auto travel proceeds via a network of one @-@ way streets which connects West Campus to <unk> Drive , the main road of the campus . Woodruff Dining Hall , or " Woody 's " , is the West Campus Dining Hall . It connects the Woodruff North and Woodruff South undergraduate dorms . 
 = = = East Campus = = = 
 East Campus houses all of the fraternities and sororities as well as most of the undergraduate freshman dormitories . East Campus abuts the Downtown Connector , granting residences quick access to Midtown and its businesses ( for example , The Varsity ) via a number of bridges over the highway . Georgia Tech football 's home , Bobby Dodd Stadium is located on East Campus , as well as Georgia Tech basketball 's home , McCamish Pavilion ( formerly Alexander Memorial Coliseum ) . 
 Brittain Dining Hall is the main dining hall for East Campus . It is modeled after a medieval church , complete with carved columns and stained glass windows showing symbolic figures . The main road leading from East Campus to Central Campus is a steep ascending incline commonly known as " Freshman Hill " ( in reference to the large number of freshman dorms near its foot ) . On March 8 , 2007 , the former Georgia State University Village apartments were transferred to Georgia Tech . Renamed North Avenue Apartments by the institute , they began housing students in the fall semester of 2007 . 
 = = = Central Campus = = = 
 Central Campus is home to the majority of the academic , research , and administrative buildings . The Central Campus includes , among others : the Howey Physics Building ; the Boggs Chemistry Building ; the College of Computing Building ; the Klaus Advanced Computing Building ; the College of Design Building ; the Skiles Classroom Building , which houses the School of Mathematics and the School of Literature , Media and Culture ; the D. M. Smith Building , which houses the School of Public Policy ; and the Ford Environmental Science & Technology Building . In 2005 , the School of Modern Languages returned to the Swann Building , a 100 @-@ year @-@ old former dormitory that now houses some of the most technology @-@ equipped classrooms on campus . <unk> with these are a variety of research facilities , such as the Centennial Research Building , the Microelectronics Research Center , the Neely Nuclear Research Center , the Nanotechnology Research Center , and the Petit Biotechnology Building . 
 Tech 's administrative buildings , such as Tech Tower , and the Bursar 's Office , are also located on the Central Campus , in the recently renovated Georgia Tech Historic District . The campus library , the Fred B. Wenn Student Center , and the Student Services Building ( " Flag Building " ) are also located on Central Campus . The Student Center provides a variety of recreational and social functions for students including : a computer lab , a game room ( " Tech Rec " ) , the Student Post Office , a music venue , a movie theater , the Food Court , plus meeting rooms for various clubs and organizations . Adjacent to the eastern entrance of the Student Center is the Kessler Campanile ( which is referred to by students as " The Shaft " ) . The former Hightower Textile Engineering building was demolished in 2002 to create Yellow Jacket Park . More greenspace now occupies the area around the Kessler Campanile for a more aesthetically pleasing look , in accordance with the official Campus Master Plan . In August 2011 , the G. Wayne Clough Undergraduate Learning Commons opened next to the library and occupies part of the Yellow Jacket Park area . 
 = = = Technology Square = = = 
 Technology Square , also known as " Tech Square " , is located across the Downtown Connector and embedded in the city east of East Campus . Opened in August 2003 at a cost of $ 179 million , the district was built over run @-@ down neighborhoods and has sparked a revitalization of the entire Midtown area . Connected by the recently renovated Fifth Street Bridge , it is a pedestrian @-@ friendly area comprising Georgia Tech facilities and retail locations . One complex contains the College of Business Building , holding classrooms and office space for the Scheller College of Business , as well as the Georgia Tech Hotel and Conference Center and the Georgia Tech Global Learning Center . The Scheller College of Business is also home to three large glass chandeliers made by Dale Chihuly . This is one of the few locations of Chihuly 's works found in the state of Georgia . 
 Another part of Tech Square , the privately owned <unk> One complex , contains the Technology Square Research Building ( <unk> ) , holding faculty and graduate student offices for the College of Computing and the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering , as well as the <unk> Center , a multidisciplinary technology research center . The Advanced Technology Development Center ( <unk> ) is a science and business incubator , run by the Georgia Institute of Technology , and is also headquartered in Technology Square 's <unk> One complex . 
 Other Georgia Tech @-@ affiliated buildings in the area host the Center for Quality Growth and Regional Development , the Georgia Tech Enterprise Innovation Institute , the Advanced Technology Development Center , VentureLab , and the Georgia Electronics Design Center . Technology Square also hosts a variety of restaurants and businesses , including the headquarters of notable consulting companies like Accenture and also including the official Institute bookstore , a Barnes & Noble bookstore , and a Georgia Tech @-@ themed Waffle House . 
 = = = Satellite campuses = = = 
 In 1999 , Georgia Tech began offering local degree programs to engineering students in Southeast Georgia , and in 2003 established a physical campus in Savannah , Georgia . Until 2013 , Georgia Tech Savannah offered undergraduate and graduate programs in engineering in conjunction with Georgia Southern University , South Georgia College , Armstrong Atlantic State University , and Savannah State University . The university further collaborated with the National University of Singapore to set up The Logistics Institute – Asia Pacific in Singapore . The campus now serves the institute 's hub for professional and continuing education and is home to the regional offices of the Georgia Tech Enterprise Innovation Institute , the Savannah Advanced Technology Development Center , and the Georgia Logistics Innovation Center . 
 Georgia Tech also operates a campus in Metz , in northeastern France , known as Georgia Tech Lorraine . It was opened in October 1990 , it offers master 's @-@ level courses in Electrical and Computer Engineering , Computer Science and Mechanical Engineering and Ph.D. coursework in Electrical and Computer Engineering and Mechanical Engineering . Georgia Tech Lorraine was the defendant in a lawsuit pertaining to the language used in advertisements , which was a violation of the <unk> Law . 
 The College of Design ( formerly College of Architecture ) maintains a small permanent presence in Paris in affiliation with the École d 'architecture de Paris @-@ La Villette and the College of Computing has a similar program with the Barcelona School of Informatics at the Polytechnic University of Catalonia in Barcelona , Spain . There are additional programs in Athlone , Ireland , Shanghai , China , and Singapore . Georgia Tech will set up two campuses for research and graduate education in the cities of Visakhapatnam and Hyderabad , Telangana , India by the year 2010 . 
 = = = Campus services = = = 
 Georgia Tech Cable Network , or GTCN , is the college 's branded cable source . Most non @-@ original programming is obtained from Dish Network . GTCN currently has 100 standard @-@ definition channels and 23 high @-@ definition channels . 
 The Office of Information Technology , or <unk> , manages most of the Institute 's computing resources ( and some related services such as campus telephones ) . With the exception of a few computer labs maintained by individual colleges , <unk> is responsible for most of the computing facilities on campus . Student , faculty , and staff e @-@ mail accounts are among its services . Georgia Tech 's ResNet provides free technical support to all students and guests living in Georgia Tech 's on @-@ campus housing ( excluding fraternities and sororities ) . ResNet is responsible for network , telephone , and television service , and most support is provided by part @-@ time student employees . 
 = = Organization and administration = = 
 Georgia Tech 's undergraduate and graduate programs are divided into six colleges . Collaboration among the colleges is frequent , as mandated by a number of interdisciplinary degree programs and research centers . Georgia Tech has sought to strengthen its undergraduate and graduate offerings in less technical fields , primarily those under the Ivan Allen College of Liberal Arts . That particular College has seen a 20 % increase in admissions . Also , even in the Ivan Allen College , the Institute does not offer a Bachelor of Arts degree , only a Bachelor of Science . 
 = = Academics = = 
 = = = Demographics = = = 
 The student body consists of more than 25 @,@ 000 graduate and undergraduate students ( Fall 2015 ) and around 1 @,@ 140 full @-@ time academic faculty ( Fall 2015 ) . The student body at Georgia Tech is 65 % male and 35 % female ( Fall 2015 ) . Female enrollment has historically been low ; however , this is slowly changing due to the university 's growing liberal arts programs and outreach programs to encourage more female high school students to consider careers in science and engineering as well as changes in the admissions process . These include the " Women In Engineering " program and sponsorship of a chapter of The Society of Women Engineers . For the fall of 2014 , over 40 % of incoming freshmen were female students . 
 Around 50 – 55 % of all Georgia Tech students are residents of the state of Georgia , around 20 % come from overseas , and 25 – 30 % are residents of other U.S. states or territories . The top states of origin for all non @-@ Georgia US students are Florida , Texas , California , North Carolina , Virginia , New Jersey , and Maryland . Students at Tech represent 114 countries and all 50 states . 
 = = = Funding = = = 
 The Georgia Institute of Technology is a public institution that receives funds from the State of Georgia , tuition , fees , research grants , and alumni contributions . In 2014 , the Institute 's revenue amounted to about $ 1 @.@ 422 billion . Fifteen percent came from state appropriations and grants while 20 % originated from tuition and fees . Grants and contracts accounted for 55 % of all revenue . Expenditures were about $ 1 @.@ 36 billion . Forty @-@ eight percent went to research and 19 % went to instruction . The Georgia Tech Foundation runs the university 's endowment and was incorporated in 1932 . It includes several wholly owned subsidiaries that own land on campus or in Midtown and lease the land back to the Georgia Board of Regents and other companies and organizations . Assets totaled $ 1 @.@ 882 billion and liabilities totaled $ 0 @.@ 478 billion in 2014 . Georgia Tech has the most generous alumni donor base , percentage wise , of any public university ranked in the top 50 . 
 = = = Rankings = = = 
 Georgia Tech is consistently ranked among the best universities in the United States and the world . For over a decade , Georgia Tech has remained in the top ten public universities in the United States , and is currently listed as the smartest public college in the United States . In 2012 , The Times Higher Education World University Rankings ranked Georgia Tech 19th in the United States and 25th in the world ; its engineering program was ranked 9th in the world . As of 2015 , Tech 's undergraduate engineering program is ranked 4th and its graduate engineering program is ranked 6th by U.S. News & World Report . Tech 's undergraduate engineering programs include Aerospace ( 2nd ) , Biomedical ( 2nd ) , Chemical ( 6th ) , Civil ( 3rd ) , Computer ( 6th ) , Electrical ( 5th ) , Environmental ( 3rd ) , Industrial ( 1st ) , Materials ( 4th ) , and Mechanical ( 3rd ) . Tech 's graduate engineering programs include Aerospace ( 5th ) , Biomedical / Bioengineering ( 2nd ) , Chemical ( 9th ) , Civil ( 5th ) , Computer ( 7th ) , Electrical ( 6th ) , Environmental ( 4th ) , Industrial ( 1st ) , Materials ( 9th ) , Mechanical ( 5th ) , and Nuclear ( 8th ) . 
 In 2010 , Georgia Tech 's College of Business rose from 31st to 28th , continuing its rapid upward trend . Diverse Issues in Higher Education has ranked Tech No. 1 at the bachelor 's level , No. 2 at the master 's level , and No. 1 at the doctoral level in terms of producing African American engineering graduates . In 2010 , U.S. News & World Report ranked Tech as the No. 28 MBA program . Tech also boasts the No. 29 Physics program in the nation , specializing in Nonlinear Dynamics ( in which it ranks 5th nationwide ) and Condensed Matter Physics . U.S. News & World Report ranked the graduate chemistry program at No. 26 overall with the Physical Chemistry specialty ranked at No. 14 . The Math department is ranked at No. 30 overall and at No. 8 in Discrete Math and Combinatorics . Georgia Tech ranks # 9 among " Best Engineering Colleges By Salary Potential " in the United States . In 2015 , Georgia Tech was ranked 2nd among public universities and 8th among all universities in the United States for students ' return on investment . 
 = = Research = = 
 Georgia Tech is classified by The Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching as a university with very high research activity . Much of this research is funded by large corporations or governmental organizations . Research is organizationally under the Executive Vice President for Research , Stephen E. Cross , who reports directly to the institute president . Nine " interdisciplinary research institutes " report to him , with all research centers , laboratories and interdisciplinary research activities at Georgia Tech reporting through one of those institutes . 
 The oldest of those research institutes is a nonprofit research organization referred to as the Georgia Tech Research Institute ( GTRI ) . GTRI provides sponsored research in a variety of technical specialties including radar , electro @-@ optics , and materials engineering . Around forty percent ( by award value ) of Georgia Tech 's research , especially government @-@ funded classified work , is conducted through this counterpart organization . GTRI employs over 1 @,@ 700 people and had $ 305 million in revenue in fiscal year 2014 . The other institutes include : the Parker H. Petit Institute for Bioengineering & Bioscience , the Georgia Tech Institute for Electronics and Nanotechnology , the Georgia Tech Strategic Energy Institute , the Brook Byers Institute for Sustainable Systems , the Georgia Tech Manufacturing Institute , the Institute of Paper Science and Technology , Institute for Materials and the Institute for People and Technology . 
 Many startup companies are produced through research conducted at Georgia Tech , with the Advanced Technology Development Center and VentureLab ready to assist Georgia Tech 's researchers and entrepreneurs in organization and commercialization . The Georgia Tech Research Corporation serves as Georgia Tech 's contract and technology licensing agency . Georgia Tech is ranked fourth for startup companies , eighth in patents , and eleventh in technology transfer by the Milken Institute . Georgia Tech and GTRI devote 1 @,@ 900 @,@ 000 square feet ( 180 @,@ 000 m2 ) of space to research purposes , including the new $ 90 million Marcus Nanotechnology Building , one of the largest nanotechnology research facilities in the Southeastern United States with over 30 @,@ 000 square feet ( 2 @,@ 800 m2 ) of clean room space . 
 Georgia Tech encourages undergraduates to participate in research alongside graduate students and faculty . The Undergraduate Research Opportunities Program awards scholarships each semester to undergraduates who pursue research activities . These scholarships , called the President 's Undergraduate Research Awards , take the form of student salaries or help cover travel expenses when students present their work at professional meetings . Additionally , undergraduates may participate in research and write a thesis to earn a " Research Option " credit on their transcripts . An undergraduate research journal , The Tower , was established in 2007 to provide undergraduates with a venue for disseminating their research and a chance to become familiar with the academic publishing process . 
 Recent developments include a proposed graphene antenna . 
 Georgia Tech and Emory University have a strong research partnership and jointly administer the Emory @-@ Georgia Tech Predictive Health Institute . They also , along with Peking University , administer the Wallace H. Coulter Department of Biomedical Engineering . In 2015 , Georgia Tech and Emory were awarded an $ 8 @.@ 3 million grant by the National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) to establish a National Exposure Assessment Laboratory . In July 2015 , Georgia Tech , Emory , and Children 's Healthcare of Atlanta were awarded a four @-@ year , 1 @.@ 8 million dollar grant by the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation in order to expand the Atlanta Cystic Fibrosis Research and Development Program . In 2015 , the two universities received a five @-@ year , $ 2 @.@ 9 million grant from the National Science Foundation ( NSF ) to create new bachelor 's , master 's , and doctoral degree programs and concentrations in healthcare robotics , which will be the first program of its kind in the Southeastern United States . 
 The Georgia Tech Panama Logistics Innovation & Research Center is an initiative between the H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial and Systems Engineering , the Ecuador National Secretariat of Science and Technology , and the government of Panama that aims to enhance Panama 's logistics capabilities and performance through a number of research and education initiatives . The center is creating models of country level logistics capabilities that will support the decision @-@ making process for future investments and trade opportunities in the growing region and has established dual degree programs in the University of Panama and other Panamanian universities with Georgia Tech . A similar center in Singapore , The Centre for Next Generation Logistics , was established in 2015 and is a collaboration between Georgia Tech and the National University of Singapore . The Center will work closely with government agencies and the industry to perform research in logistics and supply chain systems for translation into innovations and commercialization to achieve transformative economic and societal impact . 
 = = = Industry connections = = = 
 Georgia Tech maintains close ties to the industrial world . Many of these connections are made through Georgia Tech 's cooperative education and internship programs . Georgia Tech 's Division of Professional Practice ( <unk> ) , established in 1912 as the Georgia Institute of Technology Cooperative Division , operates the largest and fourth @-@ oldest cooperative education program in the United States , and is accredited by the Accreditation Council for Cooperative Education . The <unk> is charged with providing opportunities for students to gain real @-@ world employment experience through four programs , each targeting a different body of students . The Undergraduate Cooperative Education Program is a five @-@ year program in which undergraduate students alternate between semesters of formal instruction at Georgia Tech and semesters of full @-@ time employment with their employers . 
 The Graduate Cooperative Education Program , established in 1983 , is the largest such program in the United States . It allows graduate students pursuing master 's degrees or doctorates in any field to spend a maximum of two consecutive semesters working full- or part @-@ time with employers . The Undergraduate Professional Internship Program enables undergraduate students — typically juniors or seniors — to complete a one- or two @-@ semester internship with employers . The Work Abroad Program hosts a variety of cooperative education and internship experiences for upperclassmen and graduate students seeking international employment and cross @-@ cultural experiences . While all four programs are voluntary , they consistently attract high numbers of students — more than 3 @,@ 000 at last count . Around 1 @,@ 000 businesses and organizations hire these students , who collectively earn $ 20 million per year . 
 Georgia Tech 's cooperative education and internship programs have been externally recognized for their strengths . The Undergraduate Cooperative Education was recognized by U.S. News & World Report as one of the top 10 " Programs that Really Work " for five consecutive years . U.S. News & World Report additionally ranked Georgia Tech 's internship and cooperative education programs among 14 " Academic Programs to Look For " in 2006 and 2007 . On June 4 , 2007 , the University of Cincinnati inducted Georgia Tech into its Cooperative Education Hall of Honor . 
 = = Student life = = 
 Georgia Tech students benefit from many Institute @-@ sponsored or -related events on campus , as well as a wide selection of cultural options in the surrounding district of Midtown Atlanta , " Atlanta 's Heart of the Arts " . Just off campus , students can choose from several restaurants , including a half @-@ dozen in Technology Square alone . Home Park , a neighborhood that borders the north end of campus , is a popular living area for Tech students and recent graduates . 
 = = = Traditions = = = 
 Georgia Tech has a number of legends and traditions , some of which have persisted for decades . Some are well @-@ known ; for example , the most notable of these is the popular but rare tradition of stealing the ' T ' from Tech Tower . Tech Tower , Tech 's historic primary administrative building , has the letters " TECH " hanging atop it on each of its four sides . There have been several attempts by students to orchestrate complex plans to steal the huge symbolic letter T , and on occasion they have carried this act out successfully . One of the cherished holdovers from Tech 's early years , a steam whistle blows five minutes before the hour , every hour from 7 : 55 a.m. to 5 : 55 p.m. The faculty newspaper is named The Whistle . 
 Georgia Tech students hold a heated , long and ongoing rivalry with the University of Georgia , known as Clean , Old @-@ Fashioned Hate . The first known hostilities between the two institutions trace back to 1891 . The University of Georgia 's literary magazine proclaimed UGA 's colors to be " old gold , black , and crimson " . Dr. Charles H. Herty , then President of the University of Georgia , felt that old gold was too similar to yellow and that it " symbolized cowardice " . After the 1893 football game against Tech , Herty removed old gold as an official color . Tech would first use old gold for their uniforms , as a proverbial slap in the face to UGA , in their first unofficial football game against Auburn in 1891 . Georgia Tech 's school colors would henceforth be old gold and white . 
 = = = Housing = = = 
 Georgia Tech Housing is subject to a clear geographic division of campus into eastern and western areas that contain the vast majority of housing . East Campus is largely populated by freshmen and is served by Brittain Dining Hall . West Campus houses some freshmen , transfer , and returning students ( upperclassmen ) , and is served by Woodruff Dining Hall . Graduate students typically live off @-@ campus ( for example , in Home Park ) or on @-@ campus in the Graduate Living Center or 10th and Home . 
 The Institute 's administration has implemented programs in an effort to reduce the levels of stress and anxiety felt by Tech students . The <unk> and Adaptation to the Surroundings and Environs of Tech ( FASET ) Orientation and Freshman Experience ( a freshman @-@ only dorm life program to " encourage friendships and a feeling of social involvement " ) programs , which seek to help acclimate new students to their surroundings and foster a greater sense of community . As a result , the Institute 's retention rates improved . 
 In recent years as of 2011 , Georgia Tech Housing has been at or over capacity . In Fall 2006 , many dorms housed " triples " , which was a project that put three residents into a two @-@ person room . Certain pieces of furniture were not provided to the third resident as to accommodate a third bed . When spaces became available in other parts of campus , the third resident was moved elsewhere . In 2013 , Georgia Tech provided housing for 9 @,@ 553 students , and housing was 98 % occupied . 
 In the fall of 2007 , the North Avenue Apartments were opened to Tech students . Originally built for the 1996 Olympics and belonging to Georgia State University , the buildings were given to Georgia Tech and have been used to accommodate Tech 's expanding population . Georgia Tech freshmen students were the first to inhabit the dormitories in the Winter and Spring 1996 quarters , while much of East Campus was under renovation for the Olympics . The North Avenue Apartments ( commonly known as " North Ave " ) are also noted as the first Georgia Tech buildings to rise above the top of Tech Tower . Open to second @-@ year undergraduate students and above , the buildings are located on East Campus , across North Avenue and near Bobby Dodd Stadium , putting more upperclassmen on East Campus . Currently , the North Avenue Apartments East and North buildings are undergoing extensive renovation to the façade . During their construction , the bricks were not properly secured and thus were a safety hazard to pedestrians and vehicles on the Downtown Connector below . 
 Two programs on campus as well have houses on East Campus : the International House ( commonly referred to as the I @-@ House ) ; and Women , Science , and Technology . The I @-@ House is housed in 4th Street East and Hayes . Women , Science , and Technology is housed in Goldin and Stein . The I @-@ House hosts an International Coffee Hour every Monday night that class is in session from 6 to 7 pm , hosting both residents and their guests for discussions . 
 Single graduate students may live in the Graduate Living Center ( GLC ) or at 10th and Home . 10th and Home is the designated family housing unit of Georgia Tech . Residents are zoned to Atlanta Public Schools . Residents are zoned to Centennial Place Elementary , Inman Middle School , and Grady High School . 
 = = = Student clubs and activities = = = 
 Several extracurricular activities are available to students , including over 350 student organizations overseen by the Office of Student Involvement . The Student Government Association ( SGA ) , Georgia Tech 's student government , has separate executive , legislative , and judicial branches for undergraduate and graduate students . One of the SGA 's primary duties is the disbursement of funds to student organizations in need of financial assistance . These funds are derived from the Student Activity Fee that all Georgia Tech students must pay , currently $ 123 per semester . The ANAK Society , a secret society and honor society established at Georgia Tech in 1908 , claims responsibility for founding many of Georgia Tech 's earliest traditions and oldest student organizations , including the SGA . 
 = = = Arts = = = 
 Georgia Tech 's Music Department was established as part of the school 's General College in 1963 under the leadership of Ben Logan Sisk . In 1976 , the Music Department was assigned to the College of Sciences & Liberal Studies , and in 1991 it was relocated to its current home in the College of Design . In 2009 , it was reorganized into the School of Music . The Georgia Tech Glee Club , founded in 1906 , is one of the oldest student organizations on campus , and still operates today as part of the School of Music . The Glee Club was among the first collegiate choral groups to release a recording of their songs . The group has toured extensively and appeared on The Ed Sullivan Show twice , providing worldwide exposure to " Ramblin ' Wreck from Georgia Tech " . Today , the modern Glee Club performs dozens of times each semester for many different events , including official Georgia Tech ceremonies , banquets , and sporting events . It consists of 50 to 70 members and requires no audition or previous choral experience . 
 The Georgia Tech Band Program , also in the School of Music , represents Georgia Tech at athletic events and provides Tech students with a musical outlet . It was founded in 1908 by 14 students and Robert " Biddy " Bidez . The marching band consistently fields over 300 members and invites students from other Atlanta universities who do not have football programs ( Emory , Agnes Scott , Kennesaw State , etc . ) to participate . Members of the marching band travel to every football game . 
 The School of Music is also home to a number of ensembles , such as the 80 @-@ to @-@ 90 @-@ member Symphony Orchestra , Jazz Ensemble , Concert Band , and Percussion and MIDI Ensembles . Students also can opt to form their own small Chamber Ensembles , either for course credit or independently . The contemporary Sonic Generator group , backed by the <unk> and in collaboration with the Center for Music Technology , performs a diverse lineup of music featuring new technologies and recent composers . 
 Georgia Tech also has a music scene that is made up of groups that operate independently from the Music Department . These groups include three student @-@ led a cappella groups : Nothin ' but Treble , Sympathetic Vibrations , and Infinite Harmony . Musician 's Network , another student @-@ led group , operates Under the Couch , a live music venue and recording facility that was formerly located beneath the Couch Building on West Campus and is now located in the Student Center . 
 Many music , theatre , dance , and opera performances are held in the <unk> Center for the Arts . <unk> is the campus ' student @-@ run theater . The theater has been entertaining Georgia Tech and the surrounding community since 1947 . They are also home to Let 's Try This ! ( the campus improv troupe ) and <unk> ( a song and dance troupe ) . <unk> is an annual anime / gaming / comics convention held on campus in March hosted by Anime O @-@ <unk> , the Georgia Tech anime club . The convention has free admission and was held in the Student Center , Instructional Center , and surrounding outdoor areas until 2010 . Beginning in 2011 , the convention moved its venue to locations in Technology Square . 
 = = = Student media = = = 
 WREK is Georgia Tech 's student run radio station . Broadcast at 91 @.@ 1 MHz on the FM band the station is known as " <unk> Radio " . The studio is on the second floor of the Student Center Commons . Broadcasting with 100 kW ERP , WREK is among the nation 's most powerful college radio stations . WREK is a student operated and run radio station . In April 2007 , a debate was held regarding the future of the radio station . The prospective purchasers were GPB and NPR . WREK maintained its independence after dismissing the notion with approval from the Radio Communications Board of Georgia Tech . The Georgia Tech Amateur Radio Club , founded in 1912 , is among the oldest collegiate amateur radio clubs in the nation . The club provided emergency radio communications during several disasters including numerous hurricanes and the 1985 Mexican Earthquake . 
 The Technique , also known as the " ' <unk> " , is Tech 's official student newspaper . It is distributed weekly during the Fall and Spring semesters ( on Fridays ) , and biweekly during the Summer semester ( with certain exceptions ) . It was established on November 17 , 1911 . Blueprint is Tech 's yearbook , established in 1908 . Other student publications include The North Avenue Review , Tech 's " free @-@ speech magazine " , Erato , Tech 's literary magazine , The Tower , Tech 's undergraduate research journal and T @-@ Book , the student handbook detailing Tech traditions . The offices of all student publications are located in the Student Services Building . 
 = = = Greek life = = = 
 Greek life at Georgia Tech includes over 50 active chapters of social fraternities and sororities . All of the groups are chapters of national organizations , including members of the North @-@ American Interfraternity Conference , National Panhellenic Conference , and National Pan @-@ Hellenic Council . The first fraternity to establish a chapter at Georgia Tech was Alpha Tau Omega in 1888 , before the school held its first classes . The first sorority to establish a chapter was Alpha Xi Delta in 1954 . Students with Greek affiliation make up around 26 percent of the undergraduate student body . 
 = = = Student stress = = = 
 Georgia Tech carries a strong reputation for being difficult . In 2001 , The Princeton Review placed Tech among the 10 toughest colleges and universities in the United States and later reported that Tech 's heavy workload led to " overly stressed " students with " minimal time for social functions " . In 2010 , The Daily Beast included Tech on its list of the 50 most stressful colleges and universities in the U.S. However , in 2010 , the Daily Beast also listed Tech among the 100 happiest colleges indicating that student stress does not necessarily prevent student happiness . Among students , it is widely believed that a sacrifice of sleep , studying , or a social life defines " the Tech lifestyle " . For these reasons , students commonly refer to graduation from Tech as " getting out " . 
 = = Athletics = = 
 Georgia Tech teams are variously known as the Yellow Jackets , the Ramblin ' Wreck and the Engineers ; but the official nickname is Yellow Jackets . They compete as a member of the National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) Division I level ( Football Bowl Subdivision ( FBS ) sub @-@ level for football ) , primarily competing in the Atlantic Coast Conference ( ACC ) for all sports since the 1979 @-@ 80 season ( a year after they officially joined the conference before beginning conference play ) , Coastal Division in any sports split into a divisional format since the 2005 @-@ 06 season . The Yellow Jackets previously competed as a charter member of the Metro Conference from 1975 @-@ 76 to 1977 @-@ 78 , as a charter member of the Southeastern Conference ( SEC ) from 1932 @-@ 33 to 1963 @-@ 64 , as a charter of the Southern Conference ( SoCon ) from 1921 @-@ 22 to 1931 @-@ 32 , and as a charter member of the Southern Intercollegiate Athletic Association ( SIAA ) from 1895 @-@ 96 to 1920 @-@ 21 . They also competed as an Independent from 1964 @-@ 65 to 1974 @-@ 75 and on the 1978 @-@ 79 season . Men 's sports include baseball , basketball , cross country , football , golf , swimming & diving , tennis and track & field ; while women 's sports include basketball , cross country , softball , swimming and diving , tennis , track & field and volleyball . 
 The Institute mascots are Buzz and the Ramblin ' Wreck . The Institute 's traditional football rival is the University of Georgia ; the rivalry is considered one of the fiercest in college football . The rivalry is commonly referred to as Clean , Old @-@ Fashioned Hate , which is also the title of a book about the subject . Tech has seventeen varsity sports : football , women 's and men 's basketball , baseball , softball , volleyball , golf , men 's and women 's tennis , men 's and women 's swimming and diving , men 's and women 's track and field , and men 's and women 's cross country . Four Georgia Tech football teams were selected as national champions in news polls : 1917 , 1928 , 1952 , and 1990 . In May 2007 , the women 's tennis team won the NCAA National Championship with a 4 – 2 victory over UCLA , the first ever national title granted by the NCAA to Tech . 
 = = = Fight songs = = = 
 Tech 's fight song " I 'm a Ramblin ' Wreck from Georgia Tech " is known worldwide . First published in the 1908 Blue Print , it was adapted from an old drinking song ( " Son of a Gambolier " ) and embellished with trumpet flourishes by Frank Roman . Then @-@ Vice President Richard Nixon and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev sang the song together when they met in Moscow in 1958 to reduce the tension between them . As the story goes , Nixon did not know any Russian songs , but Khrushchev knew that one American one as it had been sung on The Ed Sullivan Show . 
 " I 'm a Ramblin ' Wreck " has had many other notable moments in its history . It is reportedly the first school song to have been played in space . Gregory Peck sang the song while strumming a ukulele in the movie The Man in the Gray Flannel Suit . John Wayne whistled it in The High and the Mighty . Tim Holt 's character sings a few bars of it in the movie His Kind of Woman . There are numerous stories of commanding officers in Higgins boats crossing the English Channel on the morning of D @-@ Day leading their men in the song to calm their nerves . It is played after every Georgia Tech score in a football game . 
 Another popular fight song is " Up With the White and Gold " , which is usually played by the band preceding " Ramblin ' Wreck " . First published in 1919 , " Up with the White and Gold " was also written by Frank Roman . The song 's title refers to Georgia Tech 's school colors and its lyrics contain the phrase , " Down with the Red and Black " , an explicit reference to the school colors of the University of Georgia and the then @-@ budding Georgia Tech – UGA rivalry . 
 = = = Club sports = = = 
 Georgia Tech participates in many non @-@ NCAA sanctioned club sports , including airsoft , crew , cricket , cycling ( winning three consecutive Dirty South Collegiate Cycling Conference mountain bike championships ) , disc golf , equestrian , fencing , field hockey , gymnastics , ice hockey , kayaking , lacrosse , paintball , roller hockey , soccer , rugby union , sailing , skydiving , table tennis , triathlon , ultimate , water polo , water ski , and wrestling . Many club sports take place at the Georgia Tech Aquatic Center , where swimming , diving , water polo , and the swimming portion of the modern pentathlon competitions for the 1996 Summer Olympics were held . 
 = = Alumni = = 
 There are many notable graduates , non @-@ graduate former students and current students of Georgia Tech . Georgia Tech alumni are known as Yellow Jackets . According to the Georgia Tech Alumni Association : 
 [ the status of " alumni " ] is open to all graduates of Georgia Tech , all former students of Georgia Tech who regularly matriculated and left Georgia Tech in good standing , active and retired members of the faculty and administration staff , and those who have rendered some special and conspicuous service to Georgia Tech or to [ the alumni association ] . 
 The first class of 95 students entered Georgia Tech in 1888 , and the first two graduates received their degrees in 1890 . Since then , the institute has greatly expanded , with an enrollment of 14 @,@ 558 undergraduates and 6 @,@ 913 postgraduate students as of Fall 2013 . 
 Many distinguished individuals once called Georgia Tech home , the most notable being Jimmy Carter , former President of the United States and Nobel Peace Prize winner , who briefly attended Georgia Tech in the early 1940s before matriculating at and graduating from the United States Naval Academy . Juan Carlos Varela , a 1985 industrial engineering graduate , was elected president of Panama in May 2014 . Another Georgia Tech graduate and Nobel Prize winner , Kary Mullis , received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1993 . A large number of businesspeople ( including but not limited to prominent CEOs and directors ) began their careers at Georgia Tech . Some of the most successful of these are Charles " Garry " Betty ( CEO <unk> ) , David Dorman ( CEO AT & T Corporation ) , Mike Duke ( CEO Wal @-@ Mart ) , and James D. Robinson III ( CEO American Express and later director of The Coca @-@ Cola Company ) . 
 Tech graduates have been deeply influential in politics , military service , and activism . Atlanta mayor Ivan Allen , Jr. and former United States Senator Sam Nunn have both made significant changes from within their elected offices . Former Georgia Tech president G. Wayne Clough was also a Tech graduate , the first Tech alumnus to serve in that position . Many notable military commanders are alumni ; James A. Winnefeld , Jr. who currently serves as the ninth Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff , Philip M. Breedlove who currently serves as the Commander , U.S. Air Forces in Europe , William L. Ball was the 67th Secretary of the Navy , John M. Brown III is the Commander of the United States Army Pacific Command , and Leonard Wood was Chief of Staff of the Army and a Medal of Honor recipient for helping capture of the Apache chief Geronimo . Wood was also Tech 's first football coach and ( simultaneously ) the team captain , and was instrumental in Tech 's first @-@ ever football victory in a game against the University of Georgia . Thomas McGuire was the second @-@ highest scoring American ace during World War II and a Medal of Honor recipient . 
 Numerous astronauts and National Aeronautics and Space Administration ( NASA ) administrators spent time at Tech ; most notably , Retired Vice Admiral Richard H. Truly was the eighth administrator of NASA , and later served as the president of the Georgia Tech Research Institute . John Young walked on the moon as the commander of Apollo 16 , first commander of the space shuttle and is the only person to have piloted four different classes of spacecraft . Georgia Tech has its fair share of noteworthy engineers , scientists , and inventors . Nobel Laureate Kary Mullis developed the polymerase chain reaction , Herbert Saffir developed the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale , and W. Jason Morgan made significant contributions to the theory of plate tectonics and geodynamics . In computer science , Krishna Bharat developed Google News , and D. Richard Hipp developed SQLite . Architect Michael Arad designed the World Trade Center Memorial in New York City . 
 Despite their highly technical backgrounds , Tech graduates are no strangers to the arts or athletic competition . Among them , comedian / actor Jeff Foxworthy of Blue Collar Comedy Tour fame and Randolph Scott both called Tech home . Several famous athletes have , as well ; about 150 Tech students have gone into the National Football League ( NFL ) , with many others going into the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) or Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . Well @-@ known American football athletes include all @-@ time greats such as Joe Hamilton , Pat Swilling , Billy Shaw , and Joe Guyon , former Tech head football coaches Pepper Rodgers and Bill Fulcher , and recent students such as Calvin Johnson and Tashard Choice . Some of Tech 's recent entrants into the NBA include Chris Bosh , Derrick Favors , Thaddeus Young , Jarrett Jack , and Iman Shumpert . Award @-@ winning baseball stars include Kevin Brown , Mark Teixeira , Nomar Garciaparra , and Jason Varitek . In golf , Tech alumni include the legendary Bobby Jones , who founded The Masters , and David Duval , who was ranked the No. 1 golfer in the world in 1999 . 
 = SMS Radetzky = 
 SMS Radetzky was the first of the three Radetzky @-@ class pre @-@ dreadnought battleships built for the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy ( K.u.K. Kriegsmarine ) . She was named for the 19th century Austrian Field Marshal Joseph Radetzky von Radetz . Radetzky and her sisters , Erzherzog Franz Ferdinand and Zrínyi , were the last pre @-@ dreadnoughts built by the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy — they were followed by the larger and significantly more powerful Tegetthoff @-@ class dreadnoughts . 
 Radetzky was built by the shipbuilding company Stabilimento Tecnico in Trieste and commissioned into the fleet on 15 January 1911 . The ship conducted training cruises in the Mediterranean before the outbreak of World War I in mid @-@ 1914 . During the war , Radetzky operated largely as part of a fleet in being alongside the rest of the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy ; in doing so , the ships tied down considerable naval forces from the Triple Entente . Radetzky did participate in some offensive operations , primarily shore bombardments in the Adriatic Sea against French , Montenegrin , and Italian targets . 
 Towards the end of 1918 , with the war going against the Austrians , Radetzky was prepared to be transferred to the State of Slovenes , Croats and Serbs . On 10 November 1918 — six days after the Austrian armistice — Yugoslav navy officers sailed the battleship out of Pola and surrendered it to a squadron of American submarine chasers . Under the terms of the Treaty of Saint @-@ Germain @-@ en @-@ Laye , the transfer was not recognized ; instead , Radetzky was given to Italy and broken up for scrap . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Radetzky was built at the Stabilimento Tecnico Triestino dockyard in Trieste , the same place where her sister ships were built . She was the second ship of her class to be constructed and her kneel was laid down on 26 November 1907 . The teak used on Radetzky 's deck was the only material Austria @-@ Hungary had to purchase abroad to build the ship . Radetzky was launched from the slipway on 3 July 1909 , and commissioned into the Austro @-@ Hungarian navy on 15 January 1911 and had a crew of 880 to 890 officers and men . 
 Radetzky was 138 @.@ 8 m ( 455 ft 4 in ) long , and had a beam of 24 @.@ 6 m ( 80 ft 8 in ) and a draft of 8 @.@ 1 m ( 26 ft 9 in ) . She displaced 14 @,@ 508 long tons ( 14 @,@ 741 t ) normally , and up to 15 @,@ 845 @.@ 5 long tons ( 16 @,@ 099 @.@ 8 t ) with a full combat load . The ship was powered by two @-@ shaft four @-@ cylinder vertical triple expansion engines rated at 19 @,@ 800 indicated horsepower and a top speed of 20 @.@ 5 knots ( 38 @.@ 0 km / h ; 23 @.@ 6 mph ) . She had a maximum range of 4 @,@ 000 nmi ( 7 @,@ 400 km ; 4 @,@ 600 mi ) at a cruising speed of 10 kn ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 The ship 's primary armament consisted of four 30 @.@ 5 cm ( 12 in ) 45 @-@ caliber guns in two twin gun turrets . This was augmented by a heavy secondary battery of eight 24 cm ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) guns in four wing turrets . The tertiary battery consisted of twenty 10 cm L / 50 guns in casemated single mounts , two 66 mm ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) landing guns , four 47 mm ( 1 @.@ 85 in ) L / 44 and one 47 mm L / 33 quick @-@ firing guns . Three 45 cm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes were also carried , two on the beams and one in the stern . 
 = = Service history = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ war = = = 
 One of Radetzky 's first duties was to attend the British Coronation Review for King George V in Spithead in June 1911 . Following her return to the Austro @-@ Hungarian fleet , she conducted several training cruises in the eastern Mediterranean with her two sisters in 1912 . Later that year , Radetzky and her sisters , under the command of Vice Admiral Maximilian <unk> , took part in an international fleet demonstration in the Ionian Sea to protest the Balkan Wars . Among the ships from other navies were the British pre @-@ dreadnought HMS King Edward VII , the Italian pre @-@ dreadnought Ammiraglio di Saint Bon , the French armored cruiser Edgar Quinet , and the German light cruiser SMS Breslau . The combined flotilla , under the command of British Admiral Cecil Burney , proceeded to blockade the Montenegrin coast to prevent Serbian reinforcements from supporting the siege at Scutari . 
 During the operation , the first seaplanes to be used in combat were operated from Radetzky and her two sisters . This proved unsatisfactory , however , because the ships lacked cranes with which to lift the planes onto the deck , as well as the fact that the deck was too small to accommodate the aircraft . As a result of the pressure from the international blockade , Serbia withdrew its army from Scutari , which was then occupied by a joint Allied ground force . By 1913 , the new dreadnoughts of the Tegetthoff class were coming into active service , and so Radetzky and her sisters were shifted from the 1st Division to the 2nd Division of the 1st Battle Squadron . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 At the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , the German battlecruisers Goeben and Breslau were coaling in Messina ; British warships had begun to assemble outside the port in an attempt to trap the German ships . The German navy called upon its Austro @-@ Hungarian allies to come to their aid ; the Austro @-@ Hungarian high command was initially hesitant , as they wished to avoid initiating hostilities with the British . However , when the Germans made clear they wanted the Austro @-@ Hungarian fleet to steam only as far as Brindisi , the high command relented and sent the portion of the fleet that had by that time been mobilized , which included Radetzky , on the operation . The fleet sailed to the designated latitude , under strict orders to only actively assist the German ships while they were in Austro @-@ Hungarian waters . After the German ships successfully broke out into the Mediterranean , the Austro @-@ Hungarian fleet returned to port . 
 In October 1914 , the French army established artillery batteries on Mount <unk> to support the Army of Montenegro against the Austrian army at Cattaro . By the time they were operational , on 15 October , the Austro @-@ Hungarians were ready with the pre @-@ dreadnoughts of the Monarch class . However , their 24 cm guns were insufficient to dislodge the French artillery batteries , and so Radetzky was sent to assist them . On 21 October , the ship arrived , and the gunfire from her 30 @.@ 5 cm guns forced the French to abandon the position . 
 On 23 May 1915 , between two and four hours after the Italian declaration of war reached the main Austro @-@ Hungarian naval base at Pola , Radetzky and the rest of the fleet departed to bombard the Italian and Montenegrin coast . Their focus was on the important naval base at Ancona , and later the coast of Montenegro . The bombardment of Montenegro was part of the larger Austro @-@ Hungarian campaign against the Kingdoms of Montenegro and Serbia , who were members of the Entente , during the first half of 1915 . During the attack on Ancona and the surrounding coastline , Radetzky , as well as the cruisers SMS Admiral Spaun and SMS Helgoland , and the destroyers SMS Orjen , SMS Lika Csepel , and SMS Tátra traveled south to cover the ships attacking Ancona . Upon finding no enemy ships in the region , the group bombarded the <unk> Islands , <unk> , Manfredonia , and Barletta . After leaving the Gulf of Manfredonia Radetzky and the rest of the ships accompanying her sighted the first enemy ships of the day , two Italian destroyers . During the encounter , one Italian destroyer managed to escape the Austrian ships but the other , Turbine , was severely damaged . Only when a larger Italian force appeared did Radetzky and her accompanying ships abandon their attempts to capture the damaged destroyer . 
 Aside from the encounter with Turbine , Radetzky managed to destroy a railroad bridge near the town of Fermo , severely hampering the movement of troops and supplies in the region . Sixty @-@ three Italian civilians and military personnel were killed in the bombardment . By the time Italian ships from Taranto and Brindisi arrived on the scene , the Austro @-@ Hungarians were safely back in Pola . 
 The attack on Ancona was an immense success , and the Austro @-@ Hungarian ships were largely unopposed during the entire operation . The objective of the bombardment was to delay the Italian Army from deploying its forces along the border with Austria @-@ Hungary by destroying critical transportation systems . The surprise attack on Ancona succeeded in delaying the Italian deployment to the Alps for two weeks . This delay gave Austria @-@ Hungary valuable time to strengthen its Italian border and re @-@ deploy some of its troops from the Eastern and Balkan fronts . 
 Aside from the attack on Ancona , the Austro @-@ Hungarian battleships were confined to Pola for the duration of the war . Their operations were limited by Admiral Anton Haus , the commander of the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy , who believed that he would need to husband his ships to counter any Italian attempt to seize the Dalmatian coast . Since coal was diverted to the newer Tegetthoff @-@ class battleships , the remainder of the war saw Radetzky and the rest of the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy acting as a fleet in being . This resulted in the Allied blockade of the Otranto Strait . With his fleet blockaded in the Adriatic Sea , and facing a shortage of coal , Haus attempted to use mines and submarines , rather than battleships , to reduce the numerical superiority of the Allied navies . 
 = = = End of the war = = = 
 By October 1918 , Austria prepared to transfer her entire fleet to the newly created State of Slovenes , Croats and Serbs ( later to become the Kingdom of Yugoslavia ) in order to keep it out of Italian hands . On 10 November 1918 , one day before the Allied Armistice with Germany , and six days after the Austrians and Italians agreed to the Armistice of Villa Giusti , Yugoslav officers with scratch crews sailed Radetzky and Zrínyi out of Pola . Once outside Pola , the ships spotted heavy units of the Italian fleet ; the two battleships hoisted American flags and sailed south to escape . A squadron of US Navy submarine chasers operating off the city of Spalato accepted the surrender of Radetzky and Zrínyi . However , under the subsequent peace treaty , the Allied powers ignored the transfer of the Austro @-@ Hungarian ships to the Yugoslav navy which had already taken place ; instead , the ships were ceded to Italy . Radetzky was broken up in Italy between 1920 and 1921 . 
 = Batman ( 1989 film ) = 
 Batman is a 1989 American superhero film directed by Tim Burton and produced by Jon Peters , based on the DC Comics character of the same name . It is the first installment of Warner Bros. ' initial Batman film series . The film stars Michael Keaton as Bruce Wayne / Batman , alongside Jack Nicholson , Kim Basinger , Robert Wuhl , Pat Hingle , Billy Dee Williams , Michael Gough , and Jack Palance . In the film , Batman is widely believed to be an urban legend until he actively goes to war with a rising criminal mastermind known as " the Joker " . 
 After Burton was hired as director in 1986 , Steve Englehart and Julie Hickson wrote film treatments before Sam Hamm wrote the first screenplay . Batman was not greenlit until after the success of Burton 's Beetlejuice ( 1988 ) . Numerous A @-@ list actors were considered for the role of Batman before Keaton was cast . Keaton 's casting caused a controversy since , by 1988 , he had become typecast as a comedic actor and many observers doubted he could portray a serious role . Nicholson accepted the role of the Joker under strict conditions that dictated a high salary , a portion of the box office profits and his shooting schedule . The tone and themes of the film were influenced in part by Alan Moore and Brian Bolland 's The Killing Joke and Frank Miller 's The Dark Knight Returns . The film notably invents a unique origin story for the Joker , presenting him as an organised criminal named Jack Napier . Filming took place at Pinewood Studios from October 1988 to January 1989 . The budget escalated from $ 30 million to $ 48 million , while the 1988 Writers Guild of America strike forced Hamm to drop out . Uncredited rewrites were performed by Warren Skaaren , Charles McKeown and Jonathan Gems . 
 Batman was a critical and financial success , earning over $ 400 million in box office totals . It was the fifth @-@ highest grossing film in history at the time of its release . The film received several Saturn Award nominations and a Golden Globe nomination , and won an Academy Award . It also inspired the equally successful Batman : The Animated Series , paving the way for the DC animated universe , and has influenced Hollywood 's modern marketing and development techniques of the superhero film genre . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The mayor of Gotham City , Mayor Borg ( Lee Wallace ) orders District Attorney Harvey Dent ( Billy Dee Williams ) and Police Commissioner James " Jim " Gordon ( Pat Hingle ) to increase police activity and combat crime in preparation for the city 's bicentennial . Reporter Alexander Knox ( Robert Wuhl ) and photojournalist Vicki Vale ( Kim Basinger ) begin to investigate reports of a vigilante nicknamed " Batman " , who is targeting the city 's criminals . 
 Mob boss Carl Grissom ( Jack Palance ) , who has already been targeted by Dent , discovers his mistress Alicia ( Jerry Hall ) involved with his second @-@ in @-@ command , Jack Napier ( Jack Nicholson ) . With the help of corrupt police lieutenant Max Eckhardt ( William Hootkins ) , Grissom sets up Napier to be murdered during a raid at the Axis Chemicals plant . During the ensuing shootout , Napier kills Eckhardt , after which Batman suddenly appears . The two struggle , and Napier is accidentally knocked into a vat of chemical waste . Batman flees , and Napier is presumed dead . 
 Batman is , in actuality , Bruce Wayne ( Michael Keaton ) , a billionaire industrialist who , as a child , witnessed his parents ' murder at the hands of a young psychopathic mugger . Bruce meets and falls for Vicki at a fundraiser , and the two begin a relationship . Meanwhile , Napier survives the accident , but is horribly disfigured with chalk @-@ white skin , emerald @-@ green hair and a permanent ruby @-@ red grin . Driven insane by his reflection , Napier becomes " The Joker " , kills Grissom in revenge for his set @-@ up , and usurps his criminal empire . In addition , the Joker seeks retaliation against Batman , whom he blames for his disfigurement . During his research for information about Batman , the Joker himself also falls for Vicki . 
 The Joker begins to terrorize the city , first by lacing hygiene products with a deadly chemical known as " Smilex " , which causes victims to laugh to death when used in certain combinations . The Joker then sets a trap at the Gotham Museum of Art for Vicki , and he and his henchmen vandalize works of art . Batman arrives and rescues Vicki , and the pair escape in the Batmobile . Batman gives information about Smilex to Vicki so she can warn the city via Gotham newspapers about the poisoned products . 
 Bruce meets with Vicki at her apartment , prepared to tell her that he is Batman . They are interrupted by the Joker , who asks Bruce , " Have you ever danced with the devil by the pale moonlight ? " before shooting him . Bruce , who was wearing body armour , escapes , and recollects that the young mugger who killed his parents had asked him the same question ; he realizes that the mugger was none other than the Joker himself . Vicki suddenly appears in the Batcave , having been let in by Bruce 's butler , Alfred Pennyworth ( Michael Gough ) . After avouching himself to Vicki , Bruce — as Batman — leaves to destroy the Axis Chemical plant . Meanwhile , the Joker lures the townspeople to a night time parade with a promise to give away $ 20 million in cash . After doing so , however , he attacks them with Smilex gas , spewing it from his giant parade balloons . Batman arrives on the scene and saves Gotham City from the attack using the Batwing . In his frustration , Joker kills his henchman Bob , then takes out a grenade launcher ( disguised as a clown gun ) and shoots at the Batwing , causing it to crash . 
 The Joker kidnaps Vicki and takes her to the top of a cathedral , where he forces her to dance with him . Batman , having survived the accident , pursues the two , and at the top of the dusty edifice , he and the Joker confront each other in single combat . When the Joker attempts an escape via a helicopter , Batman grapples the Joker 's leg to a heavy stone sculpture , causing him to fall to his death . 
 Commissioner Gordon unveils the Bat @-@ Signal along with a note from Batman read by Harvey Dent , promising to defend Gotham whenever crime strikes again . Vicki is escorted to the Wayne Manor by Alfred , who informs her that Bruce will be late , and she responds that she isn 't surprised . The movie ends with Batman staring at the bat @-@ signal . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Themes = = 
 When discussing the central theme of Batman , director Tim Burton explained , " the whole film and mythology of the character is a complete duel of the freaks . It 's a fight between two disturbed people " , adding that " The Joker is such a great character because there 's a complete freedom to him . Any character who operates on the outside of society and is deemed a freak and an outcast then has the freedom to do what they want ... They are the darker sides of freedom . Insanity is in some scary way the most freedom you can have , because you 're not bound by the laws of society " . 
 Burton saw Bruce Wayne as the bearer of a double identity , exposing one while hiding the reality from the world . Burton biographer Ken Hanke wrote that Bruce Wayne , struggling with his alter @-@ ego as Batman , is depicted as an antihero . Hanke felt that Batman has to push the boundaries of civil justice to deal with certain criminals , such as the Joker . Kim Newman theorized that " Burton and the writers saw Batman and the Joker as a dramatic antithesis , and the film deals with their intertwined origins and fates to an even greater extent " . 
 A visual motif is present in the scene of Batman 's first major act of vigilantism at Axis Chemicals , wherein he is carefully framed so that the single word AXIS , in gigantic red neon letters , looms over him , comparing his acts to those of the totalitarian governments of World War II and thus implying that the dangers of these actions include the transformation of Jack Napier into the Joker . Batman also conveys trademarks found in 1930s pulp magazines , notably the design of Gotham City stylized with Art Deco design . Richard Corliss , writing for Time , observed that Gotham 's design was a reference to films such as Metropolis ( 1927 ) and The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari ( 1920 ) . " Gotham City , despite being shot on a studio backlot " , he continued , " is literally another character in the script . It has the demeaning presence of German Expressionism and fascist architecture , staring down at the citizens . " Hanke further addressed the notions of Batman being a period piece , in that " The citizens , cops , people and the black @-@ and @-@ white television looks like it takes place in 1939 " ; but later said : " Had the filmmakers made Vicki Vale a femme fatale rather than a damsel in distress , this could have made Batman as a homage and tribute to classic film noir . " Portions of the climax pay homage to Vertigo . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In the late 1970s , Batman 's popularity was waning . CBS was interested in producing a Batman in Outer Space film . Producers Michael Uslan and Benjamin Melniker purchased the film rights of Batman from DC Comics on October 3 , 1979 . It was Uslan 's wish " to make the definitive , dark , serious version of Batman , the way Bob Kane and Bill Finger had envisioned him in 1939 . A creature of the night ; stalking criminals in the shadows . " Richard Maibaum was approached to write a script with Guy Hamilton to direct , but the two turned down the offer . Uslan was unsuccessful with pitching Batman to various movie studios because they wanted the film to be similar to the campy 1960s TV series . Columbia Pictures and United Artists were among those to turn down the film . 
 A disappointed Uslan then wrote a script titled Return of the Batman to give the film industry a better idea of his vision for the film . Uslan later compared its dark tone to that of The Dark Knight Returns , which his script pre @-@ dated by six years . In November 1979 , producers Jon Peters and Peter Guber joined the project . The four producers felt it was best to pattern the film 's development after that of Superman ( 1978 ) . Uslan , Melniker and Guber pitched Batman to Universal Pictures , but the studio turned it down . Though no movie studios were yet involved , the project was publicly announced with a budget of $ 15 million in July 1980 at the Comic Art Convention in New York . Warner Bros. decided to accept Batman . 
 Tom Mankiewicz completed a script titled The Batman in June 1983 , focusing on Batman and Dick Grayson 's origins , with the Joker and Rupert Thorne as villains , and Silver St. Cloud as the romantic interest . Mankiewicz took inspiration from the limited series Batman : Strange Apparitions ( ISBN 1 @-@ 56389 @-@ 500 @-@ 5 ) , written by Steve Englehart . Comic book artist Marshall Rogers , who worked with Englehart on Strange Apparitions , was hired for concept art . The Batman was then announced in late 1983 for a mid @-@ 1985 release date on a budget of $ 20 million . Originally , Mankiewicz had wanted an unknown actor for Batman , William Holden for James Gordon , David Niven as Alfred Pennyworth , and Peter O 'Toole as the Penguin , whom Mankiewicz wanted to portray as a mobster with low body temperature . Holden died in 1981 and Niven in 1983 , so this would never come to pass . A number of filmmakers were attached to Mankiewicz ' script , including Ivan Reitman and Joe Dante . Reitman wanted to cast Bill Murray as Batman and Eddie Murphy as Robin . Nine rewrites were performed by nine separate writers . Most of them were based on Strange Apparitions . However , it was Mankiewicz 's script that was still being used to guide the project . 
 After the financial success of Pee @-@ wee 's Big Adventure ( 1985 ) , Warner Bros. hired Tim Burton to direct Batman . Burton had then @-@ girlfriend Julie Hickson write a new 30 @-@ page film treatment , feeling the previous script by Mankiewicz was campy . The success of The Dark Knight Returns and Batman : The Killing Joke rekindled Warner Bros. ' interest in a film adaptation . Burton was initially not a comic book fan , but he was impressed by the dark and serious tone found in both The Dark Knight Returns and The Killing Joke . Warner Bros. enlisted the aid of Steve Englehart to write a new treatment in March 1986 . It included the Joker and Rupert Thorne as the main villains , with a cameo appearance by the Penguin . Silver St. Cloud and Dick Grayson were key supporting roles . It followed the similar storyline from Englehart 's own Strange Apparitions ( ISBN 1 @-@ 56389 @-@ 500 @-@ 5 ) . Warner Bros. was impressed , but Englehart felt there were too many characters . He removed the Penguin and Dick Grayson in his second treatment , finishing in May 1986 . 
 Burton approached Sam Hamm , a comic book fan , to write the screenplay . Hamm decided not to use an origin story , feeling that flashbacks would be more suitable and that " unlocking the mystery " would become part of the storyline . He reasoned , " You totally destroy your credibility if you show the literal process by which Bruce Wayne becomes Batman . " Hamm replaced Silver St. Cloud with Vicki Vale and Rupert Thorne with his own creation , Carl Grissom . He completed his script in October 1986 , which demoted Dick Grayson to a cameo rather than a supporting character . One scene in Hamm 's script had a young James Gordon on duty the night of the murder of Bruce Wayne 's parents . When Hamm 's script was rewritten , the scene was deleted reducing it in an only photo in the Gotham Globe but retaken to Batman Begins . 
 Warner Bros. was less willing to move forward on development , despite their enthusiasm for Hamm 's script , which Batman co @-@ creator Bob Kane greeted with positive feedback . Hamm 's script was then bootlegged at various comic book stores in the United States . Batman was finally given the greenlight to commence pre @-@ production in April 1988 , after the success of Burton 's Beetlejuice ( 1988 ) . When comic book fans found out about Burton directing the film with Michael Keaton starring in the lead role , controversy arose over the tone and direction Batman was going in . Hamm explained , " They hear Tim Burton 's name and they think of Pee @-@ wee 's Big Adventure . They hear Keaton 's name and they think of any number of Michael Keaton comedies . You think of the 1960s version of Batman , and it was the complete opposite of our film . We tried to market it with a typical dark and serious tone , but the fans didn 't believe us . " To combat negative reports on the film 's production , Kane was hired as creative consultant . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Parallel to the Superman casting , a who 's who of Hollywood top stars were considered for the role of Batman , including Mel Gibson , Kevin Costner , Charlie Sheen , Tom Selleck , Bill Murray , Harrison Ford and Dennis Quaid . Burton was pressured by Warner Bros. to cast an obvious action movie star , and had approached Pierce Brosnan , but he had no interest in playing a comic book character . Burton was originally interested in casting an unknown actor , and offered Ray Liotta a chance to audition after having completed Something Wild , but Liotta declined , a decision he regrets . Willem Dafoe , who was falsely reported to be considered for the Joker , had actually been considered for Batman early in development . Producer Jon Peters suggested Michael Keaton , arguing he had the right " edgy , tormented quality " after having seen his dramatic performance in Clean and Sober . Having directed Keaton in Beetlejuice , Burton agreed . 
 Keaton 's casting caused a controversy among comic book fans , with 50 @,@ 000 protest letters sent to Warner Bros. offices . Bob Kane , Sam Hamm and Michael Uslan also heavily questioned the casting . " Obviously there was a negative response from the comic book people . I think they thought we were going to make it like the 1960s TV series , and make it campy , because they thought of Michael Keaton from Mr. Mom and Night Shift and stuff like that . " Keaton studied The Dark Knight Returns for inspiration . 
 Brad Dourif , Tim Curry , David Bowie , John Lithgow and James Woods were considered for the Joker . Burton wanted to cast Brad Dourif , but the studio refused . Robin Williams lobbied hard for the part . Jack Nicholson had been producer Michael Uslan 's and Bob Kane 's choice since 1980 . Peters approached Nicholson as far back as 1986 , during filming of The Witches of Eastwick . Nicholson had what was known as an " off @-@ the @-@ clock " agreement . His contract specified the number of hours he was entitled to have off each day , from the time he left the set to the time he reported back for filming , as well as being off for Los Angeles Lakers home games . Nicholson demanded to have all of his scenes shot in a three @-@ week block , but the schedule lapsed into 106 days . He received a $ 6 million salary , as well as a large percentage of the box office gross estimated between $ 60 million to $ 90 million . 
 Sean Young was originally cast as Vicki Vale , but was injured in a horse @-@ riding accident prior to commencement of filming . Young 's departure necessitated an urgent search for an actress who , besides being right for the part , could commit to the film at very short notice . Peters suggested Kim Basinger : she was able to join the production immediately and was cast . As a fan of Michael Gough 's work in various Hammer Film Productions , Burton cast Gough as Bruce Wayne 's butler , Alfred Pennyworth . Robert Wuhl was cast as reporter Alexander Knox . His character was originally supposed to die by the Joker 's poison gas in the climax , but the filmmakers " liked [ my ] character so much , " Wuhl said , " that they decided to let me live . " Burton chose Billy Dee Williams as Harvey Dent because he wanted to include the villain Two @-@ Face in a future film using the concept of an African @-@ American Two @-@ Face for the black and white concept , but Tommy Lee Jones was later cast in the role for Batman Forever , which disappointed Williams . Nicholson convinced the filmmakers to cast Tracey Walter as the Joker 's henchman , Bob ; in real life , Nicholson and Walter are close friends . Kiefer Sutherland was considered as Robin before the character was deleted from the shooting script . The rest of the cast included Pat Hingle as Commissioner Gordon , Jerry Hall as Alicia Hunt , Lee Wallace as Mayor Borg , William Hootkins as Lt. Max Eckhardt , and Jack Palance as crime boss Carl Grissom . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The filmmakers considered filming Batman entirely on the Warner Bros. backlot in Burbank , California , but media interest in the film made them change the location . It was shot at Pinewood Studios in England from October 1988 to January 1989 . 18 sound stages were used , almost the entirety of Pinewood 's 95 @-@ acre backlot . Locations included Knebworth House and Hatfield House doubling for Wayne Manor , plus Acton Lane Power Station and Little Barford Power Station . The original production budget escalated from $ 30 million to $ 48 million . Filming was highly secretive . The unit publicist was offered and refused £ 10 @,@ 000 for the first pictures of Jack Nicholson as the Joker . The police were later called in when two reels of footage ( about 20 minutes ' worth ) were stolen . With various problems during filming , Burton called it " torture . The worst period of my life ! " 
 Hamm was not allowed to perform rewrites during the 1988 Writers Guild of America strike . Jonathan Gems , Warren Skaaren and Charles McKeown rewrote the script during filming . Hamm criticized the rewrites , but blamed the changes on Warner Bros. Burton explained , " I don 't understand why that became such a problem . We started out with a script that everyone liked , although we recognized it needed a little work . " Dick Grayson appeared in the shooting script but was deleted , as the filmmakers felt he was irrelevant to the plot . Bob Kane supported this decision . 
 Keaton , who called himself a " logic freak " , was concerned that Batman 's secret identity would in reality be fairly easy to uncover , and discussed ideas with Burton to better disguise the character , including the use of contact lenses . Ultimately , Keaton decided to perform Batman 's voice at a lower register than when he was portraying Bruce Wayne , which became a hallmark of the film version of the character , with Christian Bale later using the same technique . 
 Originally in the climax , the Joker was to kill Vicki Vale , sending Batman into a vengeful fury . Jon Peters reworked the climax without telling Burton and commissioned production designer Anton Furst to create a 38 @-@ foot ( 12 m ) model of the cathedral . This cost $ 100 @,@ 000 when the film was already well over budget . Burton disliked the idea , having no clue how the scene would end : " Here were Jack Nicholson and Kim Basinger walking up this cathedral , and halfway up Jack turns around and says , ' Why am I walking up all these stairs ? Where am I going ? ' ' We 'll talk about it when you get to the top ! ' I had to tell him that I didn 't know . " 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Burton was impressed with Anton Furst 's designs in The Company of Wolves , and previously failed to hire Furst as production designer for Beetlejuice . Furst had been too committed on High Spirits , a choice he later regretted . Furst enjoyed working with Burton . " I don 't think I 've ever felt so naturally in tune with a director " , he said . " Conceptually , spiritually , visually , or artistically . There was never any problem because we never fought over anything . Texture , attitude and feelings are what Burton is a master at . " 
 Furst and the art department deliberately mixed clashing architectural styles to " make Gotham City the ugliest and bleakest metropolis imaginable " . Furst continued , " [ W ] e imagined what New York City might have become without a planning commission . A city run by crime , with a riot of architectural styles . An essay in ugliness . As if hell erupted through the pavement and kept on going " . The 1985 film Brazil by Terry Gilliam was also a notable influence upon the film 's production design , as both Burton and Furst studied it as a reference . Derek Meddings served as the visual effects supervisor , while Keith Short helped construct the newly created 1989 Batmobile , adding two Browning machine guns . On designing the Batmobile , Furst explained , " We looked at jet aircraft components , we looked at war machines , we looked at all sorts of things . In the end , we went into pure expressionism , taking the Salt Flat Racers of the 30s and the Sting Ray macho machines of the 50s " . The car was built upon a Chevrolet Impala when previous development with a Jaguar and Ford Mustang failed . 
 Costume designer Bob Ringwood turned down the chance to work on Licence to Kill in favor of Batman . Ringwood found it difficult designing the Batsuit because " the image of Batman in the comics is this huge , big six @-@ foot @-@ four hunk with a dimpled chin . Michael Keaton is a guy with average build " , he stated . " The problem was to make somebody who was average @-@ sized and ordinary @-@ looking into this bigger @-@ than @-@ life creature . " Burton commented , " Michael is a bit claustrophobic , which made it worse for him . The costume put him in a dark , Batman @-@ like mood though , so he was able to use it to his advantage " . Burton 's idea was to use an all @-@ black suit , and was met with positive feedback by Bob Kane . Jon Peters wanted to use a Nike product placement with the Batsuit . Ringwood studied over 200 comic book issues for inspiration . 28 sculpted latex designs were created ; 25 different cape looks and 6 different heads were made , accumulating a total cost of $ 250 @,@ 000 . Comic book fans initially expressed negative feedback against the Batsuit . Burton opted not to use tights , spandex , or underpants as seen in the comic book , feeling it was not intimidating . Prosthetic makeup designer Nick Dudman used acrylic @-@ based makeup paint called PAX for Nicholson 's chalk @-@ white face . Part of Nicholson 's contract was approval over the makeup designer . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Burton hired Danny Elfman , his collaborator on Pee @-@ wee 's Big Adventure and Beetlejuice , to compose the music score . For inspiration , Elfman was given The Dark Knight Returns . Elfman was worried , as he had never worked on a production this large in budget and scale . In addition , producer Jon Peters was skeptical of hiring Elfman , but was later convinced when he heard the opening number . Peters and Peter Guber wanted Prince to write music for the Joker and Michael Jackson to do the romance songs . Elfman would then combine the style of Prince and Jackson 's songs together for the entire film score . 
 Burton protested the ideas , citing " my movies aren 't commercial like Top Gun . " Elfman enlisted the help of Oingo Boingo lead guitarist Steve Bartek and Shirley Walker to arrange the compositions for the orchestra . Elfman was later displeased with the audio mixing of his film score . " Batman was done in England by technicians who didn 't care , and the non @-@ caring showed , " he stated . " I 'm not putting down England because they 've done gorgeous dubs there , but this particular crew elected not to . " Batman was one of the first films to spawn two soundtracks . One of them featured songs written by Prince while the other showcased Elfman 's score . Both were successful , and compilations of Elfman 's opening credits were used in the title sequence theme for Batman : The Animated Series , also composed by Shirley Walker . 
 = = Marketing = = 
 Production designer Anton Furst designed the poster , which he called " evocative but ubiquitous . Only featuring the Bat @-@ Symbol . Not too much and not too little " . Earlier designs " had the word ' Batman ' spelled in RoboCop or Conan the Barbarian @-@ type font " . Jon Peters unified all the film 's tie @-@ ins , even turning down $ 6 million from General Motors to build the Batmobile because the car company would not relinquish creative control . 
 During production , Peters read in The Wall Street Journal that comic book fans were unsatisfied with the casting of Michael Keaton . In response , Peters rushed the first film trailer that played in thousands of theaters during Christmas . It was simply an assemblage of scenes without music , but happened to create enormous anticipation for the film . DC Comics allowed screenwriter Sam Hamm to write his own comic book miniseries . Hamm 's stories were collected in the graphic novel Batman : Blind Justice ( ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> ) . Denys Cowan and Dick Giordano illustrated the artwork . Blind Justice tells the story of Bruce Wayne trying to solve a series of murders connected to Wayne Enterprises . It also marks the first appearance of Henri Ducard , who was later used in the rebooted Batman Begins , albeit as an alias for the more notable Ra 's al Ghul . 
 In the months pre @-@ dating Batman 's release in June 1989 , a popular culture phenomenon rose known as " <unk> " . Over $ 750 million worth of merchandise was sold . Cult filmmaker and comic book writer Kevin Smith remembered : " That summer was huge . You couldn 't turn around without seeing the Bat @-@ Signal somewhere . People were cutting it into their fucking heads . It was just the summer of Batman and if you were a comic book fan it was pretty hot . " Hachette Book Group USA published a novelization , Batman written by Craig Shaw Gardner . It remained on the New York Times Best Seller list throughout June 1989 . Burton admitted he was annoyed by the publicity . David Handelman of The New York Observer categorized Batman as a high concept film . He believed " it is less movie than a corporate behemoth " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Batman opened on June 23 , 1989 , grossing $ 43 @.@ 6 million in 2 @,@ 194 theaters during its opening weekend . This broke the opening weekend record , set by Ghostbusters II one week earlier , with $ 29 @.@ 4 million . Batman would eventually gross $ 251 @.@ 2 million in North America and $ 160 @.@ 15 million internationally , totaling $ 411 @.@ 35 million . Batman was the first film to earn $ 100 million in its first ten days of release , and was the highest grossing film based on a DC comic book until 2008 's The Dark Knight . The film 's gross is the 66th highest ever in North American ranks . Although Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade made the most money worldwide in 1989 , Batman was able to beat The Last Crusade in North America , and made a further $ 150 million in home video sales . Box Office Mojo estimates that the film sold more than 60 million tickets in the US . 
 = = = Critical reaction = = = 
 Batman was criticized in some quarters for being too dark and too violent , but nonetheless received positive reviews . Many observed that Burton was more interested in the Joker and the art and set production design than Batman or anything else in terms of characterization and screentime . Comic book fans reacted negatively over the Joker murdering Thomas and Martha Wayne ; in the comic book , Joe Chill is responsible . Writer Sam Hamm said it was Burton 's idea to have the Joker murder Wayne 's parents . " The Writer 's Strike was going on , " Hamm said , " and Tim had the other writers do that . I also hold innocent to Alfred letting Vicki Vale into the Batcave . Fans were ticked off with that , and I agree . That would have been Alfred 's last day of employment at Wayne Manor . " 
 The songs written by Prince were criticized for being " too out of place " . While Burton has stated he had no problem with the Prince songs , he was less enthusiastic with their use in the film . On the film , Burton remarked , " I liked parts of it , but the whole movie is mainly boring to me . It 's OK , but it was more of a cultural phenomenon than a great movie . " Nonetheless , it received acclaim . Based on 67 reviews collected by Rotten Tomatoes , 72 % of reviewers reacted positively to Batman . Metacritic gives an aggregated score of 66 , based on 17 reviews , indicating " generally favorable " . 
 Despite initial negative reactions from comics fans prior to the film 's release , Keaton 's portrayal of Batman was generally praised . James Berardinelli called the film entertaining , with the highlight being the production design . However , he concluded , " the best thing that can be said about Batman is that it led to Batman Returns , which was a far superior effort . " Variety felt " Jack Nicholson stole every scene " but still greeted the film with positive feedback . Roger Ebert was highly impressed with the production design , but claimed " Batman is a triumph of design over story , style over substance , a great @-@ looking movie with a plot you can 't care much about . " He also called the film " a depressing experience " . His reviewing partner Gene Siskel disagreed , describing the film as having a ' refreshingly adult ' approach with performances , direction and set design that ' draws you into a psychological world ' . Jonathan Rosenbaum of the Chicago Reader called it " watchable enough " . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Anton Furst and Peter Young won the Academy Award for Best Art Direction , while Nicholson was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor ( Musical or Comedy ) . The British Academy of Film and Television Arts nominated Batman in six categories ( Production Design , Visual Effects , Costume Design , Makeup , Sound and Actor in a Supporting Role for Nicholson ) , but it won none of the categories . Nicholson , Basinger , the makeup department , and costume designer Bob Ringwood all received nominations at the Saturn Awards . The film was also nominated for the Saturn Award for Best Fantasy Film and the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation . 
 The success of Batman prompted Warner Bros. Animation to create the acclaimed Batman : The Animated Series , as a result beginning the long @-@ running DC animated universe and helped establish the modern day superhero film genre . Series co @-@ creator Bruce Timm stated the television show 's Art Deco design was inspired from the film . Timm commented , " our show would never have gotten made if it hadn 't been for that first Batman movie . " Burton joked , " ever since I did Batman , it was like the first dark comic book movie . Now everyone wants to do a dark and serious superhero movie . I guess I 'm the one responsible for that trend . " 
 Batman initiated the original Batman film series and spawned three sequels : Batman Returns ( 1992 ) , Batman Forever ( 1995 ) and Batman & Robin ( 1997 ) ; the latter two of which were directed by Joel Schumacher instead of Burton , and replaced Keaton as Batman with Val Kilmer and George Clooney , respectively . 
 Producers Michael Uslan and Benjamin Melniker filed a breach of contract lawsuit in Los Angeles County Superior Court on March 26 , 1992 . Uslan and Melniker claimed to be " the victims of a sinister campaign of fraud and coercion that has cheated them out of continuing involvement in the production of Batman and its sequels . We were denied proper credits , and deprived of any financial rewards for our indispensable creative contribution to the success of Batman . " A superior court judge rejected the lawsuit . Total revenues of Batman have topped $ 2 billion , with Uslan claiming to have " not seen a penny more than that since our net profit participation has proved worthless . " Warner Bros. offered the pair an out @-@ of @-@ court pay @-@ off , a sum described by Uslan and Melniker 's attorney as " two <unk> and two Cokes " . 
 Reflecting on the twentieth anniversary of its release in a retrospective article on Salon.com , film commentator Scott Mendelson noted the continuing impact that Batman has had on the motion film industry , including the increasing importance of opening weekend box office receipts ; the narrowing window between a film 's debut and its video release that caused the demise of second @-@ run movie theaters ; the accelerated acquisition of pre @-@ existing , pre @-@ sold properties for film adaptations that can be readily leveraged for <unk> tie @-@ ins ; the primacy of the MPAA PG @-@ 13 as the target rating for film producers ; and more off @-@ beat , non @-@ traditional casting opportunities for genre films . 
 The American Film Institute anointed Batman the 46th greatest movie hero and the Joker the 45th greatest movie villain on AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Heroes and Villains . In 2008 , Batman was selected by Empire magazine as number 458 of The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time . 
 American Film Institute lists 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movies – Nominated 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Thrills – Nominated 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Heroes and Villains : 
 The Joker – # 45 Villain 
 Batman – # 46 Hero 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movie Quotes : 
 " Have you ever danced with the Devil in the pale moonlight ? " – Nominated 
 AFI 's 100 Years of Film Scores – Nominated 
 AFI 's 10 Top 10 – Nominated Fantasy Film 
 = = = Home video = = = 
 Many versions of the film have been released . Included are VHS , Laserdisc , single @-@ disc DVD , special edition DVD and an anthology set . The Batman : The Motion Picture Anthology released in 2005 included 2 @-@ disc special edition DVDs of the Tim Burton / Joel Schumacher Batman films . This anthology set was re @-@ released on Blu @-@ ray on March 10 , 2009 . 
 On May 19 , 2009 a 20th anniversary stand @-@ alone edition was released . This stand @-@ alone version contains exactly the same special features as its anthology set ( both DVD and Blu @-@ ray ) counterparts . There are two differences : This version includes a 50 @-@ page booklet guide to the film , and a slight variation in packaging from normal Blu @-@ ray cases ( i.e. a Warner Bros. <unk> ) . They both include a digital copy of the film . 
 The film was also included in The Tim Burton Collection DVD / Blu @-@ ray set in 2012 , alongside its sequel , Batman Returns , and several other Burton films . 
 = Walter Oesau = 
 Walter " Gulle " Oesau ( 28 June 1913 – 11 May 1944 ) was a German World War II fighter ace who served in the Luftwaffe from 1934 until his death in 1944 . He rose to command Jagdgeschwader 1 , which was named in his honor after his death . 
 He served with the Condor Legion during the Spanish Civil War , with 3 Staffel of Jagdgruppe 88 ( 3 . / J 88 ) , claiming 8 aircraft during the campaign , becoming one of only 28 people to earn the award of the Spanish Cross in Gold and Diamonds . 
 At the start of World War II , Oesau was given command of 2 Staffel , Jagdgeschwader 20 . The group was moved to the Eastern Front at the start of the Invasion of Poland , moving back to the Western Front later as the redesignated III Gruppe , Jagdgeschwader 51 ( III . / JG 51 ) . After his first victory of World War II in the Battle of France , Oesau operated on both the Western and Eastern Fronts , where he was wounded and received the Silver Wound Badge . 
 He returned to operations as Geschwaderkommodore of Jagdgeschwader 1 ( JG 1 ) . He was killed in action on 11 May 1944 aged 30 . JG 1 was given the suffix " Oesau " in his honor . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Walter " Gulle " Oesau was born to a bank director in <unk> near <unk> , Germany on 28 June 1913 . He joined the German Army ( Heer ) in October 1933 and served in the Second Artillery Regiment as an enlisted soldier . After being transferred to a Luftwaffe transport unit , he undertook flying training in 1934 as a cadet ( Fahnenjunker ) at the Luftwaffe Academy ( Deutsche Verkehrsfliegerschule ) in Hanover . Upon completion of his training he was assigned to Jagdgeschwader 132 , as a Leutnant . The unit was re – designated as Jagdgeschwader 2 " Richthofen " in May 1939 . 
 = = Combat career = = 
 = = = Spanish Civil War = = = 
 Oesau started his operational career with the Condor Legion , along with future contemporary aces such as Werner Mölders and Adolf Galland . He was one of the first to join 3 . Jagdgruppe 88 in Spain in April 1938 . The Staffel , commanded by Werner Mölders , took part in the Spanish Civil War where Oesau claimed eight victories , flying 130 combat missions . For this he received the Spanish Cross ( Spanienkreuz ) in Gold with Diamonds . He was also wounded in this conflict which earned him the Spanish Wound Badge . He also received the Medalla de la Campaña and the Medalla Militar . 
 = = = Western Front 1939 – 40 = = = 
 On 1 March 1939 Oesau joined the Headquarters Flight ( Stabsschwarm ) of I. / JG 2 . By 15 July 1939 Oesau was promoted to Oberleutnant and given command of 2 . / JG 20 . On 15 July 1939 , I. / JG 20 was activated in Döberitz initially consisting of two Staffeln drawn from JG 2 . Prior to the invasion of Poland I. / JG 20 was transferred to <unk> 26 August 1939 . From there , the group was transferred to <unk> ( modern <unk> ) anticipating an attack from the Polish Air Force . A week later the group moved to Brandenburg . On 21 February 1940 , the unit was relocated to <unk> under the control of JG 51 . It continued to operate in this fashion until the end of the Battle of France . On 4 July it was re – designated III . / JG 51 . Oesau served as Staffelkapitän of 7 . / JG 51 . 
 = = = = Battle of France = = = = 
 Oesau got his first World War II victory during the Battle of France on 13 May 1940 , when he claimed a French Curtiss P @-@ 36 Hawk over <unk> in the Netherlands , earning him the Iron Cross 1st class ( Eisernes Kreuz 1 . Klasse ) . On 31 May , he claimed three Spitfires during a patrol North West of Dunkirk and next day he claimed a Bristol Blenheim . On 13 June 1940 , he shot down the last French aircraft kill claimed by JG 51 , a French Amiot bomber . By the end of hostilities in France on 25 June , his World War II tally stood at 5 ( 13 including Spanish kills ) . 
 Following the Battle of France , the Luftwaffe started its attacks on Channel convoys as a prelude to the Battle of Britain . The primary task of JG 51 during this time was to provide fighter escort to these bomber missions . The commander of JG 51 , Oberst Theo Osterkamp established a policy of unrestricted combat air patrol ( <unk> Jagd ) of fighter Staffeln providing loose protection rather than close escort to the bombers , actively seeking out Royal Air Force fighters . On 7 July 1940 Oesau claimed one Spitfire . 
 = = = = Battle of Britain = = = = 
 On 10 July 1940 , the first major clashes of the Battle of Britain occurred in a phase known as the Kanalkampf . 20 Bf 109s of III . / JG 51 led by Hauptmann Hannes Trautloft and 30 Bf 110 C of I. / Zerstörergeschwader 26 escorted 20 Dornier Do 17 bombers of II . / Kampfgeschwader 2 attacking a large convoy off Folkestone . Oberleutnant Oesau was leading 7 . / JG 51 . 
 Trautloft noticed three of a flight of six intercepting Hurricanes of No. 32 squadron higher than the escorts , attempting to intercept the bombers . Soon they were joined by four squadrons of British fighters : No. 56 Squadron , No. 111 Squadron , No. 64 Squadron and No. 74 Squadron . Oesau was able to claim three Spitfires . Two 7 . / JG 51 aircraft crash landed in France . British losses show that no Spitfire was lost or destroyed in the ensuing battle . Only one No. 32 Hurricane , piloted by Pilot Officer Higgs , was destroyed in a collision with one of the Do 17s and only one other Hurricane was damaged . It is possible Oesau was responsible for damaging Higgs ' Hurricane , causing him to lose control . Two Spitfires landed with light damage while a third was also slightly damaged and force @-@ landed at RAF Manston . Over claiming of enemy losses was rife on both sides during the battle . 
 On 19 July , III . / JG 51 were confronted by Defiants of No. 141 Squadron south of Folkestone . As the German pilots were now aware of Defiant 's lack of front armament , they soon gained the advantage in combat and claimed 11 Defiants shot down in 8 minutes . Oesau was credited with one Defiant , taking his score to 19 . He was the first one of JG 51 to reach double digits in World War II . RAF losses record six Defiants destroyed and two damaged . 
 On 18 August 1940 , III . / JG 51 escorted Dorniers attacking Hornchurch airfield . Intercepted by Hurricanes over Kent , Oesau claimed one Hurricane shot down as his 20th victory , earning him the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes ) two days later , the first pilot of JG 51 to be thus honored . On 23 August 1940 , Trautloft took over as Geschwaderkommodore of JG 54 , and Walter Oesau replaced him as Gruppenkommandeur of III . / JG 51 . By October 1940 , Oesau had a total score of 48 ( including 26 Spitfires ) . 
 On 10 November 1940 Oesau succeeded Wilhelm Balthasar as Gruppenkommandeur of III . / JG 3 . With 39 victories he was currently the 4th highest scoring Ace behind Helmut Wick , Werner Mölders and Adolf Galland . On 5 February 1941 he shot down a Hurricane over <unk> , France , his 40th victory . He was awarded the Oak Leaves ( mit Eichenlaub ) to his Knight 's Cross next day . It also earned him second entry in the Wehrmachtbericht . In early 1941 , JG 3 returned to Germany to replace their Bf 109 ' <unk> ' with the new ' F ' variant ( Friedrich ) . However , Oesau disliked the Bf 109F and kept flying his ' <unk> ' for some time . JG 3 returned to France in May 1941 and Oesau added two more kills on 16 May and 28 May bringing his total to 51 . 
 = = = Operation Barbarossa = = = 
 Oesau 's III . / JG 3 was then involved in Operation Barbarossa the invasion of Russia , launched on 22 June 1941 . Oesau shot down his first Soviet aircraft on 24 June 1941 , and by 30 June 1941 had reached his 60th victory , downing a Tupolev SB bomber . Next day he downed three more SB bombers near Lvov ( modern Lviv , Ukraine ) . This earned him his 3rd entry in the Wehrmachtbericht . On 10 July 1941 , Oesau claimed 5 more aircraft and two more kills by 11 July 1941 . On 12 July 1941 , he shot down 7 Soviet aircraft in one sortie . In the five weeks since moving to the Eastern Front , Oesau was credited with 44 Soviet aircraft downed . He became the third pilot to reach 80 victories , the 80th kill an Ilyushin DB @-@ 3 bomber . He was awarded the Swords to his Knight 's Cross with Oak Leaves ( Ritterkreuz mit Eichenlaub und Schwertern ) on same day . He was the third person to earn the Swords . He was again then wounded , receiving heavy splinter injuries in face and knee . A fortnight later he was transferred to the Western Front to take over JG 2 . 
 = = = Defence of the Reich 1941 – 44 = = = 
 He succeeded Balthasar for the second time as JG 2 commander , who had died in combat with Spitfires over northern France when he pulled the tail off his Bf 109F in a dive . The Bf 109F @-@ 2 proved an excellent match to the Spitfire V , but Oesau disliked its reduced armament compared to the ' Emil ' , and continued to fly an E @-@ 4 model in preference to the Bf 109F , until lack of spares forced him to switch to the newer variant . Upon his appointment on 4 July 1941 , he addressed JG 2 with following words . 
 In the spirit of Manfred von Richthofen , and following the example set by my predecessors , Major Wick and Hauptmann Balthasar , constant readiness and devotion to duty will enable us to achieve yet further successes . 
 JG 2 was tasked with defending targets in occupied France against the RAF fighter <unk> the next two years Oesau led JG 2 through the war of attrition waged by the RAF . On 10 August 1941 Oesau claimed a Spitfire for his first kill with JG 2 . Over the next two days , he claimed four more Spitfires . By the end of September 1941 , Oesau had claimed two more Spitfires . 
 JG 2 participated in the Luftwaffe air cover of the Channel Dash . Two B @-@ 17 C Flying fortresses of No. 90 Squadron attacked the German battleships Scharnhorst and Gneisenau . In one of the highest altitude interceptions of World War II , the bombers were attacked by I. / JG 2 , resulting in the destruction of one . This aircraft put JG 2 's score past the 800 mark , matching the score of their Great War namesake . Kills No. 88 to 92 were all Spitfires claimed between Calais and Dungeness on 12 August 1941 . Oesau claimed his 100th kill on 26 October 1941 , the third pilot to do so . This earned him 4th entry in the Wehrmachtbericht . 
 He was then grounded from flying on operations , as his experience and leadership qualities were regarded as too valuable to risk further in front line combat . He did fly on occasional sorties , the most famous involving the shooting down of a Lancaster bomber of No. 44 Squadron RAF piloted by Warrant Officer G. T. Rhodes in April 1942 , during a rare RAF daylight raid on targets in <unk> . It was his 101st kill . In August 1942 , the Geschwaderstab of JG 2 exchanged their Bf 109 F aircraft for the FW 190 A – 2s . 
 From late 1942 onwards JG 2 was in the front line against the increasingly numerous United States Army Air Forces ( USAAF ) day bomber formations of B @-@ 17s and B @-@ 24s . 
 Oesau added four more to his tally by mid @-@ 1943 . Shortly before his 30th birthday , Oesau was elevated to a series of Luftwaffe staff and administration positions . On 1 July 1943 he was posted as Fighter Leader Brittany ( Jagdfliegerführer Bretagne ) , before being appointed as Geschwaderkommodore of JG 1 on 12 November 1943 , following the death of JG 1 's Hans Philipp in October 1943 . The ban on Oesau 's combat flying was lifted . While commanding JG 1 , Oesau became an expert ( Experten ) at shooting down 4 engine bombers , with 14 bomber kills claimed . He was awarded the Combined Pilots @-@ Observation Badge in gold and diamonds on 17 October 1943 . He was awarded the German Cross in Gold on 10 January 1944 . 
 For Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Luftwaffe Hermann Göring it was an ongoing concern that inadequate numbers of fighters were able to continually engage the bomber streams , at the very time that the USAAF 's 8th Air Force 's new commander , Maj. Gen. Jimmy Doolittle had instituted a new fighter strategy against the Luftwaffe . Hence on 23 February 1944 — near the midpoint of the USAAF 's Big Week bomber offensive against the Luftwaffe , also being carried out by the 15th Air Force flying out of Italian bases — Generalmajor Joseph Schmid Commander of I. Jagdkorps established a new rule for the fighters returning to base . They were to arrive at the nearest designated fighter airfield for resupply instead of returning to their own base . They were to be commanded by the senior pilot landing on that airfield , irrespective of their unit . This was meant to turn around the fighters in time to intercept returning bombers . 
 On next day , B @-@ 24s of 2nd Bomb division of the Eighth Air Force bombed Gotha . JG 1 ( under Oesau ) , JG 11 and JG 3 was sent to intercept . Due to high winds , the bombers were ahead of the escorts unprotected . Two groups of JG 1 met them before Gotha and 9 B @-@ 24s were claimed as a result . Since B @-@ 17s of 1st Bomb division also bombed Schweinfurt , other fighter units also arrived to intercept , eventually involving almost all the Western day fighter units of the Luftwaffe . This caused for confusion in pilots landing on airfields other than their own . This tested the directive of Schmid . Oesau led one of two such improvised formations successfully , with the other led by Hauptmann Borris of I. / JG 26 Oesau added 4 fighters to his score between January and March 1944 , and his tally stood at 117 . On 8 May 1944 he claimed a Thunderbolt shot down over Hanover ; his last kill . 
 = = Death = = 
 While being the Geschwaderkommodore ( = equivalent of a RAF Group Captain or USAF Wing Commander ) of JG 1 Oesau frequently received his share of Hermann Göring 's deep anger and frustration over the failure to beat off the Allied bomber offensive . Göring questioned the commitment of <unk> who were not flying regularly and thus not really " leading " their respective units . In this context it should be stated that in order not to risk one of the Luftwaffe expert 's life [ German fighter aces were called Experten ] , there was an automatic ban on Oesau for further combat flying since his 100th kill . Perhaps the ban was lifted temporarily or bypassed when he was appointed Geschwaderkommodore of JG 1 . On the other hand , Oesau might simply have ignored the ban and continued to lead missions . 
 Oesau added several victories over American heavy bombers in the first five months of 1944 . On 11 May 1944 one thousand U.S. heavy bombers from Eighth Air Force attacked railway targets in Eastern France and North East Belgium . They were escorted by even more numbers of P @-@ 38 and P @-@ 51 fighters . Oesau was in bed with influenza . Upon hearing the news , Göring phoned Oesau 's staff : 
 Göring – " Is the Kommodore flying ? " Staff – " No , he is in bed with fever . " Göring – " Yes , yes , I know that kind ! " , Göring said scornfully , Göring – " He has also turned tired and coward ! " 
 Angered by this comment , Oesau took off in a Bf 109 G @-@ 6 / AS " Green 13 " ( Wing Number <unk> ) from Paderborn despite a high fever . Leading three aircraft of the Geschwaderstab , the <unk> broke formation over the Ardennes as it approached the bombers . In the dogfight Oesau 's wingman reported damage to his machine and he was ordered to break off . Left alone , Oesau faced P @-@ 38s and possibly P @-@ 51s as well . According to Major Hartmann Grasser , Gruppenkommandeur of III . / JG 1 , who was on the same mission , there were five P @-@ 38s facing Oesau . 
 What followed is unclear as there are several versions . Oesau was chased by 1st Lt. James Leslie Doyle , 1st Lt. Wilbur L. Jarvis III and 1st Lt. James C. Austin , of the <unk> Fighter Squadron ( 474th FG , 9th AF ) . All three were experienced pilots and chased Oesau from 28 @,@ 000 feet to tree @-@ top level . In the ensuing 20 minute dogfight , Oesau defended skillfully , though his aircraft was damaged by gunfire . While attempting an emergency landing , his Gustav received a final burst of fire in the cockpit area and crashed into the ground 6 miles south west of St. Vith . His body was thrown clear of the aircraft some yards away . 
 According to the " Eighth Air Force Mission Folder for 11 May 1944 , Mission 351 " , Lt. Doyle engaged in a turning dogfight with a pair of Bf 109s , scoring hits on the leader . Doyle had then broken off combat without claiming a kill , unaware that his victim , Oesau , had been killed by a 20 mm shell . Doyle 's kill had been the first kill of the 474th Fighter Group in its first combat with the Luftwaffe . 
 There is some dispute regarding who exactly shot down his fighter . Some sources claim that he was shot during the dogfight and while the aircraft was falling to the ground , he was shot at again a few feet above ground , possibly by the Mustangs of 354th FG . Lt Wilbur Jarvis , No. 2 in the flight led by Doyle received a Damaged credit ( not a kill ) for Oesau 's aircraft . Doyle noted bullet damage in the cockpit area and his gun camera footage showed that it was Oesau 's Green 13 . German records indicated that his death was caused by an explosive shell in the cockpit , his body having several bullet wounds . Later an image from the Gun camera was published ( without caption ) that purportedly showed Oesau 's aircraft from the right side . 
 Oesau was aged 30 at the time of his death . He had a total of 127 kills gained over 300 missions . 27 were Spitfires , 14 four @-@ engined bombers , 44 were scored on the Eastern Front and 9 in the Spanish Civil War . In recognition of his record , JG 1 received the title Oesau in honor of its fallen Geschwaderkommodore . Only Werner Mölders had a similar honor with JG 51 Mölders . Walter Oesau is buried in <unk> , close to his birthplace and the town museum ( <unk> Landesmuseum ) has documented his last journey in pictures . 
 = = Aftermath and historical importance = = 
 During his career , Oesau was mentioned five times in the Wehrmachtbericht . These were the daily propaganda reports by Oberkommando der Wehrmacht and even one mention is considered to be high military honor . The last one on 15 May 1944 was after his death . 
 Johannes Steinhoff , the high @-@ ranking Luftwaffe ace ( 176 Kills ) who went on to become the Chief of Staff for Allied Air Forces in Central Europe , once said : " Walter Gulle Oesau was the toughest fighter pilot in the Luftwaffe " . 
 In 1940 , frustrated with the perceived lack of success against RAF Fighter Command , Göring was keen on infusing the fighter force leadership with younger blood . He perceived a lack of aggressiveness in the Jagdgeschwader leadership . The likes of Theo Osterkamp were the first victim of this policy , handing over JG 51 to Werner Mölders . Oesau was considered to be one such rising star . However , being a star and staying in Göring 's favor required keeping up the kill rate and promotions were invariably linked to scores . According to Dr. Kurt Tank , the Focke – Wulf designer , although many of the younger generation were good flyers , they were unable to cope with problems of overall planning and broader strategic aspects . However , Oesau was one of the outstanding leaders ever produced by Luftwaffe fighter wings with the likes of Werner Mölders and Adolf Galland . 
 The decision to continually retain or return gifted experts ( Experten ) to front line battle proved extremely costly , resulting in the death in combat of many of the earlier experts and aces . This , coupled with the acute shortage of well trained pilots and the fact that by 1943 they were facing a better equipped and well @-@ trained enemy , meant the life expectancy of even the most gifted was tragically short . Author John Weal says that , although other Geschwaderkommodore would end up dying in combat , nothing would showcase the changing fortunes of Luftwaffe fighter forces than the death of Walter Oesau . 
 = = Personality and personal life = = 
 German historian Hans Otto Böhm commented on Oesau as " One of my best professors " . There is little information available on the personal side of Walter Oesau . He had good sense of humor and liked to spend time with his friends . He was a simple man , who did not display any flamboyant personal emblems on his aircraft . His aircraft while commanding JG 2 did not have any special markings except for the unit 's normal yellow under – cowling . While Oesau commanded , JG 2 , like many others , dropped the special symbols for Stab ( headquarters flight ) units in favor of numerals . This helped make the leader 's aircraft anonymous . Unlike other aces , Oesau reportedly never had markings on his rudder representing his personal tally , although this is contradicted by some photos displaying what may be his aircraft rudder painted with score of downed aircraft . The authenticity of the photograph is questioned by some as there are also Ju 87 photos supposedly signed by Oesau ( he never flew a Stuka bomber ) . 
 = = = Date of Rank = = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 Spanish Medalla de la Campaña 
 Spanish Medalla Militar 
 Spanish Cross in Gold with Swords and Diamonds 
 Iron Cross ( 1939 ) 
 2nd Class ( 15 May 1940 ) 
 1st Class ( 20 May 1940 ) 
 Front Flying Clasp of the Luftwaffe in Gold for fighter pilots with pennant " 300 " 
 Wound Badge ( 1939 ) in Black 
 German Cross in Gold on 17 October 1943 as Oberstleutnant and Jagdfliegerführer 4 
 Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Sword 
 Knight 's Cross on 20 August 1940 as Hauptmann and Staffelkapitän of the 7 . / JG 51 
 9th Oak Leaves on 6 February 1941 as Hauptmann and Gruppenkommandeur of the III . / JG 3 
 3rd Swords on 15 July 1941 as Hauptmann and Gruppenkommandeur of the III . / JG 3 
 = Golden Ambrosian Republic = 
 The Golden Ambrosian Republic ( Italian : Aurea Repubblica Ambrosiana ; 1447 – 1450 ) was a short @-@ lived government founded in Milan by members of the University of Pavia with popular support . With the aid of Francesco Sforza they held out against the forces of Venice , but after a betrayal Sforza defected and captured Milan to become Duke himself , abolishing the Republic . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Foundation = = = 
 When Filippo Maria Visconti , Visconti Duke of Milan , died on 13 August 1447 , the city was thrown into confusion by the unexpectedness of the Duke 's expiration and the quick way in which the claimants to the title acted . Filippo Maria had no heir through male bloodlines , but the day before his death had written a will dedicating the Duchy to Alfonso V of Aragon . Among the other claimants were Charles , Duke of Orléans , nephew of Filippo Maria through his mother Valentina Visconti , Filippo 's cousins Albert and Sigismund of the House of Habsburg , great @-@ grandsons of Bernabò Visconti , and Frederick III , Holy Roman Emperor , who declared that the Duchy reverted to the Holy Roman Empire on the extinction of male heirs . But the two most prominent candidates supported by the Milanese population were Alfonso of Aragon and Francesco Sforza , the Duke 's son @-@ in @-@ law by marriage to his illegitimate daughter , Bianca Maria Visconti . The Bracceschi , supporters of the King of Aragon , seized the Castello on the night of the 13th , almost before Filippo Maria died , forcing the captains to swear allegiance to Alfonso . 
 Despite the general support for either Alfonso or Sforza , other influential citizens believed that the old republic could be restored . Learned bodies , such as the College of Jurisprudence in Pavia , painted the days of the old republic as a golden age . The merchants , seeing the prosperity of Republican Venice , were behind this idea . On the morning of the 14th , Republicans stirred the populace to rise against the Bracceschi , led by Antonio Trivulzio , Giorgio Lampugnano , <unk> Cotta , and Teodoro Bossi , members of the College of Jurisprudence . A Republic was declared behind the Palace of the Commune , and the captains abandoned their oaths to Alfonso in favor of the Republic . The Bracceschi were driven from Milan , and the new republic was called the Golden Ambrosian Republic , named for St. Ambrose , the 4th century bishop of Milan , who was taken on as the Republic 's patron . They took the old constitution and revised it that same day as suited their needs , electing twenty @-@ four <unk> e <unk> della <unk> , or " Captains and Defenders of Liberty , " to frame laws , elected regularly and later reduced to twelve . 
 = = = Early existence = = = 
 The idea of a radical renovation of liberties in the cities did not suit the powers of North Italy , who had been in league against the Visconti territorial gains in a decades @-@ long series of wars interrupted by truces , most recently the Peace of Cremona of 20 November 1441 . Venice was already at war with Milan , and the Republic was struck a sore blow as previously Milanese cities including Pavia , Lodi , and Piacenza defected or declared their independence . Besides the loss of support and defensive locations , the drop in revenue also caused a brief financial crisis resolved by the imposition of new taxes . Venice , now occupying Lodi and Piacenza , refused to listen to Milan 's pleas for peace . Milan turned to Francesco Sforza , the greatest military leader of his day , offering him the position of Captain @-@ General and the city of Brescia . Although he wished - and indeed , planned - to succeed his father @-@ in @-@ law as Duke , he decided to accept the position and promised rewards . A draft was declared in Milan on 13 September . 
 Sforza quickly captured independent Pavia when his mother @-@ in @-@ law persuaded the city 's ruling <unk> to relinquish it to him , and the Republic grudgingly allowed him to keep it with the title of Count , fearing that the <unk> and their large arsenal might instead offer themselves to Venice if they refused . Sforza promised the <unk> no new taxes , respect for the old laws , payment for his hired officials , and to repair the city bridges and walls . He kept these promises faithfully and so won over the people of Pavia , establishing his rulership . Pavia was previously almost a second capital to Milan , and gave Sforza his own seat of power . The city was also in a strategic location on the Po River , situated where it could block the Venetians from coming to the relief of the beleaguered Piacenza via water . Returning to this siege and finding the city not likely to crumble by starvation , he resolved to storm it . Employing cannons in an almost unheard @-@ of manner , he opened up a breach in the walls and sacked the city . The news of this sack was greeted by three days ' rejoicing in Milan . Meanwhile , Milanese Captain Bartolomeo Colleoni captured <unk> which had previously proclaimed Sforza as its lord , stealing it from the now dangerously powerful Sforza . This caused further and even greater rejoicing , for the Milanese feared Sforza . 
 In January 1448 , the terms of the previous Captains and Defenders ended , and in the following election the Guelphs rose to political prominence . Being especially adverse to Sforza , they entered peace negotiations with Venice , which , also threatened by Sforza 's growing power , was willing to come to terms , albeit dictated by herself . Two of the Ghibellines who helped to found the Republic , namely Lampugnano and Bossi , stirred the populace against the Guelphs in a massive demonstration before the Court of <unk> . The Council of Nine Hundred was forced to abandon its plans for peace , and Sforza was given the go @-@ ahead for his next campaign to seize the Adda River . Sforza 's plans were voted down by the Republic in favor of more traditional tactics , namely besieging Lodi directly . While this happened , the Venetian fleet under Andrea <unk> assaulted the bridge of Cremona . However , Sforza 's wife Bianca was there , and led the defense until her husband relieved the city . The Venetian fleet withdrew and entrenched while it waited for the arrival of the Venetian army . Sforza trapped the fleet behind its defenses and , with his unorthodox use of artillery , utterly destroyed or captured every one of the seventy ships . This victory was celebrated in Milan , but the leaders of the Republic still feared Sforza , and sent him off to occupy him with the <unk> <unk> while Lodi and Caravaggio were besieged , hoping that their fall would end the war . 
 But ultimately the forces were brought together at Caravaggio , and both Sforza 's Milanese and the Venetian army under <unk> Attendolo gathered there . The siege remained unbroken throughout July and until 15 September , when Attendolo launched a surprise @-@ attack on Sforza , so rapid that he did not even have time to buckle on his armor . What might have been a rout Sforza turned into a great victory as he set the example for his troops on the front line and utterly defeated the Venetian army , capturing three generals . Caravaggio fell , and despite rejoicing in Milan , little gratitude was given by the government to the architect of the victory , and the Republic sent him on to Lodi , determined to end the war . It was here , when a satisfactory end to the war seemed imminent , that the Milanese took a fatal misstep . 
 = = = Sforza 's defection and the Guelph @-@ Ghibelline feud = = = 
 In Milan , Sforza 's enemies worked continually against him . The Piccinino brothers , sons of famous condottiere Niccolò Piccinino and former Captains @-@ General before being replaced as supreme military commanders by Sforza , convinced the suspicious Republic to work secretly against Sforza . Rumors were spread among the troops about not receiving payment at the end of the war if they remained with Sforza , and Sforza himself was ordered back from the siege of Brescia , the city promised to him , while the citizens were secretly told to hold out until peace , already in the works , was signed . Sforza learned of this treachery and defected to the Venetians for 13 @,@ 000 ducats and the Duchy of Milan in return for the <unk> , Crema , and his service . The treaty was signed on 18 October 1448 , and Sforza now undid everything he had labored for over the past year . With such a powerful man on the Venetian side , it was the beginning of the end of the Golden Ambrosian Republic . Public opinion , despite the government 's position , was generally pro @-@ Sforza , and only an impassioned , patriotic speech from Giorgio Lampugnano subdued it at last . The Piccinino brothers became Captains @-@ General once more , but were not as capable as the brilliant Sforza . 
 This was reinforced by the internal dissention that was prominent in Milan . Crime and mob violence were rampant , and the harsh but empty measures against it only served to further divide the populace . Members of the government were filled with suspicion against one another . In an attempt to resolve the situation , the podestà was given absolute power . Financial problems were also grave ; fines , confiscations , and a state lottery were instituted to try to alleviate the deficit . Moreover , Guelph aristocrats continued to be regularly elected over the Ghibellines , and began to make the Republic far less democratic . Carlo Gonzaga , Captain of the People , lived luxuriously as an autocrat with his will as law . He was supported by Giovanni <unk> and Giovanni Ossona , tradesmen @-@ turned @-@ politicians , who were prominent in government affairs . Gonzaga began replacing his officials with his unambitious supporters , and the Ghibellines saw the ideals of their Republic crumbling before their eyes . Lampugnano and his Ghibelline friends conspired against Gonzaga and the Guelph regime , but were exposed by a letter intercepted by Gonzaga from Lampugnano to his friend Bossi . Gonzaga kept this knowledge secret , knowing that Lampugnano and Bossi were two of the most influential citizens since the formation of the Republic , but with the support of the vengeful Guelph Captains and Defenders conspired to have them slain . Lampugnano and Bossi were sent as envoys to Frederick III in February 1449 , but on the road were caught and imprisoned . Lampugnano was beheaded without a trial , and Bossi was tortured until he gave the names of his fellow conspirators . Following the execution of the leaders there was a massacre of leading Ghibellines within the city , from which only a few , such as Vitaliano Borromeo , escaped to safety in <unk> , Piedmont and elsewhere . The heads of the slain were placed upon pikes in the Piazza of the <unk> . 
 Meanwhile , the other claimants to the Duchy began to see that Sforza would be a greater threat than the Ambrosian Republic . Louis of Savoy invaded in spring of 1449 , and Sforza sent Colleoni ( who had earlier defected ) to defeat him at <unk> , leading to an uneasy peace . Sforza also faced treachery within his own ranks , added with the fact that he rashly accepted the defection of his great enemies the Piccinino brothers , who , upon gaining access to Monza , promptly returned it to Milan . 
 Lampugnano , unfortunately for the Guelphs , was considered a martyr for the Republic . This was made worse by the fact that the Guelphs in leadership refused to run elections in April , until in June they were forced by the populace . Ghibelline families took the reins of Milan in this election , and the Guelphs were defeated . However , the reprisals against the Guelphs , including the imprisonment of <unk> and Ossona who had been blamed ( probably unjustly ) for the massacre , led the populace to violently depose the Ghibellines and reinstall the extremist Guelphs . Gonzaga , however , whose friend Galeotto Toscano was killed in the uprising , departed Milan to Crema , hoping to make peace with Sforza . 
 = = = End of the Republic = = = 
 Sforza was coming close to Milan itself in his conquests , and decided that since it was too powerful to be taken by force , he would surround it and starve the populace into surrender . With the loss of the outer cities by conquest or defection , Milan underwent famine . Gonzaga offered Crema to Sforza , hoping he would be tempted to take it himself and betray the Venetians . But Sforza remained staunch , and instead offered Gonzaga the city of <unk> if he would abandon Crema . This was accepted , and Crema , without support , quickly capitulated . 
 To the Milanese , Sforza 's victory now seemed certain , but he found his Venetian allies beginning to have doubts about their Captain @-@ General . They decided that Milan run by Sforza would be far more dangerous and detrimental to their interests than if it were run by a weak Republic . The last of the territory claimed by Venice , namely Crema , was now captured . Venice went behind Sforza 's back and signed a peace treaty with the Republic . They conceded conquered land to the Republic in return for peace , and let Sforza keep only Pavia , Cremona , Piacenza , and a narrow strip of land . They ordered him to accept the treaty or find Venice his enemy . The Republic rejoiced , and the citizens were confident the war was over and their future was secured . But Sforza could not accept the conditions of the treaty , and decided to persevere in the struggle . He was already very powerful , and moreover was close to Milan . The Milanese in their assurance of peace had nearly exhausted their resources to plant crops and return to the old way of life . He was confident that Milan would quickly fall to him . After reinforcing his peace with Savoy with the concession of a few unimportant castles , he defeated the Venetians under his rival Sigismondo Malatesta and continued the siege . 
 Sforza chose for his headquarters the Borromeo castle of Peschiera , south @-@ east of the city . Starvation and suffering were rampant in Milan . At last Gaspare da <unk> engineered a coup on 24 February 1450 . The next day the citizens met , but the suggestions and opinions were of great variety , save that all condemned Venice for its apparent apathy . Da <unk> convinced the people to surrender to Sforza . Sforza had made himself very popular for his generosity while fighting for Milan . He had abstained from ravaging the countryside as was so common among commanders of his day , and after some debate the public was convinced . The following day terms were offered to Sforza , who accepted them . Sforza earned the city 's devotion by distributing food to the starving people . On 22 March 1450 , he had himself declared capitano del <unk> , and by right of his wife , the Duke of Milan . He secured his popular support by letting many office @-@ holders keep their positions and being very lenient in his reprisals . The leaders were briefly imprisoned or relegated to their estates , but were generally pardoned soon after , even knighting some of his old enemies at his coronation . Ghibellines were allowed to return in safety and were restored to favor . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 Sforza remained at war with Venice for years after the downfall of the Ambrosian Republic . Venice allied herself with the kingdom of Naples , previously a contender for the succession of Milan . Sforza , however , allied himself with his friend , Cosimo de ' Medici of Florence against Venice and Aragonese Naples . The continued war was finally closed by the peace of Lodi in 1454 with the House of Sforza as the established rulers of the Duchy of Milan 
 During its three @-@ year existence , the Ambrosian Republic won two major battles . The Lombards defeated the French at the Battle of Bosco Marengo in 1447 and the Venetians at the Battle of Caravaggio in 1448 . It was those victories that ensured the Republic all the territory of the former Duchy . 
 Of the Republic , Niccolò Machiavelli remarked 
 In order to create a Republic in Milan it would be necessary to exterminate all the nobility . . . . For there are , among the nobles , so many exalted personages that the laws do not suffice to repress them , and they must needs be kept under by a living voice and a royal power . 
 = = First <unk> e <unk> = = 
 The leading magistrates of the city , the <unk> e <unk> ( " Captains and Defenders " ) , were in charge of the government , elected every six months beginning in August 1447 . They were originally numbered twenty @-@ four but were eventually reduced to twelve . 
 = = = Porta Orientale = = = 
 Giovanni <unk> 
 Giovanni <unk> 
 Rolando or <unk> <unk> 
 Giovanni <unk> 
 = = = = Porta Romana = = = = 
 Bartolomeo Visconti 
 Giovanni <unk> 
 <unk> Trivulzio 
 Antonio Visconti , perhaps Antonio <unk> 
 = = = = Porta <unk> = = = = 
 Giorgio Piatti 
 Giovanni <unk> 
 Ambrogio <unk> 
 Giovanni <unk> 
 = = = = Porta <unk> = = = = 
 Vitaliano Borromeo 
 <unk> Castiglione 
 Giacomo <unk> 
 Simone <unk> 
 = = = = Porta <unk> = = = = 
 Giacomo <unk> 
 Giorgio <unk> 
 <unk> or Luigi Bossi 
 Francesco <unk> 
 = = = = Porta Nuova = = = = 
 Bartolomeo Morone 
 Pietro Cotta 
 <unk> <unk> 
 Galeotto <unk> 
 = Mangalorean Catholics = 
 Mangalorean Catholics ( Konkani : <unk> <unk> ) are an ethno @-@ religious community of Roman Catholics following the Latin Rite from the Mangalore Diocese ( erstwhile South Canara district ) on the southwestern coast of Karnataka , India . They are a Konkani people and speak the Konkani language and Kannada language too . 
 Contemporary Mangalorean Catholics are descended mainly from Goan Catholics who migrated to South Canara between 1560 and 1763 , throughout the course of the Goa Inquisition , Portuguese – Adil Shahi wars , and the Portuguese – Maratha wars . They learned the languages of South Canara , Tulu , and Kannada , but retained Konkani as their mother tongue and preserved their lifestyle . Their 15 @-@ year captivity at Seringapatam imposed by Tipu Sultan , the de facto ruler of the Kingdom of Mysore , from 24 February 1784 to 4 May 1799 led to the near extinction of the community . After Tipu 's defeat and subsequent killing by the British in 1799 , the community resettled in South Canara , and later prospered under British rule . 
 Although early assertions of a distinct Mangalorean Catholic identity date from the migration period , a developed Mangalorean Catholic cultural identity only emerged following the captivity . The culture of Mangalorean Catholics is a blend of Mangalorean and Goan cultures . After migration , they adopted some aspects of the local Mangalorean culture , but retained many of their Goan customs and traditions , and like their Goan ancestors , modern Mangalorean Catholic culture can be best described as an increasingly Anglicised Indo @-@ Latin culture . The Mangalorean Catholic diaspora is mostly concentrated in the Arab states of the Persian Gulf and the Anglosphere . 
 = = Ethnic identity = = 
 The Roman Catholics from the Mangalore Diocese and the newly formed Udupi Diocese ( erstwhile South Canara district ) and their descendents are generally known as Mangalorean Catholics . The diocese is located on the southwestern coast of India . It comprises the civil districts of Dakshina Kannada and Udupi in Karnataka state , and Kasaragod in Kerala state . This region was collectively referred to as South Canara during the British Raj and then from the partition of India until the States Reorganisation Act of 1956 . 
 In 1526 , Portuguese ships arrived in Mangalore , and the number of local converts to Christianity slowly increased . However , a sizeable Christian population did not exist there until the second half of the 16th century , when there was a large @-@ scale immigration of Christians from Goa to South Canara . They were reluctant to learn the local languages of South Canara and continued to speak Konkani , the language they brought from Goa , so that local Christians had to learn Konkani to converse with them . After this migration , the skilled Goan Catholic agriculturists were offered various land grants by the native Bednore rulers of South Canara . They observed their traditional Hindu customs in conjunction with the newfound Catholic practices , and preserved their lifestyle . 
 Most migrants were people from the lower economic strata who had been left out of government and economic jobs ; their lands had been confiscated due to heavy taxation under the Portuguese in Goa . As a consequence of the wealth and privileges which these Goan migrants enjoyed in Mangalore , they began feeling superior to their landless kindred in Goa . Their captivity at Seringapatam ( 1784 – 1799 ) , where many died , were killed , or were forcibly converted to Islam , led to the formation of a separate and common Mangalorean Catholic cultural identity among members of the group , who hitherto had considered themselves an extension of the larger Goan Catholic community . They no longer self @-@ identified as Goan Catholics . After their years of captivity , prosperity under the British and under Italian Jesuits , followed by migration for employment to Bombay , Calcutta , Poona , the Persian Gulf Arab states , and the Anglosphere , enabled the community to restore their identity . The overwhelming majority of Mangalorean Catholics are of Goud Saraswat Brahmin lineage . Historian Alan Machado Prabhu estimates that almost 95 per cent of Mangalorean Catholics have Goan origins . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ migration era = = = 
 All records of an early existence of Christians in South Canara were lost at the time of their deportation by Tipu Sultan in 1784 . Hence , it is not known exactly when Christianity was introduced in South Canara , although it is possible that Syrian Christians settled in South Canara , just as they did in Kerala , a state south of Canara . The Italian traveller Marco Polo recorded that there were considerable trading activities between the Red Sea and the Canara coast in the 13th century . It can be surmised that foreign Christian merchants were visiting the coastal towns of South Canara during that period for commerce ; it is possible some Christian priests might have accompanied them for evangelistic work . 
 In April 1321 the French Dominican friar Jordanus <unk> of <unk> ( in south @-@ western France ) landed at Thana with four other friars . He then travelled to Bhatkal in North Canara , a port town on the coastal route from Thana to Quilon . Being the first bishop of India and the Quilon Diocese , he was entrusted the spiritual nourishment of Christian community in Mangalore and other parts of India by Pope John XXII . According to historian Severine Silva , no concrete evidence has yet been found that there were any permanent settlements of Christians in South Canara before the 16th century . It was only after the advent of the Portuguese in the region that Christianity began to spread . 
 In 1498 the Portuguese explorer Vasco da Gama landed on a group of islands in South Canara on his voyage from Portugal to India . He named the islands El Padron de Santa Maria ; they later came to be known as St Mary 's Islands . In 1500 Portuguese explorer Pedro Álvares Cabral arrived at Anjediva in North Canara with eight Franciscan missionaries . Under the leadership of Frei Henrique Soares de Coimbra , the missionaries converted 22 or 23 natives to Christianity in the Mangalore region . During the early part of the 16th century , Krishnadevaraya ( 1509 – 1529 ) , the ruler of the Vijayanagara Empire of Deccan , granted commercial privileges to the Portuguese on the Canara coast . There was complete freedom of worship , belief , and propagation of religious tenets in the Vijaynagara Empire . In 1526 , under the viceroyship of Lopo Vaz de Sampaio , the Portuguese took possession of Mangalore . 
 The Portuguese Franciscans slowly started propagating Christianity in Mangalore . The most prominent local convert was the Brahmin mahant <unk> , who in 1751 travelled with his wife from Kallianpur to Goa and was baptised , with the Portuguese viceroy assuming the role of his godfather . The honoured mahant took the name of Francisco de Távora , after the Viceroy Marques de Távora . Their properties were subsequently taken over by their Hindu relatives , but the viceroy instructed his factor of Mangalore to get their property restored . In 1534 Canara was placed under the ecclesiastic jurisdiction of the Bishop of Goa , where the Portuguese had a strong presence . Missionaries soon arrived and gained converts . The number of local converts in South Canara continually increased until 1546 . During the mid @-@ 16th century , the Portuguese faced resistance from <unk> Rani of Ullal , the Queen of the Bednore dynasty . This put a halt to conversions . The first battle between <unk> Rani and the Portuguese was fought in 1546 ; she emerged victorious and drove the Portuguese out of South Canara . 
 = = = Migration era = = = 
 In 1510 , a Portuguese fleet under Afonso de Albuquerque , sent by King Manuel I of Portugal , wrested the state of Goa from Sultan Yusuf Adil Shah of Bijapur . In 1534 , the Diocese of Goa was established . Soon missionaries were sent to Goa , which led to conversion of a sizeable population to Roman Catholicism . The bulk of Christian settlers came in three major migration waves towards South Canara . These migrations occurred in periods of great unrest : the Goa Inquisition occurred from 1560 onwards ; the Portuguese – Adil Shahi wars were between 1570 – 79 ; and the Portuguese – Maratha wars occurred between 1667 – 83 and 1737 – 40 . Other factors that led to mass migrations were disease epidemics , famines , natural calamities , overpopulation , poor living conditions , heavy tax burdens , and social discrimination by the Portuguese . 
 In 1542 , the Navarrese Jesuit Francis Xavier , co @-@ founder of the Society of Jesus ; arrived in Goa . He discovered that the newly converted Christians were practising their old Hindu customs and traditions . He requested the Portuguese king João III to install an Inquisition in Goa in 1545 . Many of the Goan ancestors of the present Mangalorean Catholics fled Goa when the Inquisition began in 1560 . King Sebastião I decreed that every trace of Indian customs should be eradicated through the Inquisition . Many Christians of Goa were tenaciously attached to some of their ancient Indian customs , especially their traditional Hindu marriage costumes , and refused to abandon them . Those who refused to comply were forced to leave Goa and to settle outside the Portuguese dominion , which resulted in the first major wave of migrations towards South Canara . 
 The Christians who left Goa were for the most part skilled agriculturists who abandoned their irrigated fields in Goa to achieve freedom . The remainder were skilled carpenters , goldsmiths , artisans , and merchants . At the time of migration , Canara was ruled by the Keladi king Shivappa Nayaka ( 1540 – 60 ) . He evinced great interest in the development of agriculture in his empire and welcomed these agriculturists to his kingdom , giving them fertile lands to cultivate . They were recruited into the armies of the Bednore dynasty . This was confirmed by Francis Buchanan , a Scottish physician , when he visited Canara in 1801 . In his book A Journey from Madras through the Countries of Mysore , Canara and Malabar ( 1807 ) , he stated that " The princes of the house of Ikkeri had given great encouragement to the Christians , and had induced 80 @,@ 000 of them to settle in Tuluva . " Later , this was identified as a probable mistake and should have read " 8 @,@ 000 " . This figure included the second emigration of Christians from Goa . The taxation policies of the Keladi Nayakas during 1598 – 1763 enabled the Goan Catholic migrants to emerge as prominent landowning gentry in South Canara . These migrants usually brought their own capital from Goa , which they invested in their new lands , thereby indirectly contributing to the prosperity of the Keladi kingdom . 
 Under the provisional treaties between the Portuguese and the Bednore rulers , and the Padroado , the Christians were allowed to build churches and help foster the growth of Christianity in South Canara . The arrival of the British and the Dutch halted the activity of the Portuguese , and they were gradually unable to send the required number of missionaries to Mangalore . Shivappa Nayaka had previously expelled the Portuguese from their forts a little before 1660 , which brought about considerable changes in the ecclesiastical situation . The appointment of the Vicar Apostolic of Mangalore was felt by the Holy See to be of critical importance . Nayaka pressured the church authorities to appoint a native priest as the Vicar Apostolic , which resulted in the appointment of Fr . Andrew Gomez to the post ; however , he died before the nomination papers could reach Mangalore . 
 At the recommendation of the Vicar General of Verapoly , Mons . Joseph Sebastiani , Pope Clement X appointed Bishop Thomas de Castro , a Goan <unk> and Bishop of <unk> , as the Vicar Apostolic of Propaganda Fide in the Vicariate of Canara on 30 August 1675 , for the purpose of providing spiritual leadership to the Canara Christians . After his consecration , he first went to Calicut and then moved to Mangalore , where he served from 1677 to 1684 . In 1677 , Bishop de Castro entered into a conflict with the Archbishop of Goa , Dom Frei António Brandão , for disregarding the Padroado . Consequently , they did not cede the jurisdiction to him despite the Pope 's letter of appointment . The Padroado – Propaganda conflict which ensued divided the Catholics of Canara into two sides — those who recognised the authority of the Padroado Archbishop in Goa versus those who supported de Castro . 
 The Portuguese refused to recognise Bishop de Castro 's appointment and vigorously opposed his activities . Archbishop Brandão 's sudden death on 6 July 1678 further complicated matters , and the Cathedral chapter administering the Archdiocese of Goa following the vacancy created by his death , forbade the Canara Catholics from receiving the sacraments from the bishop or from priests appointed by him . In his turn , Bishop de Castro excommunicated those Catholics who were obedient to the Padroado authorities in Goa and their priests . In 1681 , the Holy See appointed another Goan priest Fr . Joseph Vaz , as the Vicar <unk> of Canara ; he was asked not to submit to Bishop de Castro unless he showed the letter of appointment . However , after being convinced of its legitimacy , Fr . Vaz submitted to Bishop de Castro and brought about a truce . He further managed to persuade the bishop to delegate his jurisdiction to him while retaining the post . In 1700 , the Catholics of Canara were again brought under the jurisdiction of the Padroado Archbishop of Goa . 
 The Milagres Church , one of the oldest churches in South Canara , was built in 1680 by Bishop Thomas de Castro . In 1568 , the Church of Nossa Senhora do Rosário de Mangalore ( Our Lady of the Rosary of Mangalore ) was erected by the Portuguese at Bolar in Mangalore . The Churches of Nossa Senhora de <unk> de <unk> ( Our Lady of Mercy of Ullal ) and São Francisco de Assis ( St. Francis of Assisi ) at Farangipet were erected by the Portuguese in South Canara at around the same time . These three churches were mentioned by the Italian traveller Pietro Della Valle , who visited Mangalore in 1623 . 
 In 1570 , the Sultan of Bijapur , Ali Adil Shah I , entered into an alliance with the Sultan of Ahmadnagar , Murtaza Nizam Shah , and the Zamorin of Calicut for a simultaneous attack on the Portuguese territories of Goa , Chaul , and Mangalore . He attacked Goa in 1571 and ended Portuguese influence in the region . The Bijapur Sultans were especially renowned for their loathing of Christianity . Fearing persecution , many Goan Catholics fled to South Canara during this second wave of migrations , and settled in Barcoor , Kallianpur , Cundapore , and <unk> . For the next century , there was continual migration of Goan Catholics southwards , so that by 1650 , a considerable number of Catholics were settled around Mangalore , Moolki , <unk> , <unk> , Bantval , Cundapore , Kallianpur , and <unk> . The Christian Goud Saraswat Brahmins who came during this wave belonged mostly to the <unk> subcaste . 
 The attacks of the Maratha Empire on Goa during the mid @-@ 16th century precipitated the third major wave of migrations . In 1664 Shivaji , the founder of the Maratha empire , attacked Kudal , a town north of Goa , and began his campaign for Goa . After Shivaji 's death on 3 April 1680 , his son Sambhaji ascended to the throne . The onslaught of <unk> along the northern territories of Goa drove nearly all the Christians from their homelands , and most of them migrated to South Canara . Migration increased with the fall of the Portuguese " Province of the North " ( which included Bassein , Chaul and Salsette ) and a direct threat to the very existence of Goa in 1738 – 40 . 
 According to one estimate , <unk> from the <unk> district of Goa were around the rate of 2 @,@ 000 annually . Jesuit priests estimated that 12 @,@ 000 Christians emigrated from the <unk> district of Goa between 1710 – 12 , most of them going southward . A Goa government report of 1747 presently in the <unk> archives records that around 5 @,@ 000 Christians fled from the <unk> and <unk> districts of Goa during the Maratha invasion . During the Maratha raids on Goa , about 60 @,@ 000 Christians migrated to South Canara . These new migrants were given lands at <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> by the <unk> kings of <unk> and at Milagres , <unk> , and <unk> by the <unk> kings of Mangalore . During later years , migration slowed because of the Maratha – Mughal wars , and some 10 @,@ 000 Christians returned to Goa . According to Alan Machado Prabhu , Mangalorean Catholics numbered about 58 @,@ 000 by 1765 . 
 Subsequent to this steady rise in South Canara 's Catholic population , the Portuguese took advantage of every opportunity to extend their control over the Mangalorean Catholics , who came to be identified with Portuguese interests . The Portuguese sought to expand the power of the priests , as from the beginning of their empire , priests had accompanied Portuguese delegations on diplomatic missions and on occasion were the principal <unk> . Treaties they signed with the Keladi Nayakas progressively incorporated clauses which increased the authority of the priests over the local Catholic population , making them obedient to the priests in matters of Christian laws as well as granting priests the authority to punish violations . The Portuguese promised to refrain from slaughtering cows and to halt forcible conversions in their factories . The terms of these treaties were not always honoured by the Portuguese , with the result that whenever hostilities broke out between the <unk> and the Portuguese , the Catholic settlers were often harassed or arrested by the Nayakas . 
 = = = Post @-@ migration era and captivity = = = 
 In 1686 , Seringapatam , the capital of the Kingdom of Mysore , had a community of more than 400 Catholics . The community was severely harassed in the following two decades , with the churches destroyed and the priest 's house confiscated . The destruction was undertaken under the name of the Wodeyar king , Kanthirava Narasaraja I , by his finance minister . The priest 's house was returned to the church in 1709 . Relations between the Wodeyars and the Mangalorean Catholics improved until 1717 , when there was an anti @-@ Christian outburst . The resident priest was expelled and forbidden to preach . Several more anti @-@ Christian outbursts followed . By 1736 , there were better relations between the two groups . 
 From 1761 onwards , Hyder Ali , a distinguished soldier in the Mysore army , took de facto control of the throne of the Kingdom of Mysore through the Wodeyar dynasty . Hyder occupied Mangalore in 1763 . The Mangalorean Catholics numbered 80 @,@ 000 in 1767 . In February 1768 the British captured Mangalore from Hyder . Toward the end of 1768 , Hyder and his son Tipu Sultan defeated the British and recaptured Mangalore fort . After the conquest , Hyder was informed that the Mangalorean Catholics had helped the British in their conquest of Mangalore . Hyder believed that this behaviour of the Christians amounted to treachery against the sovereign . 
 The Christians were alleged to have helped General Mathews with a sum of Rs . 3 @,@ 30 @,@ 000 / - . Hyder summoned a Portuguese officer and several Christian priests from Mangalore to suggest the punishment for the Mangalorean Catholics for treachery . The Portuguese officer suggested the death penalty for those Catholics who helped the British , because it was a fitting punishment for people who betrayed the sovereign . But Hyder exhibited a diplomatic stance and imprisoned the Christians , rather than killing them . 
 Later , he opened negotiations with the Portuguese . As a result of the agreement , the suspicion against the clergy and the Christians was removed . During Hyder 's regime , the Mangalorean Catholic community continued to flourish . After Hyder 's death in the Second Anglo @-@ Mysore War on 7 December 1782 , the British captured the fort again . Hyder was succeeded by his son Tipu Sultan . Tipu laid several assaults on the Mangalore fort until January 1784 , all of which resulted in failure . The fort was finally delivered to Tipu when the British capitulated on 30 January 1784 . 
 Tipu received highly exaggerated reports about the role of the Mangalorean Catholics and their help to the British in the Second Anglo @-@ Mysore War . To minimise the British threat to his kingdom and in the Sultan @-@ ul @-@ Tawarikh , due to " the rage of Islam that began to boil in his breast " , Tipu banished the Mangalorean Catholic community from their lands , and imprisoned them at Seringapatam , the capital of his empire . The captivity of Mangalorean Catholics at Seringapatam , which began on 24 February 1784 and ended on 4 May 1799 , remains the most disconsolate memory in their history . 
 Soon after the Treaty of Mangalore in 1784 , Tipu gained control of Canara . He issued orders to seize the Christians in Canara , confiscate their estates , and deport them to Seringapatam , through the Jamalabad fort route . All this was accomplished in a secret and well @-@ planned move on Ash Wednesday ( 24 February 1784 ) . Accounts of the number of captives differ , ranging from 30 @,@ 000 to 80 @,@ 000 . The generally accepted figure is 60 @,@ 000 , as per Tipu 's own records . They were forced to climb nearly 4 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 200 m ) through the dense jungles and gorges of the Western Ghat mountain ranges along two routes ; one group travelled along the Bantwal @-@ Belthangadi @-@ Kulshekar @-@ <unk> @-@ Coorg @-@ Mysore route , and the other along the Gersoppa falls ( Shimoga ) route . It was 200 miles ( 320 km ) from Mangalore to Seringapatam , and the journey took six weeks . 
 According to the Barcoor Manuscript , written in Kannada by a Mangalorean Catholic from Barcoor after his return from Seringapatam , 20 @,@ 000 of them ( one @-@ third ) died on the march to Seringapatam due to hunger , disease , and ill treatment by the soldiers . At the camp at Jamalabad fort , Mangalorean Catholic leaders were thrown down from the fort . All Christian churches in South Canara , except the Hospet Church at Hospet and the Monte Mariano Church at Farangipet , were razed to the ground and all land owned by the captured Christians was taken over by Tipu and distributed among his favourites . After they were freed , all their belongings had disappeared and their deserted lands were cultivated by the Bunts . 
 After arriving at Seringapatam , the Christian captives were made to forcibly embrace Islam , were tortured , or sentenced to death . The young men who refused to embrace Islam were disfigured by cutting their noses , upper lips , and ears . They were seated on asses , paraded through the city , and thrown into the dungeons of Seringapatam . Historian <unk> Fernandes , author of Storm over Seringapatam : The Incredible Story of Hyder Ali & Tippu Sultan , states that contrary to popular belief , 40 @,@ 000 Christians were not kept manacled in the dungeons of Seringapatam . 
 Ludwig von Pastor , a German historian , author of The History of the Popes , from the Close of the Middle Ages . Volume 39 emphasises saying " countless " Mangalorean Catholics were hanged , including women with their children clinging around their necks . Others were trampled or dragged by elephants . The able @-@ bodied young men were drafted into the army after being circumcised and converted to Islam . The young women and girls were distributed as wives to Muslim officers and favourites living in Seringapatam . According to Mr. Silva of Gangollim , a survivor of the captivity , if a person who had escaped from Seringapatam was found , Tipu had ordered the cutting off of the ears , nose , the feet , and one hand as punishment . The persecutions continued until 1792 . This was followed by a brief relaxation period from 1792 – 1797 , during which a few Catholic families managed to escape to Coorg , Cannanore , and Tellicherry . The persecutions resumed in 1797 . 
 = = = British and modern era = = = 
 In the Battle of Seringapatam on 4 May 1799 , the British army under officers George Harris , David Baird , and Arthur Wellesley stormed the fortress , breached the town of Seringapatam , and killed Tipu . After his death in the Fourth Anglo @-@ Mysore War , the Mangalorean Catholics were freed from his captivity . Of the 60 @,@ 000 – 80 @,@ 000 Mangalorean Catholics taken captive , only 15 @,@ 000 – 20 @,@ 000 made it out as Christians . 
 Historian Alan Machado Prabhu mentions that only 11 @,@ 000 survived the captivity as Christians . British general Arthur Wellesley helped 10 @,@ 000 of them return to South Canara and resettle on their lands . Of the remaining Christians freed , about a thousand went to Malabar , and some hundreds settled in Coorg . According to Francis Buchanan , 15 @,@ 000 of them returned to Mangalore and its vicinity , while 10 @,@ 000 of them migrated to Malabar . The Gazetteer of the Bombay Presidency ( 1883 ) mentions that 15 @,@ 000 persons returned , of which 12 @,@ 000 were from South Canara and 3 @,@ 000 from North Canara . According to genealogist Michael Lobo , the present Mangalorean Catholic community is descended almost entirely from this small group of survivors . 
 Later , the British took over South Canara . In 1800 , they took a census of the region . Of the 396 @,@ 672 ( 396 @,@ 672 ) people living in South Canara , 10 @,@ 877 were Christians . Thomas Munro was appointed the first collector of Canara in June 1799 . He passed three orders in respect of the estates of the Christians , which were taken over by non @-@ Christians during the captivity . Through the assistance of the church and with the support of Munro , the Christians were able to recover their lands and estates . Fr . José Miguel Luis de Mendes , a Goan Catholic priest , was appointed Vicar of Our Lady of Rosary at Mangalore on 7 December 1799 . He took interest in the re @-@ establishment of the community from 1799 to 1808 . Later , British general John Goldsborough Ravenshaw was appointed collector of South Canara . He took an active part in the restoration of the Catholic community 's former possessions and the recovery of its estates . He constructed a church for them , which was completed in 1806 . 
 In 1800 , there were 2 @,@ 545 Catholic households with a population of 10 @,@ 877 . Their population almost doubled by 1818 . According to various parish books , Mangalorean Catholics numbered 19 @,@ 068 in South Canara ( 12 @,@ 877 in Mangalore and Bantval , 3 @,@ 918 in Moolki , 2 @,@ 273 in Cundapore and Barcoor ) . Most of the churches which were earlier destroyed by Tipu were rebuilt by 1815 . The community prospered under the British , and the jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Goa recommenced . 
 The opening of the Protestant German Basel Mission of 1834 in Mangalore brought many handicraft industries , such as cotton weaving and tile @-@ manufacturing , to the region and led to a large @-@ scale rise in employment . In 1836 – 37 , the political situation in Portugal was in turmoil . Antonio Feliciano de Santa Rita Carvalho , a Portuguese priest , was appointed Archbishop @-@ elect of Goa in September 1836 without authorisation from the then Pope , Gregory XVI . Many Mangalorean Catholics did not accept the leadership of Carvalho but instead submitted to the Vicar Apostolic of Verapoly in Travancore , while some of them continued to be under the jurisdiction of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Goa and Daman . The parishes in South Canara were divided into two groups — one under Goa and the other under Verapoly . 
 Under the leadership of Joachim Pius Noronha , a Mangalorean Catholic priest , and John Joseph Saldanha , a Mangalorean Catholic judge , the Mangalorean Catholics sent a petition to the Holy See in 1840 to establish Mangalore as a separate Vicariate . Conceding to their request , Pope Gregory XVI established Mangalore as a separate Vicariate on 17 February 1845 under the Verapoly Carmelites . The Mangalore Mission was transferred to the French Carmelites by a bull dated 3 January 1870 . During the regime of Carmelites , the Mangalorean Catholics constantly sent memorandums to the Holy See to send Jesuits to Mangalore to start institutions for higher education , since students frequently had to go to Bombay and Madras for educational purposes . Pope Leo XIII , by the Brief of 27 September 1878 , handed over the Mangalore mission to the Italian Jesuit of Naples , who reached Mangalore on 31 December 1878 . 
 The Italian Jesuits played an important role in education , health , and social welfare of the community . They built St. Aloysius College in 1880 , St Aloysius Chapel in 1884 , St. Joseph 's Seminary and many other institutions and churches . On 25 January 1887 , Pope Leo XIII established the Diocese of Mangalore , which is considered to be an important landmark in the community 's history . By the later half of the 19th century , many Mangalorean Catholics were involved in the Mangalore tile industry , coffee plantations , and trade in plantation products . They prospered under the British and competed with the local Brahmins for offices in the service of the British . The overwhelming majority of Mangalorean Catholics continued to remain agriculturists . 
 During the later 19th century , they started migrating to other urban areas , especially Bombay , Bangalore , Calcutta , Karachi , Madras , Mysore and Poona . The Mangalorean Catholics came to Bombay out of economic necessity . The first permanent settlement of Mangalorean Catholics in Bombay was recorded in the 1890s . The first Mangalorean Catholic settlement in Madras was recorded in the 1940s . Joachim Alva , a Mangalorean Catholic politician , actively participated in uniting the Mangalorean Catholic community against the British during the Indian Independence Movement . 
 In 1901 , Mangalorean Catholics accounted for 76 @,@ 000 of the total 84 @,@ 103 Christians in South Canara . , while in 1962 , they numbered 186 @,@ 741 ( 186 @,@ 741 ) . During the mid @-@ 20th century , Victor Fernandes , Bishop of Mangalore from 1931 to 1955 , erected a large cross at Nanthoor , near <unk> hills , on the former outskirts of Mangalore , in honour of the memory of Mangalorean Catholic martyrs who died on the march and during their 15 @-@ year captivity at Seringapatam . During the 1970s , coastal communication increased between Bombay and Mangalore with the introduction of ships by the London @-@ based trade firm Shepherd . These ships facilitated the entry of Mangalorean Catholics to Bombay . In 1993 , the Mangalore Diocese estimated the population of Mangalorean Catholics to be 325 @,@ 510 ( 325 @,@ 510 ) out of a total South Canara population of 3 @,@ 528 @,@ 540 ( 3 @,@ 528 @,@ 540 ) . This amounts to 9 @.@ 23 per cent of the population . A notable post @-@ independence era event pertaining to the Mangalorean Catholics that occurred in southern Karnataka , and made national headlines , were the attacks on Christian religious institutions in September 2008 . 
 = = Geographical distribution = = 
 The Roman Catholic Diocese of Mangalore estimates the population of Mangalorean Catholics in the areas that comprise historical South Canara to be 360 @,@ 000 ( 360 @,@ 000 ) out of a total population of 3 @,@ 957 @,@ 071 ( 3 @,@ 957 @,@ 071 ) , or approximately 9 @.@ 5 per cent of the population . Other regions of India having a significant proportion of Mangalorean Catholics , characterised by the presence of Mangalorean Catholic organisations or celebration of the unique Mangalorean Catholic Monti Fest festival , are Bangalore , Chennai , Delhi , Kolkata , Mumbai , Pune , Hyderabad , Chikkamagaluru , Hassan , and Ranchi . A few Mangalorean Catholics are found in Kodagu and Kerala , where there are tiny pockets concentrated in <unk> , Kasargod , Kannur and Kochi . They are mainly descended from those Catholics who fled the persecution and roundup by Tipu Sultan . The Mangalorean Catholic diaspora is scattered across the globe . Many Mangalorean Catholics are found in Persian Gulf Arab states in the Middle East . The Mangalorean Catholic Association of Sydney ( MCAS ) has estimated that around 300 Mangalorean Catholic families live in Sydney , Australia , with a lot of second generation families . Many of these are multi @-@ racial , being married into Anglo @-@ Saxon , Spanish , Italian , Greek , and other ethnicities . Mangalorean genealogist Michael Lobo has estimated that approximately half of the Mangalorean Catholics still reside in Mangalore and the other towns in the South Canara district . As for the remaining half , about 15 per cent reside in other parts of Karnataka ( mostly Bangalore ) , 15 per cent reside in Mumbai and its neighbouring areas , 10 per cent reside in the Persian Gulf countries , 5 per cent reside in other parts of India , and the remaining 5 per cent reside in other parts of the world . 
 = = Culture = = 
 = = = Architecture = = = 
 The German missionary <unk> set up the first tile factory at Mangalore in 1860 . It was called the Basel Mission tile factory . Mangalorean Catholics learnt the technique of preparing Mangalore tiles . The Albuquerque tile factory , the first Indian Mangalore tile factory , was started in South Canara by Pascal Albuquerque at Pane <unk> in 1868 . Since then , Mangalorean Catholics have been actively involved in manufacturing the tiles . The Alvares tile factory was established in Mangalore by Simon Alvares , a Mangalorean Catholic from Bombay , in 1878 . In 1991 – 1992 , out of twelve Mangalore tile manufacturing factories in Mangalore , six were owned by Christians . These tiles , prepared from hard clay , were in great demand throughout India , Myanmar , and Sri Lanka , and were even shipped to East Africa , the Middle East , Europe , and Australia . These were the only tiles to be recommended for Government buildings in India , and still define Mangalore 's skyline and characterise its urban setting . Urban and rural housing follows the traditional variety of laterite brick structures with Mangalore tile roofing on steeply sloped roofs . Inside the house , a spacious hall is present while a large verandah is present in front of the house . The traditional houses tend to have spacious porticos , red cement or terracotta floors , and have fruit trees outside the house . The old Catholic houses of South Canara bear traces of Portuguese influence . The tall windows , pointed roofs , and verandahs are some of the Portuguese influenced architectural features of the century @-@ old houses . 
 = = = Cuisine = = = 
 Historically , the Mangalorean Catholic diet was completely vegetarian . This changed during the 20th century , when with the advent of Westernisation , meat came to be consumed increasingly in the community , especially amongst the elite . Coconut and curry leaves are common ingredients to most curries . Sanna @-@ Dukra Maas ( Sanna is idli fluffed with toddy or yeast ; Dukra Maas is pork ) is one of the most popular dishes of the Mangalorean Catholic community . <unk> Kadi ( Ros Curry ) , a fish curry made with coconut milk ( ros ) , is a traditional curry served during the Ros ceremony . <unk> , a dish of <unk> leaves stuffed with rice , dal , jaggery , coconut , and spices is popular . <unk> are sweet delicacies prepared during Christmas and include around 22 varieties of sweets . Fish and rice form the staple diet of most Mangalorean Catholics . Par @-@ boiled rice , known as red rice , is the traditional rice eaten and is preferred over raw rice . 
 = = = Names and surnames = = = 
 Bilingual names , having variants in both Konkani and English , like <unk> ( from Portuguese João , meaning John ) and <unk> ( Magdalene ) are common among Mangalorean Catholics . Most Mangalorean Catholic names for males follow the second declension . Among women , the names follow the first declension , while among young girls , the names follow the second declension . Portuguese surnames like D 'Souza , Coelho , and Pinto are common among Mangalorean Catholics , and generally follow the second declension . Other European surnames are found . Mangalorean Catholics use their native language Konkani forms of their surnames in Konkani @-@ language contexts , along with their English forms in English @-@ language contexts , such as <unk> , <unk> , and Pint , instead of Sousa , Coelho , and Pinto . Some families use their original Konkani Brahmin surnames such as Prabhu , Kamath , Naik , Shenoy and <unk> . These original surnames are actually the names of five classes of persons : lord , cultivator , merchant , warrior , and writer . Four of these are Goud Saraswat Brahmin surnames , with the exception of <unk> , which is used by a few who trace their origins to the <unk> Brahmins of Goa . These ancestral pre @-@ conversion surnames of the Mangalorean Catholics are called <unk> in Konkani . To capture their tradition , many have reverted to their <unk> surnames , or use hyphenated names consisting of their post @-@ conversion surnames in conjunction with their ancestral ones . <unk> is a unique Mangalorean Catholic surname to be found among some Catholics that hail from Udupi . 
 = = = Language and literature = = = 
 Mangalorean Catholics speak the Konkani language , which they have retained as their mother tongue despite the migration ; the language is central to the community 's identity . They speak a dialect known as Mangalorean Catholic Konkani , which the Ethnologue broadly identifies as the Mangalore dialect . 
 The Mangalorean Catholic dialect has Sanskrit influences , and preserves many features of the <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> dialects of Prakrit . It also liberally uses loanwords from the Tulu and Kannada languages . It is written in the Kannada script . The dialect does not distinguish between the nouns of Kannada and Konkani and has developed into a language that is very practical for business . Some Kannada <unk> which have disappeared from the Goan dialects due to the influence of Portuguese have re @-@ entered the Mangalorean lexicon . 350 – 400 Portuguese lexical items are found in the Mangalorean Catholic dialect , of which more than half are related to religious terminology . The influence of Portuguese syntax is only found in some sets of phrases and prayers which have come down from the pre @-@ migration era . 
 The Mangalorean Catholic dialect is largely derived from the <unk> ( North Goan ) dialect and bears a good degree of intelligibility with the modern <unk> dialect ( spoken by North Goan Christians , North Goan Hindus , and South Goan Hindus ) and to a slightly lesser extent with the standard Konkani dialect . It consequently differs from the dialect spoken by the Goud Saraswat Brahmins in South Canara , which is copiously derived and bears a good degree of intelligibility with the modern <unk> ( South Goan ) dialect spoken by South Goan Christians and North Canara Konkani Hindus . It is much closer to the dialects of the Goan Hindus than to that of the Goan Catholics . 
 The Italian Jesuits who arrived in Mangalore in 1878 , devoted themselves to the study and development of Konkani , and were thus responsible for the revival of the Konkani language in Mangalore . The origin of their literature dates to 1883 , when Angelus Francis Xavier Maffei , an Italian Jesuit , published the first An English – Konkani Dictionary in Mangalore . He published a book on Konkani grammar in 1882 , with a revised version in 1893 . In 1912 the first Konkani periodical , Konknni <unk> ( Konkani Treasure ) , was published in Mangalore by Louis Mascarenhas . Popular Konkani periodicals published in Mangalore include <unk> ( Guardian ) ( 1938 ) by Mons . Sylvester Menezes , Konkan <unk> ( Heritage of Konkani ) ( 1958 ) , and <unk> ( Donation ) ( 1965 ) by Raymond Miranda . The twentieth @-@ century literature focused on themes like the suffering of the Mangalorean Catholics during their 15 @-@ year captivity at Seringapatam and the oppression of Goan Catholics during the Goa Inquisition . The first Konkani novel in Karnataka <unk> ( 1915 ) , was written in the Kannada script by Joachim Santan Alvares . In Bombay — which had a small Mangalorean Catholic community — periodicals like <unk> @-@ <unk> ( Ups and Downs ) ( 1948 ) by <unk> Rodrigues , Konknni <unk> ( Konkani Youth ) ( 1949 ) by George Fernandes , <unk> ( Traveller ) ( 1950 ) by <unk> Saldanha , and Divo ( Lamp ) ( 1995 ) by J.B. Moraes were published . 
 Modern literature is diverse and includes themes such as Indian politics in books like What <unk> the Socialists by George Fernandes , historical awakening , in books such as Sarasvati 's Children : A History of the Mangalorean Christians by Alan Machado Prabhu , and sexual desires , in The Revised Kama Sutra : A Novel of Colonialism and Desire by Richard <unk> . Genealogist Michael Lobo published the first genealogical Encyclopedia of the Mangalorean Catholic community in 1999 . This genealogical encyclopaedia , which exceeds 6 @,@ 000 pages , covers over a thousand families , each of which is researched as far as its ancestry can be traced . Three offshoots have thus far been launched , which include <unk> Worldwide – An International Directory ( 1999 ) , Distinguished Mangalorean Catholics ( 2000 ) , and The Mangalorean Catholic Community – A Professional History / Directory ( 2002 ) . William Robert da Silva translated the first complete Bible from English into Konkani . The work entitled <unk> ( Bible ) was written in the Kannada script , and published by the Mangalore @-@ based Konkani Bible committee in 1997 . In 2000 , the Mangalore Diocese also released a Konkani Bible in Kannada script entitled <unk> <unk> ( Holy Book ) , which was made available online on 26 July 2007 . 
 = = = Traditions and festivals = = = 
 Mangalorean Catholics have retained many Indian customs and traditions ; these are especially visible during the celebration of a marriage . Their culture is more traditional and Indian . Though the Portuguese traded quite frequently in Mangalore , and most of the priests arriving in the region were Portuguese , there did not develop a community identified with Portugal and Portuguese culture . The Mangalorean Catholics have no uniform rituals since they belong to both the patrilineal Brahmin stock and to the matrilineal non @-@ Brahmin stock . Their marriage rites share many similarities with the <unk> sub @-@ caste of the Goud Saraswat Brahmins . It was mainly these pre @-@ Christian marriage rites that the Portuguese found objectionable and prohibited during the Goan Inquisition . 
 The <unk> ( anointing ) ceremony , conducted one or two days before a wedding , celebrates the last day of virginity of the bride and bridegroom and involves the parents ' blessing of the bride and groom , who are anointed with <unk> , a mixture of coconut milk and coconut oil , while a cross is inscribed on the bride 's forehead . The marriage traditions include <unk> ( betrothal ) , exchange of <unk> Pod ( betel leaves ) during the marriage ceremony , which known as <unk> ( changing hands ; formal acceptance of the promise made by the bride 's father to the bridegroom 's father that he will give his daughter in marriage ) . The bride is adorned with the Sado ( wedding sari ) and <unk> ( wedding necklace ) . Other rites include the <unk> ( giving away the bride formally by the father or the guardian of the bride ) , <unk> ( re @-@ invitation to the bride 's house ) , and singing of <unk> ( hymns ) . Some non @-@ marriage traditions include <unk> ( partaking of the food prepared from new corn ) and <unk> ( blessing of new harvests ) . 
 In addition to common Christian festivals like Christmas , Good Friday , and Easter , the community celebrates many other festivals of religious and historical significance . Monti Fest is one of the major festivals , celebrated on 8 September . It combines the Nativity of the Blessed Virgin Mary and blessing of <unk> ( new crops ) . The festival derives its name from the Monte Mariano Church at Farangipet in South Canara , and was initiated by Fr . Joachim Miranda , a Goan Catholic priest at Farangipet , in 1763 . Although Tipu Sultan destroyed the churches of Canara , he spared Monte Mariano Church in deference to the friendship of his father Hyder Ali with Fr . Miranda . Attur <unk> or Attur Fest ( Attur festival ) is the feast of St. Lawrence , celebrated in the St. Lawrence Shrine on the outskirts of Karkala in South Canara . This shrine , in existence since 1759 , is said to have a history of miracles . <unk> <unk> ( Eucharistic Procession ) is an annual religious procession led by the Bishop of Mangalore from Milagres Church to Rosario Cathedral . The procession , held on the first Sunday of the New Year of the Gregorian calendar , seeks blessings for the new year . 
 = = = Costumes and ornaments = = = 
 Mangalorean Catholic men traditionally wore long , loose @-@ frilled , white or black coats known as <unk> ( similar to the Maratha loose coats with buttons ) , over a <unk> ( loose shirt ) , while the <unk> ( dhoti ) , a piece of unstitched cloth , usually around 7 yards ( 6 @.@ 4 m ) long , was wrapped around the waist and the legs and knotted at the waist . The turban called <unk> or <unk> , were usually flattened like the <unk> turbans . It was a long white piece of cloth with a <unk> ( golden hem ) tied around the head like a turban in a particular manner by which they could be easily identified as Catholics . In modern times however , this mode has changed . Only a few older people can be seen wearing this traditional dress on church @-@ going occasions . 
 Before marriage , women used to wear a Kirgi ( sari ) and Baju ( blouse ) . The Kirgi is a piece of cloth not longer than four feet , and about three feet wide . It was wrapped around the body from the waist down . A jacket with long sleeves called a Baju , was used to cover the upper part of the body . This dress was a sign of the bride 's virginity and was worn during the Ros ceremony . The Kirgi was wrapped around the waist , but the end of the sari is not thrown over the shoulder . To wear the sari with its end thrown over the shoulder , known as <unk> , is the exclusive right of a married woman . Married women used to wear sarees the general way . The <unk> kameez is another form of popular dress for females . The Mangalorean Catholic bride 's wedding sari is known as a Sado . It is usually a red @-@ coloured Banarasi sari which is made of finely woven silk and is decorated with elaborate engravings . In olden days , the bride wore on her head a red cloth , three feet square . Gold ornaments were absent in those days : the bride went to the church dressed as a virgin girl . In modern times , the bride wears ( in place of the Kirgi ) a red sari , but the end of the sari is not thrown over the shoulder ; it is wrapped around the waist . The bride wears a few gold ornaments , some rings on the fingers , earrings , and at least two of the Dantoni ( golden combs ) . Other ornaments worn by the bride in the olden days included Kanti , <unk> , Kap , <unk> , <unk> , Kanto , and Dantoni . 
 Dantoni consist of two ordinary combs with the upper part of each one plated with gold ; they are worn in the hair on both sides of the head over the ears . On the way to church the bride wears some white and red flowers stuck in the hair . In the centre of the forehead , a Bang ( gold chain ) was placed with a pendant . The <unk> ( Mangalsutra ) is a necklace made of black beads strung on gold wire as either as a single chain or double chain , with a connecting pendant . This necklace is worn as long as the husband is alive ; a widow is expected to take it off . It is highly prized by women as the symbol of their married state . A widow is expected to wear a black sari for the remainder of her life , and is not allowed to wear ornaments . The bridegroom 's dress in early times consisted of a short loincloth of hand @-@ woven cloth ( Dhoti ) , a shawl to cover his shoulders , and a red handkerchief on the head ( Leis ) . Later , his dress consisted of a white loincloth with a red and gold hem ( <unk> ) , a shirt with gold buttons and a coat ( <unk> ) , a shawl on the shoulders , and a towel ( <unk> ) on the head . The bridegroom wore a <unk> ( neck chain ) around his neck . He wore a pair of sandals or at least a pair of socks . At present , most Mangalorean Catholic couples opt for a White wedding , where the bridegroom wears a suit , while the bride wears a white wedding gown . The traditional style of wedding is becoming exceedingly rare . 
 = = = Historical society = = = 
 Mangalorean Catholics retained the same caste system as their ancestors in Goa . They were mainly divided into four castes : Bamonns , Charodis , <unk> , and <unk> . 
 The biggest group were the Bamonns , who were converts from the priestly Brahmin class . All Brahmin sub @-@ castes such as the Goud Saraswat Brahmins , <unk> , and <unk> , especially the goldsmiths and a few merchants , were lumped into the Christian caste of Bamonn . The descendants of Goud Saraswat converts comprised the majority of this caste . The Bamonns were further divided into other castes according to rank . In Mangalore , they were sub @-@ divided into <unk> ( the highest class ) , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . These names are taken from the villages to which they once belonged . This group constituted the landed gentry . In accordance with traditional Hindu law that allowed a Brahmin to practice any occupation except cultivation , the Bamonns refrained from cultivating their lands , and leased them to tenants . 
 The Charodis , the second @-@ largest group , were converts from the Kshatriya ( warrior class ) and Vaishya ( merchant class ) castes . They were generally engaged in trade and commercial vocations . The artisan converts formed the third @-@ biggest group and were known as <unk> ( the Konkani word for Shudras , which were the labour class ) . They were workers and agricultural labourers engaged in service professions . The converts from the fisher caste residing around Ullal , <unk> , and other places around the seacoast were called <unk> , and formed the fourth group . They cultivated the lands of the Bamonns and the high @-@ caste Hindus . Other minor castes included the <unk> , whom historian Severine Silva assumes to be local Jain converts . 
 The Mangalorean Catholics constituted a small community widely scattered across the South Canara district . Rather than being a closely knit and united group , the Goan Catholic immigrants and their progeny did not associate with the native Catholics on account of caste , origin , and language , and even among themselves were strongly divided by caste . The Hindus , including the indigenous Brahmins ( mostly belonging to the <unk> , Havyaka , and Kota sub @-@ groups ) and Bunts did not associate with the Catholics and would not admit them into their houses on account of their religion . However , a close contact was kept by the Catholics with the Hindus of the same caste who were refugees from Goa . Catholics would invite their Hindu cousins to festivities such as birth celebrations , weddings , and funeral feasts . The Hindus accepted such invitations . Unlike his Hindu counterpart , a high @-@ caste Mangalorean Catholic did not consider himself polluted upon physical contact with a member of the lower caste , but members of different castes did not fraternise or invite each other home for dinner . 
 Marriage between members of the various castes was not permitted , and such matches were strictly discouraged by the elders . For instance , a Bamonn boy would only marry a Bamonn girl and a <unk> boy would only marry a <unk> girl . The Bamonns and Charodis would invite neighbours and friends belonging to the <unk> and Gaudi castes to special occasions such as weddings and baptisms , although the latter would have to observe certain restrictions with regards to sitting and eating . The lower castes felt honoured if they were invited and usually accepted such invitations . The upper castes usually did not attend the ceremonies of the lower castes , even if expressly invited . The caste system continues to persist among Mangalorean Catholics , and as in former times , caste distinctions still figure prominently during the formation of marriage alliances . 
 It was difficult for the few priests who had accompanied the Christian emigrants to South Canara to look after them properly . Thus , the <unk> system came into existence . <unk> were Mangalorean Catholic men of good moral character who were selected as headmen in Christian settlements . They were entrusted with the social and religious supervision of the community . After migration , the only possible occupation of a Mangalorean Catholic was agriculture , since they were skilled farmers . Every farmer practised carpentry , but it was quite primitive and unskilled , and other crafts and industries were non @-@ existent . The mass was celebrated in Latin ; but the sermon , the catechism , and the explication of the mysteries were delivered to the congregation in Konkani . 
 The parishes were grouped into deaneries called <unk> . Every parish was divided into wards , while Parish Councils were present in most parishes . About 15 percent of the households in the parishes were literate . A widow had to remain indoors , practically for the rest of her life . Since high @-@ caste Hindu widows cannot remarry after the death of their husbands , the high @-@ caste Christians too considered the remarriage of a widow as something unnatural . Canon law did allow remarriage for widows and therefore there was no direct prohibition for widows to remarry in the society of the Christians of South Canara . Few women had the courage to go against the strict conventions of their community . A widow who remarried was looked down upon , pitied , and shunned as unlucky . But she was not ill @-@ treated or made an outcast , and no stigma was attached to her husband . Succession to property was practised as per the Hindu laws . 
 = = = Songs and music = = = 
 On 26 and 27 January 2008 , a Konkani cultural event , Konkani <unk> , held in Mangalore by the Mangalorean Catholic organisation Mandd Sobhann ; entered the Guinness Book of World Records for non @-@ stop singing of Konkani hymns . Mandd Sobhann members sang for 40 hours , surpassing the old record of 36 hours held by a Brazilian musical troupe , <unk> <unk> <unk> São Paulo ( Lutheran Evangelical Community of São Paulo ) of Universidade <unk> do Brasil ( Lutheran University of Brazil ) . The Silver Band , started in 1906 by Lawrence D 'Souza in Mangalore , is one of the oldest and most popular brass bands in Mangalore . The well @-@ known Konkani hymn <unk> <unk> <unk> ( Jesus entered the Garden of <unk> ) was written by Fr . Joachim Miranda , an 18th @-@ century Goan Catholic priest , when he was held captive by Tipu Sultan on his Canara mission . Mons . <unk> Placid <unk> wrote the devotional hymn <unk> Mog ( Jesus ' Love ) in 1905 , and translated the Latin hymn Stabat Mater into Konkani under the title <unk> <unk> ( Bottom of the Holy Cross ) . Joseph Saldanha 's <unk> <unk> ( 100 Hymns ) and Raimundo Mascarenhas ' Deva Daia <unk> ( O Compassionate Master ) were popular . Other popular Konkani hymns composed by Mangalorean Catholics are <unk> <unk> Jana ( Listen , O ' Christian People ) , Utha Utha <unk> ( Wake up , Creatures ) , and <unk> <unk> ( From Heaven ) . 
 Konkani pop music became popular after Indian Independence in 1947 . Henry D 'Souza and Helen D 'Cruz are known for the Konkani love duet <unk> in 1971 and the love Ballad <unk> Divo ( Lamp of the House ) in the 1970s , while <unk> <unk> ' sonnet Mog Tuzo <unk> <unk> ( How I Have Loved Thee ) from 1977 is popular . Konkani plays , especially religious ones , were written and staged in Mangalore in the 20th century by prominent playwrights such as <unk> John D 'Souza , Pascal Sequeira and Bonaventure <unk> . The <unk> was a popular musical instrument played especially during weddings . The instrument has the form of an earthen pot but is open at both sides . One end is covered with the skin of some wild animal , and the other is left open . The traditional theatre form is called <unk> , and is performed on the eve of the marriage or in connection with the marriage celebrations in the decorated <unk> ( stage ) . The play is conducted by males belonging to both the brides ' and bridegrooms ' parties , and usually takes place for two or three nights . The plays performed are usually those of Biblical stories , and their morals are presented with the purpose of educating the bride and bridegroom . This tradition has almost completely died out among the present generation . 
 The tradition of <unk> ( wedding songs ) , sung by women during a Ros , is important to this community . The procedure is that an elderly lady , usually the <unk> ( wife of the master of ceremonies , who is known as <unk> ) who knows the <unk> , leads the song while the rest of the women sing along . Only women whose husbands are still living may sing . In ancient times , the wedding songs expressed very lofty sentiments and gave vent to the feelings of the people about the marriage partners and their families , invoking the blessing of God on them . 
 = = Organisations = = 
 Many organisations cater to the community in South Canara . The most notable are Mandd Sobhann , which broke the Guinness record for non @-@ stop singing , and the Catholic Association of South Kanara ( CASK ) . The first session of the Canara Konkani Catholic World Convention took place on 26 December 2004 in Mangalore . The convention aimed to establish institutions to conduct research on the history of Mangalorean Catholics . In India , the Kanara Catholic Association , Bangalore ( KCA Bangalore ) ( established in 1955 ) and Mangalore Catholic Association ( MCA ) ( established on 10 February 1996 in Pune ) are well known . In the United Kingdom , Mangalorean United Konkani Association ( <unk> ) in Nottingham is popular . The Mangalorean Catholic Association of Victoria ( <unk> ) established in Melbourne was the first organisation for the community in Australia . In 2006 the Mangalorean Catholic Association of Sydney ( MCAS ) was established in Australia . In North America , the Mangalorean Association of Canada and the Mangalorean Konkan Christian Association ( <unk> ) in Chicago are well known . In the Middle East , the Mangalore Cultural Association ( MCA ) in Doha , Qatar ; was established on March 2008 . 
 = Characters of Carnivàle = 
 There are several main characters in Carnivàle , an American television serial drama set in the United States Depression @-@ era Dust Bowl between 1934 and 1935 . It aired on HBO between 2003 and 2005 . The show traces the disparate storylines of an ensemble of fictional characters revolving around two main characters : young Ben Hawkins working in a traveling carnival , and a California preacher named Brother Justin Crowe . 
 Carnivàle has a large cast , amounting to eighteen main cast actors over its two @-@ season run . Most characters are introduced in Ben 's storyline : Samson , a dwarf co @-@ running the carnival with Management ; Jonesy , Samson 's right @-@ hand man with a crippling knee injury ; Apollonia and Sofie , two fortunetellers working a mother @-@ daughter act ; Lodz , a blind mentalist , and his lover , Lila the Bearded Lady ; the cootch ( striptease ) Dreifuss family ; snake charmer Ruthie and her son Gabriel , a strongman ; and many other sideshow performers . The supporting characters of Brother Justin 's storyline are his sister Iris , his mentor Reverend Norman Balthus , radio show host Tommy Dolan , and convict Varlyn Stroud . Several characters appear in mysterious dreams and visions connecting the slowly converging storylines . 
 Show creator Daniel Knauf 's original story pitch to HBO included elaborate character biographies , which he gave to the actors , the writers and the studio as an overview over the series ' intended plot . These biographies were rewritten before the filming of the first season began . Receiving little to no mention in the series afterwards , the original character backgrounds were summarized on the official HBO website . After the show 's cancellation , the writers revealed future character arcs and forwarded all original biographies to fans as part of the show 's so @-@ called " Pitch Document " . Due to their nature , these sources do not offer canon information per se , but provide a frame for the characters ' motivation throughout the series . 
 The thematic and period setting of Carnivàle required an unusual casting approach . While some actors were hired for their genetic disabilities , most actors were specifically cast for their unique and distinct looks to fit the 1930s period . Award @-@ winning costumes and make @-@ up enhanced the illusion . Reviews generally lauded the actors and characters , and several actors received award recognition for their performances . 
 = = Character conception = = 
 Conceiving the initial script for Carnivàle between 1990 and 1992 , Daniel <unk> set its plot in a carnival environment in the 1930s Dust Bowl , which he felt had not been dramatized as a series yet . He had grown up with a disabled father who was not commonly accepted as a normal human being . Freaks of the 1930s , however , who might not have found another place offering a future than a carnival , tended to be celebrities in the period . Daniel Knauf expanded the plot with a complex fictional universe based on a good versus evil theme , led by carnival healer Ben Hawkins and Brother Justin Crowe , a California preacher . In his story pitch to HBO , Knauf presented Carnivàle as a collection of media samples from the perspective of a fictional author trying to uncover Ben 's mysterious story . These fictional samples consisted of interviews , diary entries , and various newspaper clippings , photos and book references forming the character biographies of all major Carnivàle characters . The character backgrounds were further developed before the filming of Carnivàle began , but were not made part of the show 's visible structure . The audience would therefore only get to know the characters as a natural aspect in the story . The characters themselves are confronted with " self @-@ realization and becoming aware of these [ supernatural ] powers and learning to harness them , and the implications of this battle between good and evil . " Seventeen actors received star billing in the first season ; fifteen of whom were part of the carnival storyline . The second season amounted to thirteen main cast members , supplemented by several actors in recurring roles . Although such large casts make shows more expensive to produce , the writers have more flexibility in story decisions . 
 = = Ben Hawkins = = 
 Played by Nick Stahl , Ryan Hanson Bradford ( as child ) – Further information : Genealogy , and season 2 finale and character fates 
 Ben Krohn Hawkins is the protagonist in Carnivàle . He begins the story as a young Oklahoma farmer and chain gang fugitive who is picked up by a traveling carnival when his mother dies . Ben has displayed inexplicable healing powers since childhood , and with the beginning of the series , he has begun to suffer dreams and visions of people unknown to him . As Ben learns from staying with the carnival , he seems to be related to Henry Scudder , a man who once worked at the carnival . He also learns that his powers come with a price – to give life , he must take life ; to raise the dead , he has to deliberately kill someone else . When the beginning of season 2 makes the mysterious happenings in the carnival clearer , Ben is told to find the preacher of his dreams to prevent an unfolding chain of catastrophic events . Henry Scudder , at this point revealed to be Ben 's father , allegedly knows the preacher 's name , and after a number of near misses and harrowing encounters , Ben is able to bring Scudder before the carnival 's Management . A fight ensues in which Ben is forced to kill Management , leaving him a full understanding of his powers . Season 2 concludes with Ben 's setting out to confront Brother Justin in California , where they finally meet in battle in a cornfield . The carnies find Brother Justin slain and Ben passed out from his own grievous wounds . They take Ben back to their camp and leave New Canaan . 
 = = = Background and development = = = 
 As his powers and use of powers already suggest in the series , Ben is an Avataric Creature of Light . An early draft of Carnivàle , which consisted of diary entries by Benjamin " Ben " Hawkins , summarized his childhood as growing up on a run @-@ down farm with his mother and grandfather in the belief that his father had died in World War I. After both his grandfather and mother had died from cancer , he was " shanghaied by a group of carnies " in 1930 . In a later version closer to the actual series , Ben left his mother 's farm at age sixteen and fell into a criminal life in Texas . After receiving a twenty @-@ year sentence in a state prison @-@ farm for a failed bank robbery , Ben planned his escape to return home to his sick mother , but he accidentally killed a prison guard who drew a gun on him . Show creator Daniel Knauf gave the latter as Ben 's chain gang background in the series . 
 The writers always intended Ben to be the leading man and hero of the series , and were looking for an actor to showcase a youthful , innocent and anti @-@ hero quality . Of the many actors auditioning , the producers found that Nick Stahl brought a " particular introspection " to the character , " project [ ing ] a great deal of sensitivity , of quiet intelligence , of pain . " They also felt that his seemingly little @-@ trained physique worked well for the 1930s period . Nick Stahl , who interpreted Ben as " very stoic " , " very quiet " , with a " dual nature " and a " real internal struggle going on " , embraced this role as a personal challenge . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 In reviewing the first three episodes , The New York Times commented that " Ben is a taciturn hero , and Mr. Stahl does a remarkable job of wordlessly conveying his character 's moods and yearnings , as well as his ungainly grace . " The Boston Globe regarded " Stahl , with his watchful eyes , [ as ] one of the show 's strengths . He has a boyish face , but the grim expression of a worn @-@ out elder " , and the Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer said Stahl " speaks volumes with his eyes and weary frown , so much so that his understated portrayal almost carries the series . " In a season 1 DVD review , DVD Talk thought that " as the two leads , Nick Stahl and Clancy Brown are nothing short of brilliant . Ben Hawkins is a very isolated and quiet character , and yet he carries a significant part of the series on his shoulders . Without the right actor it could be disastrous , but Stahl brings a level of thoughtful emotion to the character such that a glance or a stare speaks volumes . " <unk> felt in a season 2 review that " both Nick Stahl and Clancy Brown deliver perfect performances . Stahl 's gradual acceptance of his own power , and his subsequent struggle , are fascinating . " 
 For his portrayal of Ben Hawkins , Nick Stahl was nominated for a 2003 Saturn Award in the category " Best Supporting Actor in a Television Series " . He was also nominated for a 2003 Golden Satellite Award in the category " Best Performance by an Actor in a Series , Drama " . 
 = = Brother Justin Crowe = = 
 Played by Clancy Brown , Jamie Kaler ( as young man ) , Jordan Orr ( as child , Alexei Belyakov ) , Don Swayze ( Tattooed Man ) – Further information : Genealogy , and season 2 finale and character fates 
 Brother Justin Crowe is the antagonist in Carnivàle ; reviewers also saw in him a possible alternate protagonist . Brother Justin is introduced as a Methodist minister who resides with his sister Iris in the small town of Mintern , California . As the series reveals in later episodes , Justin 's birth name is Alexei Belyakov . He and his sister Iris are orphaned immigrant children in the wilderness , who were found and raised by Reverend Norman Balthus . Following strange visions and supernatural abilities in the pilot episode , Brother Justin erects a church in his God 's name . But after a fire in his new ministry leads him almost to suicide , Brother Justin is hospitalized in a <unk> and discovers his ability to manipulate and control those around him through sheer force of will . Shortly after Brother Justin 's return to Mintern , Norman suspects his foster son to be possessed by a demon and confronts him , but Brother Justin is not disturbed by his true nature for long . In the beginning of season 2 , Brother Justin has begun to gather a huge flock of worshippers of mostly migrants and Okies outside Mintern via his nightly radio sermons and newfound abilities of persuasion . A scholar named Wilfred Talbot Smith identifies him as the Usher and tells him that , in order to gain his full measure of power and fulfill his destiny , he must find and kill a man named Henry Scudder . While escaped convict Varlyn Stroud helps Brother Justin , the Crowes find a new chambermaid in ex @-@ carny Sofie , not knowing that she is Brother Justin 's daughter . Brother Justin at long last meets his adversary , Ben , in the final episode of the series . Brother Justin is killed in a battle in a cornfield near his home , but Sofie as the Omega arrives and places her hands on his chest , causing the corn stalks around them to wither and fall away . 
 = = = Background and development = = = 
 Besides being the Usher , Brother Justin is also an Avataric Creature of Dark . His spiritual presentation in the series , the Tattooed Man , was portrayed by Don Swayze . Show creator Daniel Knauf saw in Brother Justin " one of the most complex devils " , and envisioned Christopher Walken to play him when he wrote the first draft of the show . Knauf originally designed Brother Justin as a preacher far along in his career as well as a recurring instead of a regular character , " much more evolved towards the dark side . " An early draft of Carnivàle gave Brother Justin 's real name as Lucius Crowe , a radio preacher who advocated ethnic hatred , especially for Gypsies and carnival folk . It also mentioned Brother Justin joining " The Order of the Knights of Jericho " between 1921 and 1923 and becoming its head in 1926 . The completion of the construction of his " Temple of Jericho " was set in Nebraska in 1928 . At the series ' start initially projected to occur in 1930 , the character had already gathered a great army of followers through his " Church of the Air " radio sermons . 
 After seeing the preliminary pilot episode , however , Knauf and the producers realized there was no room for the character to grow in a television series . They demoted Brother Justin to an ordinary Christian minister in a little town , but when Brother Justin 's affiliation needed to be decided , Knauf contested plans to make him a Catholic priest ; he rather settled on the Methodist denomination , which he perceived as significantly less suspicious and controversial . Although Brother Justin shares traits with Father Coughlin , an Irish Catholic priest who broadcast his sermons over the radio in the 1930s , the writers never tried to retell that particular story . 
 The producers added Justin 's sister Iris as a supporting character in the revised series , and established a sexual tension between the two characters early on . While reviewers were unsure what to make of it , Daniel Knauf advertised the relationship as " just as warped and incestuous as ever " in the new season . Clancy Brown ( Brother Justin ) and Amy Madigan ( Iris ) acknowledged the lust between their characters but assumed their relationship had not been consummated in the first season . They were not in favor of their characters getting together like HBO had wanted , as " that 's really not what they 're about . " Per Brown , the sibling relationship informs Brother Justin 's and Iris 's character and motives , and continued tension frightens the audience more if it is never resolved . Although Brown and Madigan wanted to leave the status of their characters ' relationship as lovers open , they deliberately played their kisses more intimate and familiar than most people would consider comfortable . Several characters intervene the siblings ' relationship during the show 's run . The writers had planned a sexual innuendo between Iris and Tommy Dolan , a news reporter who investigates in the arson case , but Robert Knepper ( Dolan ) later felt his character might just have been a pawn between Brother Justin and Iris as siblings , making Brother Justin jealous . The Crowes also regularly hire new maids , which Knauf explained as Iris lining up surrogate women to relieve Brother Justin 's sexual pressure . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 In reviewing the first three episodes , The New York Times saw in " prim , righteous Brother Justin [ ... ] more of a caricature , but Clancy Brown finds ways to bring some subtle glints of personality to the role . " Time commented , " Brother Justin comes across as a typical whited sepulcher – if there 's one thing more trite than a dwarf in a surreal drama , it 's a preacher with a dark side – and Brown 's campy performance largely involves shouting ' Enough ! ' and ' No @-@ o @-@ o @-@ o ! ' with horror @-@ flick pathos . " Entertainment Weekly considered Brown 's Brother Justin " delightfully unsettling as the creepy evangelist taking his orders from the wrong superpower " , and Variety thought Brown was doing " a superb job straddling the line between stoic and menacing , and there are hints about his weaknesses , conveyed quickly with subtlety . " A season 1 DVD review by DVD Talk saw Clancy Brown 's performance as " nothing short of brilliant . [ ... ] Brown also has a difficult task capturing the duality of Brother Justin , a man who presents a physically intimidating presence but who wants little more than to be a subdued and loyal servant of his Lord , and he succeeds on every level . " <unk> stated in a season 2 review that " Brown 's presence and charisma is dazzling ; he is both likable and frightening . He is an actor with a great deal of range , and he uses all of it in this series . " Referring to Brown 's portrayal as " a man of God in <unk> " , the Los Angeles Times saw Brown 's " eyes always betray [ ing ] him as someone who , all things considered , would probably be happier caving in your skull and smoking a cigarette afterward than talking to you for another minute . " Time Magazine 's James Poniewozik depicted the Boardwalk Empire character Nelson Van Alden ( played by Michael Shannon ) as " such a histrionic , guilt @-@ wracked , damnation @-@ obsessed monster that he reminds me of Brother Justin " . 
 = = Characters affiliated with Ben Hawkins = = 
 = = = Samson = = = 
 Played by Michael J. Anderson ( seasons 1 – 2 main cast ) 
 Samson , in earlier drafts also called Edgar Leiber or Edgar Leonhardt , is the dwarf co @-@ manager of the Carnivàle . His original biography gave his background as a dwarf strongman who started his career in 1904 . Eight years later , he started working on traveling carnivals , including the Hyde & Teller Company . Samson 's wit elevated him from performer to general manager until another character , Management , purchased the carnival ( to be renamed Carnivàle ) and briefly gave Samson 's job to Lodz , a blind mentalist . The beginning of the series shows Samson delegating Management 's orders to the carnies . Samson temporarily loses his position to Lodz for a second time near the end of the first season but retains Management 's trust . The death of Management in season 2 leads to Samson 's secret deal with Ben to make the boy the new commander of the carnival . 
 = = = Jonesy = = = 
 Played by Tim DeKay ( seasons 1 – 2 main cast ) – Further information : Season 2 finale and character fates 
 Clayton " Jonesy " Jones is an ex @-@ baseball player who suffers from a crippling knee injury . He is Samson 's right @-@ hand man , operator of the Ferris wheel , and the leader of the <unk> . Jonesy 's original biography reveals his past as a star pitcher in the major league whose knee was injured in revenge when he refused to throw a game for the mob . Slipping to the edge of society , Jonesy joined the Carnivàle and found redemption in the eyes of young Sofie . The two became inseparable until Sofie grew into a woman , making their relationship awkward . At the beginning of the series , Jonesy is faced with Sofie avoiding his advances . While she retreats into a friendship with cootch dancer Libby Dreifuss , Jonesy finds sexual relief with Libby 's mother Rita Sue . When Sofie begins to show interest in him , he breaks off his relationship with Rita Sue ; however , the fact that he was sleeping with her ( and that Libby knew about it ) causes Sofie to break both of their hearts as pay back . After this Jonesy remains cold towards her yet finds new affection in Libby . The two eventually elope . Jonesy is kidnapped , tortured and left for dead by a man who had lost his wife in a Ferris wheel accident . Ben is able to heal Jonesy including his crippled knee , and Jonesy joins Ben on his last mission . In the series ' final minutes , Jonesy and Sofie meet again , and she shoots him in cold blood . 
 = = = Sofie and Apollonia = = = 
 Sofie played by Clea DuVall , Lilli Babb ( as child ) ( seasons 1 – 2 main cast ) – Further information : Genealogy · Season 2 finale and character fates 
 Apollonia played by Diane Salinger , Elizabeth Kate ( as young woman ) ( season 1 main cast , season 2 recurring ) – Further information : Genealogy 
 Apollonia and Sofie <unk> <unk> are fortunetellers in a mother @-@ daughter act at the carnival . Although Apollonia is catatonic , she and Sofie can communicate telepathically . Their original biographies declare Apollonia a " once renowned seer who read cards for the rich and famous " and " the only psychic Houdini was unable to debunk . " A series of seizures during Sofie 's birth in 1913 was given as reason for Apollonia 's state . Apollonia 's sister cared for her until Sofie was old enough to take over , and they began working the traveling circuits shortly afterwards . It remains unknown until late in season that 2 Sofie is the Omega , although the character 's importance for the show 's mythology is suggested much earlier . When the series starts with Ben joining the carnival , Apollonia can no longer shield Sofie from her own true self . Sofie begins to evade and rebel against her mother 's mental control , but Apollonia counters by first trying to drive Sofie to suicide , then by attempting to kill her in a trailer fire at the end of the first season . Jonesy rescues Sofie , but Apollonia dies . Nevertheless , season 2 shows Apollonia repeatedly appearing to Sofie and snake charmer Ruthie . Sofie tries to leave her fortuneteller life behind by becoming a roustabout . After a short @-@ lived relationship with Ben , Sofie leaves the carnival altogether and becomes the Crowes ' maid in California . Brother Justin introduces her to the world of religion , but several signs suggest the preacher is not the good man Sofie thought . After berating Brother Justin in the final episode , Sofie is locked in a barn where visions insinuate her as the Omega and Brother Justin as her father . She later shoots Jonesy , and her eyes have taken on the coal black appearance of Brother Justin 's eyes . The final minutes of the series show Sofie finding Brother Justin dead in a cornfield . She lays her hands on his chest , and the corn around them dies . 
 = = = Lodz = = = 
 Played by Patrick Bauchau ( season 1 main cast , season 2 recurring ) 
 Professor Ernst Lodz is a blind mentalist . As revealed both in the show and in his original biography , he has a long history with the Carnivàle . Lodz 's character arc starts with Ben joining the carnival . Lodz unsuccessfully hassles the boy to work with him and to listen to his dreams . He later initiates Ruthie 's death with Management 's blessing to get his sight back . Upon finding out these circumstances , Ben strangles Lodz to death , reviving Ruthie in the process . Nevertheless , Lodz repeatedly appears to Ruthie and leaves her the message " Sofie is the Omega " on a mirror . Using Ruthie 's body , Lodz also visits his lover Lila and informs her about the events leading to his death and " you 'll be seeing me soon [ ... ] in the flesh . " Lodz 's final appearance as Ruthie was not supposed to be his last . According to Clancy Brown ( Brother Justin ) , the writers had originally planned Lodz 's return as a mummy after a man sold his desiccated body to the carnies . Lodz 's demise in season 1 however was planned from the beginning . Besides serving a purpose to the story , it should indicate all bets are off for the other characters . 
 = = = Lila = = = 
 Played by Debra Christofferson ( seasons 1 – 2 main cast ) 
 Lila Villanueva , also known as the Bearded Lady of Brussels , is the lover of Lodz and the dressmaker of the carnival . Lila 's original biography states she was born into the Villanueva circus family in Terrebonne Parish , Louisiana in 1890 . The family traveled the international circuit as the " Flying Villalobos " until misfortune struck . One of Lila 's two older brothers died in Copenhagen in 1905 , and her father committed suicide in 1908 . At age sixteen , Lila already sported a beard and married for the first time . The marriage did not last long , and Lila would marry over nineteen more times in her life . Lodz would be her only true love . Lila 's arc of the first season is limited to being with Lodz until she notices his growing contact with Management . His sudden disappearance at the beginning of season 2 however makes her suspicious . Samson 's subsequent evasive behavior suggests external forces , but Lila finds herself unable to obtain proof . Ruthie repeatedly approaches Lila at night , seemingly possessed by Lodz , and leaves her clues . When Lila finally learns of the circumstances surrounding Lodz 's death , she <unk> the carnival crew to a mutiny that almost prevents the troupe from meeting with Brother Justin in California . 
 = = = The Dreifuss family = = = 
 Felix " Stumpy " Dreifuss played by Toby Huss ( seasons 1 – 2 main cast ) 
 Rita Sue Dreifuss played by Cynthia Ettinger ( seasons 1 – 2 main cast ) 
 Libby Dreifuss played by Carla Gallo ( seasons 1 – 2 main cast ) – Further information : Season 2 finale and character fates 
 Dora Mae Dreifuss played by Amanda Aday ( season 1 recurring ) 
 Felix " Stumpy " Dreifuss is the manager of the cootch ( striptease ) show . He is married to Rita Sue , and has two daughters , Libby and Dora Mae . Their original biographies state Rita Sue was born in Michigan in 1895 as the only child of Thomas and Emma Menninger . Her parents invested in her education at the finest Eastern boarding schools , but the family 's financial fortunes declined with Thomas 's death in 1903 . Rita Sue left her home in 1908 and started vaudeville work . She joined several traveling companies and strip @-@ shows , where she met Stumpy , a barker who had begun his career in 1910 . They married in 1914 , two months before the birth of their first child , Libby . In 1916 , their second daughter , Dora Mae , was born . When their company 's owner died , Stumpy and Rita Sue began traveling with various carnival companies and were eventually joined by their two daughters in the late 1920s . Their fortunes steadily declined in the 1930s when more cootch family acts spawned in the difficult times . The series mentions Stumpy and Rita Sue had three more children , one of whom was stillborn and two of whom died of influenza . The Dreifuss family continues to face many personal and economic problems during the show 's run . Dora Mae is murdered by an inhabitant of a haunted ghost town , the sexual relationships between Jonesy and Rita Sue , then Jonesy and Libby , cause much heartbreak , and Stumpy 's affection for gambling almost ruins the family . 
 = = = Ruthie and Gabriel = = = 
 Ruthie played by Adrienne Barbeau ( seasons 1 – 2 main cast ) 
 Gabriel played by Brian Turk ( seasons 1 – 2 main cast ) 
 Ruthie is a snake charmer and barker for the strongman acts of her son Gabriel . Their arc in the story reveals Ruthie as a former lover of the mysterious Henry Scudder . Gabriel , a big and powerful person but with a low IQ , is the first carny to experience Ben 's healing powers . Shortly after Ruthie and Ben grow close , Ruthie dies from a snake bite . Ben first tries unsuccessfully to resurrect Ruthie , but succeeds later when he strangles Lodz , the carnival 's blind mentalist . In season 2 , Ruthie starts to encounter people who have died a long time ago . Being possessed by Lodz at night , Ruthie repeatedly approaches Lila , leading to Lila turning into a major obstacle for the carnival 's success . 
 = = = Minor characters = = = 
 Gecko played by John Fleck ( season 1 main cast ) – Gecko is the Lizard Man at the carnival . While his disappearance in @-@ between seasons is not directly addressed , Bert mentions hearing about some acts having abandoned Samson ( The Road to Damascus ) . 
 Alexandria and Caladonia Potter played by Karyne and Sarah Steben ( season 1 main cast ) – Alexandria and Caladonia are twins conjoined at the hip . While their disappearance in @-@ between seasons is not directly addressed , Bert mentions hearing about some acts having abandoned Samson ( The Road to Damascus ) . 
 Burley played by Scott MacDonald ( season 1 – 2 recurring ) – Burley is a roustabout at the carnival . 
 Osgood played by Blake Shields ( season 1 – 2 recurring ) – Osgood is a roustabout at the carnival . 
 Possum played by Bill Moseley ( season 1 – 2 recurring ) – Possum is the cook of the carnival . 
 Jasper played by Frank Collison ( season 1 – 2 recurring ) – Jasper is a barker at the carnival . 
 Giant played by Matthew McGrory ( season 1 – 2 recurring ) – The giant demonstrates his size in the Ten @-@ in @-@ One . 
 Sabina Engstrom played by Bree Walker ( season 2 recurring ) – Sabina the Scorpion Lady worked at the Daily Brothers Show until its closure and joins the Carnivàle in season 2 . She was married to Samson for nine years . 
 Bert / Bertha Hagenbeck played by Paul Hipp ( season 2 recurring ) – Bert / Bertha is the current husband of Sabina . He dresses as half a man , half a woman . 
 Rollo the <unk> / Boneless Billy Benson played by Daniel Browning Smith ( season 2 recurring ) – Rollo is a contortionist . 
 <unk> played by John Hannah ( season 1 ) – <unk> is a bartender and resident of Babylon ; he is executed after a round of " Carnival Justice " due to admitting to the murder of Dora Mae . 
 = = Characters affiliated with Brother Justin = = 
 = = = Iris Crowe = = = 
 Played by Amy Madigan ( seasons 1 – 2 main cast ) , Erin Sanders ( as child , Irina Belyakov ) ( seasons 1 recurring cast ) – Further information : Genealogy 
 Iris Crowe is the older sister of Brother Justin and a devoted supporter of his ministry duties in California . Iris ' significance in the series starts when Brother Justin informs her about the church board 's plan to take away his new ministry . Shortly after , a fire in the church kills several orphans , but it remains unknown until the end of the first season that Iris was the arsonist . Radio show host Tommy Dolan , who arrived to help with the arson investigation , develops feelings for Iris , but a romance is hindered by Brother Justin 's return from a week @-@ long self @-@ discovery trip . Dolan starts to uncover evidence pointing to Iris 's guilt , but a strange twist at Iris 's planned public confession results in Dolan 's arrest as the culprit . To prevent the revelation of Brother Justin 's true nature , Iris murders an innocent Okie , Eleanor . Late in the second season , Iris joins her foster father Norman in an ultimately unsuccessful plot against Brother Justin . 
 = = = Tommy Dolan = = = 
 Played by Robert Knepper ( seasons 1 – 2 recurring ) 
 Tommy Dolan is a radio show host and news reporter from Los Angeles , who regularly travels incognito into the wilderness to collect strangers ' stories for his show Tommy Dolan on the Road . His first appearance in the series occurs when he meets Brother Justin around a campfire . After retelling Brother Justin 's story of the burned @-@ down ministry in his radio show , Dolan approaches Brother Justin 's sister Iris and helps her with receiving funds for a new church . Dolan is seemingly attracted to Iris , but Brother Justin 's return prevents further advances . By the beginning of season 2 , Dolan has fulfilled Brother Justin 's wish to become a radio preacher , yet police evidence surfaces first hinting at Brother Justin 's , then Iris ' guilt in the arson . Trying to further his career , Dolan collects evidence until Brother Justin accepts the arrangement of a special confession announcement for Iris . The confession backfires and Dolan is arrested , with Iris 's guilt never proven . 
 = = = Reverend Norman Balthus = = = 
 Played by Ralph Waite ( season 1 recurring , season 2 main cast ) – Further information : Genealogy 
