 Reverend Norman Balthus is Brother Justin 's mentor . He rescued and raised young Justin and Iris after he had found them alone in the wilderness . Late in the first season , Norman grows suspicious of Brother Justin 's inner motivations . He confronts his foster son but does not carry out Brother Justin 's plea to kill him . At the beginning of season 2 , Norman suffers a stroke leaving him unable to move or speak . He remains in the care of Brother Justin and Iris until the carnival sets up near Brother Justin 's home at the end of the series . Ben heals Norman , but the reverend is fatally lacerated by Brother Justin seconds later . 
 = = = Varlyn Stroud = = = 
 Played by John Carroll Lynch ( season 2 recurring ) 
 Varlyn Stroud is a convict . His original biography gives insight into his criminal past and names Stroud 's sister Clara as his first murder . When Clara was nine years old , Stroud deliberately upset a Ferris wheel car so Clara fell to her death . Stroud 's second murder was his grandfather three years later , which he covered as a hunting accident . Having possibly committed over a dozen contract @-@ killings , Stroud was never convicted of murder , yet still spent most of his life in prison on a variety of charges . Stroud 's story arc in the series begins in season 2 when he hears Brother Justin 's radio sermon . Made Brother Justin 's apostle in a subliminal message , Stroud escapes prison to find and bring Henry Scudder to Brother Justin . Stroud first tracks Scudder 's old life and later follows the route of the carnival . With Ben 's unintentional aid , Stroud finally finds the man he is looking for . After delivering Scudder to Brother Justin , Stroud becomes his security manager , which significantly hinders the carnival 's aim to kill Brother Justin . 
 = = = Minor characters = = = 
 Eleanor McGill played by K Callan ( seasons 1 – 2 recurring ) – Eleanor McGill is an Okie who becomes a devoted follower of Brother Justin . 
 Val Templeton played by Glenn Shadix ( seasons 1 – 2 recurring ) – Val Templeton , cousin of Chin 's owner Carroll Templeton , is a councilman in Mintern . 
 Ned Munson played by Matt McCoy ( seasons 1 – 2 recurring ) – Ned Munson is a councilman in Mintern California , assisting Val Templeton . 
 Wilfred Talbot Smith played by Time Winters ( season 2 recurring ) – Wilfred Talbot Smith advises Brother Justin in occult matters in relation to the Usher . 
 Bishop McNaughton played by John Aylward ( season 2 recurring ) – Bishop McNaughton oversees the church of Reverend Norman Balthus and Brother Justin . 
 Garrett played by Dennis W. Hall ( Season 1 – 2 , recurring ) – Garrett is married and has children with Maggie , the niece of Eleanor McGill . 
 Carroll Templeton played by Ron Perkins ( season 1 ) – Carroll Templeton , cousin of Val Templeton , is the owner of Chin 's . Brother Justin reveals his sins , which leads to his suicide . 
 = = Characters affiliated with the past = = 
 Since the first episodes of Carnivàle , Ben 's parentage is one of the big puzzles . As a man named Henry Scudder seems connected to everything and everyone , it is Ben 's job to piece together the mystery of his own past . The progressing series indicates many characters are more closely interrelated than what both the characters and the audience would imagine at first . Although these links rarely receive plot attention , the immediate genealogy of the main characters is cleared up by the end of the second season . Other character links that were largely unanswered after Carnivàle 's cancellation concern the trench war and the Hyde & Teller Company in relation to the emergence of the Carnivàle . Show creator Daniel Knauf , character biographies on the HBO website and the Pitch Document later provided detail for what was originally envisioned . Although the nature of these sources does not qualify them for canon status , they provide a framework for hints dropped in the series . 
 = = = Henry Scudder = = = 
 Played by John Savage ( seasons 1 – 2 recurring ) 
 Henry " Hack " Scudder is a mysterious man who appears in Ben 's and Brother Justin 's dreams wearing a tuxedo . Scudder is mentioned several times in the first season , revealing he once worked at the carnival 's geek show and was Ruthie 's lover . Scudder also had a relationship with Ben 's mother once ; Samson later confirms Scudder as Ben 's father . Season 2 forces both Ben and Brother Justin to find Scudder for their own purposes . It is confirmed that he is the previous generation 's Creature of Darkness , and just as Management , the previous Avatar of Light , knew Ben 's identity , he knows Brother Justin 's , the current Avatar of Darkness . He had repeatedly tried to flee from his destiny , and when he sensed Management approaching he fled to protect Ben and his mother . After a long journey , Ben finds Scudder in Damascus , Nebraska and brings him to the carnival 's Management and reveals that Management 's son is the Avatar of Darkness . Management attacks Scudder , leading to Ben killing Management to protect him . Scudder flees and moments later , escaped convict Stroud kidnaps him and brings him to Brother Justin . Brother Justin anticipates Scudder 's renewed escape and decapitates him . 
 = = = Lucius Belyakov = = = 
 Played by Michael Massee and Vladislav Kozlov ( Russian soldier ) , Cameron Clapp ( body ) , Linda Hunt ( voice ) ( seasons 1 – 2 recurring ) 
 Lucius Belyakov is a mysterious man who appears in Ben 's and Brother Justin 's dreams as a Russian soldier . He is also revealed to be the previous generation 's Creature of Light . Unknown at first , he is also the carnival 's Management , hiding in his trailer and communicating with his carny workers solely through Samson . He is also the father of Iris and Justin Crowe . As Management remains unseen during the first season , it is unclear at first whether Management exists at all . Late in the season however , Management is shown to have a conversation with Lodz . In the second season , Management reveals himself to Ben as Lucius Belyakov , the soldier of his dreams who was once badly injured by a bear . Management wants Ben to break an unfolding chain of catastrophic events , which will lead to the death of millions . Management urges Ben to find and bring Scudder to him , as he will know the identity of the current generation 's Avatar of Darkness . After Ben accomplishes his mission , Management attacks Scudder and is stabbed by Ben to protect the latter . Ben reveals to Samson that Management had planned for Ben to kill him so all of his powers would pass to Ben . With his last breath , Management tells Ben how to defeat the Usher , Ben 's ultimate nemesis . 
 = = = Emergence of the Carnivàle = = = 
 Although Carnivàle is set in the mid @-@ 1930s , Ben and Brother Justin have visions and dreams suggesting the story began much earlier . Samson summarizes the backstory in a monologue at the beginning of season 2 , without mentioning names . The Pitch Document , which served as the source for the character biographies on the HBO website , provides context for all clues . 
 The carnival 's backstory begins at the end of the nineteenth century when Lucius Belyakov , a Russian aristocrat from Minsk and officer in the Tsar 's army , became aware of his Avataric powers . The birth of his son Alexei evoked dark visions in him . After Belyakov 's attempt to kill two @-@ year @-@ old Alexei , his wife fled with their two children to America , but news spread they perished in a train accident soon thereafter . Resuming his duties in Lemberg in 1914 , Belyakov was again afflicted by dark visions . Henry Scudder , an American who had escaped prosecution for criminal activities in his home country by joining foreign armies , had had psychokinetic powers since childhood . At the time of Belyakov 's visions , Scudder was stationed in Lemberg as an observer for the Austro @-@ Hungarian Army . Belyakov became obsessed with killing his spiritual enemy ( Scudder ) and deserted his post , but an escaped circus bear feeding on the dead nearby surprised him in an attack . Belyakov was so gravely injured he would lose an arm and both legs . 
 Scudder escaped and encountered carnival performer Lodz on the battlefield , searching for his bear Bruno . When Scudder joined Lodz 's troupe , Lodz recognized and cultivated Scudder 's supernatural abilities , and they started to perform in the salons of war @-@ torn Europe . Meanwhile , Belyakov slowly recovered from his wounds and learned about his true nature and destiny through devoted study of ancient manuscripts . Scudder could feel Belyakov tracking his movements and never stayed long in one area . Growing impatient , Lodz got into a fight with Scudder about his skills and was gifted with <unk> in exchange for his sense of sight . Scudder returned to America in 1915 to flee his nightmares . Several months later , Belyakov located the broken @-@ down Lodz in Venice . Belyakov noticed the mental bond between Lodz and Scudder the power transfer had caused , and promised to restore Lodz 's sight if he helped in finding Scudder . 
 Scudder fell in love and married a local girl named Flora Hawkins from Milfay , Oklahoma , with whom he had a son , Ben . When Scudder felt his pursuing enemy again , he left his family and traveled aimlessly throughout the country . After narrowly surviving a cave @-@ in in Babylon , he joined the Hyde & Teller Company , a small carnival working the southeastern circuit . Scudder worked as a sideshow geek for nearly a year and got to know Samson , Jonesy , Possum , Lila , Ruthie and Gabriel . Meanwhile , Belyakov used Lodz 's tracking skills and purchased the Hyde & Teller Company , scantily missing Scudder . To remain undercover , Belyakov renamed the troupe " Carnivàle " , assumed the name " Management " , and replaced Samson with Lodz as the new co @-@ manager . Lodz finally located Scudder in St. Louis , but when Lodz failed in preventing Scudder from going into hiding again ( with the Order Templar ) , Samson regained his old job . Over the years , the Carnivàle took on new acts such as the fortunetellers Apollonia and Sofie , the conjoined twins , Gecko the Lizard Man , and the Dreifuss family . While Lodz <unk> waited for Management to fulfill his earlier promise of restoring his sight , Samson ran the show , counseled by Management and assisted by Jonesy . Eighteen years went by until Management felt Ben Hawkins , whom he had sensed as his Ascendant since birth , was old enough to be approached . At this point , the first season of Carnivàle resumes the story . 
 = = = Genealogy = = = 
 The pilot episode begins with Ben Hawkins waking up from a dream of a tattooed man , a man in a tuxedo , and a Russian soldier . Ben 's childhood is revealed in flashbacks and dialogue ; Ben 's father had left the family 's farm when Ben was an infant , leaving him in the care of Flora , Ben 's mother . Late season 1 confirms what early episodes had already suggested – the man in the tuxedo , Henry Scudder , is Ben 's father . In the second season , Ben meets his paternal grandmother , Emma Krohn , and learns she killed her husband Hilton Scudder on the night of Henry 's birth , along with Henry 's older brothers Owen , Gilbert , and Alvin Sr. ( According to Knauf and the HBO website , Emma 's other sons were from a previous marriage to Clarke " C.W. " Powell , who had died by natural causes . ) Emma introduces the people living with her as her grandchildren and Ben 's cousins . 
 Brother Justin Crowe is introduced as a devoted Methodist minister , who is supported by his sister Iris . On a self @-@ discovery trip in the middle of the first season , Brother Justin has an elaborate vision of two Russian immigrant children , Irina and her younger brother Alexei ; Irina talks of her evil father . As revealed shortly afterwards , this vision is a repressed memory of Brother Justin of him and Iris as the only survivors of a train accident which also cost their mother 's life . Reverend Norman Balthus later saved Irina and Alexei and raised them in a church orphanage . A vision prompts Brother Justin to get his chest tattooed early in the second season . 
 Some people of the Carnivàle are closely related . Apollonia and Sofie are introduced as mother and daughter working as fortunetellers . Sofie grew up not knowing her father , but has a vision of the Tattooed Man raping her mother later in the first season . In the season 2 opening episode , Management , the mysterious leader of the carnival , reveals himself as Lucius Belyakov , the Russian soldier of Ben 's dreams . Moments before his death several episodes later , Belyakov learns that his son Alexei ( Brother Justin ) did not die in a train accident , as he had previously believed . In the meantime , Sofie has become the Crowes ' maid . When she has a chat with Iris about her childhood , Iris has a vision of Brother Justin as a young man raping Apollonia during his seminary studies in Saint Paul . Although Iris only informs Norman of her suspicions , Sofie sees Brother Justin 's tattooed chest in the final episode of season 2 and has implicit visions insinuating Brother Justin as her father . Future seasons of Carnivàle would have expanded the Belyakov genealogy , making a fusion with the Scudder genealogy possible . 
 = = Casting = = 
 The casting approach for Carnivàle was to find the best available actors and to show the characters ' realness as opposed to depending on freak illusions too much . Carnivàle 's casting directors John <unk> and Wendy O 'Brien already had experience in casting freaks from previous projects . They attended theater showcases , approached smaller agents or hired some actors directly to find people with unique and distinct looks , which was trying as Los Angeles is a stronghold of good @-@ looking actors . The producers generally preferred actors who were not strongly identified with other projects , but were willing to make exceptions for established actors such as Adrienne Barbeau ( Ruthie ) . 
 The script for the pilot episode was the basis for the casting procedure , with little indication where the show would go afterwards . This resulted in some preliminary casting disagreements between the creators and producers , especially for leading characters . Nick Stahl had the strongest consensus among the producers to portray the leading man and hero of the series with a youthful , innocent and anti @-@ hero quality . The character of Sofie was originally written as more of an exotic gypsy girl , but Clea DuVall , a movie actress trying to become involved in regular television , got the part after four auditions . Tim DeKay , who had previously worked with Daniel Knauf on a pilot episode of a different project , was cast as Jonesy because the producers felt he best portrayed a " very American " looking baseball player of the 1930s period . Debra Christofferson impressed the producers with her first and only audition , playing Lila as Lodz 's lover instead of his best friend as the script had implied . Adrienne Barbeau ( Ruthie ) was cast after her first audition as well , although she had originally expected to be cast as Apollonia . She learned to snake @-@ dance afterwards . Brian Turk 's role as Gabriel was originally intended to be a mute character described as " a mildly retarded strongman with the face of an angel " , but the writers later gave Turk a speaking part to not have another mute character like Management and Apollonia . One of the only actors who never had any real competition was Michael J. Anderson as Samson , whom Daniel Knauf had wanted as early as the initial casting meeting ; Samson , Knauf 's favorite character , was inspired by Knauf 's father . 
 The filmed pilot episode served as basis for additional tweaking of intended story lines . The expanded role of Brother Justin encouraged the creation of his sister Iris in a supporting role , for which Amy Madigan was cast . Little was changed on Ben Hawkins ' side except for the addition of the cootch ( striptease ) Dreifuss family ; a Carnivàle consultant had elated the producers by calling attention to his research about families managing cootch shows in the 1930s . Cynthia Ettinger ( Rita Sue Dreifuss ) had lost her role as Martha Kent in the pilot episode of Smallville before the opportunity for Carnivàle came up and had turned to theater jobs ; she chose Carnivàle because of the theater @-@ like experience . Amanda Aday ( Dora Mae Dreifuss ) knew she would join the cast for only a few episodes , but was not told the story reasons at that point . The writers prolonged the character arcs of recurring John Carroll Lynch ( Stroud ) and K Callan ( Eleanor ) considerably beyond their original intention . Similarly , Robert Knepper 's role as Tommy Dolan was extended from a few episodes to half of both seasons because the writers had liked his performance as an " ambitious man [ who uses ] Brother Justin to further his career . " 
 Genetic disorders or unusual body features are not uncommon among Carnivàle actors . Michael J. Anderson ( Samson ) has osteogenesis imperfecta , a genetic bone disorder that leaves him at a size of 3 ft 7 ( 109 cm ) , while Matthew McGrory ( Giant ) stood at 7 ft 6 ( 228 cm ) because of <unk> . Bree Walker ( Sabina ) has <unk> , a rare genetic disorder that results in fused fingers and toes ; she approached the producers in the second season to let her play a " lobster gal " . Several actors for one @-@ time characters like the lobster gal in " Hot and Bothered " and Percy The Praying Mantis in " The Road to Damascus " were also cast for their respective real @-@ life disabilities . Cameron Clapp ( Management ) had lost an arm and both legs in a train accident at the age of 15 . Daniel Browning Smith ( Rollo the <unk> ) holds two Guinness World Records for his body @-@ bending abilities . The actors playing the roles of the conjoined twins ( Karyne and Sarah Steben , identical twins and real @-@ life <unk> ) , Lila the Bearded Lady ( Debra Christofferson ) and Gecko the Lizard Man ( John Fleck ) are performers without genetic <unk> whose appearances were altered through makeup and prosthetics . 
 = = Make @-@ up and costumes = = 
 To give the illusion of being freaks , the appearance of several actors was modified by make @-@ up elements . John Fleck ( Gecko ) spent over ten hours in makeup each day to transform into and out of his character . The skin , which needed to look like alligator hide , consisted of seven or eight separate pieces and needed to be glued to Fleck 's face . Patrick Bauchau ( Lodz ) had several contact lenses pairs of different opaqueness . While one pair enabled him to see shapes , another pair made him basically blind and he had to be led around the set . Debra Christofferson ( Lila ) had a fake beard applied to her chin ; the beard was custom @-@ made by hand @-@ tying human hair onto lace that would disappear when the beard was glued onto the skin . The beard of the early episodes was so heavy that the chemicals caused Christofferson 's skin to be raw at the end of the shooting day , and was later split into three pieces . Christofferson still needed to be careful with mouth movements . According to the actress , " the beard actually determined Lila 's voice . " 
 Establishing the characters ' background rather than prettiness was the main goal of costumes . Ben wore the same clothes in both seasons , and to make them look identical , around twenty multiples of his coveralls were made by hand . It took over six weeks to apply all stitches , patches and the roughly fifty holes , plus the aging process . Brother Justin 's clothes were made period @-@ correct from the beginning , but the character 's foreboding presence was enhanced by fitting his frock on the waist and making the shoulders look bigger than usual for that time period . Sofie 's clothes had a strong Bohemian Eastern influence to portray her mother 's origin and sensibilities . Stumpy 's wardrobe consisted of baggy pants and an Italian bowler hat that gave him a 1920s look instead of the 1930s , showing his clothes were second @-@ hand . The stripper clothes of Rita Sue and Libby were influenced by Mae West , harlot movies and silent films of the 1920s and 1930s , with additional research put into Asian harlots , Latin dancers and Hawaiian dancers . The costume designers chose the costumes of the Daily Brothers Show , a rival carnival , to have a new color tone to set them apart from the Carnivàle . The dress of Sabina the Scorpion Lady underwent several die @-@ bleaching cycles to achieve a red @-@ orange @-@ purple color that would work well when filming outside . Bert / Bertha 's costume was made in a hurry from a vintage tuxedo and an old feathered dress , which helped to give it a " made @-@ it @-@ on @-@ the @-@ road " feeling . 
 In 2004 , Carnivàle won a Hollywood Makeup Artist and Hair Stylist Guild Award and two Emmys in the categories " Outstanding Costumes for a Series " and " Outstanding Hairstyling for a Series " . The show was also nominated in the Emmy category " Outstanding Makeup for a Series ( Non @-@ Prosthetic ) " both in 2004 and 2005 , and in the categories " Outstanding Costumes for a Series " , " Outstanding Hairstyling for a Series " , and " Outstanding Prosthetic Makeup for a Series , Miniseries , Movie or a Special " in 2005 . In the same year , Carnivàle was nominated for two Costume Designers Guild Awards in the categories " Outstanding Costume Design for Television Series – Period / Fantasy " and " Excellence in Costume Design for Television – Period / Fantasy " , winning the latter . 
 = = Reception of supporting characters = = 
 As early reviews focused on Ben Hawkins , Brother Justin Crowe and the meaning of Carnivàle , the show 's supporting characters received little to no attention other than having their freak appearances mentioned , according to Variety 's Phil Gallo because " they don 't play significant parts in the first few episodes . " Critics who reviewed full seasons gave more credit . Wendy Tuohy of the Australian newspaper The Age stated that show creator Daniel Knauf " sprinkled enough magical gifts over the carnival 's cast of mind readers , fortunetellers , snake charmers , catatonic psychics , conjoined twins , bearded ladies and lizard men to make the bizarre and the macabre appear just about routine . " Matt Casamassina of IGN added that " from the opening sequence to the fade out on episode 12 [ of season 1 ] , Carnivàle successfully draws you into the Depression @-@ engulfed world of its many oddly likeable characters . And sure enough , odd best describes these people [ ... ] The show prominently features all manners of freaks , but each is well @-@ crafted , layered , and believable , rather than comical , as easily could have been the case under amateur direction . " MSNBC acknowledged the characters " speak [ ing ] in a dialogue that feels authentic , even if that authenticity is a modern interpretation [ ... ] Carnivàle manager Samson , Michael J. Anderson gets the best dialogue , dropping terrifically incomprehensible lines . " DVD Talk lauded Amy Madigan ( Iris ) , Tim DeKay ( Jonesy ) , and Clea DuVall ( Sofie ) as " fantastic choices " with particularly convincing 1930s looks . They highlighted Carnivàle 's status as an ensemble show , with " the performances of all the supporting characters [ being ] essential to the show 's success . Particularly inspired is the voice of Linda Hunt as the decidedly creepy ' Management ' and John Savage as Henry Scudder . " A <unk> review further praised the supporting performances of Patrick Bauchau ( Lodz ) and Michael J. Anderson ( Samson ) , pointing out that " in fact , every single character on the show , no matter how small , quirky or sinister they are , produce noteworthy performances all round . It is through the efforts of this outstanding cast that makes the entire premise of the show and the period setting so realistic and believable that the audience can 't help but get immersed in it . " 
 Several supporting actors received award recognition for their performances in Carnivàle . Adrienne Barbeau ( Ruthie ) was nominated for a 2003 Golden Satellite Award in the category " Best Performance by an Actress in a Supporting Role in a Series , Drama " , and won a 2004 WIN Award in the category " Best Actress in a Dramatic Series " . Amy Madigan ( Iris ) was nominated for a 2003 Golden Satellite Award in the category " Best Performance by an Actress in a Series , Drama " . Erin Sanders ( young Iris ) was nominated for a 2004 Young Artist Award in the category " Best Performance in a TV Series – Recurring Young Actress " . 
 = = Season 2 finale and character fates = = 
 While HBO entertainment president Carolyn Strauss felt Carnivàle had come to a natural end with its second season and gave this as the network 's explanation for not renewing Carnivàle , it was reported HBO president Chris Albrecht had originally wanted to conclude the second season of Carnivàle with a satisfying and close @-@ ended confrontation between Brother Justin and Ben . Albrecht allegedly preferred a definite demise of Brother Justin to a cliffhanger , but show creator Daniel Knauf stated Albrecht might have been misquoted . According to Knauf , Albrecht had wished in preproduction discussions to conclude season 2 with a fight between Brother Justin and Ben , which had always been Knauf 's intention . HBO had then approved the open ending by greenlighting the final scene in the writing phase , budgeting the filming including the final shot , and owning the rights of the final cut of all episodes . There was never a plan to cancel Carnivàle prematurely , and HBO had only decided the cancellation shortly before their announcement . However , Clancy Brown ( Brother Justin ) remembers the original last shot of the series as Iris watching the corn die , not of Ben in Management 's trailer . 
 Following the cancellation , the writers did not immediately answer fan questions about the characters ' future , arguing the story ideas should not be revealed just for instant fan gratification and should wait to be told until the opportunity arises . They later provided clues in DVD special features and at conventions , in forums and in online chats . Tim DeKay mentioned that the third season would have opened five years after the events of the second season finale . Daniel Knauf said Jonesy would have recovered from his gunshot wound , having been saved by Iris . Producer Howard Klein however pointed out that Jonesy " wasn 't shot in a specific place – he [ just ] collapsed " , and Knauf added " Sofie 's intent in shooting Jonesy was to stop him from taking her back to the carnival " , not to kill him . Season 3 would have opened with Jonesy pitching in a Major League Baseball game and still being married to Libby , as well as having a son with her . 
 Writer and co @-@ executive producer William Schmidt described Sofie 's last seen action as " raising her father at the end , bringing him back to life . " This was " to indicate that she was truly evil " , although " she is the Omega so there 's good in her too . " The third season " would have been pretty much centered on Sofie and the internal struggle of her good versus evil . " The nature of the Omega would have taken two seasons to unfold . 
 Both Ben and Brother Justin would have been alive in the third season . Daniel Knauf would have written Brother Justin as a man " with an inoperable chunk of shrapnel near his heart " , which the anointed blade had caused in the final season 2 episode . Brother Justin would have been " severely weakened and prone to exhaustion , serving as a hollow figurehead in his burgeoning ministry . Sofie and Iris would be vying for the power behind the throne , with Sofie by far the more dangerous of the two , although Iris is a force to be reckoned with . " Knauf had the intention of marrying Brother Justin to Sofie at some point in the future , and the third season would have shown a three @-@ year @-@ old boy amidst Sofie and the Crowes . Knauf left the question about the child 's parents open . Ben 's future would face other hardships . According to Knauf , Ben 's wounds of the season 2 finale would require repeated suturing , causing him to lose his Vitae Divina and draining him of strength . Ben would be a different man than he was before , with a personality closer to Management , and while he and Sofie would be bound together by love , their ultimate fates remain uncertain . 
 = Jack Wall ( composer ) = 
 Jack Wall ( born 1964 in Phoenixville , Pennsylvania ) is an American video game music composer . He has worked on video game music for over 20 games including the Myst franchise , Splinter Cell , Jade Empire , Mass Effect , and Call of Duty . Wall earned a degree in civil engineering from Drexel University in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , and , after a brief stint working in civil engineering , transitioned into music production . He worked with musicians such as John Cale , David Byrne , and Patti Smith , and , after performing increasingly complex production and sound engineering tasks , moved into music composition in 1995 . 
 Wall immediately began working in the video game industry , composing the soundtrack to Vigilance . Primarily composing in an orchestral style , by 2001 he composed the soundtrack to Myst III : Exile , which was the title he says put him on the map as a video game composer . In 2002 , Wall became one of around 20 co @-@ founders of the Game Audio Network Guild ( G.A.N.G. ) as well as senior director . In 2005 , Wall , along with G.A.N.G. founder and fellow composer Tommy Tallarico , produced the Video Games Live concert series , having served as the conductor for the international concert tour . His latest released soundtrack is that of 2012 Black Ops 2 . His soundtracks for Myst III : Exile , Myst IV : Revelation , Rise of the Kasai , Jade Empire , Mass Effect , and Mass Effect 2 were nominated for and won multiple awards . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Jack Wall , born in Phoenixville , Pennsylvania , earned a degree in civil engineering from Drexel University in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , and began a career " planning out sub @-@ divisions and shopping malls " . At the same time he was in a rock band , as he was also interested in music . After recording a demo tape with the band , he was inspired to change career paths and quit his job to work in the music industry . He initially worked as a bartender and later started working in recording studios in Philadelphia and later Boston and New York City , where he worked for Skyline Studios . In 1991 Wall left Skyline , and until 1994 worked as an independent music producer and sound engineer in New York City , working with musicians such as John Cale , David Byrne , and Patti Smith , as well as local bands . Over those three years , Wall consistently worked with Cale , eventually handling arrangement and orchestration of Cale 's compositions as well as producing and working as a sound engineer . While working with Cale on the soundtrack to a movie , House of America , he watched as Cale composed thirty minutes of music in almost real time , and was inspired to begin composing music . 
 = = Career = = 
 By late 1995 , Jack Wall was living in Los Angeles and was married to singer Cindy Shapiro , who he had met in 1994 . She knew Ron Martinez , who was starting a video game company , <unk> Entertainment , and he asked Wall to work for it as a composer . He composed the soundtracks for several games for <unk> ; the first released was Vigilance in 1997 . His daughter Gracie was also born early in 1997 . After leaving the company , he composed the soundtrack to 2001 's Myst III : Exile , which was his first orchestral score and the work that he said put him on the map as a video game composer . It was also interesting to him , as it was a sequel to the first video game he had ever played , Myst . Myst III was nominated for the Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences " Outstanding Achievement in Original Music Composition " award , which it lost to the <unk> soundtrack . 
 In 2002 , Wall became one of around 20 co @-@ founders of the Game Audio Network Guild ( G.A.N.G. ) as well as senior director . The group works to promote the appreciation of video game music , as well as serve as a professional resource for video game music composers and musicians . It was developed and headed by Tommy Tallarico . As of 2010 , Wall serves as vice chairman , after stepping down from heading the board of directors in 2007 . He continued to compose soundtracks for games such as The Mark of Kri and Unreal II : The Awakening . His work on Myst IV : Revelation in 2004 earned him his first three awards , those of " Best Live Performance Recording " , " Best Original Vocal Song : Choral " , and " Music of the Year " from the G.A.N.G. awards . 
 Wall , along with Tommy Tallarico , has produced the Video Games Live concert series , which began on July 6 , 2005 . The two had been planning the concert series , which presents orchestrated versions of music from dozens of games , for three years . The concerts consist of segments of video game music performed by a live orchestra with video footage and synchronized lighting and effects , as well as several interactive segments with the audience , conducted by Wall . Video Games Live was intended to take the idea of a symphonic video game music concert , which was popular in Japan , and combine it with a rock concert to make it appealing to western fans . The series is international and ongoing , with more than 70 shows planned for 2009 . Although Wall composed the soundtracks to three games released in 2005 including the award @-@ winning score to Jade Empire , his works released since then have been 2007 's Mass Effect and 2010 's Mass Effect 2 . Mass Effect 's score earned Wall several awards and nominations , as did Mass Effect 2 . 
 = = Musical style and influences = = 
 Although many of his works are orchestral , Jack Wall has worked in a wide variety of styles , including " heavy metal meets orchestral " and " tribal percussion " . For Jade Empire , he focused on using Chinese instruments and Taiko drums . When writing a video game score , Wall prefers a collaborative approach with the game designers to creating the music , as he feels that the " tug back and forth of ideas " makes the music stronger . He notes , however , that he has to be flexible , and willing to create his own vision for the music . As part of this , he prefers to be able to see illustrations and game design documents before beginning , as they provide insight into the feel of the game so that his music can mesh in with it . He also believes that a good video game music composer needs to have a lot of technical sound production skill to be successful . Wall has said that the Myst and Mass Effect soundtracks are his favorites that he has created . Wall stated that he was primarily interested in scoring games that are " interesting " , and that his main concern was creating something original . Although he has worked with live orchestras and synthetic orchestras , Wall recommends that game developers use a live one , despite the expense , as he feels they add a much more dynamic sound to the music and allow the composer more freedom than synthesizer samples . He also wrote the book Legendary Bim Bang , the man who invented music . A picture book for ages 1 to 7 
 = = Works = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 = Pig @-@ faced women = 
 Legendary stories of pig @-@ faced women originated roughly simultaneously in Holland , England and France in the late 1630s . The stories told of a wealthy woman whose body was of normal human appearance , but whose face was that of a pig . 
 In the earliest forms of the story , the woman 's pig @-@ like appearance was the result of witchcraft . Following her wedding day , the pig @-@ faced woman 's new husband was granted the choice of having her appear beautiful to him but pig @-@ like to others , or pig @-@ like to him and beautiful to others . When her husband told her that the choice was hers , the enchantment was broken and her pig @-@ like appearance vanished . These stories became particularly popular in England , and later in Ireland . 
 The magical elements gradually vanished from the story , and the existence of pig @-@ faced women began to be treated as fact . The story became particularly widespread in Dublin in the early 19th century , where it became widely believed that reclusive 18th @-@ century philanthropist Griselda Steevens had kept herself hidden from view because she had the face of a pig . In late 1814 and early 1815 , rumour swept London that a pig @-@ faced woman was living in Marylebone . Her existence was widely reported as fact , and numerous alleged portraits of her were published . With belief in pig @-@ faced women commonplace , unscrupulous showmen exhibited living " pig @-@ faced women " at fairs . These were not genuine women , but shaven bears dressed in women 's clothing . 
 Belief in pig @-@ faced women declined , and the last significant work to treat their existence as genuine was published in 1924 . Today , the legend is almost forgotten . 
 = = Standard elements = = 
 While stories of pig @-@ faced women vary in detail , they have the same basic form . A pregnant noblewoman would be approached by a beggar accompanied by her children , and would dismiss the beggar , and in so doing would in some way compare the beggar 's children to pigs . The beggar would curse the pregnant noblewoman , and come the birth of the child it would be a girl , healthy and perfectly formed in every respect other than having the face of a pig . 
 The child would grow up healthy , but with some of the behaviours of a pig . She would eat from a silver trough , and speak only in grunts or with a grunting sound to her speech . The only child of her parents , she would stand to inherit a large fortune , but her parents would be concerned about what would become of her after their death . They would thus make arrangements either to find a man willing to marry her , or to use their fortune to endow a hospital on condition that the hospital take care of her for the remainder of her life . 
 Although originating roughly simultaneously in Holland , England , and France , it was only in England , and later in Ireland , that the legend became well known and widely believed . In 1861 Charles Dickens remarked on the longevity of the belief in pig @-@ faced women in England , commenting that " In every age , I suppose , there has been a pig @-@ faced lady " . 
 = = Origins = = 
 While earlier stories of humans with the appearance of animals are common , prior to the 17th century there are no recorded European stories of humans with the faces of pigs . ( An 1829 paper in the Quarterly Journal of Science , Literature , and the Arts claims that the legend was circulating in Paris in 1595 but offers no detail or corroborating evidence . ) The earliest versions of the story of the pig @-@ faced woman appear to have originated roughly simultaneously in England , Holland and France , and to have become prevalent in England in late 1639 . A 1904 paper in <unk> magazine by Dutch historian and antiquarian nl : Gerrit Jacob <unk> traces the earliest forms of the legend as appearing in 1638 or 1639 . 
 The earliest surviving version of the legend is a Dutch print about an Amsterdam woman named <unk> Jacobs . In 1621 Jacobs , while pregnant , was approached one day by a female beggar accompanied by three children , who pleaded that her children were starving . Jacobs told the beggar " Take away your filthy pigs , I will not give you anything " . The woman replied " Are these my children pigs ? May God then give you such pigs as I have here ! " Jacobs ' daughter was born with the head and face of a pig , and at the time of publication in 1638 – 39 the daughter , by then in her teens , supposedly ate from a trough and spoke in a grunting voice . 
 Bondeson ( 2006 ) speculates that the pig @-@ faced woman myth originated as a fusion of two earlier stories . The mediaeval Dutch legend of Margaret of <unk> tells of a wealthy noblewoman who turned away a beggar with twins , and was herself punished by giving birth to 365 children . In a similar French folk tale , the noblewoman in question described the beggar 's children as " piglets " , and gave birth to a litter of nine piglets . 
 The other significant theory about the origin of the legend , proposed by Robert Chambers in 1864 , is that a genuine child was born in the early 17th century with facial deformities resembling a pig 's face and a speech impediment causing her to grunt . The science of <unk> ( the study of birth defects and physiological abnormalities ) was then in its infancy , and the theory of maternal impression ( that the thoughts of a pregnant woman could influence the future appearance of her children ) was widely accepted . It is possible that the birth of a genuinely deformed child led to the story of the beggar as a possible explanation for her appearance , with other elements of the story being later additions or distortions by publishers . Chambers speculates that the original child may have had a similar appearance to Julia Pastrana , a woman with <unk> and distorted ( although not pig @-@ like ) facial features , who was widely exhibited in Europe and North America until her death in 1860 , and then , embalmed , until the 1970s . However , while a 1952 stillbirth with a face resembling a pig is documented , there has never been a reliably documented case of a human with deformities of this kind surviving outside the womb , while all versions of the pig @-@ faced woman legend describe her as a healthy adult . 
 = = = Tannakin Skinker = = = 
 The first recorded reference in England to the legend of the pig @-@ faced woman is the fable of Tannakin Skinker , a 17th @-@ century variation on the traditional <unk> lady story , in particular on The Wife of Bath 's Tale and The Marriage of Sir Gawain . The Skinker story is generally considered the basis for later English stories of pig @-@ faced women . Between 4 and 11 December 1639 , five ballads about Skinker were published in London , all of which are now lost . ( A 1640 ballad , A Monstrous Shape : or , A <unk> Monster , a Description of a female creature born in Holland compleat in every part , save only a head like a swine , who hath travelled in many parts and is now to be seen in London , <unk> loving , courteous and effeminate and <unk> as yet could find a loving mate , is preserved in Samuel Pepys 's extensive collection of ballads . ) The earliest surviving record of the Tannakin Skinker story is that given in A Certaine Relation of the Hog @-@ faced Gentlewoman called <unk> Tannakin Skinker , a 1640 chapbook . 
 = = = = A Certaine Relation of the Hog @-@ faced Gentlewoman called <unk> Tannakin Skinker = = = = 
 A Certaine Relation claims that Tannakin Skinker was born to Joachim and Parnel Skinker in 1618 in " <unk> , a neuter towne <unk> the <unk> and the Hollander , <unk> on the river Rhyne " . Joachim Skinker is described as " a man of good revenue , but of a great estate in money and cattle . " During Parnel 's pregnancy , an elderly woman had begged her for money . Parnel was busy and refused to pay , and the old woman had left , " muttering to her selfe the <unk> pater noster , and was heard to say ' As the Mother is <unk> , so <unk> shall be the Child shee goeth <unk> ' " . At Tannakin 's birth her body and limbs were correctly proportioned , but her face had a pig 's snout , " not only a stain and blemish , but a deformed <unk> , making all the rest loathsome , contemptible and odious to all that <unk> upon her in her <unk> . " The midwife who had delivered the baby was sworn to secrecy , and the Skinkers raised her in a private room . She ate from a silver trough , " to which she stooped and ate , just like a Swine doth in his swilling tub " . 
 Tannakin 's deformity was soon discovered , and many locals came to hear her pig @-@ like speech or to watch her feed from the trough . The old woman was located , tried and convicted for witchcraft , but even at the stake refused or was unable to reverse the enchantment . 
 When Tannakin was between 16 and 17 years old , her father consulted <unk> , " a famous Artist , who was both a Mathematician , and an <unk> [ ... ] a man who was suspected to have been well versed in <unk> and hidden Arts " , as to how the curse might be undone . <unk> concluded that as long as Tannakin remained a virgin she would retain her pig 's face , but were she married , and not to " a Clowne , Bore or <unk> " , she might be cured . 
 The Skinker family announced that any gentleman who " would take her to his bed after <unk> Matrimony " would receive a dowry of £ 40 @,@ 000 . The dowry , a huge sum for the time , prompted a large number of would @-@ be husbands . A Scottish captain arrived , having spent the greater part of a month 's pay on a new suit , and was taken by Tannakin 's figure and deportment . On lifting the veil to view her face , however , " hee would stay no other conference , but ran away without further answer , saying ; they must pardon him , for hee could <unk> no <unk> . " An English sow @-@ man ( pig farmer ) assured the family that his familiarity with pigs meant he would accept Tannakin 's appearance , but after meeting her he left the building , saying that " so long as I have known Rumford , I never saw such a <unk> " . 
 Several further would @-@ be suitors visited the Skinkers , but all were repulsed by Tannakin 's face and she remained unmarried . Despairing of finding a suitable husband in <unk> , the Skinker family moved to London , and took up residence in either Blackfriars or Covent Garden . ( The anonymous author of A Certaine Relation says that the family did not wish to divulge their address , to discourage curiosity @-@ seekers from gathering . ) Many who met her were taken by her elegant dress and excellent demeanour . 
 Eventually , the Skinkers found a man in London willing to marry Tannakin . On the day of the wedding , and despite all efforts to improve her appearance , her face was as pig @-@ like as ever . With the wedding service concluded , the newly @-@ wed couple retired to the bedroom . When they lay in bed together for the first time , Tannakin reached for her husband 's arm , saying that she would release him from his vows provided that he would look at her in the face . He turned to look at her , and saw " a sweet young Lady of incomparable beauty and feature , the like to whom to his imagination he never had in his whole life time beheld " . He reached to kiss her , but she refused , saying : 
 Sir , I am indeed no other than I now <unk> unto you ; and of these two things I give you free choice , whether I shall appeare to you thus as you now see me , young , faire , and lovely in your bed , and all the daytime , and abroad , of my former deformity : or thus <unk> in the day , to the sight of your friends , but in your armes every night of my former Age and <unk> : of these two things I give you free choice of , which till you have <unk> 'd me , there can be no other familiarity betwixt in : therefore without pause give me a speedy answer . 
 Torn between the choice of a wife who would appear beautiful to him but hideous to all his friends , or hideous to him but beautiful to all his friends , he could not reach a decision but instead said to her " into you owne hands and <unk> I give the full power and <unk> to make election of which you best please . " On hearing this , Tannakin turned to him and said : 
 Now Sir , you have given me that which all women most desire , my Will , and <unk> ; and know I , was by a wicked and <unk> step @-@ dame <unk> , never to returne to my pristine shape , till I was first married , and after had received such power from my Husband · And now from henceforth I shall be the same to you night and day , of that youth and lively @-@ hood which you now see mee ; till Time and Age breed new alteration , even to the last period of my life . 
 = = = = Public reaction = = = = 
 The fable of Tannakin Skinker was popular in England , and the idea of the pig @-@ faced woman soon entered popular culture , to the extent that by 1654 , it was recorded that one of the signs at Bartholomew Fair was " the Signe of the Hoggs @-@ fac 'd Gentlewoman " . By the 1670s , The Long @-@ Nos 'd Lass was a popular song , relating in detail how a tailor and a miller courted a woman whose " visage was perfectly just like a Sow " in the hope of securing her dowry ( given as £ 17 @,@ 000 , not the £ 40 @,@ 000 of A Certaine Relation ) . On seeing her face each turned and fled . The Long @-@ Nos 'd Lass does not contain the magical elements of A Certaine Relation , nor end in the wedding and the transformation of the pig @-@ faced woman , the traditional ending of stories in the genre . Instead , the pig @-@ faced woman remains unmarried , and the ballad ends : 
 Both <unk> and <unk> and Glovers also 
 Came to her , the Money encouraged them so 
 Nay , thousands came to her then every day , 
 Each striving to carry this Beauty away 
 But when they beheld this most ordinary stuff . 
 The sight of her Visage did give them <unk> ; 
 Yet if she be Marry 'd while here she does live , 
 A perfect account of the Wedding I 'le give . 
 = = 18th century = = 
 In the 18th century , stories of pig @-@ faced women began to be reported as fact in England . James Paris du Plessis , former servant to Samuel Pepys , told in his Short History of Human Prodigious & Monstrous Births ( compiled 1731 – 33 ) of a pig @-@ faced woman living in Holborn in central London , which was widely reprinted . An 1850 article in Chambers 's Edinburgh Journal carried the recollections of " a venerable and clear @-@ headed old lady of ninety " , in which she recounted that her mother was well acquainted with a pig @-@ faced woman , of Scottish birth but living in London , and would regularly visit her home in Sloane Street . In 1800 , The Pig @-@ faced Lady , as " sung at Astley 's Theatre , & c . " , was published in London by John Pitts , and an 1815 editorial in The Times recounted reports of a pig @-@ faced woman living in London as having circulated in 1764 and in the 1780s . 
 = = = Daughter of a Jewish convert = = = 
 A variant form of the legend , and the only one in which the pig @-@ faced woman is not connected with a great fortune , told of a Christian man who converted to Judaism . In this version , the first child born to him after his conversion was a girl with the face of a pig . Some years later , the father realised that his daughter 's appearance was a divine punishment , and re @-@ converted to Christianity along with his pig @-@ faced daughter . At the moment of the daughter 's baptism , the holy water washed her pig @-@ like features away , revealing a normal human face . The story was alleged to be represented by a sculpture in " one of the grand old cathedrals of Belgium " , but no evidence for such a sculpture has been found . 
 = = = Griselda Steevens = = = 
 Griselda Steevens ( 1653 – 18 March 1746 ) , sometimes written as " Grizel Steevens " , was the twin sister of Dr Richard Steevens ( 1653 – 1710 ) , a Dublin physician . Dr Steevens died in 1710 , bequeathing an estate with an income of £ 606 ( about £ 72 @,@ 000 as of 2016 ) per year to Griselda . A clause in Dr Steevens ' will stipulated that on Griselda 's death , the income was to be used to provide a hospital for the poor of Dublin . 
 Although the terms of Dr Steevens ' will were that work on the hospital would not begin until after Griselda Steevens ' death , she decided to begin work on the hospital in 1720 . <unk> only £ 120 per year for her own use , she used the remaining funds to buy a plot of land near Kilmainham and to build the new hospital , with the sole condition being that she be granted a suite of apartments in the building . As a youth Griselda had suffered a disorder of the eyes , and since then had worn a veil while in sunlight . Shy and reclusive , while conducting her charitable works in the Dublin slums she would remain in her carriage while servants gave out alms to the poor . By 1723 a sufficient portion of the new Dr Steevens ' Hospital was completed to accommodate 40 patients , in addition to Griselda 's apartments . The remainder of the hospital , with space for 200 patients , opened in 1733 . Griselda lived in the hospital from 1723 until her death . 
 At some point , it became a common belief in Dublin that Griselda Steevens had a pig 's face . It is unclear when the rumour arose . Robert Chambers and Irish Georgian Society founder Desmond Guinness claim that the rumour was current in her lifetime , but Thomas Kirkpatrick , author of History of Dr Steevens ' Hospital Dublin , says that " There is absolutely no evidence of this story in contemporary records , nor indeed does it appear to have been connected with the good lady until the nineteenth century [ ... ] It is not quite certain when this story first gained circulation . Croker @-@ King , who wrote a history of the hospital in 1785 , makes no mention of it , nor is there any suggestion of it in the newspaper accounts of the death of Madam Steevens , or the published account of the hospital in the eighteenth century . " 
 The rumour was that Griselda Steevens ' reclusiveness and always being veiled were owing to her having been born with a pig 's head . Chambers ( 1864 ) speculates that her unusual name may have contributed to the legend , and notes the common belief that she was named " Grisly " on account of her appearance when born . It was claimed that while pregnant with Richard and Griselda , Steevens ' mother had said " take away your litter of pigs ! " to a woman beggar asking for money to feed her children , and Griselda had then been born with the head and face of a pig . Dismayed by the popular belief that she had a pig 's head , Griselda took to sitting on an open balcony to allow the public to see her face . This failed to stem the spread of the rumour , and she commissioned a portrait of herself to be hung in the main hall of the hospital . The portrait failed to have the desired effect ; many of the public chose instead to believe a portrait in a pub neighbouring the hospital , which showed Steevens with a pig 's head ; the pub also displayed a silver trough alleged to have belonged to her . She eventually withdrew from public view completely before her death on 18 March 1746 . 
 Surgeon and historian William Wilde recollected that as a medical student at Dr Steevens ' Hospital in 1832 he was shown a silver trough , alleged to have belonged to Griselda Steevens , and accounts suggest that in the early 19th century a plaster cast of a human face with a pig 's snout was on display at the hospital . Although the hospital authorities later forbade the display of alleged Steevens memorabilia on pain of dismissal , in the later half of the 19th century the belief that Steevens had a pig 's face remained common . In the 1860s , a Dublin woman recollected that in her youth a large silver punchbowl , embossed with a family crest of a boar 's head , was shown to visitors and was claimed to have been the Pig @-@ faced Lady 's trough . 
 = = The Pig @-@ faced Lady of Manchester Square = = 
 In late 1814 and early 1815 , a rumour swept London that a pig @-@ faced woman was living in Marylebone , an inner @-@ city area of central London . Said to be the daughter of an unspecified noblewoman , she was supposedly young , wealthy and living in fashionable Manchester Square . In some reports she was described as the daughter of a noblewoman from Grosvenor Square . It was claimed that she would occasionally venture out of the house in a carriage , hidden by a heavy veil ; several letters to the London newspapers reported sightings of a snout protruding from a window , or a veiled , silhouetted pig 's head in a passing carriage . 
 In early 1815 the first of many portraits of the Pig @-@ faced Lady of Manchester Square was published . This included a brief biography , allegedly from " a female who attended on her " . It claimed that the Pig @-@ faced Lady was Irish and aged about 20 , from a wealthy family , and that " on her life and issue by marriage a very large property depends " . She was alleged to eat from a silver trough , and to speak only in grunts . It claimed that her attendant , although paid an annual salary of 1 @,@ 000 guineas ( about £ 70 @,@ 000 as of 2016 ) , had been too frightened to continue working for her and had resigned , giving her story to the press . 
 The Pig @-@ faced Lady of Manchester Square became a leading topic of conversation in London . She soon began to be reported in newspapers as fact , and thousands of people believed in her existence . On 9 February 1815 an advertisement appeared in the Times from a self @-@ described " young Gentlewoman " , offering to be the Pig @-@ faced Lady 's companion in return for " a handsome income yearly , and a premium for residing with her 7 years " . The advertisement was published , but a week later a prospective advertisement from a young man wishing to propose marriage to the Pig @-@ faced Lady prompted the Times to denounce the rumour , comparing believers in the Pig @-@ faced Lady to the followers of the ( recently deceased ) self @-@ proclaimed prophet Joanna Southcott . 
 There is at present a report , in London , of a woman , with a strangely deformed face , resembling that of a pig , who is possessed of a large fortune , and we suppose wants all the comforts and conveniences incident toward her sex and station . We , ourselves , unwittingly put in an advertisement from a young woman , offering herself to be her companion ; and yesterday morning , a fellow ( with a calf 's head , we suppose ) transmitted to us another advertisement , attended by a one pound note , offering himself to be her husband . We have put his offer in the fire , and shall send his money to some charity , thinking it a pity that such a fool should have any . Our rural friends hardly know what idiots London contains . The pig 's face is as firmly believed in by many as Joanna <unk> 's [ sic ] pregnancy , to which folly it has succeeded . Though no Parson Tozer has as yet mounted the rostrum to preach in support of the face , there is hardly a company in which this swinish female is not talked of ; and thousands believe in her existence . The story , however , is an old one . About 50 years ago , it is well recollected by several elderly people , there was exactly the same rumour . It was revived with but slight effect about 30 years since ; and now comes forth again in its pristine vigour . On the original invention of the pig @-@ faced woman , about the year 1764 , a man offered himself to make her an ivory trough to feed out of ; which can only be considered as a feeble type of the silver cradle actually presented in our day . Besides , there was but one actor in the first folly , and there have been twenty in the latter . 
 The Times refused to print the advertisement from the Pig @-@ faced Lady 's would @-@ be suitor , and donated his £ 1 fee to The Marine Society . An anonymous letter @-@ writer to the Times continued the comparison with Joanna Southcott , who had claimed that she would give birth to the Messiah in October 1814 , speculating that " the present miss piggy " was perhaps Southcott 's child , " brought [ ... ] into the world in a state of complete puberty " . The letter @-@ writer also ridiculed the " swinish Lothario " who hoped to marry the Pig @-@ faced Lady , suggesting that " if he means to have her , he must woo her in grunts " . 
 With the Times ridiculing belief in the Pig @-@ faced Lady , rival newspapers set out to defend her honour and that of the man who wished to marry her . The Morning Herald and Morning Chronicle both published the advertisement from her prospective suitor . The editor of the Morning Chronicle announced that , in his opinion , the advertisement from the " desperate fortune @-@ hunter " had not been immoral or indecent , and thus in his opinion there was no reason to decline to publish it . He went on to say that while deformities of this nature were unknown to doctors , it was certainly possible that a facially disfigured woman existed and that her deformities had been exaggerated in accounts ; he also chided the Times for not returning the payment for the rejected advertisement . The Morning Herald , meanwhile , speculated that the Pig @-@ faced Lady 's deformities may have been caused by her mother 's " force of imagination , in consequence of a dog having suddenly leaped on her " . 
 Despite the pleas of the Times for scepticism , belief in the Pig @-@ faced Lady of Manchester Square continued to spread in 1815 . During illuminations celebrating the end of the Napoleonic Wars a huge crowd gathered around Piccadilly , bringing traffic to a standstill . Eyewitnesses recounted that in a stopped landau a woman with a fashionable bonnet and a pig 's snout was visible . The crowd tried to stop the carriage , but the coachman drove through the crowd at high speed . It was later claimed that the coach had been seen to stop in Grosvenor Square ; it was presumed that the Pig @-@ faced Lady was the daughter of " a well @-@ known lady of fashion " who lived there . 
 It was also reported that William Elliot , a young baronet , called to visit a " great lady " at the house in Grosvenor Square in which the Pig @-@ faced Lady was believed to be staying . Taken into the drawing room , he was confronted by a fashionably dressed woman with the face of a pig . Elliot " could not refrain from uttering a shout of horror , and rushed to the door in a manner the reverse of polite " . The Pig @-@ faced Lady rushed at Elliot as he left and bit him on the back of the neck ; it was claimed that he was badly injured in the attack , requiring treatment by eminent surgeon Sir Cæsar Hawkins . A popular print entitled Beware the pig @-@ sty ! depicted the supposed attack on Elliot . 
 In April 1861 , a man signing himself " M. A. " wrote to Notes and Queries magazine , asking : 
 Could you or any of your readers kindly inform me whether there exists any account , medical or biographical , of this person ? She lived , I believe , about forty years ago ; and I am acquainted with two authentic instances of her having been seen , in one of the two , by a gentleman still living . In spite of the natural horror of the phenomenon , its interest , both physiological and psychological , is so considerable that I am surprised to find so little information afloat upon the subject . May I further ask whether any more recent case of the kind has occurred ? There are one or two earlier cases . " 
 In a reply published on 22 June 1861 , a Mr F. <unk> claimed to have known the Pig @-@ faced Lady 's sister , stating that " Lady C. B. lived in Chelsea : her sister , Lady H. W. , was much admired as a beauty . I was at a dinner @-@ party forty years ago with Lady H. W. , when all the party were cautioned previously not to say a word about pigs , out of delicacy to Lady H. W. " In the same issue , a George Lloyd claimed to have seen the Pig @-@ faced Lady in Wakefield in around 1828 – 29 " but was too young to take a note further than a mental one , which has haunted me ever since " . 
 = = = The Pig @-@ faced Lady of Manchester Square in art = = = 
 On 21 March 1815 The Pig Faced Lady of Manchester Square and the Spanish Mule of Madrid , a coloured print by George Cruikshank , was published . <unk> " Ah ! Sure a pair was never seen so justly form 'd to meet by nature ! " , it contrasts the Pig @-@ faced Lady with the unpopular Ferdinand VII of Spain . The Pig @-@ faced Lady wears a transparent veil and plays " Air <unk> <unk> , set to music by Grunt Esq " on a piano . Her silver trough lies on a table behind her , and on her wall is a picture of " Lord Bacon " , also shown with a pig 's head . Her image is captioned : 
 This extraordinary Female is about 18 years of age – of High rank & great fortune . Her body & limbs are of the most perfect & Beautiful Shape , but , her head & Face resembles that of a Pig – she eats her <unk> out of a Silver Trough in the same manner as Pigs do , & when spoken to she can only answer by <unk> ! her <unk> Amusement is the Piano which she plays most delightfully . 
 Facing her in another panel is Ferdinand VII , shown with a mule 's head . Ferdinand sits on a wooden throne , with a chamber pot filled with holy water at his feet . On the wall behind him , a painting shows Ferdinand ( again with a mule 's head ) watching a mass execution ; a monk says " Here 's some more patriots " , and Ferdinand replies " O ! That 's right kill ' em kill ' em " . The caption to Ferdinand 's image reads : 
 This wonderful monster ( to the great <unk> of his subjects ) is a King ! ! ! He was caught about 7 years ago by Buonaparte , & during his confinement in France , amused himself by singing anthems & Working a Robe in Tambour for the Holy Virgin ! but since his liberation , he has amused himself , by Hanging his best Friends ! ! ! ! ! 
 Cruikshank returned to the theme of the Pig @-@ faced Lady with Suitors to the Pig @-@ faced Lady , published shortly after The Pig Faced Lady and the Spanish Mule . This shows a number of men wooing the lady , who rejects them all in term with " If you think to gammon me , you 'll find you 've got the wrong sow by the ear – I 'm meat for your masters , so go along , I 'll not be plagued by any of you " . 
 At the height of the Pig @-@ faced Lady mania of 1814 – 15 , it was rumoured that Sholto Henry <unk> , 9th Lord Kirkcudbright had made enquiries about the whereabouts of the Pig @-@ faced Lady of Manchester Square , possibly with a view to becoming one of her suitors . Waltzing a Courtship , an anonymous drawing , was widely circulated in various publications . It shows an elegantly dressed Pig @-@ faced Lady dancing with a hunchbacked and extremely short man bearing a strong resemblance to Kirkcudbright . 
 Another popular print , The Wonderful Mrs Atkinson , was published anonymously in around 1815 , based on an earlier drawing by George Morland . ( Morland had died in 1804 , so his drawing cannot have been inspired by the 1814 – 15 reports . ) Morland 's original drawing stated that the Pig @-@ faced Lady was " born in Ireland , has £ 20 @,@ 000 fortune , and is fed out of a silver trough " . The caption to the later , published print goes into more detail , claiming that : 
 The Wonderful Mrs Atkinson is Born and Married to a Gentleman in Ireland of that name , having 20 @,@ 000 fortune . She is fed out of a Silver Hog @-@ Trough , and is called to her Meals by Pig .. Pig .. Pig . This wonderful account was told me by George Simpson who will swear to the truth of it , having heard it on board the Vesuvius Gun Boat , from some Irish Sailors who he says cannot tell lies . The above G. Simpson is my Servant and can tell several curious Stories as good as this all of which he will swear to the truth . 
 = = = Paris Pig @-@ faced woman hoax = = = 
 Shortly after the London pig @-@ faced lady craze of 1814 – 15 , a similar story began to circulate in Paris . In this version , the woman was " gifted with every accomplishment in the most <unk> [ sic ] degree " , and was seeking a man who would love her for her talents despite her appearance . Unlike the pig @-@ faced woman reports in London , the woman 's address was given . Large crowds gathered in the street outside , and a large number of letters were delivered to the address . 
 She was eventually revealed as a hoax . A young man , his advances rebuffed by a woman , had started the story as a means of revenge . It was reported that the stream of visitors wishing to meet the Pig @-@ faced Lady became so annoying , the young woman in question was forced to move house . 
 = = Fair exhibits in the 19th century = = 
 In the wake of the Pig @-@ faced Lady scare of 1814 – 15 , exhibits on the subject of pig @-@ faced women became popular at fairs . William Wilde records that a print of The Wonderful Mrs Atkinson was a popular exhibit at an early 19th century Irish fair , while larger fairs included exhibits of pig @-@ faced women moulded in papier @-@ mâché or wax . There is some evidence that a living pig @-@ faced woman was exhibited at Bartholomew Fair in 1828 , and possibly also in previous years . ( The pig @-@ faced woman exhibited in Wakefield in 1828 – 29 , recalled by George Lloyd in 1861 , may have been the same one shown at Bartholomew Fair in 1828 . ) At an 1843 fair in Hyde Park , " Madam Steevens , the Wonderful Pig @-@ faced Lady " was exhibited , and would grunt to give replies to questions from the audience . 
 The pig @-@ faced women exhibited at fairs were not genuine . Showmen would drug a bear into a stupor by feeding it large amounts of strong beer , and then shave it . Once shaved , the drunken bear would be fitted with padded artificial breasts , and dressed in women 's clothing and a wig . Shoes would be attached to the bear 's hind paws , and stuffed gloves to the front paws . The bear would then be placed in a chair with a hole in the back , and securely tied to the chair . 
 Once the bear was dressed and in the chair , the audience would be allowed into the tent . The showman would tell the audience that the Pig @-@ faced Lady could not speak , but would answer questions put to her , with one grunt for " yes " and two for " no " . The audience would ask her questions , and a member of the crew would poke the bear with a stick to make it grunt in reply . The Pig @-@ faced Lady would then eat a meal of gruel , beer and apples , served in a silver trough . The display of " pig @-@ faced ladies " became extremely popular , to the extent that by 1861 Charles Dickens remarked that " no fair was complete without one " . Exhibitions of this type were particularly popular in Dublin ; an exhibition in Plymouth in the 1880s was less successful , and a disbelieving mob pulled the wig and hat from a " Pig @-@ faced Lady " in her tent and proceeded to attack the showmen . The fate of the bear is not recorded . 
 = = Uncle Silas = = 
 The legend of the pig @-@ faced woman was revived once more in 1865 , in Sheridan Le Fanu 's novel Uncle Silas . Uncle Silas tells the story of Maud <unk> , a wealthy heiress in her late teens who lives in a secluded house , whom a number of scheming men aim to marry to secure her money . The book includes a " Bretagne ballad " about the pig @-@ faced woman , sung to Maud by her scheming governess Madame de la <unk> as <unk> leads her to a secret meeting with her cousin Dudley , who also has designs on her fortune . ( No other record of the " Bretagne ballad " exists , and it was almost certainly written by Le Fanu himself . ) 
 This lady was neither pig nor maid , 
 And so she was not of human mould ; 
 Not of the living nor the dead . 
 Her left hand and foot were warm to touch ; 
 Her right as cold as a corpse 's flesh ! 
 And she would sing like a funeral bell , with a ding @-@ dong tune . 
 The pigs were afraid , and viewed her aloof ; 
 And women feared her and stood afar . 
 She could do without sleep for a year and a day ; 
 She could sleep like a corpse , for a month and more . 
 No one knew how this lady fed — 
 On acorns or on flesh . 
 Some say that she 's one of the swine @-@ possessed , 
 That swam over the sea of <unk> . 
 A mongrel body and demon soul . 
 Some say she 's the wife of the Wandering Jew , 
 And broke the law for the sake of pork ; 
 And a swinish face for a token doth bear , 
 That her shame is now , and her punishment coming . 
 While Maud is described in the book as an attractive young woman , not a deformed monster , Uncle Silas is carefully written and plotted , and it is almost certain that Le Fanu explicitly intended a comparison between Maud 's situation and the legend of the wealthy woman living in isolation and desired only for her money . Le Fanu spent his entire life in Dublin and was editor and proprietor of the Dublin University Magazine , and would certainly have been familiar with the legends of the pig @-@ faced woman , and in particular the case of Griselda Steevens . 
 = = Decline of the legend = = 
 The 1814 – 15 Pig @-@ faced Lady craze in London and the subsequent hoax in Paris were the last occasions in which the mainstream press reported the existence of pig @-@ faced women as fact . By the 1860s the fad for exhibiting " pig @-@ faced women " at fairs was losing popularity , although they continued to be exhibited until at least the 1880s . Today the legend is almost forgotten . 
 While Dr Steevens ' Hospital still exists , albeit now as the head office of the Health Service Executive ( <unk> na <unk> <unk> ) rather than as a working hospital , the display of Pig @-@ faced Lady memorabilia at the hospital had ceased by the mid @-@ 19th century . The portrait commissioned by Griselda Steevens to refute the rumours about her appearance still hangs in the hospital 's main hall . 
 The last significant work to treat the existence of pig @-@ faced women as fact was Ghosts , Helpful and Harmful by ghost hunter and supernatural researcher Elliott O 'Donnell , published in 1924 . O 'Donnell alleged that the ghost of a pig @-@ faced lady haunted a house in Chelsea . O 'Donnell claimed that the ghost was a " Vice Elemental , the most harmful of all the denizens of the Spirit World " . He describes how a clergyman , " The Rev. Mr H. " and his family , who resided in the house , were tempted by the ghost . The ghost , keeping her face concealed , led " The Rev. Mr H. " into drunkenness , and his children into cruelty towards animals , until they themselves behaved like pigs . She then revealed her face to the shocked family , who moved out of the house immediately . 
 The body , beautifully formed , and gleaming like polished ivory in the <unk> , resembled that of a woman , but the face was the face of some very grotesque and repulsive animal . In the place of human cheeks were huge <unk> of white , unwholesome fat ; the nose was <unk> , the mouth a great slit , full of hideous crooked tusks ; and whilst the whole conformity of the features suggested the face of a distorted and horrible @-@ looking pig , the animal , in contrast to the human , was made all the more poignant by the hair – unmistakably a woman 's – which fell in a bright mass of rippling gold around the neck and shoulders . The children were still staring at it , in speechless horror , when their father opened the door of his room ; and as he did so , the figure slowly faded away and vanished . 
 = Hard Justice ( 2008 ) = 
 Hard Justice ( 2008 ) was a professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view ( PPV ) event produced by the Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) promotion that took place on August 10 , 2008 at the Sovereign Bank Arena in Trenton , New Jersey . It was the fourth event under the Hard Justice name and the eighth event in the 2008 TNA PPV schedule . Seven professional wrestling matches were featured on the event 's card , three of which were for championships . 
 The main event was a Six Sides of Steel Weapons match for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship , in which the champion Samoa Joe defeated the challenger Booker T to retain the title . Another heavily promoted bout was a Last Man Standing match between Kurt Angle and A.J. Styles , which the latter won . The card also featured a match for the TNA World Tag Team Championship , which saw Beer Money , Inc . ( James Storm and Robert Roode ) defeat The Latin American Xchange ( Hernandez and Homicide ) to become the new champions . A New Jersey Street Fight was also held pitting the team of Christian Cage and Rhino against Team 3D ( Brother Devon and Brother Ray ) . Cage and Rhino were the victors in the contest . 
 Hard Justice featured the start of a storyline between veteran wrestlers and younger wrestlers in TNA along with marking the beginning of Jeff Jarrett 's return to active competition . 35 @,@ 000 was the reported figure of purchasers for the event by The Wrestling Observer Newsletter . Hard Justice had a reported attendance between 2 @,@ 300 and 3 @,@ 500 people . Canadian Online Explorer writer John Pollock reviewed the show and felt it featured the " usual assortment of wacky finishes and outside interference " but that " all in all it was a solid show . " Wade Keller and James Caldwell of the Pro Wrestling Torch Newsletter both reviewed the event , praising the Last Man Standing match saying it was a " superb " and " epic match . " 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The fourth installment under the Hard Justice name was announced in January 2008 with an August 10th date attached . In May , TNA hoped to host a PPV event in the Northeastern United States sometime before the end of the year . Hard Justice was the PPV under consideration . TNA issued a press release in late @-@ June revealing that Hard Justice would be held at the Sovereign Bank Arena in Trenton , New Jersey . Tickets for the show went on @-@ sale on June 27 . TNA released a poster to promote the event featuring the The Latin American Xchange ( Hernandez and Homicide ; LAX ) and Samoa Joe ; the poster also promoted a musical appearance by rap artists Filthee , Grandmaster Caz , and Ice @-@ T. The official theme for the show was " <unk> " by Filthee . 
 = = = Storylines = = = 
 Hard Justice featured seven professional wrestling matches that involved different wrestlers from pre @-@ existing scripted feuds and storylines . Wrestlers portrayed villains , heroes , or less distinguishable characters in the scripted events that built tension and culminated in a wrestling match or series of matches . 
 The main event at Hard Justice was a Six Sides of Steel Weapons match for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship between the champion Samoa Joe and the challenger Booker T. Joe and Booker T previously fought at TNA 's Slammiversary PPV event on June 8 in a King of the Mountain match for the title , which Joe won to remain champion . The duo also fought at TNA 's previous PPV event Victory Road on July 13 , which ended in a no contest after interference from Sting allowed Booker T to gain an unofficial pinfall counted by his legitimate wife Sharmell instead of an official referee . On the July 17 episode of TNA 's television program TNA Impact ! , Booker T proclaimed that he was the new TNA World Heavyweight Champion before Management Director Jim Cornette announced that Booker T did not win the match and that Joe was still the TNA World Heavyweight Champion , despite Booker T having taken possession of the title belt . Cornette then scheduled a rematch between the two for the title at Hard Justice ; Joe did not retrieve physical possession of the title belt after this , instead chose to reclaim the physical belt after he beat Booker T at the event . On the July 24 episode of Impact ! , Joe and Booker T made the contest a Six Sides of Steel Weapons match . 
 The predominate storyline heading into the event was the rivalry between A.J. Styles and Kurt Angle , both members of The Angle Alliance . On the February 14 episode of Impact ! , TNA held the scripted wedding of Angle 's real @-@ life wife Karen Angle and Styles despite Angle and Karen still being married on @-@ screen . Afterwards , Karen and Angle separated in the storyline on the March 13 episode of Impact ! . TNA continued to build the situation with Angle attempting to reconcile with Karen on the May 15 episode of Impact ! ; TNA began to phase out the marriage between Styles and Karen also . Karen refused Angle 's request on the May 22 episode of Impact ! , leading to Angle turning on and assaulting Styles later in the episode due to his jealousy of the affection Karen showed for Styles . This led to a match between the two at Slammiversary which Styles won after a distraction by Karen . The two faced in a Lumberjack match on the June 12 episode of Impact ! , which Angle won before it ended in a brawl between Styles , Angle , Tomko , Christian Cage , Rhino , Abyss , and Team 3D ( Brother Devon and Brother Ray ) . Afterwards , Team 3D and the team of Cage and Rhino became involved in the feud with Team 3D joining Angle , while Cage and Rhino sided with Styles . The two teams then fought in a Full Metal Mayhem at Victory Road , which the team of Angle and Team 3D won . The teams fought again on the July 24 episode of Impact ! , this time in a Six Man Tag Team Elimination Tables match , which Angle and Team 3D also won . On the July 31 episode of Impact ! , while Styles stood in a ring surrounded by a steel cage , Angle attacked Styles from behind and slammed him back @-@ first into the mat , rendering him unconscious . As a result of this action , Styles challenged Angle to a Last Man Standing match at Hard Justice ; Angle accepted the challenge . 
 The TNA World Tag Team Championship was defended at Hard Justice by LAX against Beer Money , Inc . ( James Storm and Robert Roode ) . On the June 12 episode of Impact ! , Roode and Storm teamed to face LAX for the World Tag Team Championship . The match was originally won by Roode and Storm before being restarted due to interference . LAX won the restart to retain the championship . After the bout , Roode and Storm assaulted LAX and their manager Héctor Guerrero . Management Director Jim Cornette scheduled a title defense at Victory Road between LAX and Roode and Storm under " Fan 's Revenge " Lumberjack rules on the June 19 episode of Impact ! . At Victory Road , LAX defeated the newly renamed Beer Money Incorporated to retain the World Tag Team Championship . On the July 17 episode of Impact ! , Roode and Storm began assaulting various wrestlers , crew members , and fans in retaliation for their loss at Victory Road . Later in the program , Roode and Storm once again attacked Guerrero , prompting LAX to come to his rescue . On the July 31 episode of Impact ! , Roode and Storm defeated the team of Christian Cage and Rhino for a World Tag Team Championship match at Hard Justice . On the August 7 episode of Impact ! , the team of Cage , Rhino , and LAX fought the team of Roode , Storm , and Team 3D in an Eight Man Tag Team match , which the latter lost . After the contest , Roode and Storm slammed Homicide through a glass table , injuring his right eye in the storyline . 
 Team 3D fought the team of Christian Cage and Rhino in a New Jersey Street Fight at Hard Justice . This match was a break @-@ off from the rivalry between A.J. Styles and Kurt Angle . After Team 3D , Cage , and Rhino became involved in the rivalry , Team 3D injured both Cage and Rhino in the narrative leading into Victory Road . Rhino was knocked out on the June 19 episode of Impact ! , while on the June 26 episode of Impact ! Cage was slammed through a glass table by Brother Ray . After the match at Victory Road and a Six Man Tag Team Elimination Tables match on Impact ! , Team 3D cost Cage and Rhino a shot at the World Tag Team Championship on the July 31 episode of Impact ! . Afterwards , Cage challenged Team 3D to a New Jersey Street Fight at Hard Justice , which Team 3D accepted . 
 = = Event = = 
 The telecast began with a live performance of the event theme song " <unk> " by Filthee along with Grandmaster Caz and Melle Mel . Ice @-@ T was advertised to perform but was absent with no reason given and was replaced by Mel . It later came to light that Ice @-@ T was unable to attend as a result of " travel problems . " 
 = = = Miscellaneous = = = 
 Hard Justice featured employees other than the wrestlers involved in the matches . Mike Tenay and Don West were the commentators for the telecast . Jeremy Borash and David Penzer were ring announcers for the event . Andrew Thomas , Earl Hebner , Rudy Charles , Mark " Slick " Johnson , and Traci Brooks participated as referees for the encounters . Lauren Thompson and Borash were used as interviewers during the event . Besides employees who appeared in a wrestling role , Rhaka Khan , Sheik Abdul Bashir , Raisha Saeed , Jacqueline , Héctor Guerrero , Salinas , Johnny Devine , Abyss , Sting , and Kevin Nash all appeared on camera , either in backstage or in ringside segments . 
 = = = Preliminary matches = = = 
 The opening bout was for the TNA X Division Championship between the champion Petey Williams and the challenger Consequences Creed . The duration of the match was 12 minutes and 30 seconds . Williams was accompanied to the ring by Rhaka Khan , who interfered in the contest trying to aid Williams to no avail . Near the end of the match , Sheik Abdul Bashir walked out to the ring and bashed Creed across the back with a steel chair , which allowed Williams to force Creed 's head into the mat with his signature Canadian Destroyer maneuver . Williams followed with the pin to win the match and retain the TNA X Division Championship . After the bout , Bashir continued to attack Creed . 
 The second contest of the show was a Six Woman Tag Team match pitting the team of Gail Kim , ODB , and Taylor Wilde against the team of Awesome Kong and The Beautiful People ( Angelina Love and Velvet Sky ) . Kong was accompanied to the ring by Raisha Saeed . Wilde won the match for her team with a pinning maneuver on Love at 11 minutes and 27 seconds . 
 The TNA World Tag Team Championship was defended by LAX against Beer Money , Inc. in the next encounter . Jacqueline accompanied Beer Money to the ring , while Salinas and Héctor Guerrero accompanied LAX . The duration of the encounter was 14 minutes and 15 seconds . Filthee , Grandmaster Caz , and Melle Mel performed LAX 's theme during their entrance . Near the end of the contest , Jacqueline and Salinas both interfered in the match . This led to Roode smacking Homicide in his injured right eye with a beer bottle while the referee was not looking . Storm then gained the pinfall to win the TNA World Tag Team Championship for his team . 
 TNA held a Black Tie Brawl and Chain match between Jay Lethal and Sonjay Dutt , which lasted 11 minutes and 14 seconds . In this match , both competitors were tied together via a chain and dressed in tuxedos . The only way to win was to strip their opponent of the tuxedo and either make them submit or pin them afterwards . Lethal won the encounter after jumping off of a turnbuckle to drive his elbow into Dutt 's chest and followed with the pin . 
 = = = Heavily promoted matches = = = 
 The fifth match on the card was a New Jersey Street Fight pitting the team of Christian Cage and Rhino against Team 3D ( Brother Devon and Brother Ray ) . In this match , weapons were legal to use and there were no count @-@ outs or disqualifications . Early in the match , both teams fought throughout the crowd , at which time they both used weapons against <unk> . The match ended when Cage performed a frog splash aerial maneuver onto Ray from atop a ladder , followed up by Rhino performing his signature Gore maneuver into Ray against a table placed up in the ring corner . Rhino then pinned Ray to win the contest at 15 minutes and 22 seconds . After the match , Team 3D 's associate Johnny Devine came out to help attack Cage and Rhino , however , Abyss came to their rescue and slammed Devine back @-@ first onto the mat with his trademark Black Hole Slam maneuver while Team 3D made their retreat . 
 A.J. Styles fought Kurt Angle in a Last Man Standing match next . In a Last Man Standing match , there are no disqualifications or count outs , instead to win the match the competitor has to force their opponent to not be able to reach a standing position by the count of 10 . However , this match was only promoted as a Last Man Standing match , instead it was held under Texas Death match rules where a wrestler must pin or submit their opponent and then have them fail to respond to a count of 10 . Styles got the first fall of the night , when he forced Angle to tap out to Angle 's own signature submission maneuver the Ankle lock . Angle made it to his feet before the count concluded . Angle gained a pinfall later on in the match after slamming Styles off the top of a padded turnbuckle with a suplex . Before Styles could reach his feet to beat the count , Angle slammed Styles onto the mat back @-@ first with his signature Olympic slam maneuver and gained another pinfall to start the count over . Styles beat that count as well , with Angle trying for the Olympic Slam again before Styles ' countered it into his signature Styles ' Clash maneuver and pinned Angle . After Angle reached his feet , Styles and Angle fought up a padded turnbuckle with Styles gaining the advantage . At this time , Styles grabbed Angle by the neck and fell backwards from the turnbuckle and drove Angle head @-@ first into the mat . Angle failed to reach the 10 count afterwards , with Styles being declared the winner of the contest at 24 minutes and 50 seconds . Following the encounter , the referee called for medical attention for Angle who was scripted to appear as if he had suffered a neck injury . Styles then entered the ring once Angle reached his feet and lifted Angle up and dropped him on his head . As Styles walked up the ramp , he was attacked by Sting , who drove Styles ' head into the ramp with his signature Scorpion Death Drop maneuver , as Kevin Nash looked on . 
 The main event was a Six Sides of Steel Weapons match for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship , pitting the champion Samoa Joe against the challenger Booker T , who was accompanied by Sharmell . The duration of the contest was 12 minutes and 44 seconds . Early in the bout , Booker T hit Joe in the face with a steel chair , resulting in Joe bleeding from the forehead . Later on , Booker T slammed Joe back @-@ first onto two chairs with his signature Book End maneuver , however , Joe kicked out of a pinfall attempt . Joe gained the pinfall victory to retain the TNA World Heavyweight Championship after bashing Booker T over the head with a guitar that had appeared in the ring after the lights had suddenly went off and back on . 
 = = Reception = = 
 A total of 3 @,@ 500 people attended Hard Justice , while the The Wrestling Observer Newsletter reported that 35 @,@ 000 people bought the event . However , the attendance number has been disputed , with it also being reported that Hard Justice drew an attendance of 2 @,@ 300 people . 
 Canadian Online Explorer writer John Pollock reviewed the show and felt it featured the " usual assortment of wacky finishes and outside interference " but that " all in all it was a solid show . " Pollock commented on the musical performance shown at the beginning of the telecast , stating the " crowd is silent in appreciation . " " Crowd is very hot for this opener and the atmosphere should hopefully add to this show , " stated Pollock when covering the TNA X Division Championship match . Pollock discussed the Street Fight in his review , commenting that the " crowd was really hot for this match . " As for the Last Man Standing match , Pollock said it " was an outstanding match . " Pollock also felt that the main event got " zero time . " Pollock noted that the fans in attendance started chanting " Fire Russo " during the Black Tie Brawl and Chain match in his review , which was a reference to TNA writer Vince Russo . 
 Wade Keller of the Pro Wrestling Torch Newsletter rated the matches out of five stars in his review of the event . He gave the main event 2 3 / 4 stars and discussed the amount of time it was given , stating it was " just enough time for a suitable main event " but that it did not " leave much flex time for things to run past the bare minimum for a PPV main event title match in a cage much less do whatever they 're going to do with Sting and Nash . " Keller also disapproved of unprotected use of weapons in the bout , commenting that TNA management needed to start fining " wrestlers for taking unprotected <unk> to the skull " because it was " just not worth the long @-@ term cumulative risks associated with blunt trauma to the skull over years of wrestling . " He gave the Last Man Standing bout 4 stars and said it was a " superb match " with a " scaring finish " since the " potential for something going wrong given Angle 's legit neck problems was substantial " even if " everything was planned " to work out that way . Keller rated the Street Fight 1 1 / 2 stars and stated it " was pretty clunky late and early on the crowd brawling got a little repetitive " and that it felt " like yet another weapons match . " " The match was okay , but nothing more . The tuxedos and chain served as more of a circus @-@ like distraction than a valuable prop for the match , " said Keller in his coverage of the Black Tie Brawl and Chain match , which he gave 1 1 / 4 stars . Keller gave the World Tag Team Championship match 2 stars , but did not give his opinion outside the rating on the contest . He did comment on the X Division Championship match , saying it was a " very good match " and gave it 3 stars . 
 James Caldwell , also of the Pro Wrestling Torch Newsletter , published a review of the show in which he also gave ratings out of 5 stars and some comments on the top matches on the card . He considered the main event " underwhelming " due to the " audience having sat through every possible gimmick match combination prior to another Joe @-@ Booker bout that everyone knew was going to end with some sort of gimmicky finish " and that it was " not memorable " but that it would " generate talk about Jarrett . " He gave the bout 2 stars . " That was an epic match , " said Caldwell when discussing the Last Man Standing match . However , he felt the bout had a " silly pin @-@ and @-@ <unk> ' em stipulation " and that the " all @-@ too @-@ real neck injury angle , followed by some post @-@ match activity that took away from Styles 's win . " Caldwell felt the match made Styles look " like a star when he won , then he came across like a punk attacking Angle , then a fool being in position for Sting to take him out " but that he had a " memorable , star @-@ making victory over Angle . " He disapproved of Styles being " used a means to the end of explaining Sting 's purpose @-@ driven TNA life . " Caldwell rated the encounter 4 stars . As for the Street Fight , he said it was a " fun brawl for the audience " and gave it 2 1 / 2 stars . Caldwell believed that the World Tag Team Championship match had " good heat " that " over @-@ rode the stream of outside interference , referee incompetence , and overall over @-@ booking " and that it was " refreshing to see TNA use an injury angle from TV to set @-@ up the finish of an important PPV match . " He gave the match 3 stars . The X Division Championship match was given 3 stars and he said it would have been " great " if it had avoided involving " outside interference . " 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The feud between Samoa Joe and Booker T ended after Hard Justice . On the August 14 episode of TNA Impact ! , Management Director Jim Cornette announced that Joe would defend the championship at TNA 's next PPV event No Surrender on September 14 in a Four Ways to Glory match . Cornette stated that over the weeks leading to the show three qualification matches would take place to determine the challengers to Joe . Booker T won the first qualifying match was on the August 21 episode of Impact ! by defeating Rhino . Kurt Angle defeated Kevin Nash on the August 28 episode of Impact ! to qualify for the contest . The final qualifier was Christian Cage , who defeated A.J. Styles on the September 4 episode of Impact ! . Booker T could not attend the event due to Hurricane Ike , making the bout a Three Ways to Glory match instead . Joe retained the championship at the show . 
 The finish to the main event and the segment after the Last Man Standing match led to several matches and segments following Hard Justice . Sting was announced at No Surrender to be the challenger for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship at TNA 's Bound for Glory IV PPV event on October 12 . Sting ended up defeating Joe for the title at the event due to Nash betraying and hitting Joe with a baseball bat . Styles went on to challenge Sting at TNA 's Turning Point and Final Resolution PPV events for the title , failing to win on both occasions . These matches were part of a storyline between veterans wrestlers , which made up The Main Event Mafia , and younger wrestlers , called The TNA Front Line , in TNA . Meanwhile , the finish of the main event led to the return of Jeff Jarrett at No Surrender , when he aided Joe in retaining the TNA World Heavyweight Championship by hitting Angle with a guitar . 
 The rivalry between A.J. Styles and Kurt Angle continued after Hard Justice leading into No Surrender . On the August 14 episode of Impact ! , Styles fought Angle in an Olympic Wrestling match for Angle 's 1996 Summer Olympics gold medal in freestyle wrestling . Styles defeated Angle to win the medal on the telecast . Styles and Angle fought a week later on the August 21 episode of Impact ! in a ladder match for the medal , with Styles retaining the medal . Styles then went on to feud with Angle 's on @-@ screen <unk> Frank Trigg , who attacked Styles with a kendo stick during Styles ' Four Ways to Glory qualification match with Cage , costing Styles to bout in the process . This led to Styles challenging Trigg to a bout at No Surrender , which Trigg agreed to but only if it was contested under Mixed Martial Arts rules on the September 11 episode of Impact ! . Styles and Trigg fought to a no contest at No Surrender due to Styles accidentally hitting Trigg in the groin . Afterwards , Styles beat Trigg with a kendo stick to end their feud . On the September 25 episode of Impact ! , Styles was ordered to return Angle 's gold medal by Jeff Jarrett , who had taken a role as a TNA management authority figure . The medal was returned to Angle on the October 9 episode of Impact ! by Jarrett . 
 Sonjay Dutt and Jay Lethal ended their rivalry at No Surrender . Dutt attacked Lethal after he was defeated by Sheik Abdul Bashir on the August 14 episode of Impact ! . On the September 11 episode of Impact ! , TNA promoted a Ladder of Love match at No Surrender with the winner becoming engaged to SoCal Val . Dutt won the contest at No Surrender when Val betrayed Lethal and aided Dutt . Beer Money , Inc ( James Storm and Robert Roode ) went on to defend the TNA World Tag Team Championship against The Latin American Xchange ( Hernandez and Homicide ) at No Surrender in a rematch . Beer Money , Inc retained the title at the show . Petey Williams defended the X Division Championship against Consequences Creed in a rematch on the August 21 episode of Impact ! , with Bashir once again interfering by attacking Creed , resulting in Creed winning by disqualification and Williams retaining the X Division Championship . TNA promoted a Three Way match between the three for the X Division Championship for No Surrender , which Bashir ended up winning to become the new champion on the telecast . Team 3D ( Brother Devon and Brother Ray ) and the team of Christian Cage and Rhino ended their conflict after Hard Justice . Team 3D instead went on to fight the team of Abyss and Matt Morgan at No Surrender , which the latter won . 
 = = Results = = 
 = Theodore Komnenos Doukas = 
 Theodore Komnenos Doukas ( Greek : Θεόδωρος Κομνηνός Δούκας , <unk> Komnēnos Doukas , Latinized as Theodore Comnenus Ducas , died ca . 1253 ) , was ruler of Epirus and Thessaly from 1215 to 1230 and of Thessalonica and most of the rest of Macedonia and western Thrace from 1224 to 1230 . He was also the power behind the rule of his sons John and Demetrios over Thessalonica in 1237 – 46 . 
 Theodore was the scion of a distinguished Byzantine aristocratic family related to the imperial Komnenos , Doukas , and Angelos dynasties . Nevertheless , nothing is known about Theodore 's life before the conquest of Constantinople and dissolution of the Byzantine Empire by the Fourth Crusade in 1204 . Following the fall of Constantinople , he served Theodore I Laskaris , founder of the Empire of Nicaea , for a few years , before being called to Epirus , where his bastard half @-@ brother Michael I Komnenos Doukas had founded an independent principality . When Michael died in 1215 , Theodore sidelined his brother 's underage and illegitimate son Michael II and assumed the governance of the Epirote state . Theodore continued his brother 's policy of territorial expansion . Allied with Serbia , he expanded into Macedonia , threatening the Latin Kingdom of Thessalonica . The capture of the Latin Emperor Peter II of Courtenay in 1217 opened the way to the gradual envelopment of Thessalonica , culminating in the city 's fall in 1224 . 
 As ruler of Thessalonica , Theodore quickly declared himself emperor , challenging the Nicaean emperor John III Vatatzes 's claims on the Byzantine imperial throne . In 1225 , he advanced to the outskirts of Constantinople , but his final attack against the seat of the much @-@ reduced Latin Empire was delayed until 1230 . In that year , Theodore amassed an army to besiege Constantinople , but then diverted it against Bulgaria , an ambivalent ally which threatened his northern flank . Theodore was defeated and captured at the Battle of Klokotnitsa , and spent the next seven years in captivity . In the meantime , he was succeeded by his brother Manuel . Manuel quickly lost Thrace , most of Macedonia , and Albania to the Bulgarian Tsar John II Asen . Thessalonica itself became a Bulgarian vassal , while in Epirus proper power was seized by Michael II , returning from exile . 
 Theodore was released in 1237 when his daughter Irene married John Asen , and quickly managed to regain control of Thessalonica , ousting Manuel . Having been blinded during his captivity and thus disqualified from occupying the throne again , he installed his eldest son John as emperor , but remained the de facto regent of the state . Manuel tried to regain Thessalonica with Nicaean support , but a negotiated settlement was reached which gave him Thessaly and left Thessalonica and its environs to Theodore and John . In 1241 , John III Vatatzes invited Theodore to visit Nicaea . He was welcomed and treated with great honour , but was effectively detained there until the spring of next year , when Vatatzes marched on Thessalonica with Theodore in tow . Theodore was sent in to negotiate with his son and convince him to accept demotion to the rank of Despot and to recognize the suzerainty of Nicaea . John died in 1244 and was succeeded by Theodore 's younger son Demetrios . In 1246 Vatatzes overthrew the unpopular Demetrios and annexed Thessalonica . Theodore influenced his nephew Michael II to launch an attack on Thessalonica in 1251 , but in 1252 , Vatatzes campaigned against them and forced Michael to come to terms . Theodore was taken prisoner and sent into exile in Nicaea , where he died around 1253 . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Born between 1180 and 1185 , Theodore was a son of the sebastokrator John Doukas and of Zoe Doukaina . His paternal grandparents were Constantine Angelos and Theodora , a daughter of the Byzantine emperor Alexios I Komnenos ( reigned 1081 – 1118 ) . Theodore 's uncle , Andronikos , was the father of the emperors Isaac II Angelos ( r . 1185 – 95 and 1203 – 04 ) and Alexios III Angelos ( r . 1195 – 1203 ) , who were Theodore 's first cousins . As with most members of his family , he preferred to use the surname of " Doukas " or " Komnenos Doukas " ( Κομνηνός ὁ Δούκας ) ; contemporaries variously called him " Doukas " , " Komnenos " , or even " Grand Komnenos " ( μέγας Κομνηνός ) , an appellation more usually found among the ruling family of the Empire of Trebizond . Theodore evidently preferred to be associated with the more successful dynasties of the Doukai and the Komnenoi , rather than the disastrous reign of the Angeloi ; indeed the only medieval writers to call him " Angelos " were the later , hostile pro @-@ Palaiologos historians Nikephoros Gregoras and Theodore Skoutariotes , while George Akropolites refers to him as " Komnenos " until his defeat at Klokotnitsa in 1230 and as " Angelos " after . 
 Theodore 's early life is obscure . He followed Theodore Laskaris to Asia Minor after the Fourth Crusade captured Constantinople in 1204 , where Laskaris founded the Empire of Nicaea . Theodore 's service under Laskaris is relatively unknown except for a brief reference in a letter written by the Metropolitan of Corfu , George Bardanes , one of Theodore 's apologists . Bardanes writes that Theodore " took many dangers for his sake and wrested many fortresses from the enemies and subdued them to Laskaris ' rule " , distinguishing himself through his valour and receiving many rewards from the Nicaean ruler . Some modern scholars , such as Karl Hopf and Antoine Bon , have identified a certain Theodore , who appears as " lord of Argos " and the successor of Leo Sgouros in leading the resistance against the Crusaders in the northwestern Peloponnese after Sgouros ' death in 1208 , with Theodore Komnenos Doukas . This view has been questioned by Raymond @-@ Joseph Loenertz , who argues that there is no evidence for such an assumption , an conversely it is well established that Theodore was in Nicaean service at the time . 
 Around 1210 , Theodore was invited by his half @-@ brother Michael I Komnenos Doukas to Epirus , where Michael had founded an independent Greek principality . Michael wanted Theodore 's aid , as his only son , the future Michael II Komnenos Doukas , was underage and illegitimate , while Michael 's other half @-@ brothers were considered to lack the ability to rule . Laskaris allowed Theodore to leave , but bound him with an oath of allegiance to himself and his heirs . Before going to Epirus , Theodore had married Maria Petraliphaina , with whom he had four children . 
 = = Ruler of Epirus = = 
 From 1210 on , Michael I Komnenos Doukas was engaged in a campaign of expansion , chiefly at the expense of the Latin Kingdom of Thessalonica to his east ; after initial reverses , much of Thessaly was conquered . By 1214 , Dyrrhachium and Corfu had been recovered from the Latins as well . The traditional view of historians is that these events marked Michael I 's repudiation of the allegiance he had sworn to the Latin Empire , but historian Philip Van Tricht argues that both Michael and later Theodore remained , at least in theory , vassals of the Latin Empire until 1217 . Michael was assassinated by a servant in late 1214 or in 1215 . As Michael II was illegitimate and too young , Theodore had no trouble in sidelining the boy . According to the hagiography of St. Theodora of Arta , the boy and his mother spent the duration of his reign exiled in the Peloponnese . 
 = = = Relations with Serbia and Nicaea = = = 
 Theodore was capable and extremely ambitious . Notwithstanding his oath to Laskaris , he aspired not only to expand his state at the expense of Thessalonica , but to eventually recover Constantinople and revive the Byzantine Empire . To secure his northern flank , Theodore allied himself with Serbia and the Albanian clans . The Principality of Arbanon was already in the Epirote political orbit under Michael I , and closer ties developed when its ruler Demetrios died in 1215 , leaving his principality to his widow , who promptly remarried the next year to a Greek magnate , Gregory <unk> . Against the Serbs , Theodore abandoned Michael I 's attempt to pursue a northward expansion into Zeta , and instead pursued an alliance with the Serbian prince Stefan II Nemanjić ( r . 1196 – 1228 ) that was directed towards keeping the Bulgarians in check . The ties between Epirus and Serbia were solidified by the marriage of Theodore 's brother Manuel Komnenos Doukas to one of Stefan II 's sisters ca . 1216 . Stefan II then sought to wed one of his sons — in all likelihood his eldest son and heir , Stefan Radoslav — to Michael I 's second daughter Theodora . The Archbishop of Ohrid , Demetrios Chomatianos , refused to sanction the marriage due to consanguinity — Theodora was a second cousin of Stefan Radoslav 's mother , Eudokia Angelina , a daughter of Alexios III Angelos . In 1217 , Stefan II tried to circumvent this by suggesting himself as the groom to Theodora 's half @-@ sister Maria , but Chomatianos vetoed this proposal as well on similar grounds . Finally , Stefan Radoslav married Theodore 's firstborn daughter Anna in winter 1219 / 20 . 
 With his position thus strengthened , Theodore expanded his territory into northern Macedonia , although it is possible that at least part of this region had already been captured by Michael I after the death of the local Bulgarian ruler Strez in 1214 . It is unclear to what extent Theodore 's expansion involved direct conflict with the Bulgarian Tsar Boril ( r . 1207 – 18 ) , but by 1217 he held Ohrid , Prilep , and most of the plain of Pelagonia , at least up to Strez 's old capital at Prosek , and likely beyond , approaching the Strymon River . As the Greek historian Konstantinos Varzos has noted , the capture of Ohrid , seat of the eponymous archbishopric , was particularly important for the standing of the Epirote state and Theodore 's aspirations . Theodore sponsored the election of the distinguished canonist Chomatianos to the archiepiscopal throne in 1217 , and Chomatianos would repay that support with his steadfast championing of Epirote claims to the Byzantine imperial inheritance vis @-@ à @-@ vis the rival claims of Nicaea . 
 Following the Fourth Crusade , the Orthodox clergy in the two main Greek states , Epirus and Nicaea , had effectively become separated . In 1208 , the Nicaeans had convened a synod and elected Michael Autoreianos as successor to the vacant see of the Patriarch of Constantinople . The election was uncanonical and therefore of questionable legitimacy . This in turn meant that Laskaris ' imperial title was also open to challenge , as he had been crowned by the same Michael Autoreianos . Already under Michael I , two local synods of bishops had emerged in the Epirote domains to carry on administration of the Church , largely independent of the Patriarch , one at Naupaktos under John Apokaukos , and one at Ohrid under Chomatianos . The more ambitious Chomatianos soon became the pre @-@ eminent " western " bishop , and sought to strengthen the de facto Epirote autonomy in ecclesiastical affairs , including the appointment of bishops for the local sees without the Patriarch 's interference . This policy , which dovetailed with Theodore 's own ambitions of independence from and rivalry towards Nicaea , brought the two branches of the Greek Church to an open quarrel , as the Nicaea @-@ based patriarch Manuel I Sarantenos began appointing bishops of his own to Epirote sees , whom the Epirotes refused to accept . Despite his close ties to Epirus , Stefan II Nemanjić exploited the Epirote – Nicaean rivalry to his advantage to secure autocephaly for the Serbian Church , which traditionally had been under the jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Ohrid . Brushing aside Chomatianos ' vehement objections , Stefan managed to have his brother <unk> , renamed Sava , consecrated by Manuel Sarantenos as autocephalous archbishop of Serbia in 1219 . Theodore took care not to let the quarrels of the churchmen affect his cordial relations with the Serbian ruler . 
 Theodore 's drive into Macedonia disquieted another local strongman , Alexius Slav , ruler of Melnik . A sworn enemy of Boril , Alexius had been abandoned by his erstwhile ally , the Latin Emperor , Henry of Flanders ( r . 1205 – 16 ) , who in 1213 allied himself with Bulgaria . Facing a possible attack by Theodore as well , Alexius now preferred to make common cause with him , and married a niece of Theodore 's wife . 
 = = = Capture of Peter of Courtenay = = = 
 The Epirote successes in Macedonia worried the Latins , as they opened the way to another attack on Thessalonica . The Kingdom of Thessalonica had been much weakened after the death of its founder , Boniface of Montferrat , in 1207 , since which it had been ruled by a regency for his underage son Demetrius ( r . 1207 – 24 ) . Interrupting a campaign against the Nicaeans in Asia Minor , Henry of Flanders hastened to Thessalonica . He took up contact with Boril and was preparing to march against Theodore when he suddenly died on 11 June 1216 , probably of malaria , although poisoning by his second wife Maria of Bulgaria has also been suggested . The death of the warlike Henry , followed by that of Pope Innocent III , the instigator of the Fourth Crusade , a month later , was a major stroke of good fortune for Theodore as it removed two of his most eminent and capable opponents . 
 The barons of the Latin Empire then elected Peter II of Courtenay , a cousin of King Philip II Augustus of France , as the new Latin Emperor . Receiving news of his election , Peter assembled a small army of 160 knights and 5 @,@ 500 foot and horse , and set out from France . After being crowned by Pope Honorius III in Rome , he set sail from Brindisi in April 1217 . Peter landed at Dyrrhachium , which he had promised to conquer and return to Venice , while his wife Yolanda of Flanders sailed on to Constantinople . As in the Norman invasion of William II of Sicily ( r . 1166 – 89 ) in 1185 , Peter intended ( after capturing Dyrrhachium ) to follow the ancient Via Egnatia to Thessalonica , wresting Albania and Macedonia from Epirote control in the process . 
 The commonly accepted version of events is that Dyrrhachium resisted with success , and as his casualties mounted Peter was forced to raise the siege and start his march towards Thessalonica . The march proved difficult , due to both the harsh terrain and the open hostility of the local population — the Western sources ( the Annales <unk> , Richard of San Germano , Philippe Mouskes , and the continuator of Robert of Auxerre ) also stress the loyalty of the local Albanian population to Theodore . After a few days , Theodore with his army confronted Peter . Theodore requested talks with the papal legate , Giovanni Colonna , whom he assured of his goodwill and support . Western sources claim that Theodore offered to recognize the primacy of the Catholic Church and the suzerainty of the Latin Empire — as well as to support Peter in his planned participation in the Fifth Crusade — and offered the Latins food and guides through the mountains . Peter was glad to receive this unexpected help , and an agreement between the two was concluded . As soon as the Latins let their guard down , Theodore fell upon them . Peter of Courtenay , Colonna , the Latin Archbishop of Salona , Count William I of Sancerre , and many Latin nobles were taken captive , while Peter 's army scattered into small roving bands trying to survive . Akropolites , the chronicler Ephraim , and some Western sources on the other hand claim that Dyrrhachium was captured , and are followed by some modern scholars , including the Greek I. D. Romanos and the French Alain <unk> . According to this view , Theodore offered to acknowledge Peter 's suzerainty after the city 's fall , only to treacherously ambush and defeat him . As the historian John Van Antwerp Fine remarks , " it is not important which version is correct " ; the outcome was the same , and if lost , Dyrrhachium was quickly retaken after Peter 's capture . 
 According to Philip Van Tricht , Theodore 's actions were motivated by several factors , which led him to regard Peter as a threat to himself and his principality . Peter 's attempt to return Dyrrhachium to Venice , even if it had failed for the moment , boded ill for the future . Peter 's recognition of the rights of Demetrius ' half @-@ brother William VI of Montferrat over Thessalonica opened the way for William to take power there , and Theodore was loath to see Thessalonica — whose rulers still claimed suzerainty over Epirus — strengthened , particularly given the presence of his exiled nephew Michael II in the court of the Latin Principality of Achaea . At the same time , Theodore and his court resented the increased papal interference in Greek affairs , especially in the aftermath of the mission of Cardinal Pelagius , the previous papal legate to Constantinople , whose actions had deepened the rift between Greeks and Latins further . 
 = = = Wars with the Latins and the capture of Thessalonica = = = 
 Whatever the true course of events , Theodore 's unexpected victory echoed throughout the Greek world , and greatly enhanced his standing ; even the usually hostile Akropolites was forced to admit in his history that this feat was " of great help to the Romans " . Conversely it dismayed Pope Honorius , who sent letters to the Latin princes of Greece as well as the Doge of Venice and Peter of Courtenay 's son @-@ in @-@ law King Andrew II of Hungary ( r . 1205 – 35 ) , urging them to engage themselves to secure the release of Peter and Colonna . He even wrote to Andrew and the French bishops to call for a crusade against Theodore , with which he also threatened Theodore in a letter . With the first contingents for the crusade assembling at Ancona in late 1217 , and the Venetians eager to profit from the crusade to recover Dyrrhachium , the pressure bore fruit : in March 1218 , Colonna was released , with Theodore offering his apologies and assurances of loyalty to the Pope . Honorius then changed his policy to the point of forbidding the Doge of Venice to harm Theodore in the slightest , hoping thereby to secure the release of more prisoners . Although some of the lesser barons were freed , Peter and many of the most senior lords remained in captivity until their death . It is unknown when Peter of Courtenay died , but this was probably before September 1219 . 
 The capture of Peter of Courtenay left both major Latin states in Greece , Thessalonica and Constantinople , in the hands of female regents . Before arriving in Constantinople , where she gave birth to Peter 's posthumous son , Baldwin II ( r . 1228 – 73 ) , Yolanda had stopped at the Peloponnese . There she quickly came to appreciate the wealth and strength of the Principality of Achaea , and arranged the marriage of her daughter Agnes to the principality 's heir , Geoffrey II of Villehardouin ( r. ca . 1229 – 46 ) . A politically astute ruler , Yolanda also secured her eastern border by offering her daughter Maria of Courtenay in marriage to Theodore Laskaris , who had just been widowed for the second time . 
 Before launching his final stroke against Thessalonica , Theodore also took care to secure his southern flank , by appointing his brother Constantine Komnenos Doukas as governor in Aetolia and Acarnania . An energetic governor , Constantine not only effectively shielded the Epirote domains from the threat of the Duchy of Athens , but soon recovered Neopatras and Lamia as well . Theodore himself turned his attention to clearing Thessaly of any remaining Latin presence , culminating in the surrender of the great Platamon Castle in 1218 . Over the next few years , one by one , Theodore captured the fortresses around Thessalonica itself . Platamon controlled the entrance to the <unk> Gulf , and with the surrender of Serres in late 1221 , Theodore cut the land connection between Constantinople and Thessalonica as well . Thessalonica was left thereby , in the words of John Fine , " more or less an island in the midst of Theodore 's possessions " . 
 As the fall of Thessalonica appeared imminent , Pope Honorius excommunicated Theodore , ordered an embargo on horses , troops , and supplies from the Adriatic ports , and sent letters to Constantinople urging assistance to Demetrius . Demetrius himself went to Italy to seek aid , being received by the Pope in Rome in March 1222 and by Emperor Frederick II ( r . 1220 – 50 ) soon after . A crusade was proclaimed against Theodore , and troops began to gather in Italy . In the meantime , the Latin Empire , now under Robert of Courtenay ( r . 1221 – 28 ) , was once more embroiled in warfare with Nicaea as it supported Laskaris ' brothers in their challenge against the new Nicaean emperor , John III Doukas Vatatzes ( r . 1222 – 54 ) . The first detachments of the assembling crusade , under Count Oberto II of <unk> , arrived at Thessalonica in summer 1222 and joined the de facto regent , Guy Pallavicini . Theodore now hastened his move against Thessalonica . After preliminary operations in late 1222 , in early 1223 he laid siege to the city . Honorius excommunicated him again , and redoubled his effort to promote the crusade , which had come to a standstill in the meantime . At the Pope 's urging , Venice and Emperor Frederick promised aid . Robert of Courtenay also pledged to assist , while Honorius called upon the Latin princes of southern Greece to join in the effort . The crusade finally assembled at Brindisi in March 1224 . In his instructions to his legate , however , Honorius did not rule out the possibility of Theodore coming to terms with the Crusaders . True to his word , in April 1224 Robert of Courtenay sent an army to besiege Serres . During the siege , the Latin generals learned of the disastrous defeat of the main Latin army at the hands of John III Doukas Vatatzes at the Battle of Poimanenon . They lifted the siege and hastened back to Constantinople , only to be intercepted by Theodore 's men ; most of the Latin army were killed or taken prisoner . 
 This double disaster destroyed the Pope 's plans for the crusade , as he had envisaged it to land in Theodore 's rear while he was engaged with Robert 's army . At the same time , the prospective leader of the crusade , William VI of Montferrat , fell ill . In November , the Pope was forced to postpone the crusade 's departure for the next spring . With news of the Latin defeats and the postponement of the crusade , the exhausted defenders of Thessalonica surrendered the city to Theodore sometime in December 1224 . The crusade to relieve it sailed in March 1225 , and landed in Thessaly at Halmyros . The Crusader army was soon decimated by dysentery , allegedly because the Greeks had poisoned the local water supply . William of Montferrat himself succumbed to it , and the remnants of the army left Greece . Demetrius of Montferrat still hoped to recover his realm with the help of Frederick II , but died in 1227 . 
 = = Emperor of Thessalonica = = 
 The capture of Thessalonica , traditionally the second city of the Byzantine Empire after Constantinople , was a major stroke against the Latins and greatly boosted Theodore 's standing , so much that he now regarded himself as superior to Vatatzes , and openly claimed the Byzantine imperial title by putting on the purple boots reserved to the emperor . Indeed , one of his major supporters , the eminent Metropolitan of Naupaktos , John Apokaukos , in a letter to the Patriarch in 1222 declared that the Epirotes already regarded Theodore as their " God @-@ sent regent and emperor " , and later wrote to Theodore 's wife expressing the hope that he might be able to assist at their imperial coronation at Thessalonica . 
 = = = Coronation controversy with Nicaea = = = 
 According to Byzantine custom , the coronation of an emperor could only take place in Constantinople and be performed by the Patriarch ; yet Constantinople was still in Latin hands , and the Patriarch ( now Germanus II , 1223 – 40 ) resided in Nicaea . Theodore thus turned to the Metropolitan of Thessalonica , Constantine Mesopotamites , whom he had just restored to his see after removing the Latin prelate . Mesopotamites however recognized the Patriarch at Nicaea as legitimate , and steadfastly refused to perform the rite , despite pressure from Theodore , his brother Constantine , and John Apokaukos . Rather than submit , he preferred to return to exile . In response , in March 1225 Theodore convened a council of the bishops of his domains at Arta , chaired by Apokaukos . The council approved a declaration , composed by Apokaukos , which extolled Theodore 's achievements against the Latins and Bulgarians , his liberation of Greek lands , eviction of Catholic priests and restoration of Orthodox bishops , and his imperial descent , and declared that the council recognized only him as emperor . Armed with this declaration , Theodore had the loyal Archbishop of Ohrid , Demetrios Chomatianos , perform the coronation instead . 
 Although Theodore appears to have assumed , and was addressed by , the imperial title almost immediately after the capture of Thessalonica , the date of his actual coronation is unknown . The French scholar Lucien Stiernon places it in the period between June 1227 and April 1228 , but the Greek Apostolos D. <unk> rejects this , reasoning that Theodore had no obvious reason to delay his coronation for so long , and suggested that he was crowned in 1225 , immediately after the council of Arta . Eleni Bees @-@ <unk> on the other hand , based on the letters of Apokaukos , suggests a date between 3 April and August 1227 , while <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> has narrowed the date down to 29 May 1227 . 
 As befitted an emperor , Theodore began setting up a court at his new capital , and dispensed court titles to his relatives and followers . His brothers Manuel and Constantine were raised to the rank of Despot , the long @-@ serving John <unk> became panhypersebastos and <unk> ( chief minister ) , and a number of scions of old Byzantine aristocratic families , who had sought refuge in Epirus , were appointed as provincial governors alongside members of the local aristocracy . The title of doux was used , but unlike earlier times these were mostly civilian governors with little military authority . Theodore awarded titles with such largesse that formerly exclusive titles such as pansebastos sebastos or <unk> were devalued and came to be held by city notables . To secure his new capital , Theodore instituted a guard of " <unk> " under a <unk> . 
 John Vatatzes initially reacted to Theodore 's proclamation as emperor by offering to recognize him as a sort of viceroy in his lands , but Theodore rejected this and publicly assumed the full titulature of the Byzantine emperors , as " basileus and autokrator of the Romans " . Theodore 's coronation deepened the rift between the western Greeks and Nicaea , which once again was expressed in the ecclesiastic sphere . At first , the Nicaeans tried to limit the blame to Chomatianos : though writing respectfully of Theodore himself , Patriarch Germanus II expressed his indignation at the presumption of Chomatianos in usurping the patriarchal privilege of crowning an emperor , while Chomatianos claimed that , as the successor of the ancient see of Justiniana Prima , he was an independent prelate and had the authority to do so . 
 In 1227 , a synod of Epirote bishops in Arta tried to find a compromise , acknowledging the overall authority of the Patriarch at Nicaea but requesting administrative autonomy , i.e. the right for Theodore to appoint bishops in his domains . They gave the Patriarch three months to reply , and suggested that if he did not heed their proposals , they might be forced to recognize the supremacy of the Pope instead . Germanus replied by having the patriarchal synod condemn Theodore 's assumption of the imperial title . The conflict escalated when Germanus appointed his own candidate to the vacant see of Dyrrhachium . Theodore expelled the bishop , and the Epirote synod instead elected a friend of Chomatianos , Constantine <unk> , as the bishop . Germanus now attacked Theodore directly . In response , George Bardanes composed a letter to Germanus , which insisted on Epirote ecclesiastical autonomy and challenged the very legality of Germanus ' claims to the patriarchate . The result was a full schism between the Nicaean and Epirote churches that lasted until 1232 / 3 . 
 = = = Expansion into Thrace = = = 
 Following Theodore 's coronation , there were four rulers who claimed the imperial title and vied for control of Constantinople : Theodore , the Latin Emperor , Robert of Courtenay , John III Doukas Vatatzes of Nicaea , and the young but ambitious John II Asen ( r . 1218 – 41 ) of Bulgaria . The Latin Empire was a shadow of its former strength : following Poimanenon , the Latins had lost most of their territories in Asia , while in Europe , it was soon reduced to the environs of Constantinople itself . Already in 1224 , or at least in 1225 , Theodore captured Chalcidice with Mount Athos , and in spring 1225 , he advanced through eastern Macedonia and western Thrace , seizing Christopolis , Xanthi , <unk> , Mosynopolis and Didymoteicho . In an attempt to pre @-@ empt him and block his advance onto Constantinople , the Nicaeans had answered the summons of the inhabitants of Adrianople and taken over the city from the Latins . Theodore however crossed the Evros River and blockaded the city , until it agreed to surrender . The Nicaean army , under the protostrator John Ises and John Kamytzes Komnenos , was allowed to withdraw unmolested to Asia with ships provided by Theodore . 
 The capture of Adrianople opened the path to Constantinople for Theodore . In order to secure his northern flank , he concluded an alliance with John Asen , sealed by the ( second ) marriage of his brother Manuel to Maria , an illegitimate daughter of Asen . At the same time , the Latins turned to Nicaea and concluded a peace treaty in exchange for further territorial concessions . This pact too was sealed by a marriage , of Theodore Laskaris ' daughter Eudokia to the Latin baron Anseau de Cayeux . In the same summer of 1225 , Theodore led his army to the environs of Constantinople , reaching the towns of Bizye and Vrysis . Anseau de Cayeux , leading the Latin army , was heavily wounded in the clashes , but Constantinople itself was not attacked . Not only was Theodore unprepared for a siege against the mighty Theodosian Walls , but news of William of Montferrat 's landing at Thessaly forced him to break off operations and return west . 
 For reasons that are unknown , Theodore did not renew his attack on Constantinople in 1226 or the years thereafter . Instead , he seems to have occupied himself with domestic affairs , as well as taking care to improve relations with Frederick II during the latter 's stop @-@ over at Corfu and Cephallonia to lead the Sixth Crusade in 1228 . In 1229 , he even sent a company of Greek troops to serve under Frederick in Italy . At the same time , Theodore presided over a rupture in relations with Venice , after his governor in Corfu sequestered the cargo of a shipwrecked Venetian ship . Theodore issued an edict on 19 August 1228 prohibiting Venetian merchants from practising commerce in his realm . In January of the same year , Robert of Courtenay died , leaving the throne of the Latin Empire to his eleven @-@ year @-@ old brother , Baldwin II . With a regency taking over the governance of the state , the Latin Empire stood further enfeebled . At this moment , John Asen offered an alliance . Baldwin II would marry his daughter Helena , while John Asen would take over the regency and lend his assistance at repelling Theodore 's attacks . The Latin barons viewed the offer with mistrust , as it would offer John Asen every opportunity to take over Constantinople himself ; instead , they strung out negotiations , and eventually chose the 80 @-@ year @-@ old but energetic John of Brienne ( r . 1229 – 37 ) as regent . Although the Bulgarian offer failed , it served to open a rift between Theodore and his nominal ally . In a move clearly directed against John Asen , in September 1228 , Theodore agreed to a one @-@ year truce with the Latin Empire 's regent , <unk> of <unk> , with the border between the two empires running along a line from Ainos to Vrysis . 
 = = Klokotnitsa and Bulgarian captivity = = 
 Finally , in late 1229 , Theodore began assembling his forces at Thessalonica — including a contingent of troops sent by Frederick II — for the projected final attack on Constantinople . As his troops marched east in spring 1230 , he unexpectedly turned his army north and followed the Evros valley into Bulgaria . Theodore 's motives for this sudden change are debated . Contemporary and later historians like Akropolites denounced this as a sign of Theodore 's duplicity and treachery . A more likely suggestion is that Theodore , hitherto undefeated in battle , desired to check Bulgarian power and avoid the possibility of the Bulgarians striking in his rear while he was engaged in besieging Constantinople . Although caught by surprise , John Asen reacted rapidly . Allegedly affixing the text of the broken treaty to one of his spears as a flag , he rallied his troops and met Theodore in battle in April 1230 . The ensuing Battle of Klokotnitsa was a crushing victory for the Bulgarian ruler , who took Theodore and many of his officers captive . 
 In the aftermath of Klokotnitsa , Bulgaria emerged as the mightiest power in the Balkans . Deprived of its energetic ruler , Theodore 's empire collapsed : within a few months Thrace , most of Macedonia , and Albania , fell under Bulgarian rule . As John Asen boasted in an inscription in the Holy Forty Martyrs Church at his capital of Tarnovo , he " occupied all the land from Adrianople to Dyrrhachium , Greek , Serbian , and Albanian alike " , although Dyrrhachium itself apparently remained in Greek hands . The Latin Duchy of Philippopolis was also annexed , and Alexius Slav 's principality in the Rhodope Mountains was extinguished in the process , with Alexius spending the rest of his life at Asen 's court . 
 Theodore 's brother Manuel , who managed to escape from Klokotnitsa , now took over the throne in Thessalonica . His domain was reduced to the environs of the city and his family 's core territories in Epirus and Thessaly , as well as Dyrrhachium and Corfu , while his brother Constantine in Aetolia and Acarnania recognized his suzerainty . As a son @-@ in @-@ law of John Asen , Manuel was allowed to maintain internal autonomy , but to all intents and purposes he was a client of the Bulgarian Tsar . At about the same time , Michael I 's bastard son Michael II returned from exile and quickly succeeded , apparently with the support of the local population , in taking over control of Epirus . Manuel was forced to recognize the fait accompli under the pretense that Michael recognized his suzerainty , in token of which Manuel conferred him the title of Despot . In reality Michael was fully independent , and very quickly ceased to acknowledge Manuel 's suzerainty ; by 1236 , he had seized Corfu . In order to preserve some freedom of manoeuvre and counter Asen 's attempts to subordinate the Epirote Church to the Bulgarian Church of Tarnovo , Manuel turned to his brother 's erstwhile rivals in Nicaea and brought an end to the ecclesiastical schism by acknowledging the legitimacy and superiority of the Nicaea @-@ based Patriarch . 
 Theodore himself remained in captivity at Tarnovo for seven years . Initially he was treated with honour , but at some point during his captivity he was accused of plotting against John Asen and blinded as a result . This was the customary Byzantine punishment for treason and means of sidelining potential political rivals . According to a contemporary letter written in Hebrew , Asen initially ordered two Jews to carry out the deed , for Theodore had been persecuting the Jews in his territory and confiscating their wealth to fund his campaigns . Theodore begged to be spared , and they refused to carry out the blinding , whereupon the enraged Tsar had them thrown from a cliff . Finally , in 1237 Theodore was released when Asen , recently widowed , fell in love with Theodore 's sole unmarried daughter , Irene . Immediately after the marriage , Theodore was released and allowed to depart Tarnovo to wherever he wished . 
 = = Return to Thessalonica and final years = = 
 = = = Recovery of Thessalonica = = = 
 As soon as he was set free , Theodore returned to Thessalonica . Lacking any escort or followers , he disguised himself as a beggar in order to enter the city in secret . There he contacted old supporters and favourites , and organized a conspiracy that soon ousted Manuel and took over the city . As Byzantine custom barred him from re @-@ assuming the imperial office due to his blinding , Theodore installed his son John Komnenos Doukas ( r . 1237 – 44 ) as emperor ( without a coronation ceremony ) , but remained the real ruler of the empire in his son 's name . John himself appears to have been mostly interested in religion , and more inclined to enter a monastery than to become emperor . Theodore had to persuade him that being named emperor was a God @-@ given gift , and that he was indeed the rightful Emperor of the Romans due to his imperial descent . 
 The deposed Manuel was sent to exile at Attaleia in Asia Minor , while his wife Maria was allowed to return to her father . Despite Theodore 's actions and the overthrow of his daughter and son @-@ in @-@ law , Akropolites reports that John Asen remained favourably disposed towards Theodore due to his passionate love for Irene . Manuel did not remain quiescent in exile ; determined to avenge himself , from Attaleia he secured passage through Turkish lands to Nicaea . There John Vatatzes welcomed him and agreed to support him , but not before he secured from Manuel oaths of loyalty to himself . Thus in early 1239 Manuel with six Nicaean ships set sail for Greece , landing near Demetrias in Thessaly . He received widespread support in the province , perhaps even from the local governor , Michael I 's son @-@ in @-@ law Constantine Maliasenos , allowing him to raise an army and in a short time occupy Farsala , Larissa , and Platamon . Faced with the option of open civil war , Manuel and Theodore eventually came to terms by dividing the territories of Thessalonica among themselves . Manuel renounced his allegiance to Vatatzes and received Thessaly , John and Theodore kept Thessalonica and the remaining parts of Macedonia as far west as Vodena and Ostrovo , and Constantine was confirmed in his appanage of Aetolia and Acarnania . To further secure their position , both Theodore and Michael concluded treaties with the powerful Prince of Achaea , Geoffrey II of Villehardouin . 
 = = = Submission of Thessalonica to Nicaea = = = 
 Michael II in Epirus was not part of the brothers ' agreement , and continued to pursue his own policies independently of his uncles . In 1241 , when Manuel died , Michael moved quickly to occupy Thessaly . In June of the same year , John Asen died , leaving the throne to his seven @-@ year @-@ old son Kaliman ( r . 1241 – 46 ) . Coupled with the increasingly deteriorating situation of the Latin Empire , this development left John Vatatzes of Nicaea as the pre @-@ eminent ruler of the region , and the obvious candidate for the capture of Constantinople . 
 Before undertaking any moves against Constantinople , Vatatzes realized the need to settle affairs with Thessalonica , and in particular with Theodore , whose ambition , capability , and machinations he feared . In 1240 or 1241 he therefore issued an invitation , with assurances of safe @-@ conduct , to Theodore to visit Nicaea . Theodore accepted , and was treated with great honours by Vatatzes , who deferred to him as his " uncle " and dined with him at the same table . In reality , Theodore was a prisoner in Nicaea ; he was not allowed to leave , and throughout his sojourn in the Nicaean court , preparations were in full swing for a campaign against Thessalonica . In spring 1242 , Vatatzes crossed over into Europe at the head of his army , with Theodore accompanying him as an honorary prisoner . Facing no resistance , the Nicaean army and fleet arrived before Thessalonica . The city 's garrison and inhabitants resisted with success and the Nicaean army , lacking heavy siege equipment , had to settle for a drawn @-@ out blockade . Soon , however , news arrived of a Mongol invasion of Asia Minor , which forced Vatatzes to break off the campaign and return to Nicaea . Nevertheless , the Nicaean emperor kept this news a secret , and sent Theodore to his son to negotiate . John himself reportedly was willing to surrender the city outright , but his father convinced him to hold out for better terms . In the end , after 40 days of negotiations , John was allowed to keep control of Thessalonica , but renounced his imperial title and accepted Nicaean suzerainty and the title of Despot . Theodore was also allowed to remain at Thessalonica at his son 's side . 
 John ruled as Despot in Thessalonica for two years , until his death in 1244 . Theodore himself retired to Vodena , from where he supervised the affairs of state . On John 's death he raised his younger son Demetrios Komnenos Doukas ( r . 1244 – 46 ) in his place , and sent an embassy to Nicaea to announce the succession , as befitted the terms of vassalage agreed in 1242 . If John was a religious ascetic , Demetrios was a dissolute youngster who enjoyed partying with his favourites and seducing married women . Although Theodore remained in charge of governance , Demetrios quickly became so unpopular that many leading citizens began viewing direct Nicaean rule with favour . 
 Things came to a head in autumn 1246 , when Kaliman of Bulgaria died , leaving the country in the hands of a regency for his younger brother Michael Asen ( r . 1246 – 57 ) . Vatatzes quickly attacked Bulgaria , and within three months captured most of Thrace and all of eastern and northern Macedonia , while Michael II of Epirus also took advantage of the opportunity to expand into Albania and northwestern Macedonia . At the close of this campaign in November , as Vatatzes was encamped at Melnik , he was informed of a conspiracy to depose Demetrios and deliver Thessalonica to him in exchange for a chrysobull guaranteeing the traditional rights and privileges of the city . Vatatzes readily granted this , and sent envoys to Demetrios calling for him to appear in person at his camp . Demetrios , suspicious of Vatatzes ' intentions , refused , and the Nicaeans marched on Thessalonica . After a few days , the conspirators opened one of the gates to the Nicaean army , and the city was quickly captured . Demetrios was captured and exiled to <unk> in Bithynia , while Thessalonica and all of Macedonia were placed under the governance of the Grand Domestic Andronikos Palaiologos . Theodore himself , isolated and without power in his refuge at Vodena , apparently remained uninvolved in these events . 
 = = = Final throw of the dice and death = = = 
 With Thessalonica secured , Vatatzes turned to Epirus , offering Michael II a marriage alliance between Michael 's eldest son Nikephoros and his own granddaughter Maria . The offer was enthusiastically accepted by Michael 's wife , Theodora Petraliphaina , and the young couple were engaged at Pegae . Michael , who had not abandoned his family 's ambitions , remained ambivalent about the Nicaean alliance , and Theodore used his influence over his nephew to turn him against it . Thus , in spring 1251 , Michael launched a sudden attack on Thessalonica . The city resisted successfully , and in spring of the next year Vatatzes once more crossed into Europe to campaign against the Komnenoi Doukai . Theodore with Michael had turned to the north , capturing Prilep and Veles , and when they received news of Vatatzes ' arrival , they withdrew to Epirus via Kastoria . Vatatzes besieged and captured Theodore 's stronghold of Vodena , but soon became bogged down in skirmishing in the area of Kastoria . The stalemate was broken when two Epirote generals , John Glabas and Theodore Petraliphas , defected to the Nicaeans , followed shortly after by the ruler of Kruja , Golem . This forced Michael to come to terms with Vatatzes , ceding the fortresses he had captured as well as his remaining holdings in Macedonia , and reconfirming the marriage alliance with Nicaea . Furthermore , Vatatzes explicitly demanded the handing over of Theodore . The Epirote ambassadors met Vatatzes at Vodena , where they offered Theodore and the young Nikephoros as hostages . The latter was granted the title of Despot and soon allowed to return to Epirus , but Theodore was moved as a prisoner to Asia Minor . He died shortly after , around 1253 . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 The modern biographer of the Komnenoi , Konstantinos Varzos , described Theodore as an " energetic , resourceful , and exceedingly ambitious statesman , who inherited from his ancestor Alexios I Komnenos his endurance and persistence , but not the latter 's intelligence , diplomacy , and ability to adapt " . Varzos furthermore points out that despite his great ability , Theodore 's ambition to be the one to recover Constantinople and his irreconcilable rivalry with Nicaea actually hampered and delayed the restoration of the Byzantine Empire by several decades . 
 Theodore 's legacy left a lasting mark on the political worldview of the western Greeks : Byzantinist Donald Nicol remarks that " the memory of Theodore Doukas 's victories and of his title to the Byzantine crown lived on in northern Greece and in the hearts of his descendants for many years to come " . Michael II continued his uncle 's rivalry with Nicaea , further delaying the recovery of Constantinople , and even after the restoration of the Byzantine Empire by Nicaea in 1261 , the rulers of Epirus would continue to challenge the revived empire and uphold their own claim to the Byzantine throne . 
 = = Family = = 
 By his wife Maria Petraliphaina , Theodore had four children : 
 Anna Angelina Komnene Doukaina , who married King Stefan Radoslav of Serbia 
 John Komnenos Doukas , who became Emperor of Thessalonica in 1237 
 Irene Komnene Doukaina , who married John Asen 
 Demetrios Komnenos Doukas , who succeeded as ruler of Thessalonica in 1244 
 = Tropical Storm Ignacio ( 1997 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Ignacio was a weak tropical cyclone affected parts of the western United States in August 1997 . The 12th tropical cyclone and 9th named storm of the 1997 Pacific hurricane season , Ignacio formed west of Mexico from a weather disturbance embedded within a more broad system . It was classified as a tropical depression on August 17 , and although it quickly intensified into a tropical storm , harsher environmental conditions caused it to begin weakening as the cyclone moved northward . On August 19 , Ignacio transitioned into an extratropical cyclone as it approached California , where its remnants produced unprecedented August rainfall , numerous traffic accidents , and 78 @,@ 000 power outages . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Tropical Storm Ignacio originated in a broad region of active weather that persisted west of Mexico during the middle of August 1997 . Among multiple other disturbances , the precursor to Ignacio developed on August 16 , well to the southwest of the Baja California Peninsula . Later that day , banding features formed and convection began turning counterclockwise around a nascent area of low pressure in the middle levels of the atmosphere . It continued to become better organized , and at 0000 UTC on August 17 , the National Hurricane Center classified it a tropical depression . At the time , the storm was situated approximately 520 mi ( 840 km ) southwest of Cabo San Lucas , outside of the area in which tropical cyclones usually form in the Eastern Pacific ocean basin . 
 The depression moved northwestward at 11 to 17 mph ( 18 to 27 km / h ) under the steering currents of mid- to upper @-@ level trough of low pressure off the coast of California . A burst of deep convection formed near the cyclone 's center early on August 17 , and its estimated maximum sustained winds subsequently increased to 40 mph ( 64 km / h ) . As such , it was upgraded to Tropical Storm Ignacio at 1200 UTC . At the same time , the storm reached its lowest recorded barometric pressure of 1005 millibars . However , due to increasingly colder waters and the presence of inhibiting southwesterly wind shear , it immediately stopped intensifying . Ignacio maintained tropical storm status for a short time , and early on August 18 , it weakened back into a depression . 
 During its weakening stage , deep convection existed only in the northwestern quadrant of the circulation . On August 19 , cold cloud tops reappeared , although this brief revival has been attributed to non @-@ tropical baroclinic instability . At 1200 UTC , the depression was declared extratropical , and it continued northward until dissipating near California a day later . Moisture from the system persisted as it passed through the state and the Pacific Northwest , ultimately merging with a larger extratropical cyclone involving the remnants of Hurricane Guillermo . 
 = = Impact = = 
 As a tropical cyclone , Ignacio had little or no effect on land . However , its remnants produced unprecedented precipitation in parts of coastal California . Rainfall accumulations reached record levels in some areas , amounting to as much as 2 @.@ 17 in ( 55 mm ) . San Francisco received about 1 in ( 25 mm ) of precipitation , leading to its wettest August on record , and also constituting the city 's first ever recorded rainfall on the date of August 19 . In contrast , the area usually receives just trace of moisture during August . By the estimation of one meteorologist , the atypical rainfall represented a 1 @-@ in @-@ 50 @-@ year event . A Major League Baseball game at <unk> Coliseum on August 19 was canceled due to the inclement weather . The atypical rainfall triggered isolated flash flooding in some locations and a debris flow about 7 ft ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) deep . Wine grape were adversely impacted by the heavy rainfall from Ignacio , which ruined about 10 % of the year 's Chardonnay and Sauvignon grapes . The unfavorable growing conditions were compounded by further rains from Hurricane Linda in September , creating what was described as a " tumultuous " year for the crops . 
 The storm contributed to numerous weather @-@ related traffic accidents , at least one of them classified as major . Around 20 collisions occurred on the night of August 19 across the San Francisco Peninsula . Two crashes on Interstate 80 forced the closure of four lanes for 30 minutes , while California State Route 9 was blocked in Saratoga by a large tree which fell due to saturated soil . It is unclear how many injuries resulted from the various incidents . Thunderstorms associated with the storm system left about 78 @,@ 000 electric customers in Sonoma County without power after lightning struck a power substation . The outages lasted up to a few hours . Lightning also knocked three workers unconscious in a vineyard near Lodi ; they were in good condition after hospitalization . 
 Rainfall extended as far north as the northwestern United States , ending an unusually long , 35 @-@ day dry spell at Astoria , Oregon . It remains the most significant rainfall from a tropical cyclone in the states of Washington and Oregon . 
 = German destroyer Z1 Leberecht Maass = 
 The German destroyer Z1 Leberecht Maass was a Type 1934 destroyer built for the Kriegsmarine during the 1930s . The ship was named after Rear Admiral Leberecht Maass who commanded German forces in the Battle of Heligoland Bight in August 1914 . Several days after the start of World War II , she unsuccessfully attacked , together with another destroyer , Polish ships anchored at the naval base on the Hel Peninsula . Leberecht Maass was lightly damaged during the action . In mid @-@ February 1940 , while proceeding into the North Sea to search for British fishing trawlers , the ship was bombed by a patrolling German bomber that damaged her steering . She either drifted into a newly laid British minefield or was again hit by bombs and broke in half with the loss of the bulk of her crew . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Leberecht Maass had an overall length of 119 meters ( 390 ft 5 in ) and was 114 meters ( 374 ft 0 in ) long at the waterline . The ship had a beam of 11 @.@ 30 meters ( 37 ft 1 in ) , and a maximum draft of 4 @.@ 23 meters ( 13 ft 11 in ) . She displaced 2 @,@ 223 long tons ( 2 @,@ 259 t ) at standard load and 3 @,@ 156 long tons ( 3 @,@ 207 t ) at deep load . The two Wagner geared steam turbine sets , each driving one propeller shaft , were designed to produce 70 @,@ 000 PS ( 51 @,@ 000 kW ; 69 @,@ 000 shp ) using steam provided by six high @-@ pressure Wagner boilers . The ship had a designed speed of 36 knots ( 67 km / h ; 41 mph ) , but her maximum speed was 38 @.@ 7 knots ( 71 @.@ 7 km / h ; 44 @.@ 5 mph ) . Leberecht Maass carried a maximum of 752 metric tons ( 740 long tons ) of fuel oil which was intended to give a range of 4 @,@ 400 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 100 km ; 5 @,@ 100 mi ) at a speed of 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) , but the ship proved top @-@ heavy in service and 30 % of the fuel had to be retained as ballast low in the ship . The effective range proved to be only 1 @,@ 530 nmi ( 2 @,@ 830 km ; 1 @,@ 760 mi ) at 19 knots . 
 The ship carried five 12 @.@ 7 cm SK C / 34 guns in single mounts with gun shields , two each superimposed , fore and aft . The fifth gun was carried on top of the aft superstructure . Her anti @-@ aircraft armament consisted of four 3 @.@ 7 cm SK C / 30 guns in two twin mounts abreast the rear funnel and six 2 cm C / 30 guns in single mounts . The ship carried eight above @-@ water 53 @.@ 3 @-@ centimeter ( 21 @.@ 0 in ) torpedo tubes in two power @-@ operated mounts . A pair of reload torpedoes were provided for each mount . Four depth charge throwers were mounted on the sides of the rear deckhouse and they were supplemented by six racks for individual depth charges on the sides of the stern . Enough depth charges were carried for either two or four patterns of 16 charges each . Mine rails could be fitted on the rear deck that had a maximum capacity of 60 mines . A system of passive hydrophones designated as ' GHG ' ( Gruppenhorchgerät ) was fitted to detect submarines . The crew numbered 10 officers and 315 enlisted men , plus an additional four officers and 19 enlisted men if serving as a flotilla flagship . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Leberecht Maass was the first destroyer to be built in Germany since World War I. The ship was ordered on 7 July 1934 and laid down at Deutsche Werke , Kiel , on 10 October 1934 as yard number <unk> . She was launched on 18 August 1935 and completed on 14 January 1937 . She became the flagship of the Führer der Torpedoboote ( Chief of Torpedo Boats ) upon commissioning . Leberecht Maass spent most of her first year training and made a port visit to Gothenburg in April 1938 . Upon her return she was taken in hand by Deutsche Werke to have her bow rebuilt to reduce the amount of water that came over the bow in head seas . The ship participated in the August 1938 Fleet Review and the following fleet exercise . In December , Leberecht Maass , together with her sisters Z2 Georg Thiele , Z3 Max Schultz , and Z4 Richard Beitzen , sailed to the area of Iceland to evaluate her seaworthiness in a North Atlantic winter with her new bow . On 23 – 24 March 1939 , the ship was one of the destroyers that escorted Adolf Hitler aboard the pocket battleship Deutschland to occupy Memel . She participated in the Spring fleet exercise in the western Mediterranean , as the flagship of Rear Admiral Günther Lütjens , and made several visits to Spanish and Moroccan ports in April and May . 
 On 3 September 1939 , Z1 Leberecht Maass and Z9 Wolfgang Zenker took part in an attack on the Polish ships Gryf and Wicher in Gdynia harbour . The Poles replied effectively and forced the German destroyers to make evasive maneuvers and to lay a smoke screen to throw off the aim of the Polish gunners . Leberecht Maass was hit in the superstructure by a 152 @-@ millimeter ( 6 @.@ 0 in ) shell from the coast defense battery at Hel that killed four crewmen and wounded another four men . Lütjens ordered the action broken off 40 minutes later as the German fire was ineffective . The following day , she sailed to Swinemünde to have her damage repaired , a process that took until 10 September . After its completion , Leberecht Maass helped to lay defensive minefields in the North Sea . The ship began a scheduled refit in Swinemünde on 29 September and <unk> transferred his flag to <unk> Wilhelm Heidkamp . She was attached to the 2nd Destroyer Flotilla on 22 December . 
 On 22 February 1940 , Leberecht Maass and five other destroyers , Z3 Max Schultz , Z4 Richard Beitzen , Z6 Theodor Riedel , Z13 Erich Koellner and Z16 Friedrich Eckoldt , sailed for the Dogger Bank to intercept British fishing vessels in " Operation Wikinger " . En route , the flotilla was erroneously attacked by a Heinkel He 111 bomber from KG 26 . Leberecht Maass was hit by at least one bomb , lost steering , and broke in half , sinking with the loss of 280 of her crew , among them the ship 's commanding officer , Korvettenkapitän Fritz <unk> . Only 60 men were saved . During the rescue effort , Z3 Max Schultz hit a mine and sank with the loss of her entire crew . Hitler ordered a Court of Inquiry to be convened to investigate the cause of the losses and it concluded that both ships that been sunk by bombs from the He 111 . The Kriegsmarine had failed to notify its destroyers that the Luftwaffe was making anti @-@ shipping patrols at that time and had also failed to inform the Luftwaffe that its destroyers would be at sea . Postwar evidence revealed that one or both ships struck a British minefield laid by the destroyers Ivanhoe and Intrepid . 
 = Morgan horse = 
 The Morgan horse is one of the earliest horse breeds developed in the United States . Tracing back to the foundation sire Figure , later named Justin Morgan after his best @-@ known owner , Morgans served many roles in 19th @-@ century American history , being used as coach horses and for harness racing , as general riding animals , and as cavalry horses during the American Civil War on both sides of the conflict . Morgans have influenced other major American breeds , including the American Quarter Horse , Tennessee Walking Horse and the Standardbred . During the 19th and 20th centuries , they were exported to other countries , including England , where a Morgan stallion influenced the breeding of the Hackney horse . In 1907 , the US Department of Agriculture established the US Morgan Horse Farm in Middlebury , Vermont for the purpose of perpetuating and improving the Morgan breed ; the farm was later transferred to the University of Vermont . The first breed registry was established in 1909 , and since then many organizations in the US , Europe and Oceania have developed . There were estimated to be over 175 @,@ 000 Morgan horses worldwide in 2005 . 
 The Morgan is a compact , refined breed , generally bay , black or chestnut in color , although they come in many colors , including several variations of pinto . Used in both English and Western disciplines , the breed is known for its versatility . The Morgan is the state animal of Vermont and the state horse of Massachusetts . Popular children 's authors , including Marguerite Henry and Ellen Feld , have portrayed the breed in their books ; Henry 's Justin Morgan Had a Horse was later made into a Disney movie . 
 = = Breed characteristics = = 
 There is officially one breed standard for Morgan type , regardless of the discipline or bloodline of the individual horse . Compact and refined in build , the Morgan has strong legs , an expressive head with a straight or slightly convex profile and broad forehead ; large , prominent eyes ; well @-@ defined withers , laid back shoulders , and an upright , well arched neck . The back is short , and hindquarters are strongly muscled , with a long and well @-@ muscled croup . The tail is attached high and carried gracefully and straight . Morgans appear to be a strong powerful horse , and the breed is well known as an easy keeper . The breed standard for height ranges from 14 @.@ 1 to 15 @.@ 2 hands ( 57 to 62 inches , 145 to 157 cm ) , with some individuals over and under . 
 Gaits , particularly the trot are " animated , elastic , square , and collected , " with the front and rear legs balanced . A few Morgans are gaited , meaning they can perform an intermediate speed gait other than the trot such as the rack , fox trot , or pace . The United States Equestrian Federation states , " a Morgan is distinctive for its stamina and vigor , personality and eagerness and strong natural way of moving . " The breed has a reputation for intelligence , courage and a good disposition . Registered Morgans come in a variety of colors although they are most commonly bay , black , and chestnut . Less common colors include gray , roan , dun , silver dapple , and cream dilutions such as palomino , buckskin , cremello and <unk> . In addition , three pinto color patterns are also recognized : sabino , frame overo , and splashed white . The tobiano pattern has not been noted in Morgans . 
 One genetic disease has been identified within the Morgan breed . This is Type 1 polysaccharide storage myopathy , an autosomal dominant muscle disease found mainly in stock horse and draft horse breeds caused by a missense mutation in the <unk> gene . Morgans are one of over a dozen breeds found to have the allele for the condition , though its prevalence in Morgans appears to be quite low compared to stock and draft breeds . In one study , less than one percent of randomly tested Morgans carried the allele for this condition , one of the lowest percentages amongst breeds in that study . 
 Two coat color genes found in Morgans have also been linked to genetic disorders . One is the genetic ocular syndrome multiple congenital ocular anomalies ( MCOA ) , originally called equine anterior segment <unk> ( ASD ) . MCOA is characterized by the abnormal development of some ocular tissues , which causes compromised vision , although generally of a mild form ; the disease is non @-@ progressive . Genetic studies have shown that it is closely tied to the silver dapple gene . A small number of Morgans carry the silver dapple allele , which causes cysts but no apparent vision problems if heterozygous , but when homozygous can cause vision problems . There is also the possibility of lethal white syndrome , a fatal disease seen in foals who are homozygous for the frame overo gene . At present , there is one mare line in the Morgan breed that has produced healthy heterozygous frame overo individuals . The American Morgan Horse Association advocates genetic testing to identify carriers of these genetics , and advises owners to avoid breeding horses that are heterozygous for frame overo to each other . 
 = = Breed history = = 
 = = = Justin Morgan = = = 
 All Morgans trace back to a single foundation sire , a stallion named Figure , who was born in West Springfield , Massachusetts in 1789 . In 1792 , he was given to a man named Justin Morgan as a debt payment . The horse later came to be identified by the name of this particular owner , and " the Justin Morgan horse " evolved into the name of the breed . Figure is thought to have stood about 14 hands ( 56 inches , 142 cm ) , and to have weighed about 1 @,@ 000 pounds ( 450 kg ) . He was known for his <unk> , passing on his distinctive looks , conformation , temperament , and athleticism . His exact pedigree is unknown , although extensive efforts have been made to discover his parentage . One historian notes that the writings on the possibility of his sire being a Thoroughbred named Beautiful Bay would " fill 41 detective novels and a membership application for the Liars ' Club . " In 1821 , Figure was kicked by another horse and later died of his injuries . He was buried in Tunbridge , Vermont . 
 Although Figure was used extensively as a breeding stallion , records are known to exist for only six of his sons , three of whom became notable as foundation bloodstock for the Morgan breed . Woodbury , a chestnut , stood 14 @.@ 3 hands ( 59 inches , 150 cm ) high and stood for many years at stud in New England . <unk> , a dark bay the same size as Figure , was known for his endurance and speed in harness . Best known was Sherman , another chestnut stallion , slightly shorter than Figure , who in turn was the sire and grandsire of Black Hawk and Ethan Allen . Black Hawk , born in 1833 , went on to become a foundation stallion for the Standardbred , American Saddlebred and Tennessee Walking Horse breeds , and was known for his unbeaten harness racing record . Ethan Allen , sired by Black Hawk in 1849 , is another important sire in the history of the Morgan breed , and was known for his speed in trotting races . 
 = = = Breed development = = = 
 In the 19th century , Morgans were used extensively for harness racing , as well as for pulling coaches , due to the breed 's speed and endurance in harness . They were also used as stock horses and for general riding , as well as light driving work . Miners in the California Gold Rush ( 1848 – 1855 ) used the breed , as did the Army during and after the American Civil War for both riding and harness horses . The Morgan trotting stallion Shepherd F. Knapp was exported to England in the 1860s , where his trotting ability influenced the breeding of Hackney horses . During this period , numerous Morgan mares may have been brought west and integrated into Texan horse herds , which influenced the development of the American Quarter Horse breed . The Morgan horse also was an ancestor of the Missouri Fox Trotter . By the 1870s , however , longer @-@ legged horses came into fashion , and Morgan horses were crossed with those of other breeds . This resulted in the virtual disappearance of the original style Morgan , although a few remained in isolated areas . 
 Daniel C. Lindley , a native of Middlebury , Vermont , compiled a book of Morgan breeding stallions , published in 1857 . Colonel Joseph Battell , also a Middlebury , Vermont native , published the first volume of the Morgan Horse Register in 1894 , marking the beginning of a formal breed registry . In 1907 , the US Department of Agriculture established the US Morgan Horse Farm in Middlebury , Vermont on land donated by Battell for the purpose of perpetuating and improving the Morgan breed . The breeding program aimed to produce horses that were sound , sturdy , well @-@ mannered , and capable of performing well either under saddle or in harness . In 1951 , the Morgan Horse Farm was transferred from the USDA to the Vermont Agricultural College ( now the University of Vermont ) . 
 = = = Military use = = = 
 Morgans were used as cavalry mounts by both sides in the American Civil War . Horses with Morgan roots included Sheridan 's Winchester , also known as Rienzi , ( a descendent of Black Hawk ) . Stonewall Jackson 's " Little Sorrel " has alternately been described as a Morgan or an American Saddlebred , a breed heavily influenced by the Morgan . While Morgan enthusiasts have stated that the horse Comanche , the only survivor of the Custer regiment after the Battle of the Little Big Horn , was either a Morgan or a Mustang / Morgan mix , records of the U.S. Army and other early sources do not support this . Most accounts state that Comanche was either of " Mustang lineage " or a mix of " American " and " Spanish " blood . The University of Kansas Natural History Museum , which has the stuffed body of Comanche on display , makes no statement as to his breed . All sources agree that Comanche originated in the Oklahoma or Texas area , making his Mustang background more likely . 
 = = = Families = = = 
 There are four main bloodlines groups within the Morgan breed today , known as the Brunk , Government , Lippitt , and Western Working " families . " There are also smaller subfamilies . The Brunk Family , particularly noted for soundness and athleticism , traces to the Illinois breeding program of Joseph Brunk . The Lippitt Family or " <unk> " trace to the breeding program of Robert Lippitt Knight , grandson of industrialist Robert Knight and maternal great @-@ great grandson of Revolutionary War officer Christopher Lippitt , founder of the Lippitt Mill . Robert Lippitt Knight focused on preservation breeding of horses descended from Ethan Allen II and this line is considered the " purest " of the four lines , with the most lines tracing back to Figure and no <unk> to other breeds in the 20th or 21st centuries . The Government Family is the largest , tracing to Morgans bred by the US Morgan Horse Farm between 1905 and 1951 . The foundation sire of this line was General Gates . When USDA involvement ended , the University of Vermont purchased not only the farm , but much of its breeding stock and carries on the program today . The Working Western Family , abbreviated <unk> , have no common breeder or ancestor , but are the horses bred to be stock horses and work cattle , some descended from Government farm stallions shipped west . 
 = = Organizations = = 
 In 1909 , the Morgan Horse Club was founded , later changing its name to the American Morgan Horse Association . During the 1930s and 1940s , there was controversy within the registry membership as to whether the stud book should be open or closed ; this mirrored similar controversies in other US breed registries . The result of these discussions was that the stud book was declared closed to outside blood as of January 1 , 1948 . In 1985 , the US and Canadian registries signed a reciprocity agreement regarding the registration of horses , and a similar agreement was made between the US and Great Britain registries in 1990 . As of 2012 , approximately 179 @,@ 000 horses had been registered over the life of the association , with over 3 @,@ 000 new foals registered annually . It is estimated that between 175 @,@ 000 and 180 @,@ 000 Morgans exist worldwide , and although they are most popular in the United States , there are populations in Great Britain , Sweden and other countries . 
 The American Morgan Horse Association ( AMHA ) is the largest association for the breed . In addition to the AMHA , since 1996 , there has also been a National Morgan Pony Registry , which specializes in horses under 14 @.@ 2 hands ( 58 inches , 147 cm ) . There are several other organizations that focus on specific bloodlines within the Morgan breed . These include the Rainbow Morgan Horse Association , begun in 1990 , which works with the AMHA to develop and promote unusually @-@ colored Morgans , such as those with the silver dapple and cream genes . The Foundation Morgan Horse Association registers those horses bred to resemble the stockier type seen in the late 1800s and early 1900s , before crossbreeding with the American Saddlebred became common . Two other membership based organizations , both devoted to preserving the old @-@ time Vermont or " Lippitt " strain of Morgans , also exist . The first , the Lippitt Club , was started in 1973 , and the second , the Lippitt Morgan Breeders Association , was founded in 1995 . The Lippitt Morgan Horse Registry , Inc . , was formed in 2011 . It registers and maintains a <unk> data base with pedigrees of Lippitt Morgans . There are also associations for Morgans in several countries besides the US , including Canada , Australia , New Zealand , Great Britain , Sweden , Austria and Germany . In Middlebury , Vermont there is a museum dedicated to the history of the breed . 
 = = Uses = = 
 The Morgan breed is known for its versatility , and is used for a number of English and Western events . They have been successfully shown in many disciplines , including dressage , show jumping , Western pleasure , cutting and endurance riding . They are also used as stock horses and for pleasure riding and driving . They are frequently seen in driving competitions , including combined driving and carriage driving . Morgans were the first American breed to compete in the World Pairs Driving competition , representing the US . They can been seen as mounts for 4 @-@ H and Pony Club participants and therapeutic riding programs , due to their gentle disposition and steady movement . 
 There are Morgan @-@ only shows held throughout the US , as well as an " open competition " program run by the AMHA that gives points based on competition success at all @-@ breed shows . The first annual Grand National and World Championship Morgan Horse Show was held in 1973 in Detroit , Michigan and in 1975 moved to its current home in Oklahoma City , Oklahoma . Over 1 @,@ 000 horses compete in the show each year . In 1961 , the Morgan horse was named the official state animal of Vermont , and in 1970 , the official state horse of Massachusetts . 
 = = = In literature and film = = = 
 The children 's book , Justin Morgan Had a Horse by Marguerite Henry , published in 1945 , was a fictional account of Figure and Justin Morgan . It was a Newbery Honor Book in 1946 . A movie based on the book was made by Walt Disney Studios in 1972 . Both the book and the movie have been criticized for containing a number of historical inaccuracies and for creating or perpetuating some myths about both Justin Morgan and Figure . One equine historian stated , " these should be looked upon not as true happenings but as entertainment vehicles . " 
 Ellen Feld , a children 's author , is also known for her " Morgan Horse " series . Blackjack : Dreaming of a Morgan Horse , won a Children 's Choice Award in 2005 , following the 2004 award for its sequel , Frosty : The Adventures of a Morgan Horse . These awards were given by the International Reading Association and the Children ’ s Book Council . 
 A Morgan horse is the subject of the poem , The Runaway by Robert Frost . In the poem , the speaker observes " A little Morgan " colt who has been left out in a mountain pasture during winter and seems to be afraid of the falling snow . 
 = Metis ( moon ) = 
 Metis ( / <unk> / ; Greek : <unk> ) , also known as Jupiter XVI , is the innermost moon of Jupiter . It was discovered in 1979 in images taken by Voyager 1 , and was named in 1983 after the first wife of Zeus , Metis . Additional observations made between early 1996 and September 2003 by the Galileo spacecraft allowed its surface to be imaged . 
 Metis is tidally locked to Jupiter , and its shape is strongly asymmetrical , with one of the diameters being almost twice as large as the smallest one . It is also one of the two moons known to orbit Jupiter in less than the length of Jupiter 's day , the other being Adrastea . It orbits within the main ring of Jupiter , and is thought to be a major contributor of material to the rings . 
 = = Discovery and observations = = 
 Metis was discovered in 1979 by Stephen P. Synnott in images taken by the Voyager 1 probe and was provisionally designated as S / 1979 J 3 . In 1983 it was officially named after the mythological Metis , a <unk> who was the first wife of Zeus ( the Greek equivalent of Jupiter ) . The photographs taken by Voyager 1 showed Metis only as a dot , and hence knowledge about Metis was very limited until the arrival of the Galileo spacecraft . Galileo imaged almost all of the surface of Metis and put constraints on its composition by 1998 . 
 = = Physical characteristics = = 
 Metis has an irregular shape and measures 60 × 40 × 34 km across , which makes it the second smallest of the four inner satellites of Jupiter . Therefore , a very rough estimate of its surface area could be placed between 5 @,@ 800 and 11 @,@ 600 square kilometers ( approx . 8 @,@ 700 ) . The bulk composition and mass of Metis are not known , but assuming that its mean density is like that of Amalthea ( ~ 0 @.@ 86 g / cm3 ) , its mass can be estimated as ~ 3 @.@ 6 × 1016 kg . This density would imply that it is composed of water ice with a porosity of 10 – 15 % . 
 The surface of Metis is heavily cratered , dark , and appears to be reddish in color . There is a substantial asymmetry between leading and trailing hemispheres : the leading hemisphere is 1 @.@ 3 times brighter than the trailing one . The asymmetry is probably caused by the higher velocity and frequency of impacts on the leading hemisphere , which excavate a bright material ( presumably ice ) from its interior . 
 = = Orbit and rotation = = 
 Metis is the innermost of Jupiter 's four small inner moons . It orbits Jupiter at a distance of ~ 128 @,@ 000 km ( 1 @.@ 79 Jupiter radii ) within Jupiter 's main ring . Metis 's orbit has very small eccentricity ( ~ 0 @.@ 0002 ) and inclination ( ~ 0 @.@ 06 ° ) relative to the equator of Jupiter . 
 Due to tidal locking , Metis rotates synchronously with its orbital period , with its longest axis aligned towards Jupiter . 
 Metis lies inside Jupiter 's synchronous orbit radius ( as does Adrastea ) , and as a result , tidal forces slowly cause its orbit to decay . If its density is similar to Amalthea 's , Metis 's orbit lies within the fluid Roche limit ; however , because it has not broken up , it must lie outside its rigid Roche limit . 
 Because Metis orbits very close to Jupiter , Jupiter appears as a gigantic sphere about 67 @.@ 9 ° in diameter from Metis , the largest angular diameter as viewed from any of Jupiter 's moons . For the same reason only 31 % of Jupiter 's surface is visible from Metis at any one time , the most limited view of Jupiter from any of its moons . 
 Metis is the fastest @-@ moving of Jupiter 's moons . It orbits Jupiter at 31 @.@ 5 km / s . 
 = = Relationship with Jupiter 's rings = = 
 Metis 's orbit lies ~ 1000 km within the main ring of Jupiter . It orbits within a ~ 500 km wide " gap " or " notch " in the ring . The gap is clearly somehow related to the moon but the origin of this connection has not been established . Metis supplies a significant part of the main ring 's dust . This material appears to consist primarily of material that is ejected from the surfaces of Jupiter 's four small inner satellites by meteorite impacts . It is easy for the impact ejecta to be lost from the satellites into space because the satellites ' surfaces lie fairly close to the edge of their Roche spheres due to their low density . 
 = Break Your Heart = 
 " Break Your Heart " is a song by English singer @-@ songwriter Taio Cruz . The song serves as the lead single from his second studio album , Rokstarr ( 2009 ) . It was written by Cruz and Fraser T Smith and produced by Smith . It was first released in the United Kingdom on 20 September 2009 , followed by a release in the United States and other markets on 2 February 2010 . The official remix version features American rapper Ludacris ; that version was the single released in North American countries . The song , originally penned for Cheryl Cole , is an uptempo R & B song with synthpop and dance @-@ pop elements , accompanied by Cruz 's Auto @-@ Tuned vocals . The song is lyrically a warning to someone about being a heartbreaker . 
 The song received mixed to positive reviews , critics commending its infectious sound , but noting that it was generic . The song peaked at number one in Canada , Switzerland , the United Kingdom and the United States , and also within the top ten of many other countries . The accompanying music video features several scenes of Cruz on escapades with different women , including a speedboat compared to classic Diddy and a club scene with Ludacris in the American version . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Break Your Heart " was one of two songs penned by Cruz for Cheryl Cole for her debut solo album , 3 Words . After Cruz did not hear back from Cole 's label about the song , he reworked the song for a male and made it the first song off his second album , Rokstarr . Cruz told MTV News UK that after he released the song , Cole 's people would have liked the song for her after all . The latter track by Cruz , " Stand Up " made it onto the final tracklist on Cole 's album . 
 However , according to the song 's other co @-@ writer Fraser T Smith in an interview with HitQuarters , " Break Your Heart " was rejected by Cole 's Polydor label boss Ferdy Unger @-@ Hamilton felt it was too similar to " Heartbreaker " by will.i.am , the executive producer of 3 Words . Smith also told This Must Be Pop : " Taio felt the lyric was a bit cocky for him to carry off – I told him he sounded great on it . " 
 Speaking of the song 's lyrical background , Cruz told Pete Lewis of Blues & Soul : 
 " Its about breaking a girl 's heart , but in a way that 's kinda not on purpose . It 's more that I 'm just a single guy , trying to be single and trying to remain single . And sometimes , when you are in that place , you get girls who wanna be a part of what you 're about – but , because you 're not really ready for a relationship , those girls can end up being heartbroken . So what I 'm basically saying is ' I might just break your heart . But I 'm only gonna break your heart if you come through this way right now ' . " 
 Cruz also has called his song " catchy " with a " good melody " and " fun topic " , stating that " both girls and guys can get into this character " . In an interview with Entertainment Weekly , Cruz elaborated and said the song was partially based on a personal situation , and rather an " exaggeration of an experience " . 
 The success of the song in the United Kingdom attracted the attention of David Massey and Daniel Werner from Mercury / Island Def Jam who were excited and aggressive about releasing " Break Your Heart " in the United States on their label . According to Cruz 's manager Jamie Binns , the relationship with Monte Lipman at Universal Republic had " gone a bit quiet " by this point and as Taio wanted to be with the label that was most enthusiastic about his music , a move from Universal Republic to Mercury / Island Def Jam was engineered . Massey and Werner 's belief in the single 's potential within the United States and relentless promotional push they gave it helped the song reach the Billboard Hot 100 top spot . 
 = = = Ludacris remix = = = 
 In addition to re @-@ working his album for an American release , Cruz tapped American rapper Ludacris on a remix for the American version of " Break Your Heart " . According to Cruz 's manager Jamie Binns , Mercury Records president David Massey had suggested that to introduce Cruz to the American market , the single should feature an American rapper with chart credibility . Massey and Mercury A & R manager Daniel Werner engineered an introduction with Ludacris ' manager Jeff Dixon , who then played the song to Ludacris , who loved the track and within a week his contribution was complete . 
 On collaborating with Ludacris , Cruz said , " With Ludacris , pretty much every track he 's ever featured on sounds amazing . I gave him a quick call and asked him if he could get on the record , and he recorded it and sent it over . As I expected , there was nothing I needed to change . It sounded perfect . He put my name in there , which is great – so people know to pronounce it now properly , hopefully . " The version featuring Ludacris was originally released digitally as the b @-@ side to " No Other One " in November 2009 , before in the United States in February 2010 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Break Your Heart " is an electropop song featuring a " surging dance @-@ pop " sound , accompanied with Cruz 's Auto @-@ Tuned R & B vocals . It is written in the key of E ♭ major described as a " medium dance groove " , and Cruz 's vocals span from B ♭ 4 to B ♭ 5 . According to Jason Draper of Yahoo ! Music UK , the song is a mix of European and American urban music . It includes several tempo changes , which have been compared to that of Jay Sean 's " Down " . The song is filled with boasting lyrics about being a heartbreaker rather than being heartbroken . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Although BBC Music called the song a " cheese @-@ fest " , the reviewer said " in a weird way it 's kind of beautiful " , investing in the " Ibiza @-@ inspired R & B trend " . The review also compared the song to Dizzee Rascal and Cruz 's " layered vocals " and " slick production " to OneRepublic and Timbaland 's " Apologize " . Michael Menachem of Billboard said that the " stateside version " turns up the heat with Ludacris ' feature as " Cruz 's breezy vocals on this electro @-@ pop number have all the warmth of smooth R & B , while producer Fraser T Smith sets up the right ratio of catchy vocals and tempo changes to make a hit " . Ash Dosanjh of New Musical Express said that Cruz 's downfall was when he acts the player , as on " Break Your Heart " and " Dirty Picture " . Caroline Sullivan of The Guardian said Cruz was " proficient but generic " in the song , but his " autotuned vocals could have been anyone 's , and this <unk> is a problem Cruz rarely surmounts . " Chris Ryan of MTV Buzzworthy said that the song " perfectly embodies Cruz 's infectious , dancefloor @-@ friendly sound and sleek , immaculate production " , and compares it to Jason Derülo and Akon . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Break Your Heart " debuted at number one in the United Kingdom becoming Cruz 's first song to reach the pole position in that territory . The song remained at the top of the chart for three weeks . The song also peaked at number one in Switzerland , and in the top ten in several other countries across Europe . 
 The song also charted at number two in Australia , while peaking at number one in the United States . With the jump from 53 to one on the Billboard Hot 100 , Cruz also set the record for largest jump to the top of the chart by a debut act . The record was previously held by American singer Kelly Clarkson , who jumped 52 to one with her American Idol coronation song , " A Moment Like This " , and who also holds the record for the biggest non @-@ debut jump on the chart , moving from 97 to one with " My Life Would Suck Without You " . It originally moved 31 @,@ 000 digital copies in the United States for a partial sales week prompting its original Hot 100 entry , and shifted 273 @,@ 000 downloads in its first full week of availability , claiming the top debut on Hot Digital Songs . It also marked Ludacris ' fifth number one song . 
 The song eventually dominated American airplay also , peaking at number one on the Mainstream Top 40 chart . Cruz became the twelfth male artist to have his first solo single peak at the top of the chart , and was the third since October 2008 , following Jay Sean and Jason Derulo . By August 2012 , " Break Your Heart " had sold 3 @,@ 712 @,@ 000 digital copies in the United States . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The original music video was filmed in <unk> , Spain in July 2009 , with new parts filmed in Miami , United States in February 2010 to include Ludacris , resulting in two versions of the video . 
 The video begins with Cruz and his girlfriend , played by Uzbekistan @-@ born supermodel Nadya <unk> , sitting together in a sports car near a pier . She tells him " You know I 'm just gonna hurt you . " Cruz responds by saying " You know I 'm only gonna break your heart , right ? " She says " You want a bet ? " and he says " Bring It On . " They then exit the car , walk down the pier and enter a nearby speedboat . Scenes are then shown in several different venues , including a club , a boat , a beachfront party , the speedboat and a hotel room . Throughout the video , Cruz is on escapades with different women . The video ends with Cruz 's girlfriend laughing at his attempts to break her heart and then the two get off the boat they are on and go back onto the speedboat . For the version with Ludacris , there are scenes with him and Cruz in a white concrete backdrop with a flashing light , as well as the two of them together with a large group of people in another club . 
 When asked if an old school Diddy was an influence on the video , Cruz said " Probably on some kind of subconscious level . I just love supermodels , I love sunshine , and I love sports cars . And this time we also added a speedboat . So you got the four S 's in there . " In an interview with Rap @-@ Up , when talking about the video portraying him as a heartbreaker , Cruz said " No , not really . I suppose maybe 20 % . It was more of just playing a character and having fun , just going out there and making a real cool , fun , cocky video . Not everyone has seen the whole plot of the video , but it 's actually myself and my girlfriend both going out with the intention of breaking everyone 's hearts . " 
 = = Covers and other uses = = 
 " Weird Al " Yankovic included the chorus in his polka medley " Polka Face " from his 2011 album Alpocalypse . Violinist Lindsey Stirling used the song to perform to in America 's Got Talent 
 = = Track listing = = 
 German CD single 
 " Break Your Heart " ( featuring Ludacris ) – 3 : 05 
 " Break Your Heart " ( The Wideboys Remix Radio Edit ) – 3 : 46 
 UK CD single 
 " Break Your Heart " – 3 : 23 
 " Break Your Heart " ( Vito Benito FF Radio Remix ) – 3 : 22 
 " Break Your Heart " ( Paul Thomas Remix ) – 7 : 41 
 " Break Your Heart " ( Cassette Club Remix ) – 7 : 22 
 Digital download 
 " Break Your Heart " – 3 : 23 
 " Break Your Heart " ( Paul Thomas Remix ) – 7 : 41 
 Digital download – EP 
 " Break Your Heart " ( Vito Benito FF Radio Remix ) – 3 : 22 
 " Break Your Heart " ( Cassette Club Remix ) – 7 : 22 
 " Break Your Heart " ( Agent X Remix ) – 4 : 27 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Songwriting – Taio Cruz Fraser T Smith , Chris Bridges 
 Producing – Taio Cruz , Fraser T Smith 
 Engineering – Beatriz <unk> 
 Mixing – Fraser T Smith 
 Mastering – Dick Beetham 
 Credits adapted from the album liner notes . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Max Pirkis = 
 Max Pirkis ( born 6 January 1989 ) is an English actor . Appearing in two productions during the mid @-@ 2000s , Pirkis made his film debut in Master and Commander : The Far Side of the World ( 2003 ) after the film crew recruited him at his school , Eton College . In a critically praised performance , he won the Evening Standard British Film Award for Most Promising Newcomer and the Young Artist Award for Best Young Actor in an International Film . Two years later , Pirkis was cast in the BBC / HBO television series Rome as Gaius Octavian , a role he held until 2007 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Pirkis was born in London on 6 January 1989 . His mother is a publisher , and he has a sister . After being educated at Eton College , Pirkis began attending St Catharine 's College , Cambridge , where he read Theology . There , he was captain of the college 's football team in 2009 . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Master and Commander = = = 
 Pirkis started his acting in school plays while attending Eton , though he never took them seriously . Although unsure what he wanted to do with his life , Pirkis was cast for his first professional role in 2003 , when he appeared in the successful film , Master and Commander : The Far Side of the World . The hire occurred after production staff visited Eton to hire boys for the ship 's teenage crew . Pirkis attended a workshop and auditions as " a joke " , ultimately securing the part of the 13 @-@ year @-@ old , eventually one @-@ armed midshipman Lord Blakeney of HMS Surprise . Director Peter Weir thought Pirkis " stood out very early on , but not to the extent that you see in the film . That was a complete surprise . " According to Pirkis , he was at first " nervous " about acting with Russell Crowe , but changed his mind when he realised that Crowe was " a pretty normal guy . " 
 One of four teenage actors chosen for the film , Pirkis began researching the history of the Royal Navy and the Napoleonic Wars to prepare himself for the role , before ultimately spending six months shooting the film . Weir soon discovered that Pirkis had " an old actor 's soul in his body , " and consequently gave him more acting challenges . Because his character loses an arm , Pirkis wore a prosthetic stump on set ; tucking his real arm to the side , he practised how to write and eat using only his left arm . Pirkis completed the amputation scene in two takes , thinking of the death of a family friend for inspiration . 
 Soon after being cast in Master and Commander , Pirkis was contracted to be represented by Hollywood talent agency <unk> . The income he earned for the film was placed into a bank , making him wait until he turned eighteen . For his role , Pirkis received critical acclaim and won the Evening Standard British Film Award for Most Promising Newcomer and the Young Artist Award for Best International Performance by a Young Actor at the 25th Young Artist Awards . Pirkis was also nominated for Best Performance by a Youth in a Lead or Supporting Role – Male at the 4th Phoenix Film Critics Society Awards . Jeremiah Kipp of Slant Magazine praised Pirkis , writing that he " makes a winning impression as midshipman Lord Blakeney , a pugnacious one @-@ armed lad who imitates the masculine bravado of Crowe and the bookish reserve of Bettany . " 
 = = = Rome = = = 
 In 2005 , Pirkis made his television debut . Until 2007 , Pirkis played Gaius Octavian ( later to become Caesar Augustus ) in the BBC / HBO television series Rome . Many critics highlighted Pirkis and his character for praise . At the beginning of the first season , The Washington Post columnist Tom Shales remarked : " Played both knowingly and innocently by Max Pirkis , he gives the audience something it desperately needs ... a character to root for , or at least care about . " During the second series , Pirkis was replaced by Simon Woods in order for the show to depict an older version of the character . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = Yasui v. United States = 
 Yasui v. United States , 320 U.S. 115 ( 1943 ) [ 1 ] was a United States Supreme Court case regarding the constitutionality of curfews used during World War II when they were applied to citizens of the United States . The case arose out of the implementation of Executive Order 9066 by the U.S. military to create zones of exclusion along the West Coast of the United States where Japanese @-@ Americans were subjected to curfews and eventual removal to relocation centers . This Presidential order followed the Japanese Attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941 that brought America into World War II and inflamed the existing anti @-@ Japanese sentiment in the country . 
 In their decision , the Supreme Court held that the application of curfews against citizens is constitutional . As a companion case to Hirabayashi v. United States , both decided on June 21 , 1943 , the court affirmed the conviction of U.S.-born Minoru Yasui . The court remanded the case to the district court for sentencing as the lower court had determined the curfew was not valid against citizens , but Yasui had forfeited his citizenship by working for the Japanese consulate . The Yasui and Hirabayashi decisions , along with the later Ex parte Endo and Korematsu v. United States decisions , determined the legality of the curfews and relocations during the war . In the 1980s , new information was used to vacate the conviction of Yasui . 
 = = Background = = 
 On September 1 , 1939 , Germany invaded neighboring Poland , starting World War II . After two years of combat neutrality , the United States was drawn into the war as an active participant after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7 , 1941 . U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt responded to fears of a fifth column composed of Japanese @-@ Americans by issuing Executive Order 9066 on February 19 , 1942 . This executive order authorized the military to create zones of exclusion , which were then used to relocate predominantly those of Japanese heritage from the West Coast to internment camps inland . On March 23 , 1942 , General John L. DeWitt , commander of the Western Defense Command , set restrictions on aliens and Japanese @-@ Americans including a curfew from 8 : 00 pm to 6 : 00 am . 
 Minoru Yasui was born in 1916 in Hood River , Oregon , where he graduated from high school in 1933 . He then graduated from the University of Oregon in 1937 , and that college ’ s law school in 1939 . Yasui , U.S. Army reservist , then began working at the Japanese Consulate in Chicago , Illinois , in 1940 , remaining there until December 8 , 1941 , when he then resigned and returned to Hood River . On March 28 , 1942 , he deliberately broke the military implemented curfew in Portland , Oregon , by walking around the downtown area and then presenting himself at a police station after 11 : 00 pm in order to test the curfew ’ s constitutionality . 
 On June 12 , 1942 , Judge James Alger Fee of the United States District Court for the District of Oregon began presiding over the non @-@ jury trial of Yasui , the first case challenging the curfew to make it to court . The trial was held at the Federal Courthouse in Portland . Fee determined in his ruling issued on November 16 , 1942 , that the curfew could only apply to aliens , as martial law had not been imposed by the government . However , he also ruled that because Yasui had worked for the Japanese government he had forfeited his citizenship , so that the curfew did apply to him . Fee sentenced Yasui to one year in jail , which was served at the Multnomah County Jail , and $ 5 @,@ 000 fine . This federal court decision with constitutional and war power issues made news around the country . 
 Yasui then appealed his conviction to the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit . After arguments in the case were filed , the court certified two question to the Supreme Court of the United States . The Supreme Court then ordered the entire case be decided by that court , removing the case from further consideration by the Ninth Circuit . 
 = = Decision = = 
 The Supreme Court heard arguments in the case on May 10 and May 11 , 1943 , with Charles Fahy arguing the case for the United States as Solicitor General . Min ’ s defense team included E. F. Bernard from Portland and A. L. Wirin from Los Angeles . On June 21 , 1943 , the court issued its decision in the case along with the Hirabayashi v. United States case . 
 Citing Hirabayashi , Chief Justice Stone wrote the opinion of the court , and determined that the curfew and exclusion orders were valid , even as applied to citizens of the United States . Stone ’ s opinion was three pages and did not contain any concurring opinions or dissents , while the Hirabayashi decision had thirty @-@ four pages and two concurring opinions . In Yasui the court affirmed his conviction of the misdemeanor , but ordered re @-@ sentencing since the lower court had determined that the curfew was not valid , and that Yasui had forfeited his citizenship . The Supreme Court remanded ( returned ) the case back to the district court to determine a sentence in light of these circumstances . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Once the case returned to Judge Fee , he revised his earlier opinion to strike out the ruling that Yasui was no longer a United States citizen . Fee also removed the fine and reduced the sentence to 15 days , with the time already served . Yasui was released and moved into the Japanese internment camps . 
 Korematsu v. United States was decided the next year and overshadowed both the Yasui and Hirabayashi cases . None of these cases have ever been overturned by the Supreme Court . The decisions were questioned by legal scholars even before the war had ended . Criticism has included the racist aspects of the cases and the later discovery that officials in the United States Department of Justice lied to the court at the time of the trial . 
 On February 1 , 1983 , Yasui petitioned the Oregon federal district court for a writ of error coram nobis due to the discovery of the falsehoods promulgated by the Department of Justice . This writ is only available to people who have already completed their imprisonment , and can only be used to challenge factual errors from the case . Yasui claimed in his writ that the government withheld evidence at the original trial concerning the threat of a Japanese attack on the United States mainland . The court dismissed the original indictment and conviction against Yasui , as well as the petition for the writ on request by the government . Yasui , then appealed the decision to dismiss the petition , but the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals dismissed the appeal on procedural grounds . However , the Ninth Circuit ultimately did vacate Hirabayashi 's conviction , thereby impliedly vindicating Yasui as well . In 2011 , the U.S. Solicitor General 's office publicly confessed the Justice Department 's 1943 ethical lapse in the Supreme Court . Minoru Yasui died on November 12 , 1986 . 
 Lawyers who represented Fred Korematsu , Gordon Hirabayashi , and Minoru Yasui in successful efforts in lower federal courts to nullify their convictions for violating military curfew and exclusion orders sent a letter dated January 13 , 2014 to Solicitor General Donald Verrilli Jr .. In light of the appeal proceedings before the U.S. Supreme in Hedges v. Obama , the lawyers asked <unk> to request the Supreme Court overrule its decisions in Korematsu ( 1943 ) , Hirabayashi ( 1943 ) and Yasui ( 1943 ) . If the Solicitor General should not make the request , the lawyers asked that the federal government to make clear the federal government " does not consider the internment decisions as valid precedent for governmental or military detention of individuals or groups without due process of law [ ... ] . " 
 = 2011 Giro d 'Italia = 
 The 2011 Giro d 'Italia was the 94th Giro d 'Italia , one of cycling 's Grand Tours . The race started on 7 May with a team time trial in Turin to celebrate the 150th anniversary of Italian unification , when the city served as the first capital of the single state . 
 The route was one of the most difficult in the modern history of the race , with substantial criticism that it was simply too hard for a three @-@ week @-@ long race . Of the seven stages categorized as ' high mountain ' , six had summit arrivals , highlighted by the three stages before the second rest day ending at Grossglockner in Austria , the exceptionally steep Monte Zoncolan , and a tall and steep peak near the <unk> Valley in Gardeccia . There was also , for the fifth consecutive Giro , a climbing time trial , this one to the <unk> . Of the race 's 18 mass @-@ start stages , only three ended with the majority of the field together at the front of the race . 
 In the third stage , Leopard Trek rider Wouter Weylandt crashed coming down the Passo del Bocco , near the town of <unk> , suffering catastrophic injury . Despite substantial resuscitation efforts , he was established to have died on the spot . The fourth stage was not competitively raced ; instead , it was run as a cycling procession . On the second rest day , Xavier Tondó , a member of Movistar Team , was killed in an accident at his home . Although he was not a participant , his death caused his teammates and other members of the peloton to pay tribute to him in the subsequent stages . 
 Strong overall favorite Alberto Contador was the race 's original winner , in what constituted his second Giro championship . His winning margin ahead of second @-@ placed Michele Scarponi was over six minutes . He also won the points competition as the most consistent high finisher , also with a substantial lead over Scarponi in second place , and Vincenzo Nibali completed the podium . In the other sub @-@ classifications , Stefano Garzelli won the mountains competition and Roman Kreuziger finished as the best rider aged 25 or under in the general classification ; he finished the race fifth overall . 
 In February 2012 , the Court of Arbitration for Sport decided that Contador , following his positive test for clenbuterol at the 2010 Tour de France , lost his results since that event . He was therefore stripped of the 2011 Giro title , and Scarponi became the new victor of the race , and the winner of the points classification . 
 = = Teams = = 
 All 18 UCI ProTeams were invited automatically and obligated to attend . Two UCI Professional Continental teams were announced well ahead of time , Androni Giocattoli and Farnese Vini – Neri Sottoli . UCI rules normally limit races to a peloton of 200 riders , but the Giro received special dispensation for a 207 @-@ rider peloton , allowing a 23rd team . The three additional invited teams were Acqua & Sapone , Colnago – CSF Inox , and Geox – TMC . Despite talk that ProTeam Vacansoleil – DCM might be excluded due to the doping scandals involving team members Riccardo Riccò and Ezequiel Mosquera , they were included pursuant to UCI rules . 
 The full list of participating teams is : 
 = = Pre @-@ race favorites = = 
 While the Giro had in its peloton many notable riders , including six former Grand Tour winners , the odds @-@ on favorite was always Saxo Bank – SunGard 's Alberto Contador . The 2008 Giro champion , who had likewise won the 2008 Vuelta a España and three editions of the Tour de France , announced in April 2010 that he would contest the Giro in 2011 . Though his status was put in doubt after a positive test for clenbuterol at the 2010 Tour de France , he was cleared by his national federation in February 2011 and able to return to racing , though the case still <unk> a final appeal to the Court of Arbitration for Sport later in 2011 . Contador was the overwhelming favorite for overall victory . Reigning Giro champion Ivan Basso chose not to return , preferring to focus on the Tour de France later in the season . He briefly considered riding as a domestique for Vincenzo Nibali , but opted against it because of his physical condition at the time and the feeling that doing so would be disrespectful to the race . The 2011 Giro was thus the third successive edition , and fourth in the last five , in which the reigning champion did not return to defend his championship . 
 The other five former Grand Tour winners in the field were Stefano Garzelli , Danilo Di Luca , Denis Menchov , Carlos Sastre , and Vincenzo Nibali . Of the five , only Menchov and Nibali were considered realistic overall contenders . Other riders named as contenders included Roman Kreuziger , riding as the leader of the Astana team and a protected rider in a Grand Tour for the first time in his career , 2010 Giro d 'Italia runner @-@ up David Arroyo , Lampre – ISD captain and 2010 Giro fourth @-@ place finisher Michele Scarponi , and Joaquim Rodríguez . Riders further noted as <unk> included Sastre , Contador 's teammate and main support rider Richie Porte , Di Luca , Euskaltel – Euskadi 's Igor Antón , Garzelli , Domenico Pozzovivo , Italian national champion Giovanni Visconti , and Team RadioShack 's dual leaders Tiago Machado and Yaroslav Popovych . Visconti was given the irregular race number of 150 , wearing it as the Italian national champion to commemorate 150 years of Italian unification . While squads are normally given numbers from the same group of ten , such as 151 through 159 , numbers ending in zero are seldom issued . Visconti 's Farnese Vini – Neri Sottoli squad wore numbers 150 through 158 . 
 The ongoing Mantova doping investigation , involving members of the Lampre – NGC team , as it was known in 2009 , had an effect on the race . It greatly affected the Lampre – ISD team itself , as their manager Giuseppe Saronni was implicated in the investigation and stepped down as team manager shortly before the Giro began . He was replaced by former Omega Pharma – Lotto sporting director Roberto Damiani . Their contingent for the Giro specifically excluded any riders or staff implicated in the investigation . The foremost of these riders was former Giro winner Damiano Cunego , though Damiani felt he would eventually be cleared of any wrongdoing . While the BMC Racing Team was unlikely to field an overall favorite , given that their top man Cadel Evans chose to focus on the Tour de France , they were also affected by the investigation , for the second year in a row . Just as they had before the 2010 Giro , the team suspended Alessandro Ballan and Mauro Santambrogio , members of the Lampre – NGC team in 2009 who were named in the investigation . As with 2010 , the team reactivated the two riders after the Giro ended . 
 The near total dearth of flat , sprinter @-@ friendly stages did not stop sprinters Mark Cavendish , Tyler Farrar , and Alessandro Petacchi , from all taking the start . One sprinter who was expected to take part in the race , Farnese Vini – Neri Sottoli 's Andrea Guardini , was not part of the start list . Though his sporting director at the Presidential Cycling Tour of Turkey had promised him a place in the Giro should he win two stages at that event ( Guardini did indeed win two stages in Turkey ) , the team believed he would be better served continuing to take part in somewhat smaller races . Other sprinters in the Giro peloton mainly came from much smaller teams and teams with little overall ambition . Quick @-@ Step and Team RadioShack sent two sprinters apiece — Gerald Ciolek and Francesco <unk> for the Belgian team and Robbie Hunter and Robbie McEwen on the American squad . Giro debutants Vacansoleil – DCM had among their squad Slovenian sprinter Borut Božič . Movistar Team 's sprinter was Francisco Ventoso , one of the season 's most prolific winners to date . The small Androni Giocattoli and Colnago – CSF Inox also sent sprinters , Roberto Ferrari and 2010 Giro stage winner Manuel Belletti , respectively . The Leopard Trek team had intended to send Daniele Bennati , a former winner of the points classification in the Giro d 'Italia who had had great success at the recently run Circuit de la Sarthe . After a crash at the Tour de Romandie where he sustained multiple fractures and a lung contusion , he was forced out of the Giro . That squad therefore turned their sprinting hopes to the rider originally set to be Bennati 's leadout man , Belgian sprinter Wouter Weylandt . 
 = = Route and stages = = 
 The route for the 2011 Giro was unveiled in Turin on 23 October 2010 . It was immediately recognized as being quite difficult , featuring 40 categorized climbs among its 18 mass @-@ start stages , seven of them summit finishes . Seventeen of the 20 regions of Italy were visited in the race , as the 2011 race commemorated the 150th anniversary of the unification of Italy . Attention was immediately drawn to the three stages preceding the second rest day , stages 13 , 14 , and 15 , each of which featured summit finishes and multiple high @-@ rated climbs , among them the Grossglockner , Monte Zoncolan , and the Passo <unk> , this Giro 's Cima Coppi , its tallest climb . The route as it was originally announced was 3 @,@ 496 km ( 2 @,@ 172 mi ) in length , just 4 km ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) shy of the maximum length allowed under UCI regulations . The first summit finish was Mount Etna , which the peloton was faced with twice in stage 9 . The final major climb was the Colle delle Finestre , which made its return after last featuring in the 2005 Giro d 'Italia . While there were five stages classified as flat , and Italian sprinter Alessandro Petacchi claimed he saw as many as seven potential sprint finishes , consensus was overwhelming that the majority of the route favored the strongest of the climbers at the expense of other riders . 
 While the route did get some positive critiques , there was also critical opinion that it was simply too difficult . This was particularly in comparison with the similarly difficult , yet not as difficult , route for the 2011 Tour de France revealed days earlier . Team Sky sporting director Sean Yates called the route " brutal " and said that serious Tour de France contenders would not bother coming to the race since it was so difficult . This was seen as an early indication that his team 's leader Bradley Wiggins would skip the Giro . Additional critical analysis concurred that the route was excessively difficult , for its incredible amount of vertical climbing ( 409 km ( 254 mi ) in the route as originally announced ) , number of summit finishes and long transfers , and the unpaved or ' white roads ' which featured in stages 5 and 20 . Race director Angelo Zomegnan balked at the criticisms , saying simply " It 's a hard Giro but the Giro has to be hard . " 
 Two stages in the second half of the Giro had their courses altered shortly before they were run . The more notable was stage 14 , which had been hyped as the début of the Monte Crostis in the Giro d 'Italia . <unk> from the UCI mandated it be removed the night before stage 14 was run . The Crostis is not a well @-@ maintained pass , and Giro officials had set out a detailed protocol whereby team cars would not follow the race up or down the mountain , and only motorbikes offering wheel changes would be present with the riders . Team managers expressed concern that they would not fully be able to fulfill their duties if not present with the riders like normal , and this was given as the basis of the UCI 's decision . They held that Giro organizers had sufficiently ensured rider safety on the course , but the necessary protocols did not protect the sporting aspect of the race . Thus , the Crostis was eliminated , and the stage was reduced in length from its originally planned length of 210 km ( 130 mi ) . The second @-@ category Tualis climb was added to the route for the day to offset the loss of the Crostis . However , protests from spectators disappointed by the removal of the Crostis part of the route , including many who had volunteered for works to make parts of that road safe , led to the cancellation of the Tualis climb . The route was diverted while the stage was in progress to avoid a small village at the foot of the Tualis where protesters had gathered . Therefore , the exact distance of this stage , and likewise of the entire Giro , is unknown . The Giro 's last stage , an individual time trial in Milan , was also shortened . The course was shortened by 5 @.@ 5 km ( 3 @.@ 4 mi ) four days before the stage took place , due to a special election taking place in Milan the same day as the stage . City officials expected high voter turnout and did not want the city center tied up by the race all day , so the revised route began at the outskirts of Milan instead of its center . It still ended , per its original design , at the Duomo di Milano . 
 In spite of first @-@ hand criticism from riders following the race that the route was excessively difficult and dangerous , Zomegnan remained staunch in his defense of the route . 
 = = Race overview = = 
 The Giro began with a team time trial in the city that served as Italy 's first federal capital , Turin . The HTC – Highroad squad won this stage , making their rider Marco Pinotti the first wearer of the race leader 's pink jersey . That team 's focus the next day was not to defend Pinotti 's race lead , but to try to deliver their star sprinter Mark Cavendish to the victory , which would have the indirect effect of him overtaking Pinotti for the pink jersey . Cavendish indeed became the new race leader , but after an awkward final sprint it was not he but Italian Alessandro Petacchi who won the day . David Millar then became the third race leader in as many days when he finished with a breakaway group that was 21 seconds the better of the main field in stage 3 , though this result was overshadowed by the death of Wouter Weylandt earlier in the stage . 
 The peloton chose not to run stage four competitively following Weylandt 's death ; instead the stage was ridden as a procession in his memory . The remaining members of his team Leopard Trek , as well as training partner Tyler Farrar from the Garmin – Cervélo squad , crossed the finish line first with their arms around one another before withdrawing from the race that evening . Stage 5 was held on the dirt roads of Tuscany , which had provided for one of the more spectacular stages in the 2010 Giro d 'Italia . Dutch rider Pieter Weening won the stage with an 8 @-@ second time gap against the field . That , coupled with the 20 @-@ second time bonus for winning the day , gave him the pink jersey . There was some stability in the overall standings at this point , as the race 's top riders finished together , or nearly so , in the next three stages . 
 Stage 9 was the first major mountain stage , featuring two ascents of Mount Etna , including a summit finish . It was on this day that strong overall favorite Alberto Contador first seized control of the race . Just after Androni Giocattoli 's José Rujano attacked out of the leading group on the road on the way up to Etna for the last time , Contador did likewise . Rujano struggled mightily to hold Contador 's wheel and no one else came close to reaching the pair . Contador won the stage , his first Giro stage win despite having won the Italian Grand Tour in 2008 , and immediately attained a minute 's advantage in the overall classification . In his five previous Grand Tour wins , Contador had never lost the race lead after taking it , but he had also never taken it so early on in the race . As teams who have riders with a legitimate chance to win a race overall will generally try to avoid defending the lead for too many days , lest they tire their support riders out early and leave their leader vulnerable , there was speculation that Contador would tactically relinquish the jersey . The Spaniard himself hinted that such a move would be in his plans . This would be likeliest to happen in the heavily undulating stage 11 . The breakaway group for this stage was hard @-@ fought and late @-@ forming , since someone from its number could potentially become the new race leader . While Garmin – Cervélo 's Christophe Le Mével , who entered the day third overall and had on two other occasions come within a time bonus of claiming the jersey , made the group , neither he nor anyone in it was destined to take pink . Largely under the impetus of Michele Scarponi 's Lampre – ISD team , the breakaway group was caught before the finish . Contador and the rest of the overall favorites finished at the front of the race , with riders well down in the standings claiming the time bonuses , meaning Contador retained the race leadership after all . 
 Contador took the most time against the main field out of any day in stage 13 . On this day , which ended at the Grossglockner in Austria , he and Rujano again finished well ahead of the main field . As they approached the finish line , Contador did not attempt to sprint for the win , allowing Rujano to take it . Their minute and a half time gap , plus the time bonus for second place , gave Contador a lead of over three minutes in the overall standings . Only in the 2009 Tour de France had he ever held a larger lead . The next two days were extremely difficult high mountain stages , both won by members of the Euskaltel – Euskadi team . Contador finished the best of any rider in the top five overall on both days , and so further padded his advantage . Wearing a black armband to memorialize fellow Spanish cyclist Xavier Tondó who , though not a participant in the race , died while it was run , Contador dominantly won the stage 16 uphill individual time trial . This result put him nearly five minutes clear of the next @-@ best rider , the largest such advantage he had ever held in any race . In stage 19 , Contador again finished with another rider ahead of the main field . This time it was Astana 's Paolo Tiralongo , a former teammate of Contador 's . Just as he had with Rujano earlier , Contador appeared to allow his companion a stage win he could have easily taken himself . Contador later commented that the victory , the first of Tiralongo 's 12 @-@ year career , was meant as a gesture of thanks to the Italian for all the support riding he did for him in 2010 when the two were on the same squad . Although Contador claimed that he was not going to give his strongest effort in the stage 21 individual time trial , the Giro 's final stage , his ride was still good enough for third place , extending his winning margin to over six minutes , giving him his sixth and statistically most dominant Grand Tour championship . Contador 's two stage wins and numerous top five placings also made him the winner of the points competition , by a substantial margin . Michele Scarponi and Vincenzo Nibali completed the podium , in that order , having targeted one another once it became obvious that Contador 's advantage was insurmountable . Nibali held second place on stages 13 and 14 , but Scarponi overtook him on Gardeccia , finishing a minute and a half better ( only six seconds the lesser of Contador ) , and never relinquished second place . Stefano Garzelli was in the breakaway on the Gardeccia stage and took maximum points on three of the day 's five climbs , and second place points on the other two . It was largely thanks to this performance that he won the mountains classification at the end of the race . Roman Kreuziger , still eligible by a matter of months , won the youth competition with his ride to sixth place overall . 
 On the whole , success proved to be fairly widespread . As did Contador , Cavendish won two stages , stages 10 and 12 , but prior to Cavendish 's second victory no team , let alone individual rider , had won two individual stages . Four other teams – Androni Giocattoli , Euskaltel – Euskadi , Lampre – ISD , and Movistar Team – eventually repeated as stage winners . Androni Giocattoli won the ill @-@ fated stage 3 with Ángel <unk> and later stage 13 with Rujano . Euskaltel – Euskadi 's wins came on the two most difficult stages in the race , the back @-@ to @-@ back high mountain stages that preceded the second rest day . Their leader Igor Antón won the controversy @-@ laden day ending at Monte Zoncolan , when the Monte Crostis climb was removed from the route . The next day , Mikel Nieve won the stage that Contador described as the hardest of his life , a seven @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ hour day with five high climbs ending at Gardeccia . Following Petacchi 's win in the contentious sprint that finished the first road stage , the Lampre – ISD team took another stage win with young Diego Ulissi in stage 17 , after another contentious sprint in which Italian national champion Giovanni Visconti actually crossed the line first but was relegated to third for shoving Ulissi . The Movistar Team had winners in stage 6 with Francisco Ventoso on an uphill sprint and in the Giro 's last road race stage with Vasil Kiryienka in a solo breakaway that finished almost five minutes better than the rest of the field . Rabobank , Omega Pharma – Lotto , Farnese Vini – Neri Sottoli , Ag2r – La Mondiale , Liquigas – Cannondale , Astana , and Garmin – Cervélo each won a single stage . With Acqua & Sapone 's Garzelli claiming the mountains classification and Yaroslav Popovych from Team RadioShack the Trofeo Fuga Pinarello , 15 of the 22 teams that completed the race came away with some sort of victory . 
 Much like had occurred at the final podium celebrations for the 2009 Tour de France , the wrong national anthem was played for Contador . Race organizers mistakenly played an old Spanish anthem with lyrics favored by former Spanish dictator Francisco Franco . The Spanish national anthem as it should have been played would have been purely instrumental . 
 = = = Death of Wouter Weylandt = = = 
 During the descent of the Passo del Bocco in stage 3 , Leopard Trek rider Wouter Weylandt crashed and suffered catastrophic injury . Race doctor Giovanni Tredici , and the doctor for the Garmin – Cervélo team were in cars very near Weylandt 's group on the road , and administered cardiopulmonary resuscitation for approximately 40 minutes . Doctors also gave Weylandt adrenaline and atropine to try to restart his heart , though Tredici stated that resuscitation efforts were rather clearly in vain , and that Weylandt was already dead by the time they got to him . Doctors were never able to revive Weylandt , and he was declared dead on the spot . A short time later , Weylandt 's body was airlifted off the descent and taken to a nearby hospital , where the pathologist conducting the autopsy concluded that the Belgian had died immediately upon crashing . Weylandt 's death was the first at the Giro in 25 years , and the first at one of cycling 's Grand Tours since Fabio <unk> died during the 1995 Tour de France . 
 Manuel Antonio Cardoso of Team RadioShack had been nearest to Weylandt when he crashed , and stated that Weylandt had touched a small retaining wall on the left side of the road with either his pedal or his handlebars , and was then catapulted across the road to the other side , where he again collided with something . He had looked behind him to ascertain his exact position in the race when he clipped the wall . Teammate Tom Stamsnijder also witnessed the accident , saying " it was a very hard fall . " Italian police , conducting an inquest into Weylandt 's death , also took an official statement from the Portuguese rider at Team RadioShack 's hotel . A memorial was placed at the crash site , where Weylandt 's pregnant girlfriend and his mother , along with cyclists , passersby and residents of nearby villages , placed flowers . The Leopard Trek team remained in the race for another day at the encouragement of Weylandt 's family . David Millar , who had taken the race lead that same day , spent the evening discussing with members of Leopard Trek , Weylandt 's best friend Tyler Farrar , and his girlfriend and mother how best to pay tribute to the fallen rider . 
 Race director Angelo Zomegnan said in a post @-@ stage press conference that race officials would respect whatever decision the peloton made regarding the next day 's stage . As usually occurs when a rider dies in the midst of a multi @-@ day cycling event , the next day was not competitively raced . Instead , the stage was preceded by a minute 's silence , and ridden as a procession in Weylandt 's memory . Each of the 23 teams took to the front of the peloton for about 15 minutes , and members of Leopard Trek , along with Farrar , were allowed to finish first with their arms around each other . Millar led the rest of the field across the line a few seconds later . No results for the stage were recorded , and it did not count towards the general classification or any of the points competitions . After the stage , instead of any podium presentations , the four jersey classification leaders ( Millar , Alessandro Petacchi , Gianluca Brambilla , and Jan Bakelants ) appeared on stage with the Leopard Trek team to lead another moment of silence . Subsequently , Farrar and the remaining Leopard Trek squad all decided to leave the race . Farrar later revealed that his inclusion with the Leopard Trek squad in the final moments of the neutralized stage was a decision made solely on their part , one for which he felt extremely grateful . 
 A moment of silence was also held for Weylandt before stage 11 , as his funeral took place the same day . Pieter Weening also gave the first pink jersey to be presented to him on the podium to Weylandt 's surviving family , and stage 11 winner John Gadret stated that he had had Weylandt in his thoughts as he crossed the line and dedicated his win to him , even though the two were not well acquainted . 
 = = = Death of Xavier Tondó = = = 
 On 23 May , during the second rest day of the Giro , Xavier Tondó , the reigning Vuelta a Castilla y León champion and one of the leaders on the season for the Movistar Team , was killed in a freak accident at home while preparing to train with teammates . He was reportedly crushed between his car and a garage door . 
 Despite not taking part in this edition of the Giro , Tondó had taken part in the 2010 edition and was a popular , well @-@ liked rider . Race leader and eventual winner Alberto Contador , along with many others , rode the stage 16 individual time trial with black armbands . The stage was preceded by a minute of silence . Tondó 's teammate <unk> <unk> posted a time that was provisionally best much of the day and was visibly overcome with emotion when interviewed by assembled media after his ride . Contador , who won the time trial , dedicated the victory to Tondó , as the two were acquainted despite never having been teammates . 
 Five days later , teammate and close friend Vasil Kiryienka rode to victory in a solo effort , and he too dedicated the stage victory to Tondó , pointing skyward as he crossed the finish line . The team had met to consider withdrawing from the race after Tondó 's death , but instead the riders unanimously voted to ride on . Kiryienka commented that the squad at the Giro hoped to get a further stage win ( as Francisco Ventoso 's win had come before Tondó 's death ) to honor him , while other members of the team grieved with Tondó 's family . In the final days of the race , many fans wrote signs memorializing Tondó as they had with Weylandt earlier on . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 Immediately after Weylandt 's death , Giro officials announced that they would not issue his dossard number 108 in future editions of the race . His number was a prominent part of signs held by fans on the roadside at not just the Giro but other events later in the season as well , including the Tour of California where his death was part of the reason the first stage of that race was canceled due to safety concerns . Many other races , mostly those held in Weylandt 's native Belgium , also began the practice of not issuing the number . The Belgian federation criticized this gesture , saying it would not bring Weylandt back and would only serve to continually remind fans and those in the sport of Weylandt 's death . They issued the number for the Belgian national road race championships . 
 About a month after the race concluded , reports began surfacing which stated that Giro director Angelo Zomegnan was going to be ousted from that position . Though praised for his delicate handling of Weylandt 's death , Zomegnan 's handling of the teams ' protest of and eventual removal of the Monte Crostis from the Giro race route was seen much less approvingly . A further month later , RCS Sport , owners of the race , confirmed that Zomegnan had been removed from his largely autocratic position as race director . He was replaced by RCS general director Michele <unk> and Mauro <unk> , along with a team of former professional riders . Zomegnan remains as an RCS consultant and director of the 2013 UCI Road World Championships in Florence . Zomegnan had held the position since 2004 , beginning with the 2005 Giro d 'Italia . 
 Along with the new organizational team came a certain measure of fan involvement in the direction of the 2012 Giro d 'Italia . Fans of the race were able to vote on its official Facebook page for two climbs , from an initial pool of 64 , to appear in the race . After several rounds of voting , the Passo dello Stelvio and the Passo del Mortirolo were chosen . They were later announced to be part of the same stage for the 2012 Giro . Fans were also given the opportunity to choose from among three prototypes for the design of the pink jersey in the 2012 Giro . Fans could also participate in a promotion called " Tweet Your <unk> Rosa " where they would submit 140 @-@ character or fewer Twitter messages describing what the pink jersey means to them . They were set to be printed on the jersey along with tweets from Ivan Basso , Cadel Evans , Alberto Contador , and Vincenzo Nibali , in the respective riders ' native languages . Ten tweets – six to be printed in Italian , two in English , and one each in Spanish and French – were eventually chosen by fan voting . 
 = = Contador 's results stripped = = 
 Alberto Contador rode the Giro with full knowledge that he was to answer to the Court of Arbitration for Sport ( CAS ) regarding his positive test for clenbuterol at the 2010 Tour de France , since his national federation cleared him of doping charges but both the UCI and the World Anti @-@ Doping Agency ( WADA ) chose to appeal the ruling . He rode and won with the most dominant Grand Tour performance of his career , and later rode a relatively normal and full 2011 season as his CAS date was continually pushed back . It was originally scheduled for June , to occur soon enough to decide conclusively his status prior to the 2011 Tour de France , but it was instead pushed back to August and then again to November . 
 The hearing was at last held in November , with a verdict expected in January 2012 . This , however , was also subject to a delay . Finally , on 6 February 2012 , the court spoke , overturning the Spanish federation 's decision to clear Contador and assessing the rider a backdated two @-@ year ban , from the date of his adverse test at the 2010 Tour de France . The backdated ban meant any results obtained from the time of that test to the time the court announced its verdict were to be vacated and awarded in turn to previously second @-@ placed riders . This effectively made Michele Scarponi the new Giro champion and points winner , and it made José Rujano and Vincenzo Nibali into stage winners in this Giro . The decision was reminiscent of that handed down in the Alessandro Petacchi case from the 2007 Giro d 'Italia . The court 's ruling opinion was that the minute amount of clenbuterol found was probably not caused by a doping regimen , but that strict liability rules meant that Contador had nonetheless violated WADA 's World Anti @-@ Doping Code . The court held that the adverse finding itself was never in doubt , but merely how the substance had entered the athlete 's body . This was not a matter under which they could exonerate him . 
 Reaction to the decision , and to the protracted nature of the case itself , was widespread and negative . Five @-@ time Giro winner Eddy Merckx expressed surprise at the result and disappointment that it could further sully the sport 's image , saying " It 's like someone wants to kill cycling . " Since @-@ ousted race director Angelo Zomegnan called the decision to strip the Giro championship " nonsense , " noting that Contador was permitted to ride at the time and there were no irregularities of any kind during the race . His successor Michele <unk> was also upset by the decision , believing that damage had been done to the Giro and noting that RCS Sport would need to commission a new trophy to award to Scarponi . 
 Scarponi , as well as John Gadret , the rider elevated onto the podium now in third place overall , both expressed sympathy for Contador and the feeling that being awarded these prestigious results in a court of law nearly a year after the race concluded kept them from feeling as good as they would were they attained on the road . Both Scarponi 's overall championship and Gadret 's podium finish constituted the first such results for either of them in a Grand Tour . Gadret , who had supported Contador 's presence in the Giro peloton when the race began , reconsidered his position in hindsight , saying the Spaniard 's attendance irrevocably changed the race . Further reactions from other personalities within the sport toward the ruling and the case itself were near universally negative . WADA celebrated the decision , calling the court " robust and thorough " in its jurisprudence of the World @-@ Anti Doping Code . 
 = = Classification leadership = = 
 In the 2011 Giro d 'Italia , four different jerseys were awarded . For the general classification , calculated by adding each cyclist 's finishing times on each stage , and allowing time bonuses for the first three finishers on mass @-@ start stages , the leader received a pink jersey . This classification was considered the most important of the Giro d 'Italia , and the winner was considered the winner of the Giro . 
 Additionally , there was a points classification , which awarded a red jersey . In the points classification , cyclists got points for finishing in the top 15 in a stage . Unlike in the better known points classification in the Tour de France , the type of stage had no effect on what points were on offer – each stage had the same points available on the same scale . The win earned 25 points , second place earned 20 points , third 16 , fourth 14 , fifth 12 , sixth 10 , and one point fewer per place down to a single point for 15th . In addition , points could be won in intermediate sprints . 
 There was also a mountains classification , the leadership of which was marked by a green jersey . In the mountains classifications , points were won by reaching the top of a climb before other cyclists . Each climb was categorized as either first , second , third , or fourth @-@ category , with more points available for the higher @-@ categorized climbs . The Cima Coppi , the race 's highest point of elevation , awarded still more points than the other first @-@ category climbs . 
 The fourth jersey represented the young rider classification , marked by a white jersey . This was decided the same way as the general classification , but only riders born after 1 January 1986 were eligible . 
 There were also three classifications for teams . In the Trofeo Fast Team classification , the times of the best three cyclists per team on each stage were added ; the leading team was the team with the lowest total time ; the Trofeo Super Team was a team points classification , with the top 20 placed riders on each stage earning points ( 20 for first place , 19 for second place and so on , down to a single point for 20th ) for their team ; and the Fair Play classification rewarded those teams that best avoided penalty points for minor technical infringements . 
 The rows in the following table correspond to the jerseys awarded after that stage was run , and shows to whom each jersey would have been awarded each day had Alberto Contador been removed from the standings as the race was ongoing . 
 = = Final standings = = 
 = = = Minor classifications = = = 
 Other less well @-@ known classifications , whose leaders did not receive a special jersey , were awarded during the Giro . These awards were based on points earned throughout the three weeks of the tour . Each mass @-@ start stage had one intermediate sprint , the Traguardo Volante , or T.V. The T.V. gave bonus seconds towards the general classification , points towards the regular points classification , and also points towards the T.V. classification . This award was known by various names in previous years , and was previously time @-@ based . It was won by Jan Bakelants of the Omega Pharma – Lotto team . 
 Other awards included the Combativity classification , which was a compilation of points gained for position on crossing intermediate sprints , mountain passes and stage finishes . Original general classification winner Alberto Contador won this award at the race 's conclusion ; upon his disqualification it passed to mountains category winner Stefano Garzelli . The Azzurri d 'Italia classification was based on finishing order , but points were awarded only to the top three finishers in each stage . It was originally won , like the closely associated points classification , by Contador , and passed to José Rujano when the Spaniard 's results were stripped . Additionally , the Trofeo Fuga Pinarello rewarded riders who took part in a breakaway at the head of the field , each rider in an escape of ten or fewer riders getting one point for each kilometre that the group stayed clear . Team RadioShack 's Yaroslav Popovych was first in this competition . Teams were given penalty points for minor technical infringements . Six different teams – Liquigas – Cannondale , Androni Giocattoli , HTC – Highroad , Quick @-@ Step , BMC Racing Team , and Colnago – CSF Inox – avoided incurring penalties over the course of the race , and so shared in winning the Fair Play classification . 
 = = = World Rankings points = = = 
 The Giro was one of 27 events throughout the season that contributed points towards the 2011 UCI World Tour . Points were awarded to the top 20 finishers overall , and to the top five finishers in each stage . In early 2012 , the points earned by Contador for overall placing were redistributed , and those gained for stage finishes were removed . Riders from non @-@ World Tour teams , who were not initially allocated points , received them . [ 1 ] [ 2 ] 
 = 2008 American League Central tie @-@ breaker game = 
 The 2008 American League Central tie @-@ breaker game was a one @-@ game extension to Major League Baseball 's ( MLB ) 2008 regular season , played between the Chicago White Sox and Minnesota Twins to determine the champion of the American League 's ( AL ) Central Division . It was played at US Cellular Field in Chicago , Illinois , on September 30 , 2008 . The White Sox won the game , 1 – 0 , on a home run by Jim Thome , the lowest @-@ scoring game in MLB tie @-@ breaker history . The Sox advanced to the 2008 AL Division Series , where they lost to the Tampa Bay Rays , three games to one ; the Twins failed to qualify for the postseason . 
 The game was necessary after both teams finished the season with identical win – loss records of 88 – 74 . The White Sox won a coin flip late in the season which , by rule , awarded them home field in the game . In baseball statistics , the tie @-@ breaker counted as the 163rd regular season game by both teams , with all events in the game added to regular season statistics . 
 = = Background = = 
 Prior to the start of the season , the Detroit Tigers and Cleveland Indians , the division 's top two finishers in the previous season , were predicted to be the strongest teams by journalists such as Tom Verducci of ESPN and Joe Sheehan of Baseball Prospectus . However , the Indians lineup was weakened by injuries and spent just 13 days of the season in the division lead , last on May 17 . The Tigers never led the AL Central and finished the season in last place , 14 games back . 
 The White Sox led for most of the season starting with a tie for first on May 17 , held at least a share of the lead for 154 days , and never dropped more than a game behind the leader . The Twins spent much of the season in second place behind the White Sox , along with 54 days in the lead . Despite going 11 – 15 in September , the Twins took a half @-@ game lead with an extra innings win over the White Sox on September 25 that capped a three @-@ game sweep of Chicago . The Twins maintained that lead through their final game , forcing Chicago to play a make @-@ up on September 29 against the Tigers which had been rained out earlier that month . The White Sox won , 8 – 2 , leaving the Sox and Twins tied atop the AL Central with 88 – 74 records , forcing a tie @-@ breaker to decide the division . Tickets for the tie @-@ breaker sold out within an hour of the end of the September 29 game . 
 The White Sox won the right to play at U.S. Cellular Field , their home field , as a result of a coin flip earlier in September . Fans were encouraged to wear all @-@ black clothing to show support for the White Sox . The game was broadcast on TBS . The White Sox used John Danks on three days rest as their starter , and the Twins started Nick Blackburn . 
 = = Game summary = = 
 Box score for " Blackout Day " on Tuesday September 30 , 2008 — 6 : 37 p.m. ( CT ) at US Cellular Field in Chicago , Illinois 
 Both Blackburn and Danks held the game scoreless early on , allowing only six baserunners through the first four innings of the game . The Twins ' Michael Cuddyer led off the top of the fifth with a double , the only Twins runner in scoring position for the entire game . Danks induced a deep flyball out from Delmon Young , which allowed Cuddyer to advance to third . Brendan Harris hit a deep flyball to center field which was caught for an out by Ken Griffey , Jr . Cuddyer tried to score on the ball as a sacrifice fly , but Griffey delivered an accurate throw to home plate and White Sox catcher A. J. Pierzynski blocked the plate and tagged out Cuddyer to end the inning . This play drew praise after the game as a " nice throw " and a " defensive gem " . 
 The only run of the game scored when White Sox designated hitter Jim Thome led off the bottom of the seventh inning with a solo home run . Blackburn got Paul Konerko to ground out , but allowed a double to Griffey and , following an intentional walk to Alexei Ramírez , José Mijares relieved him . John Danks lasted through eight innings without allowing a run and was relieved by closer Bobby Jenks in the ninth . Jenks recorded three outs , securing the White Sox ' 1 – 0 victory with his 30th save of the season . Twins batters Joe Mauer , Justin Morneau , and Cuddyer had a combined 22 hits in 40 at @-@ bats ( .550 batting average ) against Danks for their careers but in the tie @-@ breaker they combined to go 1 – for @-@ 9 ( <unk> ) with 3 strikeouts . This game saw the lowest combined score of any tie @-@ breaker game in MLB history , three runs lower than the 3 – 1 score of the first game of the 1951 National League tie @-@ breaker series . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 With the victory , the White Sox earned their first playoff berth since their win in the 2005 World Series . However , they lost to the eventual pennant @-@ winning Tampa Bay Rays , three games to one . Statistically , the game counted as the 163rd regular season game . Thome 's home run , for example , was his 34th of the season . This total brought him a tie for fourth most in the league . Danks lowered his earned run average from 3 @.@ 47 to 3 @.@ 32 in the game , which moved him from a tie for tenth @-@ best in the league with Zack Greinke to fifth place . Mauer , Morneau , and White Sox outfielder Carlos Quentin won Silver Slugger Awards for their offensive performances in the 2008 regular season . Mauer also won a Rawlings Gold Glove Award that year . This was the last tie @-@ breaker with home field determined by a coin flip . Following the 2008 season MLB amended their rules , leaving future tie @-@ breaker sites to be determined on a series of performance @-@ based criteria beginning with the head @-@ to @-@ head record between the teams . 
 = U.S. Route 1 Business ( Trenton , New Jersey ) = 
 U.S. Route 1 Business ( US 1 Bus . ) is a four @-@ lane surface road that provides an alternate route to the Trenton Freeway ( US 1 ) northeast of Trenton in Mercer County , New Jersey . The route is 2 @.@ 73 mi ( 4 @.@ 39 km ) long and runs between US 1 in Trenton and Lawrence Township . On the border of Trenton and Lawrence Township , US 1 Bus. intersects the northbound direction of US 206 at the Brunswick Circle . The route was once part of a longer U.S. Route 1 Alternate ( US 1 Alt . ) , which continued southwest through downtown Trenton and into Morrisville , Pennsylvania . 
 The old US 1 Alt. in Trenton is now signed by the New Jersey Department of Transportation as part of US 1 Bus . , despite not being officially recognized as such . Signage in Pennsylvania no longer exists ; most of the former US 1 Alternate is now part of Pennsylvania Route 32 ( PA 32 ) . US 1 Alt. was created in 1953 after US 1 was moved to a freeway between Morrisville and the Brunswick Circle . By the 1980s , when the Trenton Freeway was extended to its current terminus , US 1 Bus. was created onto its current alignment and US 1 Alt. was removed through Trenton and Morrisville . 
 = = Route description = = 
 US 1 Bus. begins at a split from the median of the US 1 freeway in Trenton , having access to and from the south along US 1 . The road heads north as a four @-@ lane divided highway before making a turn to the northwest . The route becomes four @-@ lane undivided Strawberry Street and passes through residential areas . At the border of Lawrence Township and Trenton , the road enters the Brunswick Circle , where it junctions with northbound US 206 and CR 645 . At the circle , the route turns northeast onto a four @-@ lane divided highway known locally as Brunswick Pike ( originally the Trenton @-@ New Brunswick Turnpike ) and enters Lawrence Township . The road runs through residential and commercial areas and passes Colonial Lake , with a few intersections controlled by jughandles . US 1 Bus. has an intersection with CR 616 , which heads east to provide access to US 1 . Further to the northeast , the settings become more commercial before US 1 Bus. merges into northbound US 1 at the northeast end of the Trenton Freeway . 
 Despite the official route beginning at US 1 near the Brunswick Circle , signage has US 1 Bus. begin at the Lower Trenton Bridge over the Delaware River , just north of the Trenton @-@ Morrisville Toll Bridge ( US 1 ) . The continuation into Pennsylvania is State Route 2060 to the PA 32 intersection in Morrisville . From the bridge , US 1 Bus. signage heads northeast on Bridge Street , with the road curving north onto Warren Street into downtown Trenton . At Livingston Street , the road becomes a one @-@ way pair following Warren Street southbound and Broad Street northbound , concurrent with US 206 . At the south end of Route 31 , the one @-@ way pair becomes Brunswick Avenue northbound and Martin Luther King Jr . Boulevard southbound , heading northeast . These two roads are two @-@ way , but carry only one direction of US 1 Bus . / US 206 . The one @-@ way pair continues to the Brunswick Circle , where the official US 1 Bus. continues north . Strawberry Street is signed " to US 1 south " from the circle , and as US 1 Business north from US 1 . Southbound US 1 Bus. leaves the circle with US 206 southbound on Brunswick Circle Extension , merging with Princeton Avenue ( CR 583 ) . Officially , Brunswick Circle Extension is CR 645 and US 206 southbound bypasses the circle via Princeton Avenue , but all signage points US 206 through the circle . Northbound US 1 Business and US 206 simply enter the circle from Brunswick Avenue . 
 = = History = = 
 What is now US 1 Bus. north of the Brunswick Circle was chartered as part of the Trenton and New Brunswick Turnpike in 1803 . This turnpike became a public road in 1903 . In 1926 , the U.S. Highway System was created and US 1 was designated to run through the Trenton area from the Lower Trenton Bridge north to Pre @-@ 1927 Route 13 , which it followed to New Brunswick . In the 1927 New Jersey state highway renumbering , pre @-@ 1927 Route 13 became Route 27 and the Trenton and New Brunswick Turnpike , which ran parallel to pre @-@ 1927 Route 13 in Trenton , became Route 26 . By the 1930s , US 1 was rerouted to follow Route 26 between Trenton and New Brunswick , with US 206 being designated along Route 27 in Trenton . 
 In December 1952 , the Trenton @-@ Morrisville Toll Bridge and its approaches opened , which included the Trenton Freeway between the Delaware River and the Brunswick Circle . US 1 was rerouted onto the new bridge and the Trenton Freeway . In the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering that occurred a month later , the Route 26 and Route 27 designations were removed through Trenton . In addition , US 1 Alt. was designated onto the former US 1 in Morrisville and Trenton , running from US 1 on the western end of Morrisville and over the Lower Trenton Bridge into Trenton , where it continued northeast to US 1 at the Brunswick Circle . By the 1980s , an extension of the Trenton Freeway had been completed to Lawrence Township . US 1 was rerouted to this freeway and US 1 Bus. was designated onto the former US 1 between the freeway ’ s north end and the interchange at Strawberry Street . The US 1 Alt. designation through Trenton and Morrisville was officially removed . Most of the route in Trenton is now only officially a part of US 206 , despite being signed as US 1 Bus . The former US 1 Alt. in Morrisville became State Route 2060 from the Lower Trenton Bridge to PA 32 and a southern extension of PA 32 south of there . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Mercer County . 
 = Russian monitor Latnik = 
 Latnik ( Russian : <unk> ) was an Uragan @-@ class monitor built for the Imperial Russian Navy in the mid @-@ 1860s . The design was based on the American Passaic @-@ class monitor , but was modified to suit Russian engines , guns and construction techniques . She was one of two ships of the class to be built in Belgium and assembled in Russia . Spending her entire career with the Baltic Fleet , the ship was only active when the Gulf of Finland was not frozen , but very little is known about her service . She was stricken in 1900 from the Navy List , converted into a coal barge in 1903 and renamed Barzha No. 38 and then Barzha No. 326 . Abandoned by the Soviets in Finland in 1918 , the ship was later scrapped by the Finns . 
 = = Description = = 
 Latnik was 201 feet ( 61 @.@ 3 m ) long overall , with a beam of 46 feet ( 14 @.@ 0 m ) and a draft of 10 @.@ 16 – 10 @.@ 84 feet ( 3 @.@ 1 – 3 @.@ 3 m ) . She displaced 1 @,@ 500 – 1 @,@ 600 long tons ( 1 @,@ 524 – 1 @,@ 626 t ) , and her crew numbered eight officers and 88 enlisted men in 1865 . They numbered 10 officers and 100 crewmen in 1877 . 
 The ship was fitted with a two @-@ cylinder , horizontal direct @-@ acting steam engine built by Carr and MacPherson of Saint Petersburg . It drove a single propeller using steam that was provided by two rectangular boilers . Specific information on the output of the ship 's engine has not survived , but it ranged between 340 – 500 indicated horsepower ( 254 – 373 kW ) for all the ships of this class . During Latnik 's sea trials on 31 May 1865 , she reached a maximum speed of 5 knots ( 9 @.@ 3 km / h ; 5 @.@ 8 mph ) , the slowest ship in the class . She carried a maximum of 190 long tons ( 193 t ) of coal , which gave her a theoretical endurance of 1 @,@ 440 nmi ( 2 @,@ 670 km ; 1 @,@ 660 mi ) at 6 knots ( 11 km / h ; 6 @.@ 9 mph ) . 
 Latnik was designed to be armed with a pair of 9 @-@ inch ( 229 mm ) smoothbore muzzle @-@ loading guns purchased from Krupp of Germany and rifled in Russia , but the rifling project was seriously delayed and the ship was completed with nine @-@ inch smoothbores . These lacked the penetration power necessary to deal with ironclads and they were replaced by license @-@ built 15 @-@ inch ( 380 mm ) smoothbore muzzle @-@ loading Rodman guns in 1867 – 68 . The Rodman guns were replaced around 1876 with the originally intended nine @-@ inch rifled guns . 
 All of the wrought @-@ iron armor that was used in the Uragan @-@ class monitors was in 1 @-@ inch ( 25 mm ) plates , just as in the Passaic @-@ class ships . The side of the ship was entirely covered with three to five layers of armor plates , of which the three innermost plates extended 42 inches ( 1 @.@ 1 m ) below the waterline . This armor was backed by a wooden beam that had a maximum thickness of 36 inches ( 914 mm ) . The gun turret was protected by eleven layers of armor and the pilothouse above it had eight layers of armor . Curved plates six layers thick protected the base of the funnel up to a height of 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) above the deck . Unlike their predecessors , the Uragans were built without deck armor to save weight , but Latnik 's deck was reinforced by the addition of 0 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 12 @.@ 7 mm ) armor plates after completion . 
 = = Career = = 
 Construction of the ship began on 17 June 1863 at the Carr and MacPherson Shipyard in Saint Petersburg . Latnik was laid down on 24 December 1863 and she was launched on 22 March 1864 . She entered service on 14 July 1865 and cost a total of 1 @,@ 148 @,@ 000 rubles , almost double her contract cost of 600 @,@ 000 rubles . The ship was assigned to the Baltic Fleet upon completion . For some reason , she was the only ship of the class not to make a port visit to Stockholm , Sweden in July – August 1865 . She suffered some sort of hull damage in September , but the details are not known . 
 Sometime after Latnik was completed , an armored ring , 5 inches ( 127 mm ) thick and 15 inches ( 381 mm ) tall , was fitted around the base of the turret to prevent splinters from jamming it . Later , an armored , outward @-@ curving bulwark was fitted around the top of the turret to protect any crewmen there . Three sponsons were later added , probably during the 1870s , to the upper portion of the turret . Each sponson , one above the gun ports and one on each side of the turret , mounted a light gun , probably a 1 @.@ 75 @-@ inch ( 44 mm ) Engstrem gun , for defense against torpedo boats . A fourth gun was mounted on a platform aft of the funnel when a hurricane deck was built between the funnel and the turret , also probably during the 1870s . 
 Little is known about the ship 's career other than that she was laid up each winter when the Gulf of Finland froze . Latnik was reclassified as a coast defense ironclad on 13 February 1892 and turned over to the Port of Kronstadt for disposal on 6 July 1900 , although she was not stricken until 17 August . During 1903 , the ship was converted into a coal barge by the removal of her turret , her side armor , and its wooden backing , and by the division of her hull into three holds . She was redesignated as Barzha No. 38 and , in 1914 , Barzha No. 326 . She was abandoned by the Soviets in Helsingfors ( Helsinki ) when they were forced to withdraw from Finland in April 1918 according to the terms of the Treaty of Brest @-@ Litovsk and was later broken up there . 
 = <unk> = 
 In hydrodynamics , the clapotis ( from French : " lapping of water " ) is a non @-@ breaking standing wave pattern , caused for example , by the reflection of a traveling surface wave train from a near vertical shoreline like a breakwater , seawall or steep cliff . The resulting <unk> wave does not travel horizontally , but has a fixed pattern of nodes and antinodes . These waves promote erosion at the toe of the wall , and can cause severe damage to shore structures . The term was coined in 1877 by French mathematician and physicist Joseph Valentin <unk> who called these waves ‘ le clapotis ’ meaning ‘ ’ the lapping " . 
 In the idealized case of " full clapotis " where a purely monotonic incoming wave is completely reflected normal to a solid vertical wall , the standing wave height is twice the height of the incoming waves at a distance of one half wavelength from the wall . In this case , the circular orbits of the water particles in the deep @-@ water wave are converted to purely linear motion , with vertical velocities at the antinodes , and horizontal velocities at the nodes . The standing waves alternately rise and fall in a mirror image pattern , as kinetic energy is converted to potential energy , and vice versa . In his 1907 text , Naval Architecture , Cecil Peabody described this phenomenon : 
 At any instant the profile of the water surface is like that of a <unk> wave , but the profile instead of appearing to run to the right or left , will grow from a horizontal surface , attain a maximum development , and then flatten out till the surface is again horizontal ; immediately another wave profile will form with its crests where the hollows formerly were , will grow and flatten out , etc . If attention is concentrated on a certain crest , it will be seen to grow to its greatest height , die away , and be succeeded in the same place by a hollow , and the interval of time between the successive formations of crests at a given place will be the same as the time of one of the component waves . 
 = = Related phenomena = = 
 True clapotis is very rare , because the depth of the water or the <unk> of the shore are unlikely to completely satisfy the idealized requirements . In the more realistic case of partial clapotis , where some of the incoming wave energy is dissipated at the shore , the incident wave is less than 100 % reflected , and only a partial standing wave is formed where the water particle motions are elliptical . This may also occur at sea between two different wave trains of near equal wavelength moving in opposite directions , but with unequal amplitudes . In partial clapotis the wave envelope contains some vertical motion at the nodes . 
 When a wave train strikes a wall at an oblique angle , the reflected wave train departs at the supplementary angle causing a cross @-@ hatched wave interference pattern known as the clapotis <unk> ( " waffled clapotis " ) . In this situation , the individual crests formed at the intersection of the incident and reflected wave train crests move parallel to the structure . This wave motion , when combined with the resultant vortices , can erode material from the seabed and transport it along the wall , undermining the structure until it fails . 
 <unk> waves on the sea surface also radiate infrasonic <unk> into the atmosphere , and seismic signals called <unk> coupled through the ocean floor to the solid Earth . 
 = John Cunningham ( RAF officer ) = 
 John " Cat 's Eyes " Cunningham CBE , DSO & Two Bars , DFC & Bar , AE ( 27 July 1917 – 21 July 2002 ) was a Royal Air Force ( RAF ) night fighter ace during the Second World War and a test pilot . During the war he was nicknamed " Cat 's Eyes " by the British Press to explain his successes and to avoid communicating the existence of airborne radar to the enemy . 
 John Cunningham was born in Croydon in 1917 in the midst of the First World War . He was keen on entering the aviation industry as a teenager . Temporarily abiding his father 's wishes to avoid the military , he approached the de Havilland company and was accepted as an engineering candidate . Concurrently , he joined the Royal Auxiliary Air Force and became a member of No. 604 ( County of Middlesex ) Squadron . Cunningham began his training in August 1935 and flew solo in March 1936 . He received his wings in the summer of 1937 . Cunningham gradually became an established test pilot , gaining a considerable amount of flying time on different types of aircraft . 
 In August 1939 Cunningham rejoined his squadron , now equipped with a version of the Bristol Blenheim . His operator was Jimmy Rawnsley , who would serve as his gunner and radio operator for most of the war and contribute to all but three of Cunningham 's victories . On 26 July 1940 the squadron was re @-@ designated a specialised night fighter unit and was amongst the first to receive airborne interception radar ( AI ) . Cunningham was promoted to squadron leader in September 1940 . In the autumn , as the Battle of Britain subsided and The Blitz began , the squadron re @-@ equipped with the rugged and heavily armed Bristol Beaufighter . 
 On the night of the 19 November 1940 , Cunningham claimed his first victory . By the time the Blitz had ended in June 1941 , he had destroyed 13 enemy aircraft and claimed three as probable victories and two damaged . After a prolonged rest period , he was promoted to wing commander in 1942 . He was also appointed to command No. 85 Squadron RAF , by which time his tally had reached 16 enemy aircraft destroyed . In 1943 and early 1944 he added a further four victories , one probable and one damaged . Cunningham 's combat career ended with 20 aerial victories , three probable and six damaged . He spent the remainder of the conflict in various staff officer positions . By the end of the war in Europe in May 1945 had attained the rank of group captain . 
 After the war Cunningham re @-@ joined de Havilland and continued his test pilot career . He flew the world 's first jet airliner , the de Havilland Comet , in 1949 . He then flew commercial jets for a time in the early 1960s and continued flying in the industry until the late 1970s . He also worked for British Aerospace as executive director , retiring in 1980 . In recognition of his wartime exploits and his contribution to civil aviation he was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire . In his retirement Cunningham was nearly financially ruined when Lloyd 's of London ran into financial difficulty in 1988 . He was forced to live frugally until the end of his life . He died six days shy of his 85th birthday . 
 = = Early life = = 
 John Cunningham was born in Croydon in south London on 27 July 1917 , in the midst of the First World War . His father , Arthur Gillespie Cunningham , worked for the Dunlop Rubber Company at Fort Dunlop based in Birmingham . He rose to the position of company secretary . In 1910 he married Evelyn Mary Spencer . Her family owned an engineering company in Coventry which supplied the fabric and textiles company Courtaulds with heavy machinery . In the 1920s , her grandfather was Lord Mayor of Coventry . The family located to Croydon where John was born , along with two elder sisters Mary and Janet and a younger brother , William . John attended Bowden House School , a preparatory school at Seaford , East Sussex until he was 9 . He was subsequently a pupil at Whitgift School , a public school in Croydon . In 1926 , on a school holiday , he took a flight in an Avro 504 . His experiences encouraged him to enter the officers training corps at the school . A personal tragedy occurred in 1930 when his father died . Still , Cunningham did well at school , particularly in the mathematics field . He was keen on entering the aviation industry as a teenager . 
 = = = de Havilland apprenticeship = = = 
 At 18 , he joined the de Havilland Aircraft company in 1935 as an apprentice . Cunningham began his engineering career with some menial projects before being invited to assist with the building of the de Havilland <unk> and de Havilland Moth Minor . Concurrently , he joined the Royal Auxiliary Air Force and became a member of No. 604 ( County of Middlesex ) Squadron after a recommendation by a friend of the family . Cunningham began his training at Hatfield Aerodrome in August 1935 and flew solo on 15 March 1936 , receiving his commission as a pilot officer on 7 May 1936 . 
 He received his wings in the summer of 1936 . He met Jimmy Rawnsley at this time , a 32 @-@ year @-@ old electrical engineer who would later severe as aerial gunner and radar operator on all but three of John 's successful air battles . Cunningham subsequently became a junior test pilot with de Havilland , working with light aircraft alongside Geoffrey de Havilland , the company founder 's son and chief test pilot . The company was short of test pilots and Cunningham caught the eye of de Havilland as his flight experience grew . It was reflected by his promotion to flying officer on 5 December 1937 . At this time John began to care more for test @-@ flying than manufacture and design . He became one of four of de Havilland 's top test pilots . 
 Cunningham continued with his career . In March 1938 he was called to readiness with 604 Squadron during the Munich crisis . At this time the squadron was flying the Hawker Demon . He was displeased when they converted to the Bristol Blenheim . The machines were fitted with a tray of four 303 Browning machine guns to give forward @-@ facing firepower . As a long @-@ range fighter it was of dubious value . The German Messerschmitt Bf 109 and Messerschmitt Bf 110 could , and would , expose the frailties of the aircraft which was originally intended as a bomber . However , Cunningham was told by the Air Ministry that it would be sufficient in the night fighter role , which is where they intended to use this variant . On 20 April 1938 , John returned to de Havilland test @-@ flying de Havilland Moth Minors . 
 On 11 April 1939 he narrowly escaped with his life alongside Geoffrey de Havilland ; both men parachuting to safety . They had taken a Moth Minor into the air to test its response to spins . The prototypes had an anti @-@ spin parachute but preceding tests had been carried out without the need to resort to the safety measure . Geoffrey put the aircraft into a left @-@ hand spin which was recovered . Climbing back to 8 @,@ 000 feet the aircraft was put into it a right @-@ hand spin . The engine cut out , the nose reared @-@ up and the aircraft stalled and entered a flat spin . Geoffrey asked John through the Gosport tube to try to escape their perilous situation after the controls proved non @-@ responsive to de Havilland 's efforts . Both decided to parachute out . Upon doing so the Moth declined its nose and recovered from the spin . The engine ignition had been left on and the wind @-@ milling propeller started the engine . The aircraft began circling the descending airmen at dangerously close range . Fortunately it descended at a faster rate and was destroyed when it hit the ground . Cunningham casually took pictures of the wreckage and his parachute which exemplified his cool nature . 
 In response to the Nazi – Soviet pact on 23 August 1939 , the RAF mobilised . Cunningham had been test @-@ flying the airliner de Havilland Dragon . Only 16 were complete before the declaration of war in September . The growing tension in Europe made war more likely . John was forced to commit himself either to de Havilland or the RAF at this juncture . The RAF had trained him and he felt he could be of far more use in the RAF than test @-@ flying aircraft . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 In August 1939 Cunningham rejoined his squadron which had been equipped with a version of the Bristol Blenheim . John was not enthusiastic about flying the Blenheim . The turret had been eliminated to reduce weight and increase speed , but the flying suits and cockpit were not heated , which caused discomfort to the crews over the winter period . The radios were too short @-@ range which caused communication problems . The Blenheim 's cockpit windshield was multi @-@ faceted and difficult to clean . It was also liable to reflect light ; which made cooperation with searchlights hazardous . The unit also had unspecified problems with blind @-@ flying instruments . The squadron incurred some losses owing to the inexperience of crews flying patrols over the North Sea from RAF North Weald in Essex , a number of them a result of the difficulties with the aircraft . In January 1940 604 moved to RAF Northolt and flew Blenheim 's adorned in the Finnish Air Force Swastika to Finland via Sweden to assist the country after the Soviet invasion . 
 Cunningham was promoted to flight lieutenant on 12 March 1940 . In April 1940 the squadron flew as escort for a De Havilland Flamingo carrying Winston Churchill , First Lord of the Admiralty , to Paris to attend a meeting after the German invasion of Denmark and Norway . Most of the unit 's time during the Phoney War was consumed engaging in intensive training over the Wash which included co @-@ operation with searchlights and mine @-@ laying operations . It did not last for long . On 15 May 1940 , 604 relocated to RAF Manston . From the airfield Cunningham flew sorties over the English Channel and patrols over Dunkirk as the Battle for France intensified . Cunningham made no recorded contact with the enemy and France capitulated on 25 June 1940 . 
 = = = Night squadron = = = 
 On 26 July 1940 the squadron was re @-@ designated a specialised night fighter unit . The squadron was amongst the first to receive airborne interception radar ( AI ) . 604 was sent a number of AI Mk . IV radar sets . Jimmy Rawnsley , Cunningham 's friend and crew @-@ mate , saw this as an opportunity to join a program which promised a bright future . Rawnsley retrained as a radar operator and would re @-@ join Cunningham in January 1941 . In the intervening period the squadron was frequently frustrated by the limitations of the Blenheim . Even with the " magic boxes " , they were too slow to catch any of the German bombers if the enemy was given the slightest advantage . Cunningham flew with 604 on the night of the 18 / 19 June when the Luftwaffe flew its first major operation in the Greater London area . No victories were claimed in the summer 1940 . 
 Cunningham was promoted to acting squadron leader in September 1940 , commanding B Flight . Within the month the unit received the heavily armed and powerful Bristol Beaufighter . After the commanding officer , Cunningham was the second man to fly it . The Beaufighter went through a teething stage in relation to its gun sight . The sight projected a ring of light with a spot at the centre onto a small sheet of glass directly in front of the pilots head . The spot in the centre provided the aiming point , and the ring , of variable diameter , helped him to judge the rage and amount of deflection needed to attack a target . The light 's brilliance was adjustable by <unk> , but the control was ineffective . Rotating it a fraction could produce maximum brilliance or cause the spot to flicker out . 
 Air Marshal Sholto Douglas formed the " Night Fighting Committee " and met regularly at Bentley Priory to discuss operational problems . As an experienced aviator , Cunningham was invited to attend . Henry Tizard invited Cunningham to air his views at the meeting . Tizard referred him to the Royal Aircraft Establishment to meet Arnold Alexander Hall , a gun sight expert . With his engineering expertise and Cunningham 's assessment of the issue , Hall ironed out the inadequacies in the design . Hall later became Cunningham 's managing director at Hawker Siddeley twenty years later . Cunningham also worked with ground control of interception ( GCI ) carrying out various exercises . He made the acquaintance of Philip Joubert de la Ferté , ( Chief of the Air Staff ) , who dropped in on 604 as well as Douglas — the two men were always keen to hear the experiences of the crew . 
 The AI sets added to Beaufighters were the first to be mass @-@ produced . The operating frequency was 190 to 195 MHz with a wavelength of 1 @.@ 5 metres . The equipment consisted of a receiver , transmitter , control panel , modulator , indicator unit and a system of fixed dipole aerials . On the nose the aerial was a double arrowhead shape with a pair of azimuth aerials protruding above and below the leading edge of each wing between the cannon and the wingtip . A pair of elevation aerials were located above and below the wing surfaces near the RAF roundel on the starboard side . The indicator display consisted of two cathode ray tubes . They displayed elevation and azimuth bearing . The set had a range @-@ limitation of four miles ( circa 20 @,@ 000 feet ) . The minimum range of detection was usually around 400 feet . At closer ranges the target merged with the transmission pulse and was obscured . At altitudes below 1 @,@ 000 feet , the returns from ground objects would swamp the tubes . Operators like Rawnsley were left to do a fair amount of guesswork . No scales or calibration markings were put on early sets . The position and heading of the enemy in the azimuth plane , its height , and its range had to be guessed . At least the GCI could bring the Beaufighter well within range of the target , usually a mile or so behind the bomber . 
 The Cunningham – Rawnsley team used the AI specifically to position themselves directly astern and underneath the enemy . Although the German bombers carried a dorsal gunner , it was difficult to locate an enemy against the black colour of the landscape . Usually the blackness of the country would swallow up the outline of an approaching night fighter . As they approached , the slipstream of the enemy could prove hazardous ; bucking the Beaufighter and throwing the pilot off his aim . Approaching from slightly below allowed the attacking pilot to avoid the slipstream . The tactics allowed for Cunningham to close the range and fire first , which was usually sufficient to end the engagement quickly and successfully . Bob Braham , a rival night fighter ace , also used this tactic . 
 = = = " Cat 's Eyes " = = = 
 Throughout the summer , Cunningham and 604 had to sit idle and frustrated as the Battle of Britain raged . By the autumn , the battle subsided . Having failed to gain air superiority the Luftwaffe now resolved to bomb British ports and industries . The change in German strategy began The Blitz phase of the aerial campaign . On the night of the 19 / 20 November 1940 the Luftwaffe raided Birmingham . The Germans hoped to follow up their attacks on the West Midlands after a highly effective raid against Coventry on 14 November 1940 . Pathfinders from Kampfgruppe 100 ( Battle Group 100 ) led 369 aircraft from Kampfgeschwader 26 ( KG 26 — Bomber Wing 26 ) , Kampfgeschwader 54 ( KG 54 ) , Kampfgeschwader 55 ( KG 55 ) to the city . 
 Cunningham took off this night from RAF Middle Wallop in Hampshire to patrol north of London . When the direction of the raid was known he was ordered to proceed to the East Midlands . GCI vectored Cunningham and his temporary radar operator John Phillipson — a former ground radar operator — onto an enemy aircraft , but the crew were forced much further westward . Search lights attracted their attention and Phillipson was able to make a contact and guide him . Soon visual confirmation was made . A tell @-@ tale sign of an aircraft was a blank patch of sky surrounded by a cluster of stars . Keeping in the enemy 's blind spot , he flew below it and adjusted his speed to match the German pilot . After closing the range as much as he dared , he fired with all four cannons and the Junkers Ju 88 exploded upon hitting the ground near Wittering , Cambridgeshire at 00 : 35 . Cunningham 's victim , 3 . / KG 54 Ju 88 flown by Unteroffizier Kaspar <unk> , was not claimed as destroyed . However , after interrogation of the two German survivors who affirmed the circumstances , Cunningham was granted the victory . 
 Cunningham had to wait a month for his next victory on 23 December 1940 . Kampfgeschwader 1 ( KG 1 ) sent 100 bombers led by Kampfgruppe 100 to attack Manchester . GCI vectored Cunningham onto the enemy aircraft . It was not yet dark and Cunningham identified the machine as a Heinkel He 111 . Flying at 15 @,@ 000 feet , he saw the Heinkel above the Beaufighter at 16 @,@ 500 feet . Cunningham engaged the enemy 50 miles south of West Lulworth . The enemy climbed to 19 @,@ 000 feet . Following , Cunningham opened fire at 200 @-@ 300 yards . The He 111 was engulfed in fire . The bomber was high enough for the crew to jettison the bombs and incendiaries and glide to France where it crash @-@ landed at Cherbourg . Two of Feldwebel Georg <unk> 's crew were wounded . The 3 . / KGr 100 machine was written off . The crew were unaware they had been a victim of a night @-@ fighter . They supposed they had been shot down by a flak ship . 
 On 2 January 1941 Cunningham nearly added a third . The Germans attacked Cardiff in the city 's heaviest raid of the war . Cunningham engaged an He 111 with an even spread of three aerial masts along its rear fuselage — indicative of a pathfinder . He expended all the Beaufighter 's ammunition against it from the working cannons — one cannon jammed . It dived into clouds at 10 @,@ 000 feet at an angle of 50 degrees . A 2 . / KGr 100 machine returned to France with a wounded gunner and Cunningham received credit for a probable victory . On 12 January he claimed a damaged He 111 — his first with operator Jimmy Rawnsley . Cunningham was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross ( DFC ) on 28 January 1941 for his achievements , including 25 night sorties . 
 On 9 February , upon the invitation of Charles Portal , Chief of the Air Staff and Sholto Douglas , Cunningham arrived at the Air Ministry . He was ordered to report to Geoffrey de Havilland at Hatfield , though neither of the senior officers would say why . When Cunningham met Geoffrey de Havilland he was summoned to a hangar . It was the first time Cunningham had laid eyes on the de Havilland Mosquito . Cunningham flew <unk> — the prototype — on 9 February 1941 . He was greatly impressed by the " lightness of the controls and generally pleasant handling characteristics " ; Cunningham concluded that when the type was fitted with AI equipment , it would be a perfect replacement for the Bristol Beaufighter . 
 Cunningham claimed a third victory on 15 February 1941 . The Luftwaffe carried out air attacks on Liverpool and Humberside . Over Newton Abbot , Devon , he engaged a He 111 from Kampfgeschwader 27 ( KG 27 ) . It crashed outside Totnes . The bomber , 1G + FR , belonging to 7 . / KG 27 was completely destroyed . Leutnant Eberhard Beckmann and his crew were killed . The fifth victory eluded Cunningham for some time . On 12 March he was twice vectored onto enemy aircraft by Rawnsley . He could only claim a Ju 88 and He 111 damaged . On the night of the 3 April 1941 he accounted for his fourth enemy aircraft . Although claimed as a He 111 , the identity of the aircraft was likely the Ju 88A @-@ 5 , Werknummer ( " factory number " ) <unk> , code V4 + AR of 7 . / KG 1 on a mission to raid Avonmouth . Leutnant Ernst <unk> and his crew ; Wilhelm Hahn , Robert König , and Wilhelm Schreiber posted missing in action . On the night of the 7 April he became a fighter ace . A He 111 of 9 . / KG 26 was intercepted as its bombers attacked Portsmouth and Portland Harbour . Leutnant Erwin Hartmann crashed into the Channel with his crew . A No. 87 Squadron RAF pilot , Flight Lieutenant Derek Harland Ward claimed the victory as he saw a glow which he fired at before it hit the sea . However , Cunningham was credited with the victory as the Heinkel was about to crash . The 87 Squadron war diary acknowledged the fact in its entry for that night . 
 Two nights later , on 9 April , he accounted for another He 111 followed by another plus a probable victory on 11 April . It is possible his victim on the later mission was He 111P @-@ 2 , Werknummer 2002 , 1G + HT of 9 . / KG 27 . Pilot Leo Roth and crew members Oberfeldwebel Wilhelm Franke , and Unteroffizier Walter <unk> and Fritz <unk> were killed . A pilot from 307 Squadron also claimed the machine which crashed at <unk> Farm , <unk> , Dorset at 01 : 35 . One 8 . / KG 55 He 111 was lost with its crew over the Channel and a Stab . / KG 26 machine was lost over northern France when the crew abandoned their damaged aircraft . Cunningham 's comrade in 604 , Roderick Aeneas Chisholm , accounted for a 5 . / KG 54 Ju 88 near Portsmouth . 
 On 15 April Cunningham was to have his most successful night , shooting down three bombers ( victories no . 8 – 10 ) . On patrol near the south coast he engaged a He 111 over Monmouthshire which he shot down with only 40 rounds . He returned to Middle Wallop only to be sent on patrol for a second sortie . He took off and headed south , towards Southampton . GCI was too busy to employ him and he was granted a request to investigate a searchlight cone towards Marlborough . Rawnsley directed him to attack and he duly shot down the He 111 which crashed into derelict houses in Southampton . He was sent by GCI after another enemy but lost the contact , appearing over Southampton again he spotted yet another He 111 in the moonlight . He closed to 80 yards and shot it down . It crashed in the area of Lymington . Cunningham 's 9th victory was Werknummer <unk> , code G1 + ES , belonging to 8 . / KG 55 . The Heinkel , piloted by Oberleutnant Günther von <unk> , crashed onto No. 10 @-@ 12 <unk> Road , Southampton at 02 : 00 . <unk> and Feldwebel Franz <unk> were killed in action and Unteroffizier Horst Rosenberg and Herbert Sauer were taken prisoner of war . In April , having downed at least 10 enemy aircraft in night @-@ fighting operations , Cunningham was decorated with his first Distinguished Service Order ( DSO ) . 
 On 3 May Cunningham accounted for another Heinkel . Four nights later on 7 May 1941 Cunningham achieved a victory — his 12th — in front of King George VI . Sholto Douglas accompanied the King when he appeared at Danebury Hill , not far from Middle Wallop . The King met Cunningham and Rawnsley , congratulated the airmen on their success and asked Cunningham to get another on that night . The King then was driven to the GCI station <unk> outside Bournemouth to tour the facility . Eager to impress the King , Cunningham drove to dispersal and prepared to go on patrol . The Luftwaffe began operations at 22 : 00 that night , attacking Liverpool which took their flight path over 604 's patrol area . Cunningham took off and intercepted a He 111 north of Bournemouth . The controller asked the King to go outside as they may have the opportunity of witnessing the battle . Although they did not see it , the King heard the results ; the roar of engines and rattle of cannon fire . The Heinkel , from 7 . / KG 27 , Werknummer 1639 code IG + DR , eventually crashed near <unk> Farm south of RAF Weston <unk> at 23 : 30 . Pilot Oberfeldwebel Heinz <unk> , Feldwebel Heinz <unk> , Oberfeldwebel Otto <unk> all survived though the pilot was badly burned . Flight Engineer Feldwebel Fritz Klemm and Feldwebel Heinz <unk> were killed by gunfire . On the night of the 31 May / 1 June 1941 he accounted for another He 111 as the Luftwaffe completed its last major raid of the Blitz . It was one of 24 German bombers lost on that night . The following morning Cunningham was promoted to temporary squadron leader . 
 = = = = Propaganda = = = = 
 In early 1941 the British press , with permission from the Air Ministry , was allowed to approach Cunningham and write about his experiences . One of the motivating reasons for the lack of censorship was morale . In the early stages of the Blitz , the perception among the civilian population was that the Germans could attack at will over Britain during the night . The publication of Cunningham 's exploits were an attempt to assure the public the RAF was fighting back and imposing losses upon the Luftwaffe . Cunningham was singled out for attention for this purpose , though Rawnsley 's contribution to his success was virtually ignored . 
 The Air Ministry did not want to allow the enemy to learn of their airborne radar . German night fighters would not be equipped with such devices on a large scale until much later . A legend was created to explain his successes instead . As the first night fighter ace , they were allowed to publish his picture . The captions read that his eyesight was so exceptional it allowed him to see in the dark with the same visually ability as a domestic cat . It was also said that his diet of carrots provided him with vitamin A which allowed him to maintain excellent night @-@ vision . The ensuing public adulation was detested by Cunningham , but he accepted the " Cats @-@ Eyes " tag as a necessary deception . The propaganda story served its purpose for the populace when it was released to the public in January 1941 . The success of night defences also told the Germans the RAF was either improving its techniques , or it had something new . 
 The premier night fighter aces in the RAF — Cunningham , Braham and <unk> Burbridge — did not appreciate press attention . In the case of Cunningham and Burbridge , this may have stemmed from deeper religious convictions about combat and killing . Burbridge became a priest during the war and both he and Cunningham did not cooperate with biographers when approached to have their exploits described in print after the war . During the war , Braham also actively shunned the lime @-@ light . One of the country 's best @-@ selling newspapers , the Daily Express , asked to interview him but he declined . Much to Braham 's embarrassment , his father gave interviews about his then famous son in 1943 . When no stories were forthcoming , the newspapers soon lost interest . Braham and Cunningham were certainly aware of each other as a result of the press attention , and a competitive rivalry developed . In his book Scramble , Braham mentioned with pride the night he surpassed Cunningham 's score permanently . 
 = = = Wing commander = = = 
 The dynamics of the air war changed in June 1941 . The German invasion of the Soviet Union , Operation Barbarossa , opened up the Eastern Front . The German bomber force was heavily committed to the theatre . The escalation of the fighting in the Mediterranean and North African theatres also diverted German air strength . The operations of the Luftwaffe over Britain changed dramatically . Small numbers of bombers would make hit @-@ and @-@ run attacks on selected targets near the coast for the remainder of 1941 , replacing the mass raids of the preceding autumn and winter . Cunningham used the decline in the pace of operations to train new crews . 
 Cunningham 's practice of leadership was different to his day @-@ fighter counterparts . A day unit would fly in formation together , engage the enemy together , communicate by radio and follow the directions and example of their commanding officer in combat . Cunningham was not in a position to lead in this way . The night fighter was a lone hunter . When it took off the crew would operate alone in the air . Instead , he could ensure proficiency in battle only by teaching his men to master their aircraft and AI . He was constantly in touch with scientists and tracked new developments . He also took up new crews in the Beaufighter to generate confidence in the machine . Night pilots had to learn to fly on instruments alone , in adverse weather conditions and for sustained periods . Rawnsley contributed with the use of AI and mock @-@ interception using target aircraft were flown regularly . 
 Cunningham still flew on operations . Flying the new Beaufighter II powered by Merlin engines on an interception in July , he was hit by return fire from a He 111 . The engines <unk> and one caught fire . Already far out to sea he flew back to base , extinguished the fire and made a wheels @-@ down landing . The following month he had greater success . On the night of the 22 August 1941 he intercepted two He 111s . One was claimed as damaged but the second was confirmed . The Heinkel He 111 , an H @-@ 5 model , Werknummer 4081 , coded F8 + BS belonging to 8 . / Kampfgeschwader 40 ( KG 40 ) , fell into the sea north @-@ west of Wells , Somerset at 22 @.@ 05 . Gefreiter G. <unk> , H. <unk> , and K. <unk> were never found . The body of Rudolf <unk> was washed ashore at Burnham Overy on 31 August . On 1 September Cunningham caught and downed a Ju 88 — his 15th victory . He was awarded a bar to his DFC on 19 September , by which time he was an acting wing commander . 
 The winter 1941 – 42 passed by with relative inactivity . In the spring 1942 , Arthur Harris began his campaign over Germany in earnest with an attack by RAF Bomber Command upon Lübeck . Adolf Hitler , enraged by the attack , ordered the Luftwaffe to begin retaliatory strikes which began the so @-@ called Baedeker Blitz . On 4 April Cunningham engaged and damaged a Baedeker raider He 111 pathfinder operating over Exeter . It was able to escape into cloud . KGr 100 , the specialist German pathfinder unit , was now operating with new navigational aids which allowed them to fly through and navigate in thick cloud and rain . They deliberately operated whenever the weather proved more difficult for night fighters . Nevertheless , Cunningham made an interception on the night of the 23 May 1942 . 
 Attempting his usual tactic , the British crew approached from behind and below . Suddenly the Heinkel lurched into a tight left @-@ hand turn allowing the gunners to fire a broad @-@ side . The bomber disappeared into the mist . Cunningham asked GCI for help . They tracked the Heinkel flying north near Shaftesbury . Engaging again the German pilot managed to turn into a head @-@ on position and dive past almost upside down . He continually evaded Cunningham by turning in underneath him at near @-@ impossible angles . Cunningham and Rawnsley came to understand they were not dealing with a novice . Soon a turning match began and then the German attempted to escape by twisting and diving . Cunningham forced him down to 900 feet but Rawnsley and GCI lost contact when the ground clutter hid the Heinkel 's signal . Cunningham returned to base . News soon came through the He 111 had crashed onto the slopes on Cranborne Chase . Apparently , the Heinkel had broken through the clouds at only a hundred feet and dived vertically into the ground near the isolated village of <unk> at 17 : 05 . Intelligence later determined that the machine was a He 111H @-@ 6 , Werknummer <unk> , code 6N + FR , from 7 . / KGr 100 . The bomber disintegrated upon impact . The pilot , Staffelkapitän ( " squadron leader " ) Hauptmann <unk> Langer was killed along with his crew ; Oberfeldwebel G. Schmidt , Feldwebel D. Hoffmann , P. <unk> and Gefreiter W. <unk> . It was a unique victory for Cunningham . He had not fired his guns in the 150 @-@ minute chase . 
 Following the episode Cunningham was promoted to temporary wing commander on 1 June 1942 , and following the downing of his 16th enemy aircraft , received a bar to his DSO on 24 July for , among other feats , " destroying an enemy aircraft without firing a single bullet ... by diving through cloud at great speed , drove the enemy aircraft to the ground . " 
 Cunningham and Rawnsley were soon ordered to staff positions . It was a compulsory order for fighter pilots even when the men considered themselves fit for operational duties . Before they departed Middle Wallop and 604 , they had a chance to test the new 4 – inch ( 10 cm ) AI Mk . VIII radar which had a range of two or three miles ( 3 – 5 kilometres ) . The new radar was a radical improvement . All the information was displayed on a single tube . The ground echo was reduced but could still be seen on screen when flying low , but it did not interfere with the overall picture . Cunningham was to take over as director of all training units from Rory Chisholm who left 604 to become a staff officer at group headquarters . Rawnsley was due to take an instructors job at 62 Operational Training Unit ( OTU ) at Usworth . Cunningham managed to persuade the CAS to deploy him to headquarters at No. 81 Group RAF , the training organisation for RAF Fighter Command . Rawnsley was also promoted to squadron leader and was awarded the DFC and Distinguished Flying Medal ( DFM ) . The pair remained grounded for six months until January 1943 . 
 = = = Last tour = = = 
 Cunningham was allowed back onto operations . He was given command of No. 85 Squadron RAF , equipped with the de Havilland Mosquito <unk> based at Hunsdon . He selected Jimmy Rawnsley as his operator . The radar set displayed the entire picture . A small cathode @-@ ray tube set on the left side of the instrument panel gave Cunningham a composite image . The duo decided Rawnsley should control the interception in the initial stages until they reached a point where the enemy could take evasive action . Then Cunningham would take over while Rawnsley would call out the ranges and free the pilot from looking at his ray @-@ tube . 
 On the night of the 3 March 1943 the Luftwaffe was active again . Cunningham scrambled too late to get contact with the GCI 's contact . He climbed toward a searchlight box . The searchlights operated in a box @-@ shape , separated by evenly spaced markers . Each fighter was given a box and flew to its allotted marker beacon . There he orbited until the lights illuminated a target , or formed a cone where he could pick up an AI contact . Soon he had a contact — a Dornier Do 217 . He closed in but his cannons jammed . After sitting behind the Dornier for some time and trying in vain to encourage the guns to fire , the German crew suddenly woke up and dived away . Cunningham was furious . Three @-@ quarters of the squadron got airborne but only he had seen an enemy . Unsatisfied with ground and aircrews , he used his influence in the small night @-@ fighter community to bring in personnel from his old unit , 604 , currently languishing in Cornwall . With the new VIII radar a uniform facility , Cunningham took command of a Mosquito <unk> — the first Mosquito to have a smooth " bluff " nose dome over the dish antenna . 
 At this time the Luftwaffe was sending increased numbers of Focke @-@ Wulf Fw 190 fighters over England , at night and at low @-@ level . They were able to hit the coastal areas and their speed and agility meant they were a difficult prospect to intercept . The German pilots were disadvantaged in some respects . There was a lack of nigh @-@ flying experience in these units , the Fw 190s did not carry radar and had a short range . Aside from a small mirror , the pilot could not always see behind him well enough at night . On 16 May 1943 the Fw 190s lost four and probably a fifth to 85 Squadron . On 13 June 1943 Cunningham intercepted an Fw 190 not far from his airfield at West Malling . The GCI controller telephoned the crew @-@ room to notify them the commanding officer was closing on an enemy aircraft heading to London . They heard both aircraft and the brief burst of fire followed by the explosion . To his amazement , Cunningham later learned the pilot — Leutnant Ullrich from 3 . / <unk> 10 ( Fast Bomber Wing 10 — SKG 10 ) — was thrown through the canopy as the Fw 190A @-@ 5 , Werknummer , <unk> code CO + LT , fell earthwards . He deployed his parachute and was picked up by a searchlight crew with a broken arm . 
 On the night of the 23 August an Fw 190 was claimed off Dunkirk and on 8 / 9 September 1943 , an Fw 190A @-@ 5 off Aldborough proved his 19th victory and last claim of Cunningham for the year . The Fw 190 was seen to crash into the sea by the Coastguard . Cunningham achieved his 20th and final air victory on the night of the 2 / 3 January 1944 . Chasing a Messerschmitt Me 410 to France , near Boulogne before shooting it down . The machine , Werknummer 017 , Code U5 + FE , belonging to 14 . / Kampfgeschwader 2 ( KG 2 ) crashed at Marquise . Oberleutnant Helmut <unk> and Heinz <unk> were killed . 
 In January 1944 the Luftwaffe initiated Operation Steinbock . Cunningham filed two claims during the offensive which lasted until May 1944 . On the night of the 20 / 21 February 1944 he claimed Junkers Ju 188 damaged at 22 : 09 near Staplehurst . One Ju 188 was lost and its destruction was attributed to another pilot . On the night of the 23 / 24 February he claimed a probable victory against another Ju 188 off Beachy Head . One Ju <unk> @-@ 1 landed at <unk> after surviving an attack by a night fighter . Werknummer <unk> , code U5 + AN from 5 . / KG 2 returned with two crewmen injured — Unteroffizier Johann <unk> and <unk> <unk> . During these missions Cunningham was nearly shot down . Closing in on a Ju 188 from astern , the gunners suddenly opened fire and the Junkers took evasive manoeuvres . A single round struck the windshield nearly shattering it . Glass fragments struck Cunningham in the face which were later removed in a field hospital . Later , a captured German crew told intelligence officers a new radar was being used in the rear of German aircraft to detect night fighters . Bombers were now more difficult to surprise . Cunningham 's last encounter with the enemy in 1944 was in pursuit of an Me 410 . He had to give up when his windshield iced over near the French coast . 
 On 3 March 1944 he was awarded another bar to his DSO . The citation describing him as " an example beyond praise . " On 11 April 1944 , Cunningham was decorated by the Soviet Union with the Order of the Patriotic War , 1st Class . He was promoted to wing commander ( war @-@ substantive ) on 1 September 1944 , serving in a series of staff positions for the remainder of the war . 
 = = = Group captain = = = 
 In March 1944 Cunningham relinquished command of 85 Squadron . He was appointed group captain in command of Night Operations at No. 11 Group RAF . At 26 he was one of the youngest to hold that rank . Air Marshal Roderick Hill asked him to report to de Havilland in company with Adolph Malan . They were to test @-@ fly the de Havilland Vampire . Cunningham commented that the machine would make an ideal night fighter . Although he was not familiar with the workings of the de Havilland Goblin turbojet , he recommended that if the cockpit was extended to allow for a navigator and the fuel tanks were enlarged , the type could make a formidable interceptor . While test @-@ flying , Cunningham and Rawnsley carried out a sortie over Normandy from RAF Uxbridge . They overflew the British sector on the 9 June 1944 as the Battle for Caen began . They were vectored onto enemy aircraft but were unable to hold their contacts . 
 On 13 June 1944 the V @-@ 1 flying bomb offensive began and Cunningham was tasked with assisting with their interception . He also coordinated his efforts with No. 100 Group RAF , which were engaged in intruder operations over occupied Europe . Cunningham was concerned at using Mosquitoes for intercepting V @-@ 1s because of the dangers of the bomb exploding and damaging the attacking fighter . One of his former commanding officers and current Group Captain Edward Crew — an ace with 15 enemy aircraft and 31 V @-@ 1s shot down — was forced to bail out when the nose of his Mosquito was split open . The operations did last long and by August 1944 the Mosquitoes were back on bomber support missions . 
 Towards the end of the war he spent most of his time flying throughout Europe and meeting various commanding officers and units . He took advantage of his position to fly other types he had not had the chance to operate . He flew Supermarine Spitfires frequently on such trips . Soon after the Normandy Campaign he took leave to visit his mother in Ireland . She was staying with his sister Mary , ( and his niece ) who had lost her husband killed in action at Anzio in Italy . He remained with 11 Group until the capitulation of Germany on 8 May 1945 . 
 In July 1945 was sent to the Far East . A group was created which was a collection of RAF forces that were to be used to recover Singapore from the Japanese . Cunningham and Rawnsley flew out to Rangoon via Malta , Cairo , Baghdad and Karachi . Soon after they arrived they learned of the atomic attacks against Japan . On 2 September 1945 , Japan surrendered and the Second World War was over . Cunningham was offered a permanent commission in the RAF but he feared his career , if he stayed , would become mired in administration , policy @-@ making staff courses and committees . It would mean flying would become a secondary occupation . He decided to return to de Havilland . The company had asked the RAF to release him the previous summer but had been refused . He was formally de @-@ mobilised in November 1945 and re @-@ joined de Havilland on 1 December . 
 = = Post @-@ war activities = = 
 Cunningham relinquished his RAF commission officially on 1 August 1946 , retaining the rank of group captain , but remaining in the re @-@ constituted Auxiliary Air Force with the permanent rank of squadron leader . He reformed his old auxiliary squadron at the request of the Air Ministry in 1946 but took no active part in its running , serving as a reserve officer in the Royal Auxiliary Air Force until his retirement as a reserve squadron leader on 1 August 1967 . 
 At de Havilland he was awarded a salary of £ 1 @,@ 500 in a company that had expanded enormously during the war . The number of employees rose from 5 @,@ 000 to 38 @,@ 000 . The turnover of the company had gone from £ 1 @.@ 5 million before the war to £ 25 million and was now supported by around 100 factories . Cunningham now took the title of chief test pilot of the de Havilland Engine Company under the supervision of Geoffrey de Havilland Jr . Cunningham served as a pilot and consultant in a series of deals with the Swedish Air Force and Swiss Air Force . Both countries were keen to employ him but Cunningham visited only to deliver and advise on the de Havilland Vampire and British airborne radar design . In 1990 the Swiss presented him with the spade @-@ grip from the control column mounted on a wooden stand when they withdrew the last of their Vampires . When the Swedes retired the machine in 1997 he was invited to celebrate its 50 years of Swedish service . 
 On 27 September 1946 Geoffrey de Havilland Jr was killed test @-@ flying the <unk> Swallow over the Thames estuary . Cunningham had taken off at the same time to deliver the first Vampire in Switzerland . Cunningham only learned the next morning , from Swiss newspapers at breakfast in Geneva , that de Havilland was missing . Cunningham knew the family well and contacted his father , whose other son John had been killed in a collision while flying a Mosquito in 1943 . With the agreement of de Havilland senior , Cunningham took the dead pilot 's post which earned him £ 2 @,@ 000 per year . 
 In March 1948 he set a world flight altitude record of 59 @,@ 430 feet ( 18 @,@ 114 metres ) in a Ghost @-@ powered Vampire . The flight lasted for 45 minutes , reaching 50 @,@ 000 feet in 13 @.@ 5 minutes . The following year he went on to test the de Havilland Comet , the world 's first jet airliner which first flew in 1949 . On 23 May 1952 he flew the Comet — now a highly successful export — carrying the recently widowed Queen Mother and Princess Margaret on a four @-@ hour tour around the Alps . At one point he supervised the Queen Mother as she took the controls . She was to dine with members of the No. 600 Royal Auxiliary Air Force squadron later that night and was anxious to say she had piloted an aircraft . Cunningham continued to test @-@ fly prototypes such as the re @-@ built Comet 3 and 4 in the late 1950s . On 23 October 1956 he travelled to the United States and received the Harmon Trophy from President Dwight D. Eisenhower . It was the most prestigious American trophy for services of civil aviation . 
 On 1 December 1958 he was appointed a member of the de Havilland board , but the company was sold and merged into Hawker Siddeley in 1960 . With the Siddeley company , he was instrumental in the development in the Hawker Siddeley Trident in 1962 . Cunningham worked under the managing director Arnold Alexander Hall , whom he had first met in 1940 to iron out the malfunctions in the Beaufighter gun sight . Later Cunningham acted as a consultant and advisor to the Chinese Government from 1972 – 79 as the company sought to increase its revenue by selling aircraft to China . At their insistence , he postponed his retirement for three years to complete a series of aircraft sales . On 1 May 1975 the British Government announced the nationalisation of the industry and British Aerospace consumed all the nation 's manufacturers . 
 Cunningham had one serious accident whilst flying . On 20 November 1975 at Dunsfold Aerodrome , Surrey , a flock of Snowy plover birds collided with the British Aerospace BAe 125 aircraft just after takeoff and were ingested by the engines . Cunningham was forced to make an emergency landing . He put the aircraft down at 130 mph ( 210 km / h ) , onto the runway , but it careered through the perimeter of the airfield and across a public road where it collided with a car carrying four passengers who were killed ; no @-@ one died on board the HS @-@ 125 . Cunningham suffered two crushed vertebra but he remained chief test pilot at Hawker Siddeley after the accident until 1978 when British Aerospace was formed . He was awarded the Segrave Trophy for his services in 1978 . In recognition of his wartime exploits and his contribution to civil aviation , he was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire and retired from British aerospace in 1980 . 
 In his retirement , Cunningham devoted himself to aviation affairs of a charitable nature while building a retirement fund for himself . In 1980 he was appointed Chairman of the Sir Geoffrey de Havilland Flying Foundation , a charity to devoted to helping young people with aspirations in aviation . Over a number of years former senior RAF officers had been attracted to investing in Lloyd 's of London as a Lloyd 's " Name " . Unfortunately , Cunningham 's commitment was one of unlimited liability . When Lloyd 's ran into financial difficulty in 1988 he was faced with enormous debts . He was forced to live frugally until the end of his life . John Cunningham died six days shy of his 85th birthday in July 2002 . 
 = = Sale of medals = = 
 Following Cunningham 's death in 2002 his service medals and flying memorabilia passed to the de Havilland Aircraft Company Trust . The medals were subsequently sold for £ 384 @,@ 000 to raise funds for the Bentley Priory Battle of Britain Trust Appeal on 7 September 2012 . 
 = The Quick and the Dead ( 1995 film ) = 
 The Quick and the Dead is a 1995 American western film directed by Sam Raimi , and starring Sharon Stone , Gene Hackman , Russell Crowe and Leonardo DiCaprio . The screenplay was written by Simon Moore but includes contributions from Joss Whedon . The story focuses on " The Lady " ( Stone ) , a gunfighter who rides into the frontier town of Redemption , controlled by John Herod ( Hackman ) . The Lady joins a deadly dueling competition in an attempt to exact revenge for her father 's death . 
 Simon Moore 's script was purchased by Sony Pictures Entertainment in May 1993 , and actress Sharon Stone signed on as both star and co @-@ producer . Development was fast tracked after director Sam Raimi 's hiring , and principal photography began in Old Tucson Studios in Arizona on November 21 , 1993 . The film was distributed by TriStar Pictures and was released in the US on February 10 , 1995 to a dismal box office performance , receiving lukewarm reviews from critics . 
 This was Russell Crowe 's American film debut . This was Woody Strode 's final performance ( the film is dedicated to him ) , as well as the last theatrical release of Roberts Blossom who died in 2011 . The phrase " the quick and the dead " is from the Book of Common Prayer and its version of the Apostles ' Creed , describing the final judgement . The plot of this film bears no resemblance to that of the 1987 film of the same name , which was based on a western novel by Louis L 'Amour . 
 = = Plot = = 
 An unnamed gunslinger referred to as The Lady enters the Old West town of Redemption circa 1881 , where she enters a single elimination gunfighting contest held by Redemption 's ruthless mayor and former outlaw John Herod . While there she meets Cort , a former Herod henchman turned preacher whom Herod has captured and forced to enter the contest . During her first night in town , The Lady saves Cort 's life by shooting the rope Herod 's men had hung Cort from . She also meets " The Kid , " a brash young man who runs the general store and who hopes to impress Herod . The Kid believes Herod is his father and that he can earn his father 's respect by entering and winning the contest . 
 In the first round of duels The Kid defeats a Swedish quick @-@ draw champion while Herod kills a braggart named Ace Hanlon , who had taken credit for some of Herod 's own accomplishments . The Lady defeats an enemy she had previously left shackled to a wagon . Cort , who has renounced violence and doesn 't have a weapon , is taken to the general store . Herod buys Cort a gun and decrees that Cort can only have one bullet at a time so that he doesn 't shoot his way out of town . Despite telling everyone he wouldn 't fight , Cort winds up drawing his gun and winning his first round fight . During a rainstorm Herod meets with Clay Cantrell , a professional gunfighter hired by the townspeople to kill Herod . Before they duel , Herod changes the rules and proclaims that all contests are now to the death . After killing Cantrell , Herod angrily addresses the townspeople and informs them that he will continue to raise his taxes on them until they understand that he is in charge of everything . During a rainstorm that evening The Lady faces off with and kills Eugene Dred after Dred rapes a young girl at the saloon . 
 The next day , Cort is slated to fight Spotted Horse , a Native American who claims he cannot be killed by bullets . The Lady , still upset over killing Dred the night before , saddles up and rides out of town before Cort 's fight . Cort narrowly beats Spotted Horse after having to beg for a second bullet . The Lady is found at a nearby cemetery by Doc Wallace , who tells her that he recognizes her and knows why she is there . During flashbacks , we learn that The Lady 's father used to be the Marshal in Redemption and was strung up by Herod 's men . Herod gave the young girl a pistol and three shots to try and break the rope her father was hanging from , but she accidentally kills him instead . Doc Wallace tells her that Herod 's men dug up her father 's body and burned it . He hands The Lady her father 's old badge and begs her to come back and help rid the town of Herod . 
 The Lady rides back to town and directly challenges Herod , but is sickened to hear that he 's already accepted a fight against The Kid . The Lady and Cort are the only other fighters left and are ordered by Herod to face off . They both proclaim they won 't fight each other , but Herod tells them he will have them gunned down by his men if they refuse . Herod takes The Kid aside and asks him to withdraw from the contest , telling him his time will come . The Kid refuses and they fight , with The Kid wounding Herod in the neck while Herod delivers a fatal bullet to The Kid . The Lady and Cort then face each other , but both refuse to draw their weapons . Herod begins a countdown from ten , declaring that if neither draws by the time he gets to zero he will have them both killed . Cort begs The Lady to kill him but she still refuses , when Herod reaches one Cort draws and fires . Doc Wallace declares The Lady dead , and Cort angrily storms up to Herod and demands they fight immediately . Herod refuses , telling Cort they will meet at dawn . Later that night , one of Herod 's men named Ratsy chains Cort to a table and beats him severely before smashing Cort 's gunfighting hand and breaking it . 
 The next morning , Herod sees Cort 's busted hand and orders Ratsy to leave town . He offers to face Cort left @-@ handed , which Cort accepts . Herod kills Ratsy with a rifle and then squares off to fight Cort . At the moment Herod draws , several buildings explode on the street . Herod 's house and the clock tower are also blown up , and through the smoke and flames The Lady walks back into town . Cort tells Herod that from now all on fights in town will be fair , and proceeds to kill Herod 's men who were stationed around town . The Lady and Herod face off , and she finally reveals to him who she is when she throws her father 's old badge at Herod 's feet . They draw on each other , Herod shoots The Lady in the arm and she fires a shot though Herod 's chest . Herod raises his gun to fire again before being dispatched by a bullet to the eye . 
 The wounded Lady throws her father 's badge to Cort and names him as the new Marshal before saddling up and riding out of the town . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Sharon Stone as Ellen ( " The Lady " ) 
 Gene Hackman as John Herod 
 Russell Crowe as Cort 
 Leonardo DiCaprio as Fee " The Kid " Herod 
 Pat Hingle as Horace 
 Kevin Conway as Eugene Dred 
 Keith David as Sgt. Clay Cantrell 
 Lance Henriksen as Ace Hanlon 
 Mark Boone Junior as Scars 
 Tobin Bell as Dog Kelly 
 Raynor <unk> as Ratsy 
 Olivia Burnette as Katie 
 Roberts Blossom as Doc Wallace 
 Gary Sinise as The Marshal 
 Sven @-@ Ole Thorsen as Swede Gutzon 
 Scott Spiegel as Gold Teeth Ma 
 Woody Strode as Charlie Moonlight 
 <unk> Gill as Spotted Horse 
 Lennie Loftin as Flat Nose Foy 
 Josef Rainer as Virgil Sparks 
 Stacy Linn <unk> as Young Ellen 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Writer Simon Moore finished his spec script for The Quick and the Dead in late 1992 , writing it as a homage to the Spaghetti Westerns of Sergio Leone , particularly the Dollars Trilogy starring Clint Eastwood . The writer decided the lead character should be a female . " When you introduce women into that kind of world , something very interesting happens and you have an interesting dynamic straight away , " Moore commented . The names of the lead villain ( Herod ) and the town ( Redemption ) were intentional allusions to the Bible . Moore considered directing his own script as an independent film and shooting The Quick and the Dead on a $ 3 – 4 million budget in either Spain or Italy . 
 Sony Pictures Entertainment purchased Moore 's script in May 1993 and approached Sharon Stone to star in the lead role in July 1993 . Because Stone also signed on as co @-@ producer , she had approval over the choice of director . Sam Raimi was hired to direct because Stone was impressed with his work on Army of Darkness ( 1992 ) . The actress told the producers that if Raimi did not direct the film , she would not star in it . Although she had mixed emotions on Raimi 's previous work , she believed that the director still had yet to showcase his talents , feeling that The Quick and the Dead would be a perfect opportunity to " stretch the limits of his technical and creative ability . " Moore was also enthusiastic over Raimi 's hiring , based on his previous work with the Evil Dead film series . 
 When Sony began fast tracking development The Quick and the Dead , the studio commissioned a series of rewrites from Moore . The writer was eventually dismissed and replaced with John Sayles , who , according to Moore , took Sony 's orders of " making more of an American Old West film " . Moore was rehired with filming to begin in three weeks because Sayles ' script was approaching a 2 @.@ 5 hour runtime . When rewriting the shooting script , Moore simply omitted Sayles ' work without Sony noticing . A week before shooting , Sony considered the script good so that Moore described the rewrites " a completely fucking pointless exercise " . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Russell Crowe originally auditioned for a different role in the film before Sharon Stone asked that the actor try for the lead male role . " When I saw Romper Stomper ( 1992 ) , I thought Russell was not only charismatic , attractive and talented but also fearless , " Stone reasoned . " And I find fearlessness very attractive . I was convinced I wouldn 't scare him . " Raimi found Crowe to be " bold and challenging . He reminds me of what we imagine the American cowboy to have been like . " On working with Raimi , Crowe later described the director as " sort of like the fourth Stooge " . 
 Sony Pictures was dubious over Stone 's choice of Crowe because he was not a famous actor in the mid @-@ 1990s . To cast Gene Hackman in the role of Herod , TriStar Pictures changed the shooting location from Durango , Mexico to Tucson , Arizona . Sam Rockwell auditioned for The Kid , a role which ended up going to Leonardo DiCaprio . Sony was also dubious over DiCaprio 's casting . As a result , Stone decided to pay for the actor 's salary herself . 
 Filming was originally set to begin in October 1993 , but was delayed because Crowe was busy on another film in Australia . Principal photography for The Quick and the Dead lasted from November 21 , 1993 to February 27 , 1994 . Locations included Old Tucson Studios in Arizona and <unk> , 40 miles southeast of Tucson . Production was briefly halted at times over weather problems . <unk> Reed , who was hired as the gun coach and weapons master , worked with the cast through over three months of training . To age Cort 's Colt 1851 Navy Revolver and the other guns used , Reed experimented with simple measures . " I took them out by my swimming pool and dipped them in chlorine water to let them rust , " he explained . " They looked rusty and old , but were brand new guns . " Such detail , including the nickel plating and ivory handles on Ellen 's Colt Peacemakers , was accurate to the time period . 
 The town of Redemption was designed by Patrizia von Brandenstein , known for her work on Amadeus ( 1984 ) and The Untouchables ( 1987 ) . Raimi 's first choice as the visual effects supervisor was William Mesa , his collaborator on Darkman ( 1991 ) and Army of Darkness ( 1993 ) . Instead , Sony chose The Computer Film Company to create the VFX sequences . Pick @-@ up scenes took place through November - December 1994 . This included an extended duel between Sharon Stone and Gene Hackman . 
 Stone had a love scene removed from the final cut of The Quick and the Dead before the film 's release in the United States . The actress / co @-@ producer thought the scene did not fit in with the picture 's established reality . It was restored for the home cinema releases of the film . 
 = = = Soundtrack = = = 
 The original motion picture soundtrack for The Quick and the Dead , was released by the Varèse Sarabande music label on February 14 , 1995 . The score for the film was composed and conducted by Alan Silvestri and mixed by Dennis Sands . Kenneth Karman and Thomas Drescher edited the film 's music . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The Quick and the Dead was released in the U.S. on February 10 , 1995 in 2 @,@ 158 theaters , earning $ 6 @,@ 515 @,@ 861 in its opening weekend . The film eventually grossed $ 18 @,@ 636 @,@ 537 in revenue and was declared to be a box office bomb . However , writer Simon Moore acknowledged that the film performed modestly in Europe . 
 The Quick and the Dead 's dismal box office performance can be attributed to competition from Billy Madison , The Brady Bunch Movie , Just Cause and Heavyweights . Director Sam Raimi later blamed himself and his visual style for the film 's failure . " I was very confused after I made that movie . For a number of years I thought , I 'm like a dinosaur . I couldn 't change with the material . " TriStar Pictures also showed The Quick and the Dead as an " out @-@ of @-@ competition " film at the May 1995 Cannes Film Festival . Additionally , Stone was nominated for the Saturn Award for Best Actress , but lost to Angela Bassett in Strange Days . A novelization written by Jack Curtis was published by HarperCollins in September 1995 . The Region 1 DVD release came in September 1998 . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The Quick and the Dead received mixed reviews from film critics . Based on 41 reviews , Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a score of 56 % , with an average rating of 5 @.@ 9 / 10 . Metacritic calculated an average score of 49 / 100 , based on 21 reviews . 
 Janet Maslin of The New York Times praised Stone 's performance and Raimi 's directing . " Stone 's presence nicely underscores the genre @-@ bending tactics of Raimi , the cult filmmaker now doing his best to reinvent the B movie in a spirit of self @-@ referential glee . " Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times criticized the film for being overtly cliché , but praised Raimi 's direction and Dante Spinotti 's cinematography . Critic and Raimi biographer Bill Warren wrote that the film " is a very conscious ( though not self @-@ conscious ) attempt to recreate some of the themes , style and appeal of Sergio Leone 's majestically operatic Spaghetti Westerns of the 1960s , especially the Man with No Name trilogy that starred Clint Eastwood . It 's brisker , more romantic and somehow more American than Leone 's movies . " 
 Jonathan Rosenbaum of the Chicago Reader observed that " Raimi tries to do a Sergio Leone , and though The Quick and the Dead is highly enjoyable in spots , it doesn 't come across as very convincing , perhaps because nothing can turn Sharon Stone into Charles Bronson . " Peter Travers of Rolling Stone felt that " The Quick and the Dead plays like a crazed compilation of highlights from famous westerns . Raimi finds the right look but misses the heartbeat . You leave the film dazed instead of dazzled , as if an expert marksman had drawn his gun only to shoot himself in the foot . " 
 = Mozart family grand tour = 
 The Mozart family grand tour was a journey through western Europe , undertaken by Leopold Mozart , his wife Anna Maria , and their musically gifted children Maria Anna ( Nannerl ) and Wolfgang Amadeus from 1763 to 1766 . At the start of the tour the children were aged eleven and seven respectively . Their extraordinary skills had been demonstrated during a visit to Vienna in 1762 , when they had played before the Empress Maria Theresa at the Imperial Court . Sensing the social and pecuniary opportunities that might accrue from a prolonged trip embracing the capitals and main cultural centres of Europe , Leopold obtained an extended leave of absence from his post as deputy Kapellmeister to the Prince @-@ Archbishop of Salzburg . Throughout the subsequent tour , the children 's Wunderkind status was confirmed as their precocious performances consistently amazed and gratified their audiences . 
 The first stage of the tour 's itinerary took the family , via Munich and Frankfurt , to Brussels and then on to Paris where they stayed for five months . They then departed for London , where during a stay of more than a year Wolfgang made the acquaintance of some of the leading musicians of the day , heard much music , and composed his first symphonies . The family then moved on to the Netherlands , where the schedule of performances was interrupted by the illnesses of both children , although Wolfgang continued to compose prolifically . The homeward phase incorporated a second stop in Paris and a trip through Switzerland , before the family 's return to Salzburg in November 1766 . 
 The material rewards of the tour , though reportedly substantial , did not transform the family 's lifestyle , and Leopold continued in the Prince @-@ Archbishop 's service . However , the journey enabled the children to experience to the full the cosmopolitan musical world , and gave them an outstanding education . In Wolfgang 's case this would continue through further journeys in the following six years , prior to his appointment by the Prince @-@ Archbishop as a court musician . 
 = = Child prodigies = = 
 The Mozart children were not alone as 18th @-@ century music prodigies . Education writer Gary Spruce refers to hundreds of similar cases , and cites that of William Crotch of Norwich who in 1778 , at the age of three , was giving organ recitals . British scholar Jane O 'Connor explains the 18th century fascination with prodigies as " the realisation of the potential entertainment and fiscal value of an individual child who was in some way extraordinary " . Other childhood contemporaries of Mozart included the violinist and composer Thomas Linley , born the same year as Wolfgang , and the organist prodigy Josef Siegmund Bachmann . Mozart eventually became recognised among prodigies as the future standard for early success and promise . 
 Of seven children born to Leopold and Anna Maria Mozart , only the fourth , Maria Anna ( Nannerl ) , born 31 July 1751 , and the youngest , Wolfgang Amadeus , born 27 January 1756 , survived infancy . The children were educated at home , under Leopold 's guidance , learning basic skills in reading , writing , drawing and arithmetic , together with some history and geography . Their musical education was aided by exposure to the constant rehearsing and playing of Leopold and his fellow musicians . When Nannerl was seven her father began to teach her to play the harpsichord , with Wolfgang looking on ; according to Nannerl 's own account " the boy immediately showed his extraordinary , God @-@ given talent . He often spent long periods at the <unk> , picking out thirds , and his pleasure showed that they sounded good to him ... When he was five years old he was composing little pieces which he would play to his father who would write them down " . A family friend , the poet Johann Andreas <unk> , recounted that at the age of four Wolfgang began to compose a recognisable piano concerto , and was able to demonstrate a phenomenal sense of pitch . 
 Nannerl herself was an apt pupil , no less quick to learn than her brother , and was playing the keyboard with striking virtuosity by the time she was eleven . In that year , 1762 , Leopold brought the children to Munich to play before Maximilian III Joseph , the Elector of Bavaria . Leopold then took the entire family to Vienna , on a trip that lasted for three months . He had secured invitations from several noble patrons , and within three days of arriving the children were playing at the palace of Count <unk> . Among those present was the Viennese Treasury councillor and future prime minister Karl von <unk> , who noted in his diary that " a little boy , said to be only five @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years old ( Wolfgang was actually nearly seven ) played the harpsichord " . After an appearance before the Imperial Vice @-@ Chancellor , the Mozarts were invited to the royal court , where the Empress Maria Theresa tested Wolfgang 's abilities by requiring him to play with the keyboard covered . During this court visit Wolfgang met the Archduchess Maria Antonia , the future Queen Marie Antoinette of France , who was two months his senior . Mozart 's biographer Eric Blom recounts an anecdote of how the Archduchess helped Wolfgang when he slipped on the polished floor ; she is supposed to have received a proposal of marriage in return . 
 As the Mozarts began to be noticed by the Viennese aristocracy , they were often required to give several performances during a single day . They were well rewarded for this activity — at the end of their first hectic week in Vienna , Leopold was able to send home the equivalent of more than two years ' salary . Their schedule was interrupted when Wolfgang fell ill with scarlet fever , and their former momentum was not regained . Nevertheless , the visit left Leopold eager to pursue further opportunities for social and financial success . On their return to Salzburg , Wolfgang played the harpsichord and violin at a birthday concert for the Archbishop , to the evident astonishment of those present . 
 = = Grand tour = = 
 = = = Preparations = = = 
 In a letter to his friend and landlord Lorenz Hagenauer ( 1712 – 1792 ) , written after the tour , Leopold quotes the German diplomat Friedrich Melchior , Baron von Grimm , who after hearing the children play had said : " Now for once in my life I have seen a miracle : this is the first " . Leopold believed that it was his duty to proclaim this miracle to the world , otherwise he would be " the most ungrateful creature " . He was said to have describe Wolfgang as “ The miracle which God let be born in Salzburg " . Mozart biographer Wolfgang Hildesheimer has suggested that , at least in the case of Wolfgang , this venture was premature : " Too soon , [ the ] father dragged [ the ] son all over Western Europe for years . This continual change of scene would have worn out even a robust child ... " However , there is little evidence to suggest that Wolfgang was physically harmed or musically hindered by these childhood exertions ; it seems that he felt equal to the challenge from the start . 
 Leopold wanted to begin the tour as soon as possible — the younger the children were , the more spectacular would be the demonstration of their gifts . The route he intended to take included southern Germany , the Austrian Netherlands , Paris , Switzerland and possibly northern Italy . The London leg was only added after urgings during the Paris visit , and the eventual Dutch trip was an unplanned detour . The plan was to take in as many princely European courts as possible , as well as the great cultural capitals — Leopold was relying on his professional musical network and on his more recent social contacts to obtain invitations from the royal courts . Practical assistance came from Hagenauer , whose trading connections in the major cities would supply the Mozarts with what were effectively banking facilities . These would enable them to obtain money en route , while waiting for the proceeds from their performances to accumulate . 
 Wolfgang prepared for the tour by perfecting himself on the violin , which he had learned to play apparently without any tuition whatsoever . As for more general preparation , the children delighted in making music together , something they never lost . On tour , even during the busiest travelling days they would fit in their daily practice , appearing to thrive on the hectic schedule . Before the journey could begin , Leopold needed the consent of his employer , the prince @-@ archbishop . Leopold had only been appointed deputy Kapellmeister in January 1763 ; nevertheless the archbishop 's consent to an extended leave of absence was granted , on the grounds that the Mozarts ' successes would bring glory to Salzburg , its ruler , and to God . 
 = = = Early stages ( July – November 1763 ) = = = 
 The journey 's beginning , on 9 July 1763 , was inauspicious ; on the first day a carriage wheel broke , requiring a 24 @-@ hour pause while repairs were carried out . Leopold turned this delay to advantage by taking Wolfgang to the nearby church at Wasserburg , where according to Leopold the boy played on the organ pedalboard as if he had been studying it for months . In Munich , on successive evenings , the children played before Elector Maximilian III , earning from these engagements the equivalent of half of Leopold 's annual salary of 354 gulden or florins . The next stop was Augsburg , where Leopold 's estranged mother refused to attend any of the three concerts given there . The family then moved on to Schwetzingen and the Mannheim court , where the children 's performance apparently amazed Elector Palatine Karl Theodor and his Electress . 
 The next extended stop was at Mainz . The Elector was ill , but the Mozarts gave three concerts in the town , which brought in 200 gulden . From Mainz the family took the market boat up the River Main to Frankfurt , where several public concerts were given . Among those present at the first of these was the fourteen @-@ year @-@ old Johann Wolfgang von Goethe , who would many years later recall " the little fellow with his wig and his sword " . An advertisement for these concerts announced that " the girl " would play " the most difficult pieces by the greatest masters " , while " the boy " would play a concerto on the violin and also repeat his Vienna trick of playing with the keyboard completely covered by a cloth . Finally " he will improvise out of his head , not only on the fortepiano but also on the organ ... in all the keys , even the most difficult , that he may be asked " . 
 The family proceeded by riverboat to Koblenz , Bonn and Cologne . Turning west they reached Aachen , where a performance was given before Princess Anna Amalia of Prussia , the sister of Frederick the Great . The princess tried to persuade Leopold to abandon his itinerary and go to Berlin , but Leopold resisted . " She has no money , " he wrote to Hagenauer , recounting that she had repaid the performance with kisses . " <unk> , neither mine host nor the postmaster are to be contented with kisses . " They proceeded into the Austrian Netherlands , an area corresponding roughly to present @-@ day Belgium and Luxembourg , where they arrived in the regional capital , Brussels , on 5 October . After several weeks ' waiting for the governor @-@ general , Prince Charles of Lorraine , to summon them ( " His highness the prince does nothing but hunt , gobble and swill " , wrote Leopold to Hagenauer ) , the Mozarts gave a grand concert in the prince 's presence on 7 November . On the 15th the family departed for Paris . 
 During the hiatus in Brussels , Wolfgang turned his attention briefly from performing to composing . On 14 October he finished an Allegro for harpsichord , which would later be incorporated into the C major sonata , K. 6 , which he completed in Paris . 
 = = = Paris ( November 1763 – April 1764 ) = = = 
 On 18 November 1763 the Mozart family arrived in Paris , one of the most important musical centres of Europe , and also a city of great power , wealth , and intellectual activity . Leopold hoped to be received by the court of Louis XV at nearby Versailles . However , a recent death in the royal family prevented any immediate invitation , so Leopold arranged other engagements . One person who took particular note of the children was the German diplomat Friedrich Melchior von Grimm , whose journal records Wolfgang 's feats in glowing terms : " the most consummate Kapellmeister could not be more profound in the science of harmony and modulation " . Leopold 's own assessment , written a few months later , was similarly effusive : " My little girl , although only 12 years old , is one of the most skilful players in Europe and , in a word , my boy knows more in his eighth year than one would expect for a man of forty " . 
 On 24 December the family moved to Versailles for two weeks during which , through a court connection , they were able to attend a royal dinner , where Wolfgang was reportedly allowed to kiss the hand of the Queen . At Versailles they also visited the famous courtesan Madame de Pompadour , then in the last months of her life — " an extremely haughty woman who still ruled over everything " , according to Leopold . In Nannerl 's later recollections , Wolfgang was made to stand on a chair to be examined by the Madame , who would not allow him to kiss her . 
 There is no record of the children giving a formal concert at Versailles . In February 1764 they were given 50 louis d 'or ( about 550 florins ) and a gold snuff @-@ box by the royal entertainments office , presumably for entertaining the royal family privately , but no more details are available . Further concerts were given in Paris on 10 March and on 9 April , at a private theatre in the rue et Porte St Honoré . At the same time Wolfgang 's first published works were printed : two pairs of sonatas for harpsichord and violin , K. 6 and 7 , and K. 8 and 9 . These pairs became Opus 1 and Opus 2 in Leopold 's private catalogue of his son 's work . The first pair was dedicated to the king 's daughter , Madame Victoire de France , the second to the Countess of Tessé . Mozart biographer Stanley Sadie comments that some aspects of these pieces are rather childish and naïve , but that nevertheless their technique is " astonishingly sure , their line of thinking is clear and smooth , and their formal balance is beyond reproach " . 
 A decision was taken in Paris to go to London , perhaps on the advice of Leopold 's musical and court acquaintances , who would probably have advised him that England was , in the words of the Mozart scholar Neal Zaslaw , " known for the enthusiasm with which it received continental musicians and the extravagance with which it rewarded them " . On 10 April the family left for Calais and after an unpleasant crossing to Dover on a hired boat , and some delays , arrived in London on 23 April . 
 = = = London ( April 1764 – July 1765 ) = = = 
 The Mozarts ' first London lodgings were above a barber 's shop in Cecil Court , near St Martin @-@ in @-@ the @-@ Fields . Letters of introduction from Paris proved effective ; on 27 April 1764 , four days after their arrival , the children were playing before King George III and his 19 @-@ year @-@ old German queen , Charlotte Sophia . A second royal engagement was fixed for 19 May , at which Wolfgang was asked by the king to play pieces by Handel , Johann Christian Bach and Carl Friedrich Abel . He was allowed to accompany the queen as she sang an aria , and he later improvised on the bass part of a Handel aria from which , according to Leopold , he produced " the most beautiful melody in such a manner that everyone was astonished " . 
 Many of the nobility and gentry were leaving town for the summer , but Leopold reckoned that most would return for the king 's birthday celebrations on 4 June , and accordingly organised a concert for the 5th . This was deemed a success , and Leopold hastened to arrange for Wolfgang to appear at a benefit concert for a maternity hospital on 29 June , at Ranelagh Pleasure Gardens . Leopold apparently saw this effort to support charitable works as " a way to earn the love of this very special nation " . Wolfgang was advertised as " the celebrated and astonishing Master Mozart , a Child of Seven Years of Age ... " ( he was in fact eight ) , " justly esteemed the most extraordinary Prodigy , and most amazing Genius , that has appeared in any Age " . On 8 July there was a private performance at the Grosvenor Square home of the Earl of Thanet , from which Leopold returned with an inflammation of the throat and other worrying symptoms . " Prepare your heart to hear one of the saddest events " , he wrote to Hagenauer in anticipation of his own imminent demise . He was ill for several weeks , and for the sake of his health the family moved from their Cecil Court lodgings to a house in the countryside , at 180 Ebury Street , then considered part of the village of Chelsea . 
 During Leopold 's illness performances were impossible , so Wolfgang turned to composition . According to the writer and musician Jane Glover , Wolfgang was inspired to write symphonies after meeting Johann Christian Bach . It is not clear when this meeting occurred , or when Wolfgang first heard J.C. Bach 's symphonies , although he had played the older composer 's harpsichord works in his May 1764 royal recital . Wolfgang soon completed his Symphony No. 1 in E flat , K. 16 , and started his No. 4 in D major , K. 19 ( which Zaslaw concludes was more likely composed , or at least completed , in The Hague ) . The D major symphony has , in Hildesheimer 's words , " an originality of melody and modulation which goes beyond the routine methods of his [ grown @-@ up ] contemporaries " . These are Wolfgang 's first orchestral writings , although Zaslaw hypothesises a theoretical " Symphony No. 0 " from sketches in Wolfgang 's musical notebook . Three lost symphonies , identified in the Köchel catalogue of Mozart 's works only by their incipits ( first few bars of music ) , may also have originated from the London period . Other works composed by Wolfgang in London include several instrumental sonatas , the jewel of which , according to Hildesheimer , is the C major sonata for piano , four hands , K. <unk> . A set of violin sonatas , with extra flute and cello parts , was dedicated to Queen Charlotte at her request , and presented to her with an appropriate inscription in January 1765 . Wolfgang also wrote his first vocal works , the motet " God is our Refuge " , K. 20 , and the tenor aria Va , dal furor <unk> , K. 21 . At the end of September , with Leopold 's recovery , the family moved back to central London , to lodgings in Thrift Street ( later 20 Frith Street ) , Soho . These lodgings were located conveniently close to several concert rooms , and to the residences of both <unk> Bach and Carl Friedrich Abel . Bach , a son of Johann Sebastian Bach , soon became a family friend ; Nannerl later recalled Bach and the eight @-@ year @-@ old Wolfgang playing a sonata together , taking turns to play a few bars individually , and that " anyone not watching would have thought it was played by one person alone " . There is no record that the Mozarts met Abel , but Wolfgang knew his symphonies , perhaps through the medium of the annual Bach @-@ Abel concert series , and was much influenced by them . 
 On 25 October , at King George 's invitation , the children played at the celebrations marking the fourth anniversary of the king 's accession . Their next public appearance was a concert on 21 February 1765 , before a moderate audience — the date clashed with a Bach @-@ Abel concert . Only one more London concert was given , on 13 May , but between April and June members of the public could go to the Mozarts ' lodgings where , for a five shilling fee , Wolfgang would perform his musical party pieces . During June both the " young <unk> " performed daily at the Swan and Harp Tavern in Cornhill , the charge this time being a mere two shillings and sixpence . These were , as Sadie puts it , " Leopold 's last , desperate effort to extract guineas from the English public " . Hildesheimer likens this part of the tour to a travelling circus , comparing the Mozarts to a family of acrobats . 
 The Mozarts left London for the continent on 24 July 1765 . Before this , Leopold allowed Wolfgang to be subjected to a scientific examination , conducted by The Hon. Daines Barrington . A report , issued in Philosophical Transactions for the year 1770 , confirms the truth of Wolfgang 's exceptional capabilities . Practically the last act of the family in London was the gift to the British Museum of the manuscript copy of " God is our Refuge " . 
 = = = The Netherlands ( September 1765 – April 1766 ) = = = 
 Leopold had been specific in letters to Hagenauer that the family would not visit the Dutch Republic , but would go to Paris and then return home to Salzburg . However , he was persuaded by an envoy of the Princess Carolina of Orange @-@ Nassau , sister of the Prince of Orange , to go instead to The Hague and to present the children to her , as official guests of the court . After the party 's landing at Calais there was a month 's delay at Lille , as first Wolfgang fell sick with tonsillitis , then Leopold suffered prolonged dizziness attacks . Early in September the family moved on to Ghent , where Wolfgang played on the new organ at the <unk> chapel ; a few days later he played on the cathedral organ at Antwerp . On 11 September the family finally reached The Hague . 
 After arriving in The Hague , Nannerl developed a severe cold and was unable to participate in the initial concerts before the Princess during their first week , nor in a performance before the Prince a few days later . Leopold was sufficiently confident of Nannerl 's recovery to announce the appearances of both prodigies at a concert to be given at the hall of the Oude <unk> on 30 September . The notice for this concert gives Wolfgang 's age as eight ( he was nine ) , but correctly gives Nannerl 's as fourteen . The advertisement concentrates on Wolfgang : " All the overtures will be from the hands of this young composer [ ... ] Music @-@ lovers may confront him with any music at will , and he will play it at sight " . It is not certain whether this concert in fact took place — Sadie believes it may have been postponed . If it did happen , Wolfgang appeared alone , for by this time Nannerl 's cold had turned into typhoid fever . Her condition grew steadily worse , and on 21 October she was given the last sacrament . A visit from the royal physician turned the tide ; he changed the treatment , and by the end of the month she was recovering . Then Wolfgang fell ill , and it was mid @-@ December before he was on his feet again . 
 Both children were able to appear at the Oude <unk> on 22 January 1766 , in a concert which may have included the first public performance of one of Wolfgang 's London symphonies , K. 19 , and possibly of a new symphony in B flat major K. 22 , composed in the Netherlands . Following this concert they spent time in Amsterdam before returning to The Hague early in March . The main reason for their return was the forthcoming public celebrations of the Prince of Orange 's coming of age . Wolfgang had composed a <unk> ( song medley ) for small orchestra and harpsichord , entitled <unk> musicum , K. 32 , which was played at a special concert to honour the Prince on 11 March . This was one of several pieces composed for the occasion ; Wolfgang also wrote arias for the Princess using words from Metastasio 's libretto <unk> ( including <unk> <unk> , K. 23 ) , and keyboard variations on a Dutch song Laat ons <unk> , <unk> ! K. 24 . He wrote a set of keyboard and violin sonatas for the Princess , as he had earlier for the French princess and for the Queen of Great Britain . Another symphony , K. 45a , commonly known as " Old Lambach " and once thought to have been written several years later , was also written in The Hague , possibly for the Prince 's coming @-@ of @-@ age concert . 
 The family left The Hague at the end of March , moving first to Haarlem , where the organist of St Bavo 's Church invited Wolfgang to play on the church 's organ , one of the largest in the country . From there they traveled east and south , giving concerts along the way at Amsterdam and Utrecht at 21st of April , before leaving the Netherlands and traveling through Brussels and Valenciennes , to arrive in Paris on 10 May . 
 = = = Homeward journey ( April – November 1766 ) = = = 
 The family remained in Paris for two months . No concerts were given by them in this period although , according to Grimm , there were performances of Wolfgang 's symphonies . Grimm was effusive about the development of both children ; Nannerl , he wrote , " had the finest and most brilliant execution on the harpsichord " , and : " no @-@ one but her brother can rob her of supremacy " . Of Wolfgang he quoted a Prince of Brunswick as saying that many <unk> at the peak of their art would die without knowing what the boy knew at the age of nine . " If these children live , " wrote Grimm , " they will not remain in Salzburg . Monarchs will soon be disputing about who should have them " . 
 The only surviving music composed by Wolfgang during this Paris visit is his Kyrie in F major , K. 33 , his first attempt to write formal church music . On 9 July , the family left Paris for Dijon , following an invitation from the Prince of Conti . The children played in a concert there on 19 July , accompanied by a local orchestra , about whose players Leopold made disparaging comments : Très <unk> – Un <unk> <unk> <unk> – <unk> tutti – Un <unk> ( a scratcher ) – Rotten . They moved on to Lyon where Wolfgang " <unk> for an hour and a quarter with the most capable master here , yielding nothing to him " . 
